"The Perfection of Yoga"
by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE:
This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of this book, and is NOT FOR
RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only,
under the "fair use" guidelines established by international copyright laws. You
may use this electronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your
own private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, student
papers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluation copy to
others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyright information intact and
do not add or subtract anything to this file and its contents. You may not reproduce
more than ten percent (10%) of this book in any medium without the express
written permission from the copyright holders.
Reference any excerpts in the following way: “Excerpted from “The Perfection of
Yoga” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta
Book Trust International, www.krishna.com.”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2004 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90034, USA. All
rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluate
dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,
www.krishna.com.


Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 2
About the Author
His Divine Grace AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s
most distinguished teacher of Vedic religion and thought, is the author
of Bhagavad-gita As It Is, Srimad-Bhagavatam, The Nector of Devotion
and many other English versions of Vedic literature. He is the founderacarya
of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, which
has hundreds of centers throughtout the world.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Second Canto
Chapter One
The First Step in God Realization
INVOCATION
p NaMaae >aGavTae vaSaudevaYa ))
oà namo bhagavate väsudeväya
oà—O my Lord; namaù—my respectful obeisances unto You;
bhagavate—unto the Personality of Godhead; väsudeväya—unto Lord Kåñëa,
the son of Vasudeva.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, the all-pervading Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful
obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
Väsudeväya means “to Kåñëa, the son of Vasudeva.” Since by chanting the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
name of Kåñëa, Väsudeva, one can achieve all the good results of charity,
austerity and penances, it is to be understood that by the chanting of this
mantra, oà namo bhagavate väsudeväya, the author or the speaker or any one
of the readers of Çrémad-Bhägavatam is offering respectful obeisances unto the
Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, the reservoir of all pleasure. In the First Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the principles of creation are described, and thus the First
Canto may be called “Creation.”
Similarly, in the Second Canto, the post-creation cosmic manifestation is
described. The different planetary systems are described in the Second Canto
as different parts of the universal body of the Lord. For this reason, the Second
Canto may be called “The Cosmic Manifestation.” There are ten chapters in
the Second Canto, and in these ten chapters the purpose of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and the different symptoms of this purpose are narrated.
The first chapter describes the glories of chanting, and it hints at the process
by which the neophyte devotees may perform meditation on the universal
form of the Lord. In the first verse, Çukadeva Gosvämé replies to the questions
of Mahäräja Parékñit, who asked him about one’s duties at the point of death.
Mahäräja Parékñit was glad to receive Çukadeva Gosvämé, and he was proud of
being a descendant of Arjuna, the intimate friend of Kåñëa. personally, he was
very humble and meek, but he expressed his gladness that Lord Kåñëa was very
kind to his grandfathers, the sons of Päëòu, especially his own grandfather,
Arjuna. And because Lord Kåñëa was always pleased with Mahäräja Parékñit’s
family, at the verge of Mahäräja Parékñit’s death Çukadeva Gosvämé was sent to
help him in the process of self-realization. Mahäräja Parékñit was a devotee of
Lord Kåñëa from his childhood, so he had natural affection for Kåñëa.
Çukadeva Gosvämé could understand his devotion. Therefore, he welcomed
the questions about the King’s duty. Because the King hinted that worship of
Lord Kåñëa is the ultimate function of every living entity, Çukadeva Gosvämé
welcomed the suggestion and said, “Because you have raised questions about
Kåñëa, your question is most glorious.” The translation of the first verse is as
follows.
TEXT 1
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
é[qéuk- ovac
vrqYaaNaez Tae Pa[én" k*-Taae l/aek-ihTa& Na*Pa )
AaTMaivTSaMMaTa" Pau&Saa& é[aeTaVYaaidzu Ya" Par" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
varéyän eña te praçnaù
kåto loka-hitaà nåpa
ätmavit-sammataù puàsäà
çrotavyädiñu yaù paraù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; varéyän—glorious; eñaù—this;
te—your; praçnaù—question; kåtaù—made by you; loka-hitam—beneficial for
all men; nåpa—O King; ätmavit—transcendentalist; sammataù—approved;
puàsäm—of all men; çrotavya-ädiñu—in all kinds of hearing; yaù—what is;
paraù—the supreme.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, your question is glorious because
it is very beneficial to all kinds of people. The answer to this question is the
prime subject matter for hearing, and it is approved by all transcendentalists.
PURPORT
Even the very question is so nice that it is the best subject matter for
hearing. Simply by such questioning and hearing, one can achieve the highest
perfectional stage of life. Because Lord Kåñëa is the original Supreme Person,
any question about Him is original and perfect. Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
said that the highest perfection of life is to achieve the transcendental loving
service of Kåñëa. Because questions and answers about Kåñëa elevate one to
that transcendental position, the questions of Mahäräja Parékñit about Kåñëa
philosophy are greatly glorified. Mahäräja Parékñit wanted to absorb his mind
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
completely in Kåñëa, and such absorption can be effected simply by hearing
about the uncommon activities of Kåñëa. For instance, in the Bhagavad-gétä it
is stated that simply by understanding the transcendental nature of Lord
Kåñëa’s appearance, disappearance, and activities, one can immediately return
home, back to Godhead, and never come back to this miserable condition of
material existence. It is very auspicious, therefore, to hear always about Kåñëa.
So Mahäräja Parékñit requested Çukadeva Gosvämé to narrate the activities of
Kåñëa so that he could engage his mind in Kåñëa. The activities of Kåñëa are
nondifferent from Kåñëa Himself. As long as one is engaged in hearing such
transcendental activities of Kåñëa, he remains aloof from the conditional life
of material existence. The topics of Lord Kåñëa are so auspicious that they
purify the speaker, the hearer and the inquirer. They are compared to the
Ganges waters, which flow from the toe of Lord Kåñëa. Wherever the Ganges
waters go, they purify the land and the person who bathes in them. Similarly,
kåñëa-kathä, or the topics of Kåñëa, are so pure that wherever they are spoken,
the place, the hearer, the inquirer, the speaker and all concerned become
purified.
TEXT 2
é[aeTaVYaadqiNa raJaeNd] Na*<aa& SaiNTa SahóXa" )
APaXYaTaaMaaTMaTatv& Ga*hezu Ga*hMaeiDaNaaMa( )) 2 ))
çrotavyädéni räjendra
nåëäà santi sahasraçaù
apaçyatäm ätma-tattvaà
gåheñu gåha-medhinäm
SYNONYMS
çrotavya-ädéni—subject matters for hearing; räjendra—O Emperor; nåëäm—of
human society; santi—there are; sahasraçaù—hundreds and thousands;
apaçyatäm—of the blind; ätma-tattvam—knowledge of self, the ultimate truth;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
gåheñu—at home; gåha-medhinäm—of persons too materially engrossed.
TRANSLATION
Those persons who are materially engrossed, being blind to the knowledge of
ultimate truth, leave many subject matters for hearing in human society, O
Emperor.
PURPORT
In the revealed scriptures there are two nomenclatures for the
householder’s life. One is gåhastha, and the other is gåhamedhé. The gåhasthas
are those who live together with wife and children but live transcendentally
for realizing the ultimate truth. The gåhamedhés, however, are those who live
only for the benefit of the family members, extended or centralized, and thus
are envious of others. The word medhé indicates jealousy of others. The
gåhamedhés, being interested in family affairs only, are certainly envious of
others. Therefore, one gåhamedhé is not on good terms with another gåhamedhé,
and in the extended form, one community, society or nation is not on good
terms with another counterpart of selfish interest. In the age of Kali, all the
householders are jealous of one another because they are blind to the
knowledge of ultimate truth. They have many subject matters for
hearing—political, scientific, social, economic and so on—but due to a poor
fund of knowledge, they set aside the question of the ultimate miseries of life,
namely miseries of birth, death, old age and disease. Factually, the human life
is meant for making an ultimate solution to birth, death, old age and disease,
but the gåhamedhés, being illusioned by the material nature, forget everything
about self-realization. The ultimate solution to the problems of life is to go
back home, back to Godhead, and thus, as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (8.16),
the miseries of material existence—birth, death, old age and disease—are
removed.
The process of going back home, back to Godhead, is to hear about the
Supreme Lord and His name, form, attributes, pastimes, paraphernalia and
variegatedness. Foolish people do not know this. They want to hear something
about the name, form, etc., of everything temporary, and they do not know
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
how to utilize this propensity of hearing for the ultimate good. Misguided as
they are, they also create some false literatures about the name, form,
attributes, etc., of the ultimate truth. One should not, therefore, become a
gåhamedhé simply to exist for envying others; one should become a real
householder in terms of the scriptural injunctions.
TEXT 3
iNad]Yaa ihYaTae Na¢&- VYavaYaeNa c va vYa" )
idva caQaeRhYaa raJaNa( ku-$u=Mb>ar<aeNa va )) 3 ))
nidrayä hriyate naktaà
vyaväyena ca vä vayaù
divä cärthehayä räjan
kuöumba-bharaëena vä
SYNONYMS
nidrayä—by sleeping; hriyate—wastes; naktam—night; vyaväyena—sex
indulgence; ca—also; vä—either; vayaù—duration of life; divä—days;
ca—and; artha—economic; éhayä—development; räjan—O King;
kuöumba—family members; bharaëena—maintaining; vä—either.
TRANSLATION
The lifetime of such an envious householder is passed at night either in
sleeping or in sex indulgence, and in the daytime either in making money or
maintaining family members.
PURPORT
The present human civilization is primarily based on the principles of
sleeping and sex indulgence at night and earning money in the day and
spending the same for family maintenance. Such a form of human civilization
is condemned by the Bhägavata school.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Because human life is a combination of matter and spirit soul, the whole
process of Vedic knowledge is directed at liberating the spirit soul from the
contamination of matter. The knowledge concerning this is called ätma-tattva.
Those men who are too materialistic are unaware of this knowledge and are
more inclined to economic development for material enjoyment. Such
materialistic men are called karmés, or fruitive laborers, and they are allowed
regulated economic development or association of woman for sex indulgence.
Those who are above the karmés, that is, the jïänés, yogés and devotees, are
strictly prohibited from sex indulgence. The karmés are more or less devoid of
ätma-tattva knowledge, and as such, their life is spent without spiritual profit.
The human life is not meant for hard labor for economic development, nor is
it meant for sex indulgence like that of the dogs and hogs. It is specially meant
for making a solution to the problems of material life and the miseries thereof.
So the karmés waste their valuable human life by sleeping and sex indulgence
at night, and by laboring hard in the daytime to accumulate wealth, and after
doing so, they try to improve the standard of materialistic life. The
materialistic way of life is described herein in a nutshell, and how foolishly
men waste the boon of human life is described as follows.
TEXT 4
dehaPaTYak-l/}aaidZvaTMaSaENYaeZvSaTSviPa )
Taeza& Pa[Mataae iNaDaNa& PaXYaàiPa Na PaXYaiTa )) 4 ))
dehäpatya-kalaträdiñv
ätma-sainyeñv asatsv api
teñäà pramatto nidhanaà
paçyann api na paçyati
SYNONYMS
deha—body; apatya—children; kalatra—wife; ädiñu—and in everything in
relation to them; ätma—own; sainyeñu—fighting soldiers; asatsu—fallible;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
api—in spite of; teñäm—of all of them; pramattaù—too attached;
nidhanam—destruction; paçyan—having been experienced; api—although;
na—does not; paçyati—see it.
TRANSLATION
Persons devoid of ätma-tattva do not inquire into the problems of life, being
too attached to the fallible soldiers like the body, children and wife. Although
sufficiently experienced, they still do not see their inevitable destruction.
PURPORT
This material world is called the world of death. Every living being,
beginning from Brahmä, whose duration of life is some thousands of millions
of years, down to the germs who live for a few seconds only, is struggling for
existence. Therefore, this life is a sort of fight with material nature, which
imposes death upon all. In the human form of life, a living being is competent
enough to come to an understanding of this great struggle for existence, but
being too attached to family members, society, country, etc., he wants to win
over the invincible material nature by the aid of bodily strength, children,
wife, relatives, etc. Although he is sufficiently experienced in the matter by
dint of past experience and previous examples of his deceased predecessors, he
does not see that the so-called fighting soldiers like the children, relatives,
society members and countrymen are all fallible in the great struggle. One
should examine the fact that his father or his father’s father has already died,
and that he himself is therefore also sure to die, and similarly, his children,
who are the would be fathers of their children, will also die in due course. No
one will survive in this struggle with material nature. The history of human
society definitely proves it, yet the foolish people still suggest that in the future
they will be able to live perpetually, with the help of material science. This
poor fund of knowledge exhibited by human society is certainly misleading,
and it is all due to ignoring the constitution of the living soul. This material
world exists only as a dream, due to our attachment to it. Otherwise, the living
soul is always different from the material nature. The great ocean of material
nature is tossing with the waves of time, and the so-called living conditions are
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
something like foaming bubbles, which appear before us as bodily self, wife,
children, society, countrymen, etc. Due to a lack of knowledge of self, we
become victimized by the force of ignorance and thus spoil the valuable energy
of human life in a vain search after permanent living conditions, which are
impossible in this material world.
Our friends, relatives and so-called wives and children are not only fallible,
but also bewildered by the outward glamor of material existence. As such, they
cannot save us. Still we think that we are safe within the orbit of family,
society or country.
The whole materialistic advancement of human civilization is like the
decoration of a dead body. Everyone is a dead body flapping only for a few
days, and yet all the energy of human life is being wasted in the decoration of
this dead body. Çukadeva Gosvämé is pointing out the duty of the human being
after showing the actual position of bewildered human activities. Persons who
are devoid of the knowledge of ätma-tattva are misguided, but those who are
devotees of the Lord and have perfect realization of transcendental knowledge
are not bewildered.
TEXT 5
TaSMaaÙarTa SavaRTMaa >aGavaNaqìrae hir" )
é[aeTaVYa" k-IiTaRTaVYaê SMaTaRVYaêeC^Taa>aYaMa( )) 5 ))
tasmäd bhärata sarvätmä
bhagavän éçvaro hariù
çrotavyaù kértitavyaç ca
smartavyaç cecchatäbhayam
SYNONYMS
tasmät—for this reason; bhärata—O descendant of Bharata; sarvätmä—the
Supersoul; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; éçvaraù—the
controller; hariù—the Lord, who vanquishes all miseries; çrotavyaù—is to be
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
heard; kértitavyaù—to be glorified; ca—also; smartavyaù—to be remembered;
ca—and; icchatä—of one who desires; abhayam—freedom.
TRANSLATION
O descendant of King Bharata, one who desires to be free from all miseries
must hear about, glorify and also remember the Personality of Godhead, who is
the Supersoul, the controller and the savior from all miseries.
PURPORT
In the previous verse, Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé has described how the foolish
materially attached men are wasting their valuable time in the improvement of
the material conditions of life by sleeping, indulging in sex life, developing
economic conditions and maintaining a band of relatives who are to be
vanquished in the air of oblivion. Being engaged in all these materialistic
activities, the living soul entangles himself in the cycle of the law of fruitive
actions. This entails the chain of birth and death in the 8,400,000 species of
life: the aquatics, the vegetables, the reptiles, the birds, the beasts, the
uncivilized man, and then again the human form, which is the chance for
getting out of the cycle of fruitive action. Therefore, if one desires freedom
from this vicious circle, then one must cease to act as a karmé or enjoyer of the
results of one’s own work, good or bad. One should not do anything, either
good or bad, on his own account, but must execute everything on behalf of the
Supreme Lord, the ultimate proprietor of everything that be. This process of
doing work is recommended in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.27) also, where instruction
is given for working on the Lord’s account. Therefore, one should first of all
hear about the Lord. When one has perfectly and scrutinizingly heard, one
must glorify His acts and deeds, and thus it will become possible to remember
constantly the transcendental nature of the Lord. Hearing about and
glorifying the Lord are identical with the transcendental nature of the Lord,
and by so doing, one will be always in the association of the Lord. This brings
freedom from all sorts of fear. The Lord is the Supersoul (Paramätmä) present
in the hearts of all living beings, and thus by the above hearing and glorifying
process, the Lord invites the association of all in His creation. This process of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
hearing about and glorifying the Lord is applicable for everyone, whoever he
may be, and it will lead one to the ultimate success in everything in which one
may be engaged by providence. There are many classes of human beings: the
fruitive workers, the empiric philosophers, the mystic yogés, and ultimately, the
unalloyed devotees. For all of them, one and the same process is applicable for
achieving the desired success. Everyone wants to be free from all kinds of fear,
and everyone wants the fullest extent of happiness in life. The perfect process
for achieving this, here and now, is recommended in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
which is uttered by such a great authority as Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé. By
hearing about and glorifying the Lord, all a person’s activities become molded
into spiritual activities, and thus all conceptions of material miseries become
completely vanquished.
TEXT 6
WTaavaNa( Saa&:YaYaaeGaa>Yaa& SvDaMaRPairiNaïYaa )
JaNMal/a>a" Par" Pau&SaaMaNTae NaaraYa<aSMa*iTa" )) 6 ))
etävän säìkhya-yogäbhyäà
sva-dharma-pariniñöhayä
janma-läbhaù paraù puàsäm
ante näräyaëa-småtiù
SYNONYMS
etävän—all these; säìkhya—complete knowledge of matter and spirit;
yogäbhyäm—knowledge of mystic power; sva-dharma—particular occupational
duty; pariniñöhayä—by full perception; janma—birth; läbhaù—gain;
paraù—the supreme; puàsäm—of a person; ante—at the end; näräyaëa—the
Personality of Godhead; småtiù—remembrance.
TRANSLATION
The highest perfection of human life, achieved either by complete knowledge
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of matter and spirit, by practice of mystic powers, or by perfect discharge of
occupational duty, is to remember the Personality of Godhead at the end of life.
PURPORT
Näräyaëa is the transcendental Personality of Godhead beyond the
material creation. Everything that is created, sustained, and at the end
annihilated is within the compass of the mahat-tattva (material principle) and
is known as the material world. The existence of Näräyaëa, or the Personality
of Godhead, is not within the jurisdiction of this mahat-tattva, and as such, the
name, form, attributes, etc. of Näräyaëa are beyond the jurisdiction of the
material world. By the speculation of empiric philosophy, which discerns
matter from spirit, or by cultivation of mystic powers, which ultimately helps
the performer to reach any planet of the universe or beyond the universe, or
by discharge of religious duties, one can achieve the highest perfection,
provided one is able to reach the stage of näräyaëa-småti, or constant
remembrance of the Personality of Godhead. This is possible only by the
association of a pure devotee, who can give a finishing touch to the
transcendental activities of all jïänés, yogés, or karmés, in terms of prescribed
duties defined in the scriptures. There are many historical instances of the
achievement of spiritual perfection, such as that of the Sanakädi Åñis or the
nine celebrated Yogendras, who attained perfection only after being situated
in the devotional service of the Lord. None of the devotees of the Lord ever
deviated from the path of devotional service by taking to other methods as
adopted by the jïänés or yogés. Everyone is anxious to achieve the highest
perfection of his particular activity, and it is indicated herein that such
perfection is näräyaëa-småti, for which everyone must endeavor his best. In
other words, life should be molded in such a manner that one is able to
progressively remember the personality of Godhead in every step of life.
TEXT 7
Pa[aYae<a MauNaYaae raJaiàv*taa iviDazeDaTa" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
NaEGauR<YaSQaa rMaNTae SMa Gau<aaNauk-QaNae hre" )) 7 ))
präyeëa munayo räjan
nivåttä vidhi-ñedhataù
nairguëya-sthä ramante sma
guëänukathane hareù
SYNONYMS
präyeëa—mainly; munayaù—all sages; räjan—O King; nivåttäù—above;
vidhi—regulative principles; sedhataù—from restrictions;
nairguëya-sthäù—transcendentally situated; ramante—take pleasure in;
sma—distinctly; guëa-anukathane—describing the glories; hareù—of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, mainly the topmost transcendentalists, who are above the
regulative principles and restrictions, take pleasure in describing the glories of
the Lord.
PURPORT
The topmost transcendentalist is a liberated soul and is therefore not
within the purview of the regulative principles. A neophyte, who is intended
to be promoted to the spiritual plane, is guided by the spiritual master under
regulative principles. He may be compared to a patient who is treated by
various restrictions under medical jurisdiction. Generally, liberated souls also
take pleasure in describing the transcendental activities. As mentioned above,
since Näräyaëa, Hari, the Personality of Godhead, is beyond the material
creation, His form and attributes are not material. The topmost
transcendentalists or the liberated souls realize Him by advanced experience of
transcendental knowledge, and therefore they take pleasure in the discussion
of the transcendental qualities of the Lord’s pastimes. In the Bhagavad-gétä
(4.9), the personality of Godhead declares that His appearance and activities
are all divyam, or transcendental. The common man, who is under the spell of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
material energy, takes it for granted that the Lord is like one of us, and
therefore he refuses to accept the transcendental nature of the Lord’s form,
name, etc. The topmost transcendentalist is not interested in anything
material, and his taking interest in the matter of the Lord’s activities is
definite proof that the Lord is not like one of us in the material world. In the
Vedic literatures also, it is confirmed that the Supreme Lord is one, but that
He is engaged in His transcendental pastimes in the company of His unalloyed
devotees and that simultaneously He is present as the Supersoul, an expansion
of Baladeva, in the heart of all living entities. Therefore, the highest
perfection of transcendental realization is to take pleasure in hearing and
describing the transcendental qualities of the Lord and not in merging into
His impersonal Brahman existence, for which the impersonalist monist aspires.
Real transcendental pleasure is realized in the glorification of the
transcendental Lord, and not in the feeling of being situated in His impersonal
feature. But there are also others who are not the topmost transcendentalists
but are in a lower status, and who do not take pleasure in describing the
transcendental activities of the Lord. Rather, they discuss such activities of the
Lord formally with the aim of merging into His existence.
TEXT 8
wd& >aaGavTa& NaaMa Paura<a& b]øSaiMMaTaMa( )
ADaqTavaNa( ÜaParadaE iPaTauÜOEPaaYaNaadhMa( )) 8 ))
idaà bhägavataà näma
puräëaà brahma-sammitam
adhétavän dväparädau
pitur dvaipäyanäd aham
SYNONYMS
idam—this; bhägavatam—Çrémad-Bhägavatam; näma—of the name;
puräëam—Vedic supplement; brahma-sammitam—approved as the essence of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Vedas; adhétavän—studied; dväpara-ädau—at the end of the
Dväpara-yuga; pituù—from my father; dvaipäyanät—Dvaipäyana Vyäsadeva;
aham—myself.
TRANSLATION
At the end of the Dväpara-yuga, I studied this great supplement of Vedic
literature named Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is equal to all the Vedas, from my
father, Çréla Dvaipäyana Vyäsadeva.
PURPORT
The statement made by Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé that the topmost
transcendentalist, who is beyond the jurisdiction of regulations and
restrictions, mainly takes to the task of hearing about and glorifying the
Personality of Godhead, is verified by his personal example. Çukadeva
Gosvämé, being a recognized liberated soul and the topmost transcendentalist,
was accepted by all of the topmost sages present in the meeting during the last
seven days of Mahäräja Parékñit. He cites from the example of his life that he
himself was attracted by the transcendental activities of the Lord, and he
studied Çrémad-Bhägavatam from his great father, Çré Dvaipäyana Vyäsadeva.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, or, for that matter, any other scientific literature, cannot
be studied at home by one’s own intellectual capacity. Medical books of
anatomy or physiology are available in the market, but no one can become a
qualified medical practitioner simply by reading such books at home. One has
to be admitted to the medical college and study the books under the guidance
of learned professors. Similarly, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the postgraduate study of
the science of Godhead, can only be learned by studying it at the feet of a
realized soul like Çréla Vyäsadeva. Although Çukadeva Gosvämé was a liberated
soul from the very day of his birth, he still had to take lessons of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam from his great father, Vyäsadeva, who compiled the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam under the instruction of another great soul, Çré Närada
Muni. Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu instructed a learned brähmaëa to study
Çrémad-Bhägavatam from a personal bhägavata. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is based on
the transcendental name, form, attributes, pastimes, entourage and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
variegatedness of the Supreme Person, and it is spoken by the incarnation of
the Personality of Godhead, Çréla Vyäsadeva. Pastimes of the Lord are
executed in cooperation with His pure devotees, and consequently historical
incidences are mentioned in this great literature because they are related to
Kåñëa. It is called brahma-sammitam because it is the sound representative of
Lord Kåñëa—like the Bhagavad-gétä. Bhagavad-gétä is the sound incarnation of
the Lord because it is spoken by the Supreme Lord, and Çrémad-Bhägavatam is
the sound representative of the Lord because it was spoken by the incarnation
of the Lord about the activities of the Lord. As stated in the beginning of this
book, it is the essence of the Vedic desire tree and the natural commentation
on the Brahma-sütras, the topmost philosophical thesis on the subject matter
of Brahman. Vyäsadeva appeared at the end of Dväpara-yuga as the son of
Satyavaté, and therefore the word dväpara-ädau, or “the beginning of
Dväpara-yuga,” in this context means just prior to the beginning of the
Kali-yuga. The logic of this statement, according to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, is
comparable to that of calling the upper portion of the tree the beginning. The
root of the tree is the beginning of the tree, but in common knowledge the
upper portion of the tree is first seen. In that way the end of the tree is
accepted as its beginning.
TEXT 9
PairiNaiïTaae_iPa NaEGauR<Ya otaMaëaek-l/Il/Yaa )
Ga*hqTaceTaa raJazeR Aa:YaaNa& YadDaqTavaNa( )) 9 ))
pariniñöhito ’pi nairguëya
uttama-çloka-lélayä
gåhéta-cetä räjarñe
äkhyänaà yad adhétavän
SYNONYMS
pariniñöhitaù—fully realized; api—in spite of; nairguëye—in transcendence;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
uttama—enlightened; çloka—verse; lélayä—by the pastimes; gåhéta—being
attracted; cetäù—attention; räjarñe—O saintly King; äkhyänam—delineation;
yat—that; adhétavän—I have studied.
TRANSLATION
O saintly King, I was certainly situated perfectly in transcendence, yet I was
still attracted by the delineation of the pastimes of the Lord, who is described by
enlightened verses.
PURPORT
The Absolute Truth is realized as the impersonal Brahman at the first
instance by philosophical speculation and later as the Supersoul by further
progress of transcendental knowledge. But if, by the grace of the Lord, an
impersonalist is enlightened by the superior statements of Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
he is also converted into a transcendental devotee of the Personality of
Godhead. With a poor fund of knowledge, we cannot adjust to the idea of the
personality of the Absolute Truth, and the personal activities of the Lord are
deplored by the less intelligent impersonalists; but reasons and arguments
together with the transcendental process of approaching the Absolute Truth
help even the staunch impersonalist to become attracted by the personal
activities of the Lord. A person like Çukadeva Gosvämé cannot be attracted by
any mundane activity, but when such a devotee is convinced by a superior
method, he is certainly attracted by the transcendental activities of the Lord.
The Lord is transcendental, as are His activities. He is neither inactive nor
impersonal.
TEXT 10
Tadh& Tae_i>aDaaSYaaiMa MahaPaaEåizk-ae >avaNa( )
YaSYa é[ÕDaTaaMaaéu SYaaNMauku-Nde MaiTa" SaTaq )) 10 ))
tad ahaà te ’bhidhäsyämi
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mahä-pauruñiko bhavän
yasya çraddadhatäm äçu
syän mukunde matiù saté
SYNONYMS
tat—that; aham—I; te—unto you; abhidhäsyämi—shall recite;
mahä-pauruñikaù—the most sincere devotee of Lord Kåñëa; bhavän—your
good self; yasya—of which; çraddadhatäm—of one who gives full respect and
attention; äçu—very soon; syät—it so becomes; mukunde—unto the Lord, who
awards salvation; matiù—faith; saté—unflinching.
TRANSLATION
That very Çrémad-Bhägavatam I shall recite before you because you are the
most sincere devotee of Lord Kåñëa. One who gives full attention and respect to
hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam achieves unflinching faith in the Supreme Lord,
the giver of salvation.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is recognized Vedic wisdom, and the system of
receiving Vedic knowledge is called avaroha-panthä, or the process of receiving
transcendental knowledge through bona fide disciplic succession. For
advancement of material knowledge there is a need for personal ability and
researching aptitude, but in the case of spiritual knowledge, all progress
depends more or less on the mercy of the spiritual master. The spiritual master
must be satisfied with the disciple; only then is knowledge automatically
manifest before the student of spiritual science. The process should not,
however, be misunderstood to be something like magical feats whereby the
spiritual master acts like a magician and injects spiritual knowledge into his
disciple, as if surcharging him with an electrical current. The bona fide
spiritual master reasonably explains everything to the disciple on the
authorities of Vedic wisdom. The disciple can receive such teachings not
exactly intellectually, but by submissive inquiries and a service attitude. The
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
idea is that both the spiritual master and the disciple must be bona fide. In this
case, the spiritual master, Çukadeva Gosvämé, is ready to recite exactly what he
has learned from his great father Çréla Vyäsadeva, and the disciple, Mahäräja
Parékñit, is a great devotee of Lord Kåñëa. A devotee of Lord Kåñëa is he who
believes sincerely that by becoming a devotee of the Lord one becomes fully
equipped with everything spiritual. This teaching is imparted by the Lord
Himself in the pages of the Bhagavad-gétä, in which it is clearly described that
the Lord (Çré Kåñëa) is everything, and that to surrender unto Him solely and
wholly makes one the most perfectly pious man. This unflinching faith in Lord
Kåñëa prepares one to become a student of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and one who
hears Çrémad-Bhägavatam from a devotee like Çukadeva Gosvämé is sure to
attain salvation at the end, as Mahäräja Parékñit did. The professional reciter
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam and the pseudodevotees whose faith is based on one
week’s hearing are different from Çukadeva Gosvämé and Mahäräja Parékñit.
Çréla Vyäsadeva explained Çrémad-Bhägavatam unto Çukadeva Gosvämé from
the very beginning of the janmädy asya [SB 1.1.1] verse, and so Çukadeva
Gosvämé also explained it to the Ding. Lord Kåñëa is described as the
Mahäpuruña in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (Canto Eleven) in His devotional
feature as Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is Lord
Kåñëa Himself in His devotional attitude, descended on earth to bestow special
favors upon the fallen souls of this age of Kali. There are two verses
particularly suitable to offer as prayers to this Mahäpuruña feature of Lord
Kåñëa.
dhyeyaà sadä paribhava-ghnam abhéñöa-dohaà
térthäspadaà çiva-viriïci-nutaà çaraëyam
bhåtyärti-haà praëata-päla bhaväbdhi-potaà
vande mahä-puruña te caraëäravindam
tyaktvä su-dustyaja-surepsita-räjya-lakñméà
dharmiñöha ärya-vacasä yad agäd araëyam
mäyä-mågaà dayitayepsitam anvadhävad
vande mahä-puruña te caraëäravindam
(Bhäg. 11.5.33–34)
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
In other words, puruña means the enjoyer, and mahäpuruña means the
supreme enjoyer, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa. One who
deserves to approach the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa is called the mahä-pauruñika.
Anyone who hears Çrémad-Bhägavatam attentively from its bona fide reciter is
sure to become a sincere devotee of the Lord, who is able to award liberation.
There was none so attentive as Mahäräja Parékñit in the matter of hearing
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and there was none so qualified as Çukadeva Gosvämé to
recite the text of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Therefore, anyone who follows in the
footsteps of either the ideal reciter or the ideal hearer, Çukadeva Gosvämé and
Mahäräja Parékñit respectively, will undoubtedly attain salvation like them.
Mahäräja Parékñit attained salvation by hearing only, and Çukadeva Gosvämé
attained salvation only by reciting. Recitation and hearing are two processes
out of nine devotional activities, and by strenuously following the principles,
either in all or by parts, one can attain the absolute plane. So the complete
text of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, beginning with the janmädy asya [SB 1.1.1] verse up
to the last one in the Twelfth Canto, was spoken by Çukadeva Gosvämé for the
attainment of salvation by Mahäräja Parékñit. In the Padma Puräëa, it is
mentioned that Gautama Muni advised Mahäräja Ambaréña to hear regularly
Çrémad-Bhägavatam as it was recited by Çukadeva Gosvämé, and herein it is
confirmed that Mahäräja Ambaréña heard Çrémad-Bhägavatam from the very
beginning to the end, as it was spoken by Çukadeva Gosvämé. One who is
actually interested in the Bhägavatam, therefore, must not play with it by
reading or hearing a portion from here and a portion from there; one must
follow in the footsteps of great kings like Mahäräja Ambaréña or Mahäräja
Parékñit and hear it from a bona fide representative of Çukadeva Gosvämé.
TEXT 11
WTaiàivRÛMaaNaaNaaiMaC^TaaMaku-Taae>aYaMa( )
YaaeiGaNaa& Na*Pa iNa<asTa& hreNaaRMaaNauk-ITaRNaMa( )) 11 ))
etan nirvidyamänänäm
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
icchatäm akuto-bhayam
yoginäà nåpa nirëétaà
harer nämänukértanam
SYNONYMS
etat—it is; nirvidyamänänäm—of those who are completely free from all
material desires; icchatäm—of those who are desirous of all sorts of material
enjoyment; akutaù-bhayam—free from all doubts and fear; yoginäm—of all
who are self-satisfied; nåpa—O King; nirëétam—decided truth; hareù—of the
Lord, Çré Kåñëa; näma—holy name; anu—after someone, always;
kértanam—chanting.
TRANSLATION
O King, constant chanting of the holy name of the Lord after the ways of the
great authorities is the doubtless and fearless way of success for all, including
those who are free from all material desires, those who are desirous of all
material enjoyment, and also those who are self-satisfied by dint of
transcendental knowledge.
PURPORT
In the previous verse, the great necessity for attaining attachment to
Mukunda has been accredited. There are different types of persons who desire
to attain success in different varieties of pursuits. Generally the persons are
materialists who desire to enjoy the fullest extent of material gratification.
Next to them are the transcendentalists, who have attained perfect knowledge
about the nature of material enjoyment and thus are aloof from such an
illusory way of life. More or less, they are satisfied in themselves by
self-realization. Above them are the devotees of the Lord, who neither aspire
to enjoy the material world nor desire to get out of it. They are after the
satisfaction of the Lord, Çré Kåñëa. In other words, the devotees of the Lord do
not want anything on their personal account. If the Lord desires, the devotees
can accept all sorts of material facilities, and if the Lord does not desire this,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the devotees can leave aside all sorts of facilities, even up to the limit of
salvation. Nor are they self-satisfied, because they want the satisfaction of the
Lord only. In this verse, Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé recommends the
transcendental chanting of the holy name of the Lord. By offenseless chanting
and hearing of the holy name of the Lord, one becomes acquainted with the
transcendental form of the Lord, and then with the attributes of the Lord, and
then with the transcendental nature of His pastimes, etc. Here it is mentioned
that one should constantly chant the holy name of the Lord after hearing it
from authorities. This means that hearing from the authorities is the first
essential. Hearing of the holy name gradually promotes one to the stage of
hearing about His form, about His attributes, His pastimes and so on, and thus
the necessity of the chanting of His glories develops successively. This process
is recommended not only for the successful execution of devotional service,
but also even for those who are materially attached. According to Çré
Çukadeva Gosvämé, this way of attaining success is an established fact,
concluded not only by him, but also by all other previous äcäryas. Therefore,
there is no need of further evidence. The process is recommended not only for
the progressive students in different departments of ideological success, but
also for those who are already successful in their achievement as fruitive
workers, as philosophers or as devotees of the Lord.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé instructs that chanting of the holy name of the Lord
should be loudly done, and it should be performed offenselessly as well, as
recommended in the Padma Puräëa. One can deliver himself from the effects
of all sins by surrendering himself unto the Lord. One can deliver himself from
all offenses at the feet of the Lord by taking shelter of His holy name. But one
cannot protect himself if one commits an offense at the feet of the holy name
of the Lord. Such offenses are mentioned in the Padma Puräëa as being ten in
number. The first offense is to vilify the great devotees who have preached
about the glories of the Lord. The second offense is to see the holy names of
the Lord in terms of worldly distinction. The Lord is the proprietor of all the
universes, and therefore He may be known in different places by different
names, but that does not in any way qualify the fullness of the Lord. Any
nomenclature which is meant for the Supreme Lord is as holy as the others
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
because they are all meant for the Lord. Such holy names are as powerful as
the Lord, and there is no bar for anyone in any part of the creation to chant
and glorify the Lord by the particular name of the Lord as it is locally
understood. They are all auspicious, and one should not distinguish such
names of the Lord as material commodities. The third offense is to neglect the
orders of the authorized äcäryas or spiritual masters. The fourth offense is to
vilify scriptures or Vedic knowledge. The fifth offense is to define the holy
name of the Lord in terms of one’s mundane calculation. The holy name of the
Lord is identical with the Lord Himself, and one should understand the holy
name of the Lord to be nondifferent from Him. The sixth offense is to
interpret the holy name. The Lord is not imaginary, nor is His holy name.
There are persons with a poor fund of knowledge who think the Lord to be an
imagination of the worshiper and therefore think His holy name to be
imaginary. Such a chanter of the name of the Lord cannot achieve the desired
success in the matter of chanting the holy name. The seventh offense is to
commit sins intentionally on the strength of the holy name. In the scriptures it
is said that one can be liberated from the effects of all sinful actions simply by
chanting the holy name of the Lord. One who takes advantage of this
transcendental method and continues to commit sins on the expectation of
neutralizing the effects of sins by chanting the holy name of the Lord is the
greatest offender at the feet of the holy name. Such an offender cannot purify
himself by any recommended method of purification. In other words, one may
be a sinful man before chanting the holy name of the Lord, but after taking
shelter in the holy name of the Lord and becoming immune, one should
strictly restrain oneself from committing sinful acts with a hope that his
method of chanting the holy name will give him protection. The eighth
offense is to consider the holy name of the Lord and His chanting method to
be equal to some material auspicious activity. There are various kinds of good
works for material benefits, but the holy name and His chanting are not mere
auspicious holy services. Undoubtedly the holy name is holy service, but He
should never be utilized for such purposes. Since the holy name and the Lord
are of one and the same identity, one should not try to bring the holy name
into the service of mankind. The idea is that the Supreme Lord is the supreme
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
enjoyer. He is no one’s servant or order supplier. Similarly, since the holy
name of the Lord is identical with the Lord, one should not try to utilize the
holy name for one’s personal service.
The ninth offense is to instruct those who are not interested in chanting
the holy name of the Lord about the transcendental nature of the holy name,
if such instruction is imparted to an unwilling audience, the act is considered
to be an offense at the feet of the holy name. The tenth offense is to become
uninterested in the holy name of the Lord even after hearing of the
transcendental nature of the holy name. The effect of chanting the holy name
of the Lord is perceived by the chanter as liberation from the conception of
false egoism. False egoism is exhibited by thinking oneself to be the enjoyer of
the world and thinking everything in the world to be meant for the enjoyment
of one’s self only. The whole materialistic world is moving under such false
egoism of “I” and “mine,” but the factual effect of chanting the holy name is to
become free from such misconceptions.
TEXT 12
ik&- Pa[MataSYa bhui>a" Parae+aEhaRYaNaEirh )
vr& MauhUTa| ividTa& ga$=Tae é[eYaSae YaTa" )) 12 ))
kià pramattasya bahubhiù
parokñair häyanair iha
varaà muhürtaà viditaà
ghaöate çreyase yataù
SYNONYMS
kim—what is; pramattasya—of the bewildered; bahubhiù—by many;
parokñaiù—inexperienced; häyanaiù—years; iha—in this world;
varam—better; muhürtam—a moment; viditam—conscious; ghaöate—one can
try for; çreyase—in the matter of the supreme interest; yataù—by that.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
What is the value of a prolonged life which is wasted, inexperienced by years
in this world? Better a moment of full consciousness, because that gives one a
start in searching after his supreme interest.
PURPORT
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé instructed Mahäräja Parékñit about the importance
of the chanting of the holy name of the Lord by every progressive gentleman.
In order to encourage the Ding, who had only seven remaining days of life,
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé asserted that there is no use in living hundreds of
years without any knowledge of the problems of life—better to live for a
moment with full consciousness of the supreme interest to be fulfilled. The
supreme interest of life is eternal, with full knowledge and bliss. Those who are
bewildered by the external features of the material world and are engaged in
the animal propensities of the eat-drink-and-be-merry type of life are simply
wasting their lives by the unseen passing away of valuable years. We should
know in perfect consciousness that human life is bestowed upon the
conditioned soul to achieve spiritual success, and the easiest possible procedure
to attain this end is to chant the holy name of the Lord. In the previous verse,
we have discussed this point to a certain extent, and we may further be
enlightened on the different types of offenses committed unto the feet of the
holy name. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé Prabhu has quoted many passages from
authentic scriptures and has ably supported the statements in the matter of
offenses at the feet of the holy name. From Viñëu-yämala Tantra, Çréla Jéva
Gosvämé has proven that one can be liberated from the effects of all sins
simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord. Quoting from the Märkaëòeya
Puräëa, Çré Gosväméjé says that one should neither blaspheme the devotee of
the Lord nor indulge in hearing others who are engaged in belittling a devotee
of the Lord. A devotee should try to restrict the vilifier by cutting out his
tongue, and being unable to do so, one should commit suicide rather than hear
the blaspheming of the devotee of the Lord. The conclusion is that one should
neither hear nor allow vilification of a devotee of the Lord. As far as
distinguishing the Lord’s holy name from the names of the demigods, the
revealed scriptures disclose (Bg. 10.41) that all extraordinarily powerful beings
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
are but parts and parcels of the supreme energetic, Lord Kåñëa. Except for the
Lord Himself, everyone is subordinate; no one is independent of the Lord.
Since no one is more powerful than or equal to the energy of the Supreme
Lord, no one’s name can be as powerful as that of the Lord. By chanting the
Lord’s holy name, one can derive all the stipulated energy synchronized from
all sources. Therefore, one should not equalize the supreme holy name of the
Lord with any other name. Brahmä, Çiva or any other powerful god can never
be equal to the Supreme Lord Viñëu. The powerful holy name of the Lord can
certainly deliver one from sinful effects, but one who desires to utilize this
transcendental potency of the holy name of the Lord in one’s sinister activities
is the most degraded person in the world. Such persons are never excused by
the Lord or by any agent of the Lord. One should, therefore, utilize one’s life
in glorifying the Lord by all means, without any offense. Such activity of life,
even for a moment, is never to be compared to a prolonged life of ignorance,
like the lives of the tree and other living entities who may live for thousands of
years without prosecuting spiritual advancement.
TEXT 13
%Èa®ae NaaMa raJaizRjaRTveYataaiMahaYauz" )
MauhUTaaRTSavRMauTSa*JYa GaTavaNa>aYa& hirMa( )) 13 ))
khaöväìgo näma räjarñir
jïätveyattäm ihäyuñaù
muhürtät sarvam utsåjya
gatavän abhayaà harim
SYNONYMS
khaöväìgaù—King Khaöväìga; näma—name; räja-åñiù—saintly king;
jïätvä—by knowing; iyattäm—duration; iha—in this world; äyuñaù—of one’s
life; muhürtät—within only a moment; sarvam—everything; utsåjya—leaving
aside; gatavän—had undergone; abhayam—fully safe; harim—the Personality
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The saintly King Khaöväìga, after being informed that the duration of his
life would be only a moment more, at once freed himself from all material
activities and took shelter of the supreme safety, the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
A fully responsible man should always be conscious of the prime duty of the
present human form of life. The activities to meet the immediate necessities of
material life are not everything. One should always be alert in his duty for
attainment of the best situation in the next life. Human life is meant for
preparing ourselves for that prime duty. Mahäräja Khaöväìga is mentioned
herein as a saintly king because even within the responsibility of the state
management, he was not at all forgetful of the prime duty of life. Such was the
case with other räjarñis (saintly kings), like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and
Mahäräja Parékñit. They were all exemplary personalities on account of their
being alert in discharging their prime duty. Mahäräja Khaöväìga was invited
by the demigods in the higher planets to fight demons, and as a king he fought
the battles to the full satisfaction of the demigods. The demigods, being fully
satisfied with him, wanted to give him some benediction for material
enjoyment, but Mahäräja Khaöväìga, being very much alert to his prime duty,
inquired from the demigods about his remaining duration of life. This means
that he was not as anxious to accumulate some material benediction from the
demigods as he was to prepare himself for the next life. He was informed by
the demigods, however, that his life would last only a moment longer. The king
at once left the heavenly kingdom, which is always full of material enjoyment
of the highest standard, and coming down to this earth, took ultimate shelter
of the all-safe Personality of Godhead. He was successful in his great attempt
and achieved liberation. This attempt, even for a moment, by the saintly king,
was successful because he was always alert to his prime duty. Mahäräja Parékñit
was thus encouraged by the great Çukadeva Gosvämé, even though he had only
seven days left in his life to execute the prime duty of hearing the glories of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Lord in the form of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. By the will of the Lord, Mahäräja
Parékñit instantly met the great Çukadeva Gosvämé, and thus the great treasure
of spiritual success left by him is nicely mentioned in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 14
TavaPYaeTaihR k-aErVYa Saáah& JaqivTaaviDa" )
oPak-LPaYa TaTSav| TaavÛTSaaMParaiYak-Ma( )) 14 ))
taväpy etarhi kauravya
saptähaà jévitävadhiù
upakalpaya tat sarvaà
tävad yat sämparäyikam
SYNONYMS
tava—your; api—also; etarhi—therefore; kauravya—O one born in the family
of Kuru; saptäham—seven days; jévita—duration of life; avadhiù—up to the
limit of; upakalpaya—get them performed; tat—those; sarvam—all; tävat—so
long; yat—which are; sämparäyikam—rituals for the next life.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit, now your duration of life is limited to seven more days, so
during this time you can perform all those rituals which are needed for the best
purpose of your next life.
PURPORT
Çukadeva Gosvämé, after citing the example of Mahäräja Khaöväìga, who
prepared himself for the next life within a very short time, encouraged
Mahäräja Parékñit by saying that since he still had seven days at his disposal, he
could easily take advantage of the time to prepare himself for the next life.
Indirectly, the Gosvämé told Mahäräja Parékñit that be should take shelter of
the sound representation of the Lord for the seven days still remaining in the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
duration of his life and thus get himself liberated. In other words, everyone
can best prepare himself for the next life simply by hearing
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, as it was recited by Çukadeva Gosvämé to Mahäräja
Parékñit. The rituals are not formal, but there are also some favorable
conditions, which are required to be carried out, as instructed hereafter.
TEXT 15
ANTak-ale/ Tau Pauåz AaGaTae GaTaSaaßSa" )
i^NÛadSa®Xañe<a SPa*ha& dehe_Nau Yae c TaMa( )) 15 ))
anta-käle tu puruña
ägate gata-sädhvasaù
chindyäd asaìga-çastreëa
spåhäà dehe ’nu ye ca tam
SYNONYMS
anta-käle—at the last stage of life; tu—but; puruñaù—a person; ägate—having
arrived; gata-sädhvasaù—without any fear of death; chindyät—must cut off;
asaìga—nonattachment; çastreëa—by the weapon of; spåhäm—all desires;
dehe—in the matter of the material tabernacle; anu—pertaining; ye—all that;
ca—also; tam—them.
TRANSLATION
At the last stage of one’s life, one should be bold enough not to be afraid of
death. But one must cut off all attachment to the material body and everything
pertaining to it and all desires thereof.
PURPORT
The foolishness of gross materialism is that people think of making a
permanent settlement in this world, although it is a settled fact that one has to
give up everything here that has been created by valuable human energy.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Great statesmen, scientists, philosophers, etc., who are foolish, without any
information of the spirit soul, think that this life of a few years only is all in all
and that there is nothing more after death. This poor fund of knowledge, even
in the so-called learned circles of the world, is killing the vitality of human
energy, and the awful result is being keenly felt. And yet the foolish
materialistic men do not care about what is going to happen in the next life.
The preliminary instruction in the Bhagavad-gétä is that one should know that
the identity of the individual living entity is not lost even after the end of this
present body, which is nothing but an outward dress only. As one changes an
old garment, so the individual living being also changes his body, and this
change of body is called death. Death is therefore a process of changing the
body at the end of the duration of the present life. An intelligent person must
be prepared for this and must try to have the best type of body in the next life.
The best type of body is a spiritual body, which is obtained by those who go
back to the kingdom of God or enter the realm of Brahman. In the second
chapter of this canto, this matter will be broadly discussed, but as far as the
change of body is concerned, one must prepare now for the next life. Foolish
people attach more importance to the present temporary life, and thus the
foolish leaders make appeals to the body and the bodily relations. The bodily
relations extend not only to this body but also to the family members, wife,
children, society, country and so many other things which end at the end of
life. After death one forgets everything about the present bodily relations; we
have a little experience of this at night when we go to sleep. While sleeping,
we forget everything about this body and bodily relations, although this
forgetfulness is a temporary situation for only a few hours. Death is nothing
but sleeping for a few months in order to develop another term of bodily
encagement, which we are awarded by the law of nature according to our
aspiration. Therefore, one has only to change the aspiration during the course
of this present body, and for this there is need of training in the current
duration of human life. This training can be begun at any stage of life, or even
a few seconds before death, but the usual procedure is for one to get the
training from very early life, from the stage of brahmacarya, and gradually
progress to the gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa orders of life. The
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
institution which gives such training is called varëäçrama-dharma, or the
system of sanätana-dharma, the best procedure for making the human life
perfect. One is therefore required to give up the attachment to family or social
or political life just at the age of fifty years, if not earlier, and the training in
the vänaprastha and sannyäsa-äçramas is given for preparation of the next life.
Foolish materialists, in the garb of leaders of the people in general, stick to
family affairs without attempting to cut off relations with them, and thus they
become victims of nature’s law and get gross bodies again, according to their
work. Such foolish leaders may have some respect from the people at the end
of life, but that does not mean that such leaders will be immune to the natural
laws under which everyone is tightly bound by the hands and feet. The best
thing is, therefore, that everyone voluntarily give up family relations by
transferring attachment from family, society, country, and everything thereof
to the devotional service of the Lord. It is stated herein that one should give
up all desires of family attachment. One must have a chance for better desires;
otherwise there is no chance of giving up such morbid desires. Desire is the
concomitant factor of the living entity. The living entity is eternal, and
therefore his desires, which are natural for a living being, are also eternal. One
cannot, therefore, stop desiring, but the subject matter for desires can be
changed. So one must develop the desires for returning back home, back to
Godhead, and automatically the desires for material gain, material honor and
material popularity will diminish in proportion to the development of
devotional service. A living being is meant for service activities, and his
desires are centered around such a service attitude. Beginning from the top
executive head of the state down to the insignificant pauper in the street, all
are rendering some sort of service to others. The perfection of such a service
attitude is only attained simply by transferring the desire of service from
matter to spirit, or from Satan to God.
TEXT 16
Ga*haTa( Pa[v]iJaTaae Daqr" Pau<YaTaqQaRJal/aPlu/Ta" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
éucaE iviv¢- AaSaqNaae iviDavTk-iLPaTaaSaNae )) 16 ))
gåhät pravrajito dhéraù
puëya-tértha-jaläplutaù
çucau vivikta äséno
vidhivat kalpitäsane
SYNONYMS
gåhät—from one’s home; pravrajitaù—having gone out;
dhéraù—self-controlled; puëya—pious; tértha—sacred place;
jala-äplutaù—fully washed; çucau—cleansed; vivikte—solitary; äsénaù—seated;
vidhivat—according to regulations; kalpita—having done; äsane—on a sitting
place.
TRANSLATION
One should leave home and practice self-control. In a sacred place he should
bathe regularly and sit down in a lonely place duly sanctified.
PURPORT
To prepare oneself for the better next life, one must get out of one’s
so-called home. The system of varëäçrama-dharma, or sanätana-dharma,
prescribes retirement from family encumbrances as early as possible after one
has passed fifty years of age. Modern civilization is based on family comforts,
the highest standard of amenities, and therefore after retirement everyone
expects to live a very comfortable life in a well-furnished home decorated with
fine ladies and children, without any desire to get out of such a comfortable
home. High government officers and ministers stick to their prize posts until
death, and they neither dream nor desire to get out of homely comforts. Bound
by such hallucinations, materialistic men prepare various plans for a still more
comfortable life, but suddenly cruel death comes without mercy and takes away
the great planmaker against his desire, forcing him to give up the present body
for another body. Such a planmaker is thus forced to accept another body in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
one of the 8,400,000 species of life according to the fruits of the work he has
performed. In the next life, persons who are too much attached to family
comforts are generally awarded lower species of life on account of sinful acts
performed during a long duration of sinful life, and thus all the energy of the
human life is spoiled. In order to be saved from the danger of spoiling the
human form of life and being attached to unreal things, one must take warning
of death at the age of fifty, if not earlier. The principle is that one should take
it for granted that the death warning is already there, even prior to the
attainment of fifty years of age, and thus at any stage of life one should prepare
himself for a better next life. The system of the sanätana-dharma institution is
so made that the follower is trained for the better next life without any chance
that the human life will be spoiled. The holy places all over the world are
meant for the residential purposes of retired persons getting ready for a better
next life. Intelligent persons must go there at the end of life, and for that
matter, after fifty years of age, to live a life of spiritual regeneration for the
sake of being freed from family attachment, which is considered to he the
shackle of material life. One is recommended to quit home just to get rid of
material attachment because one who sticks to family life until death cannot
get rid of material attachment and as long as one is materially attached one
cannot understand spiritual freedom. One should not, however, become
self-complacent simply by leaving home or by creating another home at the
holy place, either lawfully or unlawfully. Many persons leave home and go to
such holy places, but due to bad association, again become family men by illicit
connection with the opposite sex. The illusory energy of matter is so strong
that one is apt to be under such illusion at every stage of life, even after
quitting one’s happy home. Therefore, it is essential that one practice
self-control by celibacy without the least desire for sex indulgence. For a man
desiring to improve the condition of his existence, sex indulgence is
considered suicidal, or even worse. Therefore, to live apart from family life
means to become self-controlled in regard to all sense desires, especially sex
desires. The method is that one should have a duly sanctified sitting place
made of straw, deerskin and carpet, and thus sitting on it one should chant the
holy name of the Lord without offense, as prescribed above. The whole process
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
is to drag the mind from material engagements and fix it on the lotus feet of
the Lord. This simple process alone will help one advance to the highest stage
of spiritual success.
TEXT 17
A>YaSaeNMaNaSaa éuÖ& i}av*d(b]øa+ar& ParMa( )
MaNaae YaC^eiÂTaìaSaae b]øbqJaMaivSMarNa( )) 17 ))
abhyasen manasä çuddhaà
trivåd-brahmäkñaraà param
mano yacchej jita-çväso
brahma-béjam avismaran
SYNONYMS
abhyaset—one should practice; manasä—by the mind; çuddham—sacred;
tri-våt—composed of the three; brahma-akñaram—transcendental letters;
param—the supreme; manaù—mind; yacchet—get under control;
jita-çväsaù—by regulating the breathing air; brahma—absolute; béjam—seed;
avismaran—without being forgotten.
TRANSLATION
After sitting in the above manner, make the mind remember the three
transcendental letters [a-u-m], and by regulating the breathing process, control
the mind so as not to forget the transcendental seed.
PURPORT
Oàkära, or the praëava, is the seed of transcendental realization, and it is
composed of the three transcendental letters a-u-m. By its chanting by the
mind, in conjunction with the breathing process, which is a transcendental
but mechanical way of getting into trance, as devised by the experience of
great mystics, one is able to bring the mind, which is materially absorbed,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
under control. This is the way of changing the habit of the mind. The mind is
not to be killed. Mind or desire cannot be stopped, but to develop a desire to
function for spiritual realization, the quality of engagement by the mind has to
be changed. The mind is the pivot of the active sense organs, and as such if the
quality of thinking, feeling and willing is changed, naturally the quality of
actions by the instrumental senses will also change. Oàkära is the seed of all
transcendental sound and it is only the transcendental sound which can bring
about the desired change of the mind and the senses. Even a mentally
deranged man can be cured by treatment of transcendental sound. In the
Bhagavad-gétä, the praëava (oàkära) has been accepted as the direct, literal
representation of the Supreme Absolute Truth. One who is not able to chant
directly the holy name of the Lord, as recommended above, can easily chant
the praëava (oàkära). This oàkära is a note of address, such as “O my Lord,”
just as oà hari om means “O my Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.”
As we have explained before, the Lord’s holy name is identical with the Lord
Himself. So also is oàkära. But persons who are unable to realize the
transcendental personal form or name of the Lord on account of their
imperfect senses (in other words, the neophytes) are trained to the practice of
self-realization by this mechanical process of regulating the breathing function
and simultaneously repeating the praëava (oàkära) within the mind. As we
have several times expressed, since the transcendental name, form, attributes,
pastimes, etc., of the Personality of Godhead are impossible to understand with
the present material senses, it is necessary that through the mind, the center of
sensual activities, such transcendental realization be set into motion. The
devotees directly fix their minds on the Person of the Absolute Truth. But one
who is unable to accommodate such personal features of the Absolute is
disciplined in impersonality to train the mind to make further progress.
TEXT 18
iNaYaC^eiÜzYae>Yaae_+aaNMaNaSaa buiÖSaariQa" )
MaNa" k-MaRi>arai+aá& éu>aaQaeR DaarYaeiÖYaa )) 18 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
niyacched viñayebhyo ’kñän
manasä buddhi-särathiù
manaù karmabhir äkñiptaà
çubhärthe dhärayed dhiyä
SYNONYMS
niyacchet—withdraw; viñayebhyaù—from sense engagements; akñän—the
senses; manasä—by dint of the mind; buddhi—intelligence; särathiù—driver;
manaù—the mind; karmabhiù—by the fruitive work; äkñiptam—being
absorbed in; çubha-arthe—for the sake of the Lord; dhärayet—hold up;
dhiyä—in full consciousness.
TRANSLATION
Gradually, as the mind becomes progressively spiritualized, withdraw it from
sense activities, and by intelligence the senses will be controlled. The mind too
absorbed in material activities can be engaged in the service of the Personality
of Godhead and become fixed in full transcendental consciousness.
PURPORT
The first process of spiritualizing the mind by mechanical chanting of the
praëava (oàkära) and by control of the breathing system is technically called
the mystic or yogic process of präëäyäma, or fully controlling the breathing air.
The ultimate state of this präëäyäma system is to be fixed in trance,
technically called samädhi. But experience has proven that even the samädhi
stage also fails to control the materially absorbed mind. For example, the great
mystic Viçvämitra Muni, even in the stage of samadhi, became a victim of the
senses and cohabited with Menakä. History has already recorded this. The
mind, although ceasing to think of sensual activities at present, remembers
past sensual activities from the subconscious status and thus disturbs one from
cent percent engagement in self-realization. Therefore, Çukadeva Gosvämé
recommends the next step of assured policy, namely to fix one’s mind in the
service of the Personality of Godhead. Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Personality of Godhead, also recommends this direct process in the
Bhagavad-gétä (6.47). Thus, the mind being spiritually cleansed, one should at
once engage himself in the transcendental loving service of the Lord by the
different devotional activities of hearing, chanting, etc. If performed under
proper guidance, that is the surest path of progress, even for the disturbed
mind.
TEXT 19
Ta}aEk-avYav& DYaaYaedVYauiC^àeNa ceTaSaa )
MaNaae iNaivRzYa& Yau¤-a TaTa" ik-ÄNa Na SMareTa( )
Pad& TaTParMa& ivZ<aaeMaRNaae Ya}a Pa[SaqdiTa )) 19 ))
tatraikävayavaà dhyäyed
avyucchinnena cetasä
mano nirviñayaà yuktvä
tataù kiïcana na smaret
padaà tat paramaà viñëor
mano yatra prasédati
SYNONYMS
tatra—thereafter; eka—one by one; avayavam—limbs of the body;
dhyäyet—should be concentrated upon; avyucchinnena—without being
deviated from the complete form; cetasä—by the mind; manaù—mind;
nirviñayam—without being contaminated by sense objects; yuktvä—being
dovetailed; tataù—after that; kiïcana—anything; na—do not; smaret—think
of; padam—personality; tat—that; paramam—Supreme; viñëoù—of Viñëu;
manaù—the mind; yatra—whereupon; prasédati—becomes reconciled.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, you should meditate upon the limbs of Viñëu, one after another,
without being deviated from the conception of the complete body. Thus the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mind becomes free from all sense objects. There should be no other thing to be
thought upon. Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, is the
Ultimate Truth, the mind becomes completely reconciled in Him only.
PURPORT
Foolish persons, bewildered by the external energy of Viñëu, do not know
that the ultimate goal of the progressive search after happiness is to get in
touch directly with Lord Viñëu, the Personality of Godhead. Viñëu-tattva is an
unlimited expansion of different transcendental forms of the Personality of
Godhead, and the supreme or original form of viñëu-tattva is Govinda, or Lord
Kåñëa, the supreme cause of all causes. Therefore, thinking of Viñëu or
meditating upon the transcendental form of Viñëu, specifically upon Lord
Kåñëa, is the last word on the subject of meditation. This meditation may be
begun from the lotus feet of the Lord. One should not, however, forget or be
misled from the complete form of the Lord; thus one should practice thinking
of the different parts of His transcendental body, one after another. Here in
this verse, it is definitely assured that the Supreme Lord is not impersonal. He
is a person, but His body is different from those of conditioned persons like us.
Otherwise, meditation beginning from the praëava (oàkära) up to the limbs of
the personal body of Viñëu would not have been recommended by Çukadeva
Gosvämé for the attainment of complete spiritual perfection. The Viñëu forms
of worship in great temples of India are not, therefore, arrangements of idol
worship, as they are wrongly interpreted to be by a class of men with a poor
fund of knowledge; rather, they are different spiritual centers of meditation on
the transcendental limbs of the body of Viñëu. The worshipable Deity in the
temple of Viñëu is identical with Lord Viñëu by the inconceivable potency of
the Lord. Therefore, a neophyte’s concentration or meditation upon the limbs
of Viñëu in the temple, as contemplated in the revealed scriptures, is an easy
opportunity for meditation for persons who are unable to sit down tightly at
one place and then concentrate upon praëava oàkära or the limbs of the body
of Viñëu, as recommended herein by Çukadeva Gosvämé, the great authority.
The common man can benefit more by meditating on the form of Viñëu in the
temple than on the oàkära, the spiritual combination of a-u-m as explained
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
before. There is no difference between oàkära and the forms of Viñëu, but
persons unacquainted with the science of Absolute Truth try to create
dissension by differentiating between the forms of Viñëu and that of oàkära.
Here it is indicated that the Viñëu form is the ultimate goal of meditation, and
as such it is better to concentrate upon the forms of Viñëu than on impersonal
oàkära. The latter process is also more difficult than the former.
TEXT 20
rJaSTaMaae>YaaMaai+aá& ivMaU!& MaNa AaTMaNa" )
YaC^eÖar<aYaa Daqrae hiNTa Yaa TaTk*-Ta& Mal/Ma( )) 20 ))
rajas-tamobhyäm äkñiptaà
vimüòhaà mana ätmanaù
yacched dhäraëayä dhéro
hanti yä tat-kåtaà malam
SYNONYMS
rajaù—the passionate mode of nature; tamobhyäm—as well as by the ignorant
mode of material nature; äkñiptam—agitated; vimüòham—bewildered;
manaù—the mind; ätmanaù—of one’s own; yacchet—get it rectified;
dhäraëayä—by conception (of Viñëu); dhéraù—the pacified; hanti—destroys;
yä—all those; tat-kåtam—done by them; malam—dirty things.
TRANSLATION
One’s mind is always agitated by the passionate mode of material nature and
bewildered by the ignorant mode of nature. But one can rectify such
conceptions by the relation of Viñëu and thus become pacified by cleansing the
dirty things created by them.
PURPORT
Persons generally conducted by the modes of passion and ignorance cannot
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
be bona fide candidates for being situated in the transcendental stage of God
realization. Only persons conducted by the mode of goodness can have the
knowledge of the Supreme Truth. Effects of the modes of passion and
ignorance are manifested by too much hankering after wealth and women.
And those who are too much after wealth and women can rectify their
leanings only by constant remembrance of Viñëu in His potential impersonal
feature. Generally the impersonalists or monists are influenced by the modes
of passion and ignorance. Such impersonalists think of themselves as liberated
souls, but they have no knowledge of the transcendental personal feature of
the Absolute Truth. Actually they are impure in heart on account of being
devoid of knowledge of the personal feature of the Absolute. In the
Bhagavad-gétä, it is said that after many hundreds of births, the impersonal
philosopher surrenders unto the Personality of Godhead. To acquire such a
qualification of God realization in the personal feature, the neophyte
impersonalist is given a chance to realize the relation of the Lord in everything
by the philosophy of pantheism.
Pantheism in its higher status does not permit the student to form an
impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth, but it extends the conception of
the Absolute Truth into the field of the so-called material energy. Everything
created by the material energy can be dovetailed with the Absolute by an
attitude of service, which is the essential part of living energy. The pure
devotee of the Lord knows the art of converting everything into its spiritual
existence by this service attitude, and only in that devotional way can the
theory of pantheism be perfected.
TEXT 21
YaSYaa& SaNDaaYaRMaa<aaYaa& YaaeiGaNaae >ai¢-l/+a<a" )
Aaéu SaMPaÛTae YaaeGa Aaé[Ya& >ad]Maq+aTa" )) 21 ))
yasyäà sandhäryamäëäyäà
yogino bhakti-lakñaëaù
äçu sampadyate yoga
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
äçrayaà bhadram ékñataù
SYNONYMS
yasyäm—by such systematic remembrance; sandhäryamäëäyäm—and thus
being fixed in the habit of; yoginaù—the mystics; bhakti-lakñaëaù—being
practiced to the devotional system; äçu—very soon; sampadyate—attains
success; yogaù—connection by devotional service; äçrayam—under the shelter
of; bhadram—the all-good; ékñataù—which seeing that.
TRANSLATION
O King, by this system of remembrance and by being fixed in the habit of
seeing the all-good personal conception of the Lord, one can very soon attain
devotional service to the Lord, under His direct shelter.
PURPORT
Success of mystic performances is achieved only by the help of the
devotional attitude. Pantheism, or the system of feeling the presence of the
Almighty everywhere, is a sort of training of the mind to become accustomed
to the devotional conception, and it is this devotional attitude of the mystic
that makes possible the successful termination of such mystic attempts. One is
not, however, elevated to such a successful status without the tinge of mixture
in devotional service. The devotional atmosphere created by pantheistic vision
develops into devotional service in later days, and that is the only benefit for
the impersonalist. It is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (12.5) that the
impersonal way of self-realization is more troublesome because it reaches the
goal in an indirect way, although the impersonalist also becomes obsessed with
the personal feature of the Lord after a long time.
TEXT 22
raJaaevac
YaQaa SaNDaaYaRTae b]øNa( Daar<aa Ya}a SaMMaTaa )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Yaad*Xaq va hredaéu PauåzSYa MaNaaeMal/Ma( )) 22 ))
räjoväca
yathä sandhäryate brahman
dhäraëä yatra sammatä
yädåçé vä hared äçu
puruñasya mano-malam
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—the fortunate King said; yathä—as it is; sandhäryate—the
conception is made; brahman—O brähmaëa; dhäraëä—conception;
yatra—where and how; sammatä—in a summary; yädåçé—the way by which;
vä—or; haret—extricated; äçu—without delay; puruñasya—of a person;
manaù—of the mind; malam—dirty things.
TRANSLATION
The fortunate King Parékñit, inquiring further, said: O brähmaëa, please
describe in full detail how and where the mind has to be applied and how the
conception can be fixed so that the dirty things in a person’s mind can be
removed.
PURPORT
The dirty things in the heart of a conditioned soul are the root cause of all
troubles for him. A conditioned soul is surrounded by the manifold miseries of
material existence, but on account of his gross ignorance he is unable to
remove the troubles due to dirty things in the heart, accumulated during the
long prison life in the material world. He is actually meant to serve the will of
the Supreme Lord, but on account of the dirty things in the heart, he likes to
serve his concocted desires. These desires, instead of giving him any peace of
mind, create new problems and thus bind him to the cycle of repeated birth
and death. These dirty things of fruitive work and empiric philosophy can be
removed only by association with the Supreme Lord. The Lord, being
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
omnipotent, can offer His association by His inconceivable potencies. Thus
persons who are unable to pin their faith on the personal feature of the
Absolute are given a chance to associate with His viräö-rüpa, or the cosmic
impersonal feature of the Lord. The cosmic impersonal feature of the Lord is a
feature of His unlimited potencies. Since the potent and potencies are
identical, even the conception of His impersonal cosmic feature helps the
conditioned soul to associate with the Lord indirectly and thus gradually rise
to the stage of personal contact.
Mahäräja Parékñit was already directly connected with the personal feature
of the Lord Çré Kåñëa, and as such he had no need to inquire from Çukadeva
Gosvämé about where and how to apply the mind in the impersonal viräö-rüpa
of the Lord. But he inquired after a detailed description of the matter for the
benefit of others, who are unable to conceive of the transcendental personal
feature of the Lord as the form of eternity, knowledge and bliss. The
nondevotee class of men cannot think of the personal feature of the Lord.
Because of their poor fund of knowledge, the personal form of the Lord, like
Räma or Kåñëa, is completely revolting to them. They have a poor estimation
of the potency of the Lord. In the Bhagavad-gétä (9.11) it is explained by the
Lord Himself that people with a poor fund of knowledge deride the supreme
personality of the Lord, taking Him to be a common man. Such men are
ignorant of the inconceivable potency of the Lord. By the inconceivable
potency of the Lord, He can move in human society or any other society of
living beings and yet remain the same omnipotent Lord, without deviating in
the slightest from His transcendental position. So, for the benefit of men who
are unable to accept the Lord in His personal eternal form, Mahäräja Parékñit
inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé how to fix the mind on Him in the
beginning, and the Gosvämé replied in detail as follows.
TEXT 23
é[qéuk- ovac
iJaTaaSaNaae iJaTaìaSaae iJaTaSa®ae iJaTaeiNd]Ya" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SQaUle/ >aGavTaae æPae MaNa" SaNDaarYaeiÖYaa )) 23 ))
çré-çuka uväca
jitäsano jita-çväso
jita-saìgo jitendriyaù
sthüle bhagavato rüpe
manaù sandhärayed dhiyä
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; jita-äsanaù—controlled sitting
posture; jita-çväsaù—controlled breathing process; jita-saìgaù—controlled
association; jita-indriyaù—controlled senses; sthüle—in the gross matter;
bhagavataù—unto the Personality of Godhead; rüpe—in the feature of;
manaù—the mind; sandhärayet—must apply; dhiyä—by intelligence.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé answered: One should control the sitting posture,
regulate the breathing process by the yogic präëäyäma and thus control the
mind and senses and with intelligence apply the mind to the gross potencies of
the Lord [called the viräö-rüpa].
PURPORT
The materially absorbed mind of the conditioned soul does not allow him to
transcend the limit of the bodily conception of self, and thus the yoga system
for meditation (controlling the sitting posture and breathing process and
fixing the mind upon the Supreme) is prescribed in order to mold the
character of the gross materialist. Unless such materialists are able to cleanse
the materially absorbed mind, it is impossible for them to concentrate upon
thoughts of transcendence. And to do so one may fix one’s mind on the gross
material or external feature of the Lord. The different parts of the gigantic
form of the Lord are described in the following verses. The materialistic men
are very anxious to have some mystic powers as a result of such a controlling
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
process, but the real purpose of yogic regulations is to eradicate the
accumulated dirty things like lust, anger, avarice and all such material
contaminations. If the mystic yogé is diverted by the accompanying feats of
mystic control, then his mission of yogic success is a failure, because the
ultimate aim is God realization. He is therefore recommended to fix his gross
materialistic mind by a different conception and thus realize the potency of
the Lord. As soon as the potencies are understood to be instrumental
manifestations of the transcendence, one automatically advances to the next
step, and gradually the stage of full realization becomes possible for him.
TEXT 24
ivXaezSTaSYa dehae_Ya& SQaivïê SQavqYaSaaMa( )
Ya}aed& VYaJYaTae ivì& >aUTa& >aVYa& >avÀ SaTa( )) 24 ))
viçeñas tasya deho ’yaà
sthaviñöhaç ca sthavéyasäm
yatredaà vyajyate viçvaà
bhütaà bhavyaà bhavac ca sat
SYNONYMS
viçeñaù—personal; tasya—His; dehaù—body; ayam—this; sthaviñöhaù—grossly
material; ca—and; sthavéyasäm—of all matter; yatra—wherein; idam—all
these phenomena; vyajyate—is experienced; viçvam—universe; bhütam—past;
bhavyam—future; bhavat—present; ca—and; sat—resultant.
TRANSLATION
This gigantic manifestation of the phenomenal material world as a whole is
the personal body of the Absolute Truth, wherein the universal resultant past,
present and future of material time is experienced.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Anything, either material or spiritual, is but an expansion of the energy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä
(13.13), the omnipotent Lord has His transcendental eyes, heads and other
bodily parts distributed everywhere. He can see, hear, touch or manifest
Himself anywhere and everywhere, for He is present everywhere as the
Supersoul of all infinitesimal souls, although He has His particular abode in
the absolute world. The relative world is also His phenomenal representation
because it is nothing but an expansion of His transcendental energy. Although
He is in His abode, His energy is distributed everywhere, just as the sun is
localized as well as expanded everywhere, since the rays of the sun, being
nondifferent from the sun, are accepted as expansions of the sun disc. In the
Viñëu Puräëa (1.22.52) it is said that as fire expands its rays and heat from one
place, similarly the Supreme Spirit, the Personality of Godhead, expands
Himself by His manifold energy everywhere and anywhere. The phenomenal
manifestation of the gigantic universe is only a part of His viräö body. Less
intelligent men cannot conceive of the transcendental all-spiritual form of the
Lord, but they are astounded by His different energies, just as the aborigines
are struck with wonder by the manifestation of lightning, a gigantic mountain
or a hugely expanded banyan tree. The aborigines praise the strength of the
tiger and the elephant because of their superior energy and strength. The
asuras cannot recognize the existence of the Lord, although there are vivid
descriptions of the Lord in the revealed scriptures, although the Lord
incarnates and exhibits His uncommon strength and energy, and although He
is accepted as the Supreme Personality of Godhead by learned scholars and
saints like Vyäsadeva, Närada, Asita and Devala in the past and by Arjuna in
the Bhagavad-gétä, as also by the äcäryas like Çaìkara, Rämänuja, Madhva and
Lord Çré Caitanya in the modern age. The asuras do not accept any evidential
proof from the revealed scriptures, nor do they recognize the authority of the
great äcäryas. They want to see with their own eyes at once. Therefore they
can see the gigantic body of the Lord as viräö, which will answer their
challenge, and since they are accustomed to paying homage to superior
material strength like that of the tiger, elephant and lightning, they can offer
respect to the viräö-rüpa. Lord Kåñëa, by the request of Arjuna, exhibited His
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
viräö-rüpa for the asuras. A pure devotee of the Lord, being unaccustomed to
looking into such a mundane gigantic form of the Lord, requires special vision
for the purpose. The Lord, therefore, favored Arjuna with special vision for
looking into His viräö-rüpa, which is described in the Eleventh Chapter of the
Bhagavad-gétä. This viräö-rüpa of the Lord was especially manifested, not for
the benefit of Arjuna, but for that unintelligent class of men who accept
anyone and everyone as an incarnation of the Lord and so mislead the general
mass of people. For them, the indication is that one should ask the cheap
incarnation to exhibit his viräö-rüpa and thus be established as an incarnation.
The viräö-rüpa manifestation of the Lord is simultaneously a challenge to the
atheist and a favor for the asuras, who can think of the Lord as viräö and thus
gradually cleanse the dirty things from their hearts in order to become
qualified to actually see the transcendental form of the Lord in the near
future. This is a favor of the all-merciful Lord to the atheists and the gross
materialists.
TEXT 25
A<@k-aeXae Xarqre_iSMaNa( Saáavr<aSa&YauTae )
vEraJa" Pauåzae Yaae_SaaE >aGavaNa( Daar<aaé[Ya" )) 25 ))
aëòa-koçe çarére ’smin
saptävaraëa-saàyute
vairäjaù puruño yo ’sau
bhagavän dhäraëäçrayaù
SYNONYMS
aëòa-koçe—within the universal shell; çarére—in the body of; asmin—this;
sapta—sevenfold; ävaraëa—coverings; saàyute—having so done;
vairäjaù—the gigantic universal; puruñaù—form of the Lord; yaù—that;
asau—He; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; dhäraëä—conception;
äçrayaù—object of.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
The gigantic universal form of the Personality of Godhead, within the body
of the universal shell, which is covered by sevenfold material elements, is the
subject for the viräö conception.
PURPORT
Simultaneously, the Lord has multifarious other forms, and all of them are
identical with the original fountainhead form of the Lord, Çré Kåñëa. In the
Bhagavad-gétä, it has been proven that the original transcendental and eternal
form of the Lord is Çré Kåñëa, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, but by His
inconceivable internal potency, ätma-mäyä, He can expand Himself by
multifarious forms and incarnations simultaneously, without being diminished
in His full potency. He is complete, and although innumerable complete forms
emanate from Him, He is still complete, without any loss. That is His spiritual
or internal potency. In the Eleventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä, the
personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, manifested His viräö-rüpa just to convince
the less intelligent class of men, who cannot conceive of the Lord as appearing
just like a human being, that He factually has the potency of His claim to be
the Supreme Absolute person without any rival or superior. Materialistic men
can think, although very imperfectly, of the huge universal space,
comprehending an innumerable number of planets as big as the sun. They can
see only the circular sky overhead, without any information that this universe,
as well as many other hundreds of thousands of universes, are each covered by
sevenfold material coverings of water, fire, air, sky, ego, noumenon and
material nature, just like a huge football, pumped and covered, floating on the
water of the Causal Ocean, wherein the Lord is lying as Mahä-Viñëu. All the
universes in seed are emanating from the breathing of the Mahä-Viñëu, who is
but part of a partial expansion of the Lord, and all the universes presided over
by the Brahmäs vanish when the Mahä-Viñëu withdraws His great breath. In
this way, the material worlds are being created and vanished by the supreme
will of the Lord. The poor foolish materialist can just imagine how ignorantly
he puts forward an insignificant creature to become His rival incarnation,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
simply on the allegations of a dying man. The viräö-rüpa was particularly
exhibited by the Lord just to give lessons to such foolish men, so that one can
accept a person as the incarnation of Godhead only if such a person is able to
exhibit such a viräö-rüpa as Lord Kåñëa did. The materialistic person may
concentrate his mind upon the viräö or gigantic form of the Lord in his own
interest and as recommended by Çukadeva Gosvämé, but he must be on his
guard not to be misled by pretenders who claim to be the identical person as
Lord Kåñëa but are not able to act like Him or exhibit the viräö-rüpa,
comprehending the whole of the universe.
TEXT 26
PaaTaal/MaeTaSYa ih PaadMaUl&/
Pa#=iNTa PaaiZ<aRPa[Pade rSaaTal/Ma( )
MahaTal&/ ivìSa*Jaae_Qa GauLf-aE
Tal/aTal&/ vE PauåzSYa Jaºe )) 26 ))
pätälam etasya hi päda-mülaà
paöhanti pärñëi-prapade rasätalam
mahätalaà viçva-såjo ’tha gulphau
talätalaà vai puruñasya jaìghe
SYNONYMS
pätälam—the planets at the bottom of the universe; etasya—of His;
hi—exactly; päda-mülam—soles of the feet; paöhanti—they study it;
pärñëi—the heels; prapade—the toes; rasätalam—the planets named Rasätala;
mahätalam—the planets named Mahätala; viçva-såjaù—of the creator of the
universe; atha—thus; gulphau—the ankles; talätalam—the planets named
Talätala; vai—as they are; puruñasya—of the gigantic person; jaìghe—the
shanks.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Persons who have realized it have studied that the planets known as Pätäla
constitute the bottoms of the feet of the universal Lord, and the heels and the
toes are the Rasätala planets. The ankles are the Mahätala planets, and His
shanks constitute the Talätala planets.
PURPORT
Outside the bodily existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
manifested cosmic existence has no reality. Everything and anything of the
manifested world rests on Him, as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.4), but
that does not imply that everything and anything in the vision of a materialist
is the Supreme Personality. The conception of the universal form of the Lord
gives a chance to the materialist to think of the Supreme Lord, but the
materialist must know for certain that his visualization of the world in a spirit
of lording over it is not God realization. The materialistic view of exploitation
of the material resources is occasioned by the illusion of the external energy of
the Lord, and as such, if anyone wants to realize the Supreme Truth by
conceiving of the universal form of the Lord, he must cultivate the service
attitude. Unless the service attitude is revived, the conception of viräö
realization will have very little effect on the seer. The transcendental Lord, in
any conception of His form, is never a part of the material creation. He keeps
His identity as Supreme Spirit in all circumstances and is never affected by the
three material qualities, for everything material is contaminated. The Lord
always exists by His internal energy.
The universe is divided into fourteen planetary systems. Seven planetary
systems, called Bhür, Bhuvar, Svar, Mahar, Janas, Tapas and Satya, are upward
planetary systems, one above the other. There are also seven planetary systems
downward, known as Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talätala, Mahätala, Rasätala and
Pätäla, gradually, one below the other. In this verse, the description begins
from the bottom because it is in the line of devotion that the Lord’s bodily
description should begin from His feet. Çukadeva Gosvämé is a recognized
devotee of the Lord, and he is exactly correct in the description.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 27
Üe JaaNauNaq SauTal&/ ivìMaUTaeR‚
æåÜYa& ivTal&/ caTal&/ c )
MahqTal&/ TaÂgaNa& MahqPaTae
Na>aSTal&/ Naai>aSarae Ga*<aiNTa )) 27 ))
dve jänuné sutalaà viçva-mürter
üru-dvayaà vitalaà cätalaà ca
mahétalaà taj-jaghanaà mahépate
nabhastalaà näbhi-saro gåëanti
SYNONYMS
dve—two; jänuné—two knees; sutalam—the planetary system named Sutala;
viçva-mürteù—of the universal form; üru-dvayam—the two thighs;
vitalam—the planetary system named Vitala; ca—also; atalam—the planets
named Atala; ca—and; mahétalam—the planetary system named Mahétala;
tat—of that; jaghanam—the hips; mahépate—O King; nabhastalam—outer
space; näbhi-saraù—the depression of the navel; gåëanti—they take it so.
TRANSLATION
The knees of the universal form are the planetary system of the name
Sutala, and the two thighs are the Vitala and Atala planetary systems. The hips
are Mahétala, and outer space is the depression of His navel.
TEXT 28
or"SQal&/ JYaaeiTarNaqk-MaSYa
Ga]qva MahvRdNa& vE JaNaae_SYa )
TaPaae vra$q& ivduraidPau&Sa"
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SaTYa& Tau XaqzaRi<a SahóXaqZ<aR" )) 28 ))
uraù-sthalaà jyotir-anékam asya
grévä mahar vadanaà vai jano ’sya
tapo varäöéà vidur ädi-puàsaù
satyaà tu çérñäëi sahasra-çérñëaù
SYNONYMS
uraù—high; sthalam—place (the chest); jyotiù-anékam—the luminary planets;
asya—of Him; grévä—the neck; mahaù—the planetary system above the
luminaries; vadanam—mouth; vai—exactly; janaù—the planetary system
above Mahar; asya—of Him; tapaù—the planetary system above the Janas;
varäöém—forehead; viduù—is known; ädi—the original; puàsaù—personality;
satyam—the topmost planetary system; tu—but; çérñäëi—the head;
sahasra—one thousand; çérñëaù—one with heads.
TRANSLATION
The chest of the Original Personality of the gigantic form is the luminary
planetary system, His neck is the Mahar planets, His mouth is the Janas
planets, and His forehead is the Tapas planetary system. The topmost planetary
system, known as Satyaloka, is the head of He who has one thousand heads.
PURPORT
The effulgent luminary planets like the sun and the moon are situated
almost in the midplace of the universe, and as such they are to be known as the
chest of the original gigantic form of the Lord. And above the luminary
planets, called also the heavenly places of the universal directorate demigods,
are the Mahar, Janas and Tapas planetary systems, and, above all, the
Satyaloka planetary system, where the chief directors of the modes of material
nature reside, namely Viñëu, Brahmä and Çiva. This Viñëu is known as the
Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, and He acts as the Supersoul in every living being. There
are innumerable universes floating on the Causal Ocean, and in each of them
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the representation of the viräö form of the Lord is there along with
innumerable suns, moons, heavenly demigods, Brahmäs, Viñëus and Çivas, all
of them situated in one part of the inconceivable potency of Lord Kåñëa, as
stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (10.42).
TEXT 29
wNd]adYaae bahv Aahuåóa"
k-<aaOE idXa" é[ae}aMaMauZYa XaBd" )
NaaSaTYadóaE ParMaSYa NaaSae
ga]a<aae_SYa GaNDaae Mau%MaiGanirÖ" )) 29 ))
indrädayo bähava ähur usräù
karëau diçaù çrotram amuñya çabdaù
näsatya-dasrau paramasya näse
ghräëo ’sya gandho mukham agnir iddhaù
SYNONYMS
indra-ädayaù—demigods headed by the heavenly king, Indra; bähavaù—arms;
ähuù—are called; usräù—the demigods; karëau—the ears; diçaù—the four
directions; çrotram—the sense of hearing; amuñya—of the Lord;
çabdaù—sound; näsatya-dasrau—the demigods known as the Açviné-kumäras;
paramasya—of the Supreme; näse—nostrils; ghräëaù—the sense of smell;
asya—of Him; gandhaù—fragrance; mukham—the mouth; agniù—fire;
iddhaù—blazing.
TRANSLATION
His arms are the demigods headed by Indra, the ten directional sides are His
ears, and physical sound is His sense of hearing. His nostrils are the two
Açviné-kumäras, and material fragrance is His sense of smell. His mouth is the
blazing fire.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The description of the gigantic form of the Personality of Godhead made in
the Eleventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä is further explained here in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The description in the Bhagavad-gétä (11.30) runs as
follows: “O Viñëu, I see You devouring all people in Your blazing mouths and
covering all the universe by Your immeasurable rays. Scorching the worlds,
You are manifest.” In that way, Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the postgraduate study
for the student of the Bhagavad-gétä. Both of them are the science of Kåñëa,
the Absolute Truth, and so they are interdependent.
The conception of the viräö-puruña, or the gigantic form of the Supreme
Lord, is said to include all the dominating demigods as well as the dominated
living beings. Even the minutest part of a living being is controlled by the
empowered agency of the Lord. Since the demigods are included in the
gigantic form of the Lord, worship of the Lord, whether in His gigantic
material conception or in His eternal transcendental form as Lord Çré Kåñëa,
also appeases the demigods and all the other parts and parcels, as much as
watering the root of a tree distributes energy to all of the tree’s other parts.
Consequently, for a materialist also, worship of the universal gigantic form of
the Lord leads one to the right path. One need not risk being misled by
approaching many demigods for fulfillment of different desires. The real entity
is the Lord Himself, and all others are imaginary, for everything is included in
Him only.
TEXT 30
ÛaEri+a<aq c+aur>aUTPaTa®"
Pa+Maai<a ivZ<aaerhNaq o>ae c )
Tad(>a]UivJa*M>a" ParMaeiïiDaZ<Ya‚
MaaPaae_SYa TaalU/ rSa Wv iJaûa )) 30 ))
dyaur akñiëé cakñur abhüt pataìgaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
pakñmäëi viñëor ahané ubhe ca
tad-bhrü-vijåmbhaù parameñöhi-dhiñëyam
äpo ’sya tälü rasa eva jihvä
SYNONYMS
dyauù—the sphere of outer space; akñiëé—the eyeballs; cakñuù—of eyes
(senses); abhüt—it so became; pataìgaù—the sun; pakñmäëi—eyelids;
viñëoù—of the personality of Godhead, Çré Viñëu; ahané—day and night;
ubhe—both; ca—and; tat—His; bhrü—eyebrows; vijåmbhaù—movements;
parameñöhi—the supreme entity (Brahmä); dhiñëyam—post; äpaù—Varuëa,
the director of water; asya—His; tälü—palate; rasaù—juice; eva—certainly;
jihvä—the tongue.
TRANSLATION
The sphere of outer space constitutes His eyepits, and the eyeball is the sun
as the power of seeing. His eyelids are both the day and night, and in the
movements of His eyebrows, the Brahmä and similar supreme personalities
reside. His palate is the director of water, Varuëa, and the juice or essence of
everything is His tongue.
PURPORT
To common sense the description in this verse appears to be somewhat
contradictory because sometimes the sun has been described as the eyeball and
sometimes as the outer space sphere. But there is no room for common sense in
the injunctions of the çästras. We must accept the description of the çästras
and concentrate more on the form of the viräö-rüpa than on common sense.
Common sense is always imperfect, whereas the description in the çästras is
always perfect and complete. If there is any incongruity, it is due to our
imperfection and not the çästras’. That is the method of approaching Vedic
wisdom.
TEXT 31
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
^Nda&SYaNaNTaSYa iXarae Ga*<aiNTa
d&í\a YaMa" òehk-l/a iÜJaaiNa )
haSaae JaNaaeNMaadk-rq c MaaYaa
durNTaSaGaaeR YadPaa®Maae+a" )) 31 ))
chandäàsy anantasya çiro gåëanti
daàñörä yamaù sneha-kalä dvijäni
häso janonmäda-karé ca mäyä
duranta-sargo yad-apäìga-mokñaù
SYNONYMS
chandäàsi—the Vedic hymns; anantasya—of the Supreme; çiraù—the
cerebral passage; gåëanti—they say; daàñöräù—the jaws of teeth;
yamaù—Yamaräja, the director of sinners; sneha-kaläù—the art of affection;
dvijäni—the set of teeth; häsaù—smile; jana-unmäda-karé—the most alluring;
ca—also; mäyä—illusory energy; duranta—unsurpassable; sargaù—the
material creation; yat-apäìga—whose glance; mokñaù—casting over.
TRANSLATION
They say that the Vedic hymns are the cerebral passage of the Lord, and His
jaws of teeth are Yama, god of death, who punishes the sinners. The art of
affection is His set of teeth, and the most alluring illusory material energy is
His smile. This great ocean of material creation is but the casting of His glance
over us.
PURPORT
According to Vedic assertion, this material creation is the result of the
Lord’s casting a glance over the material energy, which is described herein as
the most alluring illusory energy. The conditioned souls who are allured by
such materialism should know that the material temporary creation is simply
an imitation of the reality and that those who are captivated by such alluring
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
glances of the Lord are put under the direction of the controller of sinners
called Yamaräja. The Lord smiles affectionately, displaying His teeth. The
intelligent person who can grasp these truths about the Lord becomes a soul
fully surrendered unto Him.
TEXT 32
v]q@aetaraEïae_Dar Wv l/ae>aae
DaMaR" STaNaae_DaMaRPaQaae_SYa Pa*ïMa( )
k-STaSYa Mae!\& v*z<aaE c iMa}aaE
ku-i+a" SaMaud]a iGarYaae_iSQaSaºa" )) 32 ))
vréòottarauñöho ’dhara eva lobho
dharmaù stano ’dharma-patho ’sya påñöham
kas tasya meòhraà våñaëau ca mitrau
kukñiù samudrä girayo ’sthi-saìghäù
SYNONYMS
vréòa—modesty; uttara—upper; oñöhaù—lip; adharaù—chin; eva—certainly;
lobhaù—hankering; dharmaù—religion; stanaù—breast; adharma—irreligion;
pathaù—way; asya—His; påñöham—back; kaù—Brahmä; tasya—His;
meòhram—genitals; våñaëau—testicles; ca—also; mitrau—the Miträ-varuëas;
kukñiù—waist; samudräù—the oceans; girayaù—the hills; asthi—bones;
saìghäù—stack.
TRANSLATION
Modesty is the upper portion of His lips, hankering is His chin, religion is
the breast of the Lord, and irreligion is His back. Brahmäjé, who generates all
living beings in the material world, is His genitals, and the Miträ-varuëas are
His two testicles. The ocean is His waist, and the hills and mountains are the
stacks of His bones.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is not impersonal, as misconceived by less intelligent
thinkers. Rather, He is the Supreme person, as confirmed in all authentic
Vedic literatures. But His personality is different from what we can conceive.
It is stated here that Brahmäjé acts as His genitals and that the Miträ-varuëas
are His two testicles. This means that as a person He is complete with all bodily
organs, but they are of different types with different potencies. When the Lord
is described as impersonal, therefore, it should be understood that His
personality is not exactly the type of personality found within our imperfect
speculation. One can, however, worship the Lord even by seeing the hills and
mountains or the ocean and the sky as different parts and parcels of the
gigantic body of the Lord, the viräö-puruña. The viräö-rüpa, as exhibited by
Lord Kåñëa to Arjuna, is a challenge to the unbelievers.
TEXT 33
NaÛae_SYa Naa@yae_Qa TaNaUåhai<a
Mahqåha ivìTaNaaeNa*RPaeNd] )
ANaNTavqYaR" ìiSaTa& MaaTairìa
GaiTavRYa" k-MaR Gau<aPa[vah" )) 33 ))
nadyo ’sya näòyo ’tha tanü-ruhäëi
mahé-ruhä viçva-tanor nåpendra
ananta-véryaù çvasitaà mätariçvä
gatir vayaù karma guëa-pravähaù
SYNONYMS
nadyaù—the rivers; asya—of Him; näòyaù—veins; atha—and thereafter;
tanü-ruhäëi—hairs on the body; mahé-ruhäù—the plants and trees;
viçva-tanoù—of the universal form; nåpa-indra—O King; ananta-véryaù—of
the omnipotent; çvasitam—breathing; mätariçvä—air; gatiù—movement;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vayaù—passing ages; karma—activity; guëa-pravähaù—reactions of the modes
of nature.
TRANSLATION
O King, the rivers are the veins of the gigantic body, the trees are the hairs
of His body, and the omnipotent air is His breath. The passing ages are His
movements, and His activities are the reactions of the three modes of material
nature.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead is not a dead stone, nor is He inactive, as is
poorly thought by some schools. He moves with the progress of time, and
therefore lie knows all about the past and future, along with His present
activities. There is nothing unknown to Him. The conditioned souls are driven
by the reactions of the modes of material nature, which are the activities of the
Lord. As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.12), the modes of nature act under His
direction only, and as such no natural functions are blind or automatic. The
power behind the activities is the supervision of the Lord, and thus the Lord is
never inactive as is wrongly conceived. The Vedas say that the Supreme Lord
has nothing to do personally, as is always the case with superiors, but
everything is done by His direction. As it is said, not a blade of grass moves
without His sanction. In the Brahma-saàhitä (5.48), it is said that all the
universes and the heads of them (the Brahmäs) exist only for the duration of
His breathing period. The same is confirmed here. The air on which the
universes and the planets within the universes exist is nothing but a bit of the
breath of the unchallengeable viräö-puruña. So even by studying the rivers,
trees, air and passing ages, one can conceive of the Personality of Godhead
without being misled by the formless conception of the Lord. In the
Bhagavad-gétä (12.5) it is stated that those who are much inclined to the
formless conception of the Supreme Truth are more troubled than those who
can intelligently conceive of the personal form.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 34
wRXaSYa ke-XaaNa( ivdurMbuvahaNa(
vaSaSTau SaNDYaa& ku-åvYaR >aUMan" )
AVYa¢-MaahuôRdYa& MaNaê
Sa cNd]Maa" SavRivk-ark-aeXa" )) 34 ))
éçasya keçän vidur ambuvähän
väsas tu sandhyäà kuru-varya bhümnaù
avyaktam ähur hådayaà manaç ca
sa candramäù sarva-vikära-koçaù
SYNONYMS
éçasya—of the supreme controller; keçän—hairs on the head; viduù—you may
know it from me; ambu-vähän—the clouds which carry water; väsaù tu—the
dress; sandhyäm—termination of day and night; kuru-varya—O best of the
Kurus; bhümnaù—of the Almighty; avyaktam—the prime cause of material
creation; ähuù—it is said; hådayam—intelligence; manaù ca—and the mind;
saù—He; candramäù—the moon; sarva-vikära-koçaù—the reservoir of all
changes.
TRANSLATION
O best amongst the Kurus, the clouds which carry water are the hairs on His
head, the terminations of days or nights are His dress, and the supreme cause of
material creation is His intelligence. His mind is the moon, the reservoir of all
changes.
TEXT 35
ivjaNaXai¢&- MaihMaaMaNaiNTa
SavaRTMaNaae_NTa"k-r<a& iGair}aMa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
AìaìTaYauRí\GaJaa Na%aiNa
SaveR Ma*Gaa" PaXav" é[aei<adeXae )) 35 ))
vijïäna-çaktià mahim ämananti
sarvätmano ’ntaù-karaëaà giritram
açväçvatary-uñöra-gajä nakhäni
sarve mågäù paçavaù çroëi-deçe
SYNONYMS
vijïäna-çaktim—consciousness; mahim—the principle of matter;
ämananti—they call it so; sarva-ätmanaù—of the omnipresent;
antaù-karaëam—ego; giritram—Rudra (Çiva); açva—horse; açvatari—mule;
uñöra—camel; gajäù—elephant; nakhäni—nails; sarve—all other;
mågäù—stags; paçavaù—quadrupeds; çroëi-deçe—on the region of the belt.
TRANSLATION
The principle of matter [mahat-tattva] is the consciousness of the
omnipresent Lord, as asserted by the experts, and Rudradeva is His ego. The
horse, mule, camel and elephant are His nails, and wild animals and all
quadrupeds are situated in the belt zone of the Lord.
TEXT 36
vYaa&iSa TaÜyak-r<a& ivic}a&
MaNauMaRNaqza MaNauJaae iNavaSa" )
GaNDavRivÛaDarcar<aaPSar"
SvrSMa*TaqrSauraNaqk-vqYaR" )) 36 ))
vayäàsi tad-vyäkaraëaà vicitraà
manur manéñä manujo niväsaù
gandharva-vidyädhara-cäraëäpsaraù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
svara-småtér asuränéka-véryaù
SYNONYMS
vayäàsi—varieties of birds; tat-vyäkaraëam—vocables; vicitram—artistic;
manuù—the father of mankind; manéñä—thoughts; manujaù—mankind (the
sons of Manu); niväsaù—residence; gandharva—the human beings named
Gandharvas; vidyädhara—the Vidyädharas; cäraëa—the Cäraëas;
apsaraù—the angels; svara—musical rhythm; småtéù—remembrance;
asura-anéka—the demoniac soldiers; véryaù—prowess.
TRANSLATION
Varieties of birds are indications of His masterful artistic sense. Manu, the
father of mankind, is the emblem of His standard intelligence, and humanity is
His residence. The celestial species of human beings, like the Gandharvas,
Vidyädharas, Cäraëas and angels, all represent His musical rhythm, and the
demoniac soldiers are representations of His wonderful prowess.
PURPORT
The aesthetic sense of the Lord is manifested in the artistic, colorful
creation of varieties of birds like the peacock, parrot and cuckoo. The celestial
species of human beings, like the Gandharvas and Vidyädharas, can sing
wonderfully and can entice even the minds of the heavenly demigods. Their
musical rhythm represents the musical sense of the Lord. How then can He be
impersonal? His musical taste, artistic sense and standard intelligence, which is
never fallible, are different signs of His supreme personality. The
Manu-saàhitä is the standard lawbook for humanity, and every human being is
advised to follow this great book of social knowledge. Human society is the
residential quarters for the Lord. This means that the human being is meant
for God realization and association with God. This life is a chance for the
conditioned soul to regain his eternal God consciousness and thus fulfill the
mission of life. Mahäräja Prahläda is the right type of representative of the
Lord in the family of asuras. None of the living beings is away from the Lord’s
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
gigantic body. Each and every one has a particular duty in relation to the
supreme body. Disruption in the matter of discharging the specific duty
assigned to each and every living being is the cause of disharmony between
one living being and another, but when the relation is reestablished in relation
with the Supreme Lord, there is complete unity between all living beings, even
up to the limit of the wild animals and human society. Lord Caitanya
Mahäprabhu displayed this living unity in the jungle of Madhya Pradesh,
where even the tigers, elephants and many other ferocious animals perfectly
cooperated in glorifying the Supreme Lord. That is the way to peace and amity
all over the world.
TEXT 37
b]øaNaNa& +a}a>auJaae MahaTMaa
iv@Uårx(iga]ié[Tak*-Z<av<aR" )
NaaNaai>aDaa>aqJYaGa<aaePaPaàae
d]VYaaTMak-" k-MaR ivTaaNaYaaeGa" )) 37 ))
brahmänanaà kñatra-bhujo mahätmä
viò ürur aìghri-çrita-kåñëa-varëaù
nänäbhidhäbhéjya-gaëopapanno
dravyätmakaù karma vitäna-yogaù
SYNONYMS
brahma—the brähmaëas; änanam—the face; kñatra—the kñatriyas;
bhujaù—the arms; mahätmä—the viräö-puruña; viö—the vaiçyas; üruù—the
thighs; aìghri-çrita—under the protection of His feet; kåñëa-varëaù—the
çüdras; nänä—various; abhidhä—by names; abhéjya-gaëa—the demigods;
upapannaù—being overtaken; dravya-ätmakaù—with feasible goods;
karma—activities; vitäna-yogaù—performances of sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The viräö-puruña’s face is the brähmaëas, His arms are the kñatriyas, His
thighs are the vaiçyas, and the çüdras are under the protection of His feet. All
the worshipable demigods are also overtaken by Him, and it is the duty of
everyone to perform sacrifices with feasible goods to appease the Lord.
PURPORT
Monotheism is practically suggested here. Offering sacrifices to many
demigods under different names is mentioned in the Vedic literatures, but the
suggestion made in this verse is that all those varieties of demigods are
included in the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; they are only the
parts and parcels of the original whole. Similarly, the divisions of the orders of
human society, namely the brähmaëas (the intelligent class), the kñatriyas (the
administrators), the vaiçyas (the mercantile community) and the çüdras (the
laborer class), are all included in the body of the Supreme. As such, sacrifice by
every one of them in terms of pleasing the Supreme by feasible goods is
recommended. Generally, the sacrifice is offered with clarified butter and
grains, but with the progress of time, human society has produced varieties of
goods by transforming materials supplied by God’s material nature. Human
society, therefore, must learn to offer sacrifices not only with clarified butter, but
also with other manufactured goods in the propagation of the Lord’s glory, and
that will bring about perfection in human society. The intelligent class of men, or
brähmaëas, may give direction for such sacrifices in consultation with the
previous äcäryas; the administrators may give all facilities to perform such
sacrifices; the vaiçya class or mercantile community, who produce such goods,
may offer them for sacrifice; and the çüdra class may offer their manual labor
for the successful termination of such sacrifice. Thus by the cooperation of all
classes of human beings, the sacrifice recommended in this age, namely the
sacrifice of congregational chanting of the holy name of the Lord, may be
executed for the common welfare of all the people of the world.
TEXT 38
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
wYaaNaSaavqìrivGa]hSYa
Ya" SaiàveXa" k-iQaTaae MaYaa Tae )
SaNDaaYaRTae_iSMaNa( vPauiz SQaivïe
MaNa" SvbuÖya Na YaTaae_iSTa ik-iÄTa( )) 38 ))
iyän asäv éçvara-vigrahasya
yaù sanniveçaù kathito mayä te
sandhäryate ’smin vapuñi sthaviñöhe
manaù sva-buddhyä na yato ’sti kiïcit
SYNONYMS
iyän—all these; asau—that; éçvara—Supreme Lord; vigrahasya—of the form;
yaù—whatsoever; sanniveçaù—as they are located; kathitaù—explained;
mayä—by me; te—unto you; sandhäryate—one may concentrate; asmin—in
this; vapuñi—form of viräö; sthaviñöhe—in the gross; manaù—mind;
sva-buddhyä—by one’s intelligence; na—not; yataù—beyond Him; asti—there
is; kiïcit—anything else.
TRANSLATION
I have thus explained to you the gross material gigantic conception of the
Personality of Godhead. One who seriously desires liberation concentrates his
mind on this form of the Lord, because there is nothing more than this in the
material world.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä (9.10), the Supreme Personality of Godhead has verily
explained that the material nature is only an order-carrying agent of His. She
is one of the different potencies of the Lord, and she acts under His direction
only. As the supreme transcendental Lord, He simply casts a glance over the
material principle, and thus the agitation of matter begins, and the resultant
actions are manifested one after another by six kinds of gradual
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
differentiations. All material creation is moving in that way, and thus it
appears and disappears in due course.
Less intelligent persons with a poor fund of knowledge cannot
accommodate the thought of this inconceivable potency of the Lord Çré Kåñëa,
by which He appears just like a human being (Bg. 9.11). His appearance in the
material world as one of us is also His causeless mercy upon the fallen souls. He
is transcendental to all material conceptions, but by His unbounded mercy
upon His pure devotees, He comes down and manifests Himself as the
personality of Godhead. Materialistic philosophers and scientists are too much
engrossed with atomic energy and the gigantic situation of the universal form,
and they offer respect more seriously to the external phenomenal feature of
material manifestations than to the noumenal principle of spiritual existence.
The transcendental form of the Lord is beyond the jurisdiction of such
materialistic activities, and it is very difficult to conceive that the Lord can be
simultaneously localized and all-pervasive, because the materialistic
philosophers and scientists think of everything in terms of their own
experience. Because they are unable to accept the personal feature of the
Supreme Lord, the Lord is kind enough to demonstrate the viräö feature of His
transcendental form, and herein Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé has vividly described
this form of the Lord. He concludes that there is nothing beyond this gigantic
feature of the Lord. None of the materialistic thoughtful men can go beyond
this conception of the gigantic form. The minds of the materialistic men are
flickering and constantly changing from one aspect to another. Therefore, one
is advised to think of the Lord by thinking of any part of His gigantic body,
and by one’s intelligence only one can think of Him in any manifestation of
the material world—the forest, the hill, the ocean, the man, the animal, the
demigod, the bird, the beast or anything else. Each and every item of the
material manifestation entails a part of the body of the gigantic form, and thus
the flickering mind can be fixed in the Lord only and nothing else. This
process of concentrating on the different bodily parts of the Lord will
gradually diminish the demoniac challenge of godlessness and bring about
gradual development of devotional service to the Lord. Everything being a part
and parcel of the Complete Whole, the neophyte student will gradually realize
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the hymns of Éçopaniñad which state that the Supreme Lord is everywhere, and
thus he will learn the art of not committing any offense to the body of the
Lord. This sense of God-mindedness will diminish one’s pride in challenging
the existence of God. Thus one can learn to show respect to everything, for all
things are parts and parcels of the supreme body.
TEXT 39
Sa SavRDaqv*tYaNau>aUTaSavR
AaTMaa YaQaa SvPanJaNaei+aTaEk-" )
Ta& SaTYaMaaNaNdiNaiDa& >aJaeTa
NaaNYa}a SaÂed( YaTa AaTMaPaaTa" )) 39 ))
sa sarva-dhé-våtty-anubhüta-sarva
ätmä yathä svapna-janekñitaikaù
taà satyam änanda-nidhià bhajeta
nänyatra sajjed yata ätma-pätaù
SYNONYMS
saù—He (the Supreme Person); sarva-dhé-våtti—the process of realization by
all sorts of intelligence; anubhüta—cognizant; sarve—everyone; ätmä—the
Supersoul; yathä—as much as; svapna-jana—a person dreaming; ékñita—seen
by; ekaù—one and the same; tam—unto Him; satyam—the Supreme Truth;
änanda-nidhim—the ocean of bliss; bhajeta—must one worship; na—never;
anyatra—anything else; sajjet—be attached; yataù—whereby;
ätma-pätaù—degradation of oneself.
TRANSLATION
One should concentrate his mind upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who alone distributes Himself in so many manifestations just as ordinary
persons create thousands of manifestations in dreams. One must concentrate the
mind on Him, the only all-blissful Absolute Truth. Otherwise one will be
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
misled and will cause his own degradation.
PURPORT
In this verse, the process of devotional service is indicated by the great
Gosvämé, Çréla Çukadeva. He tries to impress upon us that instead of diverting
our attention to several branches of self-realization, we should concentrate
upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the supreme object of realization,
worship and devotion. Self-realization is, as it were, offering a fight for eternal
life against the material struggle for existence, and therefore by the illusory
grace of the external energy, the yogé or the devotee is faced with many
allurements which can entangle a great fighter again in the bondage of
material existence. A yogé can attain miraculous successes in material
achievements, such as aëimä and laghimä, by which one can become more
minute than the minutest or lighter than the lightest, or in the ordinary sense,
one may achieve material benedictions in the shape of wealth and women. But
one is warned against such allurements because entanglement again in such
illusory pleasure means degradation of the self and further imprisonment in
the material world. By this warning, one should follow one’s vigilant
intelligence only.
The Supreme Lord is one, and His expansions are various. He is therefore
the Supersoul of everything. When a man sees anything, he must know that
his seeing is secondary and the Lord’s seeing is primary. One cannot see
anything without the Lord’s having first seen it. That is the instruction of the
Vedas and the Upaniñads. So whatever we see or do, the Supersoul of all acts of
seeing or doing is the Lord. This theory of simultaneous oneness and
difference between the individual soul and the Supersoul is propounded by
Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu as the philosophy of
acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(1). The viräö-rüpa, or the gigantic feature of the
Supreme Lord, includes everything materially manifested, and therefore the
viräö or gigantic feature of the Lord is the Supersoul of all living and nonliving
entities. But the viräö-rüpa is also the manifestation of Näräyaëa or Viñëu, and
going further on and on one will eventually see that Lord Kåñëa is the ultimate
Supersoul of everything that be. The conclusion is that one should
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
unhesitatingly become a worshiper of Lord Kåñëa, or, for that matter, His
plenary expansion Näräyaëa, and none else. In the Vedic hymns, it is clearly
said that first of all Näräyaëa cast a glance over matter and thus there was
creation. Before creation, there was neither Brahmä nor Çiva, and what to
speak of others. Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya has definitely accepted this, that
Näräyaëa is beyond the material creation and that all others are within the
material creation. The whole material creation, therefore, is one with and
different from Näräyaëa, simultaneously, and this supports the
acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(2) philosophy of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
Being an emanation from the glancing potency of Näräyaëa, the whole
material creation is nondifferent from Him. But because it is the effect of His
external energy (bahiraìgä mäyä) and is aloof from the internal potency
(ätma-mäyä), the whole material creation is different from Him at the same
time. The example given in this verse very nicely is that of the dreaming man.
The dreaming man creates many things in his dream, and thus he himself
becomes the entangled seer of the dream and is also affected by the
consequences. This material creation is also exactly a dreamlike creation of the
Lord, but He, being the transcendental Supersoul, is neither entangled nor
affected by the reactions of such a dreamlike creation. He is always in His
transcendental position, but essentially He is everything, and nothing is apart
from Him. As a part of Him, one should therefore concentrate on Him only,
without deviation; otherwise one is sure to be overcome by the potencies of the
material creation, one after another. It is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.7)
as follows:
sarva-bhütäni kaunteya
prakåtià yänti mämikäm
kalpa-kñaye punas täni
kalpädau visåjämy aham
“O son of Kunté, at the end of the millennium every material manifestation
enters into My nature, and at the beginning of another millennium, by My
potency, I again create.”
The human life, however, is an opportunity to get out of this repetition of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
creation and annihilation. It is a means whereby one may escape the Lord’s
external potency and enter into His internal potency.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, First Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “The First Step in God Realization.”
Chapter Two
The Lord in the Heart
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
Wv& Paura Daar<aYaaTMaYaaeiNa‚
NaRía& SMa*iTa& Pa[TYavåDYa TauíaTa( )
TaQaa SaSaJaeRdMaMaaegad*ií‚
YaRQaaPYaYaaTa( Pa[aGa( VYavSaaYabuiÖ" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evaà purä dhäraëayätma-yonir
nañöäà småtià pratyavarudhya tuñöät
tathä sasarjedam amogha-dåñöir
yathäpyayät präg vyavasäya-buddhiù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—just in the same way;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
purä—prior to the manifestation of the cosmos; dhäraëayä—by such a
conception; ätma-yoniù—of Brahmäjé; nañöäm—lost; småtim—remembrance;
pratyavarudhya—by regaining consciousness; tuñöät—because of appeasing the
Lord; tathä—thereafter; sasarja—created; idam—this material world;
amogha-dåñöiù—one who has attained clear vision; yathä—as;
apyayät—created; präk—as formerly; vyavasäya—ascertained;
buddhiù—intelligence.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Formerly, prior to the manifestation of the
cosmos, Lord Brahmä, by meditating on the viräö-rüpa, regained his lost
consciousness by appeasing the Lord. Thus he was able to rebuild the creation
as it was before.
PURPORT
The example cited herein of Çré Brahmäjé is one of forgetfulness. Brahmäjé
is the incarnation of one of the mundane attributes of the Lord. Being the
incarnation of the passion mode of material nature, he is empowered by the
Lord to generate the beautiful material manifestation. Yet due to his being one
of the numerous living entities, he is apt to forget the an of his creative energy.
This forgetfulness of the living being—beginning from Brahmä down to the
lowest insignificant ant—is a tendency which can be counteracted by
meditation on the viräö-rüpa of the Lord. This chance is available in the
human form of life, and if a human being follows the instruction of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and begins to meditate upon the viräö-rüpa, then revival of
his pure consciousness and counteraction of the tendency to forget his eternal
relationship with the Lord can follow simultaneously. And as soon as this
forgetfulness is removed, the vyavasäya-buddhi, as mentioned here and in the
Bhagavad-gétä (2.41), follows at once. This ascertained knowledge of the living
being leads to loving service to the Lord, which the living being requires. The
kingdom of God is unlimited; therefore the number of the assisting hands of
the Lord is also unlimited. The Bhagavad-gétä (13.14) asserts that the Lord has
His hands, legs, eyes and mouths in every nook and corner of His creation,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
This means that the expansions of differentiated parts and parcels, called jévas
or living entities, are assisting hands of the Lord, and all of them are meant for
rendering a particular pattern of service to the Lord. The conditioned soul,
even in the position of a Brahmä, forgets this by the influence of illusory,
material energy generated out of false egoism. One can counteract such false
egoism by invoking God consciousness. Liberation means getting out of the
slumber of forgetfulness and becoming situated in the real loving service of the
Lord, as exemplified in the case of Brahmä. The service of Brahmä is the
sample of service in liberation distinguished from the so-called altruistic
services full of mistakes and forgetfulness. Liberation is never inaction, but
service without human mistakes.
TEXT 2
XaaBdSYa ih b]ø<a Wz PaNQaa
YaàaMai>aDYaaRYaiTa DaqrPaaQaOE" )
Pair>a]Ma&STa}a Na ivNdTae_QaaRNa(
MaaYaaMaYae vaSaNaYaa XaYaaNa" )) 2 ))
çäbdasya hi brahmaëa eña panthä
yan nämabhir dhyäyati dhér apärthaiù
paribhramaàs tatra na vindate ’rthän
mäyämaye väsanayä çayänaù
SYNONYMS
çäbdasya—of the Vedic sound; hi—certainly; brahmaëaù—of the Vedas;
eñaù—these; panthäù—the way; yat—what is; nämabhiù—by different names;
dhyäyati—ponders; dhéù—intelligence; apärthaiù—by meaningless ideas;
paribhraman—wandering; tatra—there; na—never; vindate—enjoys;
arthän—realities; mäyä-maye—in illusory things; väsanayä—by different
desires; çayänaù—as if dreaming in sleep.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
The way of presentation of the Vedic sounds is so bewildering that it directs
the intelligence of the people to meaningless things like the heavenly kingdoms.
The conditioned souls hover in dreams of such heavenly illusory pleasures, but
actually they do not relish any tangible happiness in such places.
PURPORT
The conditioned soul is always engaged in laying out plans for happiness
within the material world, even up to the end of the universal limit. He is not
even satisfied with available amenities on this planet earth, where he has
exploited the resources of nature to the best of his ability. He wants to go to
the moon or the planet Venus to exploit resources there. But the Lord has
warned us in the Bhagavad-gétä (8.16) about the worthlessness of all the
innumerable planets of this universe, as well as those planets within other
systems. There are innumerable universes and also innumerable planets in
each of them. But none of them is immune to the chief miseries of material
existence, namely the pangs of birth, the pangs of death, the pangs of old age
and the pangs of disease. The Lord says that even the topmost planet, known
as the Brahmaloka or Satyaloka, (and what to speak of other planets, like the
heavenly planets) is not a happy land for residential purposes, due to the
presence of material pangs, as above mentioned. Conditioned souls are strictly
under the laws of fruitive activities, and as such they sometimes go up to
Brahmaloka and again come down to Pätälaloka, as if they were unintelligent
children on a merry-go-round. The real happiness is in the kingdom of God,
where no one has to undergo the pangs of material existence. Therefore, the
Vedic ways of fruitive activities for the living entities are misleading. One
thinks of a superior way of life in this country or that, or on this planet or
another, but nowhere in the material world can he fulfill his real desire of life,
namely eternal life, full intelligence and complete bliss. Indirectly, Çréla
Çukadeva Gosvämé affirms that Mahäräja Parékñit, in the last stage of life,
should not desire to transfer himself to the so-called heavenly planets, but
should prepare himself for going back home, back to Godhead. None of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
material planets, nor the amenities available there for living conditions, is
everlasting; therefore one must have a factual reluctance to enjoy such
temporary happiness as they afford.
TEXT 3
ATa" k-ivNaaRMaSau YaavdQaR"
SYaadPa[Mataae VYavSaaYabuiÖ" )
iSaÖe_NYaQaaQaeR Na YaTaeTa Ta}a
Pairé[Ma& Ta}a SaMaq+aMaa<a" )) 3 ))
ataù kavir nämasu yävad arthaù
syäd apramatto vyavasäya-buddhiù
siddhe ’nyathärthe na yateta tatra
pariçramaà tatra samékñamäëaù
SYNONYMS
ataù—for this reason; kaviù—the enlightened person; nämasu—in names
only; yävat—minimum; arthaù—necessity; syät—must be;
apramattaù—without being mad after them; vyavasäya-buddhiù—intelligently
fixed; siddhe—for success; anyathä—otherwise; arthe—in the interest of;
na—should never; yateta—endeavor for; tatra—there; pariçramam—laboring
hard; tatra—there; samékñamäëaù—one who sees practically.
TRANSLATION
For this reason the enlightened person should endeavor only for the
minimum necessities of life while in the world of names. He should be
intelligently fixed and never endeavor for unwanted things, being competent to
perceive practically that all such endeavors are merely hard labor for nothing.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The bhägavata-dharma, or the cult of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, is perfectly
distinct from the way of fruitive activities, which are considered by the
devotees to be merely a waste of time. The whole universe, or for that matter
all material existence, is moving on as jagat, simply for planning business to
make one’s position very comfortable or secure, although everyone sees that
this existence is neither comfortable nor secure and can never become
comfortable or secure at any stage of development. Those who are captivated
by the illusory advancement of material civilization (following the way of
phantasmagoria) are certainly madmen. The whole material creation is a
jugglery of names only; in fact, it is nothing but a bewildering creation of
matter like earth, water and fire. The buildings, furniture, cars, bungalows,
mills, factories, industries, peace, war or even the highest perfection of
material science, namely atomic energy and electronics, are all simply
bewildering names of material elements with their concomitant reactions of
the three modes. Since the devotee of the Lord knows them perfectly well, he
is not interested in creating unwanted things for a situation which is not at all
reality, but simply names of no more significance than the babble of sea waves.
The great kings, leaders and soldiers fight with one another in order to
perpetuate their names in history. They are forgotten in due course of time,
and they make a place for another era in history. But the devotee realizes how
much history and historical persons are useless products of flickering time. The
fruitive worker aspires after a big fortune in the matter of wealth, woman and
worldly adoration, but those who are fixed in perfect reality are not at all
interested in such false things. For them it is all a waste of time. Since every
second of human life is important, an enlightened man should be very careful
to utilize time very cautiously. One second of human life wasted in the vain
research of planning for happiness in the material world can never be
replaced, even if one spends millions of coins of gold. Therefore, the
transcendentalist desiring freedom from the clutches of mäyä, or the illusory
activities of life, is warned herewith not to be captivated by the external
features of fruitive actors. Human life is never meant for sense gratification,
but for self-realization. Çrémad-Bhägavatam instructs us solely on this subject
from the very beginning to the end. Human life is simply meant for
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
self-realization. The civilization which aims at this utmost perfection never
indulges in creating unwanted things, and such a perfect civilization prepares
men only to accept the bare necessities of life or to follow the principle of the
best use of a bad bargain. Our material bodies and our lives in that connection
are bad bargains because the living entity is actually spirit, and spiritual
advancement of the living entity is absolutely necessary. Human life is
intended for the realization of this important factor, and one should act
accordingly, accepting only the bare necessities of life and depending more on
God’s gift without diversion of human energy for any other purpose, such as
being mad for material enjoyment. The materialistic advancement of
civilization is called “the civilization of the demons,” which ultimately ends in
wars and scarcity. The transcendentalist is specifically warned herewith to be
fixed in mind, so that even if there is difficulty in plain living and high
thinking he will not budge even an inch from his stark determination. For a
transcendentalist, it is a suicidal policy to be intimately in touch with the sense
gratifiers of the world, because such a policy will frustrate the ultimate gain of
life. Çukadeva Gosvämé met Mahäräja Parékñit when the latter felt a necessity
for such a meeting. It is the duty of a transcendentalist to help persons who
desire real salvation and to support the cause of salvation. One might note that
Çukadeva Gosvämé never met Mahäräja Parékñit while he was ruling as a great
king. For a transcendentalist, the mode of activities is explained in the next
çloka.
TEXT 4
SaTYaa& i+aTaaE ik&- k-iXaPaae" Pa[YaaSaE‚
baRhaE SviSaÖe ùuPabhR<aE" ik-Ma( )
SaTYaÅl/aE ik&- PauåDaaàPaa}Yaa
idGvLk-l/adaE SaiTa ik&- dukU-lE/" )) 4 ))
satyäà kñitau kià kaçipoù prayäsair
bähau svasiddhe hy upabarhaëaiù kim
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
saty aïjalau kià purudhänna-pätryä
dig-valkalädau sati kià dukülaiù
SYNONYMS
satyäm—being in possession; kñitau—earthly flats; kim—where is the
necessity; kaçipoù—of beds and cots; prayäsaiù—endeavoring for; bähau—the
arms; sva-siddhe—being self-sufficient; hi—certainly; upabarhaëaiù—bed and
bedstead; kim—what is the use; sati—being present; aïjalau—the palms of the
hands; kim—what is the use; purudhä—varieties of; anna—eatables;
pätryä—by the utensils; dik—open space; valkala-ädau—skins of trees;
sati—being existent; kim—what is the use of; dukülaiù—clothes.
TRANSLATION
When there are ample earthly flats to lie on, what is the necessity of cots
and beds? When one can use his own arms, what is the necessity of a pillow?
When one can use the palms of his hands, what is the necessity of varieties of
utensils? When there is ample covering, or the skins of trees, what is the
necessity of clothing?
PURPORT
The necessities of life for the protection and comfort of the body must not
be unnecessarily increased. Human energy is spoiled in a vain search after such
illusory happiness. If one is able to lie down on the floor, then why should one
endeavor to get a good bedstead or soft cushion to lie on? If one can rest
without any pillow and make use of the soft arms endowed by nature, there is
no necessity of searching after a pillow. If we make a study of the general life
of the animals, we can see that they have no intelligence for building big
houses, furniture, and other household paraphernalia, and yet they maintain a
healthy life by lying down on the open land. They do not know how to cook or
prepare foodstuff, yet they still live healthy lives more easily than the human
being. This does not mean that human civilization should revert to animal life
or that the human being should live naked in the jungles without any culture,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
education and sense of morality. An intelligent human cannot live the life of
an animal; rather, man should try to utilize his intelligence in arts and science,
poetry and philosophy. In such a way he can further the progressive march of
human civilization. But here the idea given by Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé is that
the reserve energy of human life, which is far superior to that of animals,
should simply he utilized for self-realization. Advancement of human
civilization must be towards the goal of establishing our lost relationship with
God, which is not possible in any form of life other than the human. One must
realize the nullity of the material phenomenon, considering it a passing
phantasmagoria, and must endeavor to make a solution to the miseries of life.
Self-complacence with a polished type of animal civilization geared to sense
gratification is delusion, and such a “civilization” is not worthy of the name. In
pursuit of such false activities, a human being is in the clutches of mäyä, or
illusion. Great sages and saints in the days of yore were not living in palatial
buildings furnished with good furniture and so-called amenities of life. They
used to live in huts and groves and sit on the flat ground, and yet they have
left immense treasures of high knowledge with all perfection. Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé and Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé were high-ranking ministers of state, but
they were able to leave behind them immense writings on transcendental
knowledge, while residing only for one night underneath one tree. They did
not live even two nights under the same tree, and what to speak of
well-furnished rooms with modern amenities. And still they were able to give
us most important literatures of self-realization. So-called comforts of life are
not actually helpful for progressive civilization; rather, they are detrimental to
such progressive life. In the system of sanätana-dharma, of four divisions of
social life and four orders of progressive realization, there are ample
opportunities and sufficient directions for a happy termination of the
progressive life, and the sincere followers are advised therein to accept a
voluntary life of renunciation in order to achieve the desired goal of life. If one
is not accustomed to abiding by the life of renunciation and self-abnegation
from the beginning, one should try to get into the habit at a later stage of life
as recommended by Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, and that will help one to achieve
the desired success.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 5
cqrai<a ik&- PaiQa Na SaiNTa idXaiNTa i>a+aa&
NaEvax(iga]Paa" Par>a*Ta" SairTaae_PYaéuZYaNa( )
åÖa Gauha" ik-MaiJaTaae_viTa NaaePaSaàaNa(
k-SMaad( >aJaiNTa k-vYaae DaNaduMaRdaNDaaNa( )) 5 ))
céräëi kià pathi na santi diçanti bhikñäà
naiväìghripäù para-bhåtaù sarito ’py açuñyan
ruddhä guhäù kim ajito ’vati nopasannän
kasmäd bhajanti kavayo dhana-durmadändhän
SYNONYMS
céräëi—torn clothes; kim—whether; pathi—on the road; na—not;
santi—there is; diçanti—give in charity; bhikñäm—alms; na—not; eva—also;
aìghripäù—the trees; para-bhåtaù—one who maintains others; saritaù—the
rivers; api—also; açuñyan—have dried up; ruddhäù—closed; guhäù—caves;
kim—whether; ajitaù—the Almighty Lord; avati—give protection; na—not;
upasannän—the surrendered soul; kasmät—what for, then; bhajanti—flatters;
kavayaù—the learned; dhana—wealth; durmada-andhän—too intoxicated by.
TRANSLATION
Are there no torn clothes lying on the common road? Do the trees, which
exist for maintaining others, no longer give alms in charity? Do the rivers, being
dried up, no longer supply water to the thirsty? Are the caves of the mountains
now closed, or, above all, does the Almighty Lord not protect the fully
surrendered souls? Why then do the learned sages go to flatter those who are
intoxicated by hard-earned wealth?
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The renounced order of life is never meant for begging or living at the cost
of others as a parasite. According to the dictionary, a parasite is a sycophant
who lives at the cost of society without making any contribution to that
society. The renounced order is meant for contributing something substantial
to society and not depending on the earnings of the householders. On the
contrary, acceptance of alms from the householders by the bona fide
mendicant is an opportunity afforded by the saint for the tangible benefit of
the donor. In the sanätana-dharma institution, alms-giving to the mendicant is
part of a householder’s duty, and it is advised in the scriptures that the
householders should treat the mendicants as their family children and should
provide them with food, clothing, etc., without being asked.
Pseudomendicants, therefore, should not take advantage of the charitable
disposition of the faithful householders. The first duty of a person in the
renounced order of life is to contribute some literary work for the benefit of
the human being in order to give him realized direction toward self-realization.
Amongst the other duties in the renounced order of life of Çréla Sanätana,
Çréla Rüpa and the other Gosvämés of Våndävana, the foremost duty
discharged by them was to hold learned discourses amongst themselves at
Seväkuïja, Våndävana (the spot where Çré Rädhä-Dämodara Temple was
established by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé and where the actual samädhi tombs of Çréla
Rüpa Gosvämé and Çréla Jéva Gosvämé are laid). For the benefit of all in human
society, they left behind them immense literatures of transcendental
importance. Similarly, all the äcäryas who voluntarily accepted the renounced
order of life aimed at benefiting human society and not at living a comfortable
or irresponsible life at the cost of others. However, those who cannot give any
contribution should not go to the householders for food, for such mendicants
asking bread from the householders are an insult to the highest order.
Çukadeva Gosvämé gave this warning especially for those mendicants who
adopt this line of profession to solve their economic problems. Such
mendicants are in abundance in the age of Kali. When a man becomes a
mendicant willfully or by circumstances, he must be of firm faith and
conviction that the Supreme Lord is the maintainer of all living beings
everywhere in the universe. Why, then, would He neglect the maintenance of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
a surrendered soul who is cent percent engaged in the service of the Lord? A
common master looks to the necessities of his servant, so how much more
would the all-powerful, all-opulent Supreme Lord look after the necessities of
life for a fully surrendered soul. The general rule is that a mendicant devotee
will accept a simple small loincloth without asking anyone to give it in charity.
He simply salvages it from the rejected torn cloth thrown in the street. When
he is hungry he may go to a magnanimous tree which drops fruits, and when he
is thirsty he may drink water from the flowing river. He does not require to
live in a comfortable house, but should find a cave in the hills and not be
afraid of jungle animals, keeping faith in God, who lives in everyone’s heart.
The Lord may dictate to tigers and other jungle animals not to disturb His
devotee. Haridäsa Öhäkura, a great devotee of Lord Çré Caitanya, used to live
in such a cave, and by chance a great venomous snake was a co-partner of the
cave. Some admirer of Öhäkura Haridäsa who had to visit the Öhäkura every
day feared the snake and suggested that the Öhäkura leave that place. Because
his devotees were afraid of the snake and they were regularly visiting the cave,
Öhäkura Haridäsa agreed to the proposal on their account. But as soon as this
was settled, the snake actually crawled out of its hole in the cave and left the
cave for good before everyone present. By the dictation of the Lord, who lived
also within the heart of the snake, the snake gave preference to Haridäsa and
decided to leave the place and not disturb him. So this is a tangible example of
how the Lord gives protection to a bona fide devotee like Öhäkura Haridäsa.
According to the regulations of the sanätana-dharma institution, one is
trained from the beginning to depend fully on the protection of the Lord in all
circumstances. The path of renunciation is recommended for acceptance by
one who is fully accomplished and fully purified in his existence. This stage is
described also in the Bhagavad-gétä (16.5) as daivé sampat. A human being is
required to accumulate daivé sampat, or spiritual assets; otherwise, the next
alternative, äsuré sampat, or material assets, will overcome him
disproportionately, and thus one will be forced into the entanglement of
different miseries of the material world. A sannyäsé should always live alone,
without company, and he must be fearless. He should never be afraid of living
alone, although he is never alone. The Lord is residing in everyone’s heart, and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
unless one is purified by the prescribed process, one will feel that he is alone.
But a man in the renounced order of life must be purified by the process; thus
he will feel the presence of the Lord everywhere and will have nothing to fear
(such as being without any company). Everyone can become a fearless and
honest person if his very existence is purified by discharging the prescribed
duty for each and every order of life. One can become fixed in one’s prescribed
duty by faithful aural reception of Vedic instructions and assimilation of the
essence of Vedic knowledge by devotional service to the Lord.
TEXT 6
Wv& Svictae SvTa Wv iSaÖ
AaTMaa iPa[Yaae_QaaeR >aGavaNaNaNTa" )
Ta& iNav*RTaae iNaYaTaaQaaeR >aJaeTa
Sa&SaarheTaUParMaê Ya}a )) 6 ))
evaà sva-citte svata eva siddha
ätmä priyo ’rtho bhagavän anantaù
taà nirvåto niyatärtho bhajeta
saàsära-hetüparamaç ca yatra
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; sva-citte—in one’s own heart; svataù—by His omnipotency;
eva—certainly; siddhaù—fully represented; ätmä—the Supersoul;
priyaù—very dear; arthaù—substance; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; anantaù—the eternal unlimited; tam—unto Him; nirvåtaù—being
detached from the world; niyata—permanent; arthaù—the supreme gain;
bhajeta—one must worship; saàsära-hetu—the cause of the conditioned state
of existence; uparamaù—cessation; ca—certainly; yatra—in which.
TRANSLATION
Thus being fixed, one must render service unto the Supersoul situated in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
one’s own heart by His omnipotency. Because He is the Almighty Personality
of Godhead, eternal and unlimited, He is the ultimate goal of life, and by
worshiping Him one can end the cause of the conditioned state of existence.
PURPORT
As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (18.61), the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Çré Kåñëa is the all-pervading omnipresent Supersoul. Therefore one who is a
yogé can worship only Him because He is the substance and not illusion. Every
living creature is engaging in the service of something else. A living being’s
constitutional position is to render service, but in the atmosphere of mäyä, or
illusion, or the conditional state of existence, the conditioned soul seeks the
service of illusion. A conditioned soul works in the service of his temporary
body, bodily relatives like the wife and children, and the necessary
paraphernalia for maintaining the body and bodily relations, such as the
house, land, wealth, society and country, but he does not know that all such
renderings of service are totally illusory. As we have discussed many times
before, this material world is itself an illusion, like a mirage in the desert. In
the desert there is an illusion of water, and the foolish animals become
entrapped by such an illusion and run after water in the desert, although there
is no water at all. But because there is no water in the desert, one does not
conclude that there is no water at all. The intelligent person knows well that
there is certainly water, water in the seas and oceans, but such vast reservoirs
of water are far, far away from the desert. One should therefore search for
water in the vicinity of seas and oceans and not in the desert. Every one of us
is searching after real happiness in life, namely eternal life, eternal or
unlimited knowledge and unending blissful life. But foolish people who have
no knowledge of the substance search after the reality of life in the illusion.
This material body does not endure eternally, and everything in relation with
this temporary body, such as the wife, children, society and country, also
changes along with the change of body. This is called saàsära, or repetition of
birth, death, old age and disease. We would like to find a solution for all these
problems of life, but we do not know the way. Herein it is suggested that
anyone who wants to make an end to these miseries of life, namely repetition
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of birth, death, disease, and old age, must take to this process of worshiping the
Supreme Lord and not others, as it is also ultimately suggested in the
Bhagavad-gétä (18.65). If we at all want to end the cause of our conditioned life,
we must take to the worship of Lord Çré Kåñëa, who is present in everyone’s
heart by His natural affection for all living beings, who are actually the parts
and parcels of the Lord (Bg. 18.61). The baby in the lap of his mother is
naturally attached to the mother, and the mother is attached to the child. But
when the child grows up and becomes overwhelmed by circumstances, he
gradually becomes detached from the mother, although the mother always
expects some sort of service from the grown-up child and is equally
affectionate toward her child, even though the child is forgetful. Similarly,
because we are all part and parcel of the Lord, the Lord is always affectionate
to us, and He always tries to get us back home, back to Godhead. But we, the
conditioned souls, do not care for Him and run instead after the illusory bodily
connections. We must therefore extricate ourselves from all illusory
connections of the world and seek reunion with the Lord, trying to render
service unto Him because He is the ultimate truth. Actually we are hankering
after Him as the child seeks the mother. And to search out the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, we need not go anywhere else, because the Lord is
within our hearts. This does not suggest, however, that we should not go to the
places of worship, namely the temples, churches and mosques. Such holy places
of worship are also occupied by the Lord because the Lord is omnipresent. For
the common man these holy places are centers of learning about the science of
God. When the temples are devoid of activities, the people in general become
uninterested in such places, and consequently the mass of people gradually
become godless, and a godless civilization is the result. Such a hellish
civilization artificially increases the conditions of life, and existence becomes
intolerable for everyone. The foolish leaders of a godless civilization try to
devise various plans to bring about peace and prosperity in the godless world
under a patent trademark of materialism, and because such attempts are
illusory only, the people elect incompetent, blind leaders, one after another,
who are incapable of offering solutions. If we want at all to end this anomaly of
a godless civilization, we must follow the principles of revealed scriptures like
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam and follow the instruction of a person like Çré
Çukadeva Gosvämé who has no attraction for material gain.
TEXT 7
k-STaa& TvNaad*TYa ParaNauicNTaa‚
Ma*Tae PaéUNaSaTaq& NaaMa ku-YaaRTa( )
PaXYaÅNa& PaiTaTa& vETar<Yaa&
Svk-MaRJaaNa( PairTaaPaaÅuza<aMa( )) 7 ))
kas täà tv anädåtya paränucintäm
åte paçün asatéà näma kuryät
paçyaï janaà patitaà vaitaraëyäà
sva-karmajän paritäpäï juñäëam
SYNONYMS
kaù—who else; täm—that; tu—but; anädåtya—by neglecting;
para-anucintäm—transcendental thoughts; åte—without; paçün—the
materialists; asatém—in the nonpermanent; näma—name; kuryät—will adopt;
paçyan—seeing definitely; janam—the general mass of people;
patitam—fallen; vaitaraëyäm—in Vaitaraëé, the river of suffering;
sva-karma-jän—produced from one’s own work; paritäpän—suffering;
juñäëam—being overtaken by.
TRANSLATION
Who else but the gross materialists will neglect such transcendental thought
and take to the nonpermanent names only, seeing the mass of people fallen in
the river of suffering as the consequence of accruing the result of their own
work?
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
In the Vedas it is said that persons who are attached to demigods to the
exclusion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are like the animals who
follow the herdsman even though they are taken to the slaughterhouse. The
materialists, like animals, also do not know how they are being misdirected by
neglecting the transcendental thought of the Supreme person. No one can
remain vacant of thought. It is said that an idle brain is a devil’s workshop
because a person who cannot think in the right way must think of something
which may bring about disaster. The materialists are always worshiping some
minor demigods, although this is condemned in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.20). As
long as a person is illusioned by material gains, he petitions the respective
demigods to draw some particular benefit which is, after all, illusory and
nonpermanent. The enlightened transcendentalist is not captivated by such
illusory things; therefore he is always absorbed in the transcendental thought
of the Supreme in different stages of realization, namely Brahman, Paramätmä
and Bhagavän. In the previous verse it is suggested that one should think of
the Supersoul, which is one step higher than the impersonal thought of
Brahman, as it was suggested in the case of contemplating the viräö-rüpa of the
personality of Godhead.
Intelligent persons who can see properly may look into the general
conditions of the living entities who are wandering in the cycle of the It is said
that there is an everlasting belt of water called the River Vaitaraëé at the
entrance of the plutonic planet of Yamaräja, who punishes sinners in different
manners. After being subjected to such sufferings, a sinner is awarded a
particular species of life according to his deeds in the past. Such living entities
as are punished by Yamaräja are seen in different varieties of conditioned life.
Some of them are in heaven, and some of them are in hell. Some of them are
brähmaëas, and some of them are misers. But no one is happy in this material
world, and all of them are either class A, B or C prisoners suffering because of
their own deeds. The Lord is impartial to all circumstances of the sufferings of
the living entities, but to one who takes shelter at His lotus feet, the Lord gives
proper protection, and He takes such a living entity back home, back to
Himself.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 8
ke-icTa( SvdehaNTaôRdYaavk-aXae
Pa[adeXaMaa}a& Pauåz& vSaNTaMa( )
cTau>auRJa& k-ÅrQaa®Xa«‚
GadaDar& Daar<aYaa SMariNTa )) 8 ))
kecit sva-dehäntar-hådayävakäçe
prädeça-mätraà puruñaà vasantam
catur-bhujaà kaïja-rathäìga-çaìkhagadä-
dharaà dhäraëayä smaranti
SYNONYMS
kecit—others; sva-deha-antaù—within the body; hådaya-avakäçe—in the
region of the heart; prädeça-mätram—measuring only eight inches;
puruñam—the Personality of Godhead; vasantam—residing;
catuù-bhujam—with four hands; kaïja—lotus; ratha-aìga—the wheel of a
chariot; çaìkha—conchshell; gadä-dharam—and with a club in the hand;
dhäraëayä—conceiving in that way; smaranti—do meditate upon Him.
TRANSLATION
Others conceive of the Personality of Godhead residing within the body in
the region of the heart and measuring only eight inches, with four hands
carrying a lotus, a wheel of a chariot, a conchshell and a club respectively.
PURPORT
The all-pervading personality of Godhead resides as Paramätmä in the
heart of each and every living entity. The measurement of the localized
Personality of Godhead is estimated to expand from the ring finger to the end
of the thumb, more or less eight inches. The form of the Lord described in this
verse with distribution of different symbols—beginning from the lower right
hand up and down to the lower left hand with lotus, wheel of a chariot,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
conchshell and club respectively—is called Janärdana, or the plenary portion
of the Lord who controls the general mass. There are many other forms of the
Lord with varied situations of the symbols of lotus, conchshell, etc., and they
are differently known as Puruñottama, Acyuta, Narasiàha, Trivikrama,
Håñékeça, Keçava, Mädhava, Aniruddha, Pradyumna, Saìkarñaëa, Çrédhara,
Väsudeva, Dämodara, Janärdana, Näräyaëa, Hari, Padmanäbha, Vämana,
Madhusüdana, Govinda, Kåñëa, Viñëumürti, Adhokñaja and Upendra. These
twenty-four forms of the localized Personality of Godhead are worshiped in
different parts of the planetary system, and in each system there is an
incarnation of the Lord having a different Vaikuëöha planet in the spiritual
sky, which is called the paravyoma. There are many other hundreds and scores
of different forms of the Lord, and each and every one of them has a particular
planet in the spiritual sky, of which this material sky is only a fragmental
offshoot. The Lord exists as puruña, or the male enjoyer, although there is no
comparing Him to any male form in the material world. But all such forms are
advaita, nondifferent from one another, and each of them is eternally young.
The young Lord with four hands is nicely decorated, as described below.
TEXT 9
Pa[Saàv£&- Nail/NaaYaTae+a<a&
k-dMbik-ÅLk-iPaXa®vaSaSaMa( )
l/SaNMaharÒihr<MaYaa®d&
Sfu-rNMaharÒik-rq$=ku-<@l/Ma( )) 9 ))
prasanna-vaktraà nalinäyatekñaëaà
kadamba-kiïjalka-piçaìga-väsasam
lasan-mahä-ratna-hiraëmayäìgadaà
sphuran-mahä-ratna-kiréöa-kuëòalam
SYNONYMS
prasanna—expresses happiness; vaktram—mouth; nalina-äyata—spread like
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the petals of a lotus; ékñaëam—eyes; kadamba—kadamba flower;
kiïjalka—saffron; piçaìga—yellow; väsasam—garments; lasat—hanging;
mahä-ratna—valuable jewels; hiraëmaya—made of gold; aìgadam—ornament;
sphurat—glowing; mahä-ratna—valuable jewels; kiréöa—head dress;
kuëòalam—earrings.
TRANSLATION
His mouth expresses His happiness. His eyes spread like the petals of a lotus,
and His garments, yellowish like the saffron of a kadamba flower, are bedecked
with valuable jewels. His ornaments are all made of gold, set with jewels, and
He wears a glowing head dress and earrings.
TEXT 10
oiàd]ôTPaªJak-i<aRk-al/Yae
YaaeGaeìraSQaaiPaTaPaadPaçvMa( )
é[ql/+a<a& k-aESTau>arÒk-NDar‚
MaãaNal/+MYaa vNaMaal/YaaicTaMa( )) 10 ))
unnidra-håt-paìkaja-karëikälaye
yogeçvarästhäpita-päda-pallavam
çré-lakñaëaà kaustubha-ratna-kandharam
amläna-lakñmyä vana-mälayäcitam
SYNONYMS
unnidra—blooming; håt—heart; paìkaja—lotus flower; karëikä-älaye—on the
surface of the whorl; yoga-éçvara—the great mystics; ästhäpita—placed;
päda-pallavam—lotus feet; çré—the goddess of fortune, or a beautiful calf;
lakñaëam—marked in that way; kaustubha—the Kaustubha jewel;
ratna—other jewels; kandharam—on the shoulder; amläna—quite fresh;
lakñmyä—beauty; vana-mälayä—by a flower garland; äcitam—spread over.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
His lotus feet are placed over the whorls of the lotuslike hearts of great
mystics. On His chest is the Kaustubha jewel, engraved with a beautiful calf,
and there are other jewels on His shoulders. His complete torso is garlanded
with fresh flowers.
PURPORT
The ornaments, flowers, clothing and all the other decorations on the
transcendental body of the Personality of Godhead are identical with the body
of the Lord. None of them are made of material ingredients; otherwise there
would be no chance of their decorating the body of the Lord. As such, in the
paravyoma, spiritual varieties are also distinguished from the material
variegatedness.
TEXT 11
iv>aUizTa& Mae%l/Yaax(Gaul/IYakE-‚
MaRhaDaNaENaURPaurk-ª<aaidi>a" )
iòGDaaMal/aku-iÄTaNaql/ku-NTalE/‚
ivRraecMaaNaaNaNahaSaPaeXal/Ma( )) 11 ))
vibhüñitaà mekhalayäìguléyakair
mahä-dhanair nüpura-kaìkaëädibhiù
snigdhämaläkuïcita-néla-kuntalair
virocamänänana-häsa-peçalam
SYNONYMS
vibhüñitam—well decorated; mekhalayä—with an ornamental wreath about
the waist; aìguléyakaiù—by finger rings; mahä-dhanaiù—all highly valuable;
nüpura—ringing leglets; kaìkaëa-ädibhiù—also by bangles; snigdha—slick;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
amala—spotless; äkuïcita—curling; néla—bluish; kuntalaiù—hair;
virocamäna—very pleasing; änana—face; häsa—smile; peçalam—beautiful.
TRANSLATION
He is well decorated with an ornamental wreath about His waist and rings
studded with valuable jewels on His fingers. His leglets, His bangles, His oiled
hair, curling with a bluish tint, and His beautiful smiling face are all very
pleasing.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the most beautiful person amongst
all others, and Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé describes every part of His
transcendental beauty, one after another, in order to teach the impersonalist
that the Personality of Godhead is not an imagination by the devotee for
facility of worship, but is the Supreme Person in fact and figure. The
impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth is but His radiation, as the sun rays
are but radiations from the sun.
TEXT 12
AdqNal/Il/ahiSaTae+a<aaeçSad(‚
>a]U>a®Sa&SaUicTa>aUYaRNauGa]hMa( )
wR+aeTa icNTaaMaYaMaeNaMaqìr&
YaavNMaNaae Daar<aYaaviTaïTae )) 12 ))
adéna-lélä-hasitekñaëollasadbhrü-
bhaìga-saàsücita-bhüry-anugraham
ékñeta cintämayam enam éçvaraà
yävan mano dhäraëayävatiñöhate
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
adéna—very magnanimous; lélä—pastimes ; hasita—smiling; ékñaëa—by
glancing over; ullasat—glowing; bhrü-bhaìga—signals of the eyebrow;
saàsücita—indicated; bhüri—extensive; anugraham—benediction;
ékñeta—one must concentrate on; cintämayam—transcendental; enam—this
particular; éçvaram—the Supreme Lord; yävat—as long as; manaù—the mind;
dhäraëayä—by meditation; avatiñöhate—can be fixed.
TRANSLATION
The Lord’s magnanimous pastimes and the glowing glancing of His smiling
face are all indications of His extensive benedictions. One must therefore
concentrate on this transcendental form of the Lord, as long as the mind can be
fixed on Him by meditation.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (12.5) it is said that the impersonalist undergoes a series of
difficult programs on account of his impersonal meditation. But the devotee,
due to the Lord’s personal service, progresses very easily. Impersonal
meditation is therefore a source of suffering for the impersonalist. Here, the
devotee has an advantage over the impersonalist philosopher. The
impersonalist is doubtful about the personal feature of the Lord, and therefore
he always tries to meditate upon something which is not objective. For this
reason there is an authentic statement in the Bhägavatam regarding the
positive concentration of the mind on the factual form of the Lord.
The process of meditation recommended herein is bhakti-yoga, or the
process of devotional service after one is liberated from the material
conditions. Jïäna-yoga is the process of liberation from the material
conditions. After one is liberated from the conditions of material existence,
i.e., when one is nivåtta, as previously stated herein, or when one is freed from
all material necessities, one becomes qualified to discharge the process of
bhakti-yoga. Therefore bhakti-yoga includes jïäna-yoga, or, in other words, the
process of pure devotional service simultaneously serves the purpose of
jïäna-yoga; liberation from material conditions is automatically achieved by
the gradual development of pure devotional service. These effects of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhakti-yoga are called anartha-nivåtti. Things which are artificially acquired
gradually disappear along with the progress of bhakti-yoga. Meditation on the
lotus feet of the personality of Godhead, the first processional step, must show
its effect by anartha-nivåtti. The grossest type of anartha which binds the
conditioned soul in material existence is sex desire, and this sex desire
gradually develops in the union of the male and female. When the male and
female are united, the sex desire is further aggravated by the accumulation of
buildings, children, friends, relatives and wealth. When all these are acquired,
the conditioned soul becomes overwhelmed by such entanglements, and the
false sense of egoism, or the sense of “myself” and “mine,” becomes prominent,
and the sex desire expands to various political, social, altruistic, philanthropic
and many other unwanted engagements, resembling the foam of the sea waves,
which becomes very prominent at one time and at the next moment vanishes
as quickly as a cloud in the sky. The conditioned soul is encircled by such
products, as well as products of sex desire, and therefore bhakti-yoga leads to
gradual evaporation of the sex desire, which is summarized in three headings,
namely profit, adoration and distinction. All conditioned souls are mad after
these different forms of sex desire, and one shall see for himself how much he
has been freed from such material hankerings based primarily on the sex
desire. As a person feels his hunger satisfied after eating each morsel of
foodstuff, he must similarly be able to see the degree to which he has been
freed from sex desire. The sex desire is diminished along with its various forms
by the process of bhakti-yoga because bhakti-yoga automatically, by the grace of
the Lord, effectively results in knowledge and renunciation, even if the
devotee is not materially very well educated. Knowledge means knowing things
as they are, and if by deliberation it is found that there are things which are at
all unnecessary, naturally the person who has acquired knowledge leaves aside
such unwanted things. When the conditioned soul finds by culture of
knowledge that material necessities are unwanted things, he becomes detached
from such unwanted things. This stage of knowledge is called vairägya, or
detachment from unwanted things. We have previously discussed that the
transcendentalist is required to be self-sufficient and should not beg from the
rich blind persons to fulfill the bare necessities of life. Çukadeva Gosvämé has
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
suggested some alternatives for the bare necessities of life, namely the problem
of eating, sleeping and shelter, but he has not suggested any alternative for sex
satisfaction. One who has the sex desire still with him should not at all try to
accept the renounced order of life. For one who has not attained to this stage,
there is no question of a renounced order of life. So by the gradual process of
devotional service under the guidance of a proper spiritual master, and
following the principles of the Bhägavatam, one must be able at least to control
the gross sex desire before one accepts the renounced order of life factually.
So purification means getting free gradually from sex desire, and this is
attained by meditation on the person of the Lord as described herein,
beginning from the feet. One should not try to go upwards artificially without
seeing for himself how much he has been released from the sex desire. The
smiling face of the Lord is the Tenth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and there
are many upstarts who at once try to begin with the Tenth Canto and
especially with the five chapters which delineate the räsa-lélä of the Lord. This
is certainly improper. By such improper study or hearing of Bhägavatam, the
material opportunists have played havoc by indulgence in sex life in the name
of Bhägavatam. This vilification of Bhägavatam is rendered by the acts of the
so-called devotees; one should be free from all kinds of sex desire before he
tries to make a show of recital of Bhägavatam. Çré Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura clearly defines the import of purification as cessation from sex
indulgence. He says, yathä yathä dhéç ca çudhyati viñaya-lämpaöyaà tyajati, tathä
tathä dhärayed iti citta-çuddhi-täratamyenaiva dhyäna-täratamyam uktam. And
as one gets free from the intoxication of sex indulgence by purification of
intelligence, one should step forward for the next meditation, or in other
words, the progress of meditation on the different limbs of the transcendental
body of the Lord should be enhanced in proportion to the progress of
purification of the heart. The conclusion is that those who are still entrapped
by sex indulgence should never progress to meditation above the feet of the
Lord; therefore recital of Çrémad-Bhägavatam by them should be restricted to
the First and Second Cantos of the great literature. One must complete the
purificatory process by assimilating the contents of the first nine cantos. Then
one should be admitted into the realm of the Tenth Canto of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 13
WkE-k-Xaae_®aiNa iDaYaaNau>aavYaeTa(
Paadaid YaavÖiSaTa& Gada>a*Ta" )
iJaTa& iJaTa& SQaaNaMaPaaeù DaarYaeTa(
Par& Par& éuÖyiTa DaqYaRQaa YaQaa )) 13 ))
ekaikaço ’ìgäni dhiyänubhävayet
pädädi yävad dhasitaà gadäbhåtaù
jitaà jitaà sthänam apohya dhärayet
paraà paraà çuddhyati dhér yathä yathä
SYNONYMS
eka-ekaçaù—one to one, or one after another; aìgäni—limbs; dhiyä—by
attention; anubhävayet—meditate upon; päda-ädi—legs, etc.; yävat—until;
hasitam—smiling; gadä-bhåtaù—the personality of Godhead; jitam
jitam—gradually controlling the mind; sthänam—place; apohya—leaving;
dhärayet—meditate upon; param param—higher and higher;
çuddhyati—purified; dhéù—intelligence; yathä yathä—as much as.
TRANSLATION
The process of meditation should begin from the lotus feet of the Lord and
progress to His smiling face. The meditation should be concentrated upon the
lotus feet, then the calves, then the thighs, and in this way higher and higher.
The more the mind becomes fixed upon the different parts of the limbs, one
after another, the more the intelligence becomes purified.
PURPORT
The process of meditation recommended in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam is not
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
to fix one’s attention on something impersonal or void. The meditation should
concentrate on the person of the Supreme Godhead, either in His viräö-rüpa,
the gigantic universal form, or in His sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], as
described in the scriptures. There are authorized descriptions of Viñëu forms,
and there are authorized representations of Deities in the temples. Thus one
can practice meditating upon the Deity, concentrating his mind on the lotus
feet of the Lord and gradually rising higher and higher, up to His smiling face.
According to the Bhägavata school, the Lord’s räsa dancing is the smiling
face of the Lord. Since it is recommended in this verse that one should
gradually progress from the lotus feet up to the smiling face, we shall not jump
at once to understand the Lord’s pastimes in the räsa dance. It is better to
practice concentrating our attention by offering flowers and tulasi to the lotus
feet of the Lord. In this way, we gradually become purified by the arcanä
process. We dress the Lord, bathe Him, etc., and all these transcendental
activities help us purify our existence. When we reach the higher standard of
purification, if we see the smiling face of the Lord or hear the räsa dance
pastimes of the Lord, then we can relish His activities. In the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, therefore, the räsa dance pastimes are delineated in the
Tenth Canto (Chapters 29–34).
The more one concentrates on the transcendental form of the Lord, either
on the lotus feet, the calves, the thighs or the chest, the more one becomes
purified. In this verse it is clearly stated, “the more the intelligence becomes
purified,” which means the more one becomes detached from sense
gratification. Our intelligence in the present conditioned state of life is impure
due to being engaged in sense gratification. The result of meditation on the
transcendental form of the Lord will be manifested by one’s detachment from
sense gratification. Therefore, the ultimate purpose of meditation is
purification of one’s intelligence.
Those who are too engrossed in sense gratification cannot be allowed to
participate in arcanä or to touch the transcendental form of the Rädhä-Kåñëa
or Viñëu Deities. For them it is better to meditate upon the gigantic viräö-rüpa
of the Lord, as recommended in the next verse. The impersonalists and the
voidists are therefore recommended to meditate upon the universal form of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Lord, whereas the devotees are recommended to meditate on the Deity
worship in the temple. Because the impersonalists and the voidists are not
sufficiently purified in their spiritual activities, arcanä is not meant for them.
TEXT 14
Yaavà JaaYaeTa Paravre_iSMaNa(
ivìeìre d]íir >ai¢-YaaeGa" )
TaavTa( SQavqYa" PauåzSYa æPa&
i§-YaavSaaNae Pa[YaTa" SMareTa )) 14 ))
yävan na jäyeta parävare ’smin
viçveçvare drañöari bhakti-yogaù
tävat sthavéyaù puruñasya rüpaà
kriyävasäne prayataù smareta
SYNONYMS
yävat—as long as; na—does not; jäyeta—develop; para—transcendental;
avare—mundane; asmin—in this form of; viçva-éçvare—the Lord of all worlds;
drañöari—unto the seer; bhakti-yogaù—devotional service; tävat—so long;
sthavéyaù—the gross materialist; puruñasya—of the viräö-puruña;
rüpam—universal form; kriyä-avasäne—at the end of one’s prescribed duties;
prayataù—with proper attention; smareta—one should remember.
TRANSLATION
Unless the gross materialist develops a sense of loving service unto the
Supreme Lord, the seer of both the transcendental and material worlds, he
should remember or meditate upon the universal form of the Lord at the end of
his prescribed duties.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The Supreme Lord is the seer of all worlds, both material and
transcendental. In other words, the Supreme Lord is the ultimate beneficiary
and enjoyer of all worlds, as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (5.29). The
spiritual world is the manifestation of His internal potency, and the material
world is the manifestation of His external potency. The living entities are also
His marginal potency, and by their own choice they can live in either the
transcendental or material worlds. The material world is not a fit place for
living entities because they are spiritually one with the Lord and in the
material world the living entities become conditioned by the laws of the
material world. The Lord wants all living entities, who are His parts and
parcels, to live with Him in the transcendental world, and for enlightening
conditioned souls in the material world, all the Vedas and the revealed
scriptures are there—expressly to recall the conditioned souls back home, back
to Godhead. Unfortunately, the conditioned living entities, although suffering
continually the threefold miseries of conditioned life, are not very serious
about going back to Godhead. It is due to their misguided way of living,
complicated by sins and virtues. Some of them who are virtuous by deeds begin
to reestablish the lost relation with the Lord, but they are unable to
understand the personal feature of the Lord. The real purpose of life is to make
contact with the Lord and be engaged in His service. That is the natural
position of living entities. But those who are impersonalists and are unable to
render any loving service to the Lord have been advised to meditate upon His
impersonal feature, the viräö-rüpa, or universal form. Some way or other, one
must try to reestablish one’s forgotten relation with the Lord if one at all
desires to gain real happiness in life, and to reclaim his natural unfettered
condition. For the less intelligent beginners, meditation on the impersonal
feature, the viräö-rüpa, or universal form of the Lord, will gradually qualify one
to rise to personal contact. One is advised herewith to meditate upon the
viräö-rüpa specified in the previous chapters in order to understand how the
different planets, seas, mountains, rivers, birds, beasts, human beings, demigods
and all that we can conceive are but different parts and limbs of the Lord’s
viräö form. This sort of thinking is also a type of meditation on the Absolute
Truth, and as soon as such meditation begins, one develops one’s godly
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
qualities, and the whole world appears to be a happy and peaceful residence for
all the people of the world. Without such meditation on God, either personal
or impersonal, all good qualities of the human being become covered with
misconceptions regarding his constitutional position, and without such
advanced knowledge, the whole world becomes a hell for the human being.
TEXT 15
iSQar& Sau%& caSaNaMaaiSQaTaae YaiTa‚
YaRda iJahaSauirMaMa® l/aek-Ma( )
k-ale/ c deXae c MaNaae Na SaÂYaeTa(
Pa[a<aaNa( iNaYaC^eNMaNaSaa iJaTaaSau" )) 15 ))
sthiraà sukhaà cäsanam ästhito yatir
yadä jihäsur imam aìga lokam
käle ca deçe ca mano na sajjayet
präëän niyacchen manasä jitäsuù
SYNONYMS
sthiram—without being disturbed; sukham—comfortable; ca—also;
äsanam—sitting accommodation; ästhitaù—being situated; yatiù—the sage;
yadä—whenever; jihäsuù—desires to give up; imam—this; aìga—O King;
lokam—this body; käle—in time; ca—and; deçe—in a proper place; ca—also;
manaù—the mind; na—not; sajjayet—may not be perplexed; präëän—the
senses; niyacchet—must control; manasä—by the mind; jita-asuù—conquering
the life air.
TRANSLATION
O King, whenever the yogé desires to leave this planet of human beings, he
should not be perplexed about the proper time or place, but should comfortably
sit without being disturbed and, regulating the life air, should control the senses
by the mind.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä (8.14) it is clearly stated that a person who is totally
engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, and who constantly
remembers Him at every step, easily obtains the mercy of the Lord by entering
into His personal contact. Such devotees do not need to seek an opportune
moment to leave the present body. But those who are mixed devotees, alloyed
with fruitive action or empirical philosophical speculation, require an
opportune moment for quitting this body. For them the opportune moments
are stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (8.23–26). But these opportune moments are
not as important as one’s being a successful yogé who is able to quit his body as
he likes. Such a yogé must be competent to control his senses by the mind. The
mind is easily conquered simply by engaging it at the lotus feet of the Lord.
Gradually, by such service, all the senses become automatically engaged in the
service of the Lord. That is the way of merging into the Supreme Absolute.
TEXT 16
MaNa" SvbuÖyaMal/Yaa iNaYaMYa
+ae}aj WTaa& iNaNaYaeTa( TaMaaTMaiNa )
AaTMaaNaMaaTMaNYavåDYa Daqrae
l/BDaaePaXaaiNTaivRrMaeTa k*-TYaaTa( )) 16 ))
manaù sva-buddhyämalayä niyamya
kñetra-jïa etäà ninayet tam ätmani
ätmänam ätmany avarudhya dhéro
labdhopaçäntir virameta kåtyät
SYNONYMS
manaù—the mind; sva-buddhyä—by his own intelligence;
amalayä—unalloyed; niyamya—by regulating; kñetra-jïe—unto the living
entity; etäm—all of them; ninayet—merge; tam—that; ätmani—the self;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ätmänam—the self; ätmani—in the Superself; avarudhya—being locked up;
dhéraù—the fully satisfied; labdha-upaçäntiù—one who has attained full bliss;
virameta—ceases from; kåtyät—all other activities.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the yogé should merge his mind, by his unalloyed intelligence,
into the living entity, and then merge the living entity into the Superself. And
by doing this, the fully satisfied living entity becomes situated in the supreme
stage of satisfaction, so that he ceases from all other activities.
PURPORT
The functions of the mind are thinking, feeling and willing. When the
mind is materialistic, or absorbed in material contact, it acts for material
advancement of knowledge, destructively ending in discovery of nuclear
weapons. But when the mind acts under spiritual urge, it acts wonderfully for
going back home, back to Godhead, for life in complete bliss and eternity.
Therefore the mind has to be manipulated by good and unalloyed intelligence.
Perfect intelligence is to render service unto the Lord. One should be
intelligent enough to understand that the living being is, in all circumstances,
a servant of the circumstances. Every living being is serving the dictates of
desire, anger, lust, illusion, insanity and enviousness—all materially affected.
But even while executing such dictations of different temperaments, he is
perpetually unhappy. When one actually feels this and turns his intelligence to
inquiring about it from the right sources, he gets information of the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. Instead of serving materially for the
abovementioned different humors of the body, the living entity’s intelligence
then becomes freed from the unhappy illusion of materialistic temperament,
and thus, by unalloyed intelligence, the mind is brought into the service of the
Lord. The Lord and His service are identical, being on the absolute plane.
Therefore the unalloyed intelligence and the mind are merged into the Lord,
and thus the living entity does not remain a seer himself but becomes seen by
the Lord transcendentally. When the living entity is directly seen by the Lord,
the Lord dictates to him to act according to His desire, and when the living
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
entity follows Him perfectly, the living entity ceases to discharge any other
duty for his illusory satisfaction. In his pure unalloyed state, the living being
attains the stage of full bliss, labdhopaçänti, and ceases all material hankerings.
TEXT 17
Na Ya}a k-al/ae_iNaiMaza& Par" Pa[>au"
ku-Taae Nau deva JaGaTaa& Ya wRiXare )
Na Ya}a Satv& Na rJaSTaMaê
Na vE ivk-arae Na MahaNa( Pa[DaaNaMa( )) 17 ))
na yatra kälo ’nimiñäà paraù prabhuù
kuto nu devä jagatäà ya éçire
na yatra sattvaà na rajas tamaç ca
na vai vikäro na mahän pradhänam
SYNONYMS
na—not; yatra—wherein; kälaù—destructive time; animiñäm—of the
heavenly demigods; paraù—superior; prabhuù—controller; kutaù—where is
there; nu—certainly; deväù—the demigods; jagatäm—the mundane creatures;
ye—those; éçire—rules; na—not; yatra—therein; sattvam—mundane goodness;
na—nor; rajaù—mundane passion; tamaù—mundane ignorance; ca—also;
na—nor; vai—certainly; vikäraù—transformation; na—nor; mahän—the
material Causal Ocean; pradhänam—material nature.
TRANSLATION
In that transcendental state of labdhopaçänti, there is no supremacy of
devastating time, which controls even the celestial demigods who are
empowered to rule over mundane creatures. (And what to speak of the
demigods themselves?) Nor is there the mode of material goodness, nor passion,
nor ignorance, nor even the false ego, nor the material Causal Ocean, nor the
material nature.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Devastating time, which controls even the celestial demigods by its
manifestations of past, present and future, does not act on the transcendental
plane. The influence of time is exhibited by the symptoms of birth, death, old
age and disease, and these four principles of material conditions are present
everywhere in any part of the material cosmos up to the planet Brahmaloka,
where the duration of life of the inhabitants appears to us to be fabulous.
Insurmountable time even brings about the death of Brahmä, so what to speak
of other demigods like Indra, Candra, Sürya, Väyu and Varuëa? The
astronomical influence directed by the different demigods over mundane
creatures is also conspicuous by its absence. In material existence, the living
entities are afraid of Satanic influence, but for a devotee on the
transcendental plane there is no such fear at all. The living entities change
their material bodies in different shapes and forms under the influence of the
different modes of material nature, but in the transcendental state the devotee
is guëa-téta, or above the material modes of goodness, passion and ignorance.
Thus the false ego of “I am the lord of all I survey” does not arise there. In the
material world the false ego of the living being trying to lord it over the
material nature is something like the moth’s falling in a blazing fire. The moth
is captivated by the glaring beauty of the fire, and when he comes to enjoy it,
the blazing fire consumes him. In the transcendental state the living being is
pure in his consciousness, and as such he has no false ego to lord it over the
material nature. Rather, his pure consciousness directs him to surrender unto
the Supreme Lord, as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.19): väsudevaù sarvam iti sa
mahätmä sudurlabhaù. All this indicates that in the transcendental state there
is neither material creation nor the Causal Ocean for material nature.
The above-mentioned state of affairs is factual on the transcendental plane,
but is factually revealed in a transcendentalist’s knowledge of the advanced
state of pure consciousness. Such transcendentalists are of two types, namely
the impersonalists and the devotees. For the impersonalist the ultimate goal or
destination is the brahmajyoti of the spiritual sky, but for the devotees the
ultimate goal is the Vaikuëöha planets. The devotees experience the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
above-mentioned state of affairs by attainment of spiritual forms for activity in
the transcendental loving service of the Lord. But the impersonalist, because
of his neglecting the association of the Lord, does not develop a spiritual body
for spiritual activity, but remains a spiritual spark only, merged in the effulgent
spiritual rays of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is the
full-fledged form of eternity, bliss and knowledge, but the formless brahmajyoti
is simply eternity and knowledge. The Vaikuëöha planets are also forms of
eternity, bliss and knowledge, and therefore the devotees of the Lord, who are
admitted into the abode of the Lord, also get bodies of eternity, bliss and
knowledge. As such there is no difference between one and another. The
Lord’s abode, name, fame, entourage, etc., are of the same transcendental
quality, and how this transcendental quality differs from the material world is
explained herewith in this verse. In the Bhagavad-gétä, three principal subjects
have been explained by Lord Çré Kåñëa, namely karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga and
bhakti-yoga, but one can reach the Vaikuëöha planets by the practice of
bhakti-yoga only. The other two are incompetent in helping one reach the
Vaikuëöhalokas, although they can, however, conveniently take one to the
effulgent brahmajyoti, as described above.
TEXT 18
Par& Pad& vEZ<avMaaMaNaiNTa Tad(
YaàeiTa NaeTaqTYaTaduiTSaSa*+av" )
ivSa*JYa daEraTMYaMaNaNYaSaaEôda
ôdaePaGauùahRPad& Pade Pade )) 18 ))
paraà padaà vaiñëavam ämananti tad
yan neti netéty atad utsisåkñavaù
visåjya daurätmyam ananya-sauhådä
hådopaguhyärha-padaà pade pade
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
param—the supreme; padam—situation; vaiñëavam—in relation with the
personality of Godhead; ämananti—do they know; tat—that; yat—which; na
iti—not this; na iti—not this; iti—thus; atat—godless; utsisåkñavaù—those
who desire to avoid; visåjya—giving it up completely;
daurätmyam—perplexities; ananya—absolutely; sauhådäù—in good will; hådä
upaguhya—taking them into his heart; arha—that which is only worshipable;
padam—lotus feet; pade pade—at every moment.
TRANSLATION
The transcendentalists desire to avoid everything godless, for they know that
supreme situation in which everything is related with the Supreme Lord Viñëu.
Therefore a pure devotee who is in absolute harmony with the Lord does not
create perplexities, but worships the lotus feet of the Lord at every moment,
taking them into his heart.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä, mad-dhäma (“My abode”) is mentioned several times,
and according to the version of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa
there exists the unlimited spiritual sky, wherein the planets are called
Vaikuëöhas, or the abode of the Personality of Godhead. In that sky, which is
far, far beyond the material sky and its sevenfold coverings, there is no need of
the sun or the moon, nor is there necessity of electricity for illumination,
because the planets are self-illuminating and more brilliant than the material
suns. pure devotees of the Lord are absolutely in harmony with the Personality
of Godhead, or in other words, they always think of the Lord as their only
dependable friend and well-wisher. They do not care for any mundane
creature, up to the status of Brahmä, the lord of the universe. Only they can
definitely have a clear vision of the Vaikuëöha planets. Such pure devotees,
being perfectly directed by the Supreme Lord, do not create any artificial
perplexity in the matter of transcendental understanding by wasting time in
discussing what is Brahman and what is non-Brahman, or mäyä, nor do they
falsely think of themselves as one with the Lord, or argue that there is no
existence of the Lord separately, or that there is no God at all, or that living
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
beings are themselves God, or that when God incarnates Himself He assumes a
material body. Nor do they concern themselves with many obscure speculative
theories, which are in actuality so many stumbling blocks on the path of
transcendental understanding. Apart from the class of impersonalists or
nondevotees, there are also classes who pose themselves as devotees of the
Lord but at heart maintain the idea of salvation by becoming one with the
impersonal Brahman. They wrongly manufacture their own way of devotional
service by open debauchery and mislead others who are simpletons or
debauchees like themselves. All these nondevotees and debauchees are,
according to Viçvanätha Cakravarté, durätmäs, or crooked souls in the dress of
mahätmäs, or great souls. Such nondevotees and debauchees are completely
excluded from the list of transcendentalists by the presentation of this
particular verse by Çukadeva Gosvämé.
So the Vaikuëöha planets are factually the supreme residential places called
the paraà padam. The impersonal brahmajyoti is also called the paraà padam
due to its being the rays of the Vaikuëöha planets, as the sun rays are the rays
of the sun. In the Bhagavad-gétä (14.27) it is clearly said that the impersonal
brahmajyoti rests on the person of the Lord, and because everything rests on
the brahmajyoti directly and indirectly, everything is generated from the Lord,
everything rests on Him, and after annihilation, everything is merged in Him
only. Therefore, nothing is independent of Him. A pure devotee of the Lord
no longer wastes valuable time in discriminating the Brahman from
non-Brahman because he knows perfectly well that the Lord Parabrahman, by
His Brahman energy, is interwoven in everything, and thus everything is
looked upon by a devotee as the property of the Lord. The devotee tries to
engage everything in His service and does not create perplexities by falsely
lording it over the creation of the Lord. He is so faithful that he engages
himself, as well as everything else, in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord. In everything, the devotee sees the Lord, and he sees everything in the
Lord. The specific disturbance created by a durätmä, or crooked soul, is due to
his maintaining that the transcendental form of the Lord is something
material.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 19
wTQa& MauiNaSTaUParMaed( VYaviSQaTaae
ivjaNad*GvqYaRSauriNDaTaaXaYa" )
SvPaaiZ<aRNaaPaq@y Gaud& TaTaae_iNal&/
SQaaNaezu z$(SaUàMaYaeiÂTa©-Ma" )) 19 ))
itthaà munis tüparamed vyavasthito
vijïäna-dåg-vérya-surandhitäçayaù
sva-pärñëinäpéòya gudaà tato ’nilaà
sthäneñu ñaösünnamayej jita-klamaù
SYNONYMS
ittham—thus, by Brahman realization; muniù—the philosopher; tu—but;
uparamet—should retire; vyavasthitaù—well situated; vijïäna-dåk—by
scientific knowledge; vérya—strength; su-randhita—well regulated;
äçayaù—aim of life; sva-pärñëinä—with the heel of one’s foot; äpéòya—by
blocking; gudam—the air hole; tataù—thereafter; anilam—life air;
sthäneñu—in the places; ñaösu—six primary; unnamayet—must be lifted;
jita-klamaù—by extinguishing material desires.
TRANSLATION
By the strength of scientific knowledge, one should be well situated in
absolute realization and thus be able to extinguish all material desires. One
should then give up the material body by blocking the air hole [through which
stool is evacuated] with the heel of one’s foot and by lifting the life air from one
place to another in the six primary places.
PURPORT
There are many durätmäs who claim to have realized themselves as
Brahman and yet are unable to conquer material desires. In the Bhagavad-gétä
(18.54) it is clearly explained that an absolutely self-realized soul becomes
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
completely aloof from all material desires. Material desires are based on the
false ego of the living being and are exhibited by his childish and useless
activities to conquer the laws of material nature and by his desire to lord it
over the resources of the five elements. With such a mentality, one is led to
believe in the strength of material science, with its discovery of atomic energy
and space travel by mechanical vehicles, and by such tiny advancements in
material science the false egoist tries to challenge even the strength of the
Supreme Lord, who can finish all man’s tiny endeavors in less than a second.
The well-situated self, or Brahman-realized soul, perfectly understands that the
Supreme Brahman, or the personality of Godhead, is the all-powerful
Väsudeva and that he (the self-realized living being) is a part and parcel of the
supreme whole. As such, his constitutional position is to cooperate with Him
in all respects in the transcendental relation of the served and the servitor.
Such a self-realized soul ceases to exhibit his useless activities of attempting to
lord it over material nature. Being scientifically well informed, he fully engages
himself in faithful devotion to the Lord.
The expert yogé who has thoroughly practiced the control of the life air by
the prescribed method of the yoga system is advised to quit the body as follows.
He should plug up the evacuating hole with the heel of the foot and then
progressively move the life air on and on to six places: the navel, abdomen,
heart, chest, palate, eyebrows and cerebral pit. Controlling the life air by the
prescribed yogic process is mechanical, and the practice is more or less a
physical endeavor for spiritual perfection. In olden days such practice was very
common for the transcendentalist, for the mode of life and character in those
days were favorable. But in modern days, when the influence of Kali Age is so
disturbing, practically everyone is untrained in this art of bodily exercise.
Concentration of the mind is more easily attained in these days by the
chanting of the holy name of the Lord. The results are more effective than
those derived from the inner exercise of the life air.
TEXT 20
Naa>Yaa& iSQaTa& ôÛiDaraePYa TaSMaa‚
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
dudaNaGaTYaaeriSa Ta& NaYaeNMauiNa" )
TaTaae_NauSaNDaaYa iDaYaa MaNaSvq
SvTaalu/MaUl&/ XaNakE-NaRYaeTa )) 20 ))
näbhyäà sthitaà hådy adhiropya tasmäd
udäna-gatyorasi taà nayen muniù
tato ’nusandhäya dhiyä manasvé
sva-tälu-mülaà çanakair nayeta
SYNONYMS
näbhyäm—on the navel; sthitam—situated; hådi—in the heart; adhiropya—by
placing; tasmät—from there; udäna—soaring; gatya—force; urasi—on the
chest; tam—thereafter; nayet—should draw; muniù—the meditative devotee;
tataù—them; anusandhäya—just to search out; dhiyä—by intelligence;
manasvé—the meditative; sva-tälu-mülam—at the root of the palate;
çanakaiù—slowly; nayeta—may be brought in.
TRANSLATION
The meditative devotee should slowly push up the life air from the navel to
the heart, from there to the chest and from there to the root of the palate. He
should search out the proper places with intelligence.
PURPORT
There are six circles of the movement of the life air, and the intelligent
bhakti-yogé should search out these places with intelligence and in a meditative
mood. Among these, mentioned above is the svädhiñöhäna-cakra, or the
powerhouse of the life air, and above this, just below the abdomen and navel, is
the maëi-püraka-cakra. When upper space is further searched out in the heart,
one reaches the anähata-cakra, and further up, when the life air is placed at
the root of the palate, one reaches the viçuddhi-cakra.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 21
TaSMaad( >a]uvaerNTarMauàYaeTa
iNaåÖSaáaYaTaNaae_NaPae+a" )
iSQaTva MauhUTaaRDaRMaku-<#=d*ií‚
iNaRi>aRÛ MaUDaRNa( ivSa*JaeTPar& GaTa" )) 21 ))
tasmäd bhruvor antaram unnayeta
niruddha-saptäyatano ’napekñaù
sthitvä muhürtärdham akuëöha-dåñöir
nirbhidya mürdhan visåjet paraà gataù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—from there; bhruvoù—of the eyebrows; antaram—in between;
unnayeta—should be brought in; niruddha—by blocking; sapta—seven;
äyatanaù—outlets of the life air; anapekñaù—independent of all material
enjoyment; sthitvä—by keeping; muhürta—of a moment; ardham—half;
akuëöha—back home, back to Godhead; dåñöiù—one whose aim is targeted like
that; nirbhidya—punching; mürdhan—the cerebral hole; visåjet—should give
up his body; param—the Supreme; gataù—having gone to.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the bhakti-yogé should push the life air up between the eyebrows,
and then, blocking the seven outlets of the life air, he should maintain his aim
for going back home, back to Godhead. If he is completely free from all desires
for material enjoyment, he should then reach the cerebral hole and give up his
material connections, having gone to the Supreme.
PURPORT
The process of giving up all material connections and returning home, back
to Godhead, the Supreme, is recommended herein. The condition is that one
should be completely freed from desire for material enjoyment. There are
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
different grades of material enjoyments in respect to duration of life and
sensual gratification. The highest plane of sensual enjoyment for the longest
period of life is mentioned in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.20). All are but material
enjoyments, and one should be thoroughly convinced that he has no need of
such a long duration of life, even in the Brahmaloka planet. He must return
home, back to Godhead, and must not be attracted by any amount of material
facilities. In the Bhagavad-gétä (2.59) it is said that this sort of material
detachment is possible to attain when one is acquainted with the supreme
association of life. Paraà dåñövä nivartate. One cannot be freed from material
attraction unless he has complete understanding of the nature of spiritual life.
The propaganda by a certain class of impersonalists that spiritual life is void of
all varieties is dangerous propaganda to mislead the living beings into
becoming more and more attracted by material enjoyments. As such, persons
with a poor fund of knowledge cannot have any conception of the param, the
Supreme; they try to stick to the varieties of material enjoyments, although
they may flatter themselves as being Brahman-realized souls. Such less
intelligent persons cannot have any conception of the param, as mentioned in
this verse, and therefore they cannot reach the Supreme. The devotees have
full knowledge of the spiritual world, the Personality of Godhead and His
transcendental association in unlimited spiritual planets called
Vaikuëöhalokas. Herein akuëöha-dåñöiù is mentioned. Akuëöha and vaikuëöha
convey the same import, and only one who has his aim fixed upon that
spiritual world and personal association with the Godhead can give up his
material connections even while living in the material world. This param and
the paraà dhäma mentioned in several places in the Bhagavad-gétä are one and
the same thing. One who goes to the paraà dhäma does not return to the
material world. This freedom is not possible even by reaching the topmost loka
of the material world.
The life air passes through seven openings, namely two eyes, two nostrils,
two ears and one mouth. Generally it passes through the mouth at the time of
an ordinary man’s death. But the yogé, as above mentioned, who controls the
life air in his own way, generally releases the life air by puncturing the cerebral
hole in the head. The yogé therefore blocks up all the above-mentioned seven
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
openings, so that the life air will naturally burst forth through the cerebral
hole. This is the sure sign of a great devotee’s leaving the material connection.
TEXT 22
Yaid Pa[YaaSYaNa( Na*Pa PaarMaeïy&
vEhaYaSaaNaaMauTa Yad( ivharMa( )
AíaiDaPaTYa& Gau<aSaiàvaYae
SahEv GaC^eNMaNaSaeiNd]YaEê )) 22 ))
yadi prayäsyan nåpa pärameñöhyaà
vaihäyasänäm uta yad vihäram
añöädhipatyaà guëa-sanniväye
sahaiva gacchen manasendriyaiç ca
SYNONYMS
yadi—however; prayäsyan—maintaining a desire; nåpa—O King;
pärameñöhyam—the governing planet of the material world; vaihäyasänäm—of
the beings known as the Vaihäyasas; uta—it is said; yat—what is;
vihäram—place of enjoyment; añöa-ädhipatyam—lording it over with eightfold
achievements; guëa-sanniväye—in the world of three modes of nature;
saha—along with; eva—certainly; gacchet—should go; manasä—accompanied
by the mind; indriyaiù—and the senses; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
However, O King, if a yogé maintains a desire for improved material
enjoyments, like transference to the topmost planet, Brahmaloka, or the
achievement of the eightfold perfections, travel in outer space with the
Vaihäyasas, or a situation in one of the millions of planets, then he has to take
away with him the materially molded mind and senses.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
In the upper status of the planetary systems there are facilities thousands
and thousands of times greater for material enjoyments than in the lower
planetary systems. The topmost planetary systems consist of planets like
Brahmaloka and Dhruvaloka (the polestar), and all of them are situated
beyond Maharloka. The inhabitants of those planets are empowered with
eightfold achievements of mystic perfection. They do not have to learn and
practice the mystic processes of yoga perfection and achieve the power of
becoming small like a particle (aëimä-siddhi), or lighter than a soft feather
(laghimä-siddhi). They do not have to get anything and everything from
anywhere and everywhere (präpti-siddhi), to become heavier than the heaviest
(mahimä-siddhi), to act freely even to create something wonderful or to
annihilate anything at will (éçitva-siddhi), to control all material elements
(vaçitva-siddhi), to possess such power as will never be frustrated in any desire
(präkämya-siddhi), or to assume any shape or form one may even whimsically
desire (kämävasäyitä-siddhi). All these expediencies are as common as natural
gifts for the inhabitants of those higher planets. They do not require any
mechanical help to travel in outer space, and they can move and travel at will
from one planet to any other planet within no time. The inhabitants of the
earth cannot move even to the nearest planet except by mechanical vehicles
like spacecraft, but the highly talented inhabitants of such higher planets can
do everything very easily.
Since a materialist is generally inquisitive to experience what is actually in
such planetary systems, he wants to see everything personally. As inquisitive
persons tour all over the world to gain direct local experience, the less
intelligent transcendentalist similarly desires to have some experience of those
planets about which he has heard so many wonderful things. The yogé can,
however, easily fulfill his desire by going there with the present materialistic
mind and senses. The prime inclination of the materialistic mind is to lord it
over the material world, and all the siddhis mentioned above are features of
domination over the world. The devotees of the Lord are not ambitious to
dominate a false and temporary phenomenon. On the contrary, a devotee
wants to be dominated by the supreme predominator, the Lord. A desire to
serve the Lord, the supreme predominator, is spiritual or transcendental, and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
one has to attain this purification of the mind and the senses to get admission
into the spiritual kingdom. With the materialistic mind one can reach the best
planet in the universe, but no one can enter into the kingdom of God. Senses
are called spiritually purified when they are not involved in sense gratification.
Senses require engagements, and when the senses are engaged totally in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord, they have no chance to become
contaminated by material infections.
TEXT 23
YaaeGaeìra<aa& GaiTaMaahurNTa‚
bRihiñl/aeKYaa" PavNaaNTaraTMaNaaMa( )
Na k-MaRi>aSTaa& GaiTaMaaPanuviNTa
ivÛaTaPaaeYaaeGaSaMaaiDa>aaJaaMa( )) 23 ))
yogeçvaräëäà gatim ähur antarbahis-
tri-lokyäù pavanäntar-ätmanäm
na karmabhis täà gatim äpnuvanti
vidyä-tapo-yoga-samädhi-bhäjäm
SYNONYMS
yoga-éçvaräëäm—of the great saints and devotees; gatim—destination;
ähuù—it is said; antaù—within; bahiù—without; tri-lokyäù—of the three
planetary systems; pavana-antaù—within the air; ätmanäm—of the subtle
body; na—never; karmabhiù—by fruitive activities; täm—that; gatim—speed;
äpnuvanti—achieve; vidyä—devotional service; tapaù—austerities;
yoga—mystic power; samädhi—knowledge; bhäjäm—of those who entertain.
TRANSLATION
The transcendentalists are concerned with the spiritual body. As such, by
the strength of their devotional service, austerities, mystic power and
transcendental knowledge, their movements are unrestricted, within and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
beyond the material worlds. The fruitive workers, or the gross materialists, can
never move in such an unrestricted manner.
PURPORT
The materialistic scientist’s endeavor to reach other planets by mechanical
vehicles is only a futile attempt. One can, however, reach heavenly planets by
virtuous activities, but one can never expect to go beyond Svarga or Janaloka
by such mechanical or materialistic activities, either gross or subtle. The
transcendentalists who have nothing to do with the gross material body can
move anywhere within or beyond the material worlds. Within the material
worlds they move in the planetary systems of the Mahar-, Janas-, Tapas- and
Satya-loka, and beyond the material worlds they can move in the Vaikuëöhas
as unrestricted spacemen. Närada Muni is one of the examples of such
spacemen, and Durväsä Muni is one of such mystics. By the strength of
devotional service, austerities, mystic powers and transcendental knowledge,
everyone can move like Närada Muni or Durväsä Muni. It is said that Durväsä
Muni traveled throughout the entirety of material space and part of spiritual
space within one year only. The speed of the transcendentalists can never be
attained by the gross or subtle materialists.
TEXT 24
vEìaNar& YaaiTa ivhaYaSaa GaTa"
SauzuM<aYaa b]øPaQaeNa Xaaeicza )
ivDaUTak-Lk-ae_Qa hreådSTaaTa(
Pa[YaaiTa c§&- Na*Pa XaEéuMaarMa( )) 24 ))
vaiçvänaraà yäti vihäyasä gataù
suñumëayä brahma-pathena çociñä
vidhüta-kalko ’tha harer udastät
prayäti cakraà nåpa çaiçumäram
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
vaiçvänaram—the controlling deity of fire; yäti—goes; vihäyasä—by the path
in the sky (the Milky Way); gataù—by passing over; suñumëayä—by the
Suñumëä; brahma—Brahmaloka; pathena—on the way to;
çociñä—illuminating; vidhüta—being washed off; kalkaù—dirt;
atha—thereafter; hareù—of Lord Hari; udastät—upwards; prayäti—does
reach; cakram—circle; nåpa—O King; çaiçumäram—named Çiçumära.
TRANSLATION
O King, when such a mystic passes over the Milky Way by the illuminating
Suñumëä to reach the highest planet, Brahmaloka, he goes first to Vaiçvänara,
the planet of the deity of fire, wherein he becomes completely cleansed of all
contaminations, and thereafter he still goes higher, to the circle of Çiçumära, to
relate with Lord Hari, the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The polar star of the universe and the circle thereof is called the Çiçumära
circle, and therein the local residential planet of the Personality of Godhead
(Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu) is situated. Before reaching there, the mystic passes over
the Milky Way to reach Brahmaloka, and while going there he first reaches
Vaiçvänara-loka, where the demigod controls fire. On Vaiçvänara-loka the yogé
becomes completely cleansed of all dirty sins acquired while in contact with
the material world. The Milky Way in the sky is indicated herein as the way
leading to Brahmaloka, the highest planet of the universe.
TEXT 25
Tad( ivìNaai>a& TviTavTYaR ivZ<aae‚
r<aqYaSaa ivrJaeNaaTMaNaEk-" )
NaMaSk*-Ta& b]øivdaMauPaEiTa
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
k-LPaaYauzae Yad( ivbuDaa rMaNTae )) 25 ))
tad viçva-näbhià tv ativartya viñëor
aëéyasä virajenätmanaikaù
namaskåtaà brahma-vidäm upaiti
kalpäyuño yad vibudhä ramante
SYNONYMS
tat—that; viçva-näbhim—navel of the universal Personality of Godhead;
tu—but; ativartya—crossing over; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu, the Personality of
Godhead; aëéyasä—due to mystic perfection; virajena—by the purified;
ätmanä—by the living entity; ekaù—alone; namaskåtam—worshipable;
brahma-vidäm—by those who are transcendentally situated; upaiti—reaches;
kalpa-äyuñaù—a period of 4,300,000,000 solar years; yat—the place;
vibudhäù—self-realized souls; ramante—do enjoy.
TRANSLATION
This Çiçumära is the pivot for the turning of the complete universe, and it is
called the navel of Viñëu [Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu]. The yogé alone goes beyond
this circle of Çiçumära and attains the planet [Maharloka] where purified saints
like Bhågu enjoy a duration of life of 4,300,000,000 solar years. This planet is
worshipable even for the saints who are transcendentally situated.
TEXT 26
AQaae ANaNTaSYa Mau%aNale/Na
dNdùMaaNa& Sa iNarq+Ya ivìMa( )
iNaYaaRiTa iSaÖeìrYauíiDaZ<Ya&
Yad( ÜEParaDYa| Tadu PaarMaeïyMa( )) 26 ))
atho anantasya mukhänalena
dandahyamänaà sa nirékñya viçvam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
niryäti siddheçvara-yuñöa-dhiñëyaà
yad dvai-parärdhyaà tad u pärameñöhyam
SYNONYMS
atho—thereupon; anantasya—of Ananta, the resting incarnation of Godhead;
mukha-analena—by the fire emanating from His mouth;
dandahyamänam—burning to ashes; saù—he; nirékñya—by seeing this;
viçvam—the universe; niryäti—goes out;
siddheçvara-yuñöa-dhiñëyam—airplanes used by the great purified souls;
yat—the place; dvai-parärdhyam—15,480,000,000,000 solar years; tat—that;
u—the exalted; pärameñöhyam—Satyaloka, where Brahmä resides.
TRANSLATION
At the time of the final devastation of the complete universe [the end of the
duration of Brahmä’s life], a flame of fire emanates from the mouth of Ananta
[from the bottom of the universe]. The yogé sees all the planets of the universe
burning to ashes, and thus he leaves for Satyaloka by airplanes used by the great
purified souls. The duration of life in Satyaloka is calculated to be
15,480,000,000,000 years.
PURPORT
It is indicated herein that the residents of Maharloka, where the purified
living entities or demigods possess a duration of life calculated to be
4,300,000,000 solar years, have airships by which they reach Satyaloka, the
topmost planet of the universe. In other words, the Çrémad-Bhägavatam gives
us many clues about other planets far, far away from us which modern planes
and spacecraft cannot reach, even by imaginary speeds. The statements of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam are accepted by great äcäryas like Çrédhara Svämé,
Rämänujäcärya and Vallabhäcärya. Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu specifically
accepts Çrémad-Bhägavatam as the spotless Vedic authority, and as such no
sane man can ignore the statements of Çrémad-Bhägavatam when it is spoken
by the self-realized soul Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, who follows in the footsteps
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of his great father, Çréla Vyäsadeva, the compiler of all Vedic literatures. In the
creation of the Lord there are many wonderful things we can see with our own
eyes every day and night, but we are unable to reach them equipped by modern
materialistic science. We should not, therefore, depend on the fragmentary
authority of materialistic science for knowing things beyond the range of
scientific purview. For a common man, both modern science and Vedic
wisdom are simply to be accepted because none of the statements either of
modern science or of Vedic literature can be verified by him. The alternative
for a common man is to believe either of them or both of them. The Vedic way
of understanding, however, is more authentic because it has been accepted by
the äcäryas, who are not only faithful and learned men, but are also liberated
souls without any of the flaws of conditioned souls. The modern scientists,
however, are conditioned souls liable to so many errors and mistakes; therefore
the safe side is to accept the authentic version of Vedic literatures, like
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is accepted unanimously by the great äcäryas.
TEXT 27
Na Ya}a Xaaek-ae Na Jara Na Ma*TYau‚
NaaRiTaRNaR caeÜeGa ‰Tae ku-TaiêTa( )
YaiÀtaTaae_d" k*-PaYaaiNad&ivda&
durNTadu"%Pa[>avaNaudXaRNaaTa( )) 27 ))
na yatra çoko na jarä na måtyur
närtir na codvega åte kutaçcit
yac cit tato ’daù kåpayänidaà-vidäà
duranta-duùkha-prabhavänudarçanät
SYNONYMS
na—never; yatra—there are; çokaù—bereavement; na—nor; jarä—old age;
na—nor; måtyuù—death; na—nor; artiù—pains; na—nor; ca—also;
udvegaù—anxieties; åte—save and except; kutaçcit—sometimes; yat—because
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of; cit—consciousness; tataù—therefore; adaù—compassion; kåpayä—out of
heartfelt sympathy; an-idam-vidäm—of those who are ignorant of the process
of devotional service; duranta—unsurpassable; duùkha—misery;
prabhava—repeated birth and death; anudarçanät—by successive experience.
TRANSLATION
In that planet of Satyaloka, there is neither bereavement, nor old age nor
death. There is no pain of any kind, and therefore there are no anxieties, save
that sometimes, due to consciousness, there is a feeling of compassion for those
unaware of the process of devotional service, who are subjected to
unsurpassable miseries in the material world.
PURPORT
Foolish men of materialistic temperament do not take advantage of
successive authorized knowledge. The Vedic knowledge is authorized and is
acquired not by experiment but by authentic statements of the Vedic
literatures explained by bona fide authorities. Simply by becoming an
academic scholar one cannot understand the Vedic statements; one has to
approach the real authority who has received the Vedic knowledge by disciplic
succession, as clearly explained in the Bhagavad-gétä (4.2). Lord Kåñëa affirmed
that the system of knowledge as explained in the Bhagavad-gétä was explained
to the sun-god, and the knowledge descended by disciplic succession from the
sun-god to his son Manu, and from Manu to King Ikñväku (the forefather of
Lord Rämacandra), and thus the system of knowledge was explained down the
line of great sages, one after another. But in due course of time the authorized
succession was broken, and therefore, just to reestablish the true spirit of the
knowledge, the Lord again explained the same knowledge to Arjuna, who was
a bona fide candidate for understanding due to his being a pure devotee of the
Lord. Bhagavad-gétä, as it was understood by Arjuna, is also explained (Bg.
10.12–13), but there are many foolish men who do not follow in the footsteps of
Arjuna in understanding the spirit of Bhagavad-gétä. They create instead their
own interpretations, which are as foolish as they themselves, and thereby only
help to put a stumbling block on the path of real understanding, misdirecting
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the innocent followers who are less intelligent, or the çüdras. It is said that one
should become a brähmaëa before one can understand the Vedic statements,
and this stricture is as important as the stricture that no one shall become a
lawyer who has not qualified himself as a graduate. Such a stricture is not an
impediment in the path of progress for anyone and everyone, but it is
necessary for an unqualified understanding of a particular science. Vedic
knowledge is misinterpreted by those who are not qualified brähmaëas. A
qualified brähmaëa is one who has undergone strict training under the
guidance of a bona fide spiritual master.
The Vedic wisdom guides us to understanding our relation with the
Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa and to acting accordingly in order to achieve the
desired result of returning home, back to Godhead. But materialistic men do
not understand this. They want to make a plan to become happy in a place
where there is no happiness. For false happiness they try to reach other
planets, either by Vedic rituals or by spacecraft, but they should know for
certain that any amount of materialistic adjustment for becoming happy in a
place which is meant for distress cannot benefit the misguided man because,
after all, the whole universe with all its paraphernalia will come to an end after
a certain period. Then all plans of materialistic happiness will automatically
come to an end. The intelligent person therefore makes a plan to return home,
back to Godhead. Such an intelligent person surpasses all the pangs of material
existence, like birth, death, disease and old age. He is actually happy because
he has no anxieties of material existence, but as a compassionate sympathizer
he feels unhappiness for the suffering materialistic men, and thus he
occasionally comes before the materialistic men to teach them the necessity of
going back to Godhead. All the bona fide äcäryas preach this truth of
returning home, back to Godhead, and warn men not to make a false plan for
happiness in a place where happiness is only a myth.
TEXT 28
TaTaae ivXaez& Pa[iTaPaÛ iNa>aRYa‚
STaeNaaTMaNaaPaae_Nal/MaUiTaRrTvrNa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
JYaaeiTaMaRYaae vaYauMauPaeTYa k-ale/
vaYvaTMaNaa %& b*hdaTMail/®Ma( )) 28 ))
tato viçeñaà pratipadya nirbhayas
tenätmanäpo ’nala-mürtir atvaran
jyotirmayo väyum upetya käle
väyv-ätmanä khaà båhad ätma-liìgam
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; viçeñam—particularly; pratipadya—by obtaining;
nirbhayaù—without any doubt; tena—by that; ätmanä—pure self;
äpaù—water; anala—fire; mürtiù—forms; atvaran—by surpassing;
jyotiù-mayaù—effulgent; väyum—atmosphere; upetya—having reached there;
käle—in due course of time; väyu—air; ätmanä—by the self; kham—ethereal;
båhat—great; ätma-liìgam—the real form of the self.
TRANSLATION
After reaching Satyaloka, the devotee is specifically able to be incorporated
fearlessly by the subtle body in an identity similar to that of the gross body, and
one after another he gradually attains stages of existence from earthly to
watery, fiery, glowing and airy, until he reaches the ethereal stage.
PURPORT
Anyone who can reach Brahmaloka, or Satyaloka, by dint of spiritual
perfection and practice is qualified to attain three different types of
perfection. One who has attained a specific planet by dint of pious activities
attains places in terms of his comparative pious activities. One who has
attained the place by dint of viräö or Hiraëyagarbha worship is liberated along
with the liberation of Brahmä. But one who attains the place by dint of
devotional service is specifically mentioned here, in relation to how he can
penetrate into the different coverings of the universe and thus ultimately
disclose his spiritual identity in the absolute atmosphere of supreme existence.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, all the universes are clustered together up
and down, and each and every one of them is separately sevenfold-covered.
The watery portion is beyond the sevenfold coverings, and each covering is
ten times more expansive than the previous covering. The personality of
Godhead who creates all such universes by His breathing period lies above the
cluster of the universes. The water of the Causal Ocean is differently situated
than the covering water of the universe. The water that serves as covering for
the universe is material, whereas the water of the Causal Ocean is spiritual. As
such, the watery covering mentioned herein is considered to be the false
egoistic covering of all living entities, and the gradual process of liberation
from the material coverings, one after another, as mentioned herein, is the
gradual process of being liberated from false egoistic conceptions of the
material gross body, and then being absorbed in the identification of the subtle
body till the attainment of the pure spiritual body in the absolute realm of the
kingdom of God.
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé confirms that a part of the material nature, after being
initiated by the Lord, is known as the mahat-tattva. A fractional portion of the
mahat-tattva is called the false ego. A portion of the ego is the vibration of
sound, and a portion of sound is atmospheric air. A portion of the airy
atmosphere is turned into forms, and the forms constitute the power of
electricity or heat. Heat produces the smell of the aroma of the earth, and the
gross earth is produced by such aroma. And all these combined together
constitute the cosmic phenomenon. The extent of the cosmic phenomenon is
calculated to be diametrically (both ways) four billion miles. Then the
coverings of the universe begin. The first stratum of the covering is calculated
to extend eighty million miles, and the subsequent coverings of the universe
are respectively of fire, effulgence, air and ether, one after another, each
extending ten times further than the previous. The fearless devotee of the
Lord penetrates each one of them and ultimately reaches the absolute
atmosphere where everything is of one and the same spiritual identity. Then
the devotee enters one of the Vaikuëöha planets, where he assumes exactly the
same form as the Lord and engages in the loving transcendental service of the
Lord. That is the highest perfection of devotional life. Beyond this there is
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
nothing to be desired or achieved by the perfect yogé.
TEXT 29
ga]a<aeNa GaNDa& rSaNaeNa vE rSa&
æPa& c d*íya ìSaNa& TvcEv )
é[ae}ae<a caePaeTYa Na>aaeGau<aTv&
Pa[a<aeNa cakU-iTaMauPaEiTa YaaeGaq )) 29 ))
ghräëena gandhaà rasanena vai rasaà
rüpaà ca dåñöyä çvasanaà tvacaiva
çrotreëa copetya nabho-guëatvaà
präëena cäkütim upaiti yogé
SYNONYMS
ghräëena—by smelling; gandham—aroma; rasanena—by taste; vai—exactly;
rasam—palate; rüpam—forms; ca—also; dåñöyä—by vision;
çvasanam—contact; tvacä—touch; eva—as it were; çrotreëa—by vibration of
the ear; ca—also; upetya—by achieving; nabhaù-guëatvam—identification of
ether; präëena—by sense organs; ca—also; äkütim—material activities;
upaiti—attains; yogé—the devotee.
TRANSLATION
The devotee thus surpasses the subtle objects of different senses like aroma
by smelling, the palate by tasting, vision by seeing forms, touch by contacting,
the vibrations of the ear by ethereal identification, and the sense organs by
material activities.
PURPORT
Beyond the sky there are subtle coverings, resembling the elementary
coverings of the universes. The gross coverings are a development of partial
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ingredients of the subtle causes. So the yogé or devotee, along with liquidation
of the gross elements, relinquishes the subtle causes like aroma by smelling.
The pure spiritual spark, the living entity, thus becomes completely cleansed of
all material contamination to become eligible for entrance into the kingdom of
God.
TEXT 30
Sa >aUTaSaU+MaeiNd]YaSaiàk-z|
MaNaaeMaYa& devMaYa& ivk-aYaRMa( )
Sa&SaaÛ GaTYaa Sah TaeNa YaaiTa
ivjaNaTatv& Gau<aSaiàraeDaMa( )) 30 ))
sa bhüta-sükñmendriya-sannikarñaà
manomayaà devamayaà vikäryam
saàsädya gatyä saha tena yäti
vijïäna-tattvaà guëa-sannirodham
SYNONYMS
saù—he (the devotee); bhüta—the gross; sükñma—and the subtle;
indriya—senses; sannikarñam—the point of neutralization;
manaù-mayam—the mental plane; deva-mayam—in the mode of goodness;
vikäryam—egoism; saàsädya—surpassing; gatyä—by the progress; saha—along
with; tena—them; yäti—goes; vijïäna—perfect knowledge; tattvam—truth;
guëa—the material modes; sannirodham—completely suspended.
TRANSLATION
The devotee, thus surpassing the gross and the subtle forms of coverings,
enters the plane of egoism. And in that status he merges the material modes of
nature [ignorance and passion] in this point of neutralization and thus reaches
egoism in goodness. After this, all egoism is merged in the mahat-tattva, and he
comes to the point of pure self-realization.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Pure self-realization, as we have several times discussed, is the pure
consciousness of admitting oneself to be the eternal servitor of the Lord. Thus
one is reinstated in his original position of transcendental loving service to the
Lord, as will be clearly explained in the following verse. This stage of
rendering transcendental loving service to the Lord without any hopes of
emolument from the Lord, or any other way, can be attained when the
material senses are purified and the original pure state of the senses is revived.
It is suggested herein that the process of purifying the senses is by the yogic
way, namely the gross senses are merged in the mode of ignorance, and the
subtle senses are merged in the mode of passion. The mind belongs to the mode
of goodness and therefore is called devamaya, or godly. perfect purification of
the mind is made possible when one is fixed in the conviction of being the
eternal servitor of the Lord. Therefore simple attainment of goodness is also a
material mode; one has to surpass this stage of material goodness and reach the
point of purified goodness, or vasudeva-sattva. This vasudeva-sattva helps one
to enter into the kingdom of God.
We may also remember in this connection that the process of gradual
emancipation by the devotees in the manner mentioned above, although
authoritative, is not viable in the present age because of people’s being
primarily unaware of yoga practice. The so-called yoga practice by the
professional protagonists may be physiologically beneficial, but such small
successes cannot help one in the attainment of spiritual emancipation as
mentioned herein. Five thousand years ago, when the social status of human
society was in perfect Vedic order, the yoga process mentioned herein was a
common affair for everyone because everyone, and especially the brähmaëa
and kñatriya, was trained in the transcendental art under the care of the
spiritual master far away from home, in the status of brahmacarya. Modern
man, however, is incompetent to understand it perfectly.
Lord Çré Caitanya, therefore, made it easier for the prospective devotee of
the present age in the following specific manner. Ultimately there is no
difference in the result. The first and foremost point is that one must
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
understand the prime importance of bhakti-yoga. The living beings in different
species of life are undergoing different terms of encagement according to their
fruitive actions and reactions. But in the execution of different activities, one
who secures some resources in bhakti-yoga can understand the importance of
service to the Lord through the causeless mercy of the Lord, as well as that of
the spiritual master. A sincere soul is helped by the Lord through meeting a
bona fide spiritual master, the representative of the Lord. By the instruction of
such a spiritual master, one gets the seed of bhakti-yoga. Lord Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu recommends that the devotee sow the seed of bhakti-yoga in his
heart and nurture it by the watering of hearing and chanting the holy name,
fame, etc., of the Lord. The simple process of offenselessly chanting and
hearing the holy name of the Lord will gradually promote one very soon to the
stage of emancipation. There are three stages in chanting the holy name of the
Lord. The first stage is the offensive chanting of the holy name, and the
second is the reflective stage of chanting the holy name. The third stage is the
offenseless chanting of the holy name of the Lord. In the second stage only,
the stage of reflection, between the offensive and offenseless stages, one
automatically attains the stage of emancipation. And in the offenseless stage,
one actually enters into the kingdom of God, although physically he may
apparently be within the material world. To attain the offenseless stage, one
must be on guard in the following manner.
When we speak of hearing and chanting, it means that not only should one
chant and hear of the holy name of the Lord as Räma, Kåñëa (or systematically
the sixteen names Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare
Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare), but one should also read and hear
the Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam in the association of devotees. The
primary practice of bhakti-yoga will cause the seed already sowed in heart to
sprout, and by a regular watering process, as mentioned above, the bhakti-yoga
creeper will begin to grow. By systematic nurturing, the creeper will grow to
such an extent that it will penetrate the coverings of the universe, as we have
heard in the previous verses, reach the effulgent sky, the brahmajyoti, and go
farther and farther and reach the spiritual sky, where there are innumerable
spiritual planets called Vaikuëöhalokas. Above all of them is Kåñëaloka, or
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Goloka Våndävana, wherein the growing creeper enters and takes repose at
the lotus feet of Lord Çré Kåñëa, the original Personality of Godhead. When
one reaches the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa at Goloka Våndävana, the watering
process of hearing and reading, as also chanting of the holy name in the pure
devotional stage, fructifies, and the fruits grown there in the form of love of
God are tangibly tasted by the devotee, even though he is here in this material
world. The ripe fruits of love of God are relished only by the devotees
constantly engaged in the watering process as described above. But the
working devotee must always be mindful so that the creeper which has so
grown will not be cut off. Therefore he should be mindful of the following
considerations:
(1) Offense by one at the feet of a pure devotee may be likened to the mad
elephant who devastates a very good garden if it enters.
(2) One must be very careful to guard himself against such offenses at the
feet of pure devotees, just as one protects a creeper by all-around fencing.
(3) It so happens that by the watering process some weeds are also grown,
and unless such weeds are uprooted, the nurturing of the main creeper, or the
creeper of bhakti-yoga, may be hampered.
(4) Actually these weeds are material enjoyment, merging of the self in the
Absolute without separate individuality, and many other desires in the field of
religion, economic development, sense enjoyment and emancipation.
(5) There are many other weeds, like disobedience to the tenets of the
revered scriptures, unnecessary engagements, killing animals, and hankering
after material gain, prestige and adoration.
(6) If sufficient care is not taken, then the watering process may only help
to breed the weeds, stunting the healthy growth of the main creeper and
resulting in no fructification of the ultimate requirement: love of God.
(7) The devotee must therefore be very careful to uproot the different
weeds in the very beginning. Only then will the healthy growth of the main
creeper not be stunted.
(8) And by so doing, the devotee is able to relish the fruit of love of God
and thus live practically with Lord Kåñëa, even in this life, and be able to see
the Lord in every step.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The highest perfection of life is to enjoy life constantly in the association of
the Lord, and one who can relish this does not aspire after any temporary
enjoyment of the material world via other media.
TEXT 31
TaeNaaTMaNaaTMaaNaMauPaEiTa XaaNTa‚
MaaNaNdMaaNaNdMaYaae_vSaaNae )
WTaa& GaiTa& >aaGavTaq& GaTaae Ya"
Sa vE PauNaNaeRh ivzÂTae_® )) 31 ))
tenätmanätmänam upaiti çäntam
änandam änandamayo ’vasäne
etäà gatià bhägavatéà gato yaù
sa vai punar neha viñajjate ’ìga
SYNONYMS
tena—by that purified; ätmanä—by the self; ätmänam—the Supersoul;
upaiti—attains; çäntam—rest; änandam—satisfaction;
änanda-mayaù—naturally so being; avasäne—being freed from all material
contamination; etäm—such; gatim—destination; bhägavatém—devotional;
gataù—attained by; yaù—the person; saù—he; vai—certainly; punaù—again;
na—never; iha—in this material world; viñajjate—becomes attracted; aìga—O
Mahäräja Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
Only the purified soul can attain the perfection of associating with the
Personality of Godhead in complete bliss and satisfaction in his constitutional
state. Whoever is able to renovate such devotional perfection is never again
attracted by this material world, and he never returns.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
We should specially note in this verse the description of gatià bhägavatém.
To become merged in the rays of the Parabrahman, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, as desired by the brahmavädé impersonalist, is not bhägavatém
perfection. The bhägavatas never accept merging in the impersonal rays of the
Lord, but always aspire after personal association with the Supreme Lord in
one of the Vaikuëöha spiritual planets in the spiritual sky. The whole of the
spiritual sky, of which the total number of the material skies is only an
insignificant part, is full of unlimited numbers of Vaikuëöha planets. The
destination of the devotee (the bhägavata) is to enter into one of the
Vaikuëöha planets, in each of which the Personality of Godhead, in His
unlimited personal expansions, enjoys Himself in the association of unlimited
numbers of pure devotee associates. The conditioned souls in the material
world, after gaining emancipation by devotional service, are promoted to these
planets. But the number of ever-liberated souls is far, far greater than the
number of conditioned souls in the material world, and the ever-liberated souls
in the Vaikuëöha planets never care to visit this miserable material world.
The impersonalists, who aspire to merge in the impersonal brahmajyoti
effulgence of the Supreme Lord but have no conception of loving devotional
service to Him in His personal form in the spiritual manifestation, may be
compared to certain species of fish, who, being born in the rivers and rivulets,
migrate to the great ocean. They cannot stay in the ocean indefinitely, for
their urge for sense gratification brings them back to the rivers and streams to
spawn. Similarly, when the materialist becomes frustrated in his attempts to
enjoy himself in the limited material world, he may seek impersonal liberation
by merging either with the Causal Ocean or with the impersonal brahmajyoti
effulgence. However, as neither the Causal Ocean nor the impersonal
brahmajyoti effulgence affords any superior substitute for association and
engagement of the senses, the impersonalist will fall again into the limited
material world to become entangled once more in the wheel of births and
deaths, drawn on by the inextinguishable desire for sensual engagement. But
any devotee who enters the kingdom of God by transcendental engagement of
his senses in devotional service, and who associates with the liberated souls
and the Personality of Godhead there, will never be attracted to the limited
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
surroundings of the material world.
In the Bhagavad-gétä (8.15) also the same is confirmed, as the Lord says,
“The great mahätmäs, or the bhakti-yogés, after attaining My association, never
come back to this material world, which is full of miseries and is
nonpermanent.” The highest perfection of life, therefore, is to attain His
association, and nothing else. The bhakti-yogé, being completely engaged in the
Lord’s service, has no attraction for any other process of liberation like jïäna
or yoga. A pure devotee is a one hundred percent devotee of the Lord and
nothing more.
We should further note in this verse the two words çäntam and änandam,
which denote that devotional service of the Lord can really bestow upon the
devotee two important benedictions, namely peace and satisfaction. The
impersonalist is desirous of becoming one with the Supreme, or in other words,
he wants to become the Supreme. This is a myth only. The mystic yogés become
encumbered by various mystic powers and so have neither peace nor
satisfaction. So neither the impersonalists nor the yogi can have real peace and
satisfaction, but the devotee can become fully peaceful and satisfied because of
his association with the complete whole. Therefore, merging in the Absolute
or attaining some mystic powers has no attraction for the devotee.
Attainment of love of Godhead means complete freedom from all other
attractions. The conditioned soul has many aspirations such as becoming a
religious man, a rich man, or a first-class enjoyer or becoming God himself, or
becoming powerful like the mystics and acting wonderfully by getting anything
or doing anything, but all these aspirations should be rejected by the
prospective devotee who actually wants to revive his dormant love of God.
The impure devotee aspires after all of the abovementioned material things by
perfection of devotion. But a pure devotee has none of the tinges of the above
contaminations, which are the influence of material desires, impersonal
speculations and attainment of mystic powers. One can attain the stage of love
of God by pure devotional service, or by “a learned labor of love,” for the sake
of the devotee’s lovable object, the Personality of Godhead.
To be more clear, if one wants to attain the stage of love of Godhead, he
must give up all desires for material enjoyment, he should refrain from
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
worshiping any of the demigods, and he should devote himself only to the
worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He must give up the foolish
idea of becoming one with the Lord and the desire to have some wonderful
powers just to get the ephemeral adoration of the world. The pure devotee is
only favorably engaged in the service of the Lord, without any hope of
emolument. This will bring about love of Godhead, or the stage of çäntam and
änandam, as stated in this verse.
TEXT 32
WTae Sa*Taq Tae Na*Pa vedGaqTae
TvYaai>aPa*íe c SaNaaTaNae c )
Yae vE Paura b]ø<a Aah Tauí
AaraiDaTaae >aGavaNa( vaSaudev" )) 32 ))
ete såté te nåpa veda-géte
tvayäbhipåñöe ca sanätane ca
ye vai purä brahmaëa äha tuñöa
ärädhito bhagavän väsudevaù
SYNONYMS
ete—all that is described; såté—way; te—unto you; nåpa—O Mahäräja Parékñit;
veda-géte—according to the version of the Vedas; tvayä—by Your Majesty;
abhipåñöe—being properly inquired; ca—also; sanätane—in the matter of
eternal truth; ca—verily; ye—which; vai—certainly; purä—before;
brahmaëe—unto Lord Brahmä; äha—said; tuñöaù—being satisfied;
ärädhitaù—being worshiped; bhagavän—the personality of Godhead;
väsudevaù—Lord Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Your Majesty Mahäräja Parékñit, know that all that I have described in reply
to your proper inquiry is just according to the version of the Vedas, and it is
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
eternal truth. This was described personally by Lord Kåñëa unto Brahmä, with
whom the Lord was satisfied upon being properly worshiped.
PURPORT
The two different ways of reaching the spiritual sky and thereby getting
emancipation from all material bondage, namely either the direct process of
reaching the kingdom of God or the gradual process through the other higher
planets of the universe, are set forth exactly according to the version of the
Vedas. The Vedic versions in this connection are, yadä sarve pramucyante
kämä ye ’sya hådi çritäù/ atha martyo ’måto bhavaty atra brahma samaçnute
(Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad 4.4.7) and te ’rcir abhisambhavanti (Båhad-äraëyaka
Upaniñad 6.2.15): “Those who are free from all material desires, which are
diseases of the heart, are able to conquer death and enter the kingdom of God
through the Arci planets.” These Vedic versions corroborate the version of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and the latter is further confirmed by Çukadeva Gosvämé,
who affirms that the truth was disclosed by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Lord Çré Kåñëa, Väsudeva, to Brahmä, the first authority on the
Vedas. The disciplic succession holds that the Vedas were uttered by Lord
Kåñëa to Brahmä, by Brahmä to Närada, and by Närada to Vyäsadeva, and
then by Vyäsadeva to Çukadeva Gosvämé and so on. So there is no difference
between the versions of all the authorities. The truth is eternal, and as such
there cannot be any new opinion about the truth. That is the way of knowing
the knowledge contained in the Vedas. It is not a thing to be understood by
one’s erudite scholarship or by the fashionable interpretations of mundane
scholars. There is nothing to be added and nothing to be subtracted, because
the truth is the truth. One has to accept, after all, some authority. The modern
scientists are also authorities for the common man for some scientific truths.
The common man follows the version of the scientist. This means that the
common man follows the authority. The Vedic knowledge is also received in
that way. The common man cannot argue about what is beyond the sky or
beyond the universe; he must accept the versions of the Vedas as they are
understood by the authorized disciplic succession. In the Bhagavad-gétä also the
same process of understanding the Gétä is stated in the Fourth Chapter. If one
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
does not follow the authoritative version of the äcäryas, he will vainly search
after the truth mentioned in the Vedas.
TEXT 33
Na ùTaae_NYa" iXav" PaNQaa ivXaTa" Sa&Sa*Taaivh )
vaSaudeve >aGaviTa >ai¢-YaaeGaae YaTaae >aveTa( )) 33 ))
na hy ato ’nyaù çivaù panthä
viçataù saàsåtäv iha
väsudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogo yato bhavet
SYNONYMS
na—never; hi—certainly; ataù—beyond this; anyaù—any other;
çivaù—auspicious; panthäù—means; viçataù—wandering; saàsåtau—in the
material world; iha—in this life; väsudeve—unto Lord Väsudeva, Kåñëa;
bhagavati—the Personality of Godhead; bhakti-yogaù—direct devotional
service; yataù—wherein; bhavet—may result in.
TRANSLATION
For those who are wandering in the material universe, there is no more
auspicious means of deliverance than what is aimed at in the direct devotional
service of Lord Kåñëa.
PURPORT
As will be clarified in the next verse, devotional service, or direct
bhakti-yoga, is the only absolute and auspicious means of deliverance from the
grip of material existence. There are many indirect methods for deliverance
from the clutches of material existence, but none of them is as easy and
auspicious as bhakti-yoga. The means of jïäna and yoga and other allied
disciplines are not independent in delivering a performer. Such activities help
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
one to reach the stage of bhakti-yoga after many, many years. In the
Bhagavad-gétä (12.5) it is said that those who are attached to the impersonal
feature of the Absolute are liable to many troubles in the pursuit of their
desired goal, and the empiricist philosophers, searching after the Absolute
Truth, realize the importance of Väsudeva realization as all in all after many,
many births (Bg. 7.19). As far as yoga systems are concerned, it is also said in
the Bhagavad-gétä (6.47) that amongst the mystics who pursue the Absolute
Truth, the one who is always engaged in the service of the Lord is the greatest
of all. And the last instruction in the Bhagavad-gétä (18.66) advises fully
surrendering unto the Lord, leaving aside all other engagements or different
processes for self-realization and liberation from material bondage. And the
purport of all Vedic literatures is to induce one to accept the transcendental
loving service of the Lord by all means.
As already explained in the texts of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (First Canto),
either direct bhakti-yoga or the means which ultimately culminate in
bhakti-yoga, without any tinge of fruitive activity, constitutes the highest form
of religion. Everything else is simply a waste of time for the performer.
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé and all other äcäryas, like Jéva Gosvämé, agree that
bhakti-yoga is not only easy, simple, natural and free from trouble, but is the
only source of happiness for the human being.
TEXT 34
>aGavaNa( b]ø k-aTSNYaeRNa i}arNvq+Ya MaNaqzYaa )
TadDYavSYaTa( kU-$=SQaae riTaraTMaNa( YaTaae >aveTa( )) 34 ))
bhagavän brahma kärtsnyena
trir anvékñya manéñayä
tad adhyavasyat küöa-stho
ratir ätman yato bhavet
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhagavän—the great personality Brahmä; brahma—the Vedas; kärtsnyena—by
summarization; triù—three times; anvékñya—scrutinizingly examined;
manéñayä—with scholarly attention; tat—that; adhyavasyat—ascertained it;
küöa-sthaù—with concentration of the mind; ratiù—attraction; ätman
(ätmani)—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa; yataù—by
which; bhavet—it so happens.
TRANSLATION
The great personality Brahmä, with great attention and concentration of the
mind, studied the Vedas three times, and after scrutinizingly examining them,
he ascertained that attraction for the Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré
Kåñëa is the highest perfection of religion.
PURPORT
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé is referring to the highest Vedic authority, Lord
Brahmä, who is the qualitative incarnation of Godhead. The Vedas were
taught to Brahmäjé in the beginning of the material creation. Although
Brahmäjé was to hear Vedic instructions directly from the personality of
Godhead, in order to satisfy the inquisitiveness of all prospective students of
the Vedas, Brahmäjé, just like a scholar, studied the Vedas three times, as
generally done by all scholars. He studied with great attention, concentrating
on the purpose of the Vedas, and after scrutinizingly examining the whole
process, he ascertained that becoming a pure, unalloyed devotee of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa is the topmost perfection of all
religious principles. Aid this is the last instruction of the Bhagavad-gétä
directly presented by the Personality of Godhead. The Vedic conclusion is
thus accepted by all äcäryas, and those who are against this conclusion are only
veda-väda-ratas, as explained in the Bhagavad-gétä (2.42).
TEXT 35
>aGavaNa( SavR>aUTaezu l/i+aTa" SvaTMaNaa hir" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
d*XYaEbuRÖyaidi>ad]Ría l/+a<aErNauMaaPakE-" )) 35 ))
bhagavän sarva-bhüteñu
lakñitaù svätmanä hariù
dåçyair buddhy-ädibhir drañöä
lakñaëair anumäpakaiù
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; sarva—all; bhüteñu—in the living
entities; lakñitaù—is visible; sva-ätmanä—along with the self; hariù—the Lord;
dåçyaiù—by what is seen; buddhi-ädibhiù—by intelligence; drañöä—one who
sees; lakñaëaiù—by different signs; anumäpakaiù—by hypothesis.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead Lord Çré Kåñëa is in every living being along
with the individual soul. And this fact is perceived and hypothesized in our acts
of seeing and taking help from the intelligence.
PURPORT
The general argument of the common man is that since the Lord is not
visible to our eyes, how can one either surrender unto Him or render
transcendental loving service unto Him? To such a common man, here is a
practical suggestion given by Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé as to how one can
perceive the Supreme Lord by reason and perception. Actually the Lord is not
perceivable by our present materialized senses, but when one is convinced of
the presence of the Lord by a practical service attitude, there is a revelation by
the Lord’s mercy, and such a pure devotee of the Lord can perceive the Lord’s
presence always and everywhere. He can perceive that intelligence is the
form-direction of the Paramätmä plenary portion of the Personality of
Godhead. The presence of Paramätmä in everyone’s company is not very
difficult to realize, even for the common man. The procedure is as follows. One
can perceive one’s self-identification and feel positively that he exists. He may
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
not feel it very abruptly, but by using a little intelligence, he can feel that he is
not the body. He can feel that the hand, the leg, the head, the hair and the
limbs are all his bodily parts and parcels, but as such the hand, the leg, the
head, etc., cannot be identified with his self. Therefore just by using
intelligence he can distinguish and separate his self from other things that he
sees. So the natural conclusion is that the living being, either man or beast, is
the seer, and he sees besides himself all other things. So there is a difference
between the seer and the seen. Now, by a little use of intelligence we can also
readily agree that the living being who sees the things beyond himself by
ordinary vision has no power to see or to move independently. All our
ordinary actions and perceptions depend on various forms of energy supplied
to us by nature in various combinations. Our senses of perception and of
action, that is to say, our five perceptive senses of (1) hearing, (2) touch, (3)
sight, (4) taste and (5) smell, as well as our five senses of action, namely (1)
hands, (2) legs, (3) speech, (4) evacuation organs and (5) reproductive organs,
and also our three subtle senses, namely (1) mind, (2) intelligence and (3) ego
(thirteen senses in all), are supplied to us by various arrangements of gross or
subtle forms of natural energy. And it is equally evident that our objects of
perception are nothing but the products of the inexhaustible permutations and
combinations of the forms taken by natural energy. As this conclusively proves
that the ordinary living being has no independent power of perception or of
motion, and as we undoubtedly feel our existence being conditioned by
nature’s energy, we conclude that he who sees is spirit, and that the senses as
well as the objects of perception are material. The spiritual quality of the seer
is manifest in our dissatisfaction with the limited state of materially
conditioned existence. That is the difference between spirit and matter. There
are some less intelligent arguments that matter develops the power of seeing
and moving as a certain organic development, but such an argument cannot be
accepted because there is no experimental evidence that matter has anywhere
produced a living entity. Trust no future, however pleasant. Idle talks
regarding future development of matter into spirit are actually foolish because
no matter has ever developed the power of seeing or moving in any part of the
world. Therefore it is definite that matter and spirit are two different
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
identities, and this conclusion is arrived at by the use of intelligence. Now we
come to the point that the things which are seen by a little use of intelligence
cannot be animate unless we accept someone as the user of or director of the
intelligence. Intelligence gives one direction like some higher authority, and
the living being cannot see or move or eat or do anything without the use of
intelligence. When one fails to take advantage of intelligence he becomes a
deranged man, and so a living being is dependent on intelligence or the
direction of a superior being. Such intelligence is all-pervading. Every living
being has his intelligence, and this intelligence, being the direction of some
higher authority, is just like a father giving direction to his son. The higher
authority, who is present and residing within every individual living being, is
the Superself.
At this point in our investigation, we may consider the following question:
on the one hand we realize that all our perceptions and activities are
conditioned by arrangements of material nature, yet we also ordinarily feel and
say, “I am perceiving” or “I am doing.” Therefore we can say that our material
senses of perception and action are moving because we are identifying the self
with the material body, and that the superior principle of Superself is guiding
and supplying us according to our desire. By taking advantage of the guidance
of Superself in the form of intelligence, we can either continue to study and to
put into practice our conclusion that “I am not this body,” or we can choose to
remain in the false material identification, fancying ourselves to be the
possessors and doers. Our freedom consists in orienting our desire either
toward the ignorant, material misconception or the true, spiritual conception.
We can easily attain to the true, spiritual conception by recognizing the
Superself (Paramätmä) to be our friend and guide and by dovetailing our
intelligence with the superior intelligence of Paramätmä. The Superself and
the individual self are both spirit, and therefore the Superself and the
individual self are both qualitatively one and distinct from matter. But the
Superself and the individual self cannot be on an equal level because the
Superself gives direction or supplies intelligence and the individual self follows
the direction, and thus actions are performed properly. The individual is
completely dependent on the direction of the Superself because in every step
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the individual self follows the direction of the Superself in the matter of
seeing, hearing, thinking, feeling, willing, etc.
So far as common sense is concerned, we come to the conclusion that there
are three identities, namely matter, spirit and Superspirit. Now if we go to the
Bhagavad-gétä, or the Vedic intelligence, we can further understand that all
three identities, namely matter, individual spirit, and the Superspirit, are all
dependent on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Superself is a partial
representation or plenary portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
Bhagavad-gétä affirms that the Supreme Personality of Godhead dominates all
over the material world by His partial representation only. God is great, and
He cannot be simply an order supplier of the individual selves; therefore the
Superself cannot be a full representation of the Supreme Self, Puruñottama,
the Absolute Personality of Godhead. Realization of the Superself by the
individual self is the beginning of self-realization, and by the progress of such
self-realization one is able to realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
intelligence, by the help of authorized scriptures, and, principally, by the grace
of the Lord. The Bhagavad-gétä is the preliminary conception of the
Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa, and Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the further
explanation of the science of Godhead. So if we stick to our determination and
pray for the mercy of the director of intelligence sitting within the same bodily
tree, like a bird sitting with another bird (as explained in the Upaniñads),
certainly the purport of the revealed information in the Vedas becomes clear
to our vision, and there is no difficulty in realizing the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Väsudeva. The intelligent man therefore, after many births of such
use of intelligence, surrenders himself at the lotus feet of Väsudeva, as
confirmed by the Bhagavad-gétä (7.19).
TEXT 36
TaSMaaTa( SavaRTMaNaa raJaNa( hir" SavR}a SavRda )
é[aeTaVYa" k-IiTaRTaVYaê SMaTaRVYaae >aGavaà*<aaMa( )) 36 ))
tasmät sarvätmanä räjan
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
hariù sarvatra sarvadä
çrotavyaù kértitavyaç ca
smartavyo bhagavän nåëäm
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; sarva—all; ätmanä—soul; räjan—O King; hariù—the
Lord; sarvatra—everywhere; sarvadä—always; çrotavyaù—must be heard;
kértitavyaù—glorified; ca—also; smartavyaù—be remembered; bhagavän—the
Personality of Godhead; nåëäm—by the human being.
TRANSLATION
O King, it is therefore essential that every human being hear about, glorify
and remember the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, always and
everywhere.
PURPORT
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé begins this verse with the word tasmät, or
“therefore,” because in the previous verse he has already explained that there
is no auspicious means for salvation other than the sublime process of
bhakti-yoga. The bhakti-yoga process is practiced by the devotees in different
methods like hearing, chanting, remembering, serving the lotus feet of the
Lord, worshiping, praying, rendering service in love, becoming friendly, and
offering all that one may possess. All nine methods are bona fide methods, and
either all of them, some of them or even one of them can bring about the
desired result for the sincere devotee. But out of all the nine different
methods, the first one, namely hearing, is the most important function in the
process of bhakti-yoga. Without hearing sufficiently and properly, no one can
make any progress by any of the methods of practice. And for hearing only, all
the Vedic literatures are there, compiled by authorized persons like Vyäsadeva,
who is the powerful incarnation of Godhead. And since it has been
ascertained that the Lord is the Supersoul of everything, He should therefore
be heard and glorified everywhere and always. That is the special duty of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
human being. When the human being gives up the process of hearing about
the all-pervading personality of Godhead, he becomes victim to hearing
rubbish transmitted by man-made machines. Machinery is not bad because
through the machine one can take advantage of hearing about the Lord, but
because machinery is used for ulterior purposes, it is creating rapid degradation
in the standard of human civilization. It is said here that it is incumbent upon
the human beings to hear because the scriptures like Bhagavad-gétä and
Çrémad-Bhägavatam are made for that purpose. Living beings other than
human beings have no ability to hear such Vedic literatures. If human society
gives itself to the process of hearing the Vedic literature, it will not become a
victim to the impious sounds vibrated by impious men who degrade the
standards of the total society. Hearing is solidified by the process of chanting.
One who has perfectly heard from the perfect source becomes convinced about
the all-pervading Personality of Godhead and thus becomes enthusiastic in
glorifying the Lord. All the great äcäryas, like Rämänuja, Madhva, Caitanya,
Sarasvaté Öhäkura or even, in other countries, Muhammad, Christ and others,
have all extensively glorified the Lord by chanting always and in every place.
Because the Lord is all-pervading, it is essential to glorify Him always and
everywhere. In the process of glorifying the Lord there should be no restriction
of time and space. This is called sanätana-dharma or bhägavata-dharma.
Sanätana means eternal, always and everywhere. Bhägavata means pertaining
to Bhagavän, the Lord. The Lord is the master of all time and all space, and
therefore the Lord’s holy name must be heard, glorified and remembered
everywhere in the world. That will bring about the desired peace and
prosperity so eagerly awaited by the people of the world. The word ca includes
all the remaining processes or methods of bhakti-yoga, as mentioned above.
TEXT 37
iPabiNTa Yae >aGavTa AaTMaNa" SaTaa&
k-QaaMa*Ta& é[v<aPau$e=zu SaM>a*TaMa( )
PauNaiNTa Tae ivzYaivdUizTaaXaYa&
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
v]JaiNTa TaÀr<aSaraeåhaiNTak-Ma( )) 37 ))
pibanti ye bhagavata ätmanaù satäà
kathämåtaà çravaëa-puöeñu sambhåtam
punanti te viñaya-vidüñitäçayaà
vrajanti tac-caraëa-saroruhäntikam
SYNONYMS
pibanti—who drink; ye—those; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead;
ätmanaù—of the most dear; satäm—of devotees; kathä-amåtam—the nectar of
the messages; çravaëa-puöeñu—within the earholes; sambhåtam—fully filled;
punanti—purify; te—their; viñaya—material enjoyment;
vidüñita-äçayam—polluted aim of life; vrajanti—do go back; tat—the Lord’s;
caraëa—feet; saroruha-antikam—near the lotus.
TRANSLATION
Those who drink through aural reception, fully filled with the nectarean
message of Lord Kåñëa, the beloved of the devotees, purify the polluted aim of
life known as material enjoyment and thus go back to Godhead, to the lotus feet
of Him [the Personality of Godhead].
PURPORT
The sufferings of human society are due to a polluted aim of life, namely
lording it over the material resources. The more human society engages in the
exploitation of undeveloped material resources for sense gratification, the
more it will be entrapped by the illusory, material energy of the Lord, and thus
the distress of the world will be intensified instead of diminished. The human
necessities of life are fully supplied by the Lord in the shape of food grains,
milk, fruit, wood, stone, sugar, silk, jewels, cotton, salt, water, vegetables, etc.,
in sufficient quantity to feed and care for the human race of the world as well
as the living beings on each and every planet within the universe. The supply
source is complete, and only a little energy by the human being is required to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
get his necessities into the proper channel. There is no need of machines and
tools or huge steel plants for artificially creating comforts of life. Life is never
made comfortable by artificial needs, but by plain living and high thinking.
The highest perfectional thinking for human society is suggested here by
Çukadeva Gosvämé, namely, sufficiently hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam. For men
in this age of Kali, when they have lost the perfect vision of life, this
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the torchlight by which to see the real path. Çréla Jéva
Gosvämé Prabhupäda has commented on the kathämåtam mentioned in this
verse and has indicated Çrémad-Bhägavatam to be the nectarean message of the
Personality of Godhead. By sufficient hearing of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the
polluted aim of life, namely lording it over matter, will subside, and the people
in general in all parts of the world will be able to live a peaceful life of
knowledge and bliss.
For a pure devotee of the Lord, any topics in relation with His name, fame,
quality, entourage, etc., are all pleasing, and because such topics have been
approved by great devotees like Närada, Hanumän, Nanda Mahäräja and other
inhabitants of Våndävana, certainly such messages are transcendental and
pleasing to the heart and soul.
And by the constant hearing of the messages of the Bhagavad-gétä, and later
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, one is assured herein by Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé that
he will reach the Personality of Godhead and render Him transcendental
loving service in the spiritual planet of the name Goloka Våndävana, which
resembles a huge lotus flower.
Thus by the process of bhakti-yoga, directly accepted, as suggested in this
verse, by sufficient hearing of the transcendental message of the Lord, the
material contamination is directly eliminated without one’s attempting to
contemplate the impersonal viräö conception of the Lord. And by practicing
bhakti-yoga, if the performer is not purified from the material contamination,
he must be a pseudodevotee. For such an imposter there is no remedy for being
freed from material entanglement.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Second Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “The Lord in the Heart.”
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Chapter Three
Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
WvMaeTaiàGaidTa& Pa*ívaNa( YaÙvaNa( MaMa )
Na*<aa& YaiNMa]YaMaa<aaNaa& MaNauZYaezu MaNaqiz<aaMa( )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evam etan nigaditaà
påñöavän yad bhavän mama
nåëäà yan mriyamäëänäà
manuñyeñu manéñiëäm
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—so; etat—all these;
nigaditam—answered; påñöavän—as you inquired; yat—what; bhavän—your
good self; mama—unto me; nåëäm—of the human being; yat—one;
mriyamäëänäm—on the threshold of death; manuñyeñu—amongst the human
beings; manéñiëäm—of the intelligent men.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Mahäräja Parékñit, as you have inquired from
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
me as to the duty of the intelligent man who is on the threshold of death, so I
have answered you.
PURPORT
In human society all over the world there are millions and billions of men
and women, and almost all of them are less intelligent because they have very
little knowledge of spirit soul. Almost all of them have a wrong conception of
life, for they identify themselves with the gross and subtle material bodies,
which they are not, in fact. They may be situated in different high and low
positions in the estimation of human society, but one should know definitely
that unless one inquires about his own self beyond the body and the mind, all
his activities in human life are total failures. Therefore out of thousands and
thousands of men, one may inquire about his spirit self and thus consult the
revealed scriptures like Vedänta-sütras, Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
But in spite of reading and hearing such scriptures, unless one is in touch with
a realized spiritual master, he cannot actually realize the real nature of self, etc.
And out of thousands and hundreds of thousands of men, someone may know
what Lord Kåñëa is in fact. In the Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 20.122–123) it
is said that Lord Kåñëa, out of His causeless mercy, prepared the Vedic
literatures in the incarnation of Vyäsadeva for reading by the intelligent class
of men in a human society which is almost totally forgetful of the genuine
relation with Kåñëa. Even such an intelligent class of men may be forgetful in
their relation with the Lord. The whole bhakti-yoga process is therefore a
revival of the lost relation. This revival is possible in the human form of life,
which is obtained only out of the evolutionary cycle of 8,400,000 species of
life. The intelligent class of human being must take a serious note of this
opportunity. Not all human beings are intelligent, so the importance of human
life is not always understood. Therefore manéñiëäm, meaning “thoughtful,” is
particularly used here. A manéñiëäm person, like Mahäräja Parékñit, must
therefore take to the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa and fully engage himself in
devotional service, hearing, chanting, etc., of the holy name and pastimes of
the Lord, which are all hari-kathämåta. This action is especially recommended
when one is preparing for death.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXTS 2–7
b]øvcRSak-aMaSTau YaJaeTa b]ø<a" PaiTaMa( )
wNd]iMaiNd]Yak-aMaSTau Pa[Jaak-aMa" Pa[JaaPaTaqNa( )) 2 ))
devq& MaaYaa& Tau é[qk-aMaSTaeJaSk-aMaae iv>aavSauMa( )
vSauk-aMaae vSaUNa( åd]aNa( vqYaRk-aMaae_Qa vqYaRvaNa( )) 3 ))
AàaÛk-aMaSTvidiTa& SvGaRk-aMaae_idTae" SauTaaNa( )
ivìaNdevaNa( raJYak-aMa" SaaDYaaNSa&SaaDak-ae ivXaaMa( )) 4 ))
AaYauZk-aMaae_iìNaaE devaE Pauiík-aMa wl/a& YaJaeTa( )
Pa[iTaïak-aMa" Pauåzae raedSaq l/aek-MaaTaraE )) 5 ))
æPaai>ak-aMaae GaNDavaRNa( ñqk-aMaae_PSar ovRXaqMa( )
AaiDaPaTYak-aMa" SaveRza& YaJaeTa ParMaeiïNaMa( )) 6 ))
Yaj& YaJaed( YaXaSk-aMa" k-aeXak-aMa" Pa[ceTaSaMa( )
ivÛak-aMaSTau iGairXa& daMPaTYaaQaR oMaa& SaTaqMa( )) 7 ))
brahma-varcasa-kämas tu
yajeta brahmaëaù patim
indram indriya-kämas tu
prajä-kämaù prajäpatén
devéà mäyäà tu çré-kämas
tejas-kämo vibhävasum
vasu-kämo vasün rudrän
vérya-kämo ’tha véryavän
annädya-kämas tv aditià
svarga-kämo ’diteù sutän
viçvän devän räjya-kämaù
sädhyän saàsädhako viçäm
äyuñ-kämo ’çvinau devau
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
puñöi-käma iläà yajet
pratiñöhä-kämaù puruño
rodasé loka-mätarau
rüpäbhikämo gandharvän
stré-kämo ’psara urvaçém
ädhipatya-kämaù sarveñäà
yajeta parameñöhinam
yajïaà yajed yaças-kämaù
koça-kämaù pracetasam
vidyä-kämas tu giriçaà
dämpatyärtha umäà satém
SYNONYMS
brahma—the absolute; varcasa—effulgence; kämaù tu—but one who desires in
that way; yajeta—do worship; brahmaëaù—of the Vedas; patim—the master;
indram—the King of heaven; indriya-kämaù tu—but one who desires strong
sense organs; prajä-kämaù—one who desires many offspring; prajäpatén—the
Prajäpatis; devém—the goddess; mäyäm—unto the mistress of the material
world; tu—but; çré-kämaù—one who desires beauty; tejaù—power;
kämaù—one who so desires; vibhävasum—the fire-god; vasu-kämaù—one who
wants wealth; vasün—the Vasu demigods; rudrän—the Rudra expansions of
Lord Çiva; vérya-kämaù—one who wants to be very strongly built;
atha—therefore; véryavän—the most powerful; anna-adya—grains;
kämaù—one who so desires; tu—but; aditim—Aditi, mother of the demigods;
svarga—heaven; kämaù—so desiring; aditeù sutän—the sons of Aditi;
viçvän—Viçvadeva; devän—demigods; räjya-kämaù—those who hanker for
kingdoms; sädhyän—the Sädhya demigods; saàsädhakaù—what fulfills the
wishes; viçäm—of the mercantile community; äyuù-kämaù—desirous of long
life; açvinau—the two demigods known as the Açviné brothers; devau—the two
demigods; puñöi-kämaù—one who desires a strongly built body; iläm—the
earth; yajet—must worship; pratiñöhä-kämaù—one who desires good fame, or
stability in a post; puruñaù—such men; rodasé—the horizon;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
loka-mätarau—and the earth; rüpa—beauty; abhikämaù—positively aspiring
for; gandharvän—the residents of the Gandharva planet, who are very
beautiful and are expert in singing; stré-kämaù—one who desires a good wife;
apsaraù urvaçém—the society girls of the heavenly kingdom;
ädhipatya-kämaù—one who desires to dominate others; sarveñäm—everyone;
yajeta—must worship; parameñöhinam—Brahmä, the head of the universe;
yajïam—the Personality of Godhead; yajet—must worship; yaçaù-kämaù—one
who desires to be famous; koça-kämaù—one who desires a good bank balance;
pracetasam—the treasurer of heaven, known as Varuëa; vidyä-kämaù tu—but
one who desires education; giriçam—the lord of the Himalayas, Lord Çiva;
dämpatya-arthaù—and for conjugal love; umäm satém—the chaste wife of Lord
Çiva, known as Umä.
TRANSLATION
One who desires to be absorbed in the impersonal brahmajyoti effulgence
should worship the master of the Vedas [Lord Brahmä or Båhaspati, the learned
priest], one who desires powerful sex should worship the heavenly King, Indra,
and one who desires good progeny should worship the great progenitors called
the Prajäpatis. One who desires good fortune should worship Durgädevé, the
superintendent of the material world. One desiring to be very powerful should
worship fire, and one who aspires only after money should worship the Vasus.
One should worship the Rudra incarnations of Lord Çiva if he wants to be a
great hero. One who wants a large stock of grains should worship Aditi. One
who desires to attain the heavenly planets should worship the sons of Aditi.
One who desires a worldly kingdom should worship Viçvadeva, and one who
wants to be popular with the general mass of population should worship the
Sädhya demigod. One who desires a long span of life should worship the
demigods known as the Açviné-kumäras, and a person desiring a strongly built
body should worship the earth. One who desires stability in his post should
worship the horizon and the earth combined. One who desires to be beautiful
should worship the beautiful residents of the Gandharva planet, and one who
desires a good wife should worship the Apsaräs and the Urvaçé society girls of
the heavenly kingdom. One who desires domination over others should worship
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord Brahmä, the head of the universe. One who desires tangible fame should
worship the Personality of Godhead, and one who desires a good bank balance
should worship the demigod Varuëa. If one desires to be a greatly learned man
he should worship Lord Çiva, and if one desires a good marital relation he
should worship the chaste goddess Umä, the wife of Lord Çiva.
PURPORT
There are different modes of worship for different persons desiring success
in particular subjects. The conditioned soul living within the purview of the
material world cannot be an expert in every type of materially enjoyable asset,
but one can have considerable influence over a particular matter by
worshiping a particular demigod, as mentioned above. Rävaëa was made a very
powerful man by worshiping Lord Çiva, and he used to offer severed heads to
please Lord Çiva. He became so powerful by the grace of Lord Çiva that all the
demigods were afraid of him, until he at last challenged the Personality of
Godhead Çré Rämacandra and thus ruined himself. In other words, all such
persons who aspire after gaining some or all of the material objects of
enjoyment, or the gross materialistic persons, are on the whole less intelligent,
as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.20). It is said there that those who are
bereft of all good sense, or those whose intelligence is withdrawn by the
deluding energy of mäyä, aspire to achieve all sorts of material enjoyment in
life by pleasing the various demigods, or by advancing in material civilization
under the heading of scientific progress. The real problem of life in the
material world is to solve the question of birth, death, old age and disease. No
one wants to change his birthright, no one wants to meet death, no one wants
to be old or invalid, and no one wants diseases. But these problems are solved
neither by the grace of any demigod nor by the so-called advancement of
material science. In the Bhagavad-gétä, as well as in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
such less intelligent persons have been described as devoid of all good sense.
Çukadeva Gosvämé said that out of the 8,400,000 species of living entities, the
human form of life is rare and valuable, and out of those rare human beings
those who are conscious of the material problems are rarer still, and the still
more rare persons are those who are conscious of the value of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which contains the messages of the Lord and His pure
devotees. Death is inevitable for everyone, intelligent or foolish. But Parékñit
Mahäräja has been addressed by the Gosvämé as the manéñé, or the man of
highly developed mind, because at the time of death he left all material
enjoyment and completely surrendered unto the lotus feet of the Lord by
hearing His messages from the right person, Çukadeva Gosvämé. But
aspirations for material enjoyment by endeavoring persons are condemned.
Such aspirations are something like the intoxication of the degraded human
society. Intelligent persons should try to avoid these aspirations and seek
instead the permanent life by returning home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 8
DaMaaRQaR otaMaëaek&- TaNTau" TaNvNa( iPaTa›Na( YaJaeTa( )
r+aak-aMa" Pau<YaJaNaaNaaeJaSk-aMaae MaåÓ<aaNa( )) 8 ))
dharmärtha uttama-çlokaà
tantuù tanvan pitèn yajet
rakñä-kämaù puëya-janän
ojas-kämo marud-gaëän
SYNONYMS
dharma-arthaù—for spiritual advancement; uttama-çlokam—the Supreme
Lord or persons attached to the Supreme Lord; tantuù—for offspring;
tanvan—and for their protection; pitèn—the residents of Pitåloka; yajet—must
worship; rakñä-kämaù—one who desires protection; puëya-janän—pious
persons; ojaù-kämaù—one who desires strength should worship;
marut-gaëän—the demigods.
TRANSLATION
One should worship Lord Viñëu or His devotee for spiritual advancement in
knowledge, and for protection of heredity and advancement of a dynasty one
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
should worship the various demigods.
PURPORT
The path of religion entails making progress on the path of spiritual
advancement, ultimately reviving the eternal relation with Lord Viñëu in His
impersonal effulgence, His localized Paramätmä feature, and ultimately His
personal feature by spiritual advancement in knowledge. And one who wants
to establish a good dynasty and be happy in the progress of temporary bodily
relations should take shelter of the Pitäs and the demigods in other pious
planets. Such different classes of worshipers of different demigods may
ultimately reach the respective planets of those demigods within the universe,
but he who reaches the spiritual planets in the brahmajyoti achieves the
highest perfection.
TEXT 9
raJYak-aMaae MaNaUNa( devaNa( iNa‰RiTa& Tvi>acrNa( YaJaeTa( )
k-aMak-aMaae YaJaeTa( SaaeMaMak-aMa" Pauåz& ParMa( )) 9 ))
räjya-kämo manün devän
niråtià tv abhicaran yajet
käma-kämo yajet somam
akämaù puruñaà param
SYNONYMS
räjya-kämaù—anyone desiring an empire or kingdom; manün—the Manus,
semi-incarnations of God; devän—demigods; niråtim—demons; tu—but;
abhicaran—desiring victory over the enemy; yajet—should worship;
käma-kämaù—one who desires sense gratification; yajet—should worship;
somam—the demigod named Candra; akämaù—one who has no material
desires to be fulfilled; puruñam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
param—the Supreme.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
One who desires domination over a kingdom or an empire should worship
the Manus. One who desires victory over an enemy should worship the demons,
and one who desires sense gratification should worship the moon. But one who
desires nothing of material enjoyment should worship the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
PURPORT
For a liberated person, all the enjoyments listed above are considered to be
absolutely useless. Only those who are conditioned by the material modes of
external energy are captivated by different types of material enjoyment. In
other words, the transcendentalist has no material desires to be fulfilled,
whereas the materialist has all types of desires to be fulfilled. The Lord has
proclaimed that the materialists, who desire material enjoyment and thus seek
the favor of different demigods, as above mentioned, are not in control of their
senses and so give themselves to nonsense. One should therefore not desire
any sort of material enjoyment, being sensible enough to worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The leaders of nonsensical persons are still more
nonsensical because they preach openly and foolishly that one can worship
any form of demigod and get the same result. This sort of preaching is not only
against the teachings of the Bhagavad-gétä, or those of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
but is also foolish, just as it is foolish to claim that with the purchase of any
travel ticket one may reach the same destination. No one can reach Bombay
from Delhi by purchasing a ticket for Baroda. It is clearly defined herein that
persons impregnated with different desires have different modes of worship,
but one who has no desire for material enjoyment should worship the Supreme
Lord, Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead. And this worshiping process is
called devotional service. Pure devotional service means service to the Lord
without any tinge of material desires, including desire for fruitive activity and
empiric speculation. For fulfillment of material desires one may worship the
Supreme Lord, but the result of such worship is different, as will be explained
in the next verse. Generally the Lord does not fulfill anyone’s material desires
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
for sense enjoyment, but He awards such benedictions to worshipers of the
Lord, for they ultimately come to the point of not desiring material enjoyment.
The conclusion is that one must minimize the desires for material enjoyment,
and for this one should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
described here as param, or beyond anything material. Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya
has also stated, näräyaëaù paro ’vyaktät: the Supreme Lord is beyond the
material encirclement.
TEXT 10
Ak-aMa" SavRk-aMaae va Maae+ak-aMa odarDaq" )
Taqv]e<a >ai¢-YaaeGaeNa YaJaeTa Pauåz& ParMa( )) 10 ))
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
SYNONYMS
akämaù—one who has transcended all material desires; sarva-kämaù—one
who has the sum total of material desires; vä—either; mokña-kämaù—one who
desires liberation; udära-dhéù—with broader intelligence; tévreëa—with great
force; bhakti-yogena—by devotional service to the Lord; yajeta—should
worship; puruñam—the Lord; param—the supreme whole.
TRANSLATION
A person who has broader intelligence, whether he be full of all material
desire, without any material desire, or desiring liberation, must by all means
worship the supreme whole, the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord Çré Kåñëa is described in the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Bhagavad-gétä as puruñottama, or the Supreme Personality. It is He only who
can award liberation to the impersonalists by absorbing such aspirants in the
brahmajyoti, the bodily rays of the Lord. The brahmajyoti is not separate from
the Lord, as the glowing sun ray is not independent of the sun disc. Therefore
one who desires to merge into the supreme impersonal brahmajyoti must also
worship the Lord by bhakti-yoga, as recommended here in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Bhakti-yoga is especially stressed here as the means of all
perfection. In the previous chapters it has been stated that bhakti-yoga is the
ultimate goal of both karma-yoga and jïäna-yoga, and in the same way in this
chapter it is emphatically declared that bhakti-yoga is the ultimate goal of the
different varieties of worship of the different demigods. Bhakti-yoga, thus
being the supreme means of self-realization, is recommended here. Everyone
must therefore seriously take up the methods of bhakti-yoga, even though one
aspires for material enjoyment or liberation from material bondage.
Akämaù is one who has no material desire. A living being, naturally being
the part and parcel of the supreme whole puruñaà pürëam, has as his natural
function to serve the Supreme Being, just as the parts and parcels of the body,
or the limbs of the body, are naturally meant to serve the complete body.
Desireless means, therefore, not to be inert like the stone, but to be conscious
of one’s actual position and thus desire satisfaction only from the Supreme
Lord. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has explained this desirelessness as
bhajanéya-parama-puruña-sukha-mätra-sva-sukhatvam in his Sandarbha. This
means that one should feel happy only by experiencing the happiness of the
Supreme Lord. This intuition of the living being is sometimes manifested even
during the conditioned stage of a living being in the material world, and such
intuition is expressed in the manner of altruism, philanthropy, socialism,
communism, etc., by the undeveloped minds of less intelligent persons. In the
mundane field such an outlook of doing good to others in the form of society,
community, family, country or humanity is a partial manifestation of the same
original feeling in which a pure living entity feels happiness by the happiness
of the Supreme Lord. Such superb feelings were exhibited by the damsels of
Vrajabhümi for the happiness of the Lord. The gopés loved the Lord without
any return, and this is the perfect exhibition of the akämaù spirit. Käma spirit,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
or the desire for one’s own satisfaction, is fully exhibited in the material world,
whereas the spirit of akämaù is fully exhibited in the spiritual world.
Thoughts of becoming one with the Lord, or being merged in the
brahmajyoti, can also be exhibitions of käma spirit if they are desires for one’s
own satisfaction to be free from the material miseries. A pure devotee does not
want liberation so that he may be relieved from the miseries of life. Even
without so-called liberation, a pure devotee is aspirant for the satisfaction of
the Lord. Influenced by the käma spirit, Arjuna declined to fight in the
Kurukñetra battlefield because he wanted to save his relatives for his own
satisfaction. But being a pure devotee, he agreed to fight on the instruction of
the Lord because he came to his senses and realized that satisfaction of the
Lord at the cost of his own satisfaction was his prime duty. Thus he became
akäma. That is the perfect stage of a perfect living being.
Udära-dhéù means one who has a broader outlook. people with desires for
material enjoyment worship small demigods, and such intelligence is
condemned in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.20) as håta jïäna, the intelligence of one
who has lost his senses. One cannot obtain any result from demigods without
getting sanction from the Supreme Lord. Therefore a person with a broader
outlook can see that the ultimate authority is the Lord, even for material
benefits. Under the circumstances, one with a broader outlook, even with the
desire for material enjoyment or for liberation, should take to the worship of
the Lord directly. And everyone, whether an akäma or sakäma or mokña-käma,
should worship the Lord with great expedience. This implies that bhakti-yoga
may be perfectly administered without any mixture of karma and jïäna. As the
unmixed sun ray is very forceful and is therefore called tévra, similarly unmixed
bhakti-yoga of hearing, chanting, etc., may be performed by one and all
regardless of inner motive.
TEXT 11
WTaavaNaev YaJaTaaiMah iNa"é[eYaSaaedYa" )
>aGavTYacl/ae >aavae Yad( >aaGavTaSa®Ta" )) 11 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
etävän eva yajatäm
iha niùçreyasodayaù
bhagavaty acalo bhävo
yad bhägavata-saìgataù
SYNONYMS
etävän—all these different kinds of worshipers; eva—certainly;
yajatäm—while worshiping; iha—in this life; niùçreyasa—the highest
benediction; udayaù—development; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; acalaù—unflinching; bhävaù—spontaneous attraction;
yat—which; bhägavata—the pure devotee of the Lord; saìgataù—association.
TRANSLATION
All the different kinds of worshipers of multidemigods can attain the highest
perfectional benediction, which is spontaneous attraction unflinchingly fixed
upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, only by the association of the pure
devotee of the Lord.
PURPORT
All living entities in different statuses of life within the material creation,
beginning from the first demigod, Brahmä, down to the small ant, are
conditioned under the law of material nature, or the external energy of the
Supreme Lord. The living entity in his pure state is conscious of the fact that
he is a part and parcel of the Lord, but when he is thrown into the material
world on account of his desire to lord it over material energy, he becomes
conditioned by the three modes of material nature and thus struggles for
existence for the highest benefit. This struggle for existence is something like
following the will-o’-the-wisp under the spell of material enjoyment. All plans
for material enjoyment, either by worship of different demigods as described in
the previous verses of this chapter or by modernized advancement of scientific
knowledge without the help of God or demigod, are illusory only, for despite
all such plans for happiness, the conditioned living being within the compass
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of material creation can never solve the problems of life, namely birth, death,
old age and disease. The history of the universe is full of such planmakers, and
many kings and emperors come and go, leaving a planmaking story only. But
the prime problems of life remain unsolved despite all endeavors by such
planmakers.
Actually human life is meant for making a solution to the problems of life.
One can never solve such problems by satisfying the different demigods, by
different modes of worship, or by so-called scientific advancement in
knowledge without the help of God or the demigods. Apart from the gross
materialists, who care very little either for God or for the demigods, the Vedas
recommend worship of different demigods for different benefits, and so the
demigods are neither false nor imaginary. The demigods are as factual as we
are, but they are much more powerful due to their being engaged in the direct
service of the Lord in managing different departments in the universal
government. The Bhagavad-gétä affirms this, and the different planets of the
demigods are mentioned there, including the one of the supreme demigod,
Lord Brahmä. The gross materialists do not believe in the existence of God or
the demigods. Nor do they believe that different planets are dominated by
different demigods. They are creating a great commotion about reaching the
closest celestial body, Candraloka, or the moon, but even after much
mechanical research they have only very scanty information of this moon, and
in spite of much false advertisement for selling land on the moon, the
puffed-up scientists or gross materialists cannot live there, and what to speak
of reaching the other planets, which they are unable even to count. However,
the followers of the Vedas have a different method of acquiring knowledge.
They accept the statements of the Vedic literatures as authority in toto, as we
have already discussed in Canto One, and therefore they have full and
reasonable knowledge of God and demigods and of their different residential
planets situated within the compass of the material world and beyond the limit
of the material sky. The most authentic Vedic literature, accepted by the great
Indian äcäryas like Çaìkara, Rämänuja, Madhva, Viñëusvämé, Nimbärka and
Caitanya and studied by all important personalities of the world, is the
Bhagavad-gétä, in which the worship of the demigods and their respective
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
residential planets are mentioned. The Bhagavad-gétä (9.25) affirms:
yänti deva-vratä devän
pitèn yänti pitå-vratäù
bhütäni yänti bhütejyä
yänti mad-yäjino ’pi mäm
“The worshipers of demigods reach the respective planets of the demigods,
and the worshipers of forefathers reach the planets of the forefathers. The
gross materialist remains in the different material planets, but the devotees of
the Lord reach the kingdom of God.”
We also have information from the Bhagavad-gétä that all the planets
within the material world, including Brahmaloka, are but temporarily situated,
and after a fixed period they are all annihilated. Therefore the demigods and
their followers are all annihilated at the period of devastation, but one who
reaches the kingdom of God gets a permanent share in eternal life. That is the
verdict of Vedic literature. The worshipers of the demigods have one facility
more than the unbelievers due to their being convinced of the Vedic version,
by which they can get information of the benefit of worshiping the Supreme
Lord in the association of the devotees of the Lord. The gross materialist,
however, without any faith in the Vedic version, remains eternally in
darkness, driven by a false conviction on the basis of imperfect experimental
knowledge, or so-called material science, which can never reach into the realm
of transcendental knowledge.
Therefore unless the gross materialists or the worshipers of the temporary
demigods come in contact with a transcendentalist like the pure devotee of the
Lord, their attempts are simply a waste of energy. Only by the grace of the
divine personalities, the pure devotees of the Lord, can one achieve pure
devotion, which is the highest perfection of human life. Only a pure devotee
of the Lord can show one the right way of progressive life. Otherwise both the
materialistic way of life, without any information of God or the demigods, and
the life engaged in the worship of demigods, in pursuit of temporary material
enjoyments, are different phases of phantasmagoria. They are nicely explained
in the Bhagavad-gétä also, but the Bhagavad-gétä can be understood in the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
association of pure devotees only, and not by the interpretations of politicians
or dry philosophical speculators.
TEXT 12
jaNa& YadaPa[iTaiNav*taGau<aaeiMaRc§-‚
MaaTMaPa[Saad oTa Ya}a Gau<aeZvSa®" )
kE-vLYaSaMMaTaPaQaSTvQa >ai¢-YaaeGa"
k-ae iNav*RTaae hirk-QaaSau riTa& Na ku-YaaRTa( )) 12 ))
jïänaà yad äpratinivåtta-guëormi-cakram
ätma-prasäda uta yatra guëeñv asaìgaù
kaivalya-sammata-pathas tv atha bhakti-yogaù
ko nirvåto hari-kathäsu ratià na kuryät
SYNONYMS
jïänam—knowledge; yat—that which; ä—up to the limit of;
pratinivåtta—completely withdrawn; guëa-ürmi—the waves of the material
modes; cakram—whirlpool; ätma-prasädaù—self-satisfaction; uta—moreover;
yatra—where there is; guëeñu—in the modes of nature; asaìgaù—no
attachment; kaivalya—transcendental; sammata—approved; pathaù—path;
tu—but; atha—therefore; bhakti-yogaù—devotional service; kaù—who;
nirvåtaù—absorbed in; hari-kathäsu—in the transcendental topics of the Lord;
ratim—attraction; na—shall not; kuryät—do.
TRANSLATION
Transcendental knowledge in relation with the Supreme Lord Hari is
knowledge resulting in the complete suspension of the waves and whirlpools of
the material modes. Such knowledge is self-satisfying due to its being free from
material attachment, and being transcendental it is approved by authorities.
Who could fail to be attracted?
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
According to Bhagavad-gétä (10.9) the characteristics of pure devotees are
wonderful. The complete functional activities of a pure devotee are always
engaged in the service of the Lord, and thus the pure devotees exchange
feelings of ecstasy between themselves and relish transcendental bliss. This
transcendental bliss is experienced even in the stage of devotional practice
(sädhana-avasthä), if properly undertaken under the guidance of a bona fide
spiritual master. And in the mature stage the developed transcendental feeling
culminates in realization of the particular relationship with the Lord by which
a living entity is originally constituted (up to the relationship of conjugal love
with the Lord, which is estimated to be the highest transcendental bliss). Thus
bhakti-yoga, being the only means of God realization, is called kaivalya. Çréla
Jéva Gosvämé quotes the Vedic version (eko näräyaëo devaù, parävaräëäà
parama äste kaivalya-saàjïitaù) in this connection and establishes that
Näräyaëa, the Personality of Godhead, is known as kaivalya, and the means
which enables one to approach the Lord is called the kaivalya-panthä, or the
only means of attainment of Godhead. This kaivalya-panthä begins from
çravaëa, or hearing those topics that relate to the Personality of Godhead, and
the natural consequence of hearing such hari-kathä is attainment of
transcendental knowledge, which causes detachment from all mundane topics,
for which a devotee has no taste at all. For a devotee, all mundane activities,
social and political, become unattractive, and in the mature state such a
devotee becomes uninterested even in his own body, and what to speak of
bodily relatives. In such a state of affairs one is not agitated by the waves of the
material modes. There are different modes of material nature, and all mundane
functions in which a common man is very much interested or in which he
takes part become unattractive for the devotee. This state of affairs is
described herein as pratinivåtta-guëormi, and it is possible by ätma-prasäda, or
complete self-satisfaction without any material connection. The first-class
devotee of the Lord attains this stage by devotional service, but despite his
loftiness, for the Lord’s satisfaction he may play the voluntary part of a
preacher of the Lord’s glory and dovetail all into devotional service, even
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mundane interest, just to give the neophytes a chance to transform mundane
interest into transcendental bliss. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has described this
action of a pure devotee as nirbandhaù kåñëa-sambandhe yuktaà vairägyam
ucyate. Even mundane activities dovetailed with service to the Lord are also
calculated to be transcendental or approved kaivalya affairs.
TEXT 13
XaaENak- ovac
wTYai>aVYaaôTa& raJaa iNaXaMYa >arTazR>a" )
ik-MaNYaTPa*ívaNa( >aUYaae vEYaaSaik-Ma*iz& k-ivMa( )) 13 ))
çaunaka uväca
ity abhivyähåtaà räjä
niçamya bharatarñabhaù
kim anyat påñöavän bhüyo
vaiyäsakim åñià kavim
SYNONYMS
çaunakaù uväca—Çaunaka said; iti—thus; abhivyähåtam—all that was spoken;
räjä—the King; niçamya—by hearing; bharata-åñabhaù—Mahäräja Parékñit;
kim—what; anyat—more; påñöavän—did he inquire from him; bhüyaù—again;
vaiyäsakim—unto the son of Vyäsadeva; åñim—one who is well versed;
kavim—poetic.
TRANSLATION
Çaunaka said: The son of Vyäsadeva, Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, was a highly
learned sage and was able to describe things in a poetic manner. What did
Mahäräja Parékñit again inquire from him after hearing all that he had said?
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord automatically develops all godly qualities, and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
some of the prominent features of those qualities are as follows: he is kind,
peaceful, truthful, equable, faultless, magnanimous, mild, clean, nonpossessive,
a well-wisher to all, satisfied, surrendered to Kåñëa, without hankering, simple,
fixed, self-controlled, a balanced eater, sane, mannerly, prideless, grave,
sympathetic, friendly, poetic, expert and silent. Out of these twenty-six
prominent features of a devotee, as described by Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja in his
Caitanya-caritämåta, the qualification of being poetic is especially mentioned
herein in relation to Çukadeva Gosvämé. The presentation of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam by his recitation is the highest poetic contribution. He was
a self-realized learned sage. In other words, he was a poet amongst the sages.
TEXT 14
WTaC^ué[UzTaa& ivÜNa( SaUTa Naae_hRiSa >aaizTauMa( )
k-Qaa hirk-Qaaedk-aR" SaTaa& SYau" SadiSa Da]uvMa( )) 14 ))
etac chuçrüñatäà vidvan
süta no ’rhasi bhäñitum
kathä hari-kathodarkäù
satäà syuù sadasi dhruvam
SYNONYMS
etat—this; çuçrüñatäm—of those eager to hear; vidvan—O learned; süta—Süta
Gosvämé; naù—unto us; arhasi—may you do it; bhäñitum—just to explain it;
kathäù—topics; hari-kathä-udarkäù—result in the topics of the Lord;
satäm—of the devotees; syuù—may be; sadasi—in the assembly of;
dhruvam—certainly.
TRANSLATION
O learned Süta Gosvämé! Please continue to explain such topics to us
because we are all eager to hear. Besides that, topics which result in the
discussion of the Lord Hari should certainly be discussed in the assembly of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
devotees.
PURPORT
As we have already quoted above from the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu of Rüpa
Gosvämé, even mundane things, if dovetailed in the service of the Lord Çré
Kåñëa, are accepted as transcendental. For example, the epics or the histories
of Rämäyaëa and Mahäbhärata, which are specifically recommended for the
less intelligent classes (women, çüdras and unworthy sons of the higher castes),
are also accepted as Vedic literature because they are compiled in connection
with the activities of the Lord. Mahäbhärata is accepted as the fifth division of
the Vedas after its first four divisions, namely Säma, Yajur, Åg and Atharva.
The less intelligent do not accept Mahäbhärata as part of the Vedas, but great
sages and authorities accept it as the fifth division of the Vedas. Bhagavad-gétä
is also part of the Mahäbhärata, and it is full of the Lord’s instruction for the
less intelligent class of men. Some less intelligent men say that Bhagavad-gétä is
not meant for householders, but such foolish men forget that Bhagavad-gétä
was explained to Arjuna, a gåhastha (family man), and spoken by the Lord in
His role as a gåhastha. So Bhagavad-gétä, although containing the high
philosophy of the Vedic wisdom, is for the beginners in the transcendental
science, and Çrémad-Bhägavatam is for graduates and postgraduates in the
transcendental science. Therefore literatures like Mahäbhärata, the, puräëas
and similar other literatures which are full of the pastimes of the Lord, are all
transcendental literatures, and they should be discussed with full confidence
in the society of great devotees.
The difficulty is that such literatures, when discussed by professional men,
appear to be mundane literature like histories or epics because there are so
many historical facts and figures. It is said here, therefore, that such literatures
should be discussed in the assembly of devotees. Unless they are discussed by
devotees, such literatures cannot be relished by the higher class of men. So the
conclusion is that the Lord is not impersonal in the ultimate issue. He is the
Supreme Person, and He has His different activities. He is the leader of all
living entities, and He descends at His will and by His personal energy to
reclaim the fallen souls. Thus He plays exactly like the social, political or
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
religious leaders. Because such roles ultimately culminate in the discussion of
topics of the Lord, all such preliminary topics are also transcendental. That is
the way of spiritualizing the civic activities of human society. Men have
inclinations for studying history and many other mundane literatures—stories,
fiction, dramas, magazines, newspapers, etc.—so let them be dovetailed with
the transcendental service of the Lord, and all of them will turn to the topics
relished by all devotees. The propaganda that the Lord is impersonal, that He
has no activity and that He is a dumb stone without any name and form has
encouraged people to become godless, faithless demons, and the more they
deviate from the transcendental activities of the Lord, the more they become
accustomed to mundane activities that only clear their path to hell instead of
return them home, back to Godhead.*(3) Çrémad-Bhägavatam begins from the
history of the Päëòavas (with necessary politics and social activities), and yet
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is said to be the Päramahaàsa-saàhitä, or the Vedic
literature meant for the topmost transcendentalist, and it describes paraà
jïänam, the highest transcendental knowledge. pure devotees of the Lord are
all paramahaàsas, and they are like the swans, who know the art of sucking
milk out of a mixture of milk and water.
TEXT 15
Sa vE >aaGavTaae raJaa Paa<@veYaae MaharQa" )
bal/§-I@NakE-" §-I@Na( k*-Z<a§-I@a& Ya Aadde )) 15 ))
sa vai bhägavato räjä
päëòaveyo mahä-rathaù
bäla-kréòanakaiù kréòan
kåñëa-kréòäà ya ädade
SYNONYMS
saù—he; vai—certainly; bhägavataù—a great devotee of the Lord;
räjä—Mahäräja Parékñit; päëòaveyaù—grandson of the Päëòavas;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mahä-rathaù—a great fighter; bäla—while a child; kréòanakaiù—with play
dolls; kréòan—playing; kåñëa—Lord Kåñëa; kréòäm—activities; yaù—who;
ädade—accepted.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit, the grandson of the Päëòavas, was from his very
childhood a great devotee of the Lord. Even while playing with dolls, he used to
worship Lord Kåñëa by imitating the worship of the family Deity.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä (6.41) it is stated that even a person who has failed in
the proper discharge of yoga practice is given a chance to take birth in the
house of devout brähmaëas or in the houses of rich men like kñatriya kings or
rich merchants. But Mahäräja Parékñit was more than that because he had
been a great devotee of the Lord since his previous birth, and as such he took
his birth in an imperial family of the Kurus, and especially that of the
Päëòavas. So from the very beginning of his childhood he had the chance to
know intimately the devotional service of Lord Kåñëa in his own family. The
Päëòavas, all being devotees of the Lord, certainly venerated family Deities in
the royal palace for worship. Children who appear in such families fortunately
generally imitate such worship of the Deities, even in the way of childhood
play. By the grace of Lord Çré Kåñëa, we had the chance of being born in a
Vaiñëava family, and in our childhood we imitated the worship of Lord Kåñëa
by imitating our father. Our father encouraged us in all respects to observe all
functions such as the Ratha-yäträ and Dola-yäträ ceremonies, and he used to
spend money liberally for distributing prasäda to us children and our friends.
Our spiritual master, who also took his birth in a Vaiñëava family, got all
inspirations from his great Vaiñëava father, Öhäkura Bhaktivinoda. That is the
way of all lucky Vaiñëava families. The celebrated Mérä Bäé was a staunch
devotee of Lord Kåñëa as the great lifter of Govardhana Hill.
The life history of many such devotees is almost the same because there is
always symmetry between the early lives of all great devotees of the Lord.
According to Jéva Gosvämé, Mahäräja Parékñit must have heard about the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
childhood pastimes of Lord Kåñëa at Våndävana, for he used to imitate the
pastimes with his young playmates. According to Çrédhara Svämé, Mahäräja
Parékñit used to imitate the worship of the family Deity by elderly members.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté also confirms the viewpoint of Jéva Gosvämé. So
accepting either of them, Mahäräja Parékñit was naturally inclined to Lord
Kåñëa from his very childhood. He might have imitated either of the
above-mentioned activities, and all of them establish his great devotion from
his very childhood, a symptom of a mahä-bhägavata. Such mahä-bhägavatas are
called nitya-siddhas, or souls liberated from birth. But there are also others,
who may not be liberated from birth but who develop a tendency for
devotional service by association, and they are called sädhana-siddhas. There is
no difference between the two in the ultimate issue, and so the conclusion is
that everyone can become a sädhana-siddha, a devotee of the Lord, simply by
association with the pure devotees. The concrete example is our great spiritual
master Çré Närada Muni. In his previous life he was simply a boy of a
maidservant, but through association with great devotees he became a devotee
of the Lord of his own standard, unique in the history of devotional service.
TEXT 16
vEYaaSaik-ê >aGavaNa( vaSaudevParaYa<a" )
oåGaaYaGau<aaedara" SaTaa& SYauihR SaMaaGaMae )) 16 ))
vaiyäsakiç ca bhagavän
väsudeva-paräyaëaù
urugäya-guëodäräù
satäà syur hi samägame
SYNONYMS
vaiyäsakiù—the son of Vyäsadeva; ca—also; bhagavän—full in transcendental
knowledge; väsudeva—Lord Kåñëa; paräyaëaù—attached to; urugäya—of the
Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa, who is glorified by great philosophers;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
guëa-udäräù—great qualities; satäm—of the devotees; syuù—must have been;
hi—as a matter of fact; samägame—by the presence of.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé, the son of Vyäsadeva, was also full in transcendental
knowledge and was a great devotee of Lord Kåñëa, son of Vasudeva. So there
must have been discussion of Lord Kåñëa, who is glorified by great philosophers
and in the company of great devotees.
PURPORT
The word satäm is very important in this verse. Satäm means the pure
devotees, who have no other desire than to serve the Lord. Only in the
association of such devotees are the transcendental glories of Lord Kåñëa
properly discussed. It is said by the Lord that His topics are all full of spiritual
significance, and once one properly hears about Him in the association of the
satäm, certainly one senses the great potency and so automatically attains to
the devotional stage of life. As already described, Mahäräja Parékñit was a great
devotee of the Lord from his very birth, and so was Çukadeva Gosvämé. Both of
them were on the same level, although it appeared that Mahäräja Parékñit was
a great king accustomed to royal facilities whereas Çukadeva Gosvämé was a
typical renouncer of the world, so much so that he did not even put a cloth on
his body. Superficially, Mahäräja Parékñit and Çukadeva Gosvämé might seem
to be opposites, but basically they were both unalloyed pure devotees of the
Lord. When such devotees are assembled together, there can be no topics save
discussions of the glories of the Lord, or bhakti-yoga. In the Bhagavad-gétä also,
when there were talks between the Lord and His devotee Arjuna, there could
not be any topic other than bhakti-yoga, however the mundane scholars may
speculate on it in their own ways. The use of the word ca after vaiyäsakiù
suggests, according to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, that both Çukadeva Gosvämé and
Mahäräja Parékñit were of the same category, settled long before, although one
was playing the part of the master and the other the disciple. Since Lord Kåñëa
is the center of the topics, the word väsudeva-paräyaëaù, or “devotee of
Väsudeva,” suggests devotee of Lord Kåñëa, the common aim. Although there
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
were many others who assembled at the place where Mahäräja Parékñit was
fasting, the natural conclusion is that there was no topic other than the
glorification of Lord Kåñëa, because the principal speaker was Çukadeva
Gosvämé and the chief audience was Mahäräja Parékñit. So
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, as it was spoken and heard by two principal devotees of
the Lord, is only for the glorification of the Supreme Lord, the Personality of
Godhead, Çré Kåñëa.
TEXT 17
AaYauhRriTa vE Pau&SaaMauÛàSTa& c YaàSaaE )
TaSYaTaeR YaT+a<aae NaqTa otaMaëaek-vaTaRYaa )) 17 ))
äyur harati vai puàsäm
udyann astaà ca yann asau
tasyarte yat-kñaëo néta
uttama-çloka-värtayä
SYNONYMS
äyuù—duration of life; harati—decreases; vai—certainly; puàsäm—of the
people; udyan—rising; astam—setting; ca—also; yan—moving; asau—the sun;
tasya—of one who glorifies the Lord; åte—except; yat—by whom;
kñaëaù—time; nétaù—utilized; uttama-çloka—the all-good Personality of
Godhead; värtayä—in the topics of.
TRANSLATION
Both by rising and by setting, the sun decreases the duration of life of
everyone, except one who utilizes the time by discussing topics of the all-good
Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
This verse indirectly confirms the greater importance of utilizing the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
human form of life to realize our lost relationship with the Supreme Lord by
acceleration of devotional service. Time and tide wait for no man. So the time
indicated by the sunrise and the sunset will be uselessly wasted if such time is
not properly utilized for realizing identification of spiritual values. Even a
fraction of the duration of life wasted cannot be compensated by any amount
of gold. Human life is simply awarded to a living entity (jéva) so that he can
realize his spiritual identity and his permanent source of happiness. A living
being, especially the human being, is seeking happiness because happiness is
the natural situation of the living entity. But he is vainly seeking happiness in
the material atmosphere. A living being is constitutionally a spiritual spark of
the complete whole, and his happiness can be perfectly perceived in spiritual
activities. The Lord is the complete spirit whole, and His name, form, quality,
pastimes, entourage and personality are all identical with Him. Once a person
comes into contact with any one of the above-mentioned energies of the Lord
through the proper channel of devotional service, the door to perfection is
immediately opened. In the Bhagavad-gétä (2.40) the Lord has explained such
contact in the following words: “Endeavors in devotional service are never
baffled. Nor is there failure. A slight beginning of such activities is sufficient
even to deliver a person from the great ocean of material fears.” As a highly
potent drug injected intravenously acts at once on the whole body, the
transcendental topics of the Lord injected through the ear of the pure devotee
of the Lord can act very efficiently. Aural realization of the transcendental
messages implies total realization, just as fructification of one part of a tree
implies fructification of all other parts. This realization for a moment in the
association of pure devotees like Çukadeva Gosvämé prepares one’s complete
life for eternity. And thus the sun fails to rob the pure devotee of his duration
of life, inasmuch as he is constantly busy in the devotional service of the Lord,
purifying his existence. Death is a symptom of the material infection of the
eternal living being; only due to material infection is the eternal living entity
subjected to the law of birth, death, old age and disease.
The materialistic way of pious activities like charity is recommended in the
småti-çästras as quoted by Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura. Money given
in charity to a suitable person is guaranteed bank balance in the next life.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Such charity is recommended to be given to a brähmaëa. If the money is given
in charity to a non-brähmaëa (without brahminical qualification) the money is
returned in the next life in the same proportion. If it is given in charity to a
half-educated brähmaëa, even then the money is returned double. If the
money is given in charity to a learned and fully qualified brähmaëa, the money
is returned a hundred and a thousand times, and if the money is given to a
veda-päraga (one who has factually realized the path of the Vedas), it is
returned by unlimited multiplication. The ultimate end of Vedic knowledge is
realization of the Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, as stated in the
Bhagavad-gétä (vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15]). There is a
guarantee of money’s being returned if given in charity, regardless of the
proportion. Similarly, a moment passed in the association of a pure devotee by
hearing and chanting the transcendental messages of the Lord is a perfect
guarantee for eternal life, for returning home, back to Godhead. Mad-dhäma
gatvä punar janma na vidyate. In other words, a devotee of the Lord is
guaranteed eternal life. A devotee’s old age or disease in the present life is but
an impetus to such guaranteed eternal life.
TEXT 18
Tarv" ik&- Na JaqviNTa >aña" ik&- Na ìSaNTYauTa )
Na %adiNTa Na MaehiNTa ik&- Ga]aMae PaXavae_Pare )) 18 ))
taravaù kià na jévanti
bhasträù kià na çvasanty uta
na khädanti na mehanti
kià gräme paçavo ’pare
SYNONYMS
taravaù—the trees; kim—whether; na—do not; jévanti—live;
bhasträù—bellows; kim—whether; na—do not; çvasanti—breathe; uta—also;
na—do not; khädanti—eat; na—do not; mehanti—discharge semen;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kim—whether; gräme—in the locality; paçavaù—beastly living being;
apare—others.
TRANSLATION
Do the trees not live? Do the bellows of the blacksmith not breathe? All
around us, do the beasts not eat and discharge semen?
PURPORT
The materialistic man of the modern age will argue that life, or part of it, is
never meant for discussion of theosophical or theological arguments. Life is
meant for the maximum duration of existence for eating, drinking, sexual
intercourse, making merry and enjoying life. The modern man wants to live
forever by the advancement of material science, and there are many foolish
theories for prolonging life to the maximum duration. But the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam affirms that life is not meant for so-called economic
development or advancement of materialistic science for the hedonistic
philosophy of eating, mating, drinking and merrymaking. Life is solely meant
for tapasya, for purifying existence so that one may enter into eternal life just
after the end of the human form of life.
The materialists want to prolong life as much as possible because they have
no information of the next life. They want to get the maximum comforts in
this present life because they think conclusively that there is no life after
death. This ignorance about the eternity of the living being and the change of
covering in the material world has played havoc in the structure of modern
human society. Consequently there are many problems, multiplied by various
plans of modernized man. The plans for solving the problems of society have
only aggravated the troubles. Even if it is possible to prolong life more than
one hundred years, advancement of human civilization does not necessarily
follow. The Bhägavatam says that certain trees live for hundreds and
thousands of years. At Våndävana there is a tamarind tree (the place is known
as Imlitala) which is said to have existed since the time of Lord Kåñëa. In the
Calcutta Botanical Garden there is a banyan tree said to be older than five
hundred years, and there are many such trees all over the world. Svämé
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Çaìkaräcärya lived only thirty-two years, and Lord Caitanya lived forty-eight
years. Does it mean that the prolonged lives of the abovementioned trees are
more important than Çaìkara or Caitanya? Prolonged life without spiritual
value is not very important. One may doubt that trees have life because they
do not breathe. But modern scientists like Bose have already proved that there
is life in plants, so breathing is no sign of actual life. The Bhägavatam says that
the bellows of the blacksmith breathes very soundly, but that does not mean
that the bellows has life. The materialist will argue that life in the tree and life
in the man cannot be compared because the tree cannot enjoy life by eating
palatable dishes or by enjoying sexual intercourse. In reply to this, the
Bhägavatam asks whether other animals like the dogs and hogs, living in the
same village with human beings, do not eat and enjoy sexual life. The specific
utterance of Çrémad-Bhägavatam in regard to “other animals” means that
persons who are simply engaged in planning a better type of animal life
consisting of eating, breathing and mating are also animals in the shape of
human beings. A society of such polished animals cannot benefit suffering
humanity, for an animal can easily harm another animal but rarely do good.
TEXT 19
ìivÍrahaeí\%rE" Sa&STauTa" Pauåz" Paéu" )
Na YaTk-<aRPaQaaePaeTaae JaaTau NaaMa GadaGa]Ja" )) 19 ))
çva-viò-varähoñöra-kharaiù
saàstutaù puruñaù paçuù
na yat-karëa-pathopeto
jätu näma gadägrajaù
SYNONYMS
çva—a dog; viö-varäha—the village hog who eats stool; uñöra—the camel;
kharaiù—and by the asses; saàstutaù—perfectly praised; puruñaù—a person;
paçuù—animal; na—never; yat—of him; karëa—ear; patha—path;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
upetaù—reached; jätu—at any time; näma—the holy name; gadägrajaù—Lord
Kåñëa, the deliver from all evils.
TRANSLATION
Men who are like dogs, hogs, camels and asses praise those men who never
listen to the transcendental pastimes of Lord Çré Kåñëa, the deliverer from evils.
PURPORT
The general mass of people, unless they are trained systematically for a
higher standard of life in spiritual values, are no better than animals, and in
this verse they have particularly been put on the level of dogs, hogs, camels
and asses. Modern university education practically prepares one to acquire a
doggish mentality with which to accept the service of a greater master. After
finishing a so-called education, the so-called educated persons move like dogs
from door to door with applications for some service, and mostly they are
driven away, informed of no vacancy. As dogs are negligible animals and serve
the master faithfully for bits of bread, a man serves a master faithfully without
sufficient rewards.
Persons who have no discrimination in the matter of foodstuff and who eat
all sorts of rubbish are compared to hogs. Hogs are very much attached to
eating stools. So stool is a kind of foodstuff for a particular type of animal. And
even stones are eatables for a particular type of animal or bird. But the human
being is not meant for eating everything and anything; he is meant to eat
grains, vegetables, fruits, milk, sugar, etc. Animal food is not meant for the
human being. For chewing solid food, the human being has a particular type of
teeth meant for cutting fruits and vegetables. The human being is endowed
with two canine teeth as a concession for persons who will eat animal food at
any cost. It is known to everyone that one man’s food is another man’s poison.
Human beings are expected to accept the remnants of food offered to Lord Çré
Kåñëa, and the Lord accepts foodstuff from the categories of leaves, flowers,
fruits, etc. (Bg. 9.26). As prescribed by Vedic scriptures, no animal food is
offered to the Lord. Therefore, a human being is meant to eat a particular type
of food. He should not imitate the animals to derive so-called vitamin values.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Therefore, a person who has no discrimination in regard to eating is compared
to a hog.
The camel is a kind of animal that takes pleasure in eating thorns. A person
who wants to enjoy family life or the worldly life of so-called enjoyment is
compared to the camel. Materialistic life is full of thorns, and so one should
live only by the prescribed method of Vedic regulations just to make the best
use of a bad bargain. Life in the material world is maintained by sucking one’s
own blood. The central point of attraction for material enjoyment is sex life.
To enjoy sex life is to suck one’s own blood, and there is not much more to be
explained in this connection. The camel also sucks its own blood while
chewing thorny twigs. The thorns the camel eats cut the tongue of the camel,
and so blood begins to flow within the camel’s mouth. The thorns, mixed with
fresh blood, create a taste for the foolish camel, and so he enjoys the
thorn-eating business with false pleasure. Similarly, the great business
magnates, industrialists who work very hard to earn money by different ways
and questionable means, eat the thorny results of their actions mixed with
their own blood. Therefore the Bhägavatam has situated these diseased fellows
along with the camels.
The ass is an animal who is celebrated as the greatest fool, even amongst
the animals. The ass works very hard and carries burdens of the maximum
weight without making profit for itself. Footnote.(4) The ass is generally
engaged by the washerman, whose social position is not very respectable. And
the special qualification of the ass is that it is very much accustomed to being
kicked by the opposite sex. When the ass begs for sexual intercourse, he is
kicked by the fair sex, yet he still follows the female for such sexual pleasure. A
henpecked man is compared, therefore, to the ass. The general mass of people
work very hard, especially in the age of Kali. In this age the human being is
actually engaged in the work of an ass, carrying heavy burdens and driving
öhelä and rickshaws. The so-called advancement of human civilization has
engaged a human being in the work of an ass. The laborers in great factories
and workshops are also engaged in such burdensome work, and after working
hard during the day, the poor laborer has to be again kicked by the fair sex, not
only for sex enjoyment but also for so many household affairs.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
So Çrémad-Bhägavatam’s categorization of the common man without any
spiritual enlightenment into the society of dogs, hogs, camels and asses is not
at all an exaggeration. The leaders of such ignorant masses of people may feel
very proud of being adored by such a number of dogs and hogs, but that is not
very flattering. The Bhägavatam openly declares that although a person may be
a great leader of such dogs and hogs disguised as men, if he has no taste for
being enlightened in the science of Kåñëa, such a leader is also an animal and
nothing more. He may be designated as a powerful, strong animal, or a big
animal, but in the estimation of Çrémad-Bhägavatam he is never given a place
in the category of man, on account of his atheistic temperament. Or, in other
words, such godless leaders of dogs and hoglike men are bigger animals with
the qualities of animals in greater proportion.
TEXT 20
ible/ bTaaeå§-Maiv§-MaaNa( Yae
Na é*<vTa" k-<aRPau$e= NarSYa )
iJaûaSaTaq daduRirke-v SaUTa
Na caePaGaaYaTYauåGaaYaGaaQaa" )) 20 ))
bile batorukrama-vikramän ye
na çåëvataù karëa-puöe narasya
jihväsaté därdurikeva süta
na copagäyaty urugäya-gäthäù
SYNONYMS
bile—snake holes; bata—like; urukrama—the Lord, who acts marvelously;
vikramän—prowess; ye—all these; na—never; çåëvataù—heard;
karëa-puöe—the earholes; narasya—of the man; jihvä—tongue; asaté—useless;
därdurikä—of the frogs; iva—exactly like that; süta—O Süta Gosvämé;
na—never; ca—also; upagäyati—chants loudly; urugäya—worth singing;
gäthäù—songs.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
One who has not listened to the messages about the prowess and marvelous
acts of the Personality of Godhead and has not sung or chanted loudly the
worthy songs about the Lord is to be considered to possess earholes like the
holes of snakes and a tongue like the tongue of a frog.
PURPORT
Devotional service to the Lord is rendered by all limbs or parts of the body.
It is the transcendental dynamic force of the spirit soul; therefore a devotee is
engaged one hundred percent in the service of the Lord. One can engage in
devotional service when the senses of the body are purified in relation with
the Lord, and one can render service to the Lord with the help of all the
senses. As such, the senses and the action of the senses are to be considered
impure or materialistic as long as they are employed only in sense gratification.
The purified senses are engaged not in sense gratification but in the service of
the Lord in toto. The Lord is the Supreme with all senses, and the servitor, who
is part and parcel of the Lord, also has the same senses. Service to the Lord is
the completely purified use of the senses, as described in the Bhagavad-gétä.
The Lord imparted instructions with full senses, and Arjuna received them
with full senses, and thus there was a perfect exchange of sensible and logical
understanding between the master and the disciple. Spiritual understanding is
nothing like an electrical charge from the master to the disciple, as foolishly
claimed by some propaganda-mongers. Everything is full of sense and logic,
and the exchange of views between the master and disciple is possible only
when the reception is submissive and real. In the Caitanya-caritämåta it is said
that one should receive the teaching of Lord Caitanya with intellect and full
senses so that one can logically understand the great mission.
In the impure state of a living being, the various senses are fully engaged in
mundane affairs. If the ear is not engaged in the service of the Lord by hearing
about Him from Bhagavad-gétä or Çrémad-Bhägavatam, certainly the holes of
the ear will be filled with some rubbish. Therefore the messages of
Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam should be preached all over the world
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
very loudly. That is the duty of a pure devotee who has actually heard about
them from the perfect sources. Many want to speak something to others, but
because they are not trained to speak on the subject matter of Vedic wisdom
they are all speaking nonsense, and people are receiving them with no sense.
There are hundreds and thousands of sources for distributing mundane news
of the world, and people of the world are also receiving it. Similarly, the people
of the world should be taught to hear the transcendental topics of the Lord,
and the devotee of the Lord must speak loudly so that they can hear. The frogs
loudly croak, with the result that they invite the snakes to eat them. The
human tongue is especially given for chanting the Vedic hymns and not for
croaking like frogs. The word asaté used in this verse is also significant. Asaté
means a woman who has become a prostitute. A prostitute has no reputation
for good womanly qualities. Similarly, the tongue, which is given to the human
being for chanting the Vedic hymns, will be considered a prostitute when
engaged in chanting some mundane nonsense.
TEXT 21
>aar" Par& PaÆik-rq$=Jauí‚
MaPYautaMaa®& Na NaMaeNMauku-NdMa( )
XaavaE k-raE Naae ku-åTae SaPaYaa|
hrelR/SaTk-aÄNak-ª<aaE va )) 21 ))
bhäraù paraà paööa-kiréöa-juñöam
apy uttamäìgaà na namen mukundam
çävau karau no kurute saparyäà
harer lasat-käïcana-kaìkaëau vä
SYNONYMS
bhäraù—a great burden; param—heavy; paööa—silk; kiréöa—turban;
juñöam—dressed with; api—even; uttama—upper; aìgam—parts of the body;
na—never; namet—bow down; mukundam—Lord Kåñëa, the deliverer;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
çävau—dead bodies; karau—hands; no—do not; kurute—do;
saparyäm—worshiping; hareù—of the Personality of Godhead;
lasat—glittering; käïcana—made of gold; kaìkaëau—bangles; vä—even
though.
TRANSLATION
The upper portion of the body, though crowned with a silk turban, is only a
heavy burden if not bowed down before the Personality of Godhead who can
award mukti [freedom]. And the hands, though decorated with glittering
bangles, are like those of a dead man if not engaged in the service of the
Personality of Godhead Hari.
PURPORT
As stated hereinbefore, there are three kinds of devotees of the Lord. The
first-class devotee does not at all see anyone who is not in the service of the
Lord, but the second-class devotee makes distinctions between devotees and
nondevotees. The second-class devotees are therefore meant for preaching
work, and as referred to in the above verse, they must loudly preach the glories
of the Lord. The second-class devotee accepts disciples from the section of
third-class devotees or nondevotees. Sometimes the first-class devotee also
comes down to the category of the second-class devotee for preaching work.
But the common man, who is expected to become at least a third-class devotee,
is advised herein to visit the temple of the Lord and bow down before the
Deity, even though he may be a very rich man or even a king with a silk
turban or crown. The Lord is the Lord of everyone, including the great kings
and emperors, and men who are rich in the estimation of mundane people
must therefore make it a point to visit the temple of Lord Çré Kåñëa and
regularly bow down before the Deity. The Lord in the temple in the
worshipable form is never to be considered to be made of stone or wood, for
the Lord in His arcä incarnation as the Deity in the temple shows immense
favor to the fallen souls by His auspicious presence. By the hearing process, as
mentioned hereinbefore, this realization of the presence of the Lord in the
temple is made possible. As such, the first process in the routine work of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
devotional service—hearing—is the essential point. Hearing by all classes of
devotees from the authentic sources like Bhagavad-gétä and
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is essential. The common man who is puffed up with his
material position and does not bow down before the Deity of the Lord in the
temple, or who defies temple worship without any knowledge of the science,
must know that his so-called turban or crown will only succeed in further
drowning him in the water of the ocean of material existence. A drowning
man with a heavy weight on his head is sure to go down more swiftly than
those who have no heavy weight. A foolish, puffed-up man defies the science
of God and says that God has no meaning for him, but when he is in the grip
of God’s law and is caught by some disease like cerebral thrombosis, that
godless man sinks into the ocean of nescience by the weight of his material
acquisition. Advancement of material science without God consciousness is a
heavy load on the head of human society, and so one must take heed of this
great warning.
The common man, if he has no time to worship the Lord, may at least
engage his hands for a few seconds in washing or sweeping the Lord’s temple.
Mahäräja Pratäparudra, the greatly powerful king of Orissa, was always very
busy with heavy state responsibilities, yet he made it a point to sweep the
temple of Lord Jagannätha at Puré once a year during the festival of the Lord.
The idea is that however important a man one may be he must accept the
supremacy of the Supreme Lord. This God consciousness will help a man even
in his material prosperity. Mahäräja Pratäparudra’s subordination before Lord
Jagannätha made him a powerful king, so much so that even the great Pathan
in his time could not enter into Orissa on account of the powerful Mahäräja
Pratäparudra. And at last Mahäräja Pratäparudra was graced by Lord Çré
Caitanya on the very grounds of his acceptance of subordination to the Lord
of the universe. So even though a rich man’s wife has glittering bangles made
of gold on her hands, she must engage herself in rendering service to the Lord.
TEXT 22
bhaRiYaTae Tae NaYaNae Nara<aa&
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
il/®aiNa ivZ<aaeNaR iNarq+aTaae Yae )
PaadaE Na*<aa& TaaE d]uMaJaNMa>aaJaaE
+ae}aai<a NaaNauv]JaTaae hreYaaOE )) 22 ))
barhäyite te nayane naräëäà
liìgäni viñëor na nirékñato ye
pädau nåëäà tau druma-janma-bhäjau
kñeträëi nänuvrajato harer yau
SYNONYMS
barhäyite—like plumes of a peacock; te—those; nayane—eyes; naräëäm—of
men; liìgäni—forms; viñëoù—of the Personality of Godhead; na—does not;
nirékñataù—look upon; ye—all such; pädau—legs; nåëäm—of men; tau—those;
druma-janma—being born of the tree; bhäjau—like that; kñeträëi—holy
places; na—never; anuvrajataù—goes after; hareù—of the Lord; yau—which.
TRANSLATION
The eyes which do not look at the symbolic representations of the
Personality of Godhead Viñëu [His forms, name, quality, etc.] are like those
printed on the plumes of the peacock, and the legs which do not move to the
holy places [where the Lord is remembered] are considered to be like tree
trunks.
PURPORT
Especially for the householder devotees, the path of Deity worship is
strongly recommended. As far as possible, every householder, by the direction
of the spiritual master, must install the Deity of Viñëu, forms like
Rädhä-Kåñëa, Lakñmé-Näräyaëa or Sétä-Räma especially, or any other form of
the Lord, like Nåsiàha, Varäha, Gaura-Nitäi, Matsya, Kürma, çälagräma-çilä
and many other forms of Viñëu, like Trivikrama, Keçava, Acyuta, Väsudeva,
Näräyaëa and Dämodara, as recommended in the Vaiñëava-tantras or Puräëas,
and one’s family should worship strictly following the directions and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
regulations of arcana-vidhi. Any member of the family who is above twelve
years of age should be initiated by a bona fide spiritual master, and all the
members of the household should be engaged in the daily service of the Lord,
beginning from morning (4 a.m.) till night (10 p.m.) by performing
maìgala-ärätrika, niraïjana, arcana, püjä, kértana, çåìgära, bhoga-vaikäli,
sandhyä-ärätrika, päöha, bhoga (at night), çayana-ärätrika, etc. Engagement in
such worship of the Deity, under the direction of a bona fide spiritual master,
will greatly help the householders to purify their very existence and make
rapid progress in spiritual knowledge. Simple theoretical book knowledge is
not sufficient for a neophyte devotee. Book knowledge is theoretical, whereas
the arcana process is practical. Spiritual knowledge must be developed by a
combination of theoretical and practical knowledge, and that is the
guaranteed way for attainment of spiritual perfection. The training of
devotional service for a neophyte devotee completely depends on the expert
spiritual master who knows how to lead his disciple to make gradual progress
towards the path back home, back to Godhead. One should not become a
pseudo spiritual master as a matter of business to meet one’s family
expenditures; one must be an expert spiritual master to deliver the disciple
from the clutches of impending death. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
has defined the bona fide qualities of a spiritual master, and one of the verses
in that description reads:
çré-vigrahärädhana-nitya-nänäçåìgära-
tan-mandira-märjanädau
yuktasya bhaktäàç ca niyuïjato ’pi
vande guroù çré-caraëäravindam **(5)
Çré-vigraha is the arcä, or suitable worshipable form of the Lord, and the
disciple should be engaged in worshiping the Deity regularly by çåìgära, by
proper decoration and dressing, as also by mandira-märjana, the matter of
cleansing the temple. The spiritual master teaches the neophyte devotee all
these kindly and personally to help him gradually in the realization of the
transcendental name, quality, form, etc., of the Lord.
Only attention engaged in the service of the Lord, especially in dressing
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and decorating the temple, accompanied by musical kértana and spiritual
instructions from scriptures, can save the common man from the hellish
cinema attractions and rubbish sex-songs broadcast everywhere by radios. If
one is unable to maintain a temple at home, he should go to another’s temple
where all the above performances are regularly executed. Visiting the temple
of a devotee and looking at the profusely decorated forms of the Lord well
dressed in a well-decorated, sanctified temple naturally infuse the mundane
mind with spiritual inspiration. People should visit holy places like Våndävana
where such temples and worship of the Deity are specifically maintained.
Formerly all rich men like kings and rich merchants constructed such temples
under the direction of expert devotees of the Lord, like the six Gosvämés, and
it is the duty of the common man to take advantage of these temples and
festivals observed in the holy places of pilgrimage by following in the footsteps
of great devotees (anuvraja). One should not visit all these sanctified
pilgrimage places and temples with sightseeing in mind, but one must go to
such temples and sanctified places immortalized by the transcendental
pastimes of the Lord and be guided by proper men who know the science. This
is called anuvraja. Anu means to follow. It is therefore best to follow the
instruction of the bona fide spiritual master, even in visiting temples and the
holy places of pilgrimage. One who does not move in that way is as good as a
standing tree condemned by the Lord not to move. The moving tendency of
the human being is misused by visiting places for sightseeing. The best purpose
of such traveling tendencies could be fulfilled by visiting the holy places
established by great äcäryas and thereby not being misled by the atheistic
propaganda of moneymaking men who have no knowledge of spiritual matters.
TEXT 23
JaqvH^vae >aaGavTaax(iga]re<au&
Na JaaTau MaTYaaeR_i>al/>aeTa YaSTau )
é[qivZ<auPaÛa MaNauJaSTaul/SYaa"
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ìSaH^vae YaSTau Na ved GaNDaMa( )) 23 ))
jévaï chavo bhägavatäìghri-reëuà
na jätu martyo ’bhilabheta yas tu
çré-viñëu-padyä manujas tulasyäù
çvasaï chavo yas tu na veda gandham
SYNONYMS
jévan—while living; çavaù—a dead body; bhägavata-aìghri-reëum—the dust of
the feet of a pure devotee; na—never; jätu—at any time; martyaù—mortal;
abhilabheta—particularly received; yaù—a person; tu—but; çré—with
opulence; viñëu-padyäù—of the lotus feet of Viñëu; manu-jaù—a descendant
of Manu (a man); tulasyäù—leaves of the tulasi tree; çvasan—while breathing;
çavaù—still a dead body; yaù—who; tu—but; na veda—never experienced;
gandham—the aroma.
TRANSLATION
The person who has not at any time received the dust of the feet of the
Lord’s pure devotee upon his head is certainly a dead body. And the person who
has never experienced the aroma of the tulasé leaves from the lotus feet of the
Lord is also a dead body, although breathing.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the breathing dead
body is a ghost. When a man dies, he is called dead, but when he again appears
in a subtle form not visible to our present vision and yet acts, such a dead body
is called a ghost. Ghosts are always very bad elements, always creating a fearful
situation for others. Similarly, the ghostlike nondevotees who have no respect
for the pure devotees, nor for the Viñëu Deity in the temples, create a fearful
situation for the devotees at all times. The Lord never accepts any offering by
such impure ghosts. There is a common saying that one should first love the
dog of the beloved before one shows any loving sentiments for the beloved.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The stage of pure devotion is attained by sincerely serving a pure devotee of
the Lord. The first condition of devotional service to the Lord is therefore to
be a servant of a pure devotee, and this condition is fulfilled by the statement
“reception of the dust of the lotus feet of a pure devotee who has also served
another pure devotee.” That is the way of pure disciplic succession, or
devotional paramparä.
Mahäräja Rahügaëa inquired from the great saint Jaòa Bharata as to how
he had attained such a liberated stage of a paramahaàsa, and in answer the
great saint replied as follows (Bhäg. 5.12.12):
rahügaëaitat tapasä na yäti
na cejyayä nirvapaëäd gåhäd vä
na cchandasä naiva jalägni-süryair
vinä mahat-päda-rajo-’bhiñekam
“O King Rahügaëa, the perfectional stage of devotional service, or the
paramahaàsa stage of life, cannot be attained unless one is blessed by the dust
of the feet of great devotees. It is never attained by tapasya [austerity], the Vedic
worshiping process, acceptance of the renounced order of life, the discharge of
the duties of household life, the chanting of the Vedic hymns, or the
performance of penances in the hot sun, within cold water or before the
blazing fire.”
In other words, Lord Çré Kåñëa is the property of His pure unconditional
devotees, and as such only the devotees can deliver Kåñëa to another devotee;
Kåñëa is never obtainable directly. Lord Caitanya therefore designated Himself
as gopé-bhartuù pada-kamalayor däsa-däsänudäsaù, or “the most obedient
servant of the servants of the Lord, who maintains the gopé damsels at
Våndävana.” A pure devotee therefore never approaches the Lord directly, but
tries to please the servant of the Lord’s servants, and thus the Lord becomes
pleased, and only then can the devotee relish the taste of the tulasé leaves
stuck to His lotus feet. In the Brahma-saàhitä it is said that the Lord is never
to be found by becoming a great scholar of the Vedic literatures, but He is very
easily approachable through His pure devotee. In Våndävana all the pure
devotees pray for the mercy of Çrématé Rädhäräëé, the pleasure potency of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord Kåñëa. Çrématé Rädhäräëé is a tenderhearted feminine counterpart of the
supreme whole, resembling the perfectional stage of the worldly feminine
nature. Therefore, the mercy of Rädhäräëé is available very readily to the
sincere devotees, and once She recommends such a devotee to Lord Kåñëa, the
Lord at once accepts the devotee’s admittance into His association. The
conclusion is, therefore, that one should be more serious about seeking the
mercy of the devotee than that of the Lord directly, and by one’s doing so (by
the good will of the devotee) the natural attraction for the service of the Lord
will be revived.
TEXT 24
TadXMaSaar& ôdYa& bTaed&
Yad( Ga*ùMaa<aEhRirNaaMaDaeYaE" )
Na ivi§-YaeTaaQa Yada ivk-arae
Nae}ae Jal&/ Gaa}aåhezu hzR" )) 24 ))
tad açma-säraà hådayaà batedaà
yad gåhyamäëair hari-näma-dheyaiù
na vikriyetätha yadä vikäro
netre jalaà gätra-ruheñu harñaù
SYNONYMS
tat—that; açma-säram—is steel-framed; hådayam—heart; bata
idam—certainly that; yat—which; gåhyamäëaiù—in spite of chanting;
hari-näma—the holy name of the Lord; dheyaiù—by concentration of the
mind; na—does not; vikriyeta—change; atha—thus; yadä—when;
vikäraù—reaction; netre—in the eyes; jalam—tears; gätra-ruheñu—at the
pores; harñaù—eruptions of ecstasy.
TRANSLATION
Certainly that heart is steel-framed which, in spite of one’s chanting the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
holy name of the Lord with concentration, does not change when ecstasy takes
place, tears fill the eyes and the hairs stand on end.
PURPORT
We should note with profit that in the first three chapters of the Second
Canto a gradual process of development of devotional service is being
presented. In the First Chapter the first step in devotional service for God
consciousness by the process of hearing and chanting has been stressed, and a
gross conception of the Personality of Godhead in His universal form for the
beginners is recommended. By such a gross conception of God through the
material manifestations of His energy, one is enabled to spiritualize the mind
and the senses and gradually concentrate the mind upon Lord Viñëu, the
Supreme, who is present as the Supersoul in every heart and everywhere, in
every atom of the material universe. The system of païca-upäsanä,
recommending five mental attitudes for the common man, is also enacted for
this purpose, namely gradual development, worship of the superior that may be
in the form of fire, electricity, the sun, the mass of living beings, Lord Çiva
and, at last, the impersonal Supersoul, the partial representation of Lord
Viñëu. They are all nicely described in the Second Chapter, but in the Third
Chapter further development is prescribed after one has actually reached the
stage of Viñëu worship, or pure devotional service, and the mature stage of
Viñëu worship is suggested herein in relation to the change of heart.
The whole process of spiritual culture is aimed at changing the heart of the
living being in the matter of his eternal relation with the Supreme Lord as
subordinate servant, which is his eternal constitutional position. So with the
progress of devotional service, the reaction of change in the heart is exhibited
by gradual detachment from the sense of material enjoyment by a false sense of
lording it over the world and an increase in the attitude of rendering loving
service to the Lord. Vidhi-bhakti, or regulated devotional service by the limbs
of the body (namely the eyes, the ears, the nose, the hands and the legs, as
already explained hereinbefore), is now stressed herein in relation to the mind,
which is the impetus for all activities of the limbs of the body. It is expected by
all means that by discharging regulated devotional service one must manifest
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the change of heart. If there is no such change, the heart must be considered
steel-framed, for it is not melted even when there is chanting of the holy name
of the Lord. We must always remember that hearing and chanting are the
basic principles of discharging devotional duties, and if they are properly
performed there will follow the reactional ecstasy with signs of tears in the
eyes and standing of the hairs on the body. These are natural consequences
and are the preliminary symptoms of the bhäva stage, which occurs before one
reaches the perfectional stage of prema, love of Godhead.
If the reaction does not take place, even after continuous hearing and
chanting of the holy name of the Lord, it may be considered to be due to
offenses only. That is the opinion of the Sandarbha. In the beginning of
chanting of the holy name of the Lord, if the devotee has not been very careful
about evading the ten kinds of offenses at the feet of the holy name, certainly
the reaction of feelings of separation will not be visible by tears in the eyes and
standing of the hair on end.
The bhäva stage is manifested by eight transcendental symptoms, namely
inertness, perspiration, standing of hairs on end, failing in the voice,
trembling, paleness of the body, tears in the eyes and finally trance. The Nectar
of Devotion, a summary study of Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé’s Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu,
explains those symptoms and vividly describes other transcendental
developments, both in steady and accelerating manifestations.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has very critically discussed all these
bhäva displays in connection with some unscrupulous neophyte’s imitating the
above symptoms for cheap appreciation. Not only Viçvanätha Cakravarté but
also Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé treated them very critically. Sometimes all the above
eight symptoms of ecstasy are imitated by the mundane devotees
(präkåta-sahajiyäs), but the pseudo symptoms are at once detected when one
sees the pseudodevotee addicted to so many forbidden things. Even though
decorated with the signs of a devotee, a person addicted to smoking, drinking
or illegitimate sex with women cannot have all the above-mentioned ecstatic
symptoms. But it is seen that sometimes these symptoms are willfully imitated,
and for this reason Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté accuses the imitators of being
stonehearted men. They are sometimes even affected by the reflection of such
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
transcendental symptoms, yet if they still do not give up the forbidden habits,
then they are hopeless cases for transcendental realization.
When Lord Caitanya met Çréla Rämänanda Räya of Kavaur on the bank of
the Godävaré, the Lord developed all these symptoms, but because of the
presence of some nondevotee brähmaëas who were attendants of the Räya, the
Lord suppressed these symptoms. So sometimes they are not visible even in the
body of the first-class devotee for certain circumstantial reasons. Therefore
real, steady bhäva is definitely displayed in the matter of cessation of material
desires (kñänti), utilization of every moment in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord (avyärtha-kälatvam [Cc.Madhya 23.18-19]), eagerness for
glorifying the Lord constantly (näma-gäne sadä ruci [Cc. Madhya 23.32]),
attraction for living in the land of the Lord (prétis tad-vasati sthalePrétis tad
vasati sthäle), complete detachment from material happiness (virakti), and
pridelessness (mäna-çünyatä). One who has developed all these transcendental
qualities is really possessed of the bhäva stage, as distinguished from the
stonehearted imitator or mundane devotee.
The whole process can be summarized as follows: The advanced devotee
who chants the holy name of the Lord in a perfectly offenseless manner and is
friendly to everyone can actually relish the transcendental taste of glorifying
the Lord. And the result of such realization is reflected in the cessation of all
material desires, etc., as mentioned above. The neophytes, due to their being in
the lower stage of devotional service, are invariably envious, so much so that
they invent their own ways and means of devotional regulations without
following the äcäryas. As such, even if they make a show of constantly
chanting the holy name of the Lord, they cannot relish the transcendental
taste of the holy name. Therefore, the show of tears in the eyes, trembling,
perspiration or unconsciousness, etc., is condemned. They can, however, get in
touch with a pure devotee of the Lord and rectify their bad habits; otherwise
they shall continue to be stonehearted and unfit for any treatment. A
complete progressive march on the return path home, back to Godhead, will
depend on the instructions of the revealed scriptures directed by a realized
devotee.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 25
AQaai>aDaeù® MaNaae_NaukU-l&/
Pa[>aazSae >aaGavTaPa[DaaNa" )
Yadah vEYaaSaik-raTMaivÛa‚
ivXaardae Na*PaiTa& SaaDau Pa*í" )) 25 ))
athäbhidhehy aìga mano-’nukülaà
prabhäñase bhägavata-pradhänaù
yad äha vaiyäsakir ätma-vidyäviçärado
nåpatià sädhu påñöaù
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; abhidhehi—please explain; aìga—O Süta Gosvämé;
manaù—mind; anukülam—favorable to our mentality; prabhäñase—you do
speak; bhägavata—the great devotee; pradhänaù—the chief; yat äha—what he
spoke; vaiyäsakiù—Çukadeva Gosvämé; ätma-vidyä—transcendental
knowledge; viçäradaù—expert; nåpatim—unto the King; sädhu—very good;
påñöaù—being asked.
TRANSLATION
O Süta Gosvämé, your words are pleasing to our minds. Please therefore
explain this to us as it was spoken by the great devotee Çukadeva Gosvämé, who
is very expert in transcendental knowledge, and who spoke to Mahäräja Parékñit
upon being asked.
PURPORT
Knowledge explained by the previous äcärya like Çukadeva Gosvämé and
followed by the next like Süta Gosvämé is always powerful transcendental
knowledge, and it is therefore penetrating and useful to all submissive
students.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Third Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart.”
Chapter Four
The Process of Creation
TEXT 1
SaUTa ovac
vEYaaSake-iriTa vcSTatviNaêYaMaaTMaNa" )
oPaDaaYaR MaiTa& k*-Z<ae AaEtareYa" SaTaq& VYaDaaTa( )) 1 ))
süta uväca
vaiyäsaker iti vacas
tattva-niçcayam ätmanaù
upadhärya matià kåñëe
auttareyaù satéà vyadhät
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; vaiyäsakeù—of Çukadeva Gosvämé; iti—thus;
vacaù—speeches; tattva-niçcayam—that which verifies the truth; ätmanaù—in
the self; upadhärya—just having realized; matim—concentration of the mind;
kåñëe—unto Lord Kåñëa; auttareyaù—the son of Uttarä; satém—chaste;
vyadhät—applied.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Mahäräja Parékñit, the son of Uttarä, after hearing the
speeches of Çukadeva Gosvämé, which were all about the truth of the self,
applied his concentration faithfully upon Lord Kåñëa.
PURPORT
The word satém is very significant. This means “existing” and “chaste.” And
both imports are perfectly applicable in the case of Mahäräja Parékñit. The
whole Vedic adventure is to draw one’s attention entirely unto the lotus feet
of Lord Kåñëa without any diversion, as instructed in the Bhagavad-gétä (15.15).
Fortunately Mahäräja Parékñit had already been attracted to the Lord from the
very beginning of his body, in the womb of his mother. In the womb of his
mother he was struck by the brahmästra atomic bomb released by Açvatthämä,
but by the grace of the Lord he was saved from being burnt by the fiery
weapon, and since then the King continuously concentrated his mind upon
Lord Kåñëa, which made him perfectly chaste in devotional service. So by
natural sequence he was a chaste devotee of the Lord, and when he further
heard from Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé that one should worship the Lord only
and no one else, even though full of all desires or desireless, his natural
affection for Kåñëa was strengthened. We have already discussed these topics.
To become a pure devotee of Lord Kåñëa, two things are very much
essential, namely having a chance to be born in the family of a devotee and
having the blessings of a bona fide spiritual master. By the grace of Lord Kåñëa,
Parékñit Mahäräja had both opportunities. He was born in a family of such
devotees as the Päëòavas, and just to continue the dynasty of the Päëòavas
and show them special favor, the Lord specifically saved Mahäräja Parékñit,
who later on, by the arrangement of the Lord, was cursed by the boy of a
brähmaëa and was able to get the association of such a spiritual master as
Çukadeva Gosvämé. In the Caitanya-caritämåta it is said that a fortunate
person, by the mercy of the spiritual master and Lord Kåñëa, achieves the path
of devotional service. This was perfectly applicable in the case of Mahäräja
Parékñit. By way of being born in a family of devotees, he automatically came
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
in touch with Kåñëa, and after being so contacted he constantly remembered
Him. Consequently Lord Kåñëa gave the King a further chance for
development in devotional service by introducing him to Çukadeva Gosvämé, a
stalwart devotee of the Lord with perfect knowledge in self-realization. And by
hearing from a bona fide spiritual master, he was perfectly able to concentrate
his chaste mind further upon Lord Kåñëa, as a matter of course.
TEXT 2
AaTMaJaaYaaSauTaaGaarPaéud]iv<abNDauzu )
raJYae caivk-le/ iNaTYa& ivæ!a& MaMaTaa& JahaE )) 2 ))
ätma-jäyä-sutägärapaçu-
draviëa-bandhuñu
räjye cävikale nityaà
virüòhäà mamatäà jahau
SYNONYMS
ätma—body; jäyä—wife; suta—son; ägära—palace; paçu—horses and
elephants; draviëa—treasury house; bandhuñu—unto friends and relatives;
räjye—in the kingdom; ca—also; avikale—without being disturbed;
nityam—constant; virüòhäm—deep-rooted; mamatäm—affinity; jahau—gave
up.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit, as a result of his wholehearted attraction for Lord Kåñëa,
was able to give up all deep-rooted affection for his personal body, his wife, his
children, his palace, his animals like horses and elephants, his treasury house,
his friends and relatives, and his undisputed kingdom.
PURPORT
To become liberated means to become free from dehätma-buddhi, the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
illusory attachment for personal bodily coverings and everything connected
with the body, namely wife, children and all other entanglements. One selects
a wife for bodily comforts, and the result is children. For wife and children one
requires a dwelling place, and as such a residential house is also necessary.
Animals like horses, elephants, cows and dogs are all household animals, and a
householder has to keep them as household paraphernalia. In modern
civilization the horses and elephants have been replaced by cars and
conveyances with considerable horsepower. To maintain all the household
affairs, one has to increase the bank balance and be careful about the treasury
house, and in order to display the opulence of material assets, one has to keep
good relations with friends and relatives, as well as become very careful about
maintaining the status quo. This is called material civilization of material
attachment. Devotion for Lord Kåñëa means negation of all material
attachments as detailed above. By the grace of Lord Kåñëa, Mahäräja Parékñit
was awarded all material amenities and an undisputed kingdom in which to
enjoy the undisturbed position of king, but by the grace of the Lord he was
able to give up all connections with material attachment. That is the position
of a pure devotee. Mahäräja Parékñit, due to his natural affection for Lord
Kåñëa as a devotee of the Lord, was always executing his royal duties on behalf
of the Lord, and as a responsible king of the world he was always careful to see
that the influence of Kali would not enter his kingdom. A devotee of the Lord
never thinks of his household paraphernalia as his own, but surrenders
everything for the service of the Lord. Thereby living entities under a
devotee’s care get the opportunity for God realization by the management of a
devotee-master.
Attachment for household paraphernalia and for Lord Kåñëa go poorly
together. One attachment is the path of darkness, and the other attachment is
the path of light. Where there is light, there is no darkness, and where there is
darkness, there is no light. But an expert devotee can turn everything to the
path of light by an attitude of service to the Lord, and the best example here is
the Päëòavas. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and householders like him can turn
everything to light by dovetailing so-called material assets in the service of the
Lord, but one who is not trained or is unable to turn everything to the service
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of the Lord (nirbandhaù kåñëa-sambandhe) must give up all material
connections before he can be fit to hear and chant the glories of the Lord, or
in other words, one who has seriously heard Çrémad-Bhägavatam for even one
day, like Mahäräja Parékñit, from a fit personality like Çukadeva Gosvämé, may
be able to lose all affinity for material things. There is no utility simply in
imitating Mahäräja Parékñit and hearing Bhägavatam from professional men,
even for seven hundred years. To take Çrémad-Bhägavatam as a means of
maintaining family expenditure is the grossest type of nämäparädha offense at
the feet of the Lord (sarva-çubha-kriyä-sämyam api pramädaù).
TEXTS 3–4
PaPa[C^ ceMaMaevaQa| YaNMaa& Pa*C^Qa SataMaa" )
k*-Z<aaNau>aavé[v<ae é[ÕDaaNaae MahaMaNaa" )) 3 ))
Sa&SQaa& ivjaYa Sa&NYaSYa k-MaR }aEviGaRk&- c YaTa( )
vaSaudeve >aGaviTa AaTMa>aav& d*!& GaTa" )) 4 ))
papraccha cemam evärthaà
yan mäà påcchatha sattamäù
kåñëänubhäva-çravaëe
çraddadhäno mahä-manäù
saàsthäà vijïäya sannyasya
karma trai-vargikaà ca yat
väsudeve bhagavati
ätma-bhävaà dåòhaà gataù
papraccha—asked; ca—also; imam—this; eva—exactly like; artham—purpose;
yat—that; mäm—unto me; påcchatha—you are asking; sattamäù—O great
sages; kåñëa-anubhäva—rapt in thought of Kåñëa; çravaëe—in hearing;
çraddadhänaù—full of faith; mahä-manäù—the great soul; saàsthäm—death;
vijïäya—being informed; sannyasya—renouncing; karma—fruitive activities;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
trai-vargikam—the three principles religion, economic development and sense
gratification; ca—also; yat—what it may be; väsudeve—unto Lord Kåñëa;
bhagavati—the Personality of Godhead; ätma-bhävam—attraction of love;
dåòham—firmly fixed; gataù—achieved.
TRANSLATION
O great sages, the great soul Mahäräja Parékñit, constantly rapt in thought of
Lord Kåñëa, knowing well of his imminent death, renounced all sorts of fruitive
activities, namely acts of religion, economic development and sense
gratification, and thus fixed himself firmly in his natural love for Kåñëa and
asked all these questions, exactly as you are asking me.
PURPORT
The three activities of religion, economic development and sense
gratification are generally attractive for conditioned souls struggling for
existence in the material world. Such regulated activities prescribed in the
Vedas are called the karma-käëòéya conception of life, and householders are
generally recommended to follow the rules just to enjoy material prosperity
both in this life and in the next. Most people are attracted by such activities.
Even in the activities of their modern godless civilization, people are more
concerned with economic development and sense gratification without any
religious sentiments. As a great emperor of the world, Mahäräja Parékñit had to
observe such regulations of the Vedic karma-käëòéya section, but by his slight
association with Çukadeva Gosvämé he could perfectly understand that Lord
Kåñëa, the Absolute Personality of Godhead (Väsudeva), for whom he had a
natural love since his birth, is everything, and thus he fixed his mind firmly
upon Him, renouncing all modes of Vedic karma-käëòéya activities. This
perfectional stage is attained by a jïäné after many, many births. The jïänés, or
the empiric philosophers endeavoring for liberation, are thousands of times
better than the fruitive workers, and out of hundreds of thousands of such
jïänés one is liberated factually. And out of hundreds of thousands of such
liberated persons, even one person is rarely found who can firmly fix his mind
unto the lotus feet of Lord Çré Kåñëa, as declared by the Lord Himself in the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Bhagavad-gétä (7.19). Mahäräja Parékñit is specially qualified with the word
mahä-manäù, which puts him on an equal level with the mahätmäs described
in the Bhagavad-gétä. In the later age also there have been many mahätmäs of
this type, and they also gave up all karma-käëòéya conceptions of life’ solely
and wholly depending on the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kåñëa. Lord
Caitanya, who is Lord Kåñëa Himself, taught us in His Çikñäñöaka (8):
äçliñya vä päda-ratäà pinañöu mäm
adarçanän marma-hatäà karotu vä
yathä tathä vä vidadhätu lampaöo
mat-präëa-näthas tu sa eva näparaù
“Lord Kåñëa, who is the lover of many devotees (women), may embrace this
fully surrendered maidservant or may trample me with His feet, or He may
render me brokenhearted by not being present before me for a long duration of
time, but still He is nothing less than the Absolute Lord of my heart.”
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé spoke thus:
viracaya mayi daëòaà déna-bandho dayämé vä
gatir iha na bhavattaù käcid anyä mamästi
nipatatu çata-koöi-nirbharaà vä navämbhaù
tad api kila-payodaù stüyate cätakena
“O Lord of the poor, do what you like with me, give me either mercy or
punishment, but in this world I have none to look to except Your Lordship.
The cätaka bird always prays for the cloud, regardless of whether it showers
rains or throws a thunderbolt.”
Çréla Mädhavendra Puré, the grand-spiritual master of Lord Caitanya, took
leave of all karma-käëòéya obligations in the following words:
sandhyä-vandana bhadram astu bhavato bhoù snäna tubhyaà namo
bho deväù pitaraç ca tarpaëa-vidhau nähaà kñamaù kñamyatäm
yatra kväpi niñadya yädava-kulottamasya kaàsa-dviñaù
smäraà smäram aghaà harämi tad alaà manye kim anyena me
“O my evening prayer, all good unto you. O my morning bath, I bid you
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
good-bye. O demigods and forefathers, please excuse me. I am unable to
perform any more offerings for your pleasure. Now I have decided to free
myself from all reactions to sins simply by remembering anywhere and
everywhere the great descendant of Yadu and the great enemy of Kaàsa [Lord
Kåñëa]. I think that this is sufficient for me. So what is the use of further
endeavors?”
Çréla Mädhavendra Puré said further:
mugdhaà mäà nigadantu néti-nipuëä bhräntaà muhur vaidikäù
mandaà bändhava-saïcayä jaòa-dhiyaà muktädaräù sodaräù
unmattaà dhanino viveka-caturäù kämam mahä-dämbhikam
moktuà na kñämate manäg api mano govinda-päda-spåhäm
“Let the sharp moralist accuse me of being illusioned; I do not mind.
Experts in Vedic activities may slander me as being misled, friends and
relatives may call me frustrated, my brothers may call me a fool, the wealthy
mammonites may point me out as mad, and the learned philosophers may
assert that I am much too proud; still my mind does not budge an inch from the
determination to serve the lotus feet of Govinda, though I be unable to do it.”
And also Prahläda Mahäräja said:
dharmärtha-käma iti yo ’bhihitas trivarga
ékñä trayé naya-damau vividhä ca värtä
manye tad etad akhilaà nigamasya satyaà
svätmärpaëaà sva-suhådaù paramasya puàsaù
“Religion, economic development and sense gratification are celebrated as
three means of attaining the path of salvation. Of these, ékñä trayé especially,
i.e., knowledge of the self, knowledge of fruitive acts and logic and also politics
and economics, are different means of livelihood. All these are different
subjects of Vedic education, and therefore I consider them temporary
engagements. On the other hand, surrendering unto the Supreme Lord Viñëu
is a factual gain in life, and I consider it the ultimate truth.” (Bhäg. 7.6.26)
The whole matter is concluded in the Bhagavad-gétä (2.41) as
vyavasäyätmikä buddhiù, or the absolute path of perfection. Çré Baladeva
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Vidyäbhüñaëa, a great Vaiñëava scholar, defines this as
bhagavad-arcanä-rüpaika-niñkäma-karmabhir viçuddha-cittaù—accepting
transcendental loving service to the Lord as the prime duty, free from fruitive
reaction.
So Mahäräja Parékñit was perfectly right when he firmly accepted the lotus
feet of Lord Kåñëa, renouncing all karma-käëòéya conceptions of life.
TEXT 5
raJaaevac
SaMaqcqNa& vcae b]øNa( SavRjSYa TavaNaga )
TaMaae ivXaqYaRTae Maù& hre" k-QaYaTa" k-QaaMa( )) 5 ))
räjoväca
samécénaà vaco brahman
sarva-jïasya tavänagha
tamo viçéryate mahyaà
hareù kathayataù kathäm
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—the King said; samécénam—perfectly right; vacaù—speeches;
brahman—O learned brähmaëa; sarva-jïasya—one who knows all;
tava—your; anagha—without any contamination; tamaù—the darkness of
ignorance; viçéryate—gradually disappearing; mahyam—unto me; hareù—of
the Lord; kathayataù—as you are speaking; kathäm—topics.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit said: O learned brähmaëa, you know everything because
you are without material contamination. Therefore whatever you have spoken
to me appears perfectly right. Your speeches are gradually destroying the
darkness of my ignorance, for you are narrating the topics of the Lord.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The practical experience of Mahäräja Parékñit is disclosed herein, revealing
that transcendental topics of the Lord act like injections when received by the
sincere devotee from a person who is perfectly uncontaminated by material
tinges. In other words, reception of the messages of Çrémad-Bhägavatam from
professional men, heard by a karma-käëòéya audience, never acts miraculously
as stated here. Devotional hearing of the messages of the Lord is not like
hearing ordinary topics; therefore the action will be felt by the sincere hearer
by experience of the gradual disappearance of ignorance.
yasya deve parä bhaktir
yathä deve tathä gurau
tasyaite kathitä hy arthäù
prakäçante mahätmanaù
[ÇU 6.23(6)]
When a hungry man is given food to eat, he feels satiation of hunger and
the pleasure of dining simultaneously. Thus he does not have to ask whether
he has actually been fed or not. The crucial test of hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam
is that one should get positive enlightenment by such an act.
TEXT 6
>aUYa Wv ivivTSaaiMa >aGavaNaaTMaMaaYaYaa )
YaQaed& Sa*JaTae ivì& duivR>aaVYaMaDaqìrE" )) 6 ))
bhüya eva vivitsämi
bhagavän ätma-mäyayä
yathedaà såjate viçvaà
durvibhävyam adhéçvaraiù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhüyaù—again; eva—also; vivitsämi—I wish to learn; bhagavän—the
Personality of Godhead; ätma—personal; mäyayä—by the energies; yathä—as;
idam—this phenomenal world; såjate—does create; viçvam—universe;
durvibhävyam—inconceivable; adhéçvaraiù—by the great demigods.
TRANSLATION
I beg to know from you how the Personality of Godhead, by His personal
energies, creates these phenomenal universes as they are, which are
inconceivable even to the great demigods.
PURPORT
In every inquisitive mind the important question of the creation of the
phenomenal world arises, and therefore for a personality like Mahäräja
Parékñit, who was to know all the activities of the Lord from his spiritual
master, such an inquiry is not uncommon. For every unknown thing, we have
to learn and inquire from a learned personality. The question of creation is
also one of such inquiries to be made to the right person. The spiritual master,
therefore, must be one who is sama jïa, as stated hereinbefore in connection
with Çukadeva Gosvämé. Thus all inquiries on God which are unknown to the
disciple may be made from the qualified spiritual master, and here the practical
example is set by Mahäräja Parékñit. It was, however, already known to
Mahäräja Parékñit that everything we see is born out of the energy of the Lord,
as we have all learned in the very beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (janmädy
asya yataù [SB 1.1.1]). So Mahäräja Parékñit wanted to know the process of
creation. The origin of creation was known to him; otherwise he would not
have inquired how the Personality of Godhead, by His different energies,
creates this phenomenal world. The common man also knows that the creation
is made by some creator and is not created automatically. We have no
experience in the practical world that a thing is created automatically. Foolish
people say that the creative energy is independent and acts automatically, as
electrical energy works. But the intelligent man knows that even the electrical
energy is generated by an expert engineer in the localized powerhouse, and
thus the energy is distributed everywhere under the resident engineer’s
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
supervision. The Lord’s supervision in connection with creation is mentioned
even in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.10), and it is clearly said there that material
energy is a manifestation of one of many such energies of the Supreme
(paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate). An inexperienced boy may be struck with
wonder by seeing the impersonal actions of electronics or many other
wonderful things conducted by electrical energy, but an experienced man
knows that behind the action is a living man who creates such energy.
Similarly the so-called scholars and philosophers of the world may, by mental
speculation, present so many utopian theories about the impersonal creation of
the universe, but an intelligent devotee of the Lord, by studying the
Bhagavad-gétä, can know that behind the creation is the hand of the Supreme
Lord, just as in the generating electrical powerhouse there is the resident
engineer. The research scholar finds out the cause and the effect of
everything, but research scholars as great as Brahmä, Çiva, Indra and many
other demigods are sometimes bewildered by seeing the wonderful creative
energy of the Lord, so what to speak of the tiny mundane scholars dealing in
petty things. As there are differences in the living conditions of different
planets of the universe, and as one planet is superior to others, the brains of
the living entities in those respective planets are also of different categorical
values. As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, one can compare the long duration of
life of the inhabitants of Brahmä’s planet, which is inconceivable to the
inhabitants of this planet earth, to the categorical value of the brain of
Brahmäjé, also inconceivable to any great scientist of this planet. And with
such high brain power, even Brahmäjé has described in his great saàhitä
(Brahma-saàhitä 5.1) as follows:
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
“There are many personalities possessing the qualities of Bhagavän, but
Kåñëa is the supreme because none can excel Him. He is the Supreme Person,
and His body is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. He is the primeval Lord
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Govinda and the cause of all causes.”
Brahmäjé admits Lord Kåñëa to be the supreme cause of all causes. But
persons with tiny brains within this petty planet earth think of the Lord as one
of them. Thus when the Lord says in the Bhagavad-gétä that He (Lord Kåñëa) is
all in all, the speculative philosophers and the mundane wranglers deride Him,
and the Lord regretfully says:
avajänanti mäà müòhä
mänuñéà tanum äçritam
paraà bhävam ajänanto
mama bhüta-maheçvaram
“Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My
transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be.” (Bg. 9.11)
Brahmä and Çiva (and what to speak of other demigods) are bhütas, or
powerful created demigods who manage universal affairs, much like ministers
appointed by a king. The ministers may be éçvaras, or controllers, but the
Supreme Lord is maheçvara, or the creator of the controllers. Persons with a
poor fund of knowledge do not know this, and therefore they have the
audacity to deride Him because He comes before us by His causeless mercy
occasionally as a human being. The Lord is not like a human being. He is
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], or the Absolute Personality of Godhead, and
there is no difference between His body and His soul. He is both the power
and the powerful.
Mahäräja Parékñit did not ask his spiritual master, Çukadeva Gosvämé, to
narrate Lord Kåñëa’s pastimes in Våndävana; he wanted to hear first about the
creation of the Lord. Çukadeva Gosvämé did not say that the King should hear
about the direct transcendental pastimes of the Lord. The time was very short,
and naturally Çukadeva Gosvämé could have gone directly to the Tenth Canto
to make a shortcut of the whole thing, as generally done by the professional
reciters. But neither the King nor the great speaker of Çrémad-Bhägavatam
jumped up like the organizers of Bhägavatam; both of them proceeded
systematically, so that both future readers and hearers might take lessons from
the example of the procedure of reciting Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Those who are in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
control of the external energy of the Lord, or in other words those who are in
the material world, must first of all know how the external energy of the Lord
is working under the direction of the Supreme Personality, and afterwards one
may try to enter into the activities of His internal energy. The mundaners are
mostly worshipers of Durgä-devé, the external energy of Kåñëa, but they do not
know that Durgä-devé is but the shadow energy of the Lord. Behind her
astonishing display of material workings is the direction of the Lord, as
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.10). The Brahma-saàhitä affirms that
Durgä-çakti is working by the direction of Govinda, and without His sanction
the powerful Durgä-çakti cannot move even a blade of grass. Therefore the
neophyte devotee, instead of jumping at once to the platform of
transcendental pastimes presented by the internal energy of the Lord, may
know how great the Supreme Lord is by inquiring about the process of His
creative energy. In the Caitanya-caritämåta also, descriptions of the creative
energy and the Lord’s hand in it are explained, and the author of
Caitanya-caritämåta has warned the neophyte devotees to be seriously on
guard against the pitfall of neglecting knowledge about Kåñëa in regard to how
great He is. Only when one knows Lord Kåñëa’s greatness can one firmly put
one’s unflinching faith in Him; otherwise, like the common man, even the
great leaders of men will mistake Lord Kåñëa for one of the many demigods, or
a historical personality, or a myth only. The transcendental pastimes of the
Lord in Våndävana, or even at Dvärakä, are relishable for persons who have
already qualified themselves in advanced spiritual techniques, and the
common man may be able to attain to such a plane by the gradual process of
service and inquiries, as we shall see in the behavior of Mahäräja Parékñit.
TEXT 7
YaQaa GaaePaaYaiTa iv>auYaRQaa Sa&YaC^Tae PauNa" )
Yaa& Yaa& Xai¢-MauPaaié[TYa PauåXai¢-" Par" PauMaaNa( )
AaTMaaNa& §-I@YaNa( §-I@Na( k-raeiTa ivk-raeiTa c )) 7 ))
yathä gopäyati vibhur
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yathä saàyacchate punaù
yäà yäà çaktim upäçritya
puru-çaktiù paraù pumän
ätmänaà kréòayan kréòan
karoti vikaroti ca
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; gopäyati—maintains; vibhuù—the great; yathä—as;
saàyacchate—winds up; punaù—again; yäm yäm—as; çaktim—energies;
upäçritya—by employing; puru-çaktiù—the all-powerful; paraù—the Supreme;
pumän—Personality of Godhead; ätmänam—plenary expansion;
kréòayan—having engaged them; kréòan—as also personally being engaged;
karoti—does them; vikaroti—and causes to be done; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Kindly describe how the Supreme Lord, who is all-powerful, engages His
different energies and different expansions in maintaining and again winding up
the phenomenal world in the sporting spirit of a player.
PURPORT
In the Kaöha Upaniñad (2.2.13) the Supreme Lord is described as the chief
eternal being amongst all other eternal individual beings (nityo nityänäà
cetanaç cetanänäm) and the one Supreme Lord who maintains innumerable
other individual living beings (eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän). So all living
entities, both in the conditioned state and in the liberated state, are
maintained by the Almighty Supreme Lord. Such maintenance is effected by
the Lord through His different expansions of Self and three principal energies,
namely the internal, external and marginal energies. The living entities are
His marginal energies, and some of them, in the confidence of the Lord, are
entrusted with the work of creation also, as are Brahmä, Maréci, etc., and the
acts of creation are inspired by the Lord unto them (tene brahma hådä). The
external energy (mäyä) is also impregnated with the jévas, or conditioned souls.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The unconditioned marginal potency acts in the spiritual kingdom, and the
Lord, by His different plenary expansions, maintains them in different
transcendental relations displayed in the spiritual sky. So the one Supreme
Personality of Godhead manifests Himself in many (bahu syäm), and thus all
diversities are in Him, and He is in all diversities, although He is nevertheless
different from all of them. That is the inconceivable mystic power of the Lord,
and as such everything is simultaneously one with and different from Him by
His inconceivable potencies (acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(7)).
TEXT 8
NaUNa& >aGavTaae b]øNa( hrerd(>auTak-MaR<a" )
duivR>aaVYaiMava>aaiTa k-ivi>aêaiPa ceiíTaMa( )) 8 ))
nünaà bhagavato brahman
harer adbhuta-karmaëaù
durvibhävyam iväbhäti
kavibhiç cäpi ceñöitam
SYNONYMS
nünam—still insufficient; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead;
brahman—O learned brähmaëa; hareù—of the Lord; adbhuta—wonderful;
karmaëaù—one who acts; durvibhävyam—inconceivable; iva—like that;
äbhäti—appears; kavibhiù—even by the highly learned; ca—also; api—in spite
of; ceñöitam—being endeavored for.
TRANSLATION
O learned brähmaëa, the transcendental activities of the Lord are all
wonderful, and they appear inconceivable because even great endeavors by
many learned scholars have still proved insufficient for understanding them.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The acts of the Supreme Lord, in the creation of just this one universe,
appear inconceivably wonderful. And there are innumerable universes, and all
of them aggregated together are known as the created material world. And this
part of His creation is only a fractional portion of the complete creation. The
material world stands as a part only (ekäàçena sthito jagat). Supposing that the
material world is a display of one part of His energy, the remaining three parts
consist of the vaikuëöha jagat or spiritual world described in the Bhagavad-gétä
as mad-dhäma or sanätana-dhäma, or the eternal world. We have marked in
the previous verse that He creates and again winds up the creation. This
action is applicable only in the material world because the other, greater part
of His creation, namely the Vaikuëöha world, is neither created nor
annihilated; otherwise the Vaikuëöha-dhäma would not have been called
eternal. The Lord exists with dhäma; His eternal name, quality, pastimes,
entourage and personality are all a display of His different energies and
expansions. The Lord is called anädi, or having no creator, and ädi, or the
origin of all. We think in our own imperfect way that the Lord is also created,
but the Vedänta informs us that He is not created. Rather, everything else is
created by Him (näräyaëaù paro ’vyaktät). Therefore, for the common man
these are all very wonderful matters for consideration. Even for great scholars
they are inconceivable, and thus such scholars present theories contradictory
to one another. Even for the insignificant part of His creation, this particular
universe, they have no complete information as to how far this limited space
extends, or how many stars and planets are there, or the different conditions
of those innumerable planets. Modern scientists have insufficient knowledge
of all this. Some of them assert that there are one hundred million planets
scattered all over space. In a news release from Moscow dated 2/21/60, the
following piece of knowledge was relayed:
“Russia’s well-known professor of astronomy Boris Vorontsov-Veliaminov
said that there must be an infinite number of planets in the universe inhabited
by beings endowed with reason.
“It could be that life similar to that on earth flourishes on such planets.
“Doctor of Chemistry Nikolai Zhirov, covering the problem of atmosphere
on other planets, pointed out that the organism of a Martian, for instance,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
could very well adapt itself to normal existence with a low body temperature.
“He said that he felt that the gaseous composition of Martian atmosphere
was quite suitable to sustain life of beings which have become adapted to it.”
This adaptability of an organism to different varieties of planets is
described in the Brahma-saàhitä as vibhüti-bhinnam; i.e., each and every one
of the innumerable planets within the universe is endowed with a particular
type of atmosphere, and the living beings there are more perfectly advanced in
science and psychology because of a better atmosphere. Vibhüti means “specific
powers,” and bhinnam means “variegated.” Scientists who are attempting to
explore outer space and are trying to reach other planets by mechanical
arrangements must know for certain that organisms adapted to the atmosphere
of earth cannot exist in the atmospheres of other planets (Easy Journey to
Other planets). One has to prepare himself, therefore, to be transferred to a
different planet after being relieved of the present body, as it is said in the
Bhagavad-gétä (9.25):
yänti deva-vratä devän
pitèn yänti pitå-vratäù
bhütäni yänti bhütejyä
yänti mad-yäjino ’pi mäm
“Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods,
those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings, and
those who worship Me will live with Me.”
Mahäräja Parékñit’s statement regarding the workings of the creative energy
of the Lord discloses that he knew everything of the process of creation. Why
then did he ask Çukadeva Gosvämé for such information? Mahäräja Parékñit,
being a great emperor, a descendant of the Päëòavas and a great devotee of
Lord Kåñëa, was quite able to know considerably about the creation of the
world, but that much knowledge was not sufficient. He said therefore that
even greatly learned scholars fail to know about that, even after great effort.
The Lord is unlimited, and His activities are also unfathomed. With a limited
source of knowledge and with imperfect senses, any living being, up to the
standard of Brahmäjé, the highest perfect living being within the universe, can
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
never imagine knowing about the unlimited. We can know something of the
unlimited when it is explained by the unlimited, as has been done by the Lord
Himself in the unique statements of the Bhagavad-gétä, and it can also be
known to some extent from realized souls like Çukadeva Gosvämé, who learned
it from Vyäsadeva, a disciple of Närada, and thus the perfect knowledge can
descend by the chain of disciplic succession only, and not by any form of
experimental knowledge, old or modern.
TEXT 9
YaQaa Gau<aa&STau Pa[k*-TaeYauRGaPaTa( §-MaXaae_iPa va )
ib>aiTaR >aUirXaSTvek-" ku-vRNa( k-MaaRi<a JaNMai>a" )) 9 ))
yathä guëäàs tu prakåter
yugapat kramaço ’pi vä
bibharti bhüriças tv ekaù
kurvan karmäëi janmabhiù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as they are; guëän—the modes of; tu—but; prakåteù—of the material
energy; yugapat—simultaneously; kramaçaù—gradually; api—also; vä—either;
bibharti—maintains; bhüriçaù—many forms; tu—but; ekaù—the supreme one;
kurvan—acting; karmäëi—activities; janmabhiù—by incarnations.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is one, whether He alone acts with the
modes of material nature, or simultaneously expands in many forms, or expands
consecutively to direct the modes of nature.
TEXT 10
ivicik-iTSaTaMaeTaNMae b]vqTau >aGavaNa( YaQaa )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
XaaBde b]øi<a iNaZ<aaTa" PariSMa&ê >avaN%lu/ )) 10 ))
vicikitsitam etan me
bravétu bhagavän yathä
çäbde brahmaëi niñëätaù
parasmiàç ca bhavän khalu
SYNONYMS
vicikitsitam—doubtful inquiry; etat—this; me—of me; bravétu—just clear up;
bhagavän—powerful like the Lord; yathä—as much as; çäbde—sound
transcendental; brahmaëi—Vedic literature; niñëätaù—fully realized;
parasmin—in transcendence; ca—also; bhavän—your good self; khalu—as a
matter of fact.
TRANSLATION
Kindly clear up all these doubtful inquiries, because you are not only vastly
learned in the Vedic literatures and self-realized in transcendence, but are also a
great devotee of the Lord and are therefore as good as the Personality of
Godhead.
PURPORT
In the Brahma-saàhitä it is said that the Supreme Absolute Truth,
Govinda, the Personality of Godhead, although one without a second, is
infallibly expanded by innumerable forms nondifferent from one another, and
although He is the original person, He is still ever young with permanent
youthful energy. He is very difficult to know simply by learning the
transcendental science of the Vedas, but He is very easily realized by His pure
devotees.
The expansions of different forms of the Lord, as from Kåñëa to Baladeva to
Saìkarñaëa, from Saìkarñaëa to Väsudeva, from Väsudeva to Aniruddha, from
Aniruddha to Pradyumna and then again to second Saìkarñaëa and from Him
to the Näräyaëa puruñävatäras, and innumerable other forms, which are
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
compared to the constant flowing of the uncountable waves of a river, are all
one and the same. They are like lamps of equal power which kindle from one
lamp to another. That is the transcendental potency of the Lord. The Vedas
say that He is so complete that even though the whole complete identity
emanates from Him, He still remains the same complete whole (pürëasya
pürëam ädäya pürëam evävaçiñyate). As such, there is no validity in a material
conception of the Lord produced by the mental speculator. Thus He remains
always a mystery for the mundane scholar, even if he is vastly learned in the
Vedic literatures (vedeñu durlabham adurlabham ätma-bhaktau [Bs. 5.33]).
Therefore, the Lord is beyond the limit of conception for mundane learned
scholars, philosophers or scientists. He is easily understandable for the pure
devotee because the Lord declares in the Bhagavad-gétä (18.54) that after
surpassing the stage of knowledge, when one is able to be engaged in the
devotional service of the Lord, then only can one know the true nature of the
Lord. One cannot have any clear conception of the Lord or His holy name,
form, attributes, pastimes, etc., unless one is engaged in His transcendental
loving service. The statement of the Bhagavad-gétä that one must first of all
surrender unto the Lord, being freed from all other engagements, means that
one must become a pure, unconditional devotee of the Lord. Only then can
one know Him by the strength of devotional service.
Mahäräja Parékñit admitted in the previous verse that the Lord is
inconceivable even for the greatest learned scholars. Why then should he
again request Çukadeva Gosvämé to clarify his insufficient knowledge about
the Lord? The reason is clear. Not only was Çukadeva Gosvämé vastly learned
in the Vedic literatures, but he was also a great self-realized soul and a
powerful devotee of the Lord. A powerful devotee of the Lord is, by the grace
of the Lord, more than the Lord Himself. The Personality of Godhead Çré
Rämacandra attempted to bridge the Indian Ocean to reach the island of
Laìkä, but Çré Hanumänjé, the unalloyed devotee of the Personality of
Godhead, could cross the ocean simply by jumping over it. The Lord is so
merciful upon His pure devotee that He presents His beloved devotee as more
powerful than Himself. The Lord expressed Himself to be unable to save
Durväsä Muni, although the Muni was so powerful that he could reach the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord directly under material conditions. But Durväsä Muni was saved by
Mahäräja Ambaréña, a devotee of the Lord. Therefore, not only is a devotee of
the Lord more powerful than the Lord, but also worship of the devotee is
considered more effective than direct worship of the Lord
(mad-bhakta-püjäbhyadhikä [SB 11.19.21]).
The conclusion is, therefore, that a serious devotee must first approach a
spiritual master who not only is well versed in the Vedic literatures but is also
a great devotee with factual realization of the Lord and His different energies.
Without the help of such a devotee spiritual master, one cannot make progress
in the transcendental science of the Lord. And a bona fide spiritual master like
Çukadeva Gosvämé does not speak about the Lord only in the matter of His
internal potencies, but also explains how He associates with His external
potencies.
The Lord’s pastimes in the internal potency are displayed in His activities
in Våndävana, but His external potential works are directed in His features of
Käraëärëavaçäyé Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté offers his good counsel to the interested Vaiñëavas
when he says that they should not be interested in hearing only about the
Lord’s activities (like räsa-lélä), but must be keenly interested in His pastimes
in His features of the puruñävatäras in connection with såñöi-tattva, creational
functions, following the examples of Mahäräja Parékñit, the ideal disciple, and
Çukadeva Gosvämé, the ideal spiritual master.
TEXT 11
SaUTa ovac
wTYauPaaMaiN}aTaae raja Gau<aaNauk-QaNae hre" )
ôzqke-XaMaNauSMa*TYa Pa[iTav¢u-& Pa[c§-Mae )) 11 ))
süta uväca
ity upämantrito räjïä
guëänukathane hareù
håñékeçam anusmåtya
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
prativaktuà pracakrame
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; iti—thus; upämantritaù—being requested;
räjïä—by the King; guëa-anukathane—in describing the transcendental
attributes of the Lord; hareù—of the personality of Godhead; håñékeçam—the
master of the senses; anusmåtya—properly remembering; prativaktum—just to
reply; pracakrame—executed the preliminaries.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: When Çukadeva Gosvämé was thus requested by the
King to describe the creative energy of the Personality of Godhead, he then
systematically remembered the master of the senses [Çré Kåñëa], and to reply
properly he spoke thus.
PURPORT
The devotees of the Lord, while delivering speeches and describing the
transcendental attributes of the Lord, do not think that they can do anything
independently. They think that they can speak only what they are induced to
speak by the Supreme Lord, the master of the senses. The senses of the
individual being are not his own; the devotee knows that such senses belong to
the Supreme Lord and that they can be properly used when they are employed
for the service of the Lord. The senses are instruments, and elements are
ingredients, all endowed by the Lord; therefore whatever an individual can do,
speak, see, etc., is under the direction of the Lord only. The Bhagavad-gétä
(15.15) confirms this: sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam
apohanaà ca. No one is free to act freely and independently, and as such, one
should always seek the permission of the Lord to act or eat or speak, and by the
blessing of the Lord everything done by a devotee is beyond the principles of
the four defects typical of the conditioned soul.
TEXT 12
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
é[qéuk- ovac
NaMa" ParSMaE PauåzaYa >aUYaSae
SaduÙvSQaaNaiNaraeDal/Il/Yaa )
Ga*hqTaXai¢-i}aTaYaaYa deihNaa‚
MaNTa>aRvaYaaNauPal/+YavTMaRNae )) 12 ))
çré-çuka uväca
namaù parasmai puruñäya bhüyase
sad-udbhava-sthäna-nirodha-lélayä
gåhéta-çakti-tritayäya dehinäm
antarbhaväyänupalakñya-vartmane
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; namaù—offering obeisances;
parasmai—the Supreme; puruñäya—personality of Godhead; bhüyase—unto
the complete whole; sad-udbhava—the creation of the material world;
sthäna—its maintenance; nirodha—and its winding up; lélayä—by the pastime
of; gåhéta—having accepted; çakti—power; tritayäya—three modes;
dehinäm—of all who possess material bodies; antaù-bhaväya—unto He who
resides within; anupalakñya—inconceivable; vartmane—one who has such
ways.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who, for the creation of the material world,
accepts the three modes of nature. He is the complete whole residing within the
body of everyone, and His ways are inconceivable.
PURPORT
This material world is a manifestation of the three modes goodness, passion
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and ignorance, and the Supreme Lord, for the creation, maintenance and
destruction of the material world, accepts three predominating forms as
Brahmä, Viñëu and Çaìkara (Çiva). As Viñëu He enters into every body
materially created. As Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu He enters into every universe,
and as Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu He enters the body of every living being. Lord Çré
Kåñëa, being the origin of all viñëu-tattvas, is addressed here as paraù pumän, or
Puruñottama, as described in the Bhagavad-gétä (15.18). He is the complete
whole. The puruñävatäras are therefore His plenary expansions. Bhakti-yoga is
the only process by which one can become competent to know Him. Because
the empiric philosophers and mystic yogés cannot conceive of the Personality
of Godhead, He is called anupalakñya-vartmane, the Lord of the inconceivable
way, or bhakti-yoga.
TEXT 13
>aUYaae NaMa" Sad(v*iJaNaiC^de_SaTaa‚
MaSaM>avaYaai%l/SatvMaUTaRYae )
Pau&Saa& PauNa" PaarMah&SYa Aaé[Mae
VYaviSQaTaaNaaMaNauMa*GYadaéuze )) 13 ))
bhüyo namaù sad-våjina-cchide ’satäm
asambhaväyäkhila-sattva-mürtaye
puàsäà punaù päramahaàsya äçrame
vyavasthitänäm anumågya-däçuñe
SYNONYMS
bhüyaù—again; namaù—my obeisances; sat—of the devotees or the pious;
våjina—distresses; chide—the liberator; asatäm—of the atheists, the
nondevotee-demons; asambhaväya—cessation of further unhappiness;
akhila—complete; sattva—goodness; mürtaye—unto the Personality;
puàsäm—of the transcendentalists; punaù—again; päramahaàsye—the
highest stage of spiritual perfection; äçrame—in the status;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vyavasthitänäm—particularly situated; anumågya—the destination;
däçuñe—one who delivers.
TRANSLATION
I again offer my respectful obeisances unto the form of complete existence
and transcendence, who is the liberator of the pious devotees from all distresses
and the destroyer of the further advances in atheistic temperament of the
nondevotee-demons. For the transcendentalists who are situated in the topmost
spiritual perfection, He grants their specific destinations.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa is the complete form of all existence, both material and
spiritual. Akhila means complete, or that which is not khila, inferior. As stated
in the Bhagavad-gétä, there are two kinds of nature (prakåti), namely the
material nature and the spiritual nature, or the external and internal potencies
of the Lord. The material nature is called aparä, or inferior, and the spiritual
nature is called superior or transcendental. Therefore the form of the Lord is
not of the inferior, material nature. He is complete transcendence. And He is
mürti, or having transcendental form. The less intelligent men, who are
unaware of His transcendental form, describe Him as impersonal Brahman.
But Brahman is simply the rays of His transcendental body (yasya prabhä [Bs.
5.40]). The devotees, who are aware of His transcendental form, render Him
service; therefore the Lord also reciprocates by His causeless mercy and thus
delivers His devotees from all distresses. The pious men who follow the rulings
of the Vedas are also dear to Him, and therefore the pious men of this world
are also protected by Him. The impious and the nondevotees are against the
principles of the Vedas, and so such persons are always hampered from making
advances in their nefarious activities. Some of them, who are specially favored
by the Lord, are killed by Him personally, as in the cases of Rävaëa,
Hiraëyakaçipu and Kaàsa, and thus such demons get salvation and are thereby
checked from further progress in their demoniac activities. Just like a kind
father, either in His favor upon the devotees or His punishment of the demons
He is ever kind to everyone because He is the complete existence for all
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
individual existence.
The paramahaàsa stage of existence is the highest perfectional stage of
spiritual values. According to Çrématé Kuntédevé, the Lord is factually
understood by the paramahaàsas only. As there is gradual realization of the
transcendence from impersonal Brahman to localized Paramätmä to the
Personality of Godhead, Puruñottama, Lord Kåñëa, similarly there is gradual
promotion of one’s situation in the spiritual life of sannyäsa. Kuöécaka,
bahüdaka, parivräjakäcärya and paramahaàsa are gradual progressive stages in
the renounced order of life, sannyäsa, and Queen Kuntédevé, the mother of the
Päëòavas, has spoken about them in her prayers for Lord Kåñëa (Canto One,
Chapter Eight). The paramahaàsas are generally found among both the
impersonalists and the devotees, but according to Çrémad-Bhägavatam (as
clearly stated by Kuntédevé), pure bhakti-yoga is understood by the
paramahaàsas, and Kuntédevé has especially mentioned that the Lord descends
(pariträëäya sädhünäm) especially to award bhakti-yoga to the paramahaàsas.
So ultimately the paramahaàsas, in the true sense of the term, are unalloyed
devotees of the Lord. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has directly accepted that the highest
destination is bhakti-yoga, by which one accepts the transcendental loving
service of the Lord. Those who accept the path of bhakti-yoga are the factual
paramahaàsas.
Since the Lord is very kind to everyone, the impersonalists, who accept
bhakti as the means of merging in the existence of the Lord in His impersonal
brahmajyoti, are also awarded their desired destination. He has assured
everyone in the Bhagavad-gétä (4.11): ye yathä mäà prapadyante. According to
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté, there are two classes of paramahaàsas, namely
the brahmänandés (impersonalists) and the premänandés (devotees), and both
are awarded their desired destinations, although the premänandés are more
fortunate than the brahmänandés. But both the brahmänandés and the
premänandés are transcendentalists, and they have nothing to do with the
inferior, material nature full of the existential miseries of life.
TEXT 14
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
NaMaae NaMaSTae_STv*z>aaYa SaaTvTaa&
ivdUrk-aïaYa Mauhu" ku-YaaeiGaNaaMa( )
iNarSTaSaaMYaaiTaXaYaeNa raDaSaa
SvDaaMaiNa b]øi<a r&SYaTae NaMa" )) 14 ))
namo namas te ’stv åñabhäya sätvatäà
vidüra-käñöhäya muhuù kuyoginäm
nirasta-sämyätiçayena rädhasä
sva-dhämani brahmaëi raàsyate namaù
SYNONYMS
namaù namaù te—let me offer my obeisances unto You; astu—are;
åñabhäya—unto the great associate; sätvatäm—of the members of the Yadu
dynasty; vidüra-käñöhäya—one who is far from mundane wranglers;
muhuù—always; ku-yoginäm—of the nondevotees; nirasta—vanquished;
sämya—equal status; atiçayena—by greatness; rädhasä—by opulence;
sva-dhämani—in His own abode; brahmaëi—in the spiritual sky;
raàsyate—enjoys; namaù—I do bow down.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto He who is the associate of the
members of the Yadu dynasty and who is always a problem for the nondevotees.
He is the supreme enjoyer of both the material and spiritual worlds, yet He
enjoys His own abode in the spiritual sky. There is no one equal to Him
because His transcendental opulence is immeasurable.
PURPORT
There are two sides of the transcendental manifestations of the Supreme
Lord, Çré Kåñëa. For the pure devotees He is the constant companion, as in the
case of His becoming one of the family members of the Yadu dynasty, or His
becoming the friend of Arjuna, or His becoming the associate neighbor of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
inhabitants of Våndävana, as the son of Nanda-Yaçodä, the friend of Sudämä,
Çrédämä and Madhumaìgala, or the lover of the damsels of Vrajabhümi, etc.
That is part of His personal features. And by His impersonal feature He
expands the rays of the brahmajyoti, which is limitless and all-pervasive. Part of
this all-pervasive brahmajyoti, which is compared to the sun rays, is covered by
the darkness of the mahat-tattva, and this insignificant part is known as the
material world. In this material world there are innumerable universes like the
one we can experience, and in each of them there are hundreds of thousands
of planets like the one we are inhabiting. The mundaners are more or less
captivated by the unlimited expansion of the rays of the Lord, but the devotees
are concerned more with His personal form, from which everything is
emanating (janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1]). As the sun rays are concentrated in
the sun disc, the brahmajyoti is concentrated in Goloka Våndävana, the
topmost spiritual planet in the spiritual sky. The immeasurable spiritual sky is
full of spiritual planets, named Vaikuëöhas, far beyond the material sky. The
mundaners have insufficient information of even the mundane sky, so what
can they think of the spiritual sky? Therefore the mundaners are always far,
far away from Him. Even if in the future they are able to manufacture some
machine whose speed may be accelerated to the velocity of the wind or mind,
the mundaners will still be unable to imagine reaching the planets in the
spiritual sky. So the Lord and His residential abode will always remain a myth
or a mysterious problem, but for the devotees the Lord will always be available
as an associate.
In the spiritual sky His opulence is immeasurable. The Lord resides in all
the spiritual planets, the innumerable Vaikuëöha planets, by expanding His
plenary portions along with His liberated devotee associates, but the
impersonalists who want to merge in the existence of the Lord are allowed to
merge as one of the spiritual sparks of the brahmajyoti. They have no
qualifications for becoming associates of the Lord either in the Vaikuëöha
planets or in the supreme planet, Goloka Våndävana, described in the
Bhagavad-gétä as mad-dhäma and here in this verse as the sva-dhäma of the
Lord.
This mad-dhäma or sva-dhäma is described in the Bhagavad-gétä (15.6) as
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
follows:
na tad bhäsayate süryo
na çaçäìko na pävakaù
yad gatvä na nivartante
tad dhäma paramaà mama
The Lord’s sva-dhäma does not require any sunlight or moonlight or
electricity for illumination. That dhäma, or place, is supreme, and whoever
goes there never comes back to this material world.
The Vaikuëöha planets and the Goloka Våndävana planet are all
self-illuminating, and the rays scattered by those sva-dhäma of the Lord
constitute the existence of the brahmajyoti. As further confirmed in the Vedas
like the Muëòaka (2.2.10), Kaöha (2.2.15) and Çvetäçvatara Upaniñads (6.14):
na tatra süryo bhäti na candra-tärakaà
nemä vidyuto bhänti kuto ’yam agniù
tam eva bhäntam anu bhäti sarvaà
tasya bhäsä sarvam idaà vibhäti
In the sva-dhäma of the Lord there is no need of sun, moon or stars for
illumination. Nor is there need of electricity, so what to speak of ignited
lamps? On the other hand, it is because those planets are self-illuminating that
all effulgence has become possible, and whatever there is that is dazzling is due
to the reflection of that sva-dhäma.
One who is dazzled by the effulgence of the impersonal brahmajyoti cannot
know the personal transcendence; therefore in the Éçopaniñad (15) it is prayed
that the Lord shift His dazzling effulgence so that the devotee can see the real
reality. It is spoken thus:
hiraëmayena pätreëa
satyasyäpihitaà mukham
tat tvaà püñann apävåëu
satya-dharmäya dåñöaye
“O Lord, You are the maintainer of everything, both material and spiritual,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and everything flourishes by Your mercy. Your devotional service, or
bhakti-yoga, is the actual principle of religion, satya-dharma, and I am engaged
in that service. So kindly protect me by showing Your real face. Please,
therefore, remove the veil of Your brahmajyoti rays so that I can see Your form
of eternal bliss and knowledge.”
TEXT 15
YaTk-ITaRNa& YaTSMar<a& Yadq+a<a&
YaÜNdNa& YaC^\v<a& YadhR<aMa( )
l/aek-SYa SaÛae ivDauNaaeiTa k-LMaz&
TaSMaE Sau>ad]é[vSae NaMaae NaMa" )) 15 ))
yat-kértanaà yat-smaraëaà yad-ékñaëaà
yad-vandanaà yac-chravaëaà yad-arhaëam
lokasya sadyo vidhunoti kalmañaà
tasmai subhadra-çravase namo namaù
SYNONYMS
yat—whose; kértanam—glorification; yat—whose; smaraëam—remembrances;
yat—whose; ékñaëam—audience; yat—whose; vandanam—prayers;
yat—whose; çravaëam—hearing about; yat—whose; arhaëam—worshiping;
lokasya—of all people; sadyaù—forthwith; vidhunoti—specifically cleanses;
kalmañam—effects of sins; tasmai—unto Him; subhadra—all-auspicious;
çravase—one who is heard; namaù—my due obeisances; namaù—again and
again.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the all-auspicious Lord Çré
Kåñëa, about whom glorification, remembrances, audience, prayers, hearing and
worship can at once cleanse the effects of all sins of the performer.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The sublime form of religious performances to free oneself from all
reactions of sins is suggested herein by the greatest authority, Çré Çukadeva
Gosvämé. Kértanam, or glorifying the Lord, can be performed in very many
ways, such as remembering, visiting temples to see the Deity, offering prayers
in front of the Lord, and hearing recitations of glorification of the Lord as they
are mentioned in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam or in the Bhagavad-gétä. Kértanam
can be performed both by singing the glories of the Lord in accompaniment
with melodious music and by recitation of scriptures like Çrémad-Bhägavatam
or Bhagavad-gétä.
The devotees need not be disappointed in the physical absence of the Lord,
though they may think of not being associated with Him. The devotional
process of chanting, hearing, remembering, etc., (either all or some of them, or
even one of them) can give us the desired result of associating with the Lord
by discharging the transcendental loving service of the Lord in the above
manner. Even the very sound of the holy name of Lord Kåñëa or Räma can at
once surcharge the atmosphere spiritually. We must know definitely that the
Lord is present wherever such pure transcendental service is performed, and
thus the performer of offenseless kértanam has positive association with the
Lord. Similarly, remembrance and prayers also can give us the desired result if
they are properly done under expert guidance. One should not concoct forms
of devotional service. One may worship the form of the Lord in a temple, or
one may impersonally offer the Lord devotional prayers in a mosque or a
church. One is sure to get free from the reactions of sins provided one is very
careful about not committing sins willingly in expectation of getting free from
the reactions of sins by worshiping in the temple or by offering prayers in the
church. This mentality of committing sins willfully on the strength of
devotional service is called nämno baläd yasya hi päpa-buddhiù, and it is the
greatest offense in the discharge of devotional service. Hearing, therefore, is
essential in order to keep oneself strictly on guard against such pitfalls of sins.
And in order to give special stress to the hearing process, the Gosvämé invokes
all auspicious fortune in this matter.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 16
ivc+a<aa YaÀr<aaePaSaadNaaTa(
Sa®& VYaudSYaae>aYaTaae_NTaraTMaNa" )
ivNdiNTa ih b]øGaiTa& GaTa©-Maa‚
STaSMaE Sau>ad]é[vSae NaMaae NaMa" )) 16 ))
vicakñaëä yac-caraëopasädanät
saìgaà vyudasyobhayato ’ntar-ätmanaù
vindanti hi brahma-gatià gata-klamäs
tasmai subhadra-çravase namo namaù
SYNONYMS
vicakñaëäù—highly intellectual; yat—whose; caraëa-upasädanät—simply
dedicating oneself unto the lotus feet; saìgam—attachment; vyudasya—giving
up completely; ubhayataù—for present and future existence;
antaù-ätmanaù—of the heart and soul; vindanti—moves progressively;
hi—certainly; brahma-gatim—toward spiritual existence;
gata-klamäù—without difficulty; tasmai—unto Him; subhadra—all-auspicious;
çravase—unto one who is heard; namaù—my due obeisances; namaù—again
and again.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances again and again unto the all-auspicious
Lord Çré Kåñëa. The highly intellectual, simply by surrendering unto His lotus
feet, are relieved of all attachments to present and future existences and
without difficulty progress toward spiritual existence.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa has repeatedly instructed Arjuna, or for that matter
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
everyone concerned with becoming His unalloyed devotee. In the last phase of
His instruction in the Bhagavad-gétä (18.64–66) He instructed most
confidentially as follows:
sarva-guhyatamaà bhüyaù
çåëu me paramaà vacaù
iñöo ’si me dåòham iti
tato vakñyämi te hitam
man-manä bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru
mäm evaiñyasi satyaà te
pratijäne priyo ’si me
[Bg. 18.65]
sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù
“My dear Arjuna, you are very dear to Me, and therefore only for your good
I will disclose the most secret part of My instructions. It is simply this: become
a pure devotee of Mine and give yourself unto Me only, and I promise you full
spiritual existence, by which you may gain the eternal right of transcendental
loving service unto Me. Just give up all other ways of religiosity and exclusively
surrender unto Me and believe that I will protect you from your sinful acts,
and I shall deliver you. Do not worry any more.”
Persons who are intelligent take serious notice of this last instruction of the
Lord. Knowledge of the self is the first step in spiritual realization, which is
called confidential knowledge, and a step further is God realization, which is
called more confidential knowledge. The culmination of the knowledge of
Bhagavad-gétä is God realization, and when one attains this stage of God
realization, he naturally, voluntarily becomes a devotee of the Lord to render
Him loving transcendental service. This devotional service to the Lord is
always based on love of God and is distinct from the nature of routine service
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
as prescribed in karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga or dhyäna-yoga. In the Bhagavad-gétä
there are different instructions for such men of different categories, and there
are various descriptions for varëäçrama-dharma, sannyäsa-dharma,
yati-dharma, the renounced order of life, controlling the senses, meditation,
perfection of mystic powers, etc., but one who fully surrenders unto the Lord
to render service unto Him, out of spontaneous love for Him, factually
assimilates the essence of all knowledge described in the Vedas. One who
adopts this method very skillfully attains perfection of life at once. And this
perfection of human life is called brahma-gati, or the progressive march in
spiritual existence. As enunciated by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé on the basis of Vedic
assurances, brahma-gati means to attain a spiritual form as good as that of the
Lord, and in that form the liberated living being eternally lives on one of the
spiritual planets situated in the spiritual sky. Attainment of this perfection of
life is easily available to a pure devotee of the Lord without his undergoing any
difficult method of perfection. Such a devotional life is full of kértanam,
smaraëam, ékñaëam, etc., as mentioned in the previous verse. One must
therefore adopt this simple way of devotional life in order to attain the highest
perfection available in any category of the human form of life in any part of
the world. When Lord Brahmä met Lord Kåñëa as a playful child at
Våndävana, he offered his prayer in which he said:
çreyaù-såtià bhaktim udasya te vibho
kliçyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye
teñäm asau kleçala eva çiñyate
nänyad yathä sthüla-tuñävaghätinäm
(Bhäg. 10.14.4)
Bhakti-yoga is the highest quality of perfection to be achieved by the
intelligent person in lieu of performing a large quantity of spiritual activities.
The example cited here is very appropriate. A handful of real paddy is more
valuable than heaps of paddy skins without any substance within. Similarly,
one should not be attracted by the jugglery of karma-käëòa or jïäna-käëòa or
even the gymnastic performances of yoga, but skillfully should take to the
simple performances of kértanam, smaraëam, etc., under a bona fide spiritual
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
master, and without any difficulty attain the highest perfection.
TEXT 17
TaPaiSvNaae daNaPara YaXaiSvNaae
MaNaiSvNaae MaN}aivd" SauMa®l/a" )
+aeMa& Na ivNdiNTa ivNaa YadPaR<a&
TaSMaE Sau>ad]é[vSae NaMaae NaMa" )) 17 ))
tapasvino däna-parä yaçasvino
manasvino mantra-vidaù sumaìgaläù
kñemaà na vindanti vinä yad-arpaëaà
tasmai subhadra-çravase namo namaù
SYNONYMS
tapasvinaù—the great learned sages; däna-paräù—the great performer of
charity; yaçasvinaù—the great worker of distinction; manasvinaù—the great
philosophers or mystics; mantra-vidaù—the great chanter of the Vedic hymns;
su-maìgaläù—strict followers of Vedic principles; kñemam—fruitful result;
na—never; vindanti—attain; vinä—without; yat-arpaëam—dedication;
tasmai—unto Him; subhadra—auspicious; çravase—hearing about Him;
namaù—my obeisances; namaù—again and again.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the all-auspicious Lord Çré Kåñëa
again and again because the great learned sages, the great performers of charity,
the great workers of distinction, the great philosophers and mystics, the great
chanters of the Vedic hymns and the great followers of Vedic principles cannot
achieve any fruitful result without dedication of such great qualities to the
service of the Lord.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Advancement of learning, a charitable disposition, political, social or
religious leadership of human society, philosophical speculations, the practice
of the yoga system, expertise in the Vedic rituals, and all similar high qualities
in man serve one in the attainment of perfection only when they are employed
in the service of the Lord. Without such dovetailing, all such qualities become
sources of trouble for people in general. Everything can be utilized either for
one’s own sense gratification or in the service of one other than oneself. There
are two kinds of self-interest also, namely personal selfishness and extended
selfishness. But there is no qualitative difference between personal and
extended selfishness. Theft for personal interest or for the family interest is of
the same quality—namely, criminal. A thief pleading not guilty because of
committing theft not for personal interest but for the interest of society or
country has never been excused by the established law of any country. People
in general have no knowledge that the self-interest of a living being attains
perfection only when such an interest coincides with the interest of the Lord.
For example, what is the interest of maintaining body and soul together? One
earns money for maintenance of the body (personal or social), but unless there
is God consciousness, unless the body is being properly maintained to realize
one’s relation with God, all good efforts to maintain body and soul together are
similar to the attempts of the animals to maintain body and soul together. The
purpose of maintaining the human body is different from that of the animals.
Similarly, advancement of learning, economic development, philosophical
research, study in the Vedic literature or even the execution of pious activities
(like charity, opening of hospitals, and the distribution of food grains) should
be done in relation with the Lord. The aim of all such acts and endeavors must
be the pleasure of the Lord and not the satisfaction of any other identity,
individual or collective (saàsiddhir hari-toñaëam [SB 1.2.13]). In the
Bhagavad-gétä (9.27) the same principle is confirmed where it is said that
whatever we may give in charity and whatever we may observe in austerity
must be given over to the Lord or be done on His account only. The expert
leaders of a godless human civilization cannot bring about a fruitful result in
all their different attempts at educational advancement or economic
development unless they are God conscious. And to become God conscious
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
one has to hear about the all-auspicious Lord, as He is described in literature
like the Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 18
ik-raTahU<aaNDa]Pauil/NdPauLk-Xaa
Aa>aqréuM>aa YavNaa" %SaadYa" )
Yae_NYae c PaaPaa YadPaaé[Yaaé[Yaa"
éuDYaiNTa TaSMaE Pa[>aivZ<ave NaMa" )) 18 ))
kiräta-hüëändhra-pulinda-pulkaçä
äbhéra-çumbhä yavanäù khasädayaù
ye ’nye ca päpä yad-apäçrayäçrayäù
çudhyanti tasmai prabhaviñëave namaù
SYNONYMS
kiräta—a province of old Bhärata; hüëa—part of Germany and Russia;
ändhra—a province of southern India; pulinda—the Greeks;
pulkaçäù—another province; äbhéra—part of old Sind; çumbhäù—another
province; yavanäù—the Turks; khasa-ädayaù—the Mongolian province;
ye—even those; anye—others; ca—also; päpäù—addicted to sinful acts;
yat—whose; apäçraya-äçrayäù—having taken shelter of the devotees of the
Lord; çudhyanti—at once purified; tasmai—unto Him; prabhaviñëave—unto
the powerful Viñëu; namaù—my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Kiräta, Hüëa, Ändhra, Pulinda, Pulkaça, Äbhéra, Çumbha, Yavana, members
of the Khasa races and even others addicted to sinful acts can be purified by
taking shelter of the devotees of the Lord, due to His being the supreme power.
I beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Kiräta: A province of old Bhärata-varña mentioned in the Bhéñma-parva of
Mahäbhärata. Generally the Kirätas are known as the aboriginal tribes of
India, and in modern days the Santal Parganas in Bihar and Chota Nagpur
might comprise the old province named Kiräta.
Hüëa: The area of East Germany and part of Russia is known as the
province of the Hüëas. Accordingly, sometimes a kind of hill tribe is known as
the Hüëas.
Ändhra: A province in southern India mentioned in the Bhéñma-parva of
Mahäbhärata. It is still extant under the same name.
Pulinda: It is mentioned in the Mahäbhärata (Ädi-parva 174.38), viz., the
inhabitants of the province of the name Pulinda. This country was conquered
by Bhémasena and Sahadeva. The Greeks are known as Pulindas, and it is
mentioned in the Vana-parva of Mahäbhärata that the non-Vedic race of this
part of the world would rule over the world. This Pulinda province was also
one of the provinces of Bhärata, and the inhabitants were classified amongst
the kñatriya kings. But later on, due to their giving up the brahminical culture,
they were mentioned as mlecchas (just as those who are not followers of the
Islamic culture are called kafirs and those who are not followers of the
Christian culture are called heathens).
Äbhéra: This name also appears in the Mahäbhärata, both in the
Sabhä-parva and Bhéñma-parva. It is mentioned that this province was situated
on the River Sarasvaté in Sind. The modern Sind province formerly extended
on the other side of the Arabian Sea, and all the inhabitants of that province
were known as the Äbhéras. They were under the domination of Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, and according to the statements of Märkaëòeya the mlecchas of
this part of the world would also rule over Bhärata. Later on this proved to be
true, as in the case of the Pulindas. On behalf of the Pulindas, Alexander the
Great conquered India, and on behalf of the Äbhéras, Muhammad Ghori
conquered India. These Äbhéras were also formerly kñatriyas within the
brahminical culture, but they gave up the connection. The kñatriyas who were
afraid of Paraçuräma and had hidden themselves in the Caucasian hilly regions
later on became known as the Äbhéras, and the place they inhabited was
known as Äbhéradeça.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Çumbhas or Kaìkas: The inhabitants of the Kaìka province of old Bhärata,
mentioned in the Mahäbhärata.
Yavanas: Yavana was the name of one of the sons of Mahäräja Yayäti who
was given the part of the world known as Turkey to rule. Therefore the Turks
are Yavanas due to being descendants of Mahäräja Yavana. The Yavanas were
therefore kñatriyas, and later on, by giving up the brahminical culture, they
became mleccha-yavanas. Descriptions of the Yavanas are in the Mahäbhärata
(Ädi-parva 85.34). Another prince called Turvasu was also known as Yavana,
and his country was conquered by Sahadeva, one of the Päëòavas. The western
Yavana joined with Duryodhana in the Battle of Kurukñetra under the
pressure of Karëa. It is also foretold that these Yavanas also would conquer
India, and it proved to be true.
Khasa: The inhabitants of the Khasadeça are mentioned in the
Mahäbhärata (Droëa-parva). Those who have a stunted growth of hair on the
upper lip are generally called Khasas. As such, the Khasa are the Mongolians,
the Chinese and others who are so designated.
The above-mentioned historical names are different nations of the world.
Even those who are constantly engaged in sinful acts are all corrigible to the
standard of perfect human beings if they take shelter of the devotees of the
Lord. Jesus Christ and Muhammad, two powerful devotees of the Lord, have
done tremendous service on behalf of the Lord on the surface of the globe.
And from the version of Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé it appears that instead of
running a godless civilization in the present context of the world situation, if
the leadership of world affairs is entrusted to the devotees of the Lord, for
which a worldwide organization under the name and style of the International
Society for Krishna Consciousness has already been started, then by the grace
of the Almighty Lord there can be a thorough change of heart in human
beings all over the world because the devotees of the Lord are able authorities
to effect such a change by purifying the dust-worn minds of the people in
general. The politicians of the world may remain in their respective positions
because the pure devotees of the Lord are not interested in political leadership
or diplomatic implications. The devotees are interested only in seeing that the
people in general are not misguided by political propaganda and in seeing that
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the valuable life of a human being is not spoiled in following a type of
civilization which is ultimately doomed. If the politicians, therefore, would be
guided by the good counsel of the devotees, then certainly there would be a
great change in the world situation by the purifying propaganda of the
devotees, as shown by Lord Caitanya. As Çukadeva Gosvämé began his prayer
by discussing the word yat-kértanam, so also Lord Caitanya recommended that
simply by glorifying the Lord’s holy name, a tremendous change of heart can
take place by which the complete misunderstanding between the human
nations created by politicians can at once be extinguished. And after the
extinction of the fire of misunderstanding, other profits will follow. The
destination is to go back home, back to Godhead, as we have several times
discussed in these pages.
According to the cult of devotion, generally known as the Vaiñëava cult,
there is no bar against anyone’s advancing in the matter of God realization. A
Vaiñëava is powerful enough to turn into a Vaiñëava even the Kiräta, etc., as
above mentioned. In the Bhagavad-gétä (9.32) it is said by the Lord that there is
no bar to becoming a devotee of the Lord (even for those who are lowborn, or
women, çüdras or vaiçyas), and by becoming a devotee everyone is eligible to
return home, back to Godhead. The only qualification is that one take shelter
of a pure devotee of the Lord who has thorough knowledge in the
transcendental science of Kåñëa (Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam).
Anyone from any part of the world who becomes well conversant in the
science of Kåñëa becomes a pure devotee and a spiritual master for the general
mass of people and may reclaim them by purification of heart. Though a
person be even the most sinful man, he can at once be purified by systematic
contact with a pure Vaiñëava. A Vaiñëava, therefore, can accept a bona fide
disciple from any part of the world without any consideration of caste and
creed and promote him by regulative principles to the status of a pure
Vaiñëava who is transcendental to brahminical culture. The system of caste, or
varëäçrama-dharma, is no longer regular even amongst the so-called followers
of the system. Nor is it now possible to reestablish the institutional function in
the present context of social, political and economic revolution. Without any
reference to the particular custom of a country, one can be accepted to the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Vaiñëava cult spiritually, and there is no hindrance in the transcendental
process. So by the order of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, the cult of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam or the Bhagavad-gétä can be preached all over the world,
reclaiming all persons willing to accept the transcendental cult. Such cultural
propaganda by the devotees will certainly be accepted by all persons who are
reasonable and inquisitive, without any particular bias for the custom of the
country. The Vaiñëava never accepts another Vaiñëava on the basis of
birthright, just as he never thinks of the Deity of the Lord in a temple as an
idol. And to remove all doubts in this connection, Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé has
invoked the blessings of the Lord, who is all-powerful (prabhaviñëave namaù).
As the all-powerful Lord accepts the humble service of His devotee in
devotional activities of the arcana His form as the worshipable Deity in the
temple, similarly the body of a pure Vaiñëava changes transcendentally at once
when he gives himself up to the service of the Lord and is trained by a
qualified Vaiñëava. The injunction of Vaiñëava regulation in this connection
runs as follows: arcye viñëau çilä-dhér guruñu nara-matir vaiñëave jäti-buddhiù
çré-viñëor nämni çabda-sämänya-buddhiù, etc. “One should not consider the
Deity of the Lord as worshiped in the temple to be an idol, nor should one
consider the authorized spiritual master an ordinary man. Nor should one
consider a pure Vaiñëava to belong to a particular caste, etc.” (Padma Puräëa)
The conclusion is that the Lord, being all-powerful, can, under any and
every circumstance, accept anyone from any part of the world, either
personally or through His bona fide manifestation as the spiritual master. Lord
Caitanya accepted many devotees from communities other than the
varëäçramites, and He Himself declared, to teach us, that He does not belong
to any caste or social order of life, but that He is the eternal servant of the
servant of the Lord who maintains the damsels of Våndävana (Lord Kåñëa).
That is the way of self-realization.
TEXT 19
Sa Wz AaTMaaTMavTaaMaDaqìr‚
S}aYaqMaYaae DaMaRMaYaSTaPaaeMaYa" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
GaTaVYal/IkE-rJaXaªraidi>a‚
ivRTaKYaRil/®ae >aGavaNa( Pa[SaqdTaaMa( )) 19 ))
sa eña ätmätmavatäm adhéçvaras
trayémayo dharmamayas tapomayaù
gata-vyalékair aja-çaìkarädibhir
vitarkya-liìgo bhagavän prasédatäm
SYNONYMS
saù—He; eñaù—it is; ätmä—the Supersoul; ätmavatäm—of the self-realized
souls; adhéçvaraù—the Supreme Lord; trayé-mayaù—personified Vedas;
dharma-mayaù—personified religious scripture; tapaù-mayaù—personified
austerity; gata-vyalékaiù—by those who are above all pretensions;
aja—Brahmäjé; çaìkara-ädibhiù—by Lord Çiva and others;
vitarkya-liìgaù—one who is observed with awe and veneration; bhagavän—the
personality of Godhead; prasédatäm—be kind toward me.
TRANSLATION
He is the Supersoul and the Supreme Lord of all self-realized souls. He is the
personification of the Vedas, religious scriptures and austerities. He is
worshiped by Lord Brahmä and Çiva and all those who are transcendental to all
pretensions. Being so revered with awe and veneration, may that Supreme
Absolute be pleased with me.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, although the Lord of all
followers of different paths of self-realization, is knowable only by those who
are above all pretensions. Everyone is searching for eternal peace or eternal
life, and with an aim to this destination everyone is either studying the Vedic
scriptures or other religious scriptures or undergoing severe austerity as
empiric philosophers, as mystics yogés or as unalloyed devotees, etc. But the
Supreme Lord is perfectly realized only by the devotees because they are above
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
all pretensions. Those who are on the path of self-realization are generally
classified as karmés, jïänés, yogés, or devotees of the Lord. The karmés, who are
much attracted by the fruitive activities of the Vedic rituals, are called
bhukti-kämé, or those who desire material enjoyment. The jïänés, who try to
become one with the Supreme by mental speculation, are called mukti-kämé, or
those who desire liberation from material existence. The mystic yogés, who
practice different types of austerities for attainment of eight kinds of material
perfection and who ultimately meet the Supersoul (Paramätmä) in trance, are
called siddhi-kämé, or those who desire the perfection of becoming finer than
the finest, becoming heavier than the heaviest, getting everything desired,
having control over everyone, creating everything liked, etc. All these are
abilities of a powerful yogé. But the devotees of the Lord do not want anything
like that for self-satisfaction. They want only to serve the Lord because the
Lord is great and as living entities they are eternally subordinate parts and
parcels of the Lord. This perfect realization of the self by the devotee helps
him to become desireless, to desire nothing for his personal self, and thus the
devotees are called niñkämé, without any desire. A living entity, by his
constitutional position, cannot be void of all desires (the bhukti-kämé,
mukti-kämé and siddhi-kämé all desire something for personal satisfaction), but
the niñkämé devotees of the Lord desire everything for the satisfaction of the
Lord. They are completely dependent on the orders of the Lord and are always
ready to discharge their duty for the satisfaction of the Lord.
In the beginning Arjuna placed himself as one of those who desire
self-satisfaction, for he desired not to fight in the Battle of Kurukñetra, but to
make him desireless the Lord preached the Bhagavad-gétä, in which the ways of
karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga, haöha-yoga and also bhakti-yoga were explained.
Because Arjuna was without any pretension, he changed his decision and
satisfied the Lord by agreeing to fight (kariñye vacanaà tava) [Bg. 18.73], and
thus he became desireless.
The examples of Brahmä and Lord Çiva are specifically cited here because
Brahmäjé, Lord Çiva, Çrématé Lakñméjé and the four Kumäras (Sanaka,
Sanätana, etc.) are leaders of the four desireless Vaiñëava sampradäyas. They
are all freed from all pretensions. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé interprets the word
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
gata-vyalékaiù as projjhita-kaitavaiù, or those who are freed from all pretensions
(the unalloyed devotees only). In the Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 19.149) it is
said:
kåñëa-bhakta——niñkäma, ata eva ’çänta’
bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kämé, sakali ’açänta’
Those who are after fruitive results for their pious activities, those who
desire salvation and identity with the Supreme, and those who desire material
perfections of mystic power are all restless because they want something for
themselves, but the devotee is completely peaceful because he has no demand
for himself and is always ready to serve the desire of the Lord. The conclusion
is, therefore, that the Lord is for everyone because no one can achieve the
result of his respective desires without His sanction, but as stated by the Lord
in Bhagavad-gétä (8.9), all such results are awarded by Him only, for the Lord is
adhéçvara (the original controller) of everyone, namely the Vedäntists, the
great karma-käëòéyas, the great religious leaders, the great performers of
austerity and all who are striving for spiritual advancement. But ultimately He
is realized by the pretensionless devotees only. Therefore special stress is given
to the devotional service of the Lord by Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé.
TEXT 20
ié[Ya" PaiTaYaRjPaiTa" Pa[JaaPaiTa‚
iDaRYaa& PaiTal/aeRk-PaiTaDaRraPaiTa" )
PaiTaGaRiTaêaNDak-v*iZ<aSaaTvTaa&
Pa[SaqdTaa& Mae >aGavaNa( SaTaa& PaiTa" )) 20 ))
çriyaù patir yajïa-patiù prajä-patir
dhiyäà patir loka-patir dharä-patiù
patir gatiç cändhaka-våñëi-sätvatäà
prasédatäà me bhagavän satäà patiù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
çriyaù—all opulence; patiù—the owner; yajïa—of sacrifice; patiù—the
director; prajä-patiù—the leader of all living entities; dhiyäm—of intelligence;
patiù—the master; loka-patiù—the proprietor of all planets; dharä—earth;
patiù—the supreme; patiù—head; gatiù—destination; ca—also; andhaka—one
of the kings of the Yadu dynasty; våñëi—the first king of the Yadu dynasty;
sätvatäm—the Yadus; prasédatäm—be merciful; me—upon me;
bhagavän—Lord Çré Kåñëa; satäm—of all devotees; patiù—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
May Lord Çré Kåñëa, who is the worshipable Lord of all devotees, the
protector and glory of all the kings like Andhaka and Våñëi of the Yadu
dynasty, the husband of all goddesses of fortune, the director of all sacrifices
and therefore the leader of all living entities, the controller of all intelligence,
the proprietor of all planets, spiritual and material, and the supreme incarnation
on the earth (the supreme all in all), be merciful upon me.
PURPORT
Since Çukadeva Gosvämé is one of the prominent gata-vyalékas, who are
freed from all misconceptions, he therefore expresses his own realized
perception of Lord Çré Kåñëa as being the sum total of all perfection, the
personality of Godhead. Everyone is seeking the favor of the goddess of
fortune, but people do not know that Lord Çré Kåñëa is the beloved husband of
all goddesses of fortune. In the Brahma-saàhitä it is said that the Lord, in His
transcendental abode Goloka Våndävana, is accustomed to herding the surabhi
cows and is served there by hundreds of thousands of goddesses of fortune. All
these goddesses of fortune are manifestations of His transcendental pleasure
potency (hlädiné-çakti) in His internal energy, and when the Lord manifested
Himself on this earth He partially displayed the activities of His pleasure
potency in His räsa-lélä just to attract the conditioned souls, who are all after
the phantasmagoria pleasure potency in degraded sex enjoyment. The pure
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
devotees of the Lord like Çukadeva Gosvämé, who was completely detached
from the abominable sex life of the material world, discussed this act of the
Lord’s pleasure potency certainly not in relation to sex, but to relish a
transcendental taste inconceivable to the mundaners who are after sex life.
Sex life in the mundane world is the root-cause of being conditioned by the
shackles of illusion, and certainly Çukadeva Gosvämé was never interested in
the sex life of the mundane world. Nor does the manifestation of the Lord’s
pleasure potency have any connection with such degraded things. Lord
Caitanya was a strict sannyäsé, so much so that He did not allow any woman to
come near Him, not even to bow down and offer respects. He never even
heard the prayers of the deva-däsés offered in the temple of Jagannätha because
a sannyäsé is forbidden to hear songs sung by the fair sex. Yet even in the rigid
position of a sannyäsé He recommended the mode of worship preferred by the
gopés of Våndävana as the topmost loving service possible to be rendered to the
Lord. And Çrématé Rädhäräëé is the principal head of all such goddesses of
fortune, and therefore She is the pleasure counterpart of the Lord and is
nondifferent from Kåñëa.
In the Vedic rituals there are recommendations for performing different
types of sacrifice in order to achieve the greatest benefit in life. Such
benedictions as the results of performing great sacrifices are, after all, favors
given by the goddess of fortune, and the Lord, being the husband or lover of
the goddess of fortune, is factually the Lord of all sacrifices also. He is the final
enjoyer of all kinds of yajïa; therefore Yajïa-pati is another name of Lord
Viñëu. It is recommended in the Bhagavad-gétä that everything be done for the
Yajïa-pati (yajïärtät karmaëaù), for otherwise one’s acts will be the cause of
conditioning by the law of material nature. Those who are not freed from all
misconceptions (vyalékam) perform sacrifices to please the minor demigods,
but the devotees of the Lord know very well that Lord Çré Kåñëa is the supreme
enjoyer of all performances of sacrifice; therefore they perform the
saìkértana-yajïa (çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23]), which is especially
recommended in this age of Kali. In Kali-yuga, performance of other types of
sacrifice is not feasible due to insufficient arrangements and inexpert
priesthood.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
We have information from the Bhagavad-gétä (3.10–11) that Lord Brahmä,
after giving rebirth to the conditioned souls within the universe, instructed
them to perform sacrifices and to lead a prosperous life. With such sacrificial
performances the conditioned souls will never be in difficulty in keeping body
and soul together. Ultimately they can purify their existence. They will find
natural promotion into spiritual existence, the real identity of the living being.
A conditioned soul should never give up the practice of sacrifice, charity and
austerity, in any circumstances. The aim of all such sacrifices is to please the
Yajïa-pati, the Personality of Godhead; therefore the Lord is also Prajä-pati.
According to the Kaöha Upaniñad, the one Lord is the leader of the
innumerable living entities. The living entities are maintained by the Lord
(eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän). The Lord is therefore called the supreme
Bhüta-bhåt, or maintainer of all living beings.
Living beings are proportionately endowed with intelligence in terms of
their previous activities. All living beings are not equally endowed with the
same quality of intelligence because behind such development of intelligence
is the control of the Lord, as declared in the Bhagavad-gétä (15.15). As
Paramätmä, Supersoul, the Lord is living in everyone’s heart, and from Him
only does one’s power of remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness follow
(mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca). One person can sharply remember past
activities by the grace of the Lord while others cannot. One is highly
intelligent by the grace of the Lord, and one is a fool by the same control.
Therefore the Lord is Dhiyäm-pati, or the Lord of intelligence.
The conditioned souls strive to become lords of the material world.
Everyone is trying to lord it over the material nature by applying his highest
degree of intelligence. This misuse of intelligence by the conditioned soul is
called madness. One’s full intelligence should be applied to get free from the
material clutches. But the conditioned soul, due to madness only, engages his
full energy and intelligence in sense gratification, and to achieve this end of
life he willfully commits all sorts of misdeeds. The result is that instead of
attaining an unconditional life of full freedom, the mad conditioned soul is
entangled again and again in different types of bondage in material bodies.
Everything we see in the material manifestation is but the creation of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord. Therefore He is the real proprietor of everything in the universes. The
conditioned soul can enjoy a fragment of this material creation under the
control of the Lord, but not self-sufficiently. That is the instruction in the
Éçopaniñad. One should be satisfied with things awarded by the Lord of the
universe. It is out of madness only that one tries to encroach upon another’s
share of material possessions.
The Lord of the universe, out of His causeless mercy upon the conditioned
souls, descends by His own energy (ätma-mäyä) to reestablish the eternal
relation of the conditioned souls with Him. He instructs all to surrender unto
Him instead of falsely claiming to be enjoyers for a certain limit under His
control. When He so descends He proves how much greater is His ability to
enjoy, and He exhibits His power of enjoyment by (for instance) marrying
sixteen thousand wives at once. The conditioned soul is very proud of
becoming the husband of even one wife, but the Lord laughs at this; the
intelligent man can know who is the real husband. Factually, the Lord is the
husband of all the women in His creation, but a conditioned soul under the
control of the Lord feels proud to be the husband of one or two wives.
All these qualifications as the different types of pati mentioned in this verse
are meant for Lord Çré Kåñëa, and Çukadeva Gosvämé has therefore especially
mentioned the pati and gati of the Yadu dynasty. The members of the Yadu
dynasty knew that Lord Çré Kåñëa is everything, and all of them intended to
return to Lord Kåñëa after He had finished His transcendental pastimes on the
earth. The Yadu dynasty was annihilated by the will of the Lord because its
members had to return home with the Lord. The annihilation of the Yadu
dynasty was a material show created by the Supreme Lord; otherwise the Lord
and the members of the Yadu dynasty are all eternal associates. The Lord is
therefore the guide of all devotees, and as such, Çukadeva Gosvämé offered
Him due respects with love-laden feelings.
TEXT 21
Yadx(g]Yai>aDYaaNaSaMaaiDaDaaETaYaa
iDaYaaNauPaXYaiNTa ih TatvMaaTMaNa" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vdiNTa cETaTa( k-vYaae YaQaaåc&
Sa Mae Mauku-Ndae >aGavaNa( Pa[SaqdTaaMa( )) 21 ))
yad-aìghry-abhidhyäna-samädhi-dhautayä
dhiyänupaçyanti hi tattvam ätmanaù
vadanti caitat kavayo yathä-rucaà
sa me mukundo bhagavän prasédatäm
SYNONYMS
yat-aìghri—whose lotus feet; abhidhyäna—thinking of, at every second;
samädhi—trance; dhautayä—being washed off; dhiyä—by such clean
intelligence; anupaçyanti—does see by following authorities; hi—certainly;
tattvam—the Absolute Truth; ätmanaù—of the Supreme Lord and of oneself;
vadanti—they say; ca—also; etat—this; kavayaù—philosophers or learned
scholars; yathä-rucam—as he thinks; saù—He; me—mine; mukundaù—Lord
Kåñëa (who gives liberation); bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
prasédatäm—be pleased with me.
TRANSLATION
It is the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa who gives liberation. By thinking
of His lotus feet at every second, following in the footsteps of authorities, the
devotee in trance can see the Absolute Truth. The learned mental speculators,
however, think of Him according to their whims. May the Lord be pleased with
me.
PURPORT
The mystic yogés, after a strenuous effort to control the senses, may be
situated in a trance of yoga just to have a vision of the Supersoul within
everyone, but the pure devotee, simply by remembering the Lord’s lotus feet at
every second, at once becomes established in real trance because by such
realization his mind and intelligence are completely cleansed of the diseases of
material enjoyment. The pure devotee thinks himself fallen into the ocean of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
birth and death and incessantly prays to the Lord to lift him up. He only
aspires to become a speck of transcendental dust at the lotus feet of the Lord.
The pure devotee, by the grace of the Lord, absolutely loses all attraction for
material enjoyment, and to keep free from contamination he always thinks of
the lotus feet of the Lord. King Kulaçekhara, a great devotee of the Lord,
prayed:
kåñëa tvadéya-pada-paìkaja-païjaräntam
adyaiva me viçatu mänasa-räja-haàsaù
präëa-prayäëa-samaye kapha-väta-pittaiù
kaëöhävarodhana-vidhau smaraëaà kutas te
“My Lord Kåñëa, I pray that the swan of my mind may immediately sink
down to the stems of the lotus feet of Your Lordship and be locked in their
network; otherwise at the time of my final breath, when my throat is choked
up with cough, how will it be possible to think of You?”
There is an intimate relationship between the swan and the lotus stem. So
the comparison is very appropriate: without becoming a swan, or
paramahaàsa, one cannot enter into the network of the lotus feet of the Lord.
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä, the mental speculators, even by dint of
learned scholarship, cannot even dream of the Absolute Truth by speculating
over it for eternity. The Lord reserves the right of not being exposed to such
mental speculators. And because they cannot enter into network stem of the
lotus stem of the Lord, all material speculators differ in conclusions, and at the
end they make a useless compromise by saying, “as many conclusions, as many
ways,” according to one’s own inclination. (yathä-rucam). But the Lord is not
like a shopkeeper trying to please all sorts of customers in the mental
speculator exchange. The Lord is what He is, the Absolute Personality of
Godhead, and He demands absolute surrender unto Him only. The pure
devotee, however, by following the ways of previous äcäryas, or authorities,
can see the Supreme Lord through the transparent medium of a bona fide
spiritual master (anupaçyanti). The pure devotee never tries to see the Lord by
mental speculation, but by following in the footsteps of the äcäryas (mahäjano
yena gataù sa panthäù). Therefore there is no difference of conclusions
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
amongst the Vaiñëava äcäryas regarding the Lord and the devotees. Lord
Caitanya asserts that the living entity (jéva) is eternally the servitor of the
Lord and that he is simultaneously one with and different from the Lord. This
tattva of Lord Caitanya’s is shared by all four sampradäyas of the Vaiñëava
school (all accepting eternal servitude to the Lord even after salvation), and
there is no authorized Vaiñëava äcärya who may think of the Lord and himself
as one.
This humbleness of the pure devotee, who is one hundred percent engaged
in His service, puts the devotee of the Lord in a trance by which to realize
everything, because to the sincere devotee of the Lord, the Lord reveals
Himself, as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (10.10). The Lord, being the Lord of
intelligence in everyone (even in the nondevotee), favors His devotee with
proper intelligence so that automatically the pure devotee is enlightened with
the factual truth about the Lord and His different energies. the Lord is
revealed not by one’s speculative power or by one’s verbal jugglery over the
Absolute Truth. Rather, He reveals Himself to a devotee when He is fully
satisfied by the devotee’s service attitude. Çukadeva Gosvämé is not a mental
speculator or compromiser of the theory of “as many ways, as many
conclusions.” Rather, he prays to the Lord only, invoking His transcendental
pleasure. That is the way of knowing the Lord.
TEXT 22
Pa[caeidTaa YaeNa Paura SarSvTaq
ivTaNvTaaJaSYa SaTaq& SMa*iTa& ôid )
Svl/+a<aa Pa[adur>aUTa( ik-l/aSYaTa"
Sa Mae ‰zq<aaMa*z>a" Pa[SaqdTaaMa( )) 22 ))
pracoditä yena purä sarasvaté
vitanvatäjasya satéà småtià hådi
sva-lakñaëä prädurabhüt kiläsyataù
sa me åñéëäm åñabhaù prasédatäm
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
pracoditä—inspired; yena—by whom; purä—in the beginning of creation;
sarasvaté—the goddess of learning; vitanvatä—amplified; ajasya—of Brahmä,
the first created living being; satém småtim—potent memory; hådi—in the
heart; sva—in his own; lakñaëä—aiming at; prädurabhüt—was generated;
kila—as if; äsyataù—from the mouth; saù—he; me—unto me; åñéëäm—of the
teachers; åñabhaù—the chief; prasédatäm—be pleased.
TRANSLATION
May the Lord, who in the beginning of the creation amplified the potent
knowledge of Brahmä from within his heart and inspired him with full
knowledge of creation and of His own Self, and who appeared to be generated
from the mouth of Brahmä, be pleased with me.
PURPORT
As we have already discussed hereinbefore, the Lord, as the Supersoul of all
living beings from Brahmä to the insignificant ant, endows all with the
required knowledge potent in every living being. A living being is sufficiently
potent to possess knowledge from the Lord in the proportion of fifty
sixty-fourths, or seventy-eight percent of the full knowledge acquirable. Since
the living being is constitutionally part and parcel of the Lord, he is unable to
assimilate all the knowledge that the Lord possesses Himself. In the
conditioned state, the living being is subject to forget everything after a
change of body known as death. This potent knowledge is again inspired by
the Lord from within the heart of every living being, and it is known as the
awakening of knowledge, for it is comparable to awakening from sleep or
unconsciousness. This awakening of knowledge is under the full control of the
Lord, and therefore we find in the practical world different grades of
knowledge in different persons. This awakening of knowledge is neither an
automatic nor a material interaction. The supply source is the Lord Himself
(dhiyäà patiù), for even Brahmä is also subject to this regulation of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
supreme creator. In the beginning of the creation, Brahmä is born first without
any father and mother because before Brahmä there were no other living
beings. Brahmä is born from the lotus which grows from the abdomen of the
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, and therefore he is known as Aja. This Brahmä, or
Aja, is also a living being, part and parcel of the Lord, but being the most pious
devotee of the Lord, Brahmä is inspired by the Lord to create, subsequent to
the main creation by the Lord, through the agency of material nature.
Therefore neither the material nature nor Brahmä is independent of the Lord.
The material scientists can merely observe the reactions of the material nature
without understanding the direction behind such activities, as a child can see
the action of electricity without any knowledge of the powerhouse engineer.
This imperfect knowledge of the material scientist is due to a poor fund of
knowledge. The Vedic knowledge was therefore first impregnated within
Brahmä, and it appears that Brahmä distributed the Vedic knowledge. Brahmä
is undoubtedly the speaker of the Vedic knowledge, but actually he was
inspired by the Lord to receive such transcendental knowledge, as it directly
descends from the Lord. The Vedas are therefore called apauruñeya, or not
imparted by any created being. Before the creation the Lord was there
(näräyaëaù paro ’vyaktät), and therefore the words spoken by the Lord are
vibrations of transcendental sound. There is a gulf of difference between the
two qualities of sound, namely präkåta and apräkåta. The physicist can deal
only with the präkåta sound, or sound vibrated in the material sky, and
therefore we must know that the Vedic sounds recorded in symbolic
expressions cannot be understood by anyone within the universe unless and
until one is inspired by the vibration of supernatural (apräkåta) sound, which
descends in the chain of disciplic succession from the Lord to Brahmä, from
Brahmä to Närada, from Närada to Vyäsa and so on. No mundane scholar can
translate or reveal the true import of the Vedic mantras (hymns). They cannot
be understood unless one is inspired or initiated by the authorized spiritual
master. The original spiritual master is the Lord Himself, and the succession
comes down through the sources of paramparä, as clearly stated in the Fourth
Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä. So unless one receives the transcendental
knowledge from the authorized paramparä, one should be considered useless
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
(viphalä matäù), even though one may be greatly qualified in the mundane
advancements of arts or science.
Çukadeva Gosvämé is praying from the Lord by dint of being inspired from
within by the Lord so that he could rightly explain the facts and figures of
creation as inquired by Mahäräja Parékñit. A spiritual master is not a
theoretical speculator, like the mundane scholar, but is çrotriyaà
brahma-niñöham [MU 1.2.12(8)].
TEXT 23
>aUTaEMaRhiÙYaR wMaa" Paurae iv>au‚
iNaRMaaRYa XaeTae YadMaUzu PaUåz" )
>au»e Gau<aaNa( zae@Xa zae@XaaTMak-"
Saae_l/x(k*-zqí >aGavaNa( vca&iSa Mae )) 23 ))
bhütair mahadbhir ya imäù puro vibhur
nirmäya çete yad amüñu püruñaù
bhuìkte guëän ñoòaça ñoòaçätmakaù
so ’laìkåñéñöa bhagavän vacäàsi me
SYNONYMS
bhütaiù—by the elements; mahadbhiù—of material creation; yaù—He who;
imäù—all these; puraù—bodies; vibhuù—of the Lord; nirmäya—for being set
up; çete—lie down; yat amüñu—one who incarnated; püruñaù—Lord Viñëu;
bhuìkte—causes to be subjected; guëän—the three modes of nature;
ñoòaça—in sixteen divisions; ñoòaça-ätmakaù—being the generator of these
sixteen; saù—He; alaìkåñéñöa—may decorate; bhagavän—the Personality of
Godhead; vacäàsi—statements; me—mine.
TRANSLATION
May the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who enlivens the materially
created bodies of the elements by lying down within the universe, and who in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
His puruña incarnation causes the living being to be subjected to the sixteen
divisions of material modes which are his generator, be pleased to decorate my
statements.
PURPORT
As a fully dependent devotee, Çukadeva Gosvämé (unlike a mundane man
who is proud of his own capability) invokes the pleasure of the Personality of
Godhead so that his statements may be successful and be appreciated by the
hearers. The devotee always thinks of himself as instrumental for anything
successfully carried out, and he declines to take credit for anything done by
himself. The godless atheist wants to take all credit for activities, not knowing
that even a blade of grass cannot move without the sanction of the Supreme
Spirit, the Personality of Godhead. Çukadeva Gosvämé therefore wants to
move by the direction of the Supreme Lord, who inspired Brahmä to speak the
Vedic wisdom. The truths described in the Vedic literatures are not theories of
mundane imagination, nor are they fictitious, as the less intelligent class of
men sometimes think. The Vedic truths are all perfect descriptions of the
factual truth without any mistake or illusion, and Çukadeva Gosvämé wants to
present the truths of creation not as a metaphysical theory of philosophical
speculation, but as the actual facts and figures of the subject, since he would be
dictated to by the Lord exactly in the same manner as Brahmäjé was inspired.
As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), the Lord is Himself the father of the
Vedänta knowledge, and it is He only who knows the factual purport of the
Vedänta philosophy. So there is no greater truth than the principles of religion
mentioned in the Vedas. Such Vedic knowledge or religion is disseminated by
authorities like Çukadeva Gosvämé because he is a humble devotional servitor
of the Lord who has no desire to become a self-appointed interpreter without
authority. That is the way of explaining the Vedic knowledge, technically
known as the paramparä system, or descending process.
The intelligent man can see without mistake that any material creation
(whether one’s own body or a fruit or flower) cannot beautifully grow up
without the spiritual touch. The greatest intelligent man of the world or the
greatest man of science can present everything very beautifully only insofar as
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the spirit life is there or insomuch as the spiritual touch is there. Therefore the
source of all truths is the Supreme Spirit, and not gross matter as wrongly
conceived by the gross materialist. We get information from the Vedic
literature that the Lord Himself first entered the vacuum of the material
universe, and thus all things gradually developed one after another. Similarly,
the Lord is situated as localized Paramätmä in every individual being; hence
everything is done by Him very beautifully. The sixteen principal creative
elements, namely earth, water, fire, air, sky, and the eleven sense organs, first
developed from the Lord Himself and were thereby shared by the living
entities. Thus the material elements were created for the enjoyment of the
living entities. The beautiful arrangement behind all material manifestations is
therefore made possible by the energy of the Lord, and the individual living
entity can only pray to the Lord to understand it properly. Since the Lord is
the supreme entity, different from Çukadeva Gosvämé, the prayer can be
offered to Him. The Lord helps the living entity to enjoy material creation, but
He is aloof from such false enjoyment. Çukadeva prays for the mercy of the
Lord, not only for being helped personally in presenting the truth, but also for
helping others to whom he would like to speak.
TEXT 24
NaMaSTaSMaE >aGavTae vaSaudevaYa veDaSae )
PaPaujaRNaMaYa& SaaEMYaa YaNMau%aMbuåhaSavMa( )) 24 ))
namas tasmai bhagavate
väsudeväya vedhase
papur jïänam ayaà saumyä
yan-mukhämburuhäsavam
SYNONYMS
namaù—my obeisances; tasmai—unto Him; bhagavate—unto the Personality
of Godhead; väsudeväya—unto Väsudeva or His incarnations; vedhase—the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
compiler of the Vedic literatures; papuù—drunk; jïänam—knowledge;
ayam—this Vedic knowledge; saumyäù—the devotees, especially the consorts
of Lord Kåñëa; yat—from whose; mukha-amburuha—the lotuslike mouth;
äsavam—nectar from His mouth.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto Çréla Vyäsadeva, the incarnation of
Väsudeva who compiled the Vedic scriptures. The pure devotees drink up the
nectarean transcendental knowledge dropping from the lotuslike mouth of the
Lord.
PURPORT
In pursuance of the specific utterance vedhase, or “the compiler of the
system of transcendental knowledge,” Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has commented
that the respectful obeisances are offered to Çréla Vyäsadeva, who is the
incarnation of Väsudeva. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has agreed to this, but Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has made a further advance, namely that the
nectar from the mouth of Lord Kåñëa is transferred to His different consorts,
and thus they learn the finer arts of music, dance, dressing, decorations and all
such things which are relished by the Lord. Such music, dance and decorations
enjoyed by the Lord are certainly not anything mundane, because the Lord is
addressed in the very beginning as para, or transcendental. This
transcendental knowledge is unknown to the forgotten conditioned souls. Çréla
Vyäsadeva, who is the incarnation of the Lord, thus compiled the Vedic
literatures to revive the lost memory of the conditioned souls about their
eternal relation with the Lord. One should therefore try to understand the
Vedic scriptures, or the nectar transferred by the Lord to His consorts in the
conjugal humor, from the lotuslike mouth of Vyäsadeva or Çukadeva. By
gradual development of transcendental knowledge, one can rise to the stage of
the transcendental arts of music and dance displayed by the Lord in His
räsa-lélä. But without having the Vedic knowledge one can hardly understand
the transcendental nature of the Lord’s räsa dance and music. The pure
devotees of the Lord, however, can equally relish the nectar in the form of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
profound philosophical discourses and in the form of kissing by the Lord in the
räsa dance, as there is no mundane distinction between the two.
TEXT 25
WTadevaTMa>aU raJaNa( NaardaYa ivPa*C^Tae )
vedGa>aaeR_>YaDaaTa( Saa+aad( Yadah hirraTMaNa" )) 25 ))
etad evätma-bhü räjan
näradäya vipåcchate
veda-garbho ’bhyadhät säkñäd
yad äha harir ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
etat—on this matter; eva—exactly; ätma-bhüù—the firstborn (Brahmäjé);
räjan—my dear King; näradäya—unto Närada Muni; vipåcchate—having
inquired about it from; veda-garbhaù—one who is impregnated with Vedic
knowledge from birth; abhyadhät—apprised; säkñät—directly; yat äha—what
he spoke; hariù—the Lord; ätmanaù—unto His own (Brahmä).
TRANSLATION
My dear King, Brahmä, the firstborn, on being questioned by Närada,
exactly apprised him on this subject, as it was directly spoken by the Lord to
His own son, who was impregnated with Vedic knowledge from his very birth.
PURPORT
As soon as Brahmä was born of the abdominal lotus petals of Viñëu, he was
impregnated with Vedic knowledge, and therefore he is known as veda-garbha,
or a Vedäntist from the embryo. Without Vedic knowledge, or perfect,
infallible knowledge, no one can create anything. All scientific knowledge and
perfect knowledge are Vedic. One can get all types of information from the
Vedas, and as such, Brahmä was impregnated with all-perfect knowledge so
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
that it was possible for him to create. Thus Brahmä knew the perfect
description of creation, as it was exactly apprised to him by the Supreme Lord
Hari. Brahmä, on being questioned by Närada, told Närada exactly what he
had heard directly from the Lord. Närada again told exactly the same thing to
Vyäsa, and Vyäsa also told Çukadeva exactly what he heard from Närada. And
Çukadeva was going to repeat the same statements as he had heard them from
Vyäsa. That is the way of Vedic understanding. The language of the Vedas can
be revealed only by the above-mentioned disciplic succession, and not
otherwise.
There is no use in theories. Knowledge must be factual. There are many
things that are complicated, and one cannot understand them unless they are
explained by one who knows. The Vedic knowledge is also very difficult to
know and must be learned by the above-mentioned system; otherwise it is not
at all understood.
Çukadeva Gosvämé, therefore, prayed for the mercy of the Lord so that he
might be able to repeat the very same message that was spoken directly by the
Lord to Brahmä, or what was directly spoken by Brahmä to Närada. Therefore
the statements of creation explained by Çukadeva Gosvämé are not at all, as
the mundaners suggest, theoretical, but are perfectly correct. One who hears
these messages and tries to assimilate them gets perfect information of the
material creation.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Fourth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “The process of Creation.”
Chapter Five
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The Cause of All Causes
TEXT 1
Naard ovac
devdev NaMaSTae_STau >aUTa>aavNa PaUvRJa )
Tad( ivJaaNaqih YaJjaNaMaaTMaTatviNadXaRNaMa( )) 1 ))
närada uväca
deva-deva namas te ’stu
bhüta-bhävana pürvaja
tad vijänéhi yaj jïänam
ätma-tattva-nidarçanam
SYNONYMS
näradaù uväca—Çré Närada said; deva—of all demigods; deva—the demigod;
namaù—obeisances; te—unto you as; astu—are; bhüta-bhävana—the
generator of all living beings; pürva-ja—the firstborn; tat vijänéhi—please
explain that knowledge; yat jïänam—which knowledge;
ätma-tattva—transcendental; nidarçanam—specifically directs.
TRANSLATION
Çré Närada Muni asked Brahmäjé: O chief amongst the demigods, O firstborn
living entity, I beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto you. Please tell me
that transcendental knowledge which specifically directs one to the truth of the
individual soul and the Supersoul.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The perfection of the paramparä system, or the path of disciplic succession,
is further confirmed. In the previous chapter it has been established that
Brahmäjé, the firstborn living entity, received knowledge directly from the
Supreme Lord, and the same knowledge was imparted to Närada, the next
disciple. Närada asked to receive the knowledge, and Brahmäjé imparted it
upon being asked. Therefore, asking for transcendental knowledge from the
right person and receiving it properly is the regulation of the disciplic
succession. This process is recommended in the Bhagavad-gétä (4.2). The
inquisitive student must approach a qualified spiritual master to receive
transcendental knowledge by surrender, submissive inquiries and service.
Knowledge received by submissive inquiries and service is more effective than
knowledge received in exchange for money. A spiritual master in the line of
disciplic succession from Brahmä and Närada has no demand for dollars and
cents. A bona fide student has to satisfy him by sincere service to obtain
knowledge of the relation and nature of the individual soul and the Supersoul.
TEXT 2
Yad]UPa& YadiDaïaNa& YaTa" Sa*íiMad& Pa[>aae )
YaTSa&SQa& YaTPar& YaÀ TaTa( Tatv& vd TatvTa" )) 2 ))
yad rüpaà yad adhiñöhänaà
yataù såñöam idaà prabho
yat saàsthaà yat paraà yac ca
tat tattvaà vada tattvataù
SYNONYMS
yat—what; rüpam—the symptoms of manifestation; yat—what;
adhiñöhänam—background; yataù—from where; såñöam—created; idam—this
world; prabho—O my father; yat—in which; saàstham—conserved;
yat—what; param—under control; yat—what are; ca—and; tat—of this;
tattvam—the symptoms; vada—please describe; tattvataù—factually.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
My dear father, please describe factually the symptoms of this manifest
world. What is its background? How is it created? How is it conserved? And
under whose control is all this being done?
PURPORT
The inquiries by Närada Muni on the basis of factual cause and effect
appear very reasonable. The atheists, however, put forward many self-made
theories without any touch of cause and effect. The manifested world, as well
as the spirit soul, is still unexplained by the godless atheists through the
medium of experimental knowledge, although they have put forward many
theories manufactured by their fertile brains. Contrary to such mental
speculative theories of creation, however, Närada Muni wanted to know all
the facts of creation in truth, and not by theories.
Transcendental knowledge regarding the soul and the Supersoul includes
knowledge of the phenomenal world and the basis of its creation. In the
phenomenal world three things are factually observed by any intelligent man:
the living beings, the manifest world, and the ultimate control over them. The
intelligent man can see that neither the living entity nor the phenomenal
world are creations of chance. The symmetry of creation and its regulative
actions and reactions suggests the plan of an intelligent brain behind them,
and by genuine inquiry one may find out the ultimate cause with the help of
one who knows them factually.
TEXT 3
Sav| ùeTad( >avaNa( ved >aUTa>aVYa>avTPa[>au" )
k-raMal/k-vd( ivì& ivjaNaaviSaTa& Tav )) 3 ))
sarvaà hy etad bhavän veda
bhüta-bhavya-bhavat-prabhuù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
karämalaka-vad viçvaà
vijïänävasitaà tava
SYNONYMS
sarvam—all and everything; hi—certainly; etat—this; bhavän—your good self;
veda—know; bhüta—all that is created or born; bhavya—all that will be
created or born; bhavat—all that is being created; prabhuù—you, the master of
everything; kara-ämalaka-vat—just like a walnut within your grip;
viçvam—the universe; vijïäna-avasitam—within your knowledge scientifically;
tava—your.
TRANSLATION
My dear father, all this is known to you scientifically because whatever was
created in the past, whatever will be created in the future, or whatever is being
created at present, as well as everything within the universe, is within your
grip, just like a walnut.
PURPORT
Brahmä is the direct creator of the manifested universe and everything
within the universe. He therefore knows what happened in the past, what will
happen in the future, and what is happening at present. Three principal items,
namely the living being, the phenomenal world and the controller, are all in
continuous action—past, present and future—and the direct manager is
supposed to know everything of such actions and reactions, as one knows
about a walnut within the grip of one’s palm. The direct manufacturer of a
particular thing is supposed to know how he learned the art of manufacturing,
where he got the ingredients, how he set it up and how the products in the
manufacturing process are being turned out. Because Brahmä is the firstborn
living being, naturally he is supposed to know everything about creative
functions.
TEXT 4
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
YaiÜjaNaae YadaDaarae YaTParSTv& YadaTMak-" )
Wk-" Sa*JaiSa >aUTaaiNa >aUTaErevaTMaMaaYaYaa )) 4 ))
yad-vijïäno yad-ädhäro
yat-paras tvaà yad-ätmakaù
ekaù såjasi bhütäni
bhütair evätma-mäyayä
SYNONYMS
yat-vijïänaù—the source of knowledge; yat-ädhäraù—under whose protection;
yat-paraù—under whose subordination; tvam—you; yat-ätmakaù—in what
capacity; ekaù—alone; såjasi—you are creating; bhütäni—the living entities;
bhütaiù—with the help of the material elements; eva—certainly; ätma—self;
mäyayä—by potency.
TRANSLATION
My dear father, what is the source of your knowledge? Under whose
protection are you standing? And under whom are you working? What is your
real position? Do you alone create all entities with material elements by your
personal energy?
PURPORT
It was known to Çré Närada Muni that Lord Brahmä attained creative
energy by undergoing severe austerities. As such, he could understand that
there was someone else superior to Brahmäjé who invested Brahmä with the
power of creation. Therefore he asked all the above questions. Discoveries of
progressive scientific achievements are therefore not independent. The
scientist has to attain the knowledge of a thing already existing by means of
the wonderful brain made by someone else. A scientist can work with the help
of such an awarded brain, but it is not possible for the scientist to create his
own or a similar brain. Therefore no one is independent in the matter of any
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
creation, nor is such creation automatic.
TEXT 5
AaTMaNa( >aavYaSae TaaiNa Na Para>aavYaNa( SvYaMa( )
AaTMaXai¢-Maví>Ya O<aRNaai>airva©-Ma" )) 5 ))
ätman bhävayase täni
na paräbhävayan svayam
ätma-çaktim avañöabhya
ürëanäbhir iväklamaù
SYNONYMS
ätman (ätmani)—by self; bhävayase—manifest; täni—all those; na—not;
paräbhävayan—being defeated; svayam—yourself;
ätma-çaktim—self-sufficient power; avañöabhya—being employed;
ürëa-näbhiù—the spider; iva—like; aklamaù—without help.
TRANSLATION
As the spider very easily creates the network of its cobweb and manifests its
power of creation without being defeated by others, so also you yourself, by
employment of your self-sufficient energy, create without any other’s help.
PURPORT
The best example of self-sufficiency is the sun. The sun does not require to
be illuminated by any other body. Rather, it is the sun which helps all other
illuminating agents, for in the presence of the sun no other illuminating agent
becomes prominent. Närada compared the position of Brahmä to the
self-sufficiency of the spider, who creates its own field of activities without any
other’s help by employment of its own energetic creation of saliva.
TEXT 6
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Naah& ved Par& ùiSMaàaPar& Na SaMa& iv>aae )
NaaMaæPaGau<aE>aaRVYa& SadSaTa( ik-iÄdNYaTa" )) 6 ))
nähaà veda paraà hy asmin
näparaà na samaà vibho
näma-rüpa-guëair bhävyaà
sad-asat kiïcid anyataù
SYNONYMS
na—do not; aham—myself; veda—know; param—superior; hi—for; asmin—in
this world; na—neither; aparam—inferior; na—nor; samam—equal; vibho—O
great one; näma—name; rüpa—characteristics; guëaiù—by qualification;
bhävyam—all that is created; sat—eternal; asat—temporary; kiïcit—or
anything like that; anyataù—from any other source.
TRANSLATION
Whatever we can understand by the nomenclature, characteristics and
features of a particular thing—superior, inferior or equal, eternal or
temporary—is not created from any source other than that of Your Lordship,
thou so great.
PURPORT
The manifested world is full of varieties of created beings in others. In
human society the human being is considered to be the superior living being,
and amongst the human beings there are also different varieties: good, bad,
equal, etc. But Närada Muni took for granted that none of them has any source
of generation besides his father, Brahmäjé. Therefore he wanted to know all
about them from Lord Brahmä.
TEXT 7
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Sa >avaNacrd( gaaer& YaTa( TaPa" SauSaMaaihTa" )
TaeNa %edYaSae NaSTv& ParaXaªa& c YaC^iSa )) 7 ))
sa bhavän acarad ghoraà
yat tapaù susamähitaù
tena khedayase nas tvaà
parä-çaìkäà ca yacchasi
SYNONYMS
saù—he; bhavän—your good self; acarat—undertook; ghoram—severe; yat
tapaù—meditation; su-samähitaù—in perfect discipline; tena—for that reason;
khedayase—gives pain; naù—ourselves; tvam—your good self; parä—the
ultimate truth; çaìkäm—doubts; ca—and; yacchasi—giving us a chance.
TRANSLATION
Yet we are moved to wonder about the existence of someone more powerful
than you when we think of your great austerities in perfect discipline, although
your good self is so powerful in the matter of creation.
PURPORT
Following in the footsteps of Çré Närada Muni, one should not blindly
accept his spiritual master as God Himself. A spiritual master is duly respected
on a par with God, but a spiritual master claiming to be God Himself should at
once be rejected. Närada Muni accepted Brahmä as the Supreme due to Lord
Brahmä’s wonderful acts in creation, but doubts arose in him when he saw that
Lord Brahmä also worshiped some superior authority. The Supreme is supreme,
and He has no worshipable superior. The ahaìgrahopäsitä, or the one who
worships himself with the idea of becoming God Himself, is misleading, but the
intelligent disciple can at once detect that the Supreme God does not need to
worship anyone, including Himself, in order to become God. Ahaìgrahopäsanä
may be one of the processes for transcendental realization, but the
ahaìgrahopäsitä can never be God Himself. No one becomes God by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
undergoing a process of transcendental realization. Närada Muni thought of
Brahmäjé as the Supreme Person, but when he saw Brahmäjé engaged in the
process of transcendental realization, doubts arose in him. So he wanted to be
clearly informed.
TEXT 8
WTaNMae Pa*C^Ta" Sav| SavRj Sak-le/ìr )
ivJaaNaqih YaQaEvedMah& buDYae_NauXaaiSaTa" )) 8 ))
etan me påcchataù sarvaà
sarva-jïa sakaleçvara
vijänéhi yathaivedam
ahaà budhye ’nuçäsitaù
SYNONYMS
etat—all those; me—unto me; påcchataù—inquisitive; sarvam—all that is
inquired; sarva-jïa—one who knows everything; sakala—over all; éçvara—the
controller; vijänéhi—kindly explain; yathä—as; eva—they are; idam—this;
aham—myself; budhye—can understand; anuçäsitaù—just learning from you.
TRANSLATION
My dear father, you know everything, and you are the controller of all.
Therefore may all that I have inquired from you be kindly instructed to me so
that I may be able to understand it as your student.
PURPORT
The inquiries made by Närada Muni are very important for everyone
concerned, and as such Närada requested Brahmäjé to deem them suitable so
that all others who may come in the line of disciplic succession of the
Brahma-sampradäya may also know them properly without any difficulty.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 9
b]øaevac
SaMYak(- k-aåi<ak-SYaed& vTSa Tae ivicik-iTSaTaMa( )
Yadh& caeidTa" SaaEMYa >aGavÜqYaRdXaRNae )) 9 ))
brahmoväca
samyak käruëikasyedaà
vatsa te vicikitsitam
yad ahaà coditaù saumya
bhagavad-vérya-darçane
SYNONYMS
brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; samyak—perfectly; käruëikasya—of you,
who are very kind; idam—this; vatsa—my dear boy; te—your;
vicikitsitam—inquisitiveness; yat—by which; aham—myself;
coditaù—inspired; saumya—O gentle one; bhagavat—of the Personality of
Godhead; vérya—prowess; darçane—in the matter of.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: My dear boy Närada, being merciful to all (including me)
you have asked all these questions because I have been inspired to see into the
prowess of the Almighty Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Brahmäjé, being so questioned by Näradajé, congratulated him, for it is usual
for the devotees to become very enthusiastic whenever they are questioned
concerning the Almighty personality of Godhead. That is the sign of a pure
devotee of the Lord. Such discourses on the transcendental activities of the
Lord purify the atmosphere in which such discussions are held, and the
devotees thus become enlivened while answering such questions. It is purifying
both for the questioners and for one who answers the questions. The pure
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
devotees are not only satisfied by knowing everything about the Lord, but are
also eager to broadcast the information to others, for they want to see that the
glories of the Lord are known to everyone. Thus the devotee feels satisfied
when such an opportunity is offered to him. This is the basic principle of
missionary activities.
TEXT 10
NaaNa*Ta& Tav TaÀaiPa YaQaa Maa& Pa[b]vqiz >aae" )
AivjaYa Par& Mata WTaavtv& YaTaae ih Mae )) 10 ))
nänåtaà tava tac cäpi
yathä mäà prabravéñi bhoù
avijïäya paraà matta
etävat tvaà yato hi me
SYNONYMS
na—not; anåtam—false; tava—of yours; tat—that; ca—also; api—as you have
stated; yathä—in the matter of; mäm—of myself; prabravéñi—as you describe;
bhoù—O my son; avijïäya—without knowing; param—the Supreme;
mattaù—beyond myself; etävat—all that you have spoken; tvam—yourself;
yataù—for the reason of; hi—certainly; me—about me.
TRANSLATION
Whatever you have spoken about me is not false because unless and until
one is aware of the Personality of Godhead, who is the ultimate truth beyond
me, one is sure to be illusioned by observing my powerful activities.
PURPORT
“The frog in the well” logic illustrates that a frog residing in the atmosphere
and boundary of a well cannot imagine the length and breadth of the gigantic
ocean. Such a frog, when informed of the gigantic length and breadth of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ocean, first of all does not believe that there is such an ocean, and if someone
assures him that factually there is such a thing, the frog then begins to measure
it by imagination by means of pumping its belly as far as possible, with the
result that the tiny abdomen of the frog bursts and the poor frog dies without
any experience of the actual ocean. Similarly, the material scientists also want
to challenge the inconceivable potency of the Lord by measuring Him with
their froglike brains and their scientific achievements, but at the end they
simply die unsuccessfully, like the frog.
Sometimes a materially powerful man is accepted as God or the incarnation
of God without any knowledge of the factual God. Such a material assessment
may be gradually extended, and the attempt may reach to the highest limit of
Brahmäjé, who is the topmost living being within the universe and has a
duration of life unimaginable to the material scientist. As we get information
from the most authentic book of knowledge, the Bhagavad-gétä (8.17),
Brahmäjé’s one day and night is calculated to be some hundreds of thousands of
years on our planet. This long duration of life may not be believed by “the frog
in the well,” but persons who have a realization of the truths mentioned in the
Bhagavad-gétä accept the existence of a great personality who creates the
variegatedness of the complete universe. It is understood from the revealed
scriptures that the Brahmäjé of this universe is younger than all the other
Brahmäs in charge of the many, many universes beyond this, but none of them
can be equal to the Personality of Godhead.
Näradajé is one of the liberated souls, and after his liberation he was known
as Närada; otherwise, before his liberation, he was simply a son of a
maidservant. The questions may be asked why Näradajé was not aware of the
Supreme Lord and why he mis-conceived Brahmäjé to be the Supreme Lord,
although factually he was not. A liberated soul is never bewildered by such a
mistaken idea, so why did Näradajé ask all those questions just like an ordinary
man with a poor fund of knowledge? There was such bewilderment in Arjuna
also, although he is eternally the associate of the Lord. Such bewilderment in
Arjuna or in Närada takes place by the will of the Lord so that other,
nonliberated persons may realize the real truth and knowledge of the Lord.
The doubt arising in the mind of Närada about Brahmäjé’s becoming
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
all-powerful is a lesson for the frogs in the well, that they may not be
bewildered in misconceiving the identity of the Personality of Godhead (even
by comparison to a personality like Brahmä, so what to speak of ordinary men
who falsely pose themselves as God or an incarnation of God). The Supreme
Lord is always the Supreme, and as we have tried to establish many times in
these purports, no living being, even up to the standard of Brahmä, can claim
to be one with the Lord. One should not be misled when people worship a
great man as God after his death as a matter of hero worship. There were many
kings like Lord Rämacandra, the King of Ayodhyä, but none of them are
mentioned as God in the revealed scriptures. To be a good king is not
necessarily the qualification for being Lord Räma, but to be a great personality
like Kåñëa is the qualification for being the Personality of Godhead. If we
scrutinize the characters who took part in the Battle of Kurukñetra, we may
find that Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was no less a pious king than Lord
Rämacandra, and by character study Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was a better
moralist than Lord Kåñëa. Lord Kåñëa asked Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira to lie, but
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira protested. But that does not mean that Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira could be equal to Lord Rämacandra or Lord Kåñëa. The great
authorities have estimated Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira to be a pious man, but they
have accepted Lord Räma or Kåñëa as the Personality of Godhead. The Lord is
therefore a different identity in all circumstances, and no idea of
anthropomorphism can be applied to Him. The Lord is always the Lord, and a
common living being can never be equal to Him.
TEXT 11
YaeNa Svraeicza ivì& raeicTa& raecYaaMYahMa( )
YaQaak-aeR_iGanYaRQaa SaaeMaae YaQa+aRGa]hTaark-a" )) 11 ))
yena sva-rociñä viçvaà
rocitaà rocayämy aham
yathärko ’gnir yathä somo
yatharkña-graha-tärakäù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
yena—by whom; sva-rociñä—by His own effulgence; viçvam—all the world;
rocitam—already created potentially; rocayämi—do manifest; aham—I;
yathä—as much; arkaù—the sun; agniù—fire; yathä—as; somaù—the moon;
yathä—as also; åkña—the firmament; graha—the influential planets;
tärakäù—the stars.
TRANSLATION
I create after the Lord’s creation by His personal effulgence [known as the
brahmajyoti], just as when the sun manifests its fire, the moon, the firmament,
the influential planets and the twinkling stars also manifest their brightness.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmäjé said to Närada that his impression that Brahmä was not the
supreme authority in the creation was correct. Sometimes less intelligent men
have the foolish impression that Brahmä is the cause of all causes. But Närada
wanted to clear the matter by the statements of Brahmäjé, the supreme
authority in the universe. As the decision of the supreme court of a state is
final, similarly the judgment of Brahmäjé, the supreme authority in the
universe, is final in the Vedic process of acquiring knowledge. As we have
already affirmed in the previous verse, Näradajé was a liberated soul; therefore,
he was not one of the less intelligent men who accept a false god or gods in
their own ways. He represented himself as less intelligent and yet intelligently
presented a doubt to be cleared by the supreme authority so that the
uninformed might take note of it and be rightly informed about the intricacies
of the creation and the creator.
In this verse Brahmäjé clears up the wrong impression held by the less
intelligent and affirms that he creates the universal variegatedness after the
potential creation by the glaring effulgence of Lord Çré Kåñëa. Brahmäjé has
also separately given this statement in the saàhitä known as the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.40), where he says:
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yasya prabhä prabhavato jagad-aëòa-koöikoöiñv
açeña-vasudhädi-vibhüti-bhinnam
tad brahma niñkalam anantam açeña-bhütaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
“I serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead Govinda, the primeval Lord,
whose transcendental bodily effulgence, known as the brahmajyoti, which is
unlimited, unfathomed and all-pervasive, is the cause of the creation of
unlimited numbers of planets, etc., with varieties of climates and specific
conditions of life.”
The same statement is in the Bhagavad-gétä (14.27). Lord Kåñëa is the
background of the brahmajyoti (brahmaëo hi pratiñöhäham). In the Nirukti, or
Vedic dictionary, the import of pratiñöhä is mentioned as “that which
establishes.” So the brahmajyoti is not independent or self-sufficient. Lord Çré
Kåñëa is ultimately the creator of the brahmajyoti, mentioned in this verse as
sva-rociñä, or the effulgence of the transcendental body of the Lord. This
brahmajyoti is all-pervading, and all creation is made possible by its potential
power; therefore the Vedic hymns declare that everything that exists is being
sustained by the brahmajyoti (sarvaà khalv idaà brahma). Therefore the
potential seed of all creation is the brahmajyoti, and the same brahmajyoti,
unlimited and unfathomed, is established by the Lord. Therefore the Lord (Çré
Kåñëa) is ultimately the supreme cause of all creation (ahaà sarvasya
prabhavaù).
One should not expect the Lord to create like a blacksmith with a hammer
and other instruments. The Lord creates by His potencies. He has His
multifarious potencies (paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate). Just as the small seed
of a banyan fruit has the potency to create a big banyan tree, the Lord
disseminates all varieties of seeds by His potential brahmajyoti (sva-rociñä), and
the seeds are made to develop by the watering process of persons like Brahmä.
Brahmä cannot create the seeds, but he can manifest the seed into a tree, just
as a gardener helps plants and orchards to grow by the watering process. The
example cited here of the sun is very appropriate. In the material world the sun
is the cause of all illumination: fire, electricity, the rays of the moon, etc. All
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
luminaries in the sky are creations of the sun, the sun is the creation of the
brahmajyoti, and the brahmajyoti is the effulgence of the Lord. Thus the
ultimate cause of creation is the Lord.
TEXT 12
TaSMaE NaMaae >aGavTae vaSaudevaYa DaqMaih )
YaNMaaYaYaa duJaRYaYaa Maa& vdiNTa JaGad(GauåMa( )) 12 ))
tasmai namo bhagavate
väsudeväya dhémahi
yan-mäyayä durjayayä
mäà vadanti jagad-gurum
SYNONYMS
tasmai—unto Him; namaù—offer my obeisances; bhagavate—unto the
Personality of Godhead; väsudeväya—unto Lord Kåñëa; dhémahi—do meditate
upon Rim; yat—by whose; mäyayä—potencies; durjayayä—invincible;
mäm—unto me; vadanti—they say; jagat—the world; gurum—the master.
TRANSLATION
I offer my obeisances and meditate upon Lord Kåñëa [Väsudeva], the
Personality of Godhead, whose invincible potency influences them [the less
intelligent class of men] to call me the supreme controller.
PURPORT
As will be more clearly explained in the next verse, the illusory potency of
the Lord bewilders the less intelligent to accept Brahmäjé, or for that matter
any other person, as the Supreme Lord. Brahmäjé, however, refuses to be called
this, and he directly offers his respectful obeisances unto Lord Väsudeva, or Çré
Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, as he has already offered the same respects
to Him in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.1):
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
“The Supreme Lord is the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa, the primeval
Lord in His transcendental body, the ultimate cause of all causes. I worship
that primeval Lord Govinda.”
Brahmäjé is conscious of his actual position, and he knows how less
intelligent persons, bewildered by the illusory energy of the Lord, whimsically
accept anyone and everyone as God. A responsible personality like Brahmäjé
refuses to be addressed as the Supreme Lord by his disciples or subordinates,
but foolish persons praised by men of the nature of dogs, hogs, camels and asses
feel flattered to be addressed as the Supreme Lord. Why such persons take
pleasure in being addressed as God, or why such persons are addressed as God
by foolish admirers, is explained in the following verse.
TEXT 13
ivl/ÂMaaNaYaa YaSYa SQaaTauMaq+aaPaQae_MauYaa )
ivMaaeihTaa ivk-TQaNTae MaMaahiMaiTa duiDaRYa" )) 13 ))
vilajjamänayä yasya
sthätum ékñä-pathe ’muyä
vimohitä vikatthante
mamäham iti durdhiyaù
SYNONYMS
vilajjamänayä—by one who is ashamed; yasya—whose; sthätum—to stay;
ékñä-pathe—in front; amuyä—by the bewildering energy; vimohitäù—those
who are bewildered; vikatthante—talk nonsense; mama—it is mine; aham—I
am everything; iti—thus vituperating; durdhiyaù—thus ill conceived.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
The illusory energy of the Lord cannot take precedence, being ashamed of
her position, but those who are bewildered by her always talk nonsense, being
absorbed in thoughts of “It is I” and “It is mine.”
PURPORT
The invincibly powerful deluding energy of the Personality of God, or the
third energy, representing nescience, can bewilder the entire world of
animation, but still she is not strong enough to be able to stand in front of the
Supreme Lord. Nescience is behind the Personality of Godhead, where she is
powerful enough to mislead the living beings, and the primary symptom of
bewildered persons is that they talk nonsense. Nonsensical talks are not
supported by the principles of Vedic literatures, and first-grade nonsense talk
is “It is I, it is mine.” A godless civilization is exclusively conducted by such
false ideas, and such persons, without any factual realization of God, accept a
false God or falsely declare themselves to be God to mislead persons who are
already bewildered by the deluding energy. Those who are before the Lord,
however, and who surrender unto Him, cannot be influenced by the deluding
energy; therefore they are free from the misconception of “It is I, it is mine,”
and therefore they do not accept a false God or pose themselves as equal to the
Supreme Lord. Identification of the bewildered person is distinctly given in
this verse.
TEXT 14
d]VYa& k-MaR c k-al/ê Sv>aavae Jaqv Wv c )
vaSaudevaTParae b]øà caNYaae_QaaeR_iSTa TatvTa" )) 14 ))
dravyaà karma ca kälaç ca
svabhävo jéva eva ca
väsudevät paro brahman
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
na cänyo ’rtho ’sti tattvataù
SYNONYMS
dravyam—the ingredients (earth, water, fire, air and sky); karma—the
interaction; ca—and; kälaù—eternal time; ca—also; sva-bhävaù—intuition or
nature; jévaù—the living being; eva—certainly; ca—and; väsudevät—from
Väsudeva; paraù—differentiated parts; brahman—O brähmaëa; na—never;
ca—also; anyaù—separate; arthaù—value; asti—there is; tattvataù—in truth.
TRANSLATION
The five elementary ingredients of creation, the interaction thereof set up by
eternal time, and the intuition or nature of the individual living beings are all
differentiated parts and parcels of the Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, and in
truth there is no other value in them.
PURPORT
This phenomenal world is impersonally the representation of Väsudeva
because the ingredients of its creation, their interaction and the enjoyer of the
resultant action, the living being, are all produced by the external and internal
energies of Lord Kåñëa. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.4–5). The
ingredients, namely earth, water, fire, air and sky, as well as the conception of
material identity, intelligence and the mind, are produced of the external
energy of the Lord. The living entity who enjoys the interaction of the above
gross and subtle ingredients, as set up by eternal time, is an offshoot of internal
potency, with freedom to remain either in the material world or in the
spiritual world. In the material world the living entity is enticed by deluding
nescience, but in the spiritual world he is in the normal condition of spiritual
existence without any delusion. The living entity is known as the marginal
potency of the Lord. But in all circumstances, neither the material ingredients
nor the spiritual parts and parcels are independent of the Personality of
Godhead Väsudeva, for all things, whether products of the external, internal
or marginal potencies of the Lord, are simply displays of the same effulgence of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Lord, just as light, heat and smoke are displays of fire. None of them are
separate from the fire—all of them combine together to be called fire;
similarly, all phenomenal manifestations, as well as the effulgence of the body
of Väsudeva, are His impersonal features, whereas He eternally exists in His
transcendental form called sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù [Bs. 5.1], distinct from all
conceptions of the material ingredients mentioned above.
TEXT 15
NaaraYa<aPara veda deva NaaraYa<aa®Jaa" )
NaaraYa<aPara l/aek-a NaaraYa<aPara Ma%a" )) 15 ))
näräyaëa-parä vedä
devä näräyaëäìgajäù
näräyaëa-parä lokä
näräyaëa-parä makhäù
SYNONYMS
näräyaëa—the Supreme Lord; paräù—is the cause and is meant for;
vedäù—knowledge; deväù—the demigods; näräyaëa—the Supreme Lord;
aìga-jäù—assisting hands; näräyaëa—the personality of Godhead; paräù—for
the sake of; lokäù—the planets; näräyaëa—the Supreme Lord; paräù—just to
please Him; makhäù—all sacrifices.
TRANSLATION
The Vedic literatures are made by and are meant for the Supreme Lord, the
demigods are also meant for serving the Lord as parts of His body, the different
planets are also meant for the sake of the Lord, and different sacrifices are
performed just to please Him.
PURPORT
According to the Vedänta-sütras (çästra-yonitvät), the Supreme Lord is the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
author of all revealed scriptures, and all revealed scriptures are for knowing
the Supreme Lord. Veda means knowledge that leads to the Lord. The Vedas
are made just to revive the forgotten consciousness of the conditioned souls,
and any literature not meant for reviving God consciousness is rejected at
once by the näräyaëa-para devotees. Such deluding books of knowledge, not
having Näräyaëa as their aim, are not at all knowledge, but are the
playgrounds for crows who are interested in the rejected refuse of the world.
Any book of knowledge (science or art) must lead to the knowledge of
Näräyaëa; otherwise it must be rejected. That is the way of advancement of
knowledge. The supreme worshipable Deity is Näräyaëa. The demigods are
recommended secondarily for worship in relation to Näräyaëa because the
demigods are assisting hands in the management of the universal affairs. As
the officers of a kingdom are respected due to their relation to the king, the
demigods are worshiped due to their relation to the Lord. Without the Lord’s
relation, worship of the demigods is unauthorized (avidhi-pürvakam), just as it
is improper to water the leaves and branches of a tree without watering its
root. Therefore the demigods are also dependent on Näräyaëa. The lokas, or
different planets, are attractive because they have different varieties of life
and bliss partially representing the sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]. Everyone
wants the eternal life of bliss and knowledge. In the material world such an
eternal life of bliss and knowledge is progressively realized in the upper
planets, but after reaching there one is inclined to achieve further progress
along the path back to Godhead. Duration of life, with a proportionate
quantity of bliss and knowledge, may be increased from one planet to another.
One can increase the duration of life to thousands and hundreds of thousands
of years in different planets, but nowhere is there eternal life. But one who can
reach the highest planet, that of Brahmä, can aspire to reach the planets in the
spiritual sky, where life is eternal. Therefore, the progressive journey from one
planet to another culminates in reaching the supreme planet of the Lord
(mad-dhäma), where life is eternal and full of bliss and knowledge. All
different kinds of sacrifice are performed just to satisfy Lord Näräyaëa with a
view to reach Him, and the best sacrifice recommended in this age of Kali is
saìkértana-yajïa, the mainstay of the devotional service of a näräyaëa-para
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
devotee.
TEXT 16
NaaraYa<aParae YaaeGaae NaaraYa<aPar& TaPa" )
NaaraYa<aPar& jaNa& NaaraYa<aPara GaiTa" )) 16 ))
näräyaëa-paro yogo
näräyaëa-paraà tapaù
näräyaëa-paraà jïänaà
näräyaëa-parä gatiù
SYNONYMS
näräyaëa-paraù—just to know Näräyaëa; yogaù—concentration of mind;
näräyaëa-param—just with an aim to achieve Näräyaëa; tapaù—austerity;
näräyaëa-param—just to realize a glimpse of Näräyaëa; jïänam—culture of
transcendental knowledge; näräyaëa-parä—the path of salvation ends by
entering the kingdom of Näräyaëa; gatiù—progressive path.
TRANSLATION
All different types of meditation or mysticism are means for realizing
Näräyaëa. All austerities are aimed at achieving Näräyaëa. Culture of
transcendental knowledge is for getting a glimpse of Näräyaëa, and ultimately
salvation is entering the kingdom of Näräyaëa.
PURPORT
In meditation, there are two systems of yoga, namely añöäìga-yoga and
säìkhya-yoga. Añöäìga-yoga is practice in concentrating the mind, releasing
oneself from all engagements by the regulative processes of meditation,
concentration, sitting postures, blocking the movements of the internal
circulation of air, etc. Säìkhya-yoga is meant to distinguish the truth from
ephemerals. But ultimately both the systems are meant for realizing the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
impersonal Brahman, which is but a partial representation of Näräyaëa, the
Personality of Godhead. As we have explained before, the impersonal
Brahman effulgence is only a part of the Personality of Godhead. Impersonal
Brahman is situated on the person of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and as such, Brahman is the glorification of the personality of the Godhead.
This is confirmed both in the Bhagavad-gétä and in the Matsya Puräëa. Gati
refers to the ultimate destination, or the last word in liberation. Oneness with
the impersonal brahmajyoti is not ultimate liberation; superior to that is the
sublime association of the Personality of Godhead in one of the innumerable
spiritual planets in the Vaikuëöha sky. Therefore the conclusion is that
Näräyaëa, or the Personality of Godhead, is the ultimate destination for all
kinds of yoga systems as well as all kinds of liberation.
TEXT 17
TaSYaaiPa d]íurqXaSYa kU-$=SQaSYaai%l/aTMaNa" )
Sa*JYa& Sa*JaaiMa Sa*íae_hMaq+aYaEvai>acaeidTa" )) 17 ))
tasyäpi drañöur éçasya
küöa-sthasyäkhilätmanaù
såjyaà såjämi såñöo ’ham
ékñayaiväbhicoditaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—His; api—certainly; drañöuù—of the seer; éçasya—of the controller;
küöa-sthasya—of the one who is over everyone’s intelligence;
akhila-ätmanaù—of the Supersoul; såjyam—that which is already created;
såjämi—do I discover; såñöaù—created; aham—myself; ékñayä—by glance over;
eva—exactly; abhicoditaù—being inspired by Him.
TRANSLATION
Inspired by Him only, I discover what is already created by Him [Näräyaëa]
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
under His vision as the all-pervading Supersoul, and I also am created by Him
only.
PURPORT
Even Brahmä, the creator of the universe, admits that he is not the actual
creator but is simply inspired by the Lord Näräyaëa and therefore creates
under His superintendence those things already created by Him, the Supersoul
of all living entities. Two identities of soul, the Supersoul and the individual
soul, are admitted to be in the living entity, even by the greatest authority of
the universe. The Supersoul is the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead,
whereas the individual soul is the eternal servitor of the Lord. The Lord
inspires the individual soul to create what is already created by the Lord, and
by the good will of the Lord a discoverer of something in the world is
accredited as the discoverer. It is said that Columbus discovered the Western
Hemisphere, but actually the tract of land was not created by Columbus. The
vast tract of land was already there by the omnipotency of the Supreme Lord,
and Columbus, by dint of his past service unto the Lord, was blessed with the
credit of discovering America. Similarly, no one can create anything without
the sanction of the Lord, since everyone sees according to his ability. This
ability is also awarded by the Lord according to one’s willingness to render
service unto the Lord. One must therefore be voluntarily willing to render
service unto the Lord, and thus the Lord will empower the doer in proportion
to his surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord. Lord Brahmä is a great devotee
of the Lord; therefore he has been empowered or inspired by the Lord to create
such a universe as the one manifested before us. The Lord also inspired Arjuna
to fight in the field of Kurukñetra as follows:
tasmät tvam uttiñöha yaço labhasva
jitvä çatrün bhuìkñva räjyaà samåddham
mayaivaite nihatäù pürvam eva
nimitta-mätraà bhava savyasäcin
(Bg. 11.33)
The Battle of Kurukñetra, or any other battle at any place or at any time, is
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
made by the will of the Lord, for no one can arrange such mass annihilation
without the sanction of the Lord. The party of Duryodhana insulted Draupadé,
a great devotee of Kåñëa, and she appealed to the Lord as well as to all the
silent observers of this unwarranted insult. Arjuna was then advised by the
Lord to fight and take credit; otherwise the party of Duryodhana would be
killed anyway by the will of the Lord. So Arjuna was advised just to become
the agent and take the credit for killing great generals like Bhéñma and Karëa.
In the Vedic writings such as the Kaöha Upaniñad, the Lord is described as
the sarva-bhüta-antarätmä, or the Personality of Godhead who resides in
everyone’s body and who directs everything for one who is a soul surrendered
unto Him. Those who are not surrendered souls are put under the care of the
material nature (bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni yanträrüòhäni mäyayä [Bg. 18.61]);
therefore, they are allowed to do things on their own account and suffer the
consequences themselves. Devotees like Brahmä and Arjuna do not do
anything on their own account, but as fully surrendered souls they always
await indications from the Lord; therefore they attempt to do something
which appears very wonderful to ordinary vision. One of the Lord’s names is
Urukrama, or one whose actions are very wonderful and are beyond the
imagination of the living being, so the actions of His devotees sometimes
appear very wonderful due to the direction of the Lord. Beginning from
Brahmä, the topmost intelligent living entity within the universe, down to the
smallest ant, every living entity’s intelligence is overseen by the Lord in His
transcendental position as the witness of all actions. The subtle presence of
the Lord is felt by the intelligent man who can study the psychic effects of
thinking, feeling and willing.
TEXT 18
Satv& rJaSTaMa wiTa iNaGauR<aSYa Gau<aañYa" )
iSQaiTaSaGaRiNaraeDaezu Ga*hqTaa MaaYaYaa iv>aae" )) 18 ))
sattvaà rajas tama iti
nirguëasya guëäs trayaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sthiti-sarga-nirodheñu
gåhétä mäyayä vibhoù
SYNONYMS
sattvam—the mode of goodness; rajaù—the mode of passion; tamaù—the
mode of ignorance; iti—all these; nirguëasya—of the Transcendence; guëäù
trayaù—are three qualities; sthiti—maintenance; sarga—creation;
nirodheñu—in destruction; gåhétäù—accepted; mäyayä—by the external
energy; vibhoù—of the Supreme.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord is pure spiritual form, transcendental to all material
qualities, yet for the sake of the creation of the material world and its
maintenance and annihilation, He accepts through His external energy the
material modes of nature called goodness, passion and ignorance.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is the master of the external energy manifested by the
three material modes, namely goodness, passion and ignorance, and as master
of this energy He is ever unaffected by the influence of such bewildering
energy. The living entities, the jévas, however, are affected by or susceptible to
being influenced by such modes of material nature—that is the difference
between the Lord and the living entities. The living entities are subjected by
those qualities, although originally the living entities are qualitatively one with
the Lord. In other words, the material modes of nature, being products of the
energy of the Lord, are certainly connected with the Lord, but the connection
is just like that between the master and the servants. The Supreme Lord is the
controller of the material energy, whereas the living entities, who are
entangled in the material world, are neither masters nor controllers. Rather,
they become subordinate to or controlled by such energy. Factually the Lord is
eternally manifested by His internal potency or spiritual energy just like the
sun and its rays in the clear sky, but at times He creates the material energy, as
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the sun creates a cloud in the clear sky. As the sun is ever increasingly
unaffected by a spot of cloud, so also the unlimited Lord is unaffected by the
spot of material energy manifested at times in the unlimited span of the Lord’s
rays of brahmajyoti.
TEXT 19
k-aYaRk-ar<ak-Ta*RTve d]VYajaNai§-Yaaé[Yaa" )
bDNaiNTa iNaTYada Mau¢&- MaaiYaNa& Pauåz& Gau<aa" )) 19 ))
kärya-käraëa-kartåtve
dravya-jïäna-kriyäçrayäù
badhnanti nityadä muktaà
mäyinaà puruñaà guëäù
SYNONYMS
kärya—effect; käraëa—cause; kartåtve—in activities; dravya—material;
jïäna—knowledge; kriyä-äçrayäù—manifested by such symptoms;
badhnanti—conditions; nityadä—eternally; muktam—transcendental;
mäyinam—affected by material energy; puruñam—the living entity;
guëäù—the material modes.
TRANSLATION
These three modes of material nature, being further manifested as matter,
knowledge and activities, put the eternally transcendental living entity under
conditions of cause and effect and make him responsible for such activities.
PURPORT
Because they are between the internal and external potencies, the eternally
transcendental living entities are called the marginal potency of the Lord.
Factually, the living entities are not meant to be so conditioned by material
energy, but due to their being affected by the false sense of lording it over the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
material energy, they come under the influence of such potency and thus
become conditioned by the three modes of material nature. This external
energy of the Lord covers up the pure knowledge of the living entity’s
eternally existing with Him, but the covering is so constant that it appears that
the conditioned soul is eternally ignorant. Such is the wonderful action of
mäyä, or external energy manifested as if materially produced. By the covering
power of the material energy, the material scientist cannot look beyond the
material causes, but factually, behind the material manifestations, there are
adhibhüta, adhyätma and adhidaiva actions, which the conditioned soul in the
mode of ignorance cannot see. The adhibhüta manifestation entails repetitions
of births and deaths with old age and diseases, the adhyätma manifestation
conditions the spirit soul, and the adhidaiva manifestation is the controlling
system. These are the material manifestations of cause and effect and the sense
of responsibility of the conditioned actors. They are, after all, manifestations
of the conditioned state, and the human being’s freedom from such a
conditioned state is the highest perfectional attainment.
TEXT 20
Sa Wz >aGavaiçm®Eiñi>areTaErDaae+aJa" )
Svl/i+aTaGaiTab]RøNa( SaveRza& MaMa ceìr" )) 20 ))
sa eña bhagaväû liìgais
tribhir etair adhokñajaù
svalakñita-gatir brahman
sarveñäà mama ceçvaraù
SYNONYMS
saù—He; eñaù—this; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; liìgaiù—by the
symptoms; tribhiù—by the three; etaiù—by all these; adhokñajaù—the
Superseer Transcendence; su-alakñita—veritably unseen; gatiù—movement;
brahman—O Närada; sarveñäm—of everyone; mama—mine; ca—as also;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
éçvaraù—the controller.
TRANSLATION
O Brähmaëa Närada, the Superseer, the transcendent Lord, is beyond the
perception of the material senses of the living entities because of the
above-mentioned three modes of nature. But He is the controller of everyone,
including me.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä (7.24–25) the Lord has declared very clearly that the
impersonalist, who gives more importance to the transcendental rays of the
Lord as brahmajyoti and who concludes that the Absolute Truth is ultimately
impersonal and only manifests a form at a time of necessity, is less intelligent
than the personalist, however much the impersonalist may be engaged in
studying the Vedänta. The fact is that such impersonalists are covered by the
above-mentioned three modes of material nature; therefore, they are unable to
approach the transcendental Personality of the Lord. The Lord is not
approachable by everyone because He is curtained by His yogamäyä potency.
But one should not wrongly conclude that the Lord was formerly unmanifested
and has now manifested Himself in the human form. This misconception of
the formlessness of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is due to the
yogamäyä curtain of the Lord and can be removed only by the Supreme Will,
as soon as the conditioned soul surrenders unto Him. The devotees of the Lord
who are transcendental to the above-mentioned three modes of material
nature can see the all-blissful transcendental form of the Lord with their
vision of love in the attitude of pure devotional service.
TEXT 21
k-al&/ k-MaR Sv>aav& c MaaYaeXaae MaaYaYaa SvYaa )
AaTMaNa( Yad*C^Yaa Pa[aá& ivbu>aUzuåPaadde )) 21 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kälaà karma svabhävaà ca
mäyeço mäyayä svayä
ätman yadåcchayä präptaà
vibubhüñur upädade
SYNONYMS
kälam—eternal time; karma—the fate of the living entity;
svabhävam—nature; ca—also; mäyä—potency; éçaù—the controller;
mäyayä—by the energy; svayä—of His own; ätman (ätmani)—unto His Self;
yadåcchayä—independently; präptam—being merged in;
vibubhüñuù—appearing differently; upädade—accepted for being created
again.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, who is the controller of all energies, thus creates, by His own
potency, eternal time, the fate of all living entities, and their particular nature,
for which they were created, and He again merges them independently.
PURPORT
The creation of the material world, wherein the conditioned souls are
allowed to act subordinately by the Supreme Lord, takes place again and again
after being repeatedly annihilated. The material creation is something like a
cloud in the unlimited sky. The real sky is the spiritual sky, eternally filled
with the rays of the brahmajyoti, and a portion of this unlimited sky is covered
by the mahat-tattva cloud of the material creation, in which the conditioned
souls, who want to lord it against the will of the Lord, are put into play as they
desire under the control of the Lord by the agency of His external energy. As
the rainy season appears and disappears regularly, the creation takes place and
is again annihilated under the control of the Lord, as confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gétä (8.19). So the creation and annihilation of the material worlds is
a regular action of the Lord just to allow the conditioned souls to play as they
like and thereby create their own fate of being differently created again in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
terms of their independent desires at the time of annihilation. The creation,
therefore, takes place at a historical date (as we are accustomed to think of
everything which has a beginning in our tiny experience). The process of
creation and annihilation is called anädi, or without reference to date
regarding the time the creation first took place, because the duration of even a
partial creation is 8,640,000,000 years. The law of creation is, however, as
mentioned in the Vedic literatures, that it is created at certain intervals and is
again annihilated by the will of the Lord. The whole material or even the
spiritual creation is a manifestation of the energy of the Lord, just as the light
and heat of a fire are different manifestations of the fire’s energy. The Lord
therefore exists in His impersonal form by such expansion of energy, and the
complete creation rests on His impersonal feature. Nonetheless He keeps
Himself distinct from such creation as the pürëam (or complete), and so no
one should wrongly think that His personal feature is not existent due to His
impersonal unlimited expansions. The impersonal expansion is a manifestation
of His energy, and He is always in His personal feature despite His
innumerable unlimited expansions of impersonal energies (Bg. 9.5–7). For
human intelligence it is very difficult to conceive how the whole creation rests
on His expansion of energy, but the Lord has given a very good example in the
Bhagavad-gétä. It is said that although the air and the atoms rest within the
huge expansion of the sky, which is like the resting reservoir of everything
materially created, still the sky remains separate and unaffected. Similarly
although the Supreme Lord maintains everything created by His expansion of
energy, He always remains separate. This is accepted even by Çaìkaräcärya,
the great advocate of the impersonal form of the Absolute. He says näräyaëaù
paro ’vyaktät, or Näräyaëa exists separately, apart from the impersonal creative
energy. The whole creation thus merges within the body of transcendental
Näräyaëa at the time of annihilation, and the creation emanates from His
body again with the same unchanging categories of fate and individual nature.
The individual living entities, being parts and parcels of the Lord, are
sometimes described as ätmä, qualitatively one in spiritual constitution. But
because such living entities are apt to be attracted to the material creation,
actively and subjectively, they are therefore different from the Lord.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 22
k-al/ad( Gau<aVYaiTak-r" Pair<aaMa" Sv>aavTa" )
k-MaR<aae JaNMa MahTa" PauåzaiDaiïTaad>aUTa( )) 22 ))
käläd guëa-vyatikaraù
pariëämaù svabhävataù
karmaëo janma mahataù
puruñädhiñöhitäd abhüt
SYNONYMS
kälät—from eternal time; guëa-vyatikaraù—transformation of the modes by
reaction; pariëämaù—transformation; svabhävataù—from the nature;
karmaëaù—of activities; janma—creation; mahataù—of the mahat-tattva;
puruña-adhiñöhität—because of the puruña incarnation of the Lord; abhüt—it
took place.
TRANSLATION
After the incarnation of the first puruña [Käraëärëavaçäyé Viñëu], the
mahat-tattva, or the principles of material creation, take place, and then time is
manifested, and in course of time the three qualities appear. Nature means the
three qualitative appearances. They transform into activities.
PURPORT
By the omnipotency of the Supreme Lord, the whole material creation
evolves by the process of transformation and reactions one after another, and
by the same omnipotency, they are wound up again one after another and
conserved in the body of the Supreme. Käla, or time, is the synonym of nature
and is the transformed manifestation of the principles of material creation. As
such, käla may be taken as the first cause of all creation, and by transformation
of nature different activities of the material world become visible. These
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
activities may be taken up as the natural instinct of each and every living
being, or even of the inert objects, and after the manifestation of activities
there are varieties of products and by-products of the same nature. Originally
these are all due to the Supreme Lord. The Vedänta-sütras and the Bhägavatam
thus begin with the Absolute Truth as the beginning of all creations (janmädy
asya yataù [SB 1.1.1]).
TEXT 23
MahTaSTau ivku-vaR<aad]Ja"SatvaePab*&ihTaaTa( )
TaMa"Pa[DaaNaSTv>avd( d]VYajaNai§-YaaTMak-" )) 23 ))
mahatas tu vikurväëäd
rajaù-sattvopabåàhität
tamaù-pradhänas tv abhavad
dravya-jïäna-kriyätmakaù
SYNONYMS
mahataù—of the mahat-tattva; tu—but; vikurväëät—being transformed;
rajaù—the material mode of passion; sattva—the mode of goodness;
upabåàhität—because of being increased; tamaù—the mode of darkness;
pradhänaù—being prominent; tu—but; abhavat—took place; dravya—matter;
jïäna—material knowledge; kriyä-ätmakaù—predominantly material
activities.
TRANSLATION
Material activities are caused by the mahat-tattva’s being agitated. At first
there is transformation of the modes of goodness and passion, and later—due to
the mode of ignorance—matter, its knowledge, and different activities of
material knowledge come into play.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Material creations of every description are more or less due to the
development of the mode of passion (rajas). The mahat-tattva is the principle
of material creation, and when it is agitated by the will of the Supreme at first
the modes of passion and goodness are prominent, and afterwards the mode of
passion, being generated in due course by material activities of different
varieties, becomes prominent, and the living entities are thus involved more
and more in ignorance. Brahmä is the representation of the mode of passion,
and Viñëu is the representation of the mode of goodness, while the mode of
ignorance is represented by Lord Çiva, the father of material activities.
Material nature is called the mother, and the initiator for materialistic life is
the father, Lord Çiva. All material creation by the living entities is therefore
initiated by the mode of passion. With the advancement of the duration of life
in a particular millennium, the different modes act by gradual development. In
the age of Kali (when the mode of passion is most prominent) material
activities of different varieties, in the name of advancement of human
civilization, take place, and the living entities become more and more involved
in forgetting their real identity—the spiritual nature. By a slight cultivation of
the mode of goodness, a glimpse of spiritual nature is perceived, but due to the
prominence of the mode of passion, the mode of goodness becomes
adulterated. Therefore one cannot transcend the limits of the material modes,
and therefore realization of the Lord, who is always transcendental to the
modes of material nature, becomes very difficult for the living entities, even
though prominently situated in the mode of goodness through cultivation of
the various methods. In other words, the gross matters are adhibhütam, their
maintenance is adhidaivam, and the initiator of material activities is called
adhyätmam. In the material world these three principles act as prominent
features, namely as raw material, its regular supplies, and its use in different
varieties of material creations for sense enjoyment by the bewildered entities.
TEXT 24
Saae_hªar wiTa Pa[ae¢-ae ivku-vRNa( SaMa>aUiT}aDaa )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vEk-airk-STaEJaSaê TaaMaSaêeiTa YaiÙda )
d]VYaXai¢-" i§-YaaXai¢-jaRNaXai¢-iriTa Pa[>aae )) 24 ))
so ’haìkära iti prokto
vikurvan samabhüt tridhä
vaikärikas taijasaç ca
tämasaç ceti yad-bhidä
dravya-çaktiù kriyä-çaktir
jïäna-çaktir iti prabho
SYNONYMS
saù—the very same thing; ahaìkäraù—ego; iti—thus; proktaù—said;
vikurvan—being transformed; samabhüt—became manifested; tridhä—in
three features; vaikärikaù—in the mode of goodness; taijasaù—in the mode of
passion; ca—and; tämasaù—in the mode of ignorance; ca—also; iti—thus;
yat—what is; bhidä—divided; dravya-çaktiù—powers that evolve matter;
kriyä-çaktiù—initiation that creates; jïäna-çaktiù—intelligence that guides;
iti—thus; prabho—O master.
TRANSLATION
The self-centered materialistic ego, thus being transformed into three
features, becomes known as the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance in
three divisions, namely the powers that evolve matter, knowledge of material
creations, and the intelligence that guides such materialistic activities. Närada,
you are quite competent to understand this.
PURPORT
Materialistic ego, or the sense of identification with matter, is grossly
self-centered, devoid of clear knowledge of the existence of God. And this
self-centered egoism of the materialistic living entities is the cause of their
being conditioned by the other paraphernalia and continuing their bondage of
material existence. In the Bhagavad-gétä this self-centered egoism is very nicely
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
explained in the Seventh Chapter (verses 24 through 27). The self-centered
impersonalist, without a clear conception of the personality of Godhead,
concludes in his own way that the personality of Godhead takes a material
shape from His original impersonal spiritual existence for a particular mission.
And this misleading conception of the Supreme Lord by the self-centered
impersonalist continues, even though he is seen to be very interested in the
Vedic literatures such as the Brahma-sütras and other highly intellectual
sources of knowledge. This ignorance of the personal feature of the Lord is due
simply to ignorance of the mixture of different modes. The impersonalist thus
cannot conceive of the Lord’s eternal spiritual form of eternal knowledge, bliss
and existence. The reason is that the Lord reserves the right of not exposing
Himself to the nondevotee who, even after a thorough study of literature like
the Bhagavad-gétä, remains an impersonalist simply by obstinacy. This
obstinacy is due to the action of yogamäyä, a personal energy of the Lord that
acts like an aide-de-camp by covering the vision of the obstinate impersonalist.
Such a bewildered human being is described as müòha, or grossly ignorant,
because he is unable to understand the transcendental form of the Lord as
being unborn and unchangeable. If the Lord takes a form or material shape
from His original impersonal feature, then it means that He is born and
changeable from impersonal to personal. But He is not changeable. Nor does
He ever take a new birth like a conditioned soul. The conditioned soul may
take a form birth after birth due to his conditional existence in matter, but the
self-centered impersonalists, by their gross ignorance, accept the Lord as one of
them because of self-centered egoism, even after so-called advancement of
knowledge in the Vedänta. The Lord, being situated in the heart of every
individual living entity, knows very well the tendency of such conditioned
souls in terms of past, present and future, but the bewildered conditioned soul
hardly can know Him in His eternal form. By the will of the Lord, therefore,
the impersonalist, even after knowing the Brahman and Paramätmä features of
the Lord, remains ignorant of His eternal personal feature as ever-existent
Näräyaëa, transcendental to all material creation.
The cause of such gross ignorance is constant engagement by the
materialistic man in the matter of artificially increasing material demands. To
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one has to purify the materialistic
senses by devotional service. The mode of goodness, or the brahminical culture
recommended in the Vedic literatures, is helpful to such spiritual realization,
and thus the jïäna-çakti stage of the conditioned soul is comparatively better
than the other two stages, namely dravya-çakti and kriyä-çakti. The whole
material civilization is manifested by a huge accumulation of materials, or, in
other words, raw materials for industrial purposes, and the industrial
enterprises (kriyä-çakti) are all due to gross ignorance of spiritual life. In order
to rectify this great anomaly of materialistic civilization, based on the
principles of dravya-çakti and kriyä-çakti, one has to adopt the process of
devotional service of the Lord by adoption of the principles of karma-yoga,
mentioned in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.27) as follows:
yat karoñi yad açnäsi
yaj juhoñi dadäsi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kuruñva mad-arpaëam
“O son of Kunté, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give
away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done as an
offering unto Me.”
TEXT 25
TaaMaSaadiPa >aUTaadeivRku-vaR<aad>aUà>a" )
TaSYa Maa}aa Gau<a" XaBdae il/®& Yad( d]í*d*XYaYaae" )) 25 ))
tämasäd api bhütäder
vikurväëäd abhün nabhaù
tasya mäträ guëaù çabdo
liìgaà yad drañöå-dåçyayoù
SYNONYMS
tämasät—from the darkness of false ego; api—certainly; bhüta-ädeù—of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
material elements; vikurväëät—because of transformation; abhüt—generated;
nabhaù—the sky; tasya—its; mäträ—subtle form; guëaù—quality;
çabdaù—sound; liìgam—characteristics; yat—as its; drañöå—the seer;
dåçyayoù—of what is seen.
TRANSLATION
From the darkness of false ego, the first of the five elements, namely the sky,
is generated. Its subtle form is the quality of sound, exactly as the seer is in
relationship with the seen.
PURPORT
The five elements, namely sky, air, fire, water and earth, are all but
different qualities of the darkness of false ego. This means that the false ego in
the sum total form of mahat-tattva is generated from the marginal potency of
the Lord, and due to this false ego of lording it over the material creation,
ingredients are generated for the false enjoyment of the living being. The
living being is practically the dominating factor over the material elements as
the enjoyer, though the background is the Supreme Lord. Factually, save and
except the Lord, no one can be called the enjoyer, but the living entity falsely
desires to become the enjoyer. This is the origin of false ego. When the
bewildered living being desires this, the shadow elements are generated by the
will of the Lord, and the living entities are allowed to run after them as after a
phantasmagoria.
It is said that first the tan-mäträ sound is created and then the sky, and in
this verse it is confirmed that actually it is so, but sound is the subtle form of
the sky, and the distinction is like that between the seer and the seen. The
sound is the representation of the actual object, as the sound produced
speaking of the object gives an idea of the description of the object. Therefore
sound is the subtle characteristic of the object. Similarly, sound representation
of the Lord, in terms of His characteristics, is the complete form of the Lord, as
was seen by Vasudeva and Mahäräja Daçaratha, the fathers of Lord Kåñëa and
Lord Räma. The sound representation of the Lord is nondifferent from the
Lord Himself because the Lord and His representation in sound are absolute
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
knowledge. Lord Caitanya has instructed us that in the holy name of the Lord,
as sound representation of the Lord, all the potencies of the Lord are invested.
Thus one can immediately enjoy the association of the Lord by the pure
vibration of the sound representation of His holy name, and the concept of the
Lord is immediately manifested before the pure devotee. A pure devotee,
therefore, is not aloof from the Lord even for a moment. The holy name of the
Lord, as recommended in the çästras—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa,
Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare—may therefore
be constantly chanted by the devotee aspiring to be constantly in touch with
the Supreme Lord. One who is thus able to associate with the Lord is sure to be
delivered from the darkness of the created world, which is a product of false
ego (tamasi mä jyotir gama).
TEXTS 26–29
Na>aSaae_Qa ivku-vaR<aad>aUTa( SPaXaRGau<aae_iNal/" )
ParaNvYaaC^Bdva&ê Pa[a<a AaeJa" Sahae bl/Ma( )) 26 ))
vaYaaeriPa ivku-vaR<aaTa( k-al/k-MaRSv>aavTa" )
odPaÛTa TaeJaae vE æPavTa( SPaXaRXaBdvTa( )) 27 ))
TaeJaSaSTau ivku-vaR<aadaSaqdM>aae rSaaTMak-Ma( )
æPavTa( SPaXaRvÀaM>aae gaaezvÀ ParaNvYaaTa( )) 28 ))
ivXaezSTau ivku-vaR<aadM>aSaae GaNDavaNa>aUTa( )
ParaNvYaad( rSaSPaXaRXaBdæPaGau<aaiNvTa" )) 29 ))
nabhaso ’tha vikurväëäd
abhüt sparça-guëo ’nilaù
paränvayäc chabdaväàç ca
präëa ojaù saho balam
väyor api vikurväëät
käla-karma-svabhävataù
udapadyata tejo vai
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
rüpavat sparça-çabdavat
tejasas tu vikurväëäd
äséd ambho rasätmakam
rüpavat sparçavac cämbho
ghoñavac ca paränvayät
viçeñas tu vikurväëäd
ambhaso gandhavän abhüt
paränvayäd rasa-sparçaçabda-
rüpa-guëänvitaù
SYNONYMS
nabhasaù—of the sky; atha—thus; vikurväëät—being transformed;
abhüt—generated; sparça—touch; guëaù—quality; anilaù—air;
para—previous; anvayät—by succession; çabdavän—full of sound; ca—also;
präëaù—life; ojaù—sense perception; sahaù—fat; balam—strength; väyoù—of
the air; api—also; vikurväëät—by transformation; käla—time;
karma—reaction of the past; svabhävataù—on the basis of nature;
udapadyata—generated; tejaù—fire; vai—duly; rüpavat—with form;
sparça—touch; çabdavat—with sound also; tejasaù—of the fire; tu—but;
vikurväëät—on being transformed; äsét—it so happened; ambhaù—water;
rasa-ätmakam—composed of juice; rüpavat—with form; sparçavat—with
touch; ca—and; ambhaù—water; ghoñavat—with sound; ca—and;
para—previous; anvayät—by succession; viçeñaù—variegatedness; tu—but;
vikurväëät—by transformation; ambhasaù—of water; gandhavän—odorous;
abhüt—became; para—previous; anvayät—by succession; rasa—juice;
sparça—touch; çabda—sound; rüpa-guëa-anvitaù—qualitative.
TRANSLATION
Because the sky is transformed, the air is generated with the quality of
touch, and by previous succession the air is also full of sound and the basic
principles of duration of life: sense perception, mental power and bodily
strength. When the air is transformed in course of time and nature’s course,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
fire is generated, taking shape with the sense of touch and sound. Since fire is
also transformed, there is a manifestation of water, full of juice and taste. As
previously, it also has form and touch and is also full of sound. And water,
being transformed from all variegatedness on earth, appears odorous and, as
previously, becomes qualitatively full of juice, touch, sound and form
respectively.
PURPORT
The whole process of creation is an act of gradual evolution and
development from one element to another, reaching up to the variegatedness
of the earth as so many trees, plants, mountains, rivers, reptiles, birds, animals
and varieties of human beings. The quality of sense perception is also
evolutionary, namely generated from sound, then touch, and from touch to
form. Taste and odor are also generated along with the gradual development of
sky, air, fire, water and earth. They are all mutually the cause and effect of one
another, but the original cause is the Lord Himself in plenary portion, as
Mahä-Viñëu lying in the causal water of the mahat-tattva. As such, Lord Kåñëa
is described in the Brahma-saàhitä as the cause of all causes, and this is
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (10.8) as follows:
ahaà sarvasya prabhavo
mattaù sarvaà pravartate
iti matvä bhajante mäà
budhä bhäva-samanvitäù
The qualities of sense perception are fully represented in the earth, and
they are manifested in other elements to a lesser extent. In the sky there is
sound only, whereas in the air there are sound and touch. In the fire there are
sound, touch and shape, and in the water there is taste also, along with the
other perceptions, namely sound, touch and shape. In the earth, however,
there are all the above-mentioned qualities with an extra development of odor
also. Therefore on the earth there is a full display of variegatedness of life,
which is originally started with the basic principle of air. Diseases of the body
take place due to derangement of air within the earthly body of the living
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
beings. Mental diseases result from special derangement of the air within the
body, and as such, yogic exercise is especially beneficial to keep the air in order
so that diseases of the body become almost nil by such exercises. When they
are properly done the duration of life also increases, and one can have control
over death also by such practices. A perfect yogé can have command over death
and quit the body at the right moment, when he is competent to transfer
himself to a suitable planet. The bhakti-yogi, however, surpasses all the yogés
because, by dint of his devotional service, he is promoted to the region beyond
the material sky and is placed in one of the planets in the spiritual sky by the
supreme will of the Lord, the controller of everything.
TEXT 30
vEk-airk-aNMaNaae Jaje deva vEk-airk-a dXa )
idGvaTaakR-Pa[ceTaae_iìvöqNd]aePaeNd]iMa}ak-a" )) 30 ))
vaikärikän mano jajïe
devä vaikärikä daça
dig-vätärka-praceto ’çvivahnéndropendra-
mitra-käù
SYNONYMS
vaikärikät—from the mode of goodness; manaù—the mind; jajïe—generated;
deväù—demigods; vaikärikäù—in the mode of goodness; daça—ten; dik—the
controller of directions; väta—the controller of air; arka—the sun;
pracetaù—Varuëa; açvi—the Açviné-kumäras; vahni—the fire-god; indra—the
King of heaven; upendra—the deity in heaven; mitra—one of the twelve
Ädityas; käù—Prajäpati Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
From the mode of goodness the mind is generated and becomes manifest, as
also the ten demigods controlling the bodily movements. Such demigods are
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
known as the controller of directions, the controller of air, the sun-god, the
father of Dakña Prajäpati, the Açviné-kumäras, the fire-god, the King of heaven,
the worshipable deity in heaven, the chief of the Ädityas, and Brahmäjé, the
Prajäpati. All come into existence.
PURPORT
Vaikärika is the neutral stage of creation, and tejas is the initiative of
creation, while tamas is the full display of material creation under the spell of
the darkness of ignorance. Manufacture of the “necessities of life” in factories
and workshops, excessively prominent in the age of Kali, or in the age of the
machine, is the summit stage of the quality of darkness. Such manufacturing
enterprises by human society are in the mode of darkness because factually
there is no necessity for the commodities manufactured. Human society
primarily requires food for subsistence, shelter for sleeping, defense for
protection, and commodities for satisfaction of the senses. The senses are the
practical signs of life, as will be explained in the next verse. Human civilization
is meant for purifying the senses, and objects of sense satisfaction should be
supplied as much as absolutely required, but not for aggravating artificial
sensory needs. Food, shelter, defense and sense gratification are all needs in
material existence. Otherwise, in his pure, uncontaminated state of original
life, the living entity has no such needs. The needs are therefore artificial, and
in the pure state of life there are no such needs. As such, increasing the
artificial needs, as is the standard of material civilization, or advancing the
economic development of human society, is a sort of engagement in darkness,
without knowledge. By such engagement, human energy is spoiled, because
human energy is primarily meant for purifying the senses in order to engage
them in satisfying the senses of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord, being
the supreme possessor of spiritual senses, is the master of the senses, Håñékeça.
Håñéka means the senses, and éça means the master. The Lord is not the servant
of the senses, or, in other words, He is not directed by the dictation of the
senses, but the conditioned souls or the individual living entities are servants
of the senses. They are conducted by the direction or dictation of the senses,
and therefore material civilization is a kind of engagement in sense
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
gratification only. The standard of human civilization should be to cure the
disease of sense gratification, and one can do this simply by becoming an agent
for satisfying the spiritual senses of the Lord. The senses are never to be
stopped in their engagements, but one should purify them by engaging them in
the pure service of sense gratification of the master of the senses. This is the
instruction of the whole Bhagavad-gétä. Arjuna wanted first of all to satisfy his
own senses by his decision not to fight with his kinsmen and friends, but Lord
Çré Kåñëa taught him the Bhagavad-gétä just to purify Arjuna’s decision for
sense gratification. Therefore Arjuna agreed to satisfy the senses of the Lord,
and thus he fought the Battle of Kurukñetra, as the Lord desired.
The Vedas instruct us to get out of the existence of darkness and go forward
on the path of light (tamasi mä jyotir gama). The path of light is therefore to
satisfy the senses of the Lord. Misguided men, or less intelligent men, follow
the path of self-realization without any attempt to satisfy the transcendental
senses of the Lord by following the path shown by Arjuna and other devotees
of the Lord. On the contrary, they artificially try to stop the activities of the
senses (yoga system), or they deny the transcendental senses of the Lord (jïäna
system). The devotees, however, are above the yogés and the jïänés because
pure devotees do not deny the senses of the Lord; they want to satisfy the
senses of the Lord. Only because of the darkness of ignorance do the yogés and
jïänés deny the senses of the Lord and thus artificially try to control the
activities of the diseased senses. In the diseased condition of the senses there is
too much engagement of the senses in increasing material needs. When one
comes to see the disadvantage of aggravating the sense activities, one is called
a jïäné, and when one tries to stop the activities of the senses by the practice
of yogic principles, he is called a yogi, but when one is fully aware of the
transcendental senses of the Lord and tries to satisfy His senses, one is called a
devotee of the Lord. The devotees of the Lord do not try to deny the senses of
the Lord, nor do they artificially stop the actions of the senses. But they do
voluntarily engage the purified senses in the service of the master of the
senses, as was done by Arjuna, thereby easily attaining the perfection of
satisfying the Lord, the ultimate goal of all perfection.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 31
TaEJaSaaTa( Tau ivku-vaR<aaidiNd]Yaai<a dXaa>avNa( )
jaNaXai¢-" i§-YaaXai¢-buRiÖ" Pa[a<aê TaEJaSaaE )
é[ae}a& TvGga]a<ad*iGJaûa vaGdaeMaeR!\ax(iga]PaaYav" )) 31 ))
taijasät tu vikurväëäd
indriyäëi daçäbhavan
jïäna-çaktiù kriyä-çaktir
buddhiù präëaç ca taijasau
çrotraà tvag-ghräëa-dåg-jihvä
väg-dor-meòhräìghri-päyavaù
SYNONYMS
taijasät—by the passionate egoism; tu—but; vikurväëät—transformation of;
indriyäëi—the senses; daça—ten; abhavan—generated; jïäna-çaktiù—the five
senses for acquiring knowledge; kriyä-çaktiù—the five senses of activities;
buddhiù—intelligence; präëaù—the living energy; ca—also; taijasau—all
products of the mode of passion; çrotram—the sense for hearing; tvak—the
sense for touching; ghräëa—the sense for smelling; dåk—the sense for seeing;
jihväù—the sense for tasting; väk—the sense for speaking; doù—the sense for
handling; meòhra—the genitals; aìghri—the legs; päyavaù—the sense for
evacuating.
TRANSLATION
By further transformation of the mode of passion, the sense organs like the
ear, skin, nose, eyes, tongue, mouth, hands, genitals, legs, and the outlet for
evacuating, together with intelligence and living energy, are all generated.
PURPORT
The living condition in material existence depends more or less on one’s
intelligence and powerful living energy. Intelligence to counteract the hard
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
struggle for existence is assisted by the senses for acquiring knowledge, and the
living energy maintains himself by manipulating the active organs, like the
hands and legs. But on the whole, the struggle for existence is an exertion of
the mode of passion. Therefore all the sense organs, headed by intelligence and
the living energy, präëa, are different products and by-products of the second
mode of nature, called passion. This mode of passion, however, is the product
of the air element, as described before.
TEXT 32
YadETae_Sa®Taa >aava >aUTaeiNd]YaMaNaaeGau<aa" )
YadaYaTaNaiNaMaaR<ae Na Xaeku-b]RøivtaMa )) 32 ))
yadaite ’saìgatä bhävä
bhütendriya-mano-guëäù
yadäyatana-nirmäëe
na çekur brahma-vittama
SYNONYMS
yadä—as long as; ete—all these; asaìgatäù—without being assembled;
bhäväù—remained so situated; bhüta—elements; indriya—senses;
manaù—mind; guëäù—modes of nature; yadä—so long; äyatana—the body;
nirmäëe—in being formed; na çekuù—was not possible; brahma-vit-tama—O
Närada, the best knower of transcendental knowledge.
TRANSLATION
O Närada, best of the transcendentalists, the forms of the body cannot take
place as long as these created parts, namely the elements, senses, mind and
modes of nature, are not assembled.
PURPORT
The different types of bodily construction of the living entities are exactly
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
like different types of motorcars manufactured by assembling the allied motor
parts. When the car is ready, the driver sits in the car and moves it as he
desires. This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (18.61): the living entity is
as if seated on the machine of the body, and the car of the body is moving by
the control of material nature, just as the railway trains are moving under the
direction of the controller. The living entities, however, are not the bodies;
they are separate from the cars of the body. But the less intelligent material
scientist cannot understand the process of assembling the parts of the body,
namely the senses, the mind and the qualities of the material modes. Every
living entity is a spiritual spark, part and parcel of the Supreme Being, and by
the kindness of the Lord, for the Father is kind to His sons, the individual
living beings are given a little freedom to act according to their will to lord it
over the material nature. Just as a father gives some playthings to the crying
child to satisfy him, the whole material creation is made possible by the will of
the Lord to allow the bewildered living entities to lord it over things as they
desire, although under the control of the agent of the Lord. The living entities
are exactly like small children playing the material field under the control of
the maidservant of the Lord (nature). They accept the mäyä, or the
maidservant, as all in all and thus wrongly conceive the Supreme Truth to be
feminine (goddess Durgä, etc.). The foolish, childlike materialists cannot reach
beyond the conception of the maidservant, material nature, but the intelligent
grown-up sons of the Lord know well that all the acts of material nature are
controlled by the Lord, just as a maidservant is under the control of the
master, the father of the undeveloped children.
The parts of the body, such as the senses, are the creation of the
mahat-tattva, and when they are assembled by the will of the Lord, the material
body comes into existence, and the living entity is allowed to use it for further
activities. This is explained as follows.
TEXT 33
Tada Sa&hTYa caNYaaeNYa& >aGavC^i¢-caeidTaa" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SadSatvMauPaadaYa cae>aYa& SaSa*JauùRd" )) 33 ))
tadä saàhatya cänyonyaà
bhagavac-chakti-coditäù
sad-asattvam upädäya
cobhayaà sasåjur hy adaù
SYNONYMS
tadä—all those; saàhatya—being assembled; ca—also; anyonyam—one
another; bhagavat—by the Personality of Godhead; çakti—energy;
coditäù—being applied; sat-asattvam—primarily and secondarily;
upädäya—accepting; ca—also; ubhayam—both; sasåjuù—came into existence;
hi—certainly; adaù—this universe.
TRANSLATION
Thus when all these became assembled by force of the energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, this universe certainly came into being by
accepting both the primary and secondary causes of creation.
PURPORT
In this verse it is clearly mentioned that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead exerts His different energies in the creation; it is not that He
Himself is transformed into material creations. He expands Himself by His
different energies, as well as by His plenary portions. In a corner of the
spiritual sky of brahmajyoti a spiritual cloud sometimes appears, and the
covered portion is called the mahat-tattva. The Lord then, by His plenary
portion as Mahä-Viñëu, lies down within the water of the mahat-tattva, and
the water is called the Causal Ocean (Käraëa-jala). While Mahä-Viñëu sleeps
within the Causal Ocean, innumerable universes are generated along with His
breathing. These universes are floating, and they are scattered all over the
Causal Ocean. They stay only during the breathing period of Mahä-Viñëu. In
each and every universal globe, the same Mahä-Viñëu enters again as
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and lies there on the serpentlike Çeña incarnation.
From His navel sprouts a lotus stem, and on the lotus, Brahmä, the lord of the
universe, is born. Brahmä creates all forms of living beings of different shapes
in terms of different desires within the universe. He also creates the sun, moon
and other demigods.
Therefore the chief engineer of the material creation is the Lord Himself,
as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.10). It is He only who directs the material
nature to produce all sorts of moving and nonmoving creations.
There are two modes of material creation: the creation of the collective
universes, as stated above, done by the Mahä-Viñëu, and the creation of the
single universe. Both are done by the Lord, and thus the universal shape, as we
can see, takes place.
TEXT 34
vzRPaUGaSahóaNTae Tad<@Maudke-XaYaMa( )
k-al/k-MaRSv>aavSQaae Jaqvae_JaqvMaJaqvYaTa( )) 34 ))
varña-püga-sahasränte
tad aëòam udake çayam
käla-karma-svabhäva-stho
jévo ’jévam ajévayat
SYNONYMS
varña-püga—many years; sahasra-ante—of thousands of years; tat—that;
aëòam—the universal globe; udake—in the causal water; çayam—being
drowned; käla—eternal time; karma—action; svabhäva-sthaù—according to
the modes of nature; jévaù—the Lord of the living beings;
ajévam—nonanimated; ajévayat—caused to be animated.
TRANSLATION
Thus all the universes remained thousands of eons within the water [the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Causal Ocean], and the Lord of living beings, entering in each of them, caused
them to be fully animated.
PURPORT
The Lord is described here as the jéva because He is the leader of all other
jévas (living entities). In the Vedas He is described as the nitya, the leader of all
other nityas. The Lord’s relation with the living entities is like that of the
father with the sons. The sons and the father are qualitatively equal, but the
father is never the son, nor is the son ever the father who begets. So, as
described above, the Lord as Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu or Hiraëyagarbha
Supersoul enters into each and every universe and causes it to be animated by
begetting the living entities within the womb of the material nature, as
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (14.3). After each annihilation of the material
creation, all the living entities are merged within the body of the Lord, and
after creation they are again impregnated within the material energy. In
material existence, therefore, the material energy is seemingly the mother of
the living entities, and the Lord is the father. When, however, the animation
takes place, the living entities revive their own natural activities under the
spell of time and energy, and thus the varieties of living beings are manifested.
The Lord, therefore, is ultimately the cause of all animation in the material
world.
TEXT 35
Sa Wv PauåzSTaSMaad<@& iNai>aRÛ iNaGaRTa" )
SahóaevRx(iga]baû+a" SahóaNaNaXaqzRvaNa( )) 35 ))
sa eva puruñas tasmäd
aëòaà nirbhidya nirgataù
sahasrorv-aìghri-bähv-akñaù
sahasränana-çérñavän
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
saù—He (the Lord); eva—Himself; puruñaù—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tasmät—from within the universe; aëòam—Hiraëyagarbha;
nirbhidya—dividing; nirgataù—came out; sahasra—thousands; üru—thighs;
aìghri—legs; bähu—arms; akñaù—eyes; sahasra—thousands of;
änana—mouths; çérñavän—with heads also.
TRANSLATION
The Lord [Mahä-Viñëu], although lying in the Causal Ocean, came out of it,
and dividing Himself as Hiraëyagarbha, He entered into each universe and
assumed the viräö-rüpa, with thousands of legs, arms, mouths, heads, etc.
PURPORT
The expansions of the planetary systems within each and every universe are
situated in the different parts of the viräö-rüpa (universal form) of the Lord,
and they are described as follows.
TEXT 36
YaSYaehavYavEl/aeRk-aNa( k-LPaYaiNTa MaNaqiz<a" )
k-$yaidi>arDa" Saá Saáaeß| JagaNaaidi>a" )) 36 ))
yasyehävayavair lokän
kalpayanti manéñiëaù
kaöy-ädibhir adhaù sapta
saptordhvaà jaghanädibhiù
SYNONYMS
yasya—whose; iha—in the universe; avayavaiù—by the limbs of the body;
lokän—all the planets; kalpayanti—imagine; manéñiëaù—great philosophers;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kaöi-ädibhiù—down from the waist; adhaù—downwards; sapta—seven systems;
sapta ürdhvam—and seven systems upwards; jaghana-ädibhiù—front portion.
TRANSLATION
Great philosophers imagine that the complete planetary systems in the
universe are displays of the different upper and lower limbs of the universal
body of the Lord.
PURPORT
The word kalpayanti, or “imagine,” is significant. The viräö universal form
of the Absolute is an imagination of the speculative philosophers who are
unable to adjust to the eternal two-handed form of Lord Çré Kåñëa. Although
the universal form, as imagined by the great philosophers, is one of the features
of the Lord, it is more or less imaginary. It is said that the seven upper
planetary systems are situated above the waist of the universal form, whereas
the lower planetary systems are situated below His waist. The idea impressed
herein is that the Supreme Lord is conscious of every part of His body, and
nowhere in the creation is there anything beyond His control.
TEXT 37
PauåzSYa Mau%& b]ø +a}aMaeTaSYa bahv" )
OvaeRvOEXYaae >aGavTa" PaÙya& éUd]ae VYaJaaYaTa )) 37 ))
puruñasya mukhaà brahma
kñatram etasya bähavaù
ürvor vaiçyo bhagavataù
padbhyäà çüdro vyajäyata
SYNONYMS
puruñasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mukham—mouth;
brahma—is the brähmaëas; kñatram—the royal order; etasya—of Him;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bähavaù—the arms; ürvoù—the thighs; vaiçyaù—are the mercantile men;
bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; padbhyäm—from His legs;
çüdraù—the laborer class; vyajäyata—became manifested.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëas represent His mouth, the kñatriyas His arms, the vaiçyas His
thighs, and the çüdras are born of His legs.
PURPORT
All living beings are stated to be the parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord,
and how they are so is explained in this verse. The four divisions of human
society, namely the intelligent class (the brähmaëas), the administrative class
(the kñatriyas), the mercantile class (the vaiçyas), and the laborer class (the
çüdras), are all in different parts of the body of the Lord. As such, no one is
different from the Lord. The mouth of the body and the legs of the body are
nondifferent constitutionally, but the mouth or the head of the body is
qualitatively more important than the legs. At the same time, the mouth, the
legs, the arms and the thighs are all component parts of the body. These limbs
of the body of the Lord are meant to serve the complete whole. The mouth is
meant for speaking and eating, the arms are meant for the protection of the
body, the legs are meant for carrying the body, and the waist of the body is
meant for maintaining the body. The intelligent class in society, therefore,
must speak on behalf of the body, as well as accept foodstuff to satisfy the
hunger of the body. The hunger of the Lord is to accept the fruits of sacrifice.
The brähmaëas, or the intelligent class, must be very expert in performing
such sacrifices, and the subordinate classes must join in such sacrifices. To
speak for the Supreme Lord means to glorify the Lord by means of propagating
the knowledge of the Lord as it is, broadcasting the factual nature of the Lord
and the factual position of all other parts of the whole body. The brähmaëas,
therefore, are required to know the Vedas, or the ultimate source of
knowledge. Veda means knowledge, and anta means the end of it. According
to Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord is the source of everything (ahaà sarvasya
prabhavaù), and thus the end of all knowledge (Vedänta) is to know the Lord,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
to know our relationship with Him and to act according to that relationship
only. The parts of the body are related to the body; similarly, the living being
must know his relationship with the Lord. The human life is especially meant
for this purpose, namely to know the factual relationship of every living being
with the Supreme Lord. Without knowing this relationship, the human life is
spoiled. The intelligent class of men, the brähmaëas, are therefore especially
responsible for broadcasting this knowledge of our relationship with the Lord
and leading the general mass of people to the right path. The administrative
class is meant for protecting the living beings so that they can serve this
purpose; the mercantile class is meant for producing food grains and
distributing them to the complete human society so that the whole population
is given a chance to live comfortably and discharge the duties of human life.
The mercantile class is also required to give protection to the cows in order to
get sufficient milk and milk products, which alone can give the proper health
and intelligence to maintain a civilization perfectly meant for knowledge of
the ultimate truth. And the laborer class, who are neither intelligent nor
powerful, can help by physical services to the other higher classes and thus be
benefited by their cooperation. Therefore the universe is a complete unit in
relationship with the Lord, and without this relationship with the Lord the
whole human society is disturbed and is without any peace and prosperity.
This is confirmed in the Vedas: brähmaëo ’sya mukham äséd, bähü räjanyaù
kåtaù.
TEXT 38
>aUl/aeRk-" k-iLPaTa" PaÙya& >auvl/aeRk-ae_SYa Naai>aTa" )
ôda Svl/aeRk- orSaa Mahl/aeRk-ae MahaTMaNa" )) 38 ))
bhürlokaù kalpitaù padbhyäà
bhuvarloko ’sya näbhitaù
hådä svarloka urasä
maharloko mahätmanaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
bhüù—the lower planetary systems up to the stratum of the earth; lokaù—the
planets; kalpitaù—it is so imagined or said; padbhyäm—out of the legs;
bhuvaù—the upper; lokaù—the planetary system; asya—of Him (the Lord);
näbhitaù—from the navel abdomen; hådä—by the heart; svarlokaù—the
planetary systems occupied by the demigods; urasä—by the chest;
maharlokaù—the planetary system occupied by great sages and saints;
mahä-ätmanaù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The lower planetary systems, up to the limit of the earthly stratum, are said
to be situated in His legs. The middle planetary systems, beginning from
Bhuvarloka, are situated in His navel. And the still higher planetary systems,
occupied by the demigods and highly cultured sages and saints, are situated in
the chest of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
There are fourteen spheres of planetary systems within this universe. The
lower systems are called Bhürloka, the middle systems are called Bhuvarloka,
and the higher planetary systems, up to Brahmaloka, the highest planetary
system of the universe, are called Svarloka. And all of them are situated on the
body of the Lord. In other words, no one within this universe is without a
relationship with the Lord.
TEXT 39
Ga]qvaYaa& JaNal/aek-ae_SYa TaPaael/aek-" STaNaÜYaaTa( )
MaUDaRi>a" SaTYal/aek-STau b]øl/aek-" SaNaaTaNa" )) 39 ))
gréväyäà janaloko ’sya
tapolokaù stana-dvayät
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mürdhabhiù satyalokas tu
brahmalokaù sanätanaù
SYNONYMS
gréväyäm—up to the neck; janalokaù—the Janaloka planetary system; asya—of
Him; tapolokaù—the Tapoloka planetary system; stana-dvayät—beginning
from the breast; mürdhabhiù—by the head; satyalokaù—the Satyaloka
planetary system; tu—but; brahmalokaù—the spiritual planets;
sanätanaù—eternal.
TRANSLATION
From the forefront of the chest up to the neck of the universal form of the
Lord are situated the planetary systems named Janaloka and Tapoloka, whereas
Satyaloka, the topmost planetary system, is situated on the head of the form.
The spiritual planets, however, are eternal.
PURPORT
Many times in these pages we have discussed the spiritual planets situated
beyond the material sky, and the description is corroborated in this verse. The
word sanätana is significant. This very idea of eternity is expressed in the
Bhagavad-gétä (8.20), where it is said that beyond the material creation is the
spiritual sky, where everything is eternal. Sometimes Satyaloka, the planet in
which Brahmä resides, is also called Brahmaloka. But the Brahmaloka
mentioned here is not the same as the Satyaloka planetary system. This
Brahmaloka is eternal, whereas the Satyaloka planetary system is not eternal.
And to distinguish between the two, the adjective sanätana has been used in
this case. According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, this Brahmaloka is the loka or
abode of Brahman, or the Supreme Lord. In the spiritual sky all the planets are
as good as the Lord Himself. The Lord is all spirit, and His name, fame, glories,
qualities, pastimes, etc., are all nondifferent from Him because He is absolute.
As such, the planets in the kingdom of God are also nondifferent from Him. In
those planets there is no difference between the body and the soul, nor is there
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
any influence of time as we experience it in the material world. And in
addition to there being no influence of time, the planets in, Brahmaloka, due
to being spiritual, are never annihilated. All variegatedness in the spiritual
planets is also one with the Lord, and therefore the Vedic aphorism ekam
evädvitéyam is fully realized in that sanätana atmosphere of spiritual
variegatedness. This material world is only a shadow phantasmagoria of the
spiritual kingdom of the Lord, and because it is a shadow it is never eternal;
the variegatedness in the material world of duality (spirit and matter) cannot
be compared to that of the spiritual world. Because of a poor fund of
knowledge, less intelligent persons sometimes mistake the conditions of the
shadow world to be equivalent to those of the spiritual world, and thus they
mistake the Lord and His pastimes in the material world to be one with the
conditioned souls and their activities. The Lord condemns such less intelligent
persons in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.11):
avajänanti mäà müòhä
mänuñéà tanum äçritam
paraà bhävam ajänanto
mama bhüta-maheçvaram
Whenever the Lord incarnates, He does so in His full internal potency
(ätma-mäyä), and less intelligent persons mistake Him to be one of the
material creations. Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, therefore, rightly commenting on this
verse, says that the Brahmaloka mentioned here is Vaikuëöha, the kingdom of
God, which is sanätana, or eternal, and is therefore not exactly like the
material creations described above. The viräö universal form of the Lord is an
imagination for the material world. It has nothing to do with the spiritual
world, or the kingdom of God.
TEXTS 40–41
TaTk-$ya& caTal&/ oeáMaUå>Yaa& ivTal&/ iv>aae" )
JaaNau>Yaa& SauTal&/ éuÖ& Jaºa>Yaa& Tau Tal/aTal/Ma( )) 40 ))
MahaTal&/ Tau GauLf-a>Yaa& Pa[Pada>Yaa& rSaaTal/Ma( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PaaTaal&/ PaadTal/Ta wiTa l/aek-MaYa" PauMaaNa( )) 41 ))
tat-kaöyäà cätalaà kÿptam
ürubhyäà vitalaà vibhoù
jänubhyäà sutalaà çuddhaà
jaìghäbhyäà tu talätalam
mahätalaà tu gulphäbhyäà
prapadäbhyäà rasätalam
pätälaà päda-talata
iti lokamayaù pumän
tat—in His; kaöyäm—waist; ca—also; atalam—the first planetary system
below the earth; kÿptam—situated; ürubhyäm—on the thighs; vitalam—the
second planetary system below; vibhoù—of the Lord; jänubhyäm—on the
ankles; sutalam—the third planetary system below; çuddham—purified;
jaìghäbhyäm—on the joints; tu—but; talätalam—the fourth planetary system
below; mahätalam—the fifth planetary system below; tu—but;
gulphäbhyäm—situated on the calves; prapadäbhyäm—on the upper or front
portion of the feet; rasätalam—the sixth planetary system below;
pätälam—the seventh planetary system below; päda-talataù—on the bottom or
soles of the feet; iti—thus; loka-mayaù—full of planetary systems; pumän—the
Lord.
TRANSLATION
My dear son Närada, know from me that there are seven lower planetary
systems out of the total fourteen. The first planetary system, known as Atala, is
situated on the waist; the second, Vitala, is situated on the thighs; the third,
Sutala, on the knees; the fourth, Talätala, on the shanks; the fifth, Mahätala,
on the ankles; the sixth, Rasätala, on the upper portion of the feet; and the
seventh, Pätäla, on the soles of the feet. Thus the viräö form of the Lord is full
of all planetary systems.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Modern enterprisers (the astronauts who travel in space) may take
information from Çrémad-Bhägavatam that in space there are fourteen
divisions of planetary systems. The situation is calculated from the earthly
planetary system, which is called Bhürloka. Above Bhürloka is Bhuvarloka,
and the topmost planetary system is called Satyaloka. These are the upper
seven lokas, or planetary systems. And similarly, there are seven lower
planetary systems, known as Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talätala, Mahätala, Rasätala
and Pätäla lokas. All these planetary systems are scattered over the complete
universe, which occupies an area of two billion times two billion square miles.
The modern astronauts can travel only a few thousand miles away from the
earth, and therefore their attempt to travel in the sky is something like child’s
play on the shore of an expansive ocean. The moon is situated in the third
status of the upper planetary system, and in the Fifth Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam we shall be able to know the distant situation of the
various planets scattered over the vast material sky. There are innumerable
universes beyond the one in which we are put, and all these material universes
cover only an insignificant portion of the spiritual sky, which is described
above as sanätana Brahmaloka. The Supreme Lord very kindly invites the
intelligent human beings to return home, back to Godhead, in the following
verse of the Bhagavad-gétä (8.16):
ä-brahma-bhuvanäl lokäù
punar ävartino ’rjuna
mäm upetya tu kaunteya
punar janma na vidyate
Beginning from Satyaloka, the topmost planet of the universe, situated just
below the eternal Brahmaloka, as described above, all the planets are material.
And one’s situation in any of the many material planets is still subject to the
laws of material nature, namely birth, death, old age and disease. But one can
get complete liberation from all the above-mentioned material pangs when one
enters into the eternal Brahmaloka sanätana atmosphere, the kingdom of God.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Therefore liberation, as contemplated by the speculative philosophers and the
mystics, is possible only when one becomes a devotee of the Lord. Anyone who
is not a devotee cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Only by attainment of
a service attitude in the transcendental position can one enter into the
kingdom of Godhead. Therefore the speculative philosophers, as well as the
mystics, must first of all be attracted to the devotional cult before they can
factually attain liberation.
TEXT 42
>aUl/aeRk-" k-iLPaTa" PaÙya& >auvl/aeRk-ae_SYa Naai>aTa" )
Svl/aeRk-" k-iLPaTaae MaUDNaaR wiTa va l/aek-k-LPaNaa )) 42 ))
bhürlokaù kalpitaù padbhyäà
bhuvarloko ’sya näbhitaù
svarlokaù kalpito mürdhnä
iti vä loka-kalpanä
SYNONYMS
bhürlokaù—the entire planetary system from Pätäla to the earthly planetary
system; kalpitaù—imagined; padbhyäm—situated on the legs;
bhuvarlokaù—the Bhuvarloka planetary system; asya—of the universal form of
the Lord; näbhitaù—out of the navel abdomen; svarlokaù—the higher
planetary system, beginning with the heavenly planets; kalpitaù—imagined;
mürdhnä—from the chest to the head; iti—thus; vä—either; loka—the
planetary systems; kalpanä—imagination.
TRANSLATION
Others may divide the whole planetary system into three divisions, namely
the lower planetary systems on the legs [up to the earth], the middle planetary
systems on the navel, and the upper planetary systems [Svarloka] from the chest
to the head of the Supreme Personality.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The three divisions of the complete planetary systems are here mentioned;
fourteen are imagined by others, and that is also explained.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Fifth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “The Cause of All Causes.”
Chapter Six
Puruña-sükta Confirmed
TEXT 1
b]øaevac
vaca& vöeMauR%& +ae}a& ^NdSaa& Saá DaaTav" )
hVYak-VYaaMa*TaaàaNaa& iJaûa SavRrSaSYa c )) 1 ))
brahmoväca
väcäà vahner mukhaà kñetraà
chandasäà sapta dhätavaù
havya-kavyämåtännänäà
jihvä sarva-rasasya ca
SYNONYMS
brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; väcäm—of the voice; vahneù—of fire;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mukham—the mouth; kñetram—the generating center; chandasäm—of the
Vedic hymns, such as Gäyatré; sapta—seven; dhätavaù—skin and six other
layers; havya-kavya—offerings for the demigods and the forefathers;
amåta—food for human beings; annänäm—of all sorts of foodstuffs; jihvä—the
tongue; sarva—all; rasasya—of all delicacies; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: The mouth of the viräö-puruña [the universal form of the
Lord] is the generating center of the voice, and the controlling deity is fire. His
skin and six other layers are the generating centers of the Vedic hymns, and
His tongue is the productive center of different foodstuffs and delicacies for
offering to the demigods, the forefathers and the general mass of people.
PURPORT
The opulences of the universal form of the Lord are described herein. It is
said that His mouth is the generating center of all kinds of voices, and its
controlling deity is the fire demigod. And His skin and other six layers of
bodily construction are the representative generating centers of the seven
kinds of Vedic hymns, like the Gäyatré. Gäyatré is the beginning of all Vedic
mantras, and it is explained in the first volume of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Since
the generating centers are the different parts of the universal form of the
Lord, and since the form of the Lord is transcendental to the material
creation, it is to be understood that the voice, the tongue, the skin, etc.,
suggest that the Lord in His transcendental form is not without them. The
material voice, or the energy of taking in foodstuff, is generated originally
from the Lord; such actions are but perverted reflections of the original
reservoirs—the transcendental situation is not without spiritual
variegatedness. In the spiritual world, all the perverted forms of material
variegatedness are fully represented in their original spiritual identity. The
only difference is that material activities are contaminated by the three modes
of material nature, whereas the potencies in the spiritual world are all pure
because they are engaged in the unalloyed transcendental loving service of the
Lord. In the spiritual world, the Lord is the sublime enjoyer of everything, and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the living entities there are all engaged in His transcendental loving service
without any contamination of the modes of material nature. The activities in
the spiritual world are without any of the inebrieties of the material world, but
there is no question of impersonal voidness on the spiritual platform, as
suggested by the impersonalists. Devotional service is defined in the
Närada-païcarätra as follows:
sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà
tat-paratvena nirmalam
håñékeëa håñékeçasevanaà
bhaktir ucyate
[Cc. Madhya 19.170]
Originally, since all the senses are produced of the Lord’s reservoir of
senses, the sensual activities of the material world are to be purified by the
process of devotional service, and thus the perfection of life can be attained
simply by purifying the present position of our material activities. And the
purifying process begins from the stage of being liberated from the conception
of different designations. Every living entity is engaged in some sort of service,
either for the self, or for the family, or for the society, country, etc., but,
unfortunately, all such services are rendered due to material attachment. The
attachments of the material affinity may be simply changed to the service of
the Lord, and thus the treatment of being freed from material attachment
begins automatically. The process of liberation is therefore easier through
devotional service than by any other methods, for in the Bhagavad-gétä (12.5)
it is said that one is subjected to various kinds of tribulations if one is
impersonally attached: kleço ’dhikataras teñäm avyaktäsakta-cetasäm.
TEXT 2
SavaRSaUNaa& c vaYaaeê TaàaSae ParMaaYa<ae )
AiìNaaeraezDaqNaa& c ga]a<aae MaaedPa[MaaedYaae" )) 2 ))
sarväsünäà ca väyoç ca
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tan-näse paramäyaëe
açvinor oñadhénäà ca
ghräëo moda-pramodayoù
SYNONYMS
sarva—all; asünäm—different kinds of life air; ca—and; väyoù—of the air;
ca—also; tat—His; näse—in the nose; parama-äyaëe—in the transcendental
generating center; açvinoù—of the Açviné-kumära demigods; oñadhénäm—of
all medicinal herbs; ca—also; ghräëaù—His smelling power; moda—pleasure;
pramodayoù—specific sport.
TRANSLATION
His two nostrils are the generating centers of our breathing and of all other
airs, His smelling powers generate the Açviné-kumära demigods and all kinds of
medicinal herbs, and His breathing energies produce different kinds of
fragrance.
TEXT 3
æPaa<aa& TaeJaSaa& c+auidRv" SaUYaRSYa cai+a<aq )
k-<aaOE idXaa& c TaqQaaRNaa& é[ae}aMaak-aXaXaBdYaae" )) 3 ))
rüpäëäà tejasäà cakñur
divaù süryasya cäkñiëé
karëau diçäà ca térthänäà
çrotram äkäça-çabdayoù
SYNONYMS
rüpäëäm—for all kinds of forms; tejasäm—of all that is illuminating;
cakñuù—the eyes; divaù—that which glitters; süryasya—of the sun; ca—also;
akñiëé—the eyeballs; karëau—the ears; diçäm—of all directions; ca—and;
térthänäm—of all the Vedas; çrotram—the sense of hearing; äkäça—the sky;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
çabdayoù—of all sounds.
TRANSLATION
His eyes are the generating centers of all kinds of forms, and they glitter and
illuminate. His eyeballs are like the sun and the heavenly planets. His ears hear
from all sides and are receptacles for all the Vedas, and His sense of hearing is
the generating center of the sky and of all kinds of sound.
PURPORT
The word térthänäm is sometimes interpreted to mean the places of
pilgrimage, but Çréla Jéva Gosvämé says that it means the reception of the
Vedic transcendental knowledge. The propounders of the Vedic knowledge are
also known as the térthas.
TEXT 4
TaÓa}a& vSTauSaara<aa& SaaE>aGaSYa c >aaJaNaMa( )
TvGaSYa SPaXaRvaYaaeê SavRMaeDaSYa cEv ih )) 4 ))
tad-gätraà vastu-säräëäà
saubhagasya ca bhäjanam
tvag asya sparça-väyoç ca
sarva-medhasya caiva hi
SYNONYMS
tat—His; gätram—bodily surface; vastu-säräëäm—of the active principles of
all articles; saubhagasya—of all auspicious opportunities; ca—and;
bhäjanam—the field of production; tvak—skin; asya—His; sparça—touch;
väyoù—of the moving airs; ca—also; sarva—all kinds of; medhasya—of
sacrifices; ca—also; eva—certainly; hi—exactly.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
His bodily surface is the breeding ground for the active principles of
everything and for all kinds of auspicious opportunities. His skin, like the
moving air, is the generating center for all kinds of sense of touch and is the
place for performing all kinds of sacrifice.
PURPORT
The air is the moving agent of all the planets, and as such the generating
centers for promotion to the deserving planets, the sacrifices, are His bodily
surface and are naturally the origin of all auspicious opportunities.
TEXT 5
raeMaa<YauiÙÂJaaTaqNaa& YaEvaR YajSTau SaM>a*Ta" )
ke-XaXMaé[uNa%aNYaSYa iXal/al/aeha>a]ivÛuTaaMa( )) 5 ))
romäëy udbhijja-jäténäà
yair vä yajïas tu sambhåtaù
keça-çmaçru-nakhäny asya
çilä-lohäbhra-vidyutäm
SYNONYMS
romäëi—hairs on the body; udbhijja—vegetables; jäténäm—of the kingdoms;
yaiù—by which; vä—either; yajïaù—sacrifices; tu—but;
sambhåtaù—particularly served; keça—hairs on the head; çmaçru—facial hair;
nakhäni—nails; asya—of Him; çilä—stones; loha—iron ores; abhra—clouds;
vidyutäm—electricity.
TRANSLATION
The hairs on His body are the cause of all vegetation, particularly of those
trees which are required as ingredients for sacrifice. The hairs on His head and
face are reservoirs for the clouds, and His nails are the breeding ground of
electricity, stones and iron ores.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The polished nails of the Lord generate electricity, and the clouds rest on
the hairs of His head. One can therefore collect all sorts of necessities of life
from the person of the Lord, and therefore the Vedas affirm that everything
that is produced is caused by the Lord. The Lord is the supreme cause of all
causes.
TEXT 6
bahvae l/aek-Paal/aNaa& Pa[aYaXa" +aeMak-MaR<aaMa( )) 6 ))
bähavo loka-pälänäà
präyaçaù kñema-karmaëäm
SYNONYMS
bähavaù—arms; loka-pälänäm—of the governing deities of the planets, the
demigods; präyaçaù—almost always; kñema-karmaëäm—of those who are
leaders and protectors of the general mass.
TRANSLATION
The Lord’s arms are the productive fields for the great demigods and other
leaders of the living entities who protect the general mass.
PURPORT
This important verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam is corroborated and nicely
explained in the Bhagavad-gétä (10.41–42) as follows:
yad yad vibhütimat sattvaà
çrémad ürjitam eva vä
tat tad evävagaccha tvaà
mama tejo-’àça-sambhavam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
athavä bahunaitena
kià jïätena tavärjuna
viñöabhyäham idaà kåtsnam
ekäàçena sthito jagat
There are many powerful kings, leaders, learned scholars, scientists, artists,
engineers, inventors, excavators, archaeologists, industrialists, politicians,
economists, business magnates, and many more powerful deities or demigods
like Brahmä, Çiva, Indra, Candra, Sürya, Varuëa and Marut, who are all
protecting the interest of the universal affairs of maintenance, in different
positions, and all of them are different powerful parts and parcels of the
Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa is the father of all living entities,
who are placed in different high and low positions according to their desires or
aspirations. Some of them, as particularly mentioned above, are specifically
endowed with powers by the will of the Lord. A sane person must know for
certain that a living being, however powerful he may be, is neither absolute
nor independent. All living beings must accept the origin of their specific
power as mentioned in this verse. And if they act accordingly, then simply by
discharging their respective occupational duties they can achieve the highest
perfection of life, namely eternal life, complete knowledge and inexhaustible
blessings. As long as the powerful men of the world do not accept the origin of
their respective powers, namely the Personality of Godhead, the actions of
mäyä (illusion) will continue to act. The actions of mäyä are such that a
powerful person, misled by the illusory, material energy, wrongly accepts
himself as all in all and does not develop God consciousness. As such, the false
sense of egoism (namely myself and mine) has become overly prominent in the
world, and there is a hard struggle for existence in human society. The
intelligent class of men, therefore, must admit the Lord as the ultimate source
of all energies and thus pay tribute to the Lord for His good blessings. Simply
by accepting the Lord as the supreme proprietor of everything, since He is
actually so, one can achieve the highest perfection of life. Whatever a person
may be in the estimation of the social order of things, if a person tries to
reciprocate a feeling of love towards the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
is satisfied with the blessings of the Lord, he will at once feel the highest peace
of mind for which he is hankering life after life. Peace of mind, or in other
words the healthy state of mind, can be achieved only when the mind is
situated in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. The parts and parcels
of the Lord are endowed with specific powers for rendering service unto the
Lord, just as a big business magnate’s sons are empowered with specific powers
of administration. The obedient son of the father never goes against the will of
the father and therefore passes life very peacefully in concurrence with the
head of the family, the father. Similarly, the Lord being the father, all living
beings should fully and satisfactorily discharge the duty and will of the father,
as faithful sons. This very mentality will at once bring peace and prosperity to
human society.
TEXT 7
iv§-Maae >aU>auRv" Svê +aeMaSYa Xar<aSYa c )
SavRk-aMavrSYaaiPa hreêr<a AaSPadMa( )) 7 ))
vikramo bhür bhuvaù svaç ca
kñemasya çaraëasya ca
sarva-käma-varasyäpi
hareç caraëa äspadam
SYNONYMS
vikramaù—forward steps; bhüù bhuvaù—of the lower and upper planets;
svaù—as well as of heaven; ca—also; kñemasya—of protection of all that we
have; çaraëasya—of fearlessness; ca—also; sarva-käma—all that we need;
varasya—of all benedictions; api—exactly; hareù—of the Lord; caraëaù—the
lotus feet; äspadam—shelter.
TRANSLATION
Thus the forward steps of the Lord are the shelter for the upper, lower and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
heavenly planets, as well as for all that we need. His lotus feet serve as
protection from all kinds of fear.
PURPORT
For absolute protection from all sorts of fear, as well as for all our needs of
life, we must take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, not only in this planet
but also in all the upper, lower and heavenly planets. This absolute
dependence on the lotus feet of the Lord is called pure devotional service, and
it is directly hinted at within this passage. No one should have any kind of
doubt in this matter, nor should one be inclined to seek the help of any other
demigods, because all of them are dependent on Him only. Everyone, except
the Lord Himself, is dependent on the mercy of the Lord; even the
all-pervading Supersoul is also dependent on the supreme aspect of Bhagavän,
the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 8
APaa& vqYaRSYa SaGaRSYa PaJaRNYaSYa Pa[JaaPaTae" )
Pau&Sa" iXaén oPaSQaSTau Pa[JaaTYaaNaNdiNav*RTae" )) 8 ))
apäà véryasya sargasya
parjanyasya prajäpateù
puàsaù çiçna upasthas tu
prajäty-änanda-nirvåteù
SYNONYMS
apäm—of water; véryasya—of the semen; sargasya—of the generative;
parjanyasya—of rains; prajäpateù—of the creator; puàsaù—of the Lord;
çiçnaù—the genitals; upasthaù tu—the place where the genitals are situated;
prajäti—due to begetting; änanda—pleasure; nirvåteù—cause.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
From the Lord’s genitals originate water, semen, generatives, rains, and the
procreators. His genitals are the cause of a pleasure that counteracts the distress
of begetting.
PURPORT
The genitals and the pleasure of begetting counteract the distresses of
family encumbrances. One would cease to generate altogether if there were
not, by the grace of the Lord, a coating, a pleasure-giving substance, on the
surface of the generative organs. This substance gives a pleasure so intense
that it counteracts fully the distress of family encumbrances. A person is so
captivated by this pleasure-giving substance that he is not satisfied by
begetting a single child, but increases the number of children, with great risk
in regard to maintaining them, simply for this pleasure-giving substance. This
pleasure-giving substance is not false, however, because it originates from the
transcendental body of the Lord. In other words, the pleasure-giving substance
is a reality, but it has taken on an aspect of pervertedness on account of
material contamination. In the material world, sex life is the cause of many
distresses on account of material contact. Therefore, the sex life in the
material world should not be encouraged beyond the necessity. There is a
necessity for generating progeny even in the material world, but such
generation of children must be carried out with full responsibility for spiritual
values. The spiritual values of life can be realized in the human form of
material existence, and the human being must adopt family planning with
reference to the context of spiritual values, and not otherwise. The degraded
form of family restriction by use of contraceptives, etc., is the grossest type of
material contamination. Materialists who use these devices want to fully utilize
the pleasure potency of the coating on the genitals by artificial means, without
knowing the spiritual importance. And without knowledge of spiritual values,
the less intelligent man tries to utilize only the material sense pleasure of the
genitals.
TEXT 9
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PaaYauYaRMaSYa iMa}aSYa PairMaae+aSYa Naard )
ih&SaaYaa iNa‰RTaeMa*RTYaaeiNaRrYaSYa Gaud& SMa*Ta" )) 9 ))
päyur yamasya mitrasya
parimokñasya närada
hiàsäyä niråter måtyor
nirayasya gudaà småtaù
SYNONYMS
päyuù—the evacuating outlet; yamasya—the controlling deity of death;
mitrasya—of Mitra; parimokñasya—of the evacuating hole; närada—O
Närada; hiàsäyäù—of envy; niråteù—of misfortune; måtyoù—of death;
nirayasya—of hell; gudam—the rectum; småtaù—is understood.
TRANSLATION
O Närada, the evacuating outlet of the universal form of the Lord is the
abode of the controlling deity of death, Mitra, and the evacuating hole and the
rectum of the Lord is the place of envy, misfortune, death, hell, etc.
TEXT 10
Para>aUTaerDaMaRSYa TaMaSaêaiPa PaiêMa" )
Naa@yae NadNadqNaa& c Gaae}aa<aaMaiSQaSa&hiTa" )) 10 ))
paräbhüter adharmasya
tamasaç cäpi paçcimaù
näòyo nada-nadénäà ca
goträëäm asthi-saàhatiù
SYNONYMS
paräbhüteù—of frustration; adharmasya—of immorality; tamasaù—of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ignorance; ca—and; api—as also; paçcimaù—the back; näòyaù—of the
intestines; nada—of the great rivers; nadénäm—of the rivulets; ca—also;
goträëäm—of the mountains; asthi—bones; saàhatiù—accumulation.
TRANSLATION
The back of the Lord is the place for all kinds of frustration and ignorance,
as well as for immorality. From His veins flow the great rivers and rivulets, and
on His bones are stacked the great mountains.
PURPORT
In order to defy the impersonal conception of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, a systematic analysis of the physiological and anatomical
constitution of His transcendental body is given here. It is clear from the
available description of the body of the Lord (His universal form) that the
form of the Lord is distinct from the forms of ordinary mundane conception.
In any case, He is never a formless void. Ignorance is the back of the Lord, and
therefore the ignorance of the less intelligent class of men is also not separate
from His bodily conception. Since His body is the complete whole of
everything that be, one cannot assert that He is impersonal only. On the
contrary, the perfect description of the Lord holds that He is both impersonal
and personal simultaneously. The Personality of Godhead is the original
feature of the Lord, and His impersonal emanation is but the reflection of His
transcendental body. Those who are fortunate enough to have a view of the
Lord from the front can realize His personal feature, whereas those who are
frustrated and are thus kept on the ignorance side of the Lord, or, in other
words, those who have the view of the Lord from the back, realize Him in His
impersonal feature.
TEXT 11
AVYa¢-rSaiSaNDaUNaa& >aUTaaNaa& iNaDaNaSYa c )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
odr& ividTa& Pau&Saae ôdYa& MaNaSa" PadMa( )) 11 ))
avyakta-rasa-sindhünäà
bhütänäà nidhanasya ca
udaraà viditaà puàso
hådayaà manasaù padam
SYNONYMS
avyakta—the impersonal feature; rasa-sindhünäm—of the seas and oceans of
water; bhütänäm—of those who take birth in the material world;
nidhanasya—of the annihilation; ca—also; udaram—His belly; viditam—is
known by the intelligent class of men; puàsaù—of the great personality;
hådayam—the heart; manasaù—of the subtle body; padam—the place.
TRANSLATION
The impersonal feature of the Lord is the abode of great oceans, and His
belly is the resting place for the materially annihilated living entities. His heart
is the abode of the subtle material bodies of living beings. Thus it is known by
the intelligent class of men.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä (8.17–18) it is stated that according to human
calculations one day of Brahmä is equal to one thousand ages of four
millenniums (4,300,000 years) each, and the same period is calculated to be his
night also. A Brahmä lives for one hundred such years and then dies. A
Brahmä, who is generally a great devotee of the Lord, attains liberation after
such a downfall. The universe (called the brahmäëòa, or the round
football-like domain controlled by a Brahmä) is thus annihilated, and thus the
inhabitants of a particular planet, or of the whole universe, are also
annihilated. Avyakta, mentioned here in this verse, means the night of
Brahmä, when partial annihilation takes place and the living entities of that
particular brahmäëòa, up to the planets of Brahmaloka, along with the big
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
oceans, etc., all repose in the belly of the viräö-puruña. At the end of a
Brahmä’s night, the creation again takes place, and the living entities, reserved
within the belly of the Lord, are let loose to play their respective parts as if
being awakened from a deep slumber. Since the living entities are never
destroyed, the annihilation of the material world does not annihilate the
existence of the living entities, but until liberation is attained one has to
accept one material body after another, again and again. The human life is
meant for making a solution to this repeated change of bodies and thereby
attaining a place in the spiritual sky, where everything is eternal, blissful and
full of knowledge. In other words, the subtle forms of the living entities take
place in the heart of the Supreme Being, and such forms take tangible shape at
the time of creation.
TEXT 12
DaMaRSYa MaMa Tau>Ya& c ku-Maara<aa& >avSYa c )
ivjaNaSYa c SatvSYa ParSYaaTMaa ParaYa<aMa( )) 12 ))
dharmasya mama tubhyaà ca
kumäräëäà bhavasya ca
vijïänasya ca sattvasya
parasyätmä paräyaëam
SYNONYMS
dharmasya—of religious principles, or of Yamaräja; mama—mine;
tubhyam—of yours; ca—and; kumäräëäm—of the four Kumäras;
bhavasya—Lord Çiva; ca—and also; vijïänasya—of transcendental knowledge;
ca—also; sattvasya—of truth; parasya—of the great personality;
ätmä—consciousness; paräyaëam—dependent.
TRANSLATION
Also, the consciousness of that great personality is the abode of religious
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
principles—mine, yours, and those of the four bachelors Sanaka, Sanätana,
Sanat-kumära and Sanandana. That consciousness is also the abode of truth and
transcendental knowledge.
TEXTS 13–16
Ah& >avaNa( >avêEv Ta wMae MauNaYaae_Ga]Jaa" )
SauraSaurNara NaaGaa" %Gaa Ma*GaSarqSa*Paa" )) 13 ))
GaNDavaRPSarSaae Ya+aa r+aae>aUTaGa<aaerGaa" )
PaXav" iPaTar" iSaÖa ivÛaDa]aêar<aa d]uMaa" )) 14 ))
ANYae c ivivDaa Jaqva Jal/SQal/Na>aaEk-Sa" )
Ga]h+aRke-TavSTaaraSTai@Ta" STaNaiYaÒv" )) 15 ))
Sav| Pauåz Wved& >aUTa& >aVYa& >avÀ YaTa( )
TaeNaedMaav*Ta& ivì& ivTaiSTaMaiDaiTaïiTa )) 16 ))
ahaà bhavän bhavaç caiva
ta ime munayo ’grajäù
suräsura-narä nägäù
khagä måga-sarésåpäù
gandharväpsaraso yakñä
rakño-bhüta-gaëoragäù
paçavaù pitaraù siddhä
vidyädhräç cäraëä drumäù
anye ca vividhä jévä
jala-sthala-nabhaukasaù
graharkña-ketavas täräs
taòitaù stanayitnavaù
sarvaà puruña evedaà
bhütaà bhavyaà bhavac ca yat
tenedam ävåtaà viçvaà
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vitastim adhitiñöhati
SYNONYMS
aham—myself; bhavän—yourself; bhavaù—Lord Çiva; ca—also;
eva—certainly; te—they; ime—all; munayaù—the great sages; agra-jäù—born
before you; sura—the demigods; asura—the demons; naräù—the human
beings; nägäù—the inhabitants of the Näga planet; khagäù—birds;
måga—beasts; sarésåpäù—reptiles; gandharva-apsarasaù, yakñäù,
rakñaù-bhüta-gaëa-uragäù, paçavaù, pitaraù, siddhäù, vidyädhräù, cäraëäù—all
inhabitants of different planets; drumäù—the vegetable kingdom; anye—many
others; ca—also; vividhäù—of different varieties; jéväù—living entities;
jala—water; sthala—land; nabha-okasaù—the inhabitants of the sky, or the
birds; graha—the asteroids; åkña—the influential stars; ketavaù—the comets;
täräù—the luminaries; taòitaù—the lightning; stanayitnavaù—the sound of
the clouds; sarvam—everything; puruñaù—the Personality of Godhead; eva
idam—certainly all these; bhütam—whatever is created; bhavyam—whatever
will be created; bhavat—and whatever was created in the past; ca—also;
yat—whatever; tena idam—it is all by Him; ävåtam—covered;
viçvam—universally comprehending; vitastim—half a cubit;
adhitiñöhati—situated.
TRANSLATION
Beginning from me [Brahmä] down to you and Bhava [Çiva], all the great
sages who were born before you, the demigods, the demons, the Nägas, the
human beings, the birds, the beasts, as well as the reptiles, etc., and all
phenomenal manifestations of the universes, namely the planets, stars,
asteroids, luminaries, lightning, thunder, and the inhabitants of the different
planetary systems, namely the Gandharvas, Apsaräs, Yakñas, Rakñas,
Bhütagaëas, Uragas, Paçus, Pitäs, Siddhas, Vidyädharas, Cäraëas, and all other
different varieties of living entities, including the birds, beasts, trees and
everything that be, are all covered by the universal form of the Lord at all
times, namely past, present and future, although He is transcendental to all of
them, eternally existing in a form not exceeding nine inches.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, by His partial representation,
measuring not more than nine inches as Supersoul, expands by His potential
energy in the shape of the universal form, which includes everything
manifested in different varieties of organic and inorganic materials. The
manifested varieties of the universe are therefore not different from the Lord,
just as golden ornaments of different shapes and forms are nondifferent from
the original stock reserve of gold. In other words, the Lord is the Supreme
Person who controls everything within the creation, and still He remains the
supreme separate identity, distinct from all manifested material creation. In
the Bhagavad-gétä (9.4–5) He is therefore said to be Yogeçvara. Everything
rests on the potency of Lord Çré Kåñëa, and still the Lord is different from and
transcendental to all such identities. In the Vedic Puruña-sükta of the Åg
mantra, this is also confirmed. This philosophical truth of simultaneous
oneness and difference was propounded by Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu,
and it is known as acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(9). Brahmä, Närada and all others
are simultaneously one with the Lord and different from the Supreme Lord.
We are all one with Him, just as the gold ornaments are one in quality with
the stock gold, but the individual gold ornament is never equal in quantity
with the stock gold. The stock gold is never exhausted even if there are
innumerable ornaments emanating from the stock because the stock is pürëam,
complete; even if pürëam is deducted from the pürëam, still the supreme
pürëam remains the same pürëam. This fact is inconceivable to our present
imperfect senses. Lord Caitanya therefore defined His theory of philosophy as
acintya (inconceivable), and as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä as well as in
the Bhägavatam, Lord Caitanya’s theory of acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(10) is the
perfect philosophy of the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 17
SviDaZ<Ya& Pa[TaPaNa( Pa[a<aae bihê Pa[TaPaTYaSaaE )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Wv& ivraJa& Pa[TaPa&STaPaTYaNTabRih" PauMaaNa( )) 17 ))
sva-dhiñëyaà pratapan präëo
bahiç ca pratapaty asau
evaà viräjaà pratapaàs
tapaty antar bahiù pumän
SYNONYMS
sva-dhiñëyam—radiation; pratapan—by expansion; präëaù—living energy;
bahiù—external; ca—also; pratapati—illuminated; asau—the sun; evam—in
the same way; viräjam—the universal form; pratapan—by expansion of;
tapati—enlivens; antaù—internally; bahiù—externally; pumän—the Supreme
Personality.
TRANSLATION
The sun illuminates both internally and externally by expanding its
radiation; similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by expanding His
universal form, maintains everything in the creation both internally and
externally.
PURPORT
The universal form of the Lord, or the impersonal feature of the Lord
known as the brahmajyoti, is clearly explained here and compared to the
radiation of the sun. The sunshine may expand all over the universe, but the
source of the sunshine, namely the sun planet or the deity known as
Sürya-näräyaëa, is the basis of such radiation. Similarly, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Lord Kåñëa is the basis of the impersonal brahmajyoti
radiation, or the impersonal feature of the Lord. This is confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gétä (14.27). So the universal form of the Lord is the secondary
imagination of the impersonal form of the Lord, but the primary form of the
Lord is Çyämasundara, with two hands, playing on His eternal flute.
Seventy-five percent of the expansive radiation of the Lord is manifested in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the spiritual sky (tripäd-vibhüti), and twenty-five percent of His personal
radiation comprehends the entire expansion of the material universes. This is
also explained and stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (10.42). Thus the seventy-five
percent expansion of His radiation is called His internal energy, whereas the
twenty-five percent expansion is called the external energy of the Lord. The
living entities, who are residents of the spiritual as well as the material
expansions, are His marginal energy (taöastha-çakti), and they are at liberty to
live in either of the energies, external or internal. Those who live within the
spiritual expansion of the Lord are called liberated souls, whereas the residents
of the external expansion are called the conditioned souls. We can just make
an estimate of the number of the residents of the internal expansions in
comparison with the number of residents in the external energy and may easily
conclude that the liberated souls are far more numerous than the conditioned
souls.
TEXT 18
Saae_Ma*TaSYaa>aYaSYaeXaae MaTYaRMaà& YadTYaGaaTa( )
MaihMaEz TaTaae b]øNa( PauåzSYa durTYaYa" )) 18 ))
so ’måtasyäbhayasyeço
martyam annaà yad atyagät
mahimaiña tato brahman
puruñasya duratyayaù
SYNONYMS
saù—He (the Lord); amåtasya—of deathlessness; abhayasya—of fearlessness;
éçaù—the controller; martyam—dying; annam—fruitive action; yat—one who
has; atyagät—has transcended; mahimä—the glories; eñaù—of Him;
tataù—therefore; brahman—O brähmaëa Närada; puruñasya—of the Supreme
Personality; duratyayaù—immeasurable.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the controller of immortality and
fearlessness, and He is transcendental to death and the fruitive actions of the
material world. O Närada, O brähmaëa, it is therefore difficult to measure the
glories of the Supreme Person.
PURPORT
The glories of the Lord, in the transcendental seventy-five percent of the
Lord’s internal potency, are stated in the Padma Puräëa (Uttara-khaëòa). It is
said there that those planets in the spiritual sky, which comprises the
seventy-five percent expansion of the internal potency of the Lord, are far, far
greater than those planets in the total universes composed of the external
potency of the Lord. In the Caitanya-caritämåta, the total universes in the
external potency of the Lord are compared to a bucketful of mustard seeds.
One mustard seed is calculated to be a universe itself. In one of the universes,
in which we are now living, the number of planets cannot be counted by
human energy, and so how can we think of the sum total in all the universes,
which are compared to a bucketful of mustard seeds? And the planets in the
spiritual sky are at least three times the number of those in the material sky.
Such planets, being spiritual, are in fact transcendental to the material modes;
therefore they are constituted in the mode of unalloyed goodness only. The
conception of spiritual bliss (brahmänanda) is fully present in those planets.
Each of them is eternal, indestructible and free from all kinds of inebrieties
experienced in the material world. Each of them is self-illuminating and more
powerfully dazzling than (if we can imagine) the total sunshine of millions of
mundane suns. The inhabitants of those planets are liberated from birth,
death, old age and diseases and have full knowledge of everything; they are all
godly and free from all sorts of material hankerings. They have nothing to do
there except to render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord
Näräyaëa, who is the predominating Deity of such Vaikuëöha planets. Those
liberated souls are engaged incessantly in singing songs mentioned in the Säma
Veda (vedaiù säìga-pada-kramopaniñadair gäyanti yaà sämagäù). All of them
are personifications of the five Upaniñads. Tripäd-vibhüti, or the seventy-five
percent known as the internal potency of the Lord, is to be understood as the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kingdom of God far beyond the material sky; and when we speak of
päda-vibhüti, or the twenty-five percent comprising His external energy, we
should understand that this refers to the sphere of the material world. It is also
said in the Padma Puräëa that the kingdom of tripäd-vibhüti is transcendental,
whereas the päda-vibhüti is mundane; tripäd-vibhüti is eternal, whereas the
päda-vibhüti is transient. The Lord and His eternal servitors in the
transcendental kingdom all have eternal forms which are auspicious, infallible,
spiritual and eternally youthful. In other words, there is no birth, death, old
age and disease. That eternal land is full of transcendental enjoyment and full
of beauty and bliss. This very fact is also corroborated in this verse of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and the transcendental nature is described as amåta. As
described in the Vedas, utämåtatvasyeçänaù: the Supreme Lord is the Lord of
immortality, or in other words, the Lord is immortal, and because He is the
Lord of immortality He can award immortality to His devotees. In the
Bhagavad-gétä (8.16) the Lord also assures that whoever may go to His abode of
immortality shall never return to this mortal land of threefold miseries. The
Lord is not like the mundane lord. The mundane master or lord never enjoys
equally with his subordinates, nor is a mundane lord immortal, nor can he
award immortality to his subordinate. The Supreme Lord, who is the leader of
all living entities, can award all the qualities of His personality unto His
devotees, including immortality and spiritual bliss. In the material world there
is always anxiety or fearfulness in the hearts of all living entities, but the Lord,
being Himself the supreme fearless, also awards the same quality of fearlessness
to His pure devotees. Mundane existence is itself a kind of fear because in all
mundane bodies the effects of birth, death, old age and disease always keep a
living being compact in fear. In the mundane world, there is always the
influence of time, which changes things from one stage to another, and the
living entity, originally being avikära, or unchangeable, suffers a great deal on
account of changes due to the influence of time. The changing effects of
eternal time are conspicuously absent in the immortal kingdom of God, which
should therefore be understood to have no influence of time and therefore no
fear whatsoever. In the material world, so-called happiness is the result of one’s
own work. One can become a rich man by dint of one’s own hard labor, and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
there are always fear and doubts as to the duration of such acquired happiness.
But in the kingdom of God, no one has to endeavor to attain a standard of
happiness. Happiness is the nature of the spirit, as stated in the
Vedänta-sütras: änandamayo ’bhyäsät—the spirit is by nature full of happiness.
Happiness in spiritual nature always increases in volume with a new phase of
appreciation; there is no question of decreasing the bliss. Such unalloyed
spiritual bliss is nowhere to be found within the orbit of the material universe,
including the Janaloka planets, or, for that matter, the Maharloka or Satyaloka
planets, because even Lord Brahmä is subject to the laws of fruitive actions
and the law of birth and death. It is therefore stated here: duratyayaù, or, in
other words, spiritual happiness in the eternal kingdom of God cannot be
imagined even by the great brahmacärés or sannyäsés who are eligible to be
promoted to the planets beyond the region of heaven. Or, the greatness of the
Supreme Lord is so great that it cannot be imagined even by the great
brahmacärés or sannyäsés, but such happiness is factually attained by the
unalloyed devotees of the Lord, by His divine grace.
TEXT 19
Paadezu SavR>aUTaaiNa Pau&Sa" iSQaiTaPadae ivdu" )
AMa*Ta& +aeMaMa>aYa& i}aMaUDNaaeR_DaaiYa MaUDaRSau )) 19 ))
pädeñu sarva-bhütäni
puàsaù sthiti-pado viduù
amåtaà kñemam abhayaà
tri-mürdhno ’dhäyi mürdhasu
SYNONYMS
pädeñu—in the one fourth; sarva—all; bhütäni—living entities; puàsaù—of
the Supreme Person; sthiti-padaù—the reservoir of all material opulence;
viduù—you should know; amåtam—deathlessness; kñemam—all happiness, free
from the anxiety of old age, diseases, etc.; abhayam—fearlessness;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tri-mürdhnaù—beyond the three higher planetary systems; adhäyi—exist;
mürdhasu—beyond the material coverings.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is to be known as the supreme
reservoir of all material opulences by the one fourth of His energy in which all
the living entities exist. Deathlessness, fearlessness and freedom from the
anxieties of old age and disease exist in the kingdom of God, which is beyond
the three higher planetary systems and beyond the material coverings.
PURPORT
Out of the total manifestations of the sandhiné energy of the Lord, one
fourth is displayed in the material world, and three fourths are displayed in the
spiritual world. The Lord’s energy is divided into three component parts,
namely sandhiné, saàvit and hlädiné; in other words, He is the full
manifestation of existence, knowledge and bliss. In the material world such a
sense of existence, knowledge and pleasure is meagerly exhibited, and all living
entities, who are minute parts and parcels of the Lord, are eligible to relish
such consciousness of existence, knowledge and bliss very minutely in the
liberated stage, whereas in the conditioned stage of material existence they
can hardly appreciate what is the factual, existential, cognizable and pure
happiness of life. The liberated souls, who exist in far greater numerical
strength than those souls in the material world, can factually experience the
potency of the above-mentioned sandhiné, saàvit and hlädiné energies of the
Lord in the matter of deathlessness, fearlessness and freedom from old age and
disease.
In the material world, the planetary systems are arranged in three spheres,
called triloka, or Svarga, Martya and Pätäla, and all of them constitute only
one fourth of the total sandhiné energy. Beyond that is the spiritual sky where
the Vaikuëöha planets exist beyond the coverings of seven material strata. In
none of the triloka planetary systems can one experience the status of
immortality, full knowledge and full bliss. The upper three planetary systems
are called sättvika planets because they provide facilities for a long duration of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
life and relative freedom from disease and old age, as well as a sense of
fearlessness. The great sages and saints are promoted beyond the heavenly
planets to Maharloka, but that also is not the place of complete fearlessness
because at the end of one kalpa the Maharloka is annihilated and the
inhabitants have to transport themselves to still higher planets. Yet even on
these planets no one is immune to death. There may be a comparative
extension of life, expansion of knowledge and sense of full bliss, but factual
deathlessness, fearlessness and freedom from old age, diseases, etc., are possible
only beyond the material spheres of the coverings of the material sky. Such
things are situated on the head (adhäyi mürdhasu).
TEXT 20
PaadañYaae bihêaSaàPa[JaaNaa& Ya Aaé[Maa" )
ANTaiñl/aeKYaaSTvParae Ga*hMaeDaae_b*hd(v]Ta" )) 20 ))
pädäs trayo bahiç cäsann
aprajänäà ya äçramäù
antas tri-lokyäs tv aparo
gåha-medho ’båhad-vrataù
SYNONYMS
pädäù trayaù—the cosmos of three fourths of the Lord’s energy; bahiù—thus
situated beyond; ca—and for all; äsan—were; aprajänäm—of those who are
not meant for rebirth; ye—those; äçramäù—status of life; antaù—within;
tri-lokyäù—of the three worlds; tu—but; aparaù—others;
gåha-medhaù—attached to family life; abåhat-vrataù—without strictly
following a vow of celibacy.
TRANSLATION
The spiritual world, which consists of three fourths of the Lord’s energy, is
situated beyond this material world, and it is especially meant for those who will
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
never be reborn. Others, who are attached to family life and who do not strictly
follow celibacy vows, must live within the three material worlds.
PURPORT
The climax of the system of varëäçrama-dharma, or sanätana-dharma, is
clearly expressed here in this particular verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The
highest benefit that can be awarded to a human being is to train him to be
detached from sex life, particularly because it is only due to sex indulgence
that the conditioned life of material existence continues birth after birth.
Human civilization in which there is no control of sex life is a fourth-class
civilization because in such an atmosphere there is no liberation of the soul
encaged in the material body. Birth, death, old age and disease are related to
the material body, and they have nothing to do with the spirit soul. But as long
as the bodily attachment for sensual enjoyment is encouraged, the individual
spirit soul is forced to continue the repetition of birth and death on account of
the material body, which is compared to garments subjected to the law of
deterioration.
In order to award the highest benefit of human life, the varëäçrama system
trains the follower to adopt the vow of celibacy beginning from the order of
brahmacäré. The brahmacäré life is for students who are educated to follow
strictly the vow of celibacy. Youngsters who have had no taste of sex life can
easily follow the vow of celibacy, and once fixed in the principle of such a life,
one can very easily continue to the highest perfectional stage, attaining the
kingdom of the three-fourths energy of the Lord. It is already explained that in
the cosmos of three-fourths energy of the Lord there is neither death nor fear,
and one is full of the blissful life of happiness and knowledge. A householder
attached to family life can easily give up such a life of sex indulgence if he has
been trained in the principles of the life of a brahmacäré. A householder is
recommended to quit home at the end of fifty years (païcaçordhvaà vanaà
vrajet) and live a life in the forest; then, being fully detached from family
affection, he may accept the order of renunciation as a sannyäsé fully engaged
in the service of the Lord. Any form of religious principles in which the
followers are trained to pursue the vow of celibacy is good for the human being
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
because only those who are trained in that way can end the miserable life of
material existence. The principles of nirväëa, as recommended by Lord
Buddha, are also meant for ending the miserable life of material existence.
And this process, in the highest degree, is recommended here in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, with clear perception of ideal perfection, although
basically there is no difference between the process of Buddhists, Çaìkarites
and Vaiñëavites. For promotion to the highest status of perfection, namely
freedom from birth and death, anxiety and fearfulness, not one of these
processes allows the follower to break the vow of celibacy.
The householders and persons who have deliberately broken the vow of
celibacy cannot enter into the kingdom of deathlessness. The pious
householders or the fallen yogés or the fallen transcendentalists can be
promoted to the higher planets within the material world (one fourth of the
energy of the Lord), but they will fail to enter into the kingdom of
deathlessness. Abåhad-vratas are those who have broken the vow of celibacy.
The vänaprasthas, or those retired from family life, and the sannyäsés, or the
renounced persons, cannot break the vow of celibacy if they want success in
the process. The brahmacärés, vänaprasthas and sannyäsés do not intend to take
rebirth (apraja), nor are they meant for secretly indulging in sex life. Such a
falldown by the spiritualist may be compensated by another chance for human
life in good families of learned brähmaëas or of rich merchants for another
term of elevation, but the best thing is to attain the highest perfection of
deathlessness as soon as the human form of life is attained; otherwise the
whole policy of human life will prove to be a total failure. Lord Caitanya was
very strict in advising His followers in this matter of celibacy. One of His
personal attendants, Choöa Haridäsa, was severely punished by Lord Caitanya
because of his failure to observe the vow of celibacy. For a transcendentalist,
therefore, who at all wants to be promoted to the kingdom beyond material
miseries, it is worse than suicide to deliberately indulge in sex life, especially in
the renounced order of life. Sex life in the renounced order of life is the most
perverted form of religious life, and such a misguided person can only be saved
if, by chance, he meets a pure devotee.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 21
Sa*Taq ivc§-Mae ivìx( SaaXaNaaNaXaNae o>ae )
YadivÛa c ivÛa c PauåzSTaU>aYaaé[Ya" )) 21 ))
såté vicakrame viçvam
säçanänaçane ubhe
yad avidyä ca vidyä ca
puruñas tübhayäçrayaù
SYNONYMS
såté—the destination of the living entities; vicakrame—exists comprehensively;
viçvaì—the all-pervading Personality of Godhead; säçana—activities of
lording it over; anaçane—activities in devotional service; ubhe—both;
yat—what is; avidyä—nescience; ca—as well as; vidyä—factual knowledge;
ca—and; puruñaù—the Supreme Person; tu—but; ubhaya—for both of them;
äçrayaù—the master.
TRANSLATION
By His energies, the all-pervading Personality of Godhead is thus
comprehensively the master in the activities of controlling and in devotional
service. He is the ultimate master of both nescience and factual knowledge of all
situations.
PURPORT
The word viçvaì is significant in this verse. One who travels perfectly in
every field of activity is called the puruña or kñetrajïa. These two terms,
kñetrajïa and puruña, are equally applicable to both the individual self and the
Supreme Self, the Lord. In the Bhagavad-gétä (13.3) the matter is explained as
follows:
kñetrajïaà cäpi mäà viddhi
sarva-kñetreñu bhärata
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kñetra-kñetrajïayor jïänaà
yat taj jïänaà mataà mama
kñetra means the place, and one who knows the place is called the kñetrajïa.
The individual self knows about his limited field of activities, but the Supreme
Self, the Lord, knows about the unlimited field of activities. The individual
soul knows about his own thinking, feeling and willing activities, but the
Supersoul, or the Paramätmä, the supreme controller, being present
everywhere, knows everyone’s thinking, feeling and willing activities, and as
such the individual living entity is the minute master of his personal affairs
whereas the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master of everyone’s
affairs, past, present and future (vedähaà samatétäni, etc.). Only the ignorant
person does not know this difference between the Lord and the living entities.
The living entities, as distinguished from incognizant matter, may be
qualitatively equal to the Lord in cognizance, but the living entity can never
be equal to the Lord in full knowledge of past, present and future.
And because the living entity is partially cognizant, he is therefore
sometimes forgetful of his own identity. This forgetfulness is specifically
manifested in the field of the ekapäd-vibhüti of the Lord, or in the material
world, but in the tripäd-vibhüti field of actions, or in the spiritual world, there
is no forgetfulness by the living entities, who are free from all kinds of
contaminations resulting from the forgetful state of existence. The material
body is the symbol of the gross and subtle form of forgetfulness; therefore the
whole atmosphere of the material world is called avidyä, or nescience, whereas
the whole atmosphere of the spiritual world is called vidyä, or full of
knowledge. There are different stages of avidyä, and they are called dharma,
artha and mokña. The idea of mokña, or liberation, held by the monist in the
matter of oneness of the living entity and the Lord by ultimate merging in one,
is also the last stage of materialism or forgetfulness. Knowledge of the
qualitative oneness of the self and Superself is partial knowledge and
ignorance also because there is no knowledge of quantitative difference, as
explained above. The individual self can never be equal to the Lord in
cognizance; otherwise he could not be placed in the state of forgetfulness. So,
because there is a stage of forgetfulness of the individual selves, or the living
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
entities, there is always a gulf of difference between the Lord and the living
entity, as between the part and the whole. The part is never equal to the
whole. So the conception of one hundred percent equality of the living being
with the Lord is also nescience.
In the field of nescience, activities are directed toward lording it over the
creation. In the material world, therefore, everyone is engaged in acquiring
material opulence to lord it over the material world. Therefore there is always
clash and frustration, which are the symptoms of nescience. But in the field of
knowledge, there is devotional service to the Lord (bhakti). Therefore there is
no chance of being contaminated by the influence of nescience or
forgetfulness (avidyä) in the liberated stage of devotional activities. The Lord
is thus the proprietor of the fields both of nescience and of cognition, and it
remains the choice of the living entity to exist in either of the above regions.
TEXT 22
YaSMaad<@& ivra@( Jaje >aUTaeiNd]YaGau<aaTMak-" )
Tad( d]VYaMaTYaGaad( ivì& Gaaei>a" SaUYaR wvaTaPaNa( )) 22 ))
yasmäd aëòaà viräò jajïe
bhütendriya-guëätmakaù
tad dravyam atyagäd viçvaà
gobhiù sürya ivätapan
SYNONYMS
yasmät—from whom; aëòam—the universal globes; viräö—and the gigantic
universal form; jajïe—appeared; bhüta—elements; indriya—senses;
guëa-ätmakaù—qualitative; tat dravyam—the universes and the universal
form, etc.; atyagät—surpassed; viçvam—all the universes; gobhiù—by the rays;
süryaù—the sun; iva—like; ätapan—distributed rays and heat.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
From that Personality of Godhead, all the universal globes and the universal
form with all material elements, qualities and senses are generated. Yet He is
aloof from such material manifestations, like the sun, which is separate from its
rays and heat.
PURPORT
The supreme truth has been ascertained in the previous verse as puruña or
the puruñottama, the Supreme person. The Absolute person is the éçvara, or the
supreme controller, by His different energies. The ekapäd-vibhüti
manifestation of the material energy of the Lord is just like one of the many
mistresses of the Lord, by whom the Lord is not so much attracted, as indicated
in the language of the Gétä (bhinnä prakåtiù). But the region of the
tripäd-vibhüti, being a pure spiritual manifestation of the energy of the Lord, is,
so to speak, more attractive to Him. The Lord, therefore, generates the
material manifestations by impregnating the material energy, and then, within
the manifestation, He expands Himself as the gigantic form of the viçva-rüpa.
The viçva-rüpa, as it was shown to Arjuna, is not the original form of the Lord.
The original form of the Lord is the transcendental form of Puruñottama, or
Kåñëa Himself. It is very nicely explained herein that He expands Himself just
like the sun. The sun expands itself by its terrible heat and rays, yet the sun is
always aloof from such rays and heat. The impersonalist takes into
consideration the rays of the Lord without any information of the tangible,
transcendental, eternal form of the Lord, known as Kåñëa. Therefore Kåñëa, in
His supreme personal form, with two hands and flute, is bewildering for the
impersonalists who can accommodate only the gigantic viçva-rüpa of the Lord.
They should know that the rays of the sun are secondary to the sun, and
similarly the impersonal gigantic form of the Lord is also secondary to the
personal form as Puruñottama. The Brahma-saàhitä (5.37) confirms this
statement as follows:
änanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhävitäbhis
täbhir ya eva nija-rüpatayä kaläbhiù
goloka eva nivasaty akhilätma-bhüto
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, the one who enlivens the
senses of everyone by His personal bodily rays, resides in His transcendental
abode, called Goloka. Yet He is present in every nook and corner of His
creation by expansion of happy spiritual rays, equal in power to His personal
potency of bliss.” He is therefore simultaneously personal and impersonal by
His inconceivable potency, or He is the one without a second, displaying
complete unity in a diversity of material and spiritual manifestations. He is
separate from everything, and still nothing is different from Him.
TEXT 23
YadaSYa Naa>Yaaàil/NaadhMaaSa& MahaTMaNa" )
Naaivd& YajSaM>aaraNa( PauåzavYavaNa*Tae )) 23 ))
yadäsya näbhyän nalinäd
aham äsaà mahätmanaù
nävidaà yajïa-sambhärän
puruñävayavän åte
SYNONYMS
yadä—at the time of; asya—His; näbhyät—from the abdomen; nalinät—from
the lotus flower; aham—myself; äsam—took my birth; mahä-ätmanaù—of the
great person; na avidam—did not know; yajïa—sacrificial;
sambhärän—ingredients; puruña—of the Lord; avayavän—personal bodily
limbs; åte—except.
TRANSLATION
When I was born from the abdominal lotus flower of the Lord
[Mahä-Viñëu], the great person, I had no ingredients for sacrificial
performances except the bodily limbs of the great Personality of Godhead.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä, the creator of the cosmic manifestation, is known as
Svayambhü, or one who is born without father and mother. The general
process is that a living creature is born out of the sex combination of the male
father and the female mother. But Brahmä, the firstborn living being, is born
out of the abdominal lotus flower of the Mahä-Viñëu plenary expansion of
Lord Kåñëa. The abdominal lotus flower is part of the Lord’s bodily limbs, and
Brahmä is born out of the lotus flower. Therefore Lord Brahmä is also a part of
the Lord’s body. Brahmä, after his appearance in the gigantic hollow of the
universe, saw darkness and nothing else. He felt perplexity, and from his heart
he was inspired by the Lord to undergo austerity, thereby acquiring the
ingredients for sacrificial performances. But there was nothing besides the two
of them, namely the Personality of Mahä-Viñëu and Brahmä himself, born of
the bodily part of the Lord. For sacrificial performances many ingredients were
in need, especially animals. The animal sacrifice is never meant for killing the
animal, but for achieving the successful result of the sacrifice. The animal
offered in the sacrificial fire is, so to speak, destroyed, but the next moment it
is given a new life by dint of the Vedic hymns chanted by the expert priest.
When such an expert priest is not available, the animal sacrifice in the fire of
the sacrificial altar is forbidden. Thus Brahmä created even the sacrificial
ingredients out of the bodily limbs of the Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, which means
that the cosmic order was created by Brahmä himself. Also, nothing is created
out of nothing, but everything is created from the person of the Lord. The
Lord says in the Bhagavad-gétä (10.8), ahaà sarvasya prabhavo mattaù sarvaà
pravartate. “Everything is made from My bodily limbs, and I am therefore the
original source of all creations.”
The impersonalists argue that there is no use in worshiping the Lord when
everything is nothing but the Lord Himself. The personalist, however,
worships the Lord out of a great sense of gratitude, utilizing the ingredients
born out of the bodily limbs of the Lord. The fruits and flowers are available
from the body of the earth, and yet mother earth is worshiped by the sensible
devotee with ingredients born from the earth. Similarly, mother Ganges is
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
worshiped by the water of the Ganges, and yet the worshiper enjoys the result
of such worship. Worship of the Lord is also performed by the ingredients born
from the bodily limbs of the Lord, and yet the worshiper, who is himself a part
of the Lord, achieves the result of devotional service to the Lord. While the
impersonalist wrongly concludes that he is the Lord himself, the personalist,
out of a great gratitude, worships the Lord in devotional service, knowing
perfectly well that nothing is different from the Lord. The devotee therefore
endeavors to apply everything in the service of the Lord because he knows that
everything is the property of the Lord and that no one can claim anything as
one’s own. This perfect conception of oneness helps the worshiper in being
engaged in His loving service, whereas the impersonalist, being falsely puffed
up, remains a nondevotee forever, without being recognized by the Lord.
TEXT 24
Taezu YajSYa PaXav" SavNaSPaTaYa" ku-Xaa" )
wd& c devYaJaNa& k-al/êaeåGau<aaiNvTa" )) 24 ))
teñu yajïasya paçavaù
savanaspatayaù kuçäù
idaà ca deva-yajanaà
kälaç coru-guëänvitaù
SYNONYMS
teñu—in such sacrifices; yajïasya—of the sacrificial performance;
paçavaù—the animals or the sacrificial ingredients; sa-vanaspatayaù—along
with flowers and leaves; kuçäù—the straw; idam—all these; ca—as also;
deva-yajanam—the sacrificial altar; kälaù—a suitable time; ca—as also;
uru—great; guëa-anvitaù—qualified.
TRANSLATION
For performing sacrificial ceremonies, one requires sacrificial ingredients,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
such as flowers, leaves and straw, along with the sacrificial altar and a suitable
time [spring].
TEXT 25
vSTaUNYaaezDaYa" òeha rSal/aehMa*dae Jal/Ma( )
‰cae YaJaU&iz SaaMaaiNa caTauhaeR}a& c SataMa )) 25 ))
vastüny oñadhayaù snehä
rasa-loha-mådo jalam
åco yajüàñi sämäni
cätur-hotraà ca sattama
SYNONYMS
vastüni—utensils; oñadhayaù—grains; snehäù—clarified butter;
rasa-loha-mådaù—honey, gold and earth; jalam—water; åcaù—the Åg Veda;
yajüàñi—the Yajur Veda; sämäni—the Säma Veda; cätuù-hotram—four
persons conducting the performance; ca—all these; sattama—O most pious
one.
TRANSLATION
Other requirements are utensils, grains, clarified butter, honey, gold, earth,
water, the Åg Veda, Yajur Veda and Säma Veda and four priests to perform the
sacrifice.
PURPORT
To perform a sacrifice successfully, at least four expert priests are needed:
one who can offer (hotä), one who can chant (udgätä), one who can kindle the
sacrificial fire without the aid of separate fire (adhvaryu), and one who can
supervise (brahmä). Such sacrifices were conducted from the birth of Brahmä,
the first living creature, and were carried on till the reign of Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira. But such expert brähmaëa priests are very rare in this age of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
corruption and quarrel, and therefore in the present age only the yajïa of
chanting the holy name of the Lord is recommended. The scriptures enjoin:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Adi 17.21]
TEXT 26
NaaMaDaeYaaiNa MaN}aaê di+a<aaê v]TaaiNa c )
devTaaNau§-Ma" k-LPa" SaªLPaSTaN}aMaev c )) 26 ))
näma-dheyäni manträç ca
dakñiëäç ca vratäni ca
devatänukramaù kalpaù
saìkalpas tantram eva ca
SYNONYMS
näma-dheyäni—invoking the names of the demigods; manträù—specific
hymns to offer to a particular demigod; ca—also; dakñiëäù—reward; ca—and;
vratäni—vows; ca—and; devatä-anukramaù—one demigod after another;
kalpaù—the specific scripture; saìkalpaù—the specific purpose; tantram—a
particular process; eva—as they are; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Other necessities include invoking the different names of the demigods by
specific hymns and vows of recompense, in accordance with the particular
scripture, for specific purposes and by specific processes.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The whole process of offering sacrifice is under the category of fruitive
action, and such activities are extremely scientific. They mainly depend on the
process of vibrating sounds with a particular accent. It is a great science, and
due to being out of proper use for more than four thousand years, for want of
qualified brähmaëas, such performances of sacrifice are no longer effective.
Nor are they recommended in this fallen age. Any such sacrifice undertaken
in this age as a matter of show may simply be a cheating process by the clever
priestly order. But such a show of sacrifices cannot be effective at any stage.
Fruitive action is being carried on by the help of material science and to a
little extent by gross material help, but the materialists await a still more subtle
advancement in the process of vibrating sounds on which the Vedic hymns are
established. Gross material science cannot divert the real purpose of human
life. They can only increase the artificial needs of life without any solution to
the problems of life; therefore the way of materialistic life leads to the wrong
type of human civilization. Since the ultimate aim of life is spiritual
realization, the direct way of invoking the holy name of the Lord, as
mentioned above, is precisely recommended by Lord Caitanya, and people of
the modern age can easily take advantage of this simple process, which is
tenable for the condition of the complicated social structure.
TEXT 27
GaTaYaae MaTaYaêEv Pa[aYaiêta& SaMaPaR<aMa( )
PauåzavYavEreTae SaM>aara" SaM>a*Taa MaYaa )) 27 ))
gatayo matayaç caiva
präyaçcittaà samarpaëam
puruñävayavair ete
sambhäräù sambhåtä mayä
SYNONYMS
gatayaù—progress to the ultimate goal (Viñëu); matayaù—worshiping the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
demigods; ca—as also; eva—certainly; präyaçcittam—compensation;
samarpaëam—ultimate offering; puruña—the Personality of Godhead;
avayavaiù—from the parts of the body of the Personality of Godhead;
ete—these; sambhäräù—the ingredients; sambhåtäù—were arranged;
mayä—by me.
TRANSLATION
Thus I had to arrange all these necessary ingredients and paraphernalia of
sacrifice from the personal bodily parts of the Personality of Godhead. By
invocation of the demigods’ names, the ultimate goal, Viñëu, was gradually
attained, and thus compensation and ultimate offering were complete.
PURPORT
In this verse, special stress is given to the person of the Supreme Lord, and
not to His impersonal brahmajyoti, as being the source of all supplies.
Näräyaëa, the Supreme Lord, is the goal of sacrificial results, and therefore the
Vedic hymns are ultimately meant for attaining this goal. Human life is thus
made successful by pleasing Näräyaëa and getting entrance into the direct
association of Näräyaëa in the spiritual kingdom of Vaikuëöha.
TEXT 28
wiTa SaM>a*TaSaM>aar" PauåzavYavErhMa( )
TaMaev Pauåz& Yaj& TaeNaEvaYaJaMaqìrMa( )) 28 ))
iti sambhåta-sambhäraù
puruñävayavair aham
tam eva puruñaà yajïaà
tenaiväyajam éçvaram
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; sambhåta—executed; sambhäraù—equipped myself well;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
puruña—the Personality of Godhead; avayavaiù—by the parts and parcels;
aham—I; tam eva—unto Him; puruñam—the Personality of Godhead;
yajïam—the enjoyer of all sacrifices; tena eva—by all those;
ayajam—worshiped; éçvaram—the supreme controller.
TRANSLATION
Thus I created the ingredients and paraphernalia for offering sacrifice out of
the parts of the body of the Supreme Lord, the enjoyer of the sacrifice, and I
performed the sacrifice to satisfy the Lord.
PURPORT
People in general are always anxious to have peace of mind or peace in the
world, but they do not know how to achieve such a standard of peace in the
world. Such peace in the world is obtainable by performances of sacrifice and
by practice of austerity. In the Bhagavad-gétä (5.29) the following prescription
is recommended:
bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram
suhådaà sarva-bhütänäà
jïätvä mäà çäntim åcchati
“The karma-yogés know that the Supreme Lord is the factual enjoyer and
maintainer of all sacrifices and of the austere life. They also know that the
Lord is the ultimate proprietor of all the planets and is the factual friend of all
living entities. Such knowledge gradually converts the karma-yogés into pure
devotees of the Lord through the association of unalloyed devotees, and thus
they are able to be liberated from material bondage.”
Brahmä, the original living being within the material world, taught us the
way of sacrifice. The word “sacrifice” suggests dedication of one’s own interests
for satisfaction of a second person. That is the way of all activities. Every man
is engaged in sacrificing his interests for others, either in the form of family,
society, community, country or the entire human society. But perfection of
such sacrifices is attained when they are performed for the sake of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Supreme Person, the Lord. Because the Lord is the proprietor of everything,
because the Lord is the friend of all living creatures, and because He is the
maintainer of the performer of sacrifice, as well as the supplier of the
ingredients of sacrifices, it is He only and no one else who should be satisfied
by all sacrifices.
The whole world is engaged in sacrificing energy for advancement of
learning, social upliftment, economic development and plans for total
improvement of the human condition, but no one is interested in sacrificing
for the sake of the Lord, as it is advised in the Bhagavad-gétä. Therefore, there
is no peace in the world. If men at all want peace in the world, they must
practice sacrifice in the interest of the supreme proprietor and friend of all.
TEXT 29
TaTaSTae >a]aTar wMae Pa[JaaNaa& PaTaYaae Nav )
AYaJaNa( VYa¢-MaVYa¢&- Pauåz& SauSaMaaihTaa" )) 29 ))
tatas te bhrätara ime
prajänäà patayo nava
ayajan vyaktam avyaktaà
puruñaà su-samähitäù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; te—your; bhrätaraù—brothers; ime—these; prajänäm—of
the living creatures; patayaù—masters; nava—nine; ayajan—performed;
vyaktam—manifested; avyaktam—nonmanifested; puruñam—personalities;
su-samähitäù—with proper rituals.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, thereafter your nine brothers, who are the masters of living
creatures, performed the sacrifice with proper rituals to satisfy both the
manifested and nonmanifested personalities.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The manifested personalities are the demigods like the ruler of the
heavenly kingdom, Indra, and his associates; and the nonmanifested
personality is the Lord Himself. The manifested personalities are mundane
controllers of the material affairs, whereas the nonmanifested Personality of
Godhead is transcendental, beyond the range of the material atmosphere. In
this age of Kali the manifested demigods are also not to be seen, for space
travel has completely stopped. So both the powerful demigods and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead are nonmanifested to the covered eyes of the
modern man. Modern men want to see everything with their eyes, although
they are not sufficiently qualified. Consequently, they disbelieve in the
existence of the demigods or of the Supreme God. They should see through the
pages of authentic scriptures and should not simply believe their unqualified
eyes. Even in these days, God can also be seen by qualified eyes tinged with the
ointment of love of God.
TEXT 30
TaTaê MaNav" k-ale/ wRiJare ‰zYaae_Pare )
iPaTarae ivbuDaa dETYaa MaNauZYaa" §-Taui>aivR>auMa( )) 30 ))
tataç ca manavaù käle
éjire åñayo ’pare
pitaro vibudhä daityä
manuñyäù kratubhir vibhum
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; ca—also; manavaù—the Manus, the fathers of mankind;
käle—in due course of time; éjire—worshiped; åñayaù—great sages;
apare—others; pitaraù—the forefathers; vibudhäù—the learned scholars;
daityäù—great devotees of the demigods; manuñyäù—mankind; kratubhiù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vibhum—by performance of sacrifices to please the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the Manus, the fathers of mankind, the great sages, the
forefathers, the learned scholars, the Daityas and mankind performed sacrifices
meant to please the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
The daityas are devotees of the demigods because they want to derive the
greatest possible material facilities from them. The devotees of the Lord are
eka-niñöha, or absolutely attached to the devotional service of the Lord.
Therefore they have practically no time to seek the benefits of material
facilities. Because of their realization of their spiritual identity, they are more
concerned with spiritual emancipation than with material comforts.
TEXT 31
NaaraYa<ae >aGaviTa Taidd& ivìMaaihTaMa( )
Ga*hqTaMaaYaaeåGau<a" SaGaaRdavGau<a" SvTa" )) 31 ))
näräyaëe bhagavati
tad idaà viçvam ähitam
gåhéta-mäyoru-guëaù
sargädäv aguëaù svataù
SYNONYMS
näräyaëe—unto Näräyaëa; bhagavati—the Personality of Godhead; tat
idam—all these material manifestations; viçvam—all the universes;
ähitam—situated; gåhéta—having accepted; mäyä—material energies;
uru-guëaù—greatly powerful; sarga-ädau—in creation, maintenance and
destruction; aguëaù—without affinity for the material modes;
svataù—self-sufficiently.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
All the material manifestations of the universes are therefore situated in His
powerful material energies, which He accepts self-sufficiently, although He is
eternally without affinity for the material modes.
PURPORT
The question put by Närada before Brahmä concerning the sustenance of
the material creation is thus answered. Material actions and reactions, as the
material scientist can superficially observe, are not basically ultimate truth in
regard to creation, maintenance and destruction. The material energy is a
potency of the Lord which is displayed in time, accepting the three qualities of
goodness, passion and ignorance in the forms of Viñëu, Brahmä and Çiva. The
material energy thus works under the supreme spell of His Lordship, although
He is always transcendental to all such material activities. A rich man
constructs a big house by spending his energy in the shape of resources, and
similarly he destroys a big house by his resources, but the maintenance is
always under his personal care. The Lord is the richest of the rich because He
is always fully complete in six opulences. Therefore He is not required to do
anything personally, but everything in the material world is carried out by His
wishes and direction; therefore, the entire material manifestation is situated in
Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The impersonal conception
of the supreme truth is due to lack of knowledge only, and this fact is clearly
explained by Brahmäjé, who is supposed to be the creator of the universal
affairs. Brahmäjé is the highest authority in Vedic wisdom, and his assertion in
this connection is therefore the supreme information.
TEXT 32
Sa*JaaiMa TaiàYau¢-ae_h& hrae hriTa TaÜXa" )
ivì& PauåzæPae<a PairPaaiTa i}aXai¢-Da*k(- )) 32 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
såjämi tan-niyukto ’haà
haro harati tad-vaçaù
viçvaà puruña-rüpeëa
paripäti tri-çakti-dhåk
SYNONYMS
såjämi—do create; tat—by His; niyuktaù—appointment; aham—I;
haraù—Lord Çiva; harati—destroys; tat-vaçaù—under His subordination;
viçvam—the whole universe; puruña—the Personality of Godhead; rüpeëa—by
His eternal form; paripäti—maintains; tri-çakti-dhåk—the controller of three
energies.
TRANSLATION
By His will, I create, Lord Çiva destroys, and He Himself, in His eternal
form as the Personality of Godhead, maintains everything. He is the powerful
controller of these three energies.
PURPORT
The conception of one without a second is clearly confirmed here. The one
is Lord Väsudeva, and only by His different energies and expansions are
different manifestations, both in the material and in the spiritual worlds,
maintained. In the material world also, Lord Väsudeva is everything, as stated
in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.19). Väsudevaù sarvam iti: everything is Väsudeva only.
In the Vedic hymns also the same Väsudeva is held to be supreme. It is said in
the Vedas, väsudevät paro brahman na cänyo ’rtho ’sti tattvataù: in fact there is
no greater truth than Väsudeva. And Lord Kåñëa affirms the same truth in the
Bhagavad-gétä (7.7). Mattaù parataraà nänyat: “There is nothing above Me
[Lord Kåñëa].” So the conception of oneness, as overly stressed by the
impersonalist, is also accepted by the personalist devotee of the Lord. The
difference is that the impersonalist denies personality in the ultimate issue,
whereas the devotee gives more importance to the Personality of Godhead.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam explains this truth in the verse under discussion: Lord
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Väsudeva is one without a second, but because He is all-powerful, He can
expand Himself as well as display His omnipotencies. The Lord is described
here as omnipotent by three energies (tri-çakti-dhåk). So primarily His three
energies are internal, marginal and external. This external energy is also
displayed in the three modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. Similarly, the
internal potency is also displayed in three spiritual modes—saàvit, sandhiné
and hlädiné. The marginal potency, or the living entities, is also spiritual
(prakåtià viddhi me paräm), but the living entities are never equal to the Lord.
The Lord is nirasta-sämya-atiçaya; in other words, no one is greater than or
equal to the Supreme Lord. So the living entities, including even such great
personalities as Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, are all subordinate to the Lord. In
the material world also, in His eternal form of Viñëu, He maintains and
controls all the affairs of the demigods, including Brahmä and Çiva.
TEXT 33
wiTa Tae_i>aihTa& TaaTa YaQaedMaNauPa*C^iSa )
NaaNYaÙGavTa" ik-iÄÙaVYa& SadSadaTMak-Ma( )) 33 ))
iti te ’bhihitaà täta
yathedam anupåcchasi
nänyad bhagavataù kiïcid
bhävyaà sad-asad-ätmakam
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; te—unto you; abhihitam—explained; täta—my dear son; yathä—as;
idam—all these; anupåcchasi—as you have inquired; na—never;
anyat—anything else; bhagavataù—beyond the Personality of Godhead;
kiïcit—nothing; bhävyam—to be thought ever; sat—cause; asat—effect;
ätmakam—in the matter of.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
My dear son, whatever you inquired from me I have thus explained unto
you, and you must know for certain that whatever there is (either as cause or as
effect, both in the material and spiritual worlds) is dependent on the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The complete cosmic situation, both in the material and in the spiritual
manifestations of the energies of the Lord, is working and moving first as the
cause and then as the effect. But the original cause is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Effects of the original cause become the causes of other effects,
and thus everything, either permanent or temporary, is working as cause and
effect. And because the Lord is the primeval cause of all persons and all
energies, He is called the cause of all causes, as confirmed in the
Brahma-saàhitä as well as in the Bhagavad-gétä. The Brahma-saàhitä (5.1)
affirms:
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
And in the Bhagavad-gétä (10.8) it is said:
ahaà sarvasya prabhavo
mattaù sarvaà pravartate
iti matvä bhajante mäà
budhä bhäva-samanvitäù
So the original primeval cause is vigraha, the personal, and the impersonal
spiritual effulgence, brahmajyoti, is also an effect of the Supreme Brahman
(brahmaëo hi pratiñöhäham [14.27]), Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 34
Na >aarTaq Mae_® Ma*zaePal/+YaTae
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Na vE KvicNMae MaNaSaae Ma*za GaiTa" )
Na Mae ôzqk-ai<a PaTaNTYaSaTPaQae
YaNMae ôdaETk-<#yvTaa Da*Taae hir" )) 34 ))
na bhäraté me ’ìga måñopalakñyate
na vai kvacin me manaso måñä gatiù
na me håñékäëi patanty asat-pathe
yan me hådautkaëöhyavatä dhåto hariù
SYNONYMS
na—never; bhäraté—statements; me—mind; aìga—O Närada;
måñä—untruth; upalakñyate—prove to be; na—never; vai—certainly;
kvacit—at any time; me—mine; manasaù—of the mind; måñä—untruth;
gatiù—progress; na—nor; me—mine; håñékäëi—senses; patanti—degrades;
asat-pathe—in temporary matter; yat—because; me—mine; hådä—heart;
autkaëöhyavatä—by great earnestness; dhåtaù—caught hold of; hariù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
O Närada, because I have caught hold of the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Hari, with great zeal, whatever I say has never proved
to have been false. Nor is the progress of my mind ever deterred. Nor are my
senses ever degraded by temporary attachment to matter.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä is the original speaker of Vedic wisdom to Närada, and
Närada is the distributor of transcendental knowledge all over the world
through his various disciples, like Vyäsadeva and others. The followers of
Vedic wisdom accept the statements of Brahmäjé as gospel truth, and
transcendental knowledge is thus being distributed all over the world by the
process of disciplic succession from time immemorial, since the beginning of
the creation. Lord Brahmä is the perfect liberated living being within the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
material world, and any sincere student of transcendental knowledge must
accept the words and statements of Brahmäjé as infallible. The Vedic
knowledge is infallible because it comes down directly from the Supreme Lord
unto the heart of Brahmä, and since he is the most perfect living being,
Brahmäjé is always correct to the letter. And this is because Lord Brahmä is a
great devotee of the Lord who has earnestly accepted the lotus feet of the Lord
as the supreme truth. In the Brahma-saàhitä, which is compiled by Brahmäjé,
he repeats the aphorism govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi: ** “I am a
worshiper of the original personality of Godhead, Govinda, the primeval
Lord.” So whatever he says, whatever he thinks, and whatever he does
normally in his mood are to be accepted as truth because of his direct and very
intimate connection with Govinda, the primeval Lord. Çré Govinda, who
pleasingly accepts the loving transcendental service of His devotees, gives all
protection to the words and actions of His devotees. The Lord declares in the
Bhagavad-gétä (9.31), kaunteya pratijänéhi: “O son of Kunté, please declare it.”
The Lord asks Arjuna to declare, and why? Because sometimes the declaration
of Govinda Himself may seem contradictory to mundane creatures, but the
mundaner will never find any contradiction in the words of the Lord’s
devotees. The devotees are especially protected by the Lord so that they may
remain infallible. Therefore the process of devotional service always begins in
the service of the devotee who appears in disciplic succession. The devotees
are always liberated, but that does not mean that they are impersonal. The
Lord is a person eternally, and the devotee of the Lord is also a person
eternally. Because the devotee has his sense organs even at the liberated stage,
he is therefore a person always. And because the devotee’s service is accepted
by the Lord in full reciprocation, the Lord is also a person in His complete
spiritual embodiment. The devotee’s senses, being engaged in the service of the
Lord, never go astray under the attraction of false material enjoyment. The
plans of the devotee never go in vain, and all this is due to the faithful
attachment of the devotee for the service of the Lord. This is the standard of
perfection and liberation. Anyone, beginning from Brahmäjé down to the
human being, is at once put on the path of liberation simply by his attachment
in great earnestness for the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, the primeval Lord. The
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord affirms this in the Bhagavad-gétä (14.26):
mäà ca yo ’vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
Anyone, therefore, who is earnestly serious in heart and soul about being in
intimate touch with the Personality of Godhead in the relationship of
transcendental loving service will always be infallible in words and action. The
reason is that the Supreme Lord is Absolute Truth, and anything earnestly
dovetailed with the Absolute Truth attains the same transcendental quality.
On the other hand, any amount of mental speculation on the strength of
material science and knowledge without any bona fide touch with the
Absolute Truth is sure to be a mundane untruth and failure, simply due to not
being in touch with the Absolute Truth. Such godless, unfaithful words and
actions, however materially enriched, are never to be trusted. That is the
purport of this important verse. A grain of devotion is more valuable than tons
of faithlessness.
TEXT 35
Saae_h& SaMaaManaYaMaYaSTaPaaeMaYa"
Pa[JaaPaTaqNaaMai>aviNdTa" PaiTa" )
AaSQaaYa YaaeGa& iNaPau<a& SaMaaihTa‚
STa& NaaDYaGaC^& YaTa AaTMaSaM>av" )) 35 ))
so ’haà samämnäyamayas tapomayaù
prajäpaténäm abhivanditaù patiù
ästhäya yogaà nipuëaà samähitas
taà nädhyagacchaà yata ätma-sambhavaù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
saù aham—myself (the great Brahmä); samämnäya-mayaù—in the chain of
disciplic succession of Vedic wisdom; tapaù-mayaù—successfully having
undergone all austerities; prajäpaténäm—of all the forefathers of living
entities; abhivanditaù—worshipable; patiù—master; ästhäya—successfully
practiced; yogam—mystic powers; nipuëam—very expert;
samähitaù—self-realized; tam—the Supreme Lord; na—did not;
adhyagaccham—properly understood; yataù—from whom; ätma—self;
sambhavaù—generated.
TRANSLATION
Although I am known as the great Brahmä, perfect in the disciplic
succession of Vedic wisdom, and although I have undergone all austerities and
am an expert in mystic powers and self-realization, and although I am
recognized as such by the great forefathers of the living entities, who offer me
respectful obeisances, still I cannot understand Him, the Lord, the very source
of my birth.
PURPORT
Brahmä, the greatest of all living creatures within the universe, is admitting
his failure to know the Supreme Lord despite his vast learning in the Vedic
wisdom, despite his austerity, penance, mystic powers and self-realization, and
despite being worshiped by the great Prajäpatis, the forefathers of the living
entities. So these qualifications are not sufficient to know the Supreme Lord.
Brahmäjé could understand the Lord to a little extent only when he was trying
to serve Him by the eagerness of his heart (hådautkaëöhyavatä), which is the
devotional service mood. Therefore, the Lord can be known only by the
sincere mood of eagerness for service, and not by any amount of material
qualification as scientist or speculative philosopher or by attainment of mystic
powers. This fact is clearly corroborated in the Bhagavad-gétä (18.54–55):
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä
viçate tad-anantaram
Only self-realization, by attainment of the above high qualifications of
Vedic wisdom, austerity, etc., can help one on the path of devotional service.
But failing in devotional service, one remains still imperfect because even in
that position of self-realization one cannot factually know the Supreme Lord.
By self-realization, one is qualified to become a devotee, and the devotee, by
service mood (bhaktyä) only, can gradually know the personality of Godhead.
One should not, however, misunderstand the import of viçate (“enters into”) as
referring to merging into the existence of the Supreme. Even in material
existence, one is merged in the existence of the Lord. No materialist can
disentangle self from matter, for the self is merged in the external energy of
the Lord. As no layman can separate butter from milk, no one can extricate
the merged self from matter by acquiring some material qualification. This
viçate by devotion (bhaktyä) means to be able to participate in the association
of the Lord in person. Bhakti, or devotional service to the Lord, means to
become free from material entanglement and then to enter into the kingdom
of God, becoming one like Him. Losing one’s individuality is not the aim of
bhakti-yoga or of the devotees of the Lord. There are five types of liberation,
one of which is called säyujya-mukti, or being merged into the existence or
body of the Lord. The other forms of liberation maintain the individuality of
the particle soul and involve being always engaged in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord. The word viçate, used in the verses of the
Bhagavad-gétä, is thus meant for the devotees who are not at all anxious for any
kind of liberation. The devotees are satisfied simply in being engaged in the
service of the Lord, regardless of the situation.
Lord Brahmä is the first living being, who directly learned the Vedic
wisdom from the Lord (tene brahma hådä ya ädi-kavaye). Therefore, who can be
a more learned Vedäntist than Lord Brahmä? He admits that in spite of his
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
perfect knowledge in the Vedas, he was unable to know the glories of the Lord.
Since no one can be more than Lord Brahmä, how can a so-called Vedäntist be
perfectly cognizant of the Absolute Truth? The so-called Vedäntist, therefore,
cannot enter into the existence of the Lord without being trained in the
matter of bhakti-vedänta, or Vedänta plus bhakti. Vedänta means
self-realization, and bhakti means realization of the Personality of Godhead, to
some extent. No one can know the personality of Godhead in full, but at least
to a certain extent one can know the Absolute Truth, the Personality of
Godhead, by self-surrender and a devotional attitude, and by nothing else. In
the Brahma-saàhitä also, it is said, vedeñu durlabham, or simply by study of
Vedänta one can hardly find out the existence of the personality of Godhead,
but the Lord is adurlabham ätma-bhaktau, very easily available to His devotee.
Çréla Vyäsadeva, therefore, was not satisfied simply with compiling the
Vedänta-sütras, but over and above this, by the advice of his spiritual master,
Närada, he compiled the Çrémad-Bhägavatam in order to understand the real
import of Vedänta. Çrémad-Bhägavatam therefore, is the absolute medium by
which to understand the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 36
NaTaae_SMYah& TaÀr<a& SaMaqYauza&
>aviC^d& SvSTYaYaNa& SauMa®l/Ma( )
Yaae ùaTMaMaaYaaiv>av& SMa PaYaRGaad(
YaQaa Na>a" SvaNTaMaQaaPare ku-Ta" )) 36 ))
nato ’smy ahaà tac-caraëaà saméyuñäà
bhavac-chidaà svasty-ayanaà sumaìgalam
yo hy ätma-mäyä-vibhavaà sma paryagäd
yathä nabhaù sväntam athäpare kutaù
SYNONYMS
nataù—let me offer my obeisances; asmi—am; aham—I; tat—the Lord’s;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
caraëam—feet; saméyuñäm—of the surrendered soul; bhavat-chidam—that
which stops repetition of birth and death; svasti-ayanam—perception of all
happiness; su-maìgalam—all-auspicious; yaù—one who; hi—exactly;
ätma-mäyä—personal energies; vibhavam—potency; sma—certainly;
paryagät—cannot estimate; yathä—as much as; nabhaù—the sky;
sva-antam—its own limit; atha—therefore; apare—others; kutaù—how.
TRANSLATION
Therefore it is best for me to surrender unto His feet, which alone can
deliver one from the miseries of repeated birth and death. Such surrender is
all-auspicious and allows one to perceive all happiness. Even the sky cannot
estimate the limits of its own expansion. So what can others do when the Lord
Himself is unable to estimate His own limits?
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä, the greatest of all learned living beings, the greatest
sacrificer, the greatest observer of the austere life, and the greatest self-realized
mystic, advises us, as the supreme spiritual master of all living beings, that one
should simply surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord in order to achieve all
success, even up to the limit of being liberated from the miseries of material
life and being endowed with all-auspicious spiritual existence. Lord Brahmä is
known as the pitämaha, or the father’s father. A young man consults his
experienced father about discharging his duties. So the father is naturally a
good advisor. But Lord Brahmä is the father of all fathers. He is the father of
the father of Manu, who is the father of mankind all over the universal
planets. Therefore the men of this insignificant planet should kindly accept
the instruction of Brahmäjé and would do well to surrender unto the lotus feet
of the Lord rather than try to estimate the length and breadth of the Lord’s
potencies. His potencies are immeasurable, as confirmed in the Vedas. Paräsya
çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad
6.8). He is the greatest of all, and all others, even the greatest of all living
beings, namely Brahmäjé, admits that the best thing for us is to surrender unto
Him. Therefore only those persons with a very poor fund of knowledge claim
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
that they themselves are lords of all that they survey. And what can they
survey? They cannot survey even the length and breadth of a small sky in one
small universe. The so-called material scientist says that he would need to live
forty thousand years to reach the highest planet of the universe, being carried
by a sputnik. This is also utopian because no one can be expected to live forty
thousand years. Besides, when the space pilot returned from his travel, none of
his friends would be present to receive him back as the greatest astronaut, as
has become fashionable for modern bewildered scientific men. One scientific
man, who had no belief in God, was very much enthusiastic in making plans
for his material existence and therefore opened a hospital to save the living.
But after opening the hospital, he himself died within six months. So one
should not spoil his human life, species of life, simply for the concocted
material happiness of life through increasing artificial needs in the name of
advancement of economic development and scientific knowledge. Rather, one
should simply surrender unto the feet of the Lord to make a solution to all
miseries of life. That is the instruction of Lord Kåñëa directly in the
Bhagavad-gétä, and that is the instruction of Çrémad-Bhägavatam by Brahmäjé,
the supreme father of all living beings.
Anyone denying this surrendering process as recommended both in the
Bhagavad-gétä and in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam—and, for that matter, in all
authorized scriptures—will be forced to surrender unto the laws of material
nature. The living entity, by his constitutional position, is not independent.
He must surrender, either unto the Lord or unto material nature. Material
nature is also not independent of the Lord, since the Lord Himself has claimed
material nature as mama mäyä, or “My energy” (Bg. 7.14), and as me bhinnä
prakåtir añöadhä, or “My separated energy in eight divisions” (Bg. 7.4).
Therefore material nature is also controlled by the Lord, as He has claimed in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.10). Mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sacaräcaram: “Under My
direction only is material nature working, and thus are all things moving.”
And the living entities, being superior energy to matter, have choice and
discrimination either to surrender unto the Lord or to surrender unto material
nature. By surrendering unto the Lord, one is happy and liberated, but by
surrendering unto material nature the living entity suffers. So the end of all
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
suffering means surrendering unto the Lord because the surrendering process
itself is bhava-cchidam (liberation from all material miseries), svasty-ayanam
(perception of all happiness), and sumaìgalam (the source of everything
auspicious).
Therefore liberty, happiness and all good fortune can be attained only by
surrendering unto the Lord because He is full liberty, full happiness and full
auspiciousness. Such liberation and happiness are also unlimited, and they
have been compared to the sky, although such liberation and happiness are
infinitely greater than the sky. In our present position we can simply
understand the magnitude of greatness when it is compared to the sky. We fail
to measure the sky, but the happiness and liberty obtained in association with
the Lord are far greater than the sky. That spiritual happiness is so great that it
cannot be measured, even by the Lord Himself, not to speak of others.
It is said in the scriptures, brahma-saukhyaà tv anantam: spiritual happiness
is unlimited. Here it is said that even the Lord cannot measure such happiness.
This does not mean that the Lord cannot measure it and is therefore imperfect
in that sense. The actual position is that the Lord can measure it, but the
happiness in the Lord is also identical with the Lord on account of absolute
knowledge. So the happiness derived from the Lord may be measured by the
Lord, but the happiness increases again, and the Lord measures it again, and
then again the happiness increases more and more, and the Lord measures it
more and more, and as such there is eternally a competition between
increment and measurement, so much so that the competition is never
stopped, but goes on unlimitedly ad infinitum. Spiritual happiness is
änandämbudhi-vardhanam, or the ocean of happiness which increases. The
material ocean is stagnant, but the spiritual ocean is dynamic. In the
Caitanya-caritämåta, (Ädi-lélä, Fourth Chapter) Kaviräja Gosvämé has very
nicely described this dynamic increment of the ocean of spiritual happiness in
the transcendental person of Çrématé Rädhäräëé, the pleasure potency of Lord
Kåñëa.
TEXT 37
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Naah& Na YaUYa& Yad*Taa& GaiTa& ivdu‚
NaR vaMadev" ik-MauTaaPare Saura" )
TaNMaaYaYaa MaaeihTabuÖYaiSTvd&
iviNaiMaRTa& caTMaSaMa& ivc+Mahe )) 37 ))
nähaà na yüyaà yad-åtäà gatià vidur
na vämadevaù kim utäpare suräù
tan-mäyayä mohita-buddhayas tv idaà
vinirmitaà cätma-samaà vicakñmahe
SYNONYMS
na—neither; aham—I; na—nor; yüyam—all you sons; yat—whose;
åtäm—factual; gatim—movements; viduù—do know; na—nor;
vämadevaù—Lord Çiva; kim—what; uta—else; apare—others;
suräù—demigods; tat—by His; mäyayä—by the illusory energy;
mohita—bewildered; buddhayaù—with such intelligence; tu—but; idam—this;
vinirmitam—what is created; ca—also; ätma-samam—by dint of one’s personal
ability; vicakñmahe—observe.
TRANSLATION
Since neither Lord Çiva nor you nor I could ascertain the limits of spiritual
happiness, how can other demigods know it? And because all of us are
bewildered by the illusory external energy of the Supreme Lord, we can see only
this manifested cosmos according to our individual ability.
PURPORT
We have many times mentioned the names of twelve selected authorities
(dvädaça-mahäjana), of which Brahmä, Närada and Lord Çiva head the list as
the first, second and third in order of merit of those who know something of
the Supreme Lord. Other demigods, semi-demigods, Gandharvas, Cäraëas,
Vidyädharas, human beings or asuras cannot possibly know fully about the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
potencies of the Absolute Lord, Çré Kåñëa. The demigods, semi-demigods,
Gandharvas, etc., are all highly intelligent persons in the upper planets, the
human beings are inhabitants of the intermediate planets, and the asuras are
inhabitants of the lower planets. All of them have their respective conceptions
and estimations of the Absolute Truth, as does the scientist or the empiric
philosopher in human society. All such living entities are creatures of the
material nature, and consequently they are bewildered by the wonderful
display of the three modes of material nature. Such bewilderment is mentioned
in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.13). Tribhir guëamayair bhävair ebhiù samam idaà
jagat: every entity, beginning from Brahmä down to the ant, is individually
bewildered by the three modes of material nature, namely goodness, passion
and ignorance. Everyone thinks, in terms of individual capacity, that this
universe, which is manifested before us, is all in all. And so the scientist in the
human society of the twentieth century calculates the beginning and end of
the universe in his own way. But what can the scientists know? Even Brahmä
himself was once bewildered, thinking himself the only one Brahmä favored by
the Lord, but later on, by the grace of the Lord, he came to know that there are
innumerable more powerful Brahmäs as well, in far bigger universes beyond
this universe, and all of these universes combined together form
ekapäd-vibhüti, or one fourth of the manifestation of the Lord’s creative
energy. The other three fourths of His energy are displayed in the spiritual
world, and so what can the tiny scientist with a tiny brain know of the
Absolute Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa? The Lord says, therefore,
mohitaà näbhijänäti mäm ebhyaù param avyayam: bewildered by such modes of
material nature, they cannot understand that beyond these manifestations is a
Supreme Person who is the absolute controller of everything. Brahmä, Närada
and Lord Çiva know about the Lord to a considerable extent, and therefore
one should follow the instructions of these great personalities instead of being
satisfied with a tiny brain and its playful discoveries such as spacecraft and
similar products of science. As the mother is the only authority to identify the
father of a child, so the mother Vedas, presented by the recognized authority
such as Brahmä, Närada or Çiva, is the only authority to inform us about the
Absolute Truth.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 38
YaSYaavTaark-MaaRi<a GaaYaiNTa ùSMadadYa" )
Na Ya& ivdiNTa TatveNa TaSMaE >aGavTae NaMa" )) 38 ))
yasyävatära-karmäëi
gäyanti hy asmad-ädayaù
na yaà vidanti tattvena
tasmai bhagavate namaù
SYNONYMS
yasya—whose; avatära—incarnation; karmäëi—activities; gäyanti—chant in
glorification; hi—indeed; asmat-ädayaù—persons like us; na—do not;
yam—whom; vidanti—know; tattvena—cent percent as He is; tasmai—unto
Him; bhagavate—unto the personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa;
namaù—respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto that Supreme Personality of
Godhead, whose incarnations and activities are chanted by us for glorification,
though He can hardly be fully known as He is.
PURPORT
It is said that the transcendental name, form, quality, pastimes,
paraphernalia, personality, etc., cannot possibly be perceived by the gross
materialistic senses. But when the senses are purified by the process of hearing,
chanting, remembering, and worshiping the lotus feet of the holy Deity, etc.,
the Lord reveals Himself proportionately to the advancement of the quality of
devotional service (ye yathä mäà prapadyante). One should not expect the
Lord to be an order-supplying agent who must be present before us as soon as
we desire to see Him. We must be ready to undergo the prescribed devotional
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
duties, following the path shown by the predecessors in the disciplic succession
from Brahmä, Närada and similar authorities. As the senses are progressively
purified by bona fide devotional service, the Lord reveals His identity
according to the spiritual advancement of the devotee. But one who is not in
the line of devotional service can hardly perceive Him simply by calculations
and philosophical speculations. Such a hard worker can present a jugglery of
words before an audience, but can never know the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in His personal feature. The Lord has clearly stated in the
Bhagavad-gétä that one can know Him only by devotional service. No one can
know the Lord by any puffed-up material process of challenge, but the humble
devotee can please the Lord by his earnest devotional activities. Thus the Lord
reveals Himself proportionately before the devotee. Lord Brahmä therefore
offers his respectful obeisances as a bona fide spiritual master and advises us to
follow the process of çravaëa and kértana. Simply by this process, or simply by
hearing and chanting the glories of the activities of the Lord’s incarnation,
one can certainly see within himself the identity of the Lord. We have already
discussed this subject in volume one of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, in connection
with this verse:
tac chraddadhänä munayo
jïäna-vairägya-yuktayä
paçyanty ätmani cätmänaà
bhaktyä çruta-gåhétayä
(Bhäg. 1.2.12)
The conclusion is that one cannot know the Supreme Personality of
Godhead fully by any method, but He can be seen and felt partially by the
devotional service process of hearing, chanting, etc.
TEXT 39
Sa Wz AaÛ" Pauåz" k-LPae k-LPae Sa*JaTYaJa" )
AaTMaaTMaNYaaTMaNaaTMaaNa& Sa Sa&YaC^iTa PaaiTa c )) 39 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sa eña ädyaù puruñaù
kalpe kalpe såjaty ajaù
ätmätmany ätmanätmänaà
sa saàyacchati päti ca
SYNONYMS
saù—He; eñaù—the very; ädyaù—the original Personality of Godhead;
puruñaù—the Mahä-Viñëu incarnation, a plenary portion of Govinda, Lord
Kåñëa; kalpe kalpe—in each and every millennium; såjati—creates; ajaù—the
unborn; ätmä—self; ätmani—upon the self; ätmanä—by His own self;
ätmänam—own self; saù—He; saàyacchati—absorbs; päti—maintains;
ca—also.
TRANSLATION
That supreme original Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, expanding
His plenary portion as Mahä-Viñëu, the first incarnation, creates this
manifested cosmos, but He is unborn. The creation, however, takes place in
Him, and the material substance and manifestations are all Himself. He
maintains them for some time and absorbs them into Himself again.
PURPORT
The creation is nondifferent from the Lord, and still He is not in the
creation. This is explained in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.4) as follows:
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
The impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth is also a form of the Lord
called avyakta-mürti. Mürti means “form,” but because His impersonal feature
is inexplicable to our limited senses, He is the avyakta-mürti form, and in that
inexplicable form of the Lord the whole creation is resting; or, in other words,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the whole creation is the Lord Himself, and the creation is also nondifferent
from Him, but simultaneously He, as the original Personality of Godhead Çré
Kåñëa, is aloof from the created manifestation. The impersonalist gives stress
to the impersonal form or feature of the Lord and does not believe in the
original personality of the Lord, but the Vaiñëavas accept the original form of
the Lord, of whom the impersonal form is merely one of the features. The
impersonal and personal conceptions of the Lord are existing simultaneously,
and this fact is clearly described both in the Bhagavad-gétä and in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and also in other Vedic scriptures. Inconceivable to
human intelligence, the idea must simply be accepted on the authority of the
scriptures, and it can only be practically realized by the progress of devotional
service unto the Lord, and never by mental speculation or inductive logic. The
impersonalists depend more or less on inductive logic, and therefore they
always remain in darkness about the original Personality of Godhead Çré
Kåñëa. Their conception of Kåñëa is not clear, although everything is clearly
mentioned in all the Vedic scriptures. A poor fund of knowledge cannot
comprehend the existence of an original personal form of the Lord when He is
expanded in everything. This imperfectness is due, more or less, to the
material conception that a substance distributed widely in parts can no longer
exist in the original form.
The original personality of Godhead (ädyaù), Govinda, expands Himself as
the Mahä-Viñëu incarnation and rests in the Causal Ocean, which He Himself
creates. The Brahma-saàhitä (5.47) confirms this as follows:
yaù käraëärëava-jale bhajati sma yoganidräm
ananta-jagad-aëòa-saroma-küpaù
ädhära-çaktim avalambya paräà sva-mürtià
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
Lord Brahmäjé says in his Brahma-saàhitä, “I worship the primeval Lord
Govinda, who lies down in the Causal Ocean in His plenary portion as
Mahä-Viñëu, with all the universes generating from the pores of hair on His
transcendental body, and who accepts the mystic slumber of eternity.”
So this Mahä-Viñëu is the first incarnation in the creation, and from Him
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
all the universes are generated and all material manifestations are produced,
one after another. The Causal Ocean is created by the Lord as the
mahat-tattva, as a cloud in the spiritual sky, and is only a part of His different
manifestations. The spiritual sky is an expansion of His personal rays, and He
is the mahat-tattva cloud also. He lies down and generates the universes by His
breathing, and again, by entering into each universe as Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu,
He creates Brahmä, Çiva and many other demigods for maintenance of the
universe and again absorbs the whole thing into His person as confirmed in
the Bhagavad-gétä (9.7):
sarva-bhütäni kaunteya
prakåtià yänti mämikäm
kalpa-kñaye punas täni
kalpädau visåjämy aham
“O son of Kunté, when the kalpa, or the duration of the life of Brahmä, is
ended, then all the created manifestations enter into My prakåti, or energy,
and again, when I desire, the same creation takes place by My personal
energy.”
The conclusion is that these are all but displays of the Lord’s inconceivable
personal energies, of which no one can have any full information. This point
we have already discussed.
TEXTS 40–41
ivéuÖ& ke-vl&/ jaNa& Pa[TYak(- SaMYaGaviSQaTaMa( )
SaTYa& PaU<aRMaNaaÛNTa& iNaGauR<a& iNaTYaMaÜYaMa( )) 40 ))
‰ze ivdiNTa MauNaYa" Pa[XaaNTaaTMaeiNd]YaaXaYaa" )
Yada TadevaSatakOE-iSTaraeDaqYaeTa ivPlu/TaMa( )) 41 ))
viçuddhaà kevalaà jïänaà
pratyak samyag avasthitam
satyaà pürëam anädy-antaà
nirguëaà nityam advayam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
åñe vidanti munayaù
praçäntätmendriyäçayäù
yadä tad eväsat-tarkais
tirodhéyeta viplutam
SYNONYMS
viçuddham—without any material tinge; kevalam—pure and perfect;
jïänam—knowledge; pratyak—all-pervading; samyak—in fullness;
avasthitam—situated; satyam—truth; pürëam—absolute; anädi—without any
beginning; antam—and so also without any end; nirguëam—devoid of
material modes; nityam—eternal; advayam—without any rival; åñe—O
Närada, O great sage; vidanti—they can only understand; munayaù—the great
thinkers; praçänta—pacified; ätma—self; indriya—senses; äçayäù—sheltered;
yadä—while; tat—that; eva—certainly; asat—untenable; tarkaiù—arguments;
tiraù-dhéyeta—disappears; viplutam—distorted.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead is pure, being free from all contaminations of
material tinges. He is the Absolute Truth and the embodiment of full and
perfect knowledge. He is all-pervading, without beginning or end, and without
rival. O Närada, O great sage, the great thinkers can know Him when
completely freed from all material hankerings and when sheltered under
undisturbed conditions of the senses. Otherwise, by untenable arguments, all is
distorted, and the Lord disappears from our sight.
PURPORT
Here is an estimation of the Lord apart from His transcendental activities
in the temporary, material creations. Mäyäväda philosophy tries to designate
the Lord as contaminated by a material body when He accepts forms of
incarnation. This sort of interpolation is completely denied herein by the
explanation that the Lord’s position is pure and unalloyed in all circumstances.
According to Mäyäväda philosophy, the spirit soul, when covered by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
nescience, is designated as jéva, but when freed from such ignorance or
nescience he merges in the impersonal existence of the Absolute Truth. But
here it is said that the Lord is eternally the symbol of full and perfect
knowledge. This is His speciality: perpetual freedom from all material
contaminations. This distinguishes the Lord from the individual, common
living entities who have the aptitude for being subordinated by nescience and
thus becoming materially designated. In the Vedas it is said that the Lord is
vijïänam änandam, full of bliss and knowledge. The conditioned souls are
never to be compared to Him because such individual souls have the tendency
to become contaminated. Although after liberation the living entity can
become one with the same quality of existence as the Lord, his very tendency
to become contaminated, which the Lord never has, makes the individual
living entity different from the Lord. In the Vedas it is said, çuddham
apäpa-viddham: the individual ätmä becomes polluted by sin, but the Lord is
never contaminated by sins. The Lord is compared to the powerful sun. The
sun is never contaminated by anything infectious because it is so powerful. On
the contrary, infected things are sterilized by the rays of the sun. Similarly, the
Lord is never contaminated by sins; on the contrary, the sinful living entities
become sterilized by contact with the Lord. This means that the Lord is also
all-pervading like the sun, and as such the word pratyak is used in this verse.
Nothing is excluded from the existence of the Lord’s potential expansions. The
Lord is within everything, and He is all-covering also, without being disturbed
by the activities of the individual souls. He is therefore infinite, and the living
entities are infinitesimal. In the Vedas it is said that only the Lord alone exists,
and all others’ existences depend on Him. He is the generating reservoir for
everyone’s existential capacity; He is the Supreme Truth of all other
categorical truths. He is the source of everyone’s opulence, and therefore no
one can equal Him in opulence. Being full of all opulences, namely wealth,
fame, strength, beauty, knowledge and renunciation, certainly He is the
Supreme Person. And because He is a person, He has many personal qualities,
although He is transcendental to the material modes. We have already
discussed the statement, itthaà-bhüta-guëo hariù (Bhäg. 1.7.10). His
transcendental qualities are so attractive that even the liberated souls
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
(ätmärämas) are also attracted by them. Although possessed of all personal
qualities, He is nevertheless omnipotent. Therefore, personally He has nothing
to do, for everything is being carried out by His omnipotent energies. This is
confirmed by the Vedic mantras: paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate sväbhäviké
jïäna-bala-kriyä ca. This suggests His specific spiritual form, which can never
be experienced by the material senses. He can be seen only when the senses
are purified by devotional service (yam evaiña våëute tena labhyaù). As such,
there are basic differences between the Lord and the living entities, in so many
respects. No one can be compared to the Lord, as the Vedas declare (ekam
evädvitéyaà brahma, dvaitäd vai bhayaà bhavati). The Lord has no competitor,
and He has nothing to fear from any other being, nor can anyone be equal to
Him. Although He is the root of all other beings, there are basic differences
between Him and other beings. Otherwise there would have been no necessity
for the statement in the previous verse that no one can know Him one
hundred percent as He is (na yaà vidanti tattvena). That no one can fully
understand Him is explained also in this verse, but the qualification for
understanding to some degree is mentioned here. Only the praçäntas, or the
unalloyed devotees of the Lord, can know Him to a greater extent. The reason
is that the devotees have no demands in their lives but to be obedient servants
of the Lord, while all others, namely the empiric philosophers, the mystics and
the fruitive workers, all basically have some demand, and as such they cannot
be pacified. The fruitive worker wants reward for his work, the mystic wants
some perfection of life, and the empiric philosopher wants to merge in the
existence of the Lord. Somehow or other, as long as there is a demand for sense
satisfaction, there is no chance for pacification; on the contrary, by
unnecessary dry speculative arguments, the whole matter becomes distorted,
and thus the Lord moves still further away from our understanding. The dry
speculators, however, because of their following the principles of austerity and
penance, can have knowledge of the impersonal features of the Lord to some
extent, but there is no chance of their understanding His ultimate form as
Govinda because only the amalätmanas, or the completely sinless persons, can
accept pure devotional service to the Lord, as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä
(7.28):
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yeñäà tv anta-gataà päpaà
janänäà puëya-karmaëäm
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktä
bhajante mäà dåòha-vratäù
TEXT 42
AaÛae_vTaar" Pauåz" ParSYa
k-al/" Sv>aav" SadSaNMaNaê )
d]VYa& ivk-arae Gau<a wiNd]Yaai<a
ivra$( Svra$( SQaaòu cirZ<au >aUMan" )) 42 ))
ädyo ’vatäraù puruñaù parasya
kälaù svabhävaù sad-asan-manaç ca
dravyaà vikäro guëa indriyäëi
viräö svaräö sthäsnu cariñëu bhümnaù
SYNONYMS
ädyaù—first; avatäraù—incarnation; puruñaù—Käraëärëavaçäyé Viñëu;
parasya—of the Lord; kälaù—time; svabhävaù—space; sat—result;
asat—cause; manaù—mind; ca—also; dravyam—elements; vikäraù—material
ego; guëaù—modes of nature; indriyäëi—senses; viräö—the complete whole
body; svaräö—Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu; sthäsnu—immovable; cariñëu—movable;
bhümnaù—of the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Käraëärëavaçäyé Viñëu is the first incarnation of the Supreme Lord, and He
is the master of eternal time, space, cause and effects, mind, the elements, the
material ego, the modes of nature, the senses, the universal form of the Lord,
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, and the sum total of all living beings, both moving and
nonmoving.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
That the material creation is not permanent has been discussed many times
hereinbefore. The material creation is but a temporary exhibition of the
material energy of the Almighty God. This material manifestation is necessary
to give a chance to the conditioned souls who are unwilling to associate with
the Lord in the relationship of loving transcendental service. Such unwilling
conditioned souls are not allowed to enter into the liberated life of spiritual
existence because at heart they are not willing to serve. Instead, they want to
enjoy themselves as imitation Gods. The living entities are constitutionally
eternal servitors of the Lord, but some of them, because of misusing their
independence, do not wish to serve; therefore they are allowed to enjoy the
material nature, which is called mäyä, or illusion. It is called illusion because
the living beings under the clutches of mäyä are not factually enjoyers,
although they think that they are, being illusioned by mäyä. Such illusioned
living entities are given a chance at intervals to rectify their perverted
mentality of becoming false masters of the material nature, and they are
imparted lessons from the Vedas about their eternal relationship with the
Supreme Lord Kåñëa (vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15]). So the
temporary creation of the material manifestation is an exhibition of the
material energy of the Lord, and to manage the whole show the Supreme Lord
incarnates Himself as the Käraëärëavaçäyé Viñëu just as a magistrate is
deputed by the government to manage affairs temporarily. This
Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu causes the manifestation of material creation by looking
over His material energy (sa aikñata). In the first volume of this book we have
already discussed to some extent the explanation of the verse jagåhe pauruñaà
rüpam. The duration of the illusory play of material creation is called a kalpa,
and we have already discussed the creation’s taking place in kalpa after kalpa.
By His incarnation and potential activities, the complete ingredients of
creation, namely time, space, cause, result, mind, the gross and subtle elements
and their interactional modes of nature—goodness, passion and
ignorance—and then the senses and their reservoir source, the gigantic
universal form as the second incarnation Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, and all living
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
beings, both moving and standing, which come out of the second incarnation,
all became manifested. Ultimately, all these creative elements and the creation
itself are but potential manifestations of the Supreme Lord; nothing is
independent of the control of the Supreme Being. This first incarnation in the
material creation, namely Käraëärëavaçäyé Viñëu, is the plenary part of the
original Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, described in the Brahma-saàhitä
(5.48) as follows:
yasyaika-niçvasita-kälam athävalambya
jévanti loma-vilajä jagad-aëòa-näthäù
viñëur mahän sa iha yasya kalä-viçeño
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
All the innumerable universes are maintained only during the breathing
period of Mahä-Viñëu, or Käraëärëavaçäyé Viñëu, who is only a plenary part of
Govinda, the original Personality of Godhead Lord Kåñëa.
TEXTS 43–45
Ah& >avae Yaj wMae Pa[JaeXaa
d+aadYaae Yae >avdadYaê )
Svl/aeRk-Paal/a" %Gal/aek-Paal/a
Na*l/aek-Paal/aSTal/l/aek-Paal/a" )) 43 ))
GaNDavRivÛaDarcar<aeXaa
Yae Ya+ar+aaerGaNaaGaNaaQaa" )
Yae va ‰zq<aaMa*z>aa" iPaTa›<aa&
dETYaeNd]iSaÖeìrdaNaveNd]a" )
ANYae c Yae Pa[eTaiPaXaac>aUTa‚
kU-ZMaa<@YaadaeMa*GaPa+YaDaqXaa" )) 44 ))
YaiTk-Ä l/aeke- >aGavNMahSv‚
daeJa"SahSvd( bl/vTa( +aMaavTa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
é[qhqiv>aUTYaaTMavdd(>auTaa<a|
Tatv& Par& æPavdSvæPaMa( )) 45 ))
ahaà bhavo yajïa ime prajeçä
dakñädayo ye bhavad-ädayaç ca
svarloka-päläù khagaloka-pälä
nåloka-päläs talaloka-päläù
gandharva-vidyädhara-cäraëeçä
ye yakña-rakñoraga-näga-näthäù
ye vä åñéëäm åñabhäù pitèëäà
daityendra-siddheçvara-dänavendräù
anye ca ye preta-piçäca-bhütaküñmäëòa-
yädo-måga-pakñy-adhéçäù
yat kiïca loke bhagavan mahasvad
ojaù-sahasvad balavat kñamävat
çré-hré-vibhüty-ätmavad adbhutärëaà
tattvaà paraà rüpavad asva-rüpam
SYNONYMS
aham—myself (Brahmäjé); bhavaù—Lord Çiva; yajïaù—Lord Viñëu; ime—all
these; prajä-éçäù—the father of the living beings; dakña-ädayaù—Dakña,
Maréci, Manu, etc.; ye—those; bhavat—yourself; ädayaù ca—and the bachelors
(Sanat-kumära and his brothers); svarloka-päläù—the leaders of the heavenly
planets; khagaloka-päläù—the leaders of space travelers; nåloka-päläù—the
leaders of mankind; talaloka-päläù—the leaders of the lower planets;
gandharva—the residents of Gandharvaloka; vidyädhara—the residents of the
Vidyädhara planet; cäraëa-éçäù—the leaders of the Cäraëas; ye—as also
others; yakña—the leaders of the Yakñas; rakña—demons; uraga—snakes;
näga-näthäù—the leaders of Nägaloka (below the earth); ye—others; vä—also;
åñéëäm—of the sages; åñabhäù—the chief; pitèëäm—of the forefathers;
daitya-indra—leaders of the atheists; siddha-éçvara—leaders of the Siddhaloka
planets (spacemen); dänava-indräù—leaders of the non-Äryans; anye—besides
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
them; ca—also; ye—those; preta—dead bodies; piçäca—evil spirits;
bhüta—jinn; küñmäëòa—a special type of evil spirit; yädaù—aquatics;
måga—animals; pakñi-adhéçäù—giant eagles; yat—anything; kim ca—and
everything; loke—in the world; bhagavat—possessed of bhaga, or extraordinary
power; mahasvat—of a special degree; ojaù-sahasvat—specific mental and
sensual dexterity; balavat—possessed of strength; kñamävat—possessed of
forgiveness; çré—beauty; hré—ashamed of impious acts; vibhüti—riches;
ätmavat—possessed of intelligence; adbhuta—wonderful; arëam—race;
tattvam—specific truth; param—transcendental; rüpavat—as if the form of;
asva-rüpam—not the form of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
I myself [Brahmä], Lord Çiva, Lord Viñëu, great generators of living beings
like Dakña and Prajäpati, yourselves [Närada and the Kumäras], heavenly
demigods like Indra and Candra, the leaders of the Bhürloka planets, the leaders
of the earthly planets, the leaders of the lower planets, the leaders of the
Gandharva planets, the leaders of the Vidyädhara planets, the leaders of the
Cäraëaloka planets, the leaders of the Yakñas, Rakñas and Uragas, the great
sages, the great demons, the great atheists and the great spacemen, as well as the
dead bodies, evil spirits, satans, jinn, küñmäëòas, great aquatics, great beasts and
great birds, etc.—in other words, anything and everything which is
exceptionally possessed of power, opulence, mental and perceptual dexterity,
strength, forgiveness, beauty, modesty, opulence, and breeding, whether in form
or formless—may appear to be the specific truth and the form of the Lord, but
actually they are not so. They are only a fragment of the transcendental potency
of the Lord.
PURPORT
Those in the list given above, beginning from the name Brahmäjé, the first
living creature within the universe, down to Lord Çiva, Lord Viñëu, Närada
and other powerful demigods, men, supermen, sages, åñis, and other lower
creatures of extraordinary strength and opulence, including the dead bodies,
satans, evil spirits, jinn, aquatics, birds and beasts, may appear to be the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Supreme Lord, but factually none of them is the Supreme Lord; every one of
them possesses only a fragment of the great potencies of the Supreme Lord.
The less intelligent man is surprised to see the wonderful actions of material
phenomena, as the aborigines are fearful of a great thunderbolt, a great and
gigantic banyan tree, or a great lofty mountain in the jungle. For such
undeveloped human beings, merely the slight display of the Lord’s potency is
captivating. A still more advanced person is captivated by the powers of the
demigods and goddesses. Therefore, those who are simply astonished by the
powers of anything in the creation of the Lord, without any factual
information of the Lord Himself, are known as çaktas, or worshipers of the
great powers. The modern scientist is also captivated by the wonderful actions
and reactions of natural phenomena and therefore is also a çakta. These
lower-grade persons gradually rise to become sauréyas (worshipers of the
sun-god) or gäëapatyas (worshipers of the mass of people as janatä janärdana or
daridra-näräyaëa, etc., in the form of Gaëapati) and then rise to the platform
of worshiping Lord Çiva in search for the ever-existing soul, and then to the
stage of worshiping Lord Viñëu, the Supersoul, etc., without any information
of Govinda, Lord Kåñëa, who is the original Lord Viñëu. In other ways some
are worshipers of race, nationality, birds, beasts, evil spirits, satans, etc. The
general worship of Çanideva, the lord of distressful condition, and Sétalädevé,
the goddess of smallpox, is also common to the mass of people, and there are
many foolish men who worship the mass of people or the poor class of men. So
different persons, societies and communities, etc., worship some of the potent
manifestations of the Lord, wrongly accepting the powerful object as God. But
in this verse it is advised by Brahmäjé that none of them is the Supreme Lord;
they are only borrowed plumes from the original Almighty Lord Çré Kåñëa.
When the Lord advises in Bhagavad-gétä to worship Him alone, it is to be
understood that worshiping Lord Kåñëa includes worshiping all that is
mentioned, because He, Lord Kåñëa, includes everyone.
When the Lord is described as formless in the Vedic literatures, it is to be
understood that all these forms mentioned above, within the experience of
universal knowledge, are different exhibitions of the Lord’s transcendental
potencies only, and none of them factually represents the transcendental form
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of the Lord. But when the Lord actually descends on the earth or anywhere
within the universe, the less intelligent class of men also mistake Him to be
one of them, and thus they imagine the Transcendence to be formless or
impersonal. Factually, the Lord is not formless, nor does He belong to any of
the multiforms experienced within the universal forms. One should try to
know the truth about the Lord by following the instruction of Brahmäjé.
TEXT 46
Pa[aDaaNYaTaae YaaNa*z AaMaNaiNTa
l/Il/avTaaraNa( PauåzSYa >aUMan" )
AaPaqYaTaa& k-<aRk-zaYaXaaeza‚
NaNau§-iMaZYae Ta wMaaNa( SauPaeXaaNa( )) 46 ))
prädhänyato yän åña ämananti
lélävatärän puruñasya bhümnaù
äpéyatäà karëa-kañäya-çoñän
anukramiñye ta imän supeçän
SYNONYMS
prädhänyataù—chiefly; yän—all those; åñe—O Närada; ämananti—worship;
lélä—pastimes; avatärän—incarnations; puruñasya—of the personality of
Godhead; bhümnaù—the Supreme; äpéyatäm—in order to be relished by you;
karëa—ears; kañäya—foul matter; çoñän—that which evaporates;
anukramiñye—shall state one after another; te—they; imän—as they are in my
heart; su-peçän—all pleasing to hear.
TRANSLATION
O Närada, now I shall state, one after another, the transcendental
incarnations of the Lord known as lélä-avatäras. Hearing of their activities
counteracts all foul matters accumulated in the ear. These pastimes are pleasing
to hear and are to be relished. Therefore they are in my heart.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
As it was said in the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.8), one cannot be
fully satisfied by hearing unless and until one is given a chance to hear of the
transcendental activities of the Lord. So Brahmäjé is also trying, in this verse,
to stress the importance of narrating the transcendental pastimes of the Lord
as He comes and manifests Himself here on the surface of the material planets.
Every living entity has a tendency to hear pleasing messages, and as such
almost every one of us is inclined to hear news and talks broadcast by the radio
stations. But the difficulty is that no one is satisfied at heart by hearing all
those messages. The cause of such dissatisfaction is the incompatibility of the
message with the innermost stratum of the living soul. This transcendental
literature is especially prepared by Çréla Vyäsadeva to give the utmost
satisfaction to the people in general by narration of the activities of the Lord,
as instructed by Çré Närada Muni to Çréla Vyäsadeva. Such activities of the
Lord are principally of two varieties. One concerns the mundane
manifestation of the material creative force, and the other deals with His
pastimes in the form of different incarnations in terms of the time and place.
There are innumerable incarnations of the Lord, like the waves of the river
flowing constantly in and out. Less intelligent persons take more interest in
the creative forces of the Lord in the material world, and, being disconnected
from their relationship with the Lord, they put forward many theories of the
creation in the name of scientific research. The devotees of the Lord, however,
know well how the creative forces work concurrently by the action and
reaction of the material energy of the Lord. Therefore they take more interest
in the transcendental activities of the Lord as He incarnates Himself on the
surface of the material world. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the history of such
activities of the Lord, and people who take interest in hearing
Çrémad-Bhägavatam clear their hearts of accumulated mundane filth. There
are a thousand and one rash literatures on the market, but one who has taken
interest in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam loses all interest in such filthy literatures.
Çré Brahmäjé is thus attempting to narrate the principal incarnations of the
Lord so that they may be drunk by Närada as transcendental nectar.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Puruña-sükta Confirmed.”
Chapter Seven
Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions
TEXT 1
b]øaevac
Ya}aaeÛTa" i+aiTaTal/aeÖr<aaYa ib>a]Ta(
§-aE@q& TaNau& Sak-l/YajMaYaqMaNaNTa" )
ANTaMaRha<aRv oPaaGaTaMaaiddETYa&
Ta& d&í\Yaaid]iMav vJa]Darae ddar )) 1 ))
brahmoväca
yatrodyataù kñiti-taloddharaëäya bibhrat
krauòéà tanuà sakala-yajïa-mayém anantaù
antar-mahärëava upägatam ädi-daityaà
taà daàñörayädrim iva vajra-dharo dadära
SYNONYMS
brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; yatra—at that time (when);
udyataù—attempted; kñiti-tala—the planet earth; uddharaëäya—for the
matter of lifting; bibhrat—assumed; krauòém—pastimes; tanum—form;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sakala—total; yajïa-mayém—all-inclusive sacrifices; anantaù—the Unlimited;
antar—within the universe; mahä-arëave—the great Garbha Ocean;
upägatam—having arrived at; ädi—the first; daityam—demon; tam—him;
daàñörayä—by the tusk; adrim—the flying mountains; iva—like;
vajra-dharaù—the controller of the thunderbolts; dadära—pierced.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: When the unlimitedly powerful Lord assumed the form of
a boar as a pastime, just to lift the planet earth, which was drowned in the great
ocean of the universe called the Garbhodaka, the first demon [Hiraëyäkña]
appeared, and the Lord pierced him with His tusk.
PURPORT
Since the beginning of creation, the demons and the demigods, or the
Vaiñëavas, are always the two classes of living beings to dominate the planets
of the universes. Lord Brahmä is the first demigod, and Hiraëyäkña is the first
demon in this universe. Only under certain conditions do the planets float as
weightless balls in the air, and as soon as these conditions are disturbed, the
planets may fall down in the Garbhodaka Ocean, which covers half the
universe. The other half is the spherical dome within which the innumerable
planetary systems exist. The floating of the planets in the weightless air is due
to the inner constitution of the globes, and the modernized drilling of the
earth to exploit oil from within is a sort of disturbance by the modern demons
and can result in a greatly harmful reaction to the floating condition of the
earth. A similar disturbance was created formerly by the demons headed by
Hiraëyäkña (the great exploiter of the gold rush), and the earth was detached
from its weightless condition and fell down into the Garbhodaka Ocean. The
Lord, as maintainer of the whole creation of the material world, therefore
assumed the gigantic form of a boar with a proportionate snout and picked up
the earth from within the water of Garbhodaka. Çré Jayadeva Gosvämé, the
great Vaiñëava poet, sang as follows:
vasati daçana-çikhare dharaëé tava lagnä
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
çaçini kalaìka-kaleva nimagnä
keçava dhåta-çükara-rüpa
jaya jagadéça hare
“O Keçava! O Supreme Lord who have assumed the form of a boar! O Lord!
The planet earth rested on Your tusks, and it appeared like the moon engraved
with spots.”
Such is the symptom of an incarnation of the Lord. The incarnation of the
Lord is not the concocted idea of fanciful men who create an incarnation out
of imagination. The incarnation of the Lord appears under certain
extraordinary circumstances like the above-mentioned occasion, and the
incarnation performs a task which is not even imaginable by the tiny brain of
mankind. The modern creators of the many cheap incarnations may take note
of the factual incarnation of God as the gigantic boar with a suitable snout to
carry the planet earth.
When the Lord appeared to pick up the earth, the demon of the name
Hiraëyäkña tried to create a disturbance in the methodical functions of the
Lord, and therefore he was killed by being pierced by the Lord’s tusk.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the demon Hiraëyäkña was killed by the
hand of the Lord. Therefore his version is that after being killed by the hand
of the Lord, the demon was pierced by the tusk. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura confirms this version.
TEXT 2
JaaTaae åcerJaNaYaTa( SauYaMaaNa( SauYaj
AakU-iTaSaUNaurMaraNaQa di+a<aaYaaMa( )
l/aek-}aYaSYa MahTaqMahrd( YadaiTa|
SvaYaM>auveNa MaNauNaa hirirTYaNaU¢-" )) 2 ))
jäto rucer ajanayat suyamän suyajïa
äküti-sünur amarän atha dakñiëäyäm
loka-trayasya mahatém aharad yad ärtià
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sväyambhuvena manunä harir ity anüktaù
SYNONYMS
jätaù—was born; ruceù—of the wife of Prajäpati; ajanayat—gave birth;
suyamän—headed by Suyama; suyajïaù—Suyajïa; äküti-sünuù—of the son of
Äküti; amarän—the demigods; atha—thus; dakñiëäyäm—unto the wife of the
name Dakñiëä; loka—the planetary systems; trayasya—of the three;
mahatém—very great; aharat—diminished; yat—all those; ärtim—distresses;
sväyambhuvena—by the Manu named Sväyambhuva; manunä—by the father
of mankind; hariù—Hari; iti—thus; anüktaù—named.
TRANSLATION
The Prajäpati first begot Suyajïa, in the womb of his wife Äküti, and then
Suyajïa begot demigods, headed by Suyama, in the womb of his wife Dakñiëä.
Suyajïa, as the Indradeva, diminished very great miseries in the three planetary
systems [upper, lower and intermediate], and because he so diminished the
miseries of the universe, he was later called Hari by the great father of
mankind, namely Sväyambhuva Manu.
PURPORT
In order to guard against the invention of unauthorized incarnations of
God by the fanciful, less intelligent persons, the name of the father of the bona
fide incarnation is also mentioned in the authorized revealed scriptures. No
one, therefore, can be accepted as an incarnation of the Lord if his father’s
name, as well as the name of the village or place in which he appears, is not
mentioned by the authorized scriptures. In the Bhägavata Puräëa the name of
the Kalki incarnation, which is to take place in almost four hundred thousand
years, is mentioned along with the name of His father and the name of the
village in which He will appear. A sane man, therefore, does not accept any
cheap edition of an incarnation without reference to the authorized scriptures.
TEXT 3
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Jaje c k-dRMaGa*he iÜJa devhUTYaa&
ñqi>a" SaMa& Navi>araTMaGaiTa& SvMaa}ae )
Oce YaYaaTMaXaMal&/ Gau<aSa®Paª‚
MaiSMaNa( ivDaUYa k-iPal/SYa GaiTa& Pa[Paede )) 3 ))
jajïe ca kardama-gåhe dvija devahütyäà
strébhiù samaà navabhir ätma-gatià sva-mätre
üce yayätma-çamalaà guëa-saìga-paìkam
asmin vidhüya kapilasya gatià prapede
SYNONYMS
jajïe—took birth; ca—also; kardama—the Prajäpati named Kardama;
gåhe—in the house of; dvija—O brähmaëa; devahütyäm—in the womb of
Devahüti; strébhiù—by women; samam—accompanied by; navabhiù—by nine;
ätma-gatim—spiritual realization; sva-mätre—unto His own mother;
üce—uttered; yayä—by which; ätma-çamalam—coverings of the spirit soul;
guëa-saìga—associated with the modes of nature; paìkam—mud; asmin—this
very life; vidhüya—being washed off; kapilasya—of Lord Kapila;
gatim—liberation; prapede—achieved.
TRANSLATION
The Lord then appeared as the Kapila incarnation, being the son of the
prajäpati brähmaëa Kardama and his wife, Devahüti, along with nine other
women [sisters]. He spoke to His mother about self-realization, by which, in
that very lifetime, she became fully cleansed of the mud of the material modes
and thereby achieved liberation, the path of Kapila.
PURPORT
The instructions of Lord Kapila to His mother Devahüti are fully described
in the Third Canto (Chapters 25–32) of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and anyone
who follows the instructions can achieve the same liberation obtained by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Devahüti. The Lord spoke Bhagavad-gétä, and thereby Arjuna achieved
self-realization, and even today anyone who follows the path of Arjuna can
also attain the same benefit as Çré Arjuna. The scriptures are meant for this
purpose. Foolish, unintelligent persons make their own interpretations by
imagination and thus mislead their followers, causing them to remain in the
dungeon of material existence. However, simply by following the instructions
imparted by Lord Kåñëa or Lord Kapila, one can obtain the highest benefit,
even today.
The word ätma-gatim is significant in the sense of perfect knowledge of the
Supreme. One should not be satisfied simply by knowing the qualitative
equality of the Lord and the living being. One should know the Lord as much
as can be known by our limited knowledge. It is impossible for the Lord to be
known perfectly as He is, even by such liberated persons as Çiva or Brahmä, so
what to speak of other demigods or men in this world. Still, by following the
principles of the great devotees and the instructions available in the scriptures,
one can know to a considerable extent the features of the Lord. His Lordship
Kapila, the incarnation of the Lord, instructed His mother fully about the
personal form of the Lord, and thereby she realized the personal form of the
Lord and was able to achieve a place in the Vaikuëöhaloka where, Lord Kapila
predominates. Every incarnation of the Lord has His own abode in the
spiritual sky. Therefore Lord Kapila also has His separate Vaikuëöha planet.
The spiritual sky is not void. There are innumerable Vaikuëöha planets, and in
each of them the Lord, by His innumerable expansions, predominates, and the
pure devotees who are there also live in the same style as the Lord and His
eternal associates.
When the Lord descends personally or by His personal plenary expansions,
such incarnations are called aàça, kalä, guëa, yuga and manvantara
incarnations, and when the Lord’s associates descend by the order of the Lord,
such incarnations are called çaktyäveça incarnations. But in all cases all the
incarnations are supported by the invulnerable statements of the authorized
scriptures, and not by any imagination of some self-interested propagandist.
Such incarnations of the Lord, in either of the above categories, always declare
the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be the ultimate truth. The impersonal
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
conception of the supreme truth is just a process of negation of the form of the
Lord from the mundane conception of the supreme truth.
The living entities, by their very constitution, are spiritually as good as the
Lord, and the only difference between them is that the Lord is always supreme
and pure, without contamination by the modes of material nature, whereas the
living entities are apt to be contaminated by association with the material
modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. This contamination by the material
modes can be washed off completely by knowledge, renunciation and
devotional service. Devotional service to the Lord is the ultimate issue, and
therefore those who are directly engaged in the devotional service of the Lord
not only acquire the necessary knowledge in spiritual science, but also attain
detachment from material connection and are thus promoted to the kingdom
of God by complete liberation, as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (14.26):
mäà ca yo ’vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
Even in the nonliberated stage, a living entity can be directly engaged in
the transcendental loving service of the Personality of Godhead Lord Kåñëa or
His plenary expansions like Räma and Narasiàha. Thus, with the
proportionate improvement of such transcendental devotional service, the
devotee makes definite progress toward brahma-gatim or ätma-gatim, and
ultimately attains kapilasya gatim, or the abode of the Lord, without difficulty.
The antiseptic potency of devotional service to the Lord is so great that it can
neutralize the material infection even in the present life of a devotee. A
devotee does not need to wait for his next birth for complete liberation.
TEXT 4
A}aerPaTYaMai>ak-a¿Ta Aah Tauíae
dtaae MaYaahiMaiTa Yad( >aGavaNa( Sa dta" )
YaTPaadPaªJaParaGaPaiv}adeha
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
YaaeGaiÖRMaaPauå>aYaq& YaduhEhYaaÛa" )) 4 ))
atrer apatyam abhikäìkñata äha tuñöo
datto mayäham iti yad bhagavän sa dattaù
yat-päda-paìkaja-paräga-pavitra-dehä
yogarddhim äpur ubhayéà yadu-haihayädyäù
SYNONYMS
atreù—of the sage Atri; apatyam—issue; abhikäìkñataù—having prayed for;
äha—said it; tuñöaù—being satisfied; dattaù—given over; mayä—by me;
aham—myself; iti—thus; yat—because; bhagavän—the Personality of
Godhead; saù—He; dattaù—Dattätreya; yat-päda—one whose feet;
paìkaja—lotus; paräga—dust; pavitra—purified; dehäù—body; yoga—mystic;
åddhim—opulence; äpuù—got; ubhayém—for both the worlds; yadu—the
father of the Yadu dynasty; haihaya-ädyäù—and others, like King Haihaya.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Atri prayed for offspring, and the Lord, being satisfied with
him, promised to incarnate as Atri’s son, Dattätreya [Datta, the son of Atri].
And by the grace of the lotus feet of the Lord, many Yadus, Haihayas, etc.,
became so purified that they obtained both material and spiritual blessings.
PURPORT
Transcendental relations between the Personality of Godhead and the
living entities are eternally established in five different affectionate humors,
which are known as çänta, däsya, sakhya, vätsalya and mädhurya. The sage Atri
was related with the Lord in the affectionate vätsalya humor, and therefore, as
a result of his devotional perfection, he was inclined to have the Personality of
Godhead as his son. The Lord accepted his prayer, and He gave Himself as the
son of Atri. Such a relation of sonhood between the Lord and His pure
devotees can be cited in many instances. And because the Lord is unlimited,
He has an unlimited number of father-devotees. Factually the Lord is the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
father of all living entities, but out of transcendental affection and love
between the Lord and His devotees, the Lord takes more pleasure in becoming
the son of a devotee than in becoming one’s father. The father actually serves
the son, whereas the son only demands all sorts of services from the father;
therefore a pure devotee who is always inclined to serve the Lord wants Him as
the son, and not as the father. The Lord also accepts such service from the
devotee, and thus the devotee becomes more than the Lord. The
impersonalists desire to become one with the Supreme, but the devotee
becomes more than the Lord, surpassing the desire of the greatest monist.
Parents and other relatives of the Lord achieve all mystic opulences
automatically because of their intimate relationship with the Lord. Such
opulences include all details of material enjoyment, salvation and mystic
powers. Therefore, the devotee of the Lord does not seek them separately,
wasting his valuable time in life. The valuable time of one’s life must therefore
be fully engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Then other
desirable achievements are automatically gained. But even after obtaining
such achievements, one should be on guard against the pitfall of offenses at the
feet of the devotees. The vivid example is Haihaya, who achieved all such
perfection in devotional service but, because of his offense at the feet of a
devotee, was killed by Lord Paraçuräma. The Lord became the son of the great
sage Atri and became known as Dattätreya.
TEXT 5
Taá& TaPaae ivivDal/aek-iSaSa*+aYaa Mae
AadaE SaNaaTa( SvTaPaSa" Sa cTau"SaNaae_>aUTa( )
Pa[a¡-LPaSaMâvivNaíiMahaTMaTatv&
SaMYaGa( JaGaad MauNaYaae Yadc+aTaaTMaNa( )) 5 ))
taptaà tapo vividha-loka-sisåkñayä me
ädau sanät sva-tapasaù sa catuù-sano ’bhüt
präk-kalpa-samplava-vinañöam ihätma-tattvaà
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
samyag jagäda munayo yad acakñatätman
SYNONYMS
taptam—having undergone austerities; tapaù—penance;
vividha-loka—different planetary systems; sisåkñayä—desiring to create;
me—of mine; ädau—at first; sanät—from the Personality of Godhead;
sva-tapasaù—by dint of my own penances; saù—He (the Lord);
catuù-sanaù—the four bachelors named Sanat-kumära, Sanaka, Sanandana
and Sanätana; abhüt—appeared; präk—previous; kalpa—creation;
samplava—in the inundation; vinañöam—devastated; iha—in this material
world; ätma—the spirit; tattvam—truth; samyak—in complete;
jagäda—became manifested; munayaù—sages; yat—that which; acakñata—saw
clearly; ätman—the spirit.
TRANSLATION
To create different planetary systems I had to undergo austerities and
penance, and the Lord, thus being pleased with me, incarnated in four sanas
[Sanaka, Sanat-kumära, Sanandana and Sanätana]. In the previous creation the
spiritual truth was devastated, but the four sanas explained it so nicely that the
truth at once became clearly perceived by the sages.
PURPORT
The Viñëu-sahasra-näma prayers mention the Lord’s name as sanät and
sanätanatama. The Lord and the living entities are both qualitatively
sanätana, or eternal, but the Lord is sanätana-tama or the eternal in the
superlative degree. The living entities are positively sanätana, but not
superlatively, because the living entities are apt to fall to the atmosphere of
noneternity. Therefore, the living entities are quantitatively different from
the superlative sanätana, the Lord.
The word san is also used in the sense of charity; therefore when everything
is given up in charity unto the Lord, the Lord reciprocates by giving Himself
unto the devotee. This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (4.11): ye yathä
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mäà prapadyante. Brahmäjé wanted to create the whole cosmic situation as it
was in the previous millennium, and because, in the last devastation,
knowledge of the Absolute Truth was altogether erased from the universe, he
desired that the same knowledge again be renovated; otherwise there would be
no meaning in the creation. Because transcendental knowledge is a prime
necessity, the ever-conditioned souls are given a chance for liberation in every
millennium of creation. This mission of Brahmäjé was fulfilled by the grace of
the Lord when the four sanas, namely Sanaka, Sanat-kumära, Sanandana and
Sanätana, appeared as his four sons. These four sanas were incarnations of the
knowledge of the Supreme Lord, and as such they explained transcendental
knowledge so explicitly that all the sages could at once assimilate this
knowledge without the least difficulty. By following in the footsteps of the four
Kumäras, one can at once see the Supreme Personality of Godhead within
oneself.
TEXT 6
DaMaRSYa d+aduihTaYaRJaiNaí MaUTYaa|
NaaraYa<aae Nar wiTa SvTaPa"Pa[>aav" )
d*îaTMaNaae >aGavTaae iNaYaMaavl/aePa&
deVYaSTvNa®Pa*TaNaa gai$=Tau& Na Xaeku-" )) 6 ))
dharmasya dakña-duhitary ajaniñöa mürtyäà
näräyaëo nara iti sva-tapaù-prabhävaù
dåñövätmano bhagavato niyamävalopaà
devyas tv anaìga-påtanä ghaöituà na çekuù
SYNONYMS
dharmasya—of Dharma (the controller of religious principles); dakña—Dakña,
one of the Prajäpatis; duhitari—unto the daughter; ajaniñöa—took birth;
mürtyäm—of the name Mürti; näräyaëaù—Näräyaëa; naraù—Nara; iti—thus;
sva-tapaù—personal penances; prabhävaù—strength; dåñövä—by seeing;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ätmanaù—of His own; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead;
niyama-avalopam—breaking the vow; devyaù—celestial beauties; tu—but;
anaìga-påtanäù—companion of Cupid; ghaöitum—to happen; na—never;
çekuù—made possible.
TRANSLATION
To exhibit His personal way of austerity and penance, He appeared in twin
forms as Näräyaëa and Nara in the womb of Mürti, the wife of Dharma and the
daughter of Dakña. Celestial beauties, the companions of Cupid, went to try to
break His vows, but they were unsuccessful, for they saw that many beauties
like them were emanating from Him, the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The Lord, being the source of everything that be, is the origin of all
austerities and penances also. Great vows of austerity are undertaken by sages
to achieve success in self-realization. Human life is meant for such tapasya,
with the great vow of celibacy, or brahmacarya. In the rigid life of tapasya, there
is no place for the association of women. And because human life is meant for
tapasya, for self-realization, factual human civilization, as conceived by the
system of sanätana-dharma or the school of four castes and four orders of life,
prescribes rigid dissociation from woman in three stages of life. In the order of
gradual cultural development, one’s life may be divided into four divisions:
celibacy, household life, retirement, and renunciation. During the first stage of
life, up to twenty-five years of age, a man may be trained as a brahmacäré under
the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master just to understand that woman is
the real binding force in material existence. If one wants to get freedom from
the material bondage of conditional life, he must get free from the attraction
for the form of woman. Woman, or the fair sex, is the enchanting principle for
the living entities, and the male form, especially in the human being, is meant
for self-realization. The whole world is moving under the spell of womanly
attraction, and as soon as a man becomes united with a woman, he at once
becomes a victim of material bondage under a tight knot. The desires for
lording it over the material world, under the intoxication of a false sense of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
lordship, specifically begin just after the man’s unification with a woman. The
desires for acquiring a house, possessing land, having children and becoming
prominent in society, the affection for community and the place of birth, and
the hankering for wealth, which are all like phantasmagoria or illusory dreams,
encumber a human being, and he is thus impeded in his progress toward
self-realization, the real aim of life. The brahmacäri, or a boy from the age of
five years, especially from the higher castes, namely from the scholarly parents
(the brähmaëas), the administrative parents (the kñatriyas), or the mercantile
or productive parents (the vaiçyas), is trained until twenty-five years of age
under the care of a bona fide guru or teacher, and under strict observance of
discipline he comes to understand the values of life along with taking specific
training for a livelihood. The brahmacäré is then allowed to go home and enter
householder life and get married to a suitable woman. But there are many
brahmacärés who do not go home to become householders but continue the life
of naiñöhika-brahmacärés, without any connection with women. They accept
the order of sannyäsa, or the renounced order of life, knowing well that
combination with women is an unnecessary burden that checks
self-realization. Since sex desire is very strong at a certain stage of life, the
guru may allow the brahmacäré to marry; this license is given to a brahmacäré
who is unable to continue the way of naiñöhika-brahmacarya, and such
discriminations are possible for the bona fide guru. A program of so-called
family planning is needed. The householder who associates with woman under
scriptural restrictions, after a thorough training of brahmacarya, cannot be a
householder like cats and dogs. Such a householder, after fifty years of age,
would retire from the association of woman as a vänaprastha to be trained to
live alone without the association of woman. When the practice is complete,
the same retired householder becomes a sannyäsé, strictly separate from
woman, even from his married wife. Studying the whole scheme of
disassociation from women, it appears that a woman is a stumbling block for
self-realization, and the Lord appeared as Näräyaëa to teach the principle of
womanly disassociation with a vow in life. The demigods, being envious of the
austere life of the rigid brahmacärés, would try to cause them to break their
vows by dispatching soldiers of Cupid. But in the case of the Lord, it became
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
an unsuccessful attempt when the celestial beauties saw that the Lord can
produce innumerable such beauties by His mystic internal potency and that
there was consequently no need to be attracted by others externally. There is a
common proverb that a confectioner is never attracted by sweetmeats. The
confectioner, who is always manufacturing sweetmeats, has very little desire to
eat them; similarly, the Lord, by His pleasure potential powers, can produce
innumerable spiritual beauties and not be the least attracted by the false
beauties of material creation. One who does not know alleges foolishly that
Lord Kåñëa enjoyed women in His räsa-lélä in Våndävana, or with His sixteen
thousand married wives at Dvärakä.
TEXT 7
k-aMa& dhiNTa k*-iTaNaae NaNau raezd*íya
raez& dhNTaMauTa Tae Na dhNTYaSaùMa( )
Saae_Ya& YadNTarMal&/ Pa[ivXaNa( ib>aeiTa
k-aMa" k-Qa& Nau PauNarSYa MaNa" é[YaeTa )) 7 ))
kämaà dahanti kåtino nanu roña-dåñöyä
roñaà dahantam uta te na dahanty asahyam
so ’yaà yad antaram alaà praviçan bibheti
kämaù kathaà nu punar asya manaù çrayeta
SYNONYMS
kämam—lust; dahanti—chastise; kåtinaù—great stalwarts; nanu—but;
roña-dåñöyä—by wrathful glance; roñam—wrath; dahantam—being
overwhelmed; uta—although; te—they; na—cannot; dahanti—subjugate;
asahyam—intolerable; saù—that; ayam—Him; yat—because;
antaram—within; alam—however; praviçan—entering; bibheti—is afraid of;
kämaù—lust; katham—how; nu—as a matter of fact; punaù—again;
asya—His; manaù—mind; çrayeta—take shelter of.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Great stalwarts like Lord Çiva can, by their wrathful glances, overcome lust
and vanquish him, yet they cannot be free from the overwhelming effects of
their own wrath. Such wrath can never enter into the heart of Him [the Lord],
who is above all this. So how can lust take shelter in His mind?
PURPORT
When Lord Çiva was engaged in severely austere meditation, Cupid, the
demigod of lust, threw his arrow of sex desire. Lord Çiva, thus being angry at
him, glanced at Cupid in great wrath, and at once the body of Cupid was
annihilated. Although Lord Çiva was so powerful, he was unable to get free
from the effects of such wrath. But in the behavior of Lord Viñëu there is no
incident of such wrath at any time. On the contrary, Bhågu Muni tested the
tolerance of the Lord by purposely kicking His chest, but instead of being
angry at Bhågu Muni the Lord begged his pardon, saying that Bhågu Muni’s leg
might have been badly hurt because His chest is too hard. The Lord has the
sign of the foot of bhågupäda as the mark of tolerance. The Lord, therefore, is
never affected by any kind of wrath, so how can there be any place for lust,
which is less strong than wrath? When lust or desire is not fulfilled, there is
the appearance of wrath, but in the absence of wrath how can there be any
place for lust? The Lord is known as äpta-käma, or one who can fulfill His
desires by Himself. He does not require anyone’s help to satisfy His desires.
The Lord is unlimited, and therefore His desires are also unlimited. All living
entities but the Lord are limited in every respect; how then can the limited
satisfy the desires of the unlimited? The conclusion is that the Absolute
Personality of Godhead has neither lust nor anger, and even if there is
sometimes a show of lust and anger by the Absolute, it should be considered an
absolute benediction.
TEXT 8
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ivÖ" SaPaTNYauidTaPai}ai>ariNTa rajae
bal/ae_iPa SaàuPaGaTaSTaPaSae vNaaiNa )
TaSMaa Adad( Da]uvGaiTa& Ga*<aTae Pa[Saàae
idVYaa" STauviNTa MauNaYaae YaduPaYaRDaSTaaTa( )) 8 ))
viddhaù sapatny-udita-patribhir anti räjïo
bälo ’pi sann upagatas tapase vanäni
tasmä adäd dhruva-gatià gåëate prasanno
divyäù stuvanti munayo yad upary-adhastät
SYNONYMS
viddhaù—pinched by; sapatni—a co-wife; udita—uttered by; patribhiù—by
sharp words; anti—just before; räjïaù—of the king; bälaù—a boy;
api—although; san—being so; upagataù—took to; tapase—severe penances;
vanäni—in a great forest; tasmai—therefore; adät—gave as a reward;
dhruva-gatim—a path to the Dhruva planet; gåëate—on being prayed for;
prasannaù—being satisfied; divyäù—denizens of higher planets; stuvanti—do
pray; munayaù—great sages; yat—thereupon; upari—up; adhastät—down.
TRANSLATION
Being insulted by sharp words spoken by the co-wife of the king, even in his
presence, Prince Dhruva, though only a boy, took to severe penances in the
forest. And the Lord, being satisfied by his prayer, awarded him the Dhruva
planet, which is worshiped by great sages, both upward and downward.
PURPORT
When he was only five years old, Prince Dhruva, a great devotee and the
son of Mahäräja Uttänapäda, was sitting on the lap of his father. His
stepmother did not like the King’s patting her stepson, so she dragged him out,
saying that he could not claim to sit on the lap of the King because he was not
born out of her womb. The little boy felt insulted by this act of his stepmother.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Nor did his father make any protest, for he was too attached to his second wife.
After this incident, Prince Dhruva went to his own mother and complained.
His real mother also could not take any step against this insulting behavior,
and so she wept. The boy inquired from his mother how he could sit on the
royal throne of his father, and the poor queen replied that only the Lord could
help him. The boy inquired where the Lord could be seen, and the queen
replied that it is said that the Lord is sometimes seen by great sages in the
dense forest. The child prince decided to go into the forest to perform severe
penances in order to achieve his objective.
Prince Dhruva performed a stringent type of penance under the instruction
of his spiritual master, Çré Närada Muni, who was specifically deputed for this
purpose by the Personality of Godhead. Prince Dhruva was initiated by Närada
into chanting the hymn composed of eighteen letters, namely oà namo
bhagavate väsudeväya, and Lord Väsudeva incarnated Himself as Påçnigarbha,
the Personality of Godhead with four hands, and awarded the prince a specific
planet above the seven stars. Prince Dhruva, after achieving success in his
undertakings, saw the Lord face to face, and he was satisfied that all his needs
were fulfilled.
The planet awarded to Prince Dhruva Mahäräja is a fixed Vaikuëöha
planet, installed in the material atmosphere by the will of the Supreme Lord,
Väsudeva. This planet, although within the material world, will not be
annihilated at the time of devastation, but will remain fixed in its place. And
because it is a Vaikuëöha planet never to be annihilated, it is worshiped even
by the denizens of the seven stars situated below the Dhruva planet, as well as
by the planets which are even above the Dhruva planet. Maharñi Bhågu’s
planet is situated above the Dhruva planet.
So the Lord incarnated Himself as Påçnigarbha just to satisfy a pure devotee
of the Lord. And Prince Dhruva achieved this perfection simply by chanting
the hymn mentioned above, after being initiated by another pure devotee,
Närada. A serious personality can thus achieve the highest perfection of
meeting the Lord and attain his objective simply by being guided by a pure
devotee, who automatically approaches by dint of one’s serious determination
to meet the Lord by all means.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The description of Prince Dhruva’s activities can be read in detail in the
Fourth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 9
YaÜeNaMauTPaQaGaTa& iÜJavaKYavJa]‚
iNaZPlu/íPaaEåz>aGa& iNarYae PaTaNTaMa( )
}aaTvaiQaRTaae JaGaiTa Pau}aPad& c le/>ae
duGDaa vSaUiNa vSauDaa Sak-l/aiNa YaeNa )) 9 ))
yad venam utpatha-gataà dvija-väkya-vajraniñpluñöa-
pauruña-bhagaà niraye patantam
trätvärthito jagati putra-padaà ca lebhe
dugdhä vasüni vasudhä sakaläni yena
SYNONYMS
yat—when; venam—unto King Vena; utpatha-gatam—going astray from the
righteous path; dvija—of the brähmaëas; väkya—words of cursing;
vajra—thunderbolt; niñpluñöa—being burnt by; pauruña—great deeds;
bhagam—opulence; niraye—into hell; patantam—going down; trätvä—by
delivering; arthitaù—so being prayed for; jagati—on the world;
putra-padam—the position of the son; ca—as well as; lebhe—achieved;
dugdhä—exploited; vasüni—produce; vasudhä—the earth; sakaläni—all kinds
of; yena—by whom.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Vena went astray from the path of righteousness, and the
brähmaëas chastised him by the thunderbolt curse. By this King Vena was
burnt with his good deeds and opulence and was en route to hell. The Lord, by
His causeless mercy, descended as his son, by the name of Påthu, delivered the
condemned King Vena from hell, and exploited the earth by drawing all kinds
of crops as produce.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
According to the system of varëäçrama-dharma, the pious and learned
brähmaëas were the natural guardians of society. The brähmaëas, by their
learned labor of love, would instruct the administrator-kings how to rule the
country in complete righteousness, and thus the process would go on as a
perfect welfare state. The kings or the kñatriya administrators would always
consult the council of learned brähmaëas. They were never autocratic
monarchs. The scriptures like Manu-saàhitä and other authorized books of the
great sages were guiding principles for ruling the subjects, and there was no
need for less intelligent persons to manufacture a code of law in the name of
democracy. The less intelligent mass of people have very little knowledge of
their own welfare, as a child has very little knowledge of its future well-being.
The experienced father guides the innocent child towards the path of progress,
and the childlike mass of people need similar guidance. The standard welfare
codes are already there in the Manu-saàhitä and other Vedic literatures. The
learned brähmaëas would advise the king in terms of those standard books of
knowledge and with reference to the particular situation of time and place.
Such brähmaëas were not paid servants of the king, and therefore they had the
strength to dictate to the king on the principles of scriptures. This system
continued even up to the time of Mahäräja Candragupta, and the brähmaëa
Cäëakya was his unpaid prime minister.
Mahäräja Vena did not adhere to this principle of ruling, and he disobeyed
the learned brähmaëas. The broad-minded brähmaëas were not self-interested,
but looked to the interest of complete welfare for all the subjects. They wanted
to chastise King Vena for his misconduct and so prayed to the Almighty Lord
as well as cursed the king.
Long life, obedience, good reputation, righteousness, prospects of being
promoted to higher planets, and blessings of great personalities are all
vanquished simply by disobedience to a great soul. One should strictly try to
follow in the footsteps of great souls. Mahäräja Vena became a king,
undoubtedly due to his past deeds of righteousness, but because he willfully
neglected the great souls, he was punished by the loss of all the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
above-mentioned acquisitions. In the Vämana Puräëa the history of Mahäräja
Vena and his degradation are fully described. When Mahäräja Påthu heard
about the hellish condition of his father, Vena, who was suffering from leprosy
in the family of a mleccha, he at once brought the former king to Kurukñetra
for his purification and relieved him of all sufferings.
Mahäräja Påthu, the incarnation of God, descended by the prayer of the
brähmaëas to rectify the disorders on earth. He produced all kinds of crops.
But, at the same time, he performed the duty of a son who delivers his father
from hellish conditions. The word putra means one who delivers from hell,
called put. That is a worthy son.
TEXT 10
Naa>aerSaav*z>a AaSa SaudeivSaUNau‚
YaaRe vE ccar SaMad*Ga( Ja@YaaeGacYaaRMa( )
YaTPaarMah&SYaMa*zYa" PadMaaMaNaiNTa
SvSQa" Pa[XaaNTak-r<a" PairMau¢-Sa®" )) 10 ))
näbher asäv åñabha äsa sudevi-sünur
yo vai cacära sama-dåg jaòa-yoga-caryäm
yat päramahaàsyam åñayaù padam ämananti
svasthaù praçänta-karaëaù parimukta-saìgaù
SYNONYMS
näbheù—by Mahäräja Näbhi; asau—the Personality of Godhead;
åñabhaù—Åñabha; äsa—became; sudevi—Sudevé; sünuù—the son of;
yaù—who; vai—certainly; cacära—performed; sama-dåk—equibalanced;
jaòa—material; yoga-caryäm—performance of yoga; yat—which;
päramahaàsyam—the highest stage of perfection; åñayaù—the learned sages;
padam—situation; ämananti—do accept; svasthaù—self-reposed;
praçänta—suspended; karaëaù—the material senses; parimukta—perfectly
liberated; saìgaù—material contamination.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
The Lord appeared as the son of Sudevé, the wife of King Näbhi, and was
known as Åñabhadeva. He performed materialistic yoga to equibalance the
mind. This stage is also accepted as the highest perfectional situation of
liberation, wherein one is situated in one’s self and is completely satisfied.
PURPORT
Out of many types of mystic performances for self-realization, the process of
jaòa-yoga is also one accepted by authorities. This jaòa-yoga involves
practicing becoming like a dumb stone and not being affected by material
reactions. Just as a stone is indifferent to all kinds of attacks and reattacks of
external situations, similarly one practices jaòa-yoga by tolerating voluntary
infliction of pain upon the material body. Such yogés, out of many
self-infliction methods, practice plucking out the hairs on their heads, without
shaving and without any instrumental help. But the real purpose of such
jaòa-yoga practice is to get free from all material affection and to be
completely situated in the self. At the last stage of his life, Emperor
Åñabhadeva wandered like a dumb madman, unaffected by all kinds of bodily
mistreatment. Seeing him like a madman, wandering naked with long hair and
a long beard, less intelligent children and men in the street used to spit on him
and urinate on his body. He used to lie in his own stool and never move. But
the stool of his body was fragrant like the smell of fragrant flowers, and a
saintly person would recognize him as a paramahaàsa, one in the highest state
of human perfection. One who is not able to make his stool fragrant should
not, however, imitate Emperor Åñabhadeva. The practice of jaòa-yoga was
possible for Åñabhadeva and others on the same level of perfection, but such
an uncommon practice is impossible for an ordinary man.
The real purpose of jaòa-yoga, as mentioned here in this verse, is
praçänta-karaëaù, or subduing the senses. The whole process of yoga, under
whatever heading it may be, is to control the unbridled material senses and
thus prepare oneself for self-realization. In this age specifically, this jaòa-yoga
cannot be of any practical value, but on the other hand the practice of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhakti-yoga is feasible because it is just suitable for this age. The simple method
of hearing from the right source, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, will lead one to the
highest perfectional stage of yoga. Åñabhadeva was the son of King Näbhi and
the grandson of King Ägnédhra, and he was the father of King Bharata, after
whose name this planet earth was called Bhärata-varña. Åñabhadeva’s mother
was also known as Merudevé, although her name is mentioned here as Sudevé.
It is sometimes proposed that Sudevé was another wife of King Näbhi, but since
King Åñabhadeva is mentioned elsewhere as the son of Merudevé, it is clear
that Merudevé and Sudevé are the same person under different names.
TEXT 11
Sa}ae MaMaaSa >aGavaNa( hYaXaqrzaQaae
Saa+aaTa( Sa YajPauåzSTaPaNaqYav<aR" )
^NdaeMaYaae Ma%MaYaae_i%l/devTaaTMaa
vacae b>aUvuåXaTaq" ìSaTaae_SYa NaSTa" )) 11 ))
satre mamäsa bhagavän haya-çérañätho
säkñät sa yajïa-puruñas tapanéya-varëaù
chandomayo makhamayo ’khila-devatätmä
väco babhüvur uçatéù çvasato ’sya nastaù
SYNONYMS
satre—in the sacrificial ceremony; mama—of mine; äsa—appeared;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; haya-çérañä—with His horselike head;
atha—thus; säkñät—directly; saù—He; yajïa-puruñaù—the person who is
pleased by performances of sacrifice; tapanéya—golden; varëaù—hue;
chandaù-mayaù—personified Vedic hymns; makha-mayaù—personified
sacrifices; akhila—all that be; devatä-ätmä—the soul of the demigods;
väcaù—sounds; babhüvuù—become audible; uçatéù—very pleasing to hear;
çvasataù—while breathing; asya—His; nastaù—through the nostrils.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
The Lord appeared as the Hayagréva incarnation in a sacrifice performed by
me [Brahmä]. He is the personified sacrifices, and the hue of His body is
golden. He is the personified Vedas as well, and the Supersoul of all demigods.
When He breathed, all the sweet sounds of the Vedic hymns came out of His
nostrils.
PURPORT
The Vedic hymns are generally meant for sacrifices performed by fruitive
workers who also want to satisfy the demigods to achieve their fruitive result.
But the Lord is the personified sacrifices and personified Vedic hymns.
Therefore one who is directly a devotee of the Lord is a person who has
automatically both served the purposes of sacrifices and pleased the demigods.
The devotees of the Lord may not perform any sacrifice or may not please the
demigods as per Vedic injunctions, and still the devotees are on a higher level
than the fruitive workers or the worshipers of different demigods.
TEXT 12
MaTSYaae YauGaaNTaSaMaYae MaNauNaaePal/BDa"
+aae<aqMaYaae iNai%l/JaqviNak-aYake-Ta" )
ivó&iSaTaaNauå>aYae Sail/le/ Mau%aNMae
AadaYa Ta}a ivJahar h vedMaaGaaRNa( )) 12 ))
matsyo yugänta-samaye manunopalabdhaù
kñoëémayo nikhila-jéva-nikäya-ketaù
visraàsitän uru-bhaye salile mukhän me
ädäya tatra vijahära ha veda-märgän
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
matsyaù—incarnation of the fish; yuga-anta—at the end of the millennium;
samaye—at the time of; manunä—the would-be Vaivasvata Manu;
upalabdhaù—seen; kñoëémayaù—up to the earthly planets; nikhila—all;
jéva—living entities; nikäya-ketaù—shelter for; visraàsitän—emanating from;
uru—great; bhaye—out of fear; salile—in the water; mukhät—from the mouth;
me—mine; ädäya—having taken to; tatra—there; vijahära—enjoyed;
ha—certainly; veda-märgän—all the Vedas.
TRANSLATION
At the end of the millennium, the would-be Vaivasvata Manu, of the name
Satyavrata, would see that the Lord in the fish incarnation is the shelter of all
kinds of living entities, up to those in the earthly planets. Because of my fear of
the vast water at the end of the millennium, the Vedas come out of my
[Brahmä’s] mouth, and the Lord enjoys those vast waters and protects the
Vedas.
PURPORT
During one day of Brahmä there are fourteen Manus, and at the end of
each Manu there is devastation up to the earthly planets, and the vast water is
fearful even to Brahmä. So in the beginning of the would-be Vaivasvata Manu,
such devastation would be seen by him. There would be many other incidents
also, such as the killing of the famous Çaìkhäsura. This foretelling is by the
past experience of Brahmäjé, who knew that in that fearful devastating scene,
the Vedas would come out of his mouth, but the Lord in His fish incarnation
not only would save all living entities, namely the demigods, animals, men and
great sages, but would also save the Vedas.
TEXT 13
+aqraedDaavMardaNavYaUQaPaaNaa‚
MauNMaQNaTaaMaMa*Tal/BDaYa Aaiddev" )
Pa*ïeNa k-C^PavPauivRdDaar Gaae}a&
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
iNad]a+a<aae_id]PairvTaRk-za<ak-<@U" )) 13 ))
kñérodadhäv amara-dänava-yüthapänäm
unmathnatäm amåta-labdhaya ädi-devaù
påñöhena kacchapa-vapur vidadhära gotraà
nidräkñaëo ’dri-parivarta-kañäëa-kaëòüù
SYNONYMS
kñéra—milk; udadhau—in the ocean of; amara—the demigods; dänava—the
demons; yütha-pänäm—of the leaders of both hosts; unmathnatäm—while
churning; amåta—nectar; labdhaya—for gaining; ädi-devaù—the primeval
Lord; påñöhena—by the backbone; kacchapa—tortoise; vapuù—body;
vidadhära—assumed; gotram—the Mandara Hill; nidräkñaëaù—while partly
sleeping; adri-parivarta—rolling the hill; kañäëa—scratching;
kaëòüù—itching.
TRANSLATION
The primeval Lord then assumed the tortoise incarnation in order to serve as
a resting place [pivot] for the Mandara Mountain, which was acting as a
churning rod. The demigods and demons were churning the ocean of milk with
the Mandara Mountain in order to extract nectar. The mountain moved back
and forth, scratching the back of Lord Tortoise, who, while partially sleeping,
was experiencing an itching sensation.
PURPORT
Although it is not in our experience, there is a milk ocean within this
universe. Even the modern scientist accepts that there are hundreds and
hundreds of thousands of planets hovering over our heads, and each of them
has different kinds of climatic conditions. Çrémad-Bhägavatam gives much
information which may not tally with our present experience. But as far as
Indian sages are concerned, knowledge is received from the Vedic literatures,
and the authorities accept without any hesitation that we should look through
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the pages of authentic books of knowledge (çästra-cakñurvat). So we cannot
deny the existence of the ocean of milk as stated in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam
unless and until we have experimentally seen all the planets hovering in space.
Since such an experiment is not possible, naturally we have to accept the
statement of Çrémad-Bhägavatam as it is because it is so accepted by spiritual
leaders like Çrédhara Svämé, Jéva Gosvämé, Viçvanätha Cakravarté and others.
The Vedic process is to follow in the footsteps of great authorities, and that is
the only process for knowing that which is beyond our imagination.
The primeval Lord, being all-powerful, can do whatever He likes, and
therefore His assuming the incarnation of a tortoise or a fish for serving a
particular purpose is not at all astonishing. Therefore we should not have any
hesitation whatsoever in accepting the statements of the authentic scriptures
like Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
The gigantic work of churning the milk ocean by the combined effort of the
demigods and the demons required a gigantic resting ground or pivot for the
gigantic Mandara Hill. Thus to help the attempt of the demigods the primeval
Lord assumed the incarnation of a gigantic tortoise, swimming in the ocean of
milk. At the same time, the mountain scratched His backbone as He was
partially sleeping and thus relieved His itching sensation.
TEXT 14
}aEiPaíPaaeå>aYaha Sa Na*iSa&hæPa&
k*-Tva >a]Mad(>a]uku-i$=d&í\k-ral/v£-Ma( )
dETYaeNd]Maaéu GadYaai>aPaTaNTaMaara‚
dUraE iNaPaaTYa ivddar Na%E" Sfu-rNTaMa( )) 14 ))
trai-piñöaporu-bhaya-hä sa nåsiàha-rüpaà
kåtvä bhramad-bhrukuöi-daàñöra-karäla-vaktram
daityendram äçu gadayäbhipatantam äräd
ürau nipätya vidadära nakhaiù sphurantam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
trai-piñöapa—the demigods; uru-bhaya-hä—one who vanquishes great fears;
saù—He (the Personality of Godhead); nåsiàha-rüpam—assuming the
incarnation Nåsiàha; kåtvä—doing so; bhramat—by rolling;
bhru-kuöi—eyebrows; daàñöra—teeth; karäla—greatly fearful;
vaktram—mouth; daitya-indram—the king of the demons; äçu—immediately;
gadayä—with club in hand; abhipatantam—while falling down; ärät—nearby;
ürau—on the thighs; nipätya—placing on; vidadära—pierced; nakhaiù—by
the nails; sphurantam—while challenging.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead assumed the incarnation of Nåsiàhadeva in
order to vanquish the great fears of the demigods. He killed the king of the
demons [Hiraëyakaçipu], who challenged the Lord with a club in his hand, by
placing the demon on His thighs and piercing him with His nails, rolling His
eyebrows in anger and showing His fearful teeth and mouth.
PURPORT
The history of Hiraëyakaçipu and his great devotee-son Prahläda Mahäräja
is narrated in the Seventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Hiraëyakaçipu
became very powerful by material achievements and thought himself to be
immortal by the grace of Brahmäjé. Brahmäjé declined to award him the
benediction of immortality because he himself is not an immortal being. But
Hiraëyakaçipu derived Brahmäjé’s benediction in a roundabout way, almost
equal to becoming an immortal being. Hiraëyakaçipu was sure that he would
not be killed by any man or demigod or by any kind of known weapon, nor
would he die in day or night. The Lord, however, assumed the incarnation of
half-man and half-lion, which was beyond the imagination of a materialistic
demon like Hiraëyakaçipu, and thus, keeping pace with the benediction of
Brahmäjé, the Lord killed him. He killed him on His lap, so that he was killed
neither on the land nor on the water nor in the sky. The demon was pierced by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Nåsiàha’s nails, which were beyond the human weapons imaginable by
Hiraëyakaçipu. The literal meaning of Hiraëyakaçipu is one who is after gold
and soft bedding, the ultimate aim of all materialistic men. Such demonic men,
who have no relationship with God, gradually become puffed up by material
acquisitions and begin to challenge the authority of the Supreme Lord and
torture those who are devotees of the Lord. Prahläda Mahäräja happened to be
the son of Hiraëyakaçipu, and because the boy was a great devotee, his father
tortured him to the best of his ability. In this extreme situation, the Lord
assumed the incarnation of Nåsiàhadeva, and just to finish the enemy of the
demigods, the Lord killed Hiraëyakaçipu in a manner beyond the demon’s
imagination. Materialistic plans of godless demons are always frustrated by the
all-powerful Lord.
TEXT 15
ANTa"SarSYauåble/Na Pade Ga*hqTaae
Ga]ahe<a YaUQaPaiTarMbuJahSTa AaTaR" )
AahedMaaidPauåzai%l/l/aek-NaaQa
TaqQaRé[v" é[v<aMa®l/NaaMaDaeYa )) 15 ))
antaù-sarasy uru-balena pade gåhéto
gräheëa yütha-patir ambuja-hasta ärtaù
ähedam ädi-puruñäkhila-loka-nätha
tértha-çravaù çravaëa-maìgala-nämadheya
SYNONYMS
antaù-sarasi—within the river; uru-balena—by superior strength; pade—leg;
gåhétaù—being taken up; gräheëa—by the crocodile; yütha-patiù—of the
leader of the elephants; ambuja-hastaù—with a lotus flower in the hand;
ärtaù—greatly aggrieved; äha—addressed; idam—like this; ädi-puruña—the
original enjoyer; akhila-loka-nätha—the Lord of the universe;
tértha-çravaù—as famous as a place of pilgrimage; çravaëa-maìgala—all good
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
simply by hearing the name; näma-dheya—whose holy name is worth
chanting.
TRANSLATION
The leader of the elephants, whose leg was attacked in a river by a crocodile
of superior strength, was much aggrieved. Taking a lotus flower in his trunk, he
addressed the Lord, saying, “O original enjoyer, Lord of the universe! O
deliverer, as famous as a place of pilgrimage! All are purified simply by hearing
Your holy name, which is worthy to be chanted.”
PURPORT
The history of delivering the leader of the elephants, whose leg was
attacked in the river by the superior strength of a crocodile, is described in the
Eighth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Since the Lord is absolute knowledge,
there is no difference between His holy name and the personality of Godhead.
The leader of the elephants was much distressed when he was attacked by the
crocodile. Although the elephant is always stronger than the crocodile, the
latter is stronger than the elephant when it is in the water. And because the
elephant was a great devotee of the Lord in his previous birth, he was able to
chant the holy name of the Lord by dint of his past good deeds. Every living
entity is always distressed in this material world because this place is such that
at every step one has to meet with some kind of distress. But one who is
supported by his past good deeds engages himself in the devotional service of
the Lord, as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.16). Those who are supported by
impious acts cannot be engaged in the devotional service of the Lord, even
though they are distressed. This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.15).
The personality of Godhead Hari appeared at once on the back of His eternal
bearer, Garuòa, and delivered the elephant.
The elephant was conscious of his relation with the Supreme Lord. He
addressed the Lord as ädi-puruña, or the original enjoyer. Both the Lord and
the living beings are conscious and are therefore enjoyers, but the Lord is the
original enjoyer because He is the creator of everything. In a family, both the
father and his sons are undoubtedly enjoyers but the father is the original
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
enjoyer, and the sons are subsequent enjoyers. A pure devotee knows well that
everything in the universe is the property of the Lord and that a living entity
can enjoy a thing as ordained by the Lord. A living being cannot even touch a
thing which is not allotted to him. This idea of the original enjoyer is
explained very nicely in the Éçopaniñad. One who knows this difference
between the Lord and himself never accepts anything without first offering it
to the Lord.
The elephant addressed the Lord as akhila-loka-nätha, or the Lord of the
universe, who is therefore the Lord of the elephant also. The elephant, being a
pure devotee of the Lord, specifically deserved to be saved from the attack of
the crocodile, and because it is a promise of the Lord that His devotee will
never be vanquished, it was quite befitting that the elephant called upon the
Lord to protect him, and the merciful Lord also at once responded. The Lord is
the protector of everyone, but He is the first protector of one who
acknowledges the superiority of the Lord instead of being so falsely proud as to
deny the superiority of the Lord or to claim to be equal to Him. He is ever
superior. A pure devotee of the Lord knows this difference between the Lord
and himself. Therefore a pure devotee is given first preference because of his
full dependence, whereas the person who denies the existence of the Lord and
declares himself the Lord is called asura, and as such he is given protection by
the strength of limited power subject to the sanction of the Lord. Since the
Lord is superior to everyone, His perfection is also superior. No one can
imagine it.
The elephant addressed the Lord as tértha-çravaù, or “as famous as a place of
pilgrimage.” People go to places of pilgrimage in order to be delivered from the
reactions of unknown sinful acts. But one can be freed from all sinful reactions
simply by remembering His holy name. The Lord is therefore as good as the
holy places of pilgrimage. One can be free from all sinful reactions after
reaching a place of pilgrimage, but one can have the same benefit at home or
at any place simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord. For a pure devotee,
there is no need to go to the holy place of pilgrimage. He can be delivered from
all sinful acts simply by remembering the Lord in earnestness. A pure devotee
of the Lord never commits any sinful acts, but because the whole world is full
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of the sinful atmosphere, even a pure devotee may commit a sin unconsciously,
as a matter of course. One who commits sinful acts consciously cannot be
worthy of being a devotee of the Lord, but a pure devotee who unconsciously
does something sinful is certainly delivered by the Lord because a pure devotee
remembers the Lord always.
The Lord’s holy name is called çravaëa-maìgala. This means that one
receives everything auspicious simply by hearing the holy name. In another
place in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, His holy name is described as
puëya-çravaëa-kértana. It is a pious act simply to chant and hear all about the
Lord. The Lord descends on this earth and acts like others in connection with
the activities of the world just to create subject matters for hearing about Him;
otherwise the Lord has nothing to do in this world, nor has He any obligation
to do anything. He comes out of His own causeless mercy and acts as He
desires, the Vedas and puräëas are full of descriptions of His different activities
so that people in general may naturally be eager to hear and read something
about His activities. Generally, however, the modern fictions and novels of the
world occupy a greater part of people’s valuable time. Such literatures cannot
do good to anyone; on the contrary, they agitate the young mind unnecessarily
and increase the modes of passion and ignorance, leading to increasing
bondage to the material conditions. The same aptitude for hearing and reading
is better utilized in hearing and reading of the Lord’s activities. This will give
one all-around benefit.
It is concluded, therefore, that the holy name of the Lord and topics in
relation with Him are always worth hearing, and therefore He is called here in
this verse näma-dheya, or one whose holy name is worth chanting.
TEXT 16
é[uTva hirSTaMar<aaiQaRNaMaPa[MaeYa‚
ê§-aYauDa" PaTaGaraJa>auJaaiDaæ!" )
c§e-<a Na§-vdNa& iviNaPaa$y TaSMaa‚
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ÖSTae Pa[Ga*ù >aGavaNa( k*-PaYaaeÂhar )) 16 ))
çrutvä haris tam araëärthinam aprameyaç
cakräyudhaù patagaräja-bhujädhirüòhaù
cakreëa nakra-vadanaà vinipäöya tasmäd
dhaste pragåhya bhagavän kåpayojjahära
SYNONYMS
çrutvä—by hearing; hariù—the Personality of Godhead; tam—him;
araëa-arthinam—one who is in need of help; aprameyaù—the unlimitedly
powerful Lord; cakra—wheel; äyudhaù—equipped with His weapon;
pataga-räja—the king of the birds (Garuòa); bhuja-adhirüòhaù—being seated
on the wings of; cakreëa—by the wheel; nakra-vadanam—the mouth of the
crocodile; vinipäöya—cutting in two; tasmät—from the mouth of the crocodile;
haste—in the hands; pragåhya—taking hold of the trunk; bhagavän—the
Personality of Godhead; kåpayä—out of causeless mercy; ujjahära—delivered
him.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, after hearing the elephant’s plea, felt that the
elephant needed His immediate help, for he was in great distress. Thus at once
the Lord appeared there on the wings of the king of birds, Garuòa, fully
equipped with His weapon, the wheel [cakra]. With the wheel He cut to pieces
the mouth of the crocodile to save the elephant, and He delivered the elephant
by lifting him by his trunk.
PURPORT
The Lord resides in His Vaikuëöha planet. No one can estimate how far
away this planet is situated. It is said, however, that anyone trying to reach
that planet by airships or by mindships, traveling for millions of years, will find
it still unknown. Modern scientists have invented airships which are material,
and the yogés make a still finer material attempt to travel by mindships. The
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yogés can reach any distant place very quickly with the help of mindships. But
neither the airship nor the mindship has access to the kingdom of God in the
Vaikuëöhaloka, situated far beyond the material sky. Since this is the situation,
how was it possible for the prayers of the elephant to be heard from such an
unlimitedly distant place, and how could the Lord at once appear on the spot?
These things cannot be calculated by human imagination. All this was possible
by the unlimited power of the Lord, and therefore the Lord is described here as
aprameya, for not even the best human brain can estimate His powers and
potencies by mathematical calculation. The Lord can hear from such a distant
place, He can eat from there, and He can appear simultaneously in all places at
a moment’s notice. Such is the omnipotency of the Lord.
TEXT 17
JYaaYaaNa( Gau<aErvrJaae_PYaidTae" SauTaaNaa&
l/aek-aNa( ivc§-Ma wMaaNa( YadQaaiDaYaj" )
+Maa& vaMaNaeNa JaGa*he i}aPadC^le/Na
YaaÁaMa*Tae PaiQa crNa( Pa[>aui>aNaR caLYa" )) 17 ))
jyäyän guëair avarajo ’py aditeù sutänäà
lokän vicakrama imän yad athädhiyajïaù
kñmäà vämanena jagåhe tripada-cchalena
yäcïäm åte pathi caran prabhubhir na cälyaù
SYNONYMS
jyäyän—the greatest; guëaiù—by qualities; avarajaù—transcendental;
api—although He is so; aditeù—of Aditi; sutänäm—of all the sons (known as
Ädityas); lokän—all the planets; vicakrame—surpassed; imän—in this
universe; yat—one who; atha—therefore; adhiyajïaù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; kñmäm—all the lands; vämanena—in the incarnation
of Vämana; jagåhe—accepted; tripada—three steps; chalena—by pretension;
yäcïäm—begging; åte—without; pathi caran—passing over the right path;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
prabhubhiù—by authorities; na—never to be; cälyaù—to be bereft of.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, although transcendental to all material modes, still surpassed all
the qualities of the sons of Aditi, known as the Ädityas. The Lord appeared as
the youngest son of Aditi. And because He surpassed all the planets of the
universe, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. On the pretense of asking
for a measurement of three footsteps of land, He took away all the lands of Bali
Mahäräja. He asked simply because without begging, no authority can take
one’s rightful possession.
PURPORT
The history of Bali Mahäräja and his charity to Vämanadeva is described in
the Eighth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Bali Mahäräja conquered all the
planets of the universe by rightful possession. A king can conquer other kings
by strength, and such possession is considered to be rightful. So Bali Mahäräja
possessed all the lands of the universe, and he happened to be charitably
disposed toward the brähmaëas. The Lord therefore pretended to be a beggar
brähmaëa, and He asked Bali Mahäräja for a measurement of three footsteps of
land. The Lord, as the proprietor of everything, could take from Bali Mahäräja
all the land he possessed, but he did not do so because Bali Mahäräja possessed
all those lands by king’s rights. When Bali Mahäräja was asked by Lord
Vämana for such small charity, Bali Mahäräja’s spiritual master, namely
Çukräcärya, objected to this proposal because he knew that Vämanadeva was
Viñëu Himself, pretending to be a beggar. Bali Mahäräja did not agree to abide
by the order of his spiritual master when he understood that the beggar was
Viñëu Himself, and he at once agreed to give Him in charity the land
requested. By this agreement Lord Vämana covered all the lands of the
universe with His first two steps and then asked Bali Mahäräja where to place
the third step. Bali Mahäräja was very glad to receive the Lord’s remaining step
upon his head, and thus Bali Mahäräja, instead of losing everything he
possessed, was blessed by the Lord’s becoming his constant companion and
doorman. So, by giving everything to the cause of the Lord, one does not lose
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
anything, but he gains everything that he could never otherwise expect.
TEXT 18
NaaQaaeR ble/rYaMauå§-MaPaadXaaEc‚
MaaPa" iXa%aDa*TavTaae ivbuDaaiDaPaTYaMa( )
Yaae vE Pa[iTaé[uTaMa*Tae Na ick-IzRdNYa‚
daTMaaNaMa® MaNaSaa hrYae_i>aMaeNae )) 18 ))
närtho baler ayam urukrama-päda-çaucam
äpaù çikhä-dhåtavato vibudhädhipatyam
yo vai pratiçrutam åte na cikérñad anyad
ätmänam aìga manasä haraye ’bhimene
SYNONYMS
na—never; arthaù—of any value in comparison with; baleù—of strength;
ayam—this; urukrama-päda-çaucam—the water washed from the feet of the
personality of Godhead; äpaù—water; çikhä-dhåtavataù—of one who has kept
it on his head; vibudha-adhipatyam—supremacy over the kingdom of the
demigods; yaù—one who; vai—certainly; pratiçrutam—what was duly
promised; åte na—besides that; cikérñat—tried for; anyat—anything else;
ätmänam—even his personal body; aìga—O Närada; manasä—within his
mind; haraye—unto the Supreme Lord; abhimene—dedicated.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja, who put on his head the water washed from the lotus feet of
the Lord, did not think of anything besides his promise, in spite of being
forbidden by his spiritual master. The king dedicated his own personal body to
fulfill the measurement of the Lord’s third step. For such a personality, even
the kingdom of heaven, which he conquered by his strength, was of no value.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Bali Mahäräja, by gaining the transcendental favor of the Lord in exchange
for his great material sacrifice, was able to have a place in Vaikuëöhaloka with
equal or greater facilities of eternal enjoyment; therefore he was not at all the
loser by sacrificing the kingdom of heaven, which he had possessed by his
material strength. In other words, when the Lord snatches away one’s
hard-earned material possessions and favors one with His personal
transcendental service for eternal life, bliss and knowledge, such taking away
by the Lord should be considered a special favor upon such a pure devotee.
Material possessions, however alluring they may be, cannot be permanent
possessions. Therefore one has to voluntarily give up such possessions, or one
has to leave such possessions at the time of quitting this material body. The
sane man knows that all material possessions are temporary and that the best
use of such possessions is to engage them in the service of the Lord so that the
Lord may be pleased with him and award him a permanent place in His paraà
dhäma.
In the Bhagavad-gétä (15.5–6), the paraà dhäma of the Lord is described as
follows:
nirmäna-mohä jita-saìga-doñä
adhyätma-nityä vinivåtta-kämäù
dvandvair vimuktäù sukha-duùkha-saàjïair
gacchanty amüòhäù padam avyayaà tat
na tad bhäsayate süryo
na çaçäìko na pävakaù
yad gatvä na nivartante
tad dhäma paramaà mama
One who possesses more in this material world, in the shape of houses, land,
children, society, friendship and wealth, possesses these things only for the
time being. One cannot possess all this illusory paraphernalia, created by mäyä,
permanently. Such a possessor is more illusioned in the matter of his
self-realization; therefore one should possess less or nothing, so that one may
be free from artificial prestige. We are contaminated in the material world by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
association with the three modes of material nature. Therefore, the more one
spiritually advances by devotional service to the Lord, in exchange for his
temporary possessions, the more one is freed from the attachment of material
illusion. To achieve this stage of life one must be firmly convinced about
spiritual existence and its permanent effects. To know exactly the permanency
of spiritual existence, one must voluntarily practice possessing less or only the
minimum to maintain one’s material existence without difficulty. One should
not create artificial needs. That will help one be satisfied with the minimum.
Artificial needs of life are activities of the senses. The modern advancement of
civilization is based on these activities of the senses, or, in other words, it is a
civilization of sense gratification. Perfect civilization is the civilization of ätmä,
or the soul proper. The civilized man of sense gratification is on an equal level
with animals because animals cannot go beyond the activities of the senses.
Above the senses is the mind. The civilization of mental speculation is also not
the perfect stage of life because above the mind is the intelligence, and the
Bhagavad-gétä gives us information of the intellectual civilization. The Vedic
literatures give different directions for the human civilization, including the
civilization of the senses, of the mind, of the intelligence, and of the soul
proper. The Bhagavad-gétä primarily deals with the intelligence of man, leading
one to the progressive path of civilization of the spirit soul. And
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the complete human civilization dealing with the
subject matter of the soul proper. As soon as a man is raised to the status of the
civilization of the soul, he is fit to be promoted to the kingdom of God, which
is described in the Bhagavad-gétä as per the above verses.
The primary information of the kingdom of God informs us that there is no
need of sun, moon or electricity, which are all necessary in this material world
of darkness. And the secondary information of the kingdom of God explains
that anyone able to reach that kingdom by adoption of the civilization of the
soul proper, or, in other words, by the method of bhakti-yoga, attains the
highest perfection of life. One is then situated in the permanent existence of
the soul, with full knowledge of transcendental loving service for the Lord.
Bali Mahäräja accepted this civilization of the soul in exchange for his great
material possessions and thus became fit for promotion to the kingdom of God.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The kingdom of heaven, which he achieved by dint of his material power, was
considered most insignificant in comparison with the kingdom of God.
Those who have attained the comforts of a material civilization made for
sense gratification should try to attain the kingdom of God by following in the
footsteps of Bali Mahäräja, who exchanged his acquired material strength,
adopting the process of bhakti-yoga as recommended in the Bhagavad-gétä and
further explained in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 19
Tau>Ya& c Naard >a*Xa& >aGavaNa( ivv*Ö‚
>aaveNa SaaDauPairTauí ovac YaaeGaMa( )
jaNa& c >aaGavTaMaaTMaSaTatvdqPa&
YaÜaSaudevXar<aa ivdurÅSaEv )) 19 ))
tubhyaà ca närada bhåçaà bhagavän vivåddhabhävena
sädhu parituñöa uväca yogam
jïänaà ca bhägavatam ätma-satattva-dépaà
yad väsudeva-çaraëä vidur aïjasaiva
SYNONYMS
tubhyam—unto you; ca—also; närada—O Närada; bhåçam—very nicely;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; vivåddha—developed; bhävena—by
transcendental love; sädhu—your goodness; parituñöaù—being satisfied;
uväca—described; yogam—service; jïänam—knowledge; ca—also;
bhägavatam—the science of God and His devotional service; ätma—the self;
sa-tattva—with all details; dépam—just like the light in the darkness;
yat—that which; väsudeva-çaraëäù—those who are souls surrendered unto
Lord Väsudeva; viduù—know them; aïjasä—perfectly well; eva—as it is.
TRANSLATION
O Närada, you were taught about the science of God and His transcendental
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
loving service by the Personality of Godhead in His incarnation of
Haàsävatära. He was very much pleased with you, due to your intense
proportion of devotional service. He also explained unto you, lucidly, the full
science of devotional service, which is especially understandable by persons who
are souls surrendered unto Lord Väsudeva, the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The devotee and devotional service are two correlative terms. Unless one is
inclined to be a devotee of the Lord, he cannot enter into the intricacies of
devotional service. Lord Çré Kåñëa wanted to explain the Bhagavad-gétä, which
is the science of devotional service, unto Çré Arjuna because Arjuna was not
only His friend but a great devotee as well. The whole process is that all living
entities, being constitutionally parts and parcels of the supreme living being,
the Absolute Personality of Godhead, have proportionately minute
independence of action also. So the preliminary qualification for entering into
the devotional service of the Lord is that one become a willing cooperator, and
as such one should voluntarily cooperate with persons who are already engaged
in the transcendental devotional service of the Lord. By cooperating with such
persons, the prospective candidate will gradually learn the techniques of
devotional service, and with the progress of such learning one becomes
proportionately free from the contamination of material association. Such a
purificatory process will establish the prospective candidate in firm faith and
gradually elevate him to the stage of transcendental taste for such devotional
service. Thus he acquires a genuine attachment for the devotional service of
the Lord, and his conviction carries him on to the point of ecstasy, just prior to
the stage of transcendental love.
Such knowledge of devotional service may be divided into two sections,
namely preliminary knowledge of the nature of devotional service and the
secondary knowledge of its execution. Bhägavatam is in relation with the
Personality of Godhead, His beauty, fame, opulence, dignity, attraction and
transcendental qualities which attract one towards Him for exchanges of love
and affection. There is a natural affinity of the living entity for the loving
service of the Lord. This affinity becomes artificially covered by the influence
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of material association, and Çrémad-Bhägavatam helps one very genuinely
remove that artificial covering. Therefore it is particularly mentioned herein
that Çrémad-Bhägavatam acts like the lamp of transcendental knowledge.
These two sections of transcendental knowledge in devotional service become
revealed to a person who is a soul surrendered unto Väsudeva; as it is said in
the Bhagavad-gétä (7.19), such a great soul, fully surrendered unto the lotus feet
of Väsudeva, is very, very rare.
TEXT 20
c§&- c id+vivhTa& dXaSau SvTaeJaae
MaNvNTarezu MaNauv&XaDarae ib>aiTaR )
duíezu raJaSau dMa& VYadDaaTa( Svk-IiTa|
SaTYae i}aPa*ï oXaTaq& Pa[QaYa&êir}aE" )) 20 ))
cakraà ca dikñv avihataà daçasu sva-tejo
manvantareñu manu-vaàça-dharo bibharti
duñöeñu räjasu damaà vyadadhät sva-kértià
satye tri-påñöha uçatéà prathayaàç caritraiù
SYNONYMS
cakram—the Sudarçana wheel of the Lord; ca—as well as; dikñu—in all
directions; avihatam—without being deterred; daçasu—ten sides;
sva-tejaù—personal strength; manvantareñu—in different incarnations of
Manu; manu-vaàça-dharaù—as the descendant of the Manu dynasty;
bibharti—rules over; duñöeñu—unto the miscreants; räjasu—upon the kings of
that type; damam—subjection; vyadadhät—performed; sva-kértim—personal
glories; satye—in the Satyaloka planet; tri-påñöhe—the three planetary systems;
uçatém—glorious; prathayan—established; caritraiù—characteristics.
TRANSLATION
As the incarnation of Manu, the Lord became the descendant of the Manu
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
dynasty and ruled over the miscreant kingly order, subduing them by His
powerful wheel weapon. Undeterred in all circumstances, His rule was
characterized by His glorious fame, which spread over the three lokas, and
above them to the planetary system of Satyaloka, the topmost in the universe.
PURPORT
We have already discussed the incarnations of Manu in the First Canto. In
one day of Brahmä there are fourteen Manus, changing one after another. In
that way there are 420 Manus in a month of Brahmä and 5,040 Manus in one
year of Brahmä. Brahmä lives for one hundred years according to his
calculation, and as such there are 504,000 Manus in the jurisdiction of one
Brahmä. There are innumerable Brahmäs, and all of them live only during one
breathing period of Mahä-Viñëu. So we can just imagine how the incarnations
of the Supreme Lord work all over the material worlds, which comprehend
only one-fourth of the total energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The manvantara incarnation chastises all the miscreant rulers of different
planets with as much power as that of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who punishes the miscreants with His wheel weapon. The manvantara
incarnations disseminate the transcendental glories of the Lord.
TEXT 21
DaNvNTairê >aGavaNa( SvYaMaev k-IiTaR‚
NaaRMana Na*<aa& PauååJaa& åJa Aaéu hiNTa )
Yaje c >aaGaMaMa*TaaYaurvavåNDa
AaYauZYavedMaNauXaaSTYavTaqYaR l/aeke- )) 21 ))
dhanvantariç ca bhagavän svayam eva kértir
nämnä nåëäà puru-rujäà ruja äçu hanti
yajïe ca bhägam amåtäyur-avävarundha
äyuñya-vedam anuçästy avatérya loke
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
dhanvantariù—the incarnation of God named Dhanvantari; ca—and;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; svayam eva—personally Himself;
kértiù—fame personified; nämnä—by the name; nåëäm puru-rujäm—of the
diseased living entities; rujaù—diseases; äçu—very soon; hanti—cures;
yajïe—in the sacrifice; ca—also; bhägam—share; amåta—nectar;
äyuù—duration of life; ava—from; avarundhe—obtains; äyuñya—of duration
of life; vedam—knowledge; anuçästi—directs; avatérya—incarnating; loke—in
the universe.
TRANSLATION
The Lord in His incarnation of Dhanvantari very quickly cures the diseases
of the ever-diseased living entities simply by his fame personified, and only
because of him do the demigods achieve long lives. Thus the Personality of
Godhead becomes ever glorified. He also exacted a share from the sacrifices, and
it is he only who inaugurated the medical science or the knowledge of medicine
in the universe.
PURPORT
As stated in the beginning of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, everything emanates
from the ultimate source of the Personality of Godhead; it is therefore
understood in this verse that medical science or knowledge in medicine was
also inaugurated by the Personality of Godhead in His incarnation
Dhanvantari, and thus the knowledge is recorded in the Vedas. The Vedas are
the source of all knowledge, and thus knowledge in medical science is also
there for the perfect cure of the diseases of the living entity. The embodied
living entity is diseased by the very construction of his body. The body is the
symbol of diseases. The disease may differ from one variety to another, but
disease must be there just as there is birth and death for everyone. So, by the
grace of the Personality of Godhead, not only are diseases of the body and
mind cured, but also the soul is relieved of the constant repetition of birth and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
death. The name of the Lord is also called bhavauñadhi, or the source of curing
the disease of material existence.
TEXT 22
+a}a& +aYaaYa iviDaNaaePa>a*Ta& MahaTMaa
b]øDa]uGauiJ‡TaPaQa& Nark-aiTaRil/PSau )
oÖNTYaSaavviNak-<$=k-MauGa]vqYaR‚
iS}a"Saák*-Tv oåDaarParìDaeNa )) 22 ))
kñatraà kñayäya vidhinopabhåtaà mahätmä
brahma-dhrug ujjhita-pathaà narakärti-lipsu
uddhanty asäv avanikaëöakam ugra-véryas
triù-sapta-kåtva urudhära-paraçvadhena
SYNONYMS
kñatram—the royal order; kñayäya—for the sake of diminishing; vidhinä—by
destination; upabhåtam—increased in proportion; mahätmä—the Lord in the
form of the great sage Paraçuräma; brahma-dhruk—the ultimate truth in
Brahman; ujjhita-patham—those who have given up the path of the Absolute
Truth; naraka-ärti-lipsu—desirous to suffer pain in hell; uddhanti—exacts;
asau—all those; avanikaëöakam—thorns of the world; ugra-véryaù—awfully
powerful; triù-sapta—thrice seven times; kåtvaù—performed; urudhära—very
sharp; paraçvadhena—by the great chopper.
TRANSLATION
When the ruling administrators, who are known as the kñatriyas, turned
astray from the path of the Absolute Truth, being desirous to suffer in hell, the
Lord, in His incarnation as the sage Paraçuräma, uprooted those unwanted
kings, who appeared as the thorns of the earth. Thus He thrice seven times
uprooted the kñatriyas with His keenly sharpened chopper.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The kñatriyas, or the ruling administrators of any part of the universe,
either on this planet or on other planets, are factually the representatives of
the Almighty Personality of Godhead, and they are meant to lead the subjects
towards the path of God realization. Every state and its administrators,
regardless of the nature of the administration—monarchy or democracy,
oligarchy or dictatorship or autocracy—have the prime responsibility to lead
the citizens toward God realization. This is essential for all human beings, and
it is the duty of the father, spiritual master, and ultimately the state to take up
the responsibility of leading the citizens towards this end. The whole creation
of material existence is made for this purpose, just to give a chance to the
fallen souls who rebelled against the will of the Supreme Father and thus
became conditioned by material nature. The force of material nature gradually
leads one to a hellish condition of perpetual pains and miseries. Those going
against the prescribed rules and regulations of conditional life are called
brahmojjhita-pathas, or persons going against the path of the Absolute Truth,
and they are liable to be punished. Lord Paraçuräma, the incarnation of the
Personality of Godhead, appeared in such a state of worldly affairs and killed
all the miscreant kings twenty-one times. Many kñatriya kings fled from India
to other parts of the world at that time, and according to the authority of the
Mahäbhärata, the kings of Egypt originally migrated from India because of
Paraçuräma’s program of chastisement. The kings or administrators are
similarly chastised in all circumstances whenever they become godless and
plan a godless civilization. That is the order of the Almighty.
TEXT 23
ASMaTPa[SaadSauMau%" k-l/Yaa k-le/Xa
w+vaku-v&Xa AvTaqYaR GauraeiNaRdeXae )
iTaïNa( vNa& SadiYaTaaNauJa AaivveXa
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
YaiSMaNa( ivåDYa dXak-NDar AaiTaRMaaC^RTa( )) 23 ))
asmat-prasäda-sumukhaù kalayä kaleça
ikñväku-vaàça avatérya guror nideçe
tiñöhan vanaà sa-dayitänuja äviveça
yasmin virudhya daça-kandhara ärtim ärcchat
SYNONYMS
asmat—unto us, beginning from Brahmä down to the insignificant ant;
prasäda—causeless mercy; sumukhaù—so inclined; kalayä—with His plenary
extensions; kaleçaù—the Lord of all potencies; ikñväku—Mahäräja Ikñväku, in
the dynasty of the sun; vaàçe—family; avatérya—by descending in; guroù—of
the father or spiritual master; nideçe—under the order of; tiñöhan—being
situated in; vanam—in the forest; sa-dayitä-anujaù—along with His wife and
younger brother; äviveça—entered; yasmin—unto whom; virudhya—being
rebellious; daça-kandharaù—Rävaëa, who had ten heads; ärtim—great distress;
ärcchat—achieved.
TRANSLATION
Due to His causeless mercy upon all living entities within the universe, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, along with His plenary extensions, appeared
in the family of Mahäräja Ikñväku as the Lord of His internal potency, Sétä.
Under the order of His father, Mahäräja Daçaratha, He entered the forest and
lived there for considerable years with His wife and younger brother. Rävaëa,
who was very materially powerful, with ten heads on his shoulders, committed a
great offense against Him and was thus ultimately vanquished.
PURPORT
Lord Räma is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His brothers,
namely Bharata, Lakñmaëa and Çatrughna, are His plenary expansions. All
four brothers are viñëu-tattva and were never ordinary human beings. There
are many unscrupulous and ignorant commentators on Rämäyaëa who present
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the younger brothers of Lord Rämacandra as ordinary living entities. But here
in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the most authentic scripture on the science of
Godhead, it is clearly stated that His brothers were His plenary expansions.
Originally Lord Rämacandra is the incarnation of Väsudeva, Lakñmaëa is the
incarnation of Saìkarñaëa, Bharata is the incarnation of Pradyumna, and
Çatrughna is the incarnation of Aniruddha, expansions of the Personality of
Godhead. Lakñméjé Sétä is the internal potency of the Lord and is neither an
ordinary woman nor the external potency incarnation of Durgä. Durgä is the
external potency of the Lord, and she is associated with Lord Çiva.
As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (4.7), the Lord appears when there are
discrepancies in the discharge of factual religion. Lord Rämacandra also
appeared under the same circumstances, accompanied by His brothers, who are
expansions of the Lord’s internal potency, and by Lakñméjé Sétädevé.
Lord Rämacandra was ordered by His father, Mahäräja Daçaratha, to leave
home for the forest under awkward circumstances, and the Lord, as the ideal
son of His father, carried out the order, even on the occasion of His being
declared the King of Ayodhyä. One of His younger brothers, Lakñmaëajé,
desired to go with Him, and so also His eternal wife, Sétäjé, desired to go with
Him. The Lord agreed to both of them, and all together they entered the
Daëòakäraëya Forest, to live there for fourteen years. During their stay in the
forest, there was some quarrel between Rämacandra and Rävaëa, and the
latter kidnapped the Lord’s wife, Sétä. The quarrel ended in the vanquishing of
the greatly powerful Rävaëa, along with all his kingdom and family.
Sétä is Lakñméjé, or the goddess of fortune, but she is never to be enjoyed by
any living being. She is meant for being worshiped by the living being along
with her husband, Çré Rämacandra. A materialistic man like Rävaëa does not
understand this great truth, but on the contrary he wants to snatch Sétädevé
from the custody of Räma and thus incurs great miseries. The materialists, who
are after opulence and material prosperity, may take lessons from the
Rämäyaëa that the policy of exploiting the nature of the Lord without
acknowledging the supremacy of the Supreme Lord is the policy of Rävaëa.
Rävaëa was very advanced materially, so much so that he turned his kingdom,
Laìkä, into pure gold, or full material wealth. But because he did not recognize
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the supremacy of Lord Rämacandra and defied Him by stealing His wife, Sétä,
Rävaëa was killed, and all his opulence and power were destroyed.
Lord Rämacandra is a full incarnation with six opulences in full, and He is
therefore mentioned in this verse as kaleçaù, or master of all opulence.
TEXT 24
YaSMaa AdadudiDaæ!>aYaa®vePaae
MaaGa| SaPaÛirPaur& hrvd( idDa+aae" )
dUre SauôNMaiQaTaraezSauXaae<ad*íya
TaaTaPYaMaaNaMak-raerGaNa§-c§-" )) 24 ))
yasmä adäd udadhir üòha-bhayäìga-vepo
märgaà sapady ari-puraà haravad didhakñoù
düre suhån-mathita-roña-suçoëa-dåñöyä
tätapyamäna-makaroraga-nakra-cakraù
SYNONYMS
yasmai—unto whom; adät—gave; udadhiù—the great Indian Ocean;
üòha-bhaya—affected by fear; aìga-vepaù—bodily trembling; märgam—way;
sapadi—quickly; ari-puram—the city of the enemy; hara-vat—like that of
Hara (Mahädeva); didhakñoù—desiring to burn to ashes; düre—at a long
distance; su-håt—intimate friend; mathita—being aggrieved by; roña—in
anger; su-çoëa—red-hot; dåñöyä—by such a glance; tätapyamäna—burning in
heat; makara—sharks; uraga—snakes; nakra—crocodiles; cakraù—circle.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead Rämacandra, being aggrieved for His distant
intimate friend [Sétä], glanced over the city of the enemy Rävaëa with red-hot
eyes like those of Hara [who wanted to burn the kingdom of heaven]. The great
ocean, trembling in fear, gave Him His way because its family members, the
aquatics like the sharks, snakes and crocodiles, were being burnt by the heat of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the angry red-hot eyes of the Lord.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead has every sentiment of a sentient being, like all
other living beings, because He is the chief and original living entity, the
supreme source of all other living beings. He is the nitya, or the chief eternal
amongst all other eternals. He is the chief one, and all others are the
dependent many. The many eternals are supported by the one eternal, and
thus both the eternals are qualitatively one. Due to such oneness, both the
eternals constitutionally have a complete range of sentiments, but the
difference is that the sentiments of the chief eternal are different in quantity
from the sentiments of the dependent eternals. When Rämacandra was angry
and showed His red-hot eyes, the whole ocean became heated with that
energy, so much so that the aquatics within the great ocean felt the heat, and
the personified ocean trembled in fear and offered the Lord an easy path for
reaching the enemy’s city. The impersonalists will see havoc in this red-hot
sentiment of the Lord because they want to see negation in perfection.
Because the Lord is absolute, the impersonalists imagine that in the Absolute
the sentiment of anger, which resembles mundane sentiments, must be
conspicuous by absence. Due to a poor fund of knowledge, they do not realize
that the sentiment of the Absolute Person is transcendental to all mundane
concepts of quality and quantity. Had Lord Rämacandra’s sentiment been of
mundane origin, how could it disturb the whole ocean and its inhabitants?
Can any mundane red-hot eye generate heat in the great ocean? These are
factors to be distinguished in terms of the personal and impersonal
conceptions of the Absolute Truth. As it is said in the beginning of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the Absolute Truth is the source of everything, so the
Absolute Person cannot be devoid of the sentiments that are reflected in the
temporary mundane world. Rather, the different sentiments found in the
Absolute, either in anger or in mercy, have the same qualitative influence, or,
in other words, there is no mundane difference of value because these
sentiments are all on the absolute plane. Such sentiments are definitely not
absent in the Absolute, as the impersonalists think, making their mundane
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
estimation of the transcendental world.
TEXT 25
v+a"SQal/SPaXaRåGanMaheNd]vah‚
dNTaEivR@iMbTak-ku-BJauz O!haSaMa( )
SaÛae_Saui>a" Sah ivNaeZYaiTa darhTauR‚
ivRSfU-iJaRTaEDaRNauz oÀrTaae_iDaSaENYae )) 25 ))
vakñaù-sthala-sparça-rugna-mahendra-vähadantair
viòambita-kakubjuña üòha-häsam
sadyo ’subhiù saha vineñyati dära-hartur
visphürjitair dhanuña uccarato ’dhisainye
SYNONYMS
vakñaù-sthala—chest; sparça—touched by; rugna—broken; mahä-indra—the
King of heaven; väha—the conveyor; dantaiù—by the trunk;
viòambita—illuminated; kakup-juñaù—all directions thus being served;
üòha-häsam—overtaken by laughter; sadyaù—within no time; asubhiù—by
the life; saha—along with; vineñyati—was killed; dära-hartuù—of the one who
kidnapped the wife; visphürjitaiù—by the tingling of the bow; dhanuñaù—bow;
uccarataù—strolling fast; adhisainye—in the midst of the fighting soldiers of
both sides.
TRANSLATION
When Rävaëa was engaged in the battle, the trunk of the elephant which
carried the King of heaven, Indra, broke in pieces, having collided with the
chest of Rävaëa, and the scattered broken parts illuminated all directions.
Rävaëa therefore felt proud of his prowess and began to loiter in the midst of
the fighting soldiers, thinking himself the conqueror of all directions. But his
laughter, overtaken by joy, along with his very air of life, suddenly ceased with
the tingling sound of the bow of Rämacandra, the Personality of Godhead.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
However powerful a living being may be, when he is condemned by God no
one can save him, and, similarly, however weak one may be, if he is protected
by the Lord no one can annihilate him.
TEXT 26
>aUMae" SaureTarvæQaivMaidRTaaYaa"
©e-XaVYaYaaYa k-l/Yaa iSaTak*-Z<ake-Xa" )
JaaTa" k-irZYaiTa JaNaaNauPal/+YaMaaGaR"
k-MaaRi<a caTMaMaihMaaePaiNabNDaNaaiNa )) 26 ))
bhümeù suretara-varütha-vimarditäyäù
kleça-vyayäya kalayä sita-kåñëa-keçaù
jätaù kariñyati janänupalakñya-märgaù
karmäëi cätma-mahimopanibandhanäni
SYNONYMS
bhümeù—of the entire world; sura-itara—other than godly persons;
varütha—soldiers; vimarditäyäù—distressed by the burden; kleça—miseries;
vyayäya—for the matter of diminishing; kalayä—along with His plenary
expansion; sita-kåñëa—not only beautiful but also black; keçaù—with such
hairs; jätaù—having appeared; kariñyati—would act; jana—people in general;
anupalakñya—rarely to be seen; märgaù—path; karmäëi—activities; ca—also;
ätma-mahimä—glories of the Lord Himself; upanibandhanäni—in relation to.
TRANSLATION
When the world is overburdened by the fighting strength of kings who have
no faith in God, the Lord, just to diminish the distress of the world, descends
with His plenary portion. The Lord comes in His original form, with beautiful
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
black hair. And just to expand His transcendental glories, He acts
extraordinarily. No one can properly estimate how great He is.
PURPORT
This verse is especially describing the appearance of Lord Kåñëa and His
immediate expansion, Lord Baladeva. Both Lord Kåñëa and Lord Baladeva are
one Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is omnipotent, and He
expands Himself in innumerable forms and energies, and the whole unit is
known as the one Supreme Brahman. Such extensions of the Lord are divided
into two divisions, namely personal and differential. The personal expansions
are called the viñëu-tattvas, and the differential expansions are called the
jéva-tattvas. And in such expansional activity, Lord Baladeva is the first
personal expansion of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
In the Viñëu Puräëa, as well as in the Mahäbhärata, both Kåñëa and
Baladeva are mentioned as having beautiful black hair, even in Their
advanced age. The Lord is called anupalakñya-märgaù or, in still more
technical Vedic terms, aväì-manasä gocaraù: one who is never to be seen or
realized by the limited sense perception of the people in general. In the
Bhagavad-gétä (7.25) it is said by the Lord, nähaà prakäçaù sarvasya
yogamäyä-samävåtaù. In other words, He reserves the right of not being
exposed to anyone and everyone. Only the bona fide devotees can know Him
by His specific symptoms, and out of many, many such symptoms, one symptom
is mentioned here in this verse, that the Lord is sita-kåñëa-keçaù, or one who is
observed always with beautiful black hair. Both Lord Kåñëa and Lord Baladeva
have such hair on Their heads, and thus even in advanced age They appeared
like young boys sixteen years old. That is the particular symptom of the
Personality of Godhead. In the Brahma-saàhitä it is stated that although He is
the oldest personality among all living entities, He always looks like a new,
youthful boy. That is the characteristic of a spiritual body. The material body
is symptomized by birth, death, old age and diseases, but the spiritual body is
conspicuous by the absence of those symptoms. Living entities who reside in
the Vaikuëöhalokas in eternal life and bliss have the same type of spiritual
body, without being affected by any signs of old age. It is described in the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Bhägavatam (Canto Six) that the party of Viñëudütas who came to deliver
Ajämila from the clutches of the party of Yamaräja appeared like youthful
boys, corroborating the description in this verse. It is ascertained thus that the
spiritual bodies in the Vaikuëöhalokas, either of the Lord or of the other
inhabitants, are completely distinct from the material bodies of this world.
Therefore, when the Lord descends from that world to this world, He descends
in His spiritual body of ätma-mäyä, or internal potency, without any touch of
the bahiraìgä-mäyä, or external, material energy. The allegation that the
impersonal Brahman appears in this material world by accepting a material
body is quite absurd. Therefore the Lord, when He comes here, has not a
material body, but a spiritual body. The impersonal brahmajyoti is only the
glaring effulgence of the body of the Lord, and there is no difference in quality
between the body of the Lord and the impersonal ray of the Lord, called
brahmajyoti.
Now the question is why the Lord, who is omnipotent, comes here to
diminish the burden created upon the world by the unscrupulous kingly order.
Certainly the Lord does not need to come here personally for such purposes,
but He actually descends to exhibit His transcendental activities in order to
encourage His pure devotees, who want to enjoy life by chanting the glories of
the Lord. In the Bhagavad-gétä (9.13–14) it is stated that the mahätmäs, great
devotees of the Lord, take pleasure in chanting of the activities of the Lord.
All Vedic literatures are meant for turning one’s attention towards the Lord
and His transcendental activities. Thus the activities of the Lord, in His
dealings with worldly people, create a subject matter for discussion by His pure
devotees.
TEXT 27
Taaeke-Na Jaqvhr<a& YadulU/ik-k-aYaa‚
S}aEMaaiSak-SYa c Pada Xak-$=ae_Pav*ta" )
Yad( ir®TaaNTarGaTaeNa idivSPa*XaaevaR
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
oNMaUl/Na& iTvTarQaaJauRNaYaaeNaR >aaVYaMa( )) 27 ))
tokena jéva-haraëaà yad ulüki-käyäs
trai-mäsikasya ca padä çakaöo ’pavåttaù
yad riìgatäntara-gatena divi-spåçor vä
unmülanaà tv itarathärjunayor na bhävyam
SYNONYMS
tokena—by a child; jéva-haraëam—killing a living being; yat—one which;
ulüki-käyäù—assumed the giant body of a demon; trai-mäsikasya—of one who
is only three months old; ca—also; padä—by the leg; çakaöaù
apavåttaù—turned over the cart; yat—one who; riìgatä—while crawling;
antara-gatena—being overtaken; divi—high in the sky; spåçoù—touching;
vä—either; unmülanam—uprooting; tu—but; itarathä—anyone else than;
arjunayoù—of the two arjuna trees; na bhävyam—was not possible.
TRANSLATION
There is no doubt about Lord Kåñëa’s being the Supreme Lord, otherwise
how was it possible for Him to kill a giant demon like Pütanä when He was just
on the lap of His mother, to overturn a cart with His leg when He was only
three months old, to uproot a pair of arjuna trees, so high that they touched the
sky, when He was only crawling? All these activities are impossible for anyone
other than the Lord Himself.
PURPORT
One cannot manufacture a God by one’s mental speculation or by
numerical votes, as has become a practice for the less intelligent class of men.
God is God eternally, and an ordinary living entity is eternally a part and
parcel of God. God is one without a second, and the ordinary living entities
are many without number. All such living entities are maintained by God
Himself, and that is the verdict of the Vedic literatures. When Kåñëa was on
the lap of His mother, the demon Pütanä appeared before His mother and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
prayed to nurture the child in her lap. Mother Yaçodä agreed, and the child
was transferred onto the lap of Pütanä, who was in the garb of a respectable
lady. Pütanä wanted to kill the child by smearing poison on the nipple of her
breast. But when everything was complete, the Lord sucked her breast along
with her very air of life, and the demon’s gigantic body, said to be as long as six
miles, fell down. But Lord Kåñëa did not need to expand Himself to the length
of the she-demon Pütanä, although He was quite competent to extend Himself
more than six miles long. In His Vämana incarnation He posed Himself as a
dwarf brähmaëa, but when He took possession of His land, promised by Bali
Mahäräja, He expanded His footstep to the top of the universe, extending over
thousands and millions of miles. So it was not very difficult for Kåñëa to
perform a miracle by extending His bodily feature, but He had no desire to do
it because of His deep filial love for His mother, Yaçodä. If Yaçodä had seen
Kåñëa in her lap extending six miles to cope with the she-demon Pütanä, then
the natural filial love of Yaçodä would have been hurt because in that way
Yaçodä would have come to know that her so-called son, Kåñëa, was God
Himself. And with the knowledge of the Godhood of Kåñëa, Yaçodämayé would
have lost the temper of her love for Kåñëa as a natural mother. But as far as
Lord Kåñëa is concerned, He is God always, either as a child on the lap of His
mother, or as the coverer of the universe, Vämanadeva. He does not require to
become God by undergoing severe penances, although some men think of
becoming God in that way. By undergoing severe austerities and penances, one
cannot become one or equal with God, but one can attain most of the godly
qualities. A living being can attain godly qualities to a large extent, but he
cannot become God, whereas Kåñëa, without undergoing any type of penance,
is God always, either in the lap of His mother or growing up or at any stage of
growth.
So at the age of only three months He killed the Çakaöäsura, who had
remained hidden behind a cart in the house of Yaçodämayé. And when He was
crawling and was disturbing His mother from doing household affairs, the
mother tied Him with a grinding pestle, but the naughty child dragged the
pestle up to a pair of very high arjuna trees in the yard of Yaçodämayé, and
when the pestle was stuck between the pair of trees, they fell down with a
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
horrible sound. When Yaçodämayé came to see the happenings, she thought
that her child had been saved from the falling trees by the mercy of the Lord,
without knowing that the Lord Himself, crawling in her yard, had wreaked the
havoc. So that is the way of reciprocation of love affairs between the Lord and
His devotees. Yaçodämayé wanted to have the Lord as her child, and the Lord
played exactly like a child in her lap, but at the same time played the part of
the Almighty Lord whenever it was so required. The beauty of such pastimes
was that the Lord fulfilled everyone’s desire. In the case of felling the gigantic
arjuna trees, the Lord’s mission was to deliver the two sons of Kuvera, who
were condemned to become trees by the curse of Närada, as well as to play like
a crawling child in the yard of Yaçodä, who took transcendental pleasure in
seeing such activities of the Lord in the very yard of her home.
The Lord in any condition is Lord of the universe, and He can act as such
in any form, gigantic or small, as He likes.
TEXT 28
Yad( vE v]Jae v]JaPaéUNa( ivzTaaeYaPaqTaaNa(
Paal/a&STvJaqvYadNauGa]hd*iív*íya )
TaC^uÖYae_iTaivzvqYaRivl/ael/iJaû‚
MauÀa$=iYaZYadurGa& ivhrNa( hidNYaaMa( )) 28 ))
yad vai vraje vraja-paçün viñatoya-pétän
päläàs tv ajévayad anugraha-dåñöi-våñöyä
tac-chuddhaye ’ti-viña-vérya-vilola-jihvam
uccäöayiñyad uragaà viharan hradinyäm
SYNONYMS
yat—one who; vai—certainly; vraje—at Våndävana; vraja-paçün—the animals
thereof; viña-toya—poisoned water; pétän—those who drank; pälän—the
cowherd men; tu—also; ajévayat—brought to life; anugraha-dåñöi—merciful
glance; våñöyä—by the showers of; tat—that; çuddhaye—for purification;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ati—exceedingly; viña-vérya—highly potent poison; vilola—lurking;
jihvam—one who has such a tongue; uccäöayiñyat—severely punished;
uragam—unto the snake; viharan—taking it as a pleasure; hradinyäm—in the
river.
TRANSLATION
Then also when the cowherd boys and their animals drank the poisoned
water of the River Yamunä, and after the Lord [in His childhood] revived them
by His merciful glance, just to purify the water of the River Yamunä He
jumped into it as if playing and chastised the venomous Käliya snake, which
was lurking there, its tongue emitting waves of poison. Who can perform such
herculean tasks but the Supreme Lord ?
TEXT 29
TaTa( k-MaR idVYaiMav YaiàiXa iNa"XaYaaNa&
davaiGanNaa éuicvNae PairdùMaaNae )
oàeZYaiTa v]JaMaTaae_viSaTaaNTak-al&/
Nae}ae iPaDaaPYa Sabl/ae_NaiDaGaMYavqYaR" )) 29 ))
tat karma divyam iva yan niçi niùçayänaà
dävägninä çuci-vane paridahyamäne
unneñyati vrajam ato ’vasitänta-kälaà
netre pidhäpya sabalo ’nadhigamya-véryaù
SYNONYMS
tat—that; karma—activity; divyam—superhuman; iva—like; yat—which;
niçi—at night; niùçayänam—sleeping carefreely; däva-agninä—by the glare of
the forest fire; çuci-vane—in the dry forest; paridahyamäne—being set ablaze;
unneñyati—would deliver; vrajam—all the inhabitants of Vraja; ataù—hence;
avasita—surely; anta-kälam—last moments of life; netre—on the eyes;
pidhäpya—simply by closing; sa-balaù—along with Baladeva;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
anadhigamya—unfathomable; véryaù—prowess.
TRANSLATION
On the very night of the day of the chastisement of the Käliya snake, when
the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi were sleeping carefreely, there was a forest fire
ablaze due to dry leaves, and it appeared that all the inhabitants were sure to
meet their death. But the Lord, along with Balaräma, saved them simply by
closing His eyes. Such are the superhuman activities of the Lord.
PURPORT
Although in this verse the Lord’s activity has been described as
superhuman, it should be noted that the Lord’s activities are always
superhuman, and that distinguishes Him from the ordinary living being.
Uprooting a gigantic banyan or arjuna tree and extinguishing a blazing forest
fire simply by closing one’s eyes are certainly impossible by any kind of human
endeavor. But not only are these activities amazing to hear, but in fact all
other activities of the Lord, whatever He may do, are all superhuman, as
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (4.9). Whoever knows the superhuman
activities of the Lord, due to their very transcendental nature, becomes eligible
to enter the kingdom of Kåñëa, and as such, after quitting this present material
body, the knower of the transcendental activities of the Lord goes back home,
back to Godhead.
TEXT 30
Ga*õqTa Yad( YaduPabNDaMaMauZYa MaaTaa
éuLb& SauTaSYa Na Tau TaTa( TadMauZYa MaaiTa )
YaÂ*M>aTaae_SYa vdNae >auvNaaiNa GaaePaq
Sa&vq+Ya XaiªTaMaNaa" Pa[iTabaeiDaTaaSaqTa( )) 30 ))
gåhëéta yad yad upabandham amuñya mätä
çulbaà sutasya na tu tat tad amuñya mäti
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yaj jåmbhato ’sya vadane bhuvanäni gopé
saàvékñya çaìkita-manäù pratibodhitäsét
SYNONYMS
gåhëéta—by taking up; yat yat—whatsoever; upabandham—ropes for tying;
amuñya—His; mätä—mother; çulbam—ropes; sutasya—of her son; na—not;
tu—however; tat tat—by and by; amuñya—His; mäti—was sufficient;
yat—that which; jåmbhataù—opening the mouth; asya—of Him; vadane—in
the mouth; bhuvanäni—the worlds; gopé—the cowherd woman; saàvékñya—so
seeing it; çaìkita-manäù—doubtful in mind; pratibodhitä—convinced in a
different way; äsét—was so done.
TRANSLATION
When the cowherd woman [Kåñëa’s foster mother, Yaçodä] was trying to tie
the hands of her son with ropes, she found the rope to be always insufficient in
length, and when she finally gave up, Lord Kåñëa, by and by, opened His
mouth, wherein the mother found all the universes situated. Seeing this, she
was doubtful in her mind, but she was convinced in a different manner of the
mystic nature of her son.
PURPORT
One day Lord Kåñëa as the naughty child disturbed His mother Yaçodä, and
she began to tie up the child with ropes just to punish Him. But no matter how
much rope she used, she found it always insufficient. Thus she became
fatigued, but in the meantime the Lord opened His mouth, and the
affectionate mother saw within the mouth of her son all the universes situated
together. The mother was astonished, but out of her deep affection for Kåñëa
she thought that the Almighty Godhead Näräyaëa had kindly looked after her
son just to protect Him from all the continuous calamities happening to Him.
Because of her deep affection for Kåñëa, she could never think that her very
son was Näräyaëa, the Personality of Godhead Himself. That is the action of
yogamäyä, the internal potency of the Supreme Lord, which acts to perfect all
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the pastimes of the Lord with His different types of devotees. Who could play
such wonders without being God?
TEXT 31
NaNd& c Maae+YaiTa >aYaad( vå<aSYa PaaXaad(
GaaePaaNa( ible/zu iPaihTaaNa( MaYaSaUNauNaa c )
AöyaPa*Ta& iNaiXa XaYaaNaMaiTaé[Mae<a
l/aek&- ivku-<#=MauPaNaeZYaiTa Gaaeku-l&/ SMa )) 31 ))
nandaà ca mokñyati bhayäd varuëasya päçäd
gopän bileñu pihitän maya-sünunä ca
ahny äpåtaà niçi çayänam atiçrameëa
lokaà vikuëöham upaneñyati gokulaà sma
SYNONYMS
nandam—unto Nanda (the father of Kåñëa); ca—also; mokñyati—saves;
bhayät—from the fear of; varuëasya—of Varuëa, the demigod of water;
päçät—from the clutches of; gopän—the cowherd men; bileñu—in the caves of
the mountain; pihitän—placed; maya-sünunä—by the son of Maya; ca—also;
ahni äpåtam—being very engaged during the daytime; niçi—at night;
çayänam—lying down; atiçrameëa—because of hard labor; lokam—planet;
vikuëöham—the spiritual sky; upaneñyati—He awarded; gokulam—the highest
planet; sma—certainly.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa saved His foster father, Nanda Mahäräja, from the fear of the
demigod Varuëa and released the cowherd boys from the caves of the mountain,
for they were placed there by the son of Maya. Also, to the inhabitants of
Våndävana, who were busy working during daytime and sleeping soundly at
night because of their hard labor in the day, Lord Kåñëa awarded promotion to
the highest planet in the spiritual sky. All these acts are transcendental and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
certainly prove without any doubt His Godhood.
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja, the foster father of Lord Kåñëa, went to take his bath in
the River Yamunä in the dead of night, mistakenly thinking that the night was
already over; thus the demigod Varuëa took him to the Varuëa planet just to
have a look at the Personality of Godhead Lord Kåñëa, who appeared there to
release His father. Actually there was no arrest of Nanda Mahäräja by Varuëa
because the inhabitants of Våndävana were always engaged in thinking of
Kåñëa, in constant meditation on the Personality of Godhead in a particular
form of samadhi, or trance of bhakti-yoga. They had no fear of the miseries of
material existence. In the Bhagavad-gétä it is confirmed that to be in
association with the Supreme Personality of Godhead by full surrender in
transcendental love frees one from the miseries inflicted by the laws of
material nature. Here it is clearly mentioned that the inhabitants of
Våndävana were extensively busy in the hard labor of their day’s work, and
due to the day’s hard labor they were engaged in sound sleep at night. So
practically they had very little time to devote to meditation or to the other
paraphernalia of spiritual activities. But factually they were engaged in the
highest spiritual activities only. Everything done by them was spiritualized
because everything was dovetailed in their relationship with Lord Çré Kåñëa.
The central point of activities was Kåñëa, and as such the so-called activities in
the material world were saturated with spiritual potency. That is the advantage
of the way of bhakti-yoga. One should discharge one’s duty on Lord Kåñëa’s
behalf, and all one’s actions will be saturated with Kåñëa thought, the highest
pattern of trance in spiritual realization.
TEXT 32
GaaePaEMaR%e Pa[iTahTae v]JaivâvaYa
deve_i>avzRiTa PaéUNa( k*-PaYaa irr+au" )
DaTaaeRiC^l/INDa]iMav SaáidNaaiNa Saá‚
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vzaeR MahqDa]MaNagaEk-k-re Sal/Il/Ma( )) 32 ))
gopair makhe pratihate vraja-viplaväya
deve ’bhivarñati paçün kåpayä rirakñuù
dhartocchiléndhram iva sapta-dinäni saptavarño
mahédhram anaghaika-kare salélam
SYNONYMS
gopaiù—by the cowherd men; makhe—in offering a sacrifice to the King of
heaven; pratihate—being hampered; vraja-viplaväya—for devastating the
whole existence of Vrajabhümi, the land of Kåñëa’s pastimes; deve—by the
King of heaven; abhivarñati—having poured down heavy rain; paçün—the
animals; kåpayä—by causeless mercy upon them; rirakñuù—desired to protect
them; dharta—held up; ucchiléndhram—uprooted as an umbrella; iva—exactly
like that; sapta-dinäni—continuously for seven days; sapta-varñaù—although
He was only seven years old; mahédhram—the Govardhana Hill;
anagha—without being tired; eka-kare—in one hand only; salélam—playfully.
TRANSLATION
When the cowherd men of Våndävana, under instruction of Kåñëa, stopped
offering sacrifice to the heavenly King, Indra, the whole tract of land known as
Vraja was threatened with being washed away by constant heavy rains for seven
days. Lord Kåñëa, out of His causeless mercy upon the inhabitants of Vraja,
held up the hill known as Govardhana with one hand only, although He was
only seven years old. He did this to protect the animals from the onslaught of
water.
PURPORT
Children play with an umbrella generally known as a frog’s umbrella, and
Lord Kåñëa, when He was only seven years old, could snatch the great hill
known as the Govardhana Parvata at Våndävana and hold it for seven days
continuously with one hand, just to protect the animals and the inhabitants of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Våndävana from the wrath of Indra, the heavenly King, who had been denied
sacrificial offerings by the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi.
Factually there is no need of offering sacrifices to the demigods for their
services if one is engaged in the service of the Supreme Lord. Sacrifices
recommended in the Vedic literature for satisfaction of the demigods are a sort
of inducement to the sacrificers to realize the existence of higher authorities.
The demigods are engaged by the Lord as controlling deities of material affairs,
and according to the Bhagavad-gétä, when a demigod is worshiped the process
is accepted as the indirect method for worshiping the Supreme Lord. But when
the Supreme Lord is worshiped directly there is no need of worshiping the
demigods or offering them sacrifices as recommended in particular
circumstances. Lord Kåñëa therefore advised the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi
not to offer any sacrifices to the heavenly King Indra. But Indra, not knowing
Lord Kåñëa in Vrajabhümi, was angry at the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi and
tried to avenge the offense. But, competent as the Lord was, He saved the
inhabitants and animals of Vrajabhümi by His personal energy and proved
definitely that anyone directly engaged as a devotee of the Supreme Lord need
not satisfy any other demigods, however great, even to the level of Brahmä, or
Çiva. Thus this incident definitely proved without a doubt that Lord Kåñëa is
the Personality of Godhead and that He was so in all circumstances, as a child
on the lap of His mother, as a boy 7 years old, and as an old man of 125 years of
age. In either case He was never on the level of the ordinary man, and even in
His advanced age He appeared a young boy 16 years old. These are the
particular features of the transcendental body of the Lord.
TEXT 33
§-I@Na( vNae iNaiXa iNaXaak-rriXMaGaaEYaa|
raSaaeNMau%" k-l/PadaYaTaMaUiC^RTaeNa )
oÕqiPaTaSMaråJaa& v]Ja>a*ÜDaUNaa&
hTauRhRirZYaiTa iXarae DaNadaNauGaSYa )) 33 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kréòan vane niçi niçäkara-raçmi-gauryäà
räsonmukhaù kala-padäyata-mürcchitena
uddépita-smara-rujäà vraja-bhåd-vadhünäà
hartur hariñyati çiro dhanadänugasya
SYNONYMS
kréòan—while engaged in His pastimes; vane—in the forest of Våndävana;
niçi—nocturnal; niçäkara—the moon; raçmi-gauryäm—white moonshine;
räsa-unmukhaù—desiring to dance with; kala-padäyata—accompanied by
sweet songs; mürcchitena—and melodious music; uddépita—awakened;
smara-rujäm—sexual desires; vraja-bhåt—the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi;
vadhünäm—of the wives; hartuù—of the kidnappers; hariñyati—will vanquish;
çiraù—the head; dhanada-anugasya—of the follower of the rich Kuvera.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord was engaged in His pastimes of the räsa dance in the forest
of Våndävana, enlivening the sexual desires of the wives of the inhabitants of
Våndävana by sweet and melodious songs, a demon of the name Çaìkhacüòa, a
rich follower of the treasurer of heaven [Kuvera], kidnapped the damsels, and
the Lord severed his head from his trunk.
PURPORT
We should carefully note that the statements described herein are the
statements of Brahmäjé to Närada, and he was speaking to Närada of events
that would happen in the future, during the advent of Lord Kåñëa. The
pastimes of the Lord are known to the experts who are able to see past, present
and future, and Brahmäjé, being one of them, foretold what would happen in
the future. The killing of Çaìkhacüòa by the Lord is a more recent incident,
after the räsa-lélä, and not exactly a simultaneous affair. In the previous verses
we have seen also that the Lord’s engagement in the affairs of the forest fire
was described along with His pastimes of punishing the Käliya snake, and
similarly the pastimes of the räsa dance and the killing of Çaìkhacüòa are also
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
described herein. The adjustment is that all these incidents would take place
in the future, after the time when it was being foretold by Brahmäjé to Närada.
The demon Çaìkhacüòa was killed by the Lord during His pastimes at Horikä
in the month of Phälguna, and the same ceremony is still observed in India by
the burning of the effigy of Çaìkhacüòa one day prior to the Lord’s pastimes at
Horikä, generally known as Holi.
Generally the future appearance and the activities of the Lord or His
incarnations are foretold in the scriptures, and thus the pseudoincarnations
are unable to cheat persons who are in knowledge of the events as they are
described in the authoritative scriptures.
TEXTS 34–35
Yae c Pa[l/Mb%rdduRrke-XYairí‚
Maçe>ak&-SaYavNaa" k-iPaPaaE<@\k-aÛa" )
ANYae c XaaLvku-JabLvl/dNTav§-‚
Saáae+aXaMbrivdUrQaåiKMaMau:Yaa" )) 34 ))
Yae va Ma*Dae SaiMaiTaXaail/Na AatacaPaa"
k-aMbaeJaMaTSYaku-åSa*ÅYakE-k-YaaÛa" )
YaaSYaNTYadXaRNaMal&/ bl/PaaQaR>aqMa‚
VYaaJaaûYaeNa hir<aa iNal/Ya& TadqYaMa( )) 35 ))
ye ca pralamba-khara-dardura-keçy-ariñöamallebha-
kaàsa-yavanäù kapi-pauëòrakädyäù
anye ca çälva-kuja-balvala-dantavakrasaptokña-
çambara-vidüratha-rukmi-mukhyäù
ye vä mådhe samiti-çälina ätta-cäpäù
kämboja-matsya-kuru-såïjaya-kaikayädyäù
yäsyanty adarçanam alaà bala-pärtha-bhémavyäjähvayena
hariëä nilayaà tadéyam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
ye—all those; ca—totally; pralamba—the demon named Pralamba;
khara—Dhenukäsura; dardura—Bakäsura; keçé—the Keçé demon; ariñöa—the
demon Ariñöäsura; malla—a wrestler in the court of Kaàsa;
ibha—Kuvalayäpéòa; kaàsa—the King of Mathurä and maternal uncle of
Kåñëa; yavanäù—the kings of Persia and other adjoining places;
kapi—Dvivida; pauëòraka-ädyäù—Pauëòraka and others; anye—others;
ca—as much as; çälva—King Çälva; kuja—Narakäsura; balvala—King Balvala;
dantavakra—the brother of Çiçupäla, a dead rival of Kåñëa’s; saptokña—King
Saptokña; çambara—King Çambara; vidüratha—King Vidüratha;
rukmi-mukhyäù—the brother of Rukmiëé, the first queen of Kåñëa at Dvärakä;
ye—all those; vä—either; mådhe—in the battlefield; samiti-çälinaù—all very
powerful; ätta-cäpäù—well equipped with bows and arrows; kämboja—the
King of Kämboja; matsya—the King of Dvarbhaìga; kuru—the sons of
Dhåtaräñöra; såïjaya—King Såïjaya; kaikaya-ädyäù—the King of Kekaya and
others; yäsyanti—would attain; adarçanam—impersonal merging within the
brahmajyoti; alam—what to speak of; bala—Baladeva, the elder brother of
Kåñëa; pärtha—Arjuna; bhéma—the second Päëòava; vyäja-ähvayena—by the
false names; hariëä—by Lord Hari; nilayam—the abode; tadéyam—of Him.
TRANSLATION
All demonic personalities like Pralamba, Dhenuka, Baka, Keçé, Ariñöa,
Cäëüra, Muñöika, Kuvalayäpéòa elephant, Kaàsa, Yavana, Narakäsura and
Pauëòraka, great marshals like Sälva, Dvivida monkey and Balvala,
Dantavakra, the seven bulls, Çambara, Vidüratha and Rukmé, as also great
warriors like Kämboja, Matsya, Kuru, Såïjaya and Kekaya, would all fight
vigorously, either with the Lord Hari directly or with Him under His names of
Baladeva, Arjuna, Bhéma, etc. And the demons, thus being killed, would attain
either the impersonal brahmajyoti or His personal abode in the Vaikuëöha
planets.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
All manifestations, in both the material and spiritual worlds, are
demonstrations of the different potencies of Lord Kåñëa. The Personality of
Godhead Baladeva is His immediate personal expansion, and Bhéma, Arjuna,
etc., are His personal associates. The Lord would appear (and He does so
whenever He appears) with all His associates and potencies. Therefore the
rebellious souls, like the demons and demoniac men, mentioned by names like
Pralamba, would be killed either by the Lord Himself or by His associates. All
these affairs will be clearly explained in the Tenth Canto. But we should know
well that all the above-mentioned living entities killed would attain salvation
either by being merged in the brahmajyoti of the Lord or being allowed to enter
into the abodes of the Lord called Vaikuëöhas. This has already been explained
by Bhéñmadeva (First Canto). All persons who participated in the Battlefield
of Kurukñetra or otherwise with the Lord or with Baladeva, etc., would benefit
by attaining spiritual existence according to the situation of their minds at the
time of death. Those who recognized the Lord would enter Vaikuëöha, and
those who estimated the Lord as only a powerful being would attain salvation
by merging into the spiritual existence of the impersonal brahmajyoti of the
Lord. But every one of them would get release from material existence. Since
such is the benefit of those who played with the Lord inimically, one can
imagine what would be the position of those who devoutly served the Lord in
transcendental relationship with Him.
TEXT 36
k-ale/Na Maqil/TaiDaYaaMavMa*XYa Na›<aa&
STaaek-aYauza& SviNaGaMaae bTa dUrPaar" )
AaivihRTaSTvNauYauGa& Sa ih SaTYavTYaa&
vedd]uMa& iv$=PaXaae iv>aiJaZYaiTa SMa )) 36 ))
kälena mélita-dhiyäm avamåçya nèëäà
stokäyuñäà sva-nigamo bata düra-päraù
ävirhitas tv anuyugaà sa hi satyavatyäà
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
veda-drumaà viöa-paço vibhajiñyati sma
SYNONYMS
kälena—in course of time; mélita-dhiyäm—of the less intelligent persons;
avamåçya—considering the difficulties; nèëäm—of humanity at large;
stoka-äyuñäm—of the short-living persons; sva-nigamaù—the Vedic literatures
compiled by Him; bata—exactly; düra-päraù—greatly difficult;
ävirhitaù—having appeared as; tu—but; anuyugam—in terms of the age;
saù—He (the Lord); hi—certainly; satyavatyäm—in the womb of Satyavaté;
veda-drumam—the desire tree of the Vedas; viöa-paçaù—by division of
branches; vibhajiñyati—will divide; sma—as it were.
TRANSLATION
The Lord Himself in His incarnation as the son of Satyavaté [Vyäsadeva]
will consider his compilation of the Vedic literature to be very difficult for the
less intelligent persons with short life, and thus He will divide the tree of Vedic
knowledge into different branches, according to the circumstances of the
particular age.
PURPORT
Herein Brahmä mentions the future compilation of Çrémad-Bhägavatam for
the short-lived persons of the Kali age. As explained in the First Canto, the
less intelligent persons of the age of Kali would be not only short-lived, but
also perplexed with so many problems of life due to the awkward situation of
the godless human society. Advancement of material comforts of the body is
activity in the mode of ignorance according to the laws of material nature.
Real advancement of knowledge means progress of knowledge in
self-realization. But in the age of Kali the less intelligent men mistakenly
consider the short lifetime of one hundred years (now factually reduced to
about forty or sixty years) to be all in all. They are less intelligent because they
have no information of the eternity of life; they identify with the temporary
material body existing for forty years and consider it the only basic principle of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
life. Such persons are described as equal to the asses and bulls. But the Lord, as
the compassionate father of all living beings, imparts unto them the vast Vedic
knowledge in short treatises like the Bhagavad-gétä and, for the graduates, the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The Puräëas and the Mahäbhärata are also similarly made
by Vyäsadeva for the different types of men in the modes of material nature.
But none of them are independent of the Vedic principles.
TEXT 37
deviÜza& iNaGaMavTMaRiNa iNaiïTaaNaa&
PaUi>aRMaRYaeNa ivihTaai>ard*XYaTaUi>aR" )
l/aek-aNa( ganTaa& MaiTaivMaaehMaiTaPa[l/ae>a&
vez& ivDaaYa bhu >aaZYaTa AaEPaDaMYaRMa( )) 37 ))
deva-dviñäà nigama-vartmani niñöhitänäà
pürbhir mayena vihitäbhir adåçya-türbhiù
lokän ghnatäà mati-vimoham atipralobhaà
veñaà vidhäya bahu bhäñyata aupadharmyam
SYNONYMS
deva-dviñäm—of those who were envious of the devotees of the Lord;
nigama—the Vedas; vartmani—on the path of; niñöhitänäm—of the well
situated; pürbhiù—by rockets; mayena—made by the great scientist Maya;
vihitäbhiù—made by; adåçya-türbhiù—unseen in the sky; lokän—the different
planets; ghnatäm—of the killers; mati-vimoham—bewilderment of the mind;
atipralobham—very attractive; veñam—dress; vidhäya—having done so; bahu
bhäñyate—will talk very much; aupadharmyam—subreligious principles.
TRANSLATION
When the atheists, after being well versed in the Vedic scientific knowledge,
annihilate inhabitants of different planets, flying unseen in the sky on
well-built rockets prepared by the great scientist Maya, the Lord will bewilder
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
their minds by dressing Himself attractively as Buddha and will preach on
subreligious principles.
PURPORT
This incarnation of Lord Buddha is not the same Buddha incarnation we
have in the present history of mankind. According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the
Buddha incarnation mentioned in this verse appeared in a different Kali age.
In the duration of life of one Manu there are more than seventy-two
Kali-yugas, and in one of them the particular type of Buddha mentioned here
would appear. Lord Buddha incarnates at a time when the people are most
materialistic and preaches common-sense religious principles. Such ahiàsä is
not a religious principle itself, but it is an important quality for persons who
are actually religious. It is a common-sense religion because one is advised to
do no harm to any other animal or living being because such harmful actions
are equally harmful to he who does the harm. But before learning these
principles of nonviolence one has to learn two other principles, namely to be
humble and to be prideless. Unless one is humble and prideless, one cannot be
harmless and nonviolent. And after being nonviolent one has to learn
tolerance and simplicity of living. One must offer respects to the great
religious preachers and spiritual leaders and also train the senses for controlled
action, learning to be unattached to family and home, and enacting devotional
service to the Lord, etc. At the ultimate stage one has to accept the Lord and
become His devotee; otherwise there is no religion. In religious principles there
must be God in the center; otherwise simple moral instructions are merely
subreligious principles, generally known as upadharma, or nearness to religious
principles.
TEXT 38
YaùaRl/YaeZviPa SaTaa& Na hre" k-Qaa" SYau"
Paazi<@Naae iÜJaJaNaa v*zl/a Na*deva" )
Svaha SvDaa vzi@iTa SMa iGarae Na Ya}a
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
XaaSTaa >aivZYaiTa k-le/>aRGavaNa( YauGaaNTae )) 38 ))
yarhy älayeñv api satäà na hareù kathäù syuù
päñaëòino dvija-janä våñalä nådeväù
svähä svadhä vañaò iti sma giro na yatra
çästä bhaviñyati kaler bhagavän yugänte
SYNONYMS
yarhi—when it happens; älayeñu—in the residence of; api—even;
satäm—civilized gentlemen; na—no; hareù—of the Personality of Godhead;
kathäù—topics; syuù—will take place; päñaëòinaù—atheists;
dvija-janäù—persons declaring themselves to be the higher three classes
(brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas); våñaläù—the lower class çüdras;
nå-deväù—ministers of the government; svähä—hymns to perform sacrifices;
svadhä—the ingredients to perform sacrifices; vañaö—the altar of sacrifice;
iti—all these; sma—shall; giraù—words; na—never; yatra—anywhere;
çästä—the chastiser; bhaviñyati—will appear; kaleù—of the Kali age;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; yuga-ante—at the end of.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, at the end of Kali-yuga, when there exist no topics on the
subject of God, even at the residences of so-called saints and respectable
gentlemen of the three higher castes, and when the power of government is
transferred to the hands of ministers elected from the lowborn çüdra class or
those less than them, and when nothing is known of the techniques of sacrifice,
even by word, at that time the Lord will appear as the supreme chastiser.
PURPORT
The symptoms of the worst conditions of the material world, at the last
stage of this age, called Kali-yuga, are stated herein. The sum and substance of
such conditions is godlessness. Even the so-called saints and higher castes of
the social orders, generally known as the dvija janas or the twice-born, will
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
become atheists. As such, all of them will practically forget even the holy name
of the Lord, and what to speak of His activities. The higher castes of society,
namely the intelligent class of men guiding the destinies of the social orders,
the administrative class of men guiding the law and order of the society, and
the productive class of men guiding the economic development of the society,
must all be properly well versed in knowledge of the Supreme Lord, knowing
factually His name, quality, pastimes, entourage, paraphernalia and
personalities. The saints and the higher castes or orders of the society are
judged by their proportion of knowledge in the science of God, or tattva jïäna,
and not by any kind of birthright or bodily designations. Such designations,
without any knowledge of the science of God and practical knowledge of
devotional service, are considered to be all decorations of dead bodies. And
when there is too much inflation of these decorated dead bodies in society,
there develop so many anomalies in the progressive, peaceful life of the human
being. Because of the lack of training or culture in the upper section of the
social orders, they are no more to be designated as the dvija janas, or the
twice-born. The significance of being twice-born has been explained in many
places in these great literatures, and again one is reminded herewith that birth,
executed by the sex life of the father and the mother, is called animal birth.
But such animal birth and progress of life on the animal principles of eating,
sleeping, fearing and mating (without any scientific culture of spiritual life) is
called the çüdra life, or, to be more explicit, the uncultured life of the lower
class of men. It is stated herein that the governmental power of society in the
Kali-yuga will be passed over to the uncultured, godless laborer classes of men,
and thus the nådevas (or the ministers of the government) will be the våñalas,
or the uncultured lower-class men of society. No one can expect any peace and
prosperity in a human society full of uncultured lower classes of men. The
symptoms of such uncultured social animals are already in vogue, and it is the
duty of the leaders of men to take note of it and try to reform the social order
by introducing the principles of twice-born men trained in the science of God
consciousness. This can be done by expanding the culture of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam all over the world. In the degraded condition of human
society, the Lord incarnates as the Kalki avatära and kills all the demonic
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
without mercy.
TEXT 39
SaGaeR TaPaae_hMa*zYaae Nav Yae Pa[JaeXaa"
SQaaNae_Qa DaMaRMa%MaNvMaravNaqXaa" )
ANTae TvDaMaRhrMaNYauvXaaSauraÛa
MaaYaaiv>aUTaYa wMaa" PauåXai¢->aaJa" )) 39 ))
sarge tapo ’ham åñayo nava ye prajeçäù
sthäne ’tha dharma-makha-manv-amarävanéçäù
ante tv adharma-hara-manyu-vaçäsurädyä
mäyä-vibhütaya imäù puru-çakti-bhäjaù
SYNONYMS
sarge—in the beginning of the creation; tapaù—penance; aham—myself;
åñayaù—sages; nava—nine; ye prajeçäù—those who would generate;
sthäne—in the middle while maintaining the creation; atha—certainly;
dharma—religion; makha—Lord Viñëu; manu—the father of mankind;
amara—the demigods deputed to control the affairs of maintenance;
avanéçäù—and the kings of different planets; ante—at the end; tu—but;
adharma—irreligion; hara—Lord Çiva; manyu-vaça—subjected to anger;
asura-ädyäù—atheists, the enemies of the devotees; mäyä—energy;
vibhütayaù—powerful representatives; imäù—all of them;
puru-çakti-bhäjaù—of the supreme powerful Lord.
TRANSLATION
At the beginning of creation there are penance, myself [Brahmä], and the
Prajäpatis, the great sages who generate; then, during the maintenance of the
creation, there are Lord Viñëu, the demigods with controlling powers, and the
kings of different planets. But at the end there is irreligion, and then Lord Çiva
and the atheists full of anger, etc. All of them are different representative
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
manifestations of the energy of the supreme power, the Lord.
PURPORT
The material world is created by the energy of the Lord, which is
manifested in the beginning of the creation by the penance of Brahmäjé, the
first living being in the creation, and then there are the nine Prajäpatis,
known as great sages. In the stage when the creation is maintained, there are
devotional service to Lord Viñëu, or factual religion, the different demigods,
and the kings of different planets who maintain the world. At last, when the
creation is preparing to wind up, there is first the principle of irreligion, then
Lord Çiva along with the atheists, full of anger. But all of them are but
different manifestations of the Supreme Lord. Therefore Brahmä, Viñëu and
Mahädeva (Çiva) are different incarnations of the different modes of material
nature. Viñëu is the Lord of the mode of goodness. Brahmä is the lord of the
mode of passion, and Çiva is the lord of the mode of ignorance. Ultimately, the
material creation is but a temporary manifestation meant to give the chance of
liberation to the conditioned souls, who are entrapped in the material world,
and one who develops the mode of goodness under the protection of Lord
Viñëu has the greatest chance of being liberated by following the Vaiñëava
principles and thus being promoted to the kingdom of God, no more to return
to this miserable material world.
TEXT 40
ivZ<aaeNauR vqYaRGa<aNaa& k-TaMaae_hRTaqh
Ya" PaaiQaRvaNYaiPa k-ivivRMaMae rJaa&iSa )
cSk-M>a Ya" SvrhSaaS%l/Taa i}aPa*ï&
YaSMaaTa( i}aSaaMYaSadNaaduåk-MPaYaaNaMa( )) 40 ))
viñëor nu vérya-gaëanäà katamo ’rhatéha
yaù pärthiväny api kavir vimame rajäàsi
caskambha yaù sva-rahasäskhalatä tri-påñöhaà
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yasmät tri-sämya-sadanäd uru-kampayänam
SYNONYMS
viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; nu—but; vérya—prowess; gaëanäm—in the matter of
accounting; katamaù—who else; arhati—is able to do it; iha—in this world;
yaù—one who; pärthiväni—the atoms; api—also; kaviù—great scientist;
vimame—might have counted; rajäàsi—particles; caskambha—could catch;
yaù—one who; sva-rahasä—by His own leg; askhalatä—without being
hampered; tri-påñöham—the topmost planetary space; yasmät—by which;
tri-sämya—the neutral state of the three modes; sadanät—up to that place;
uru-kampayänam—moving very greatly.
TRANSLATION
Who can describe completely the prowess of Viñëu? Even the scientist, who
might have counted the particles of the atoms of the universe, cannot do so.
Because it is He only who in His form of Trivikrama moved His leg effortlessly
beyond the topmost planet, Satyaloka, up to the neutral state of the three modes
of material nature. And all were moved.
PURPORT
The highest scientific advancement of the material scientists is atomic
energy. But the material scientist is not able to have an estimation of the
particles of atoms contained in the whole universe. But even if one is able to
count such atomic particles or is able to roll up the sky like one’s bedding, even
then one is unable to estimate the extent of the prowess and energy of the
Supreme Lord. He is known as Trivikrama because once, in His incarnation of
Vämana, He expanded His leg beyond the highest planetary system, Satyaloka,
and reached the neutral state of the modes of nature called the covering of the
material world. There are seven layers of material coverings over the material
sky, and the Lord could penetrate even those coverings. With His toe He made
a hole through which the water of the Causal Ocean filters into the material
sky, and the current is known as the sacred Ganges, which purifies the planets
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of the three worlds. In other words, no one is equal to the transcendentally
powerful Viñëu. He is omnipotent, and no one is equal to or greater than Him.
TEXT 41
NaaNTa& ivdaMYahMaMaq MauNaYaae_Ga]JaaSTae
MaaYaabl/SYa PauåzSYa ku-Taae_vra Yae )
GaaYaNa( Gau<aaNa( dXaXaTaaNaNa Aaiddev"
Xaezae_DauNaaiPa SaMavSYaiTa NaaSYa PaarMa( )) 41 ))
näntaà vidämy aham amé munayo ’gra-jäs te
mäyä-balasya puruñasya kuto ’varä ye
gäyan guëän daça-çatänana ädi-devaù
çeño ’dhunäpi samavasyati näsya päram
SYNONYMS
na—never; antam—end; vidämi—do I know; aham—myself; amé—and all
those; munayaù—great sages; agra-jäù—born prior to you; te—you;
mäyä-balasya—of the omnipotent; puruñasya—of the Personality of Godhead;
kutaù—what to speak of others; avaräù—born after us; ye—those; gäyan—by
singing; guëän—the qualities; daça-çata-änanaù—one who has ten hundred
faces; ädi-devaù—the first incarnation of the Lord; çeñaù—known as Çeña;
adhunä—until now; api—even; samavasyati—can achieve; na—not; asya—of
Him; päram—limit.
TRANSLATION
Neither I nor all the sages born before you know fully the omnipotent
Personality of Godhead. So what can others, who are born after us, know about
Him? Even the first incarnation of the Lord, namely Çeña, has not been able to
reach the limit of such knowledge, although He is describing the qualities of the
Lord with ten hundred faces.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The omnipotent Personality of Godhead has primarily three potential
manifestations, namely internal, external, and marginal potencies, with
unlimited expansions of these three energies. As such, the potential
expansions can never be calculated by anyone because even the Personality of
God Himself, as the incarnation of Çeña, cannot estimate the potencies,
although He has been describing them continuously with His one thousand
faces.
TEXT 42
Yaeza& Sa Wz >aGavaNa( dYaYaedNaNTa"
SavaRTMaNaaié[TaPadae Yaid iNaVYaRl/Ik-Ma( )
Tae duSTaraMaiTaTariNTa c devMaaYaa&
NaEza& MaMaahiMaiTa Daq" ìé*Gaal/>a+Yae )) 42 ))
yeñäà sa eña bhagavän dayayed anantaù
sarvätmanäçrita-pado yadi nirvyalékam
te dustaräm atitaranti ca deva-mäyäà
naiñäà mamäham iti dhéù çva-çågäla-bhakñye
SYNONYMS
yeñäm—unto those only; saù—the Lord; eñaù—the; bhagavän—the Personality
of Godhead; dayayet—does bestow His mercy; anantaù—the unlimited
potential; sarva-ätmanä—by all means, without reservation;
äçrita-padaù—surrendered soul; yadi—if such surrender;
nirvyalékam—without pretension; te—those only; dustaräm—insurmountable;
atitaranti—can overcome; ca—and the paraphernalia; deva-mäyäm—diverse
energies of the Lord; na—not; eñäm—of them; mama—mine; aham—myself;
iti—thus; dhéù—conscious; çva—dogs; çågäla—jackals; bhakñye—in the matter
of eating.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
But anyone who is specifically favored by the Supreme Lord, the Personality
of Godhead, due to unalloyed surrender unto the service of the Lord, can
overcome the insurmountable ocean of illusion and can understand the Lord.
But those who are attached to this body, which is meant to be eaten at the end
by dogs and jackals, cannot do so.
PURPORT
The unalloyed devotees of the Lord know the glories of the Lord in the
sense that they can understand how great the Lord is and how great is His
expansion of diverse energy. Those who are attached to the perishable body
can hardly enter into the realm of the science of Godhead. The whole
materialistic world, based on the conception of the material body as the self, is
ignorant of the science of God. The materialist is always busy working for the
welfare of the material body, not only his own but also those of his children,
kinsmen, communitymen, countrymen, etc. The materialists have many
branches of philanthropic and altruistic activities from a political, national
and international angle of vision, but none of the field work can go beyond the
jurisdiction of the misconception of identifying the material body with the
spirit soul. Unless, therefore, one is saved from the wrong conception of the
body and the soul, there is no knowledge of Godhead, and unless there is
knowledge of God, all advancement of material civilization, however dazzling,
should be considered a failure.
TEXTS 43–45
vedahMa® ParMaSYa ih YaaeGaMaaYaa&
YaUYa& >avê >aGavaNaQa dETYavYaR" )
PaÒq MaNaae" Sa c MaNauê TadaTMaJaaê
Pa[acqNabihR‰R>aur® oTa Da]uvê )) 43 ))
w+vaku-rEl/Maucuku-NdivdehGaaiDa‚
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
rgvMbrqzSaGara GaYaNaahuzaÛa" )
MaaNDaa}al/kR-XaTaDaNvNauriNTadeva
devv]Taae bil/rMaUtaRrYaae idl/IPa" )) 44 ))
SaaE>aYauRTaªiXaibdevl/iPaPPal/ad‚
SaarSvTaaeÖvParaXar>aUirze<aa" )
Yae_NYae iv>aqz<ahNaUMaduPaeNd]dta‚
PaaQaaRiíRze<aivduré[uTadevvYaaR" )) 45 ))
vedäham aìga paramasya hi yoga-mäyäà
yüyaà bhavaç ca bhagavän atha daitya-varyaù
patné manoù sa ca manuç ca tad-ätmajäç ca
präcénabarhir åbhur aìga uta dhruvaç ca
ikñväkur aila-mucukunda-videha-gädhiraghv-
ambaréña-sagarä gaya-nähuñädyäù
mändhätr-alarka-çatadhanv-anu-rantidevä
devavrato balir amürttarayo dilépaù
saubhary-utaìka-çibi-devala-pippalädasärasvatoddhava-
paräçara-bhüriñeëäù
ye ’nye vibhéñaëa-hanümad-upendradattapärthärñöiñeëa-
vidura-çrutadeva-varyäù
SYNONYMS
veda—know it; aham—myself; aìga—O Närada; paramasya—of the Supreme;
hi—certainly; yoga-mäyäm—potency; yüyam—yourself; bhavaù—Çiva;
ca—and; bhagavän—the great demigod; atha—as also;
daitya-varyaù—Prahläda Mahäräja, the great devotee of the Lord born in the
family of an atheist; patné—Çatarüpä; manoù—of Manu; saù—he; ca—also;
manuù—Sväyambhuva; ca—and; tat-ätma-jäù ca—and his children like
Priyavrata, Uttänapäda, Devahüti, etc.; präcénabarhiù—Präcénabarhi;
åbhuù—Åbhu; aìgaù—Aìga; uta—even; dhruvaù—Dhruva; ca—and;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ikñväkuù—Ikñväku; aila—Aila; mucukunda—Mucukunda; videha—Mahäräja
Janaka; gädhi—Gädhi; raghu—Raghu; ambaréña—Ambaréña; sagaräù—Sagara;
gaya—Gaya; nähuña—Nähuña; ädyäù—and so on; mändhätå—Mändhätä;
alarka—Alarka; çatadhanu—Çatadhanu; anu—Anu; rantideväù—Rantideva;
devavrataù—Bhéñma; baliù—Bali; amürttarayaù—Amürttaraya;
dilépaù—Dilépa; saubhari—Saubhari; utaìka—Utaìka; çibi—Çibi;
devala—Devala; pippaläda—Pippaläda; särasvata—Särasvata;
uddhava—Uddhava; paräçara—Paräçara; bhüriñeëäù—Bhüriñeëa; ye—those
who; anye—others; vibhéñaëa—Vibhéñaëa; hanümat—Hanumän;
upendra-datta—Çukadeva Gosvämé; pärtha—Arjuna; ärñöiñeëa—Arñöiñeëa;
vidura—Vidura; çrutadeva—Çrutadeva; varyäù—the foremost.
TRANSLATION
O Närada, although the potencies of the Lord are unknowable and
immeasurable, still, because we are all surrendered souls, we know how He acts
through yogamäyä potencies. And, similarly, the potencies of the Lord are also
known to the all-powerful Çiva, the great king of the atheist family, namely
Prahläda Mahäräja, Sväyambhuva Manu, his wife Çatarüpä, his sons and
daughters like Priyavrata, Uttänapäda, Äküti, Devahüti and Prasüti,
Präcénabarhi, Åbhu, Aìga the father of Vena, Mahäräja Dhruva, Ikñväku, Aila,
Mucukunda, Mahäräja Janaka, Gädhi, Raghu, Ambaréña, Sagara, Gaya, Nähuña,
Mändhätä, Alarka, Çatadhanve, Anu, Rantideva, Bhéñma, Bali, Amürttaraya,
Dilépa, Saubhari, Utaìka, Çibi, Devala, Pippaläda, Särasvata, Uddhava,
Paräçara, Bhüriñeëa, Vibhéñaëa, Hanumän, Çukadeva Gosvämé, Arjuna,
Ärñöiñeëa, Vidura, Çrutadeva, etc.
PURPORT
All the great devotees of the Lord, as mentioned above, who flourished in
the past or present, and all the devotees of the Lord who will come in the
future, are aware of the different potencies of the Lord along with the potency
of His name, quality, pastimes, entourage, personality, etc. And how do they
know? Certainly it is not by mental speculation, nor by any attempt by dint of
limited instruments of knowledge. By the limited instruments of knowledge
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
(either the senses or the material instruments like microscopes and telescopes)
one cannot even fully know the Lord’s material potencies, which are
manifested before our eyes. For example there are many millions and billions
of planets far, far beyond the scientist’s calculation. But these are only the
manifestations of the Lord’s material energy. What can the scientist hope to
know of the spiritual potency of the Lord by such material efforts? Mental
speculations, by adding some dozens of “if’s” and “maybe’s,” cannot aid the
advancement of knowledge—on the contrary, such mental speculations will
only end in despair by dismissing the case abruptly and declaring the
nonexistence of God. The sane person, therefore, ceases to speculate on
subjects beyond the jurisdiction of his tiny brain, and as a matter of course he
tries to learn to surrender unto the Supreme Lord, who alone can lead one to
the platform of real knowledge. In the Upaniñads it is clearly said that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead can never be known simply by working very
hard and taxing the good brain, nor can He be known simply by mental
speculation and jugglery of words. The Lord is knowable only by one who is a
surrendered soul. Herein Brahmäjé, the greatest of all material living beings,
acknowledges this truth. Therefore, the fruitless spoiling of energy by pursuing
the path of experimental knowledge must be given up. One should gain
knowledge by surrendering unto the Lord and by acknowledging the authority
of the persons mentioned herein. The Lord is unlimited and, by the grace of
the yogamäyä, helps the surrendered soul to know Him proportionately with
the advance of one’s surrender.
TEXT 46
Tae vE ivdNTYaiTaTariNTa c devMaaYaa&
ñqéUd]hU<aXabra AiPa PaaPaJaqva" )
YaÛd(>auTa§-MaParaYa<aXaql/iXa+aa‚
iSTaYaRGJaNaa AiPa ik-Mau é[uTaDaar<aa Yae )) 46 ))
te vai vidanty atitaranti ca deva-mäyäà
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
stré-çüdra-hüëa-çabarä api päpa-jéväù
yady adbhuta-krama-paräyaëa-çéla-çikñäs
tiryag-janä api kim u çruta-dhäraëä ye
SYNONYMS
te—such persons; vai—undoubtedly; vidanti—do know; atitaranti—surpass;
ca—also; deva-mäyäm—the covering energy of the Lord; stré—such as women;
çüdra—the laborer class of men; hüëa—the mountaineers; çabaräù—the
Siberians, or those lower than the çüdras; api—although; päpa-jéväù—sinful
living beings; yadi—provided; adbhuta-krama—one whose acts are so
wonderful; paräyaëa—those who are devotees; çéla—behavior; çikñäù—trained
by; tiryak-janäù—even those who are not human beings; api—also;
kim—what; u—to speak of; çruta-dhäraëäù—those who have taken to the idea
of the Lord by hearing about Him; ye—those.
TRANSLATION
Surrendered souls, even from groups leading sinful lives, such as women, the
laborer class, the mountaineers and the Siberians, or even the birds and beasts,
can also know about the science of Godhead and become liberated from the
clutches of the illusory energy by surrendering unto the pure devotees of the
Lord and by following in their footsteps in devotional service.
PURPORT
Sometimes there are inquiries as to how one can surrender unto the
Supreme Lord. In the Bhagavad-gétä (18.66) the Lord asked Arjuna to
surrender unto Him, and therefore persons unwilling to do so question where
God is and to whom they should surrender. The answer to such questions or
inquiries is given herein very properly. The Personality of Godhead may not
be present before one’s eyes, but if one is sincere in wanting such guidance the
Lord will send a bona fide person who can guide one properly back home, back
to Godhead. There is no need of material qualifications for making progress on
the path of spiritual realization. In the material world, when one accepts some
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
particular type of service, he is required to possess some particular type of
qualification also. Without this one is unfit for such service. But in the
devotional service of the Lord the only qualification required is surrender.
Surrendering oneself is in one’s own hand. If one likes, he can surrender
immediately, without delay, and that begins his spiritual life. The bona fide
representative of God is as good as God Himself. Or, in other words, the loving
representative of the Lord is more kind and more easy to approach. A sinful
soul cannot approach the Lord directly, but such a sinful man can very easily
approach a pure devotee of the Lord. And if one agrees to put himself under
the guidance of such a devotee of the Lord, he can also understand the science
of God and can also become like the transcendental pure devotee of the Lord
and thus get his liberation back to Godhead, back home for eternal happiness.
So realization of the science of Godhead and relief from the unnecessary,
useless struggle for existence are not at all difficult for the willing candidate.
But they are very difficult for persons who are not surrendered souls but only
simple, profitless speculators.
TEXT 47
XaìTa( Pa[XaaNTaMa>aYa& Pa[iTabaeDaMaa}a&
éuÖ& SaMa& SadSaTa" ParMaaTMaTatvMa( )
XaBdae Na Ya}a Pauåk-ark-vaNa( i§-YaaQaaeR
MaaYaa ParETYai>aMau%e c ivl/ÂMaaNaa )
Tad( vE Pad& >aGavTa" ParMaSYa Pau&Saae
b]øeiTa Yad( ivdurJaóSau%& ivXaaek-Ma( )) 47 ))
çaçvat praçäntam abhayaà pratibodha-mätraà
çuddhaà samaà sad-asataù paramätma-tattvam
çabdo na yatra puru-kärakavän kriyärtho
mäyä paraity abhimukhe ca vilajjamänä
tad vai padaà bhagavataù paramasya puàso
brahmeti yad vidur ajasra-sukhaà viçokam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
çaçvat—eternal; praçäntam—without disturbance; abhayam—without fear;
pratibodha-mätram—a consciousness opposed to the material counterpart;
çuddham—uncontaminated; samam—without distinction; sat-asataù—of the
cause and effect; paramätma-tattvam—the principle of primeval cause;
çabdaù—speculative sound; na—not; yatra—where there is;
puru-kärakavän—resulting in fruitive action; kriyä-arthaù—for the matter of
sacrifice; mäyä—illusion; paraiti—flies away; abhimukhe—in front of;
ca—also; vilajjamänä—being ashamed of; tat—that; vai—is certainly;
padam—ultimate phase; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead;
paramasya—of the Supreme; puàsaù—of the person; brahma—the Absolute;
iti—thus; yat—which; viduù—known as; ajasra—unlimited;
sukham—happiness; viçokam—without grief.
TRANSLATION
What is realized as the Absolute Brahman is full of unlimited bliss without
grief. That is certainly the ultimate phase of the supreme enjoyer, the
Personality of Godhead. He is eternally void of all disturbances and fearless. He
is complete consciousness as opposed to matter. Uncontaminated and without
distinctions, He is the principle primeval cause of all causes and effects, in
whom there is no sacrifice for fruitive activities and in whom the illusory
energy does not stand.
PURPORT
The supreme enjoyer, the Personality of Godhead, is the Supreme Brahman
or the summum bonum because of His being the supreme cause of all causes.
The conception of impersonal Brahman realization is the first step, due to His
distinction from the illusory conception of material existence. In other words,
impersonal Brahman is a feature of the Absolute distinct from the material
variegatedness, just as light is a conception distinct from its counterpart,
darkness. But the light has its variegatedness, which is seen by those who
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
further advance in the light, and thus the ultimate realization of Brahman is
the source of the Brahman light, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
summum bonum or the ultimate source of everything. Therefore, meeting the
Personality of Godhead includes the realization of the impersonal Brahman as
realized at first in contrast with material inebriety. The Personality of
Godhead is the third step of Brahman realization. As explained in the First
Canto, one must understand all three features of the Absolute—Brahman,
Paramätmä and Bhagavän.
Pratibodha-mätram is just the opposite conception of material existence. In
matter there are material miseries, and thus in the first realization of Brahman
there is the negation of such material inebrieties, and there is a feeling of
eternal existence distinct from the pangs of birth and death, disease and old
age. That is the primary conception of impersonal Brahman.
The Supreme Lord is the Supreme Soul of everything, and therefore in the
supreme conception affection is realized. The conception of affection is due to
the relationship of soul to soul. A father is affectionate to his son because
there is some relationship of nearness between the son and the father. But that
sort of affection in the material world is full of inebriety. When the
Personality of Godhead is met, the fullness of affection becomes manifested
because of the reality of the affectionate relationship. He is not the object of
affection by material tinges of body and mind, but He is the full, naked,
uncontaminated object of affection for all living entities because He is the
Supersoul, or Paramätmä, within everyone’s heart. In the liberated state of
affairs, the full-fledged affection for the Lord is awakened.
As such, there is an unlimited flow of everlasting happiness, without the
fear of its being broken as we have experienced here in the material world.
The relationship with the Lord is never broken; thus there is no grief and no
fear. Such happiness is inexplicable by words, and there can be no attempt to
generate such happiness by fruitive activities by arrangements and sacrifices.
But we must also know that happiness, unbroken happiness exchanged with
the Supreme Person, the Personality of Godhead as described in this verse,
transcends the impersonal conception of the Upaniñads. In the Upaniñads the
description is more or less negation of the material conception of things, but
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
this is not denial of the transcendental senses of the Supreme Lord. Herein
also the same is affirmed in the statements about the material elements; they
are all transcendental, free from all contamination of material identification.
And also the liberated souls are not devoid of senses; otherwise there cannot
be any reciprocation of unhampered spiritual happiness exchanged between
them in spontaneous unbroken joy. All the senses, both of the Lord and of the
devotees, are without material contamination. They are so because they are
beyond the material cause and effects, as clearly mentioned herein (sad-asataù
param). The illusory, material energy cannot work there, being ashamed before
the Lord and His transcendental devotees. In the material world the sense
activities are not without grief, but here it is clearly said that the senses of the
Lord and the devotees are without any grief. There is a distinct difference
between the material and spiritual senses. And one should understand it
without denying the spiritual senses because of a material conception.
The senses in the material world are surcharged with material ignorance. In
every way, the authorities have recommended purification of the senses from
the material conception. In the material world the senses are manipulated for
individual and personal satisfaction, whereas in the spiritual world the senses
are properly used for the purpose for which they were originally meant, namely
the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. Such sensual activities are natural, and
therefore sense gratification there is uninterrupted and unbroken by material
contamination because the senses are spiritually purified. And such
satisfaction of the senses is equally shared by the transcendental reciprocators.
Since the activities are unlimited and constantly increasing, there is no scope
for material attempts or artificial arrangements. Such happiness of
transcendental quality is called brahma-saukhyam, which will he clearly
described in the Fifth Canto.
TEXT 48
SaDY]ax( iNaYaMYa YaTaYaae YaMak-TaRheiTa& )
Jaùu" Svrai@v iNaPaaNa%iNa}aiMaNd]" )) 48 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sadhryaì niyamya yatayo yama-karta-hetià
jahyuù svaräò iva nipäna-khanitram indraù
SYNONYMS
sadhryak—artificial mental speculation or meditation; niyamya—controlling;
yatayaù—the mystics; yama-karta-hetim—the process of spiritual culture;
jahyuù—are given up; svaräö—fully independent; iva—as; nipäna—well;
khanitram—trouble for digging; indraù—the controlling demigod supplying
rains.
TRANSLATION
In such a transcendental state there is no need of artificial control of the
mind, mental speculation or meditation, as performed by the jïänés and yogés.
One gives up such processes, as the heavenly King, Indra, forgoes the trouble to
dig a well.
PURPORT
A poor man in want of water digs a well and undertakes the trouble of
digging. Similarly, those who are poor in transcendental realization speculate
on the mind or meditate by controlling the senses. But they do not know that
such control of the senses and achievement of spiritual perfection are
simultaneously made possible as soon as one is factually engaged in the
transcendental loving service of the Supreme Person, the Personality of
Godhead. It is for this reason that the great liberated souls also desire to be
associated in hearing and chanting the activities of the Lord. The example of
Indra is very appropriate in this connection. King Indra of heaven is the
controlling deity or demigod for arranging clouds and supplying rains in the
universe, and as such he does not have to take the trouble to dig a well for his
personal water supply. For him, digging a well for a water supply is simply
ludicrous. Similarly, those who are factually engaged in the loving service of
the Lord have attained the ultimate goal of life, and for them there is no need
of mental speculation to find out the true nature of God or His activities. Nor
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
do such devotees have to meditate upon the imaginary or real identity of the
Lord. Because they are factually engaged in the transcendental loving service
of the Lord, the Lord’s pure devotees have already achieved the results of
mental speculation and meditation. The real perfection of life is therefore to
be engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
TEXT 49
Sa é[eYaSaaMaiPa iv>au>aRGavaNa( YaTaae_SYa
>aavSv>aavivihTaSYa SaTa" Pa[iSaiÖ" )
dehe SvDaaTauivGaMae_NauivXaqYaRMaa<ae
VYaaeMaev Ta}a Pauåzae Na ivXaqYaRTae_Ja" )) 49 ))
sa çreyasäm api vibhur bhagavän yato ’sya
bhäva-svabhäva-vihitasya sataù prasiddhiù
dehe sva-dhätu-vigame ’nuviçéryamäëe
vyomeva tatra puruño na viçéryate ’jaù
SYNONYMS
saù—He; çreyasäm—all auspiciousness; api—also; vibhuù—the master;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; yataù—because; asya—of the living
entity; bhäva—natural modes; sva-bhäva—own constitution;
vihitasya—performances; sataù—all good work; prasiddhiù—ultimate success;
dehe—of the body; sva-dhätu—forming elements; vigame—being vanquished;
anu—after; viçéryamäëe—having given up; vyoma—sky; iva—like;
tatra—thereupon; puruñaù—the living entity; na—never; viçéryate—becomes
vanquished; ajaù—due to being unborn.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead is the supreme master of everything auspicious
because the results of whatever actions are performed by the living being, in
either the material or spiritual existence, are awarded by the Lord. As such, He
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
is the ultimate benefactor. Every individual living entity is unborn, and
therefore even after the annihilation of the material elementary body, the living
entity exists, exactly like the air within the body.
PURPORT
The living entity is unborn and eternal, and as confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gétä (2.30), the living entity is not exhausted even though the
material elementary body is vanquished. As long as the living entity is in
material existence, actions performed by him are rewarded in the next life, or
even in the present life. Similarly, in his spiritual life also actions are rewarded
by the Lord by the five kinds of liberation. Even the impersonalist cannot
achieve the desired merging into the existence of the Supreme without being
favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gétä (4.11) that the Lord awards similar results, as one desires, in
one’s present life. The living entities are given freedom to make their choice,
and the Lord awards them accordingly.
It is the duty of everyone, therefore, to worship devoutly only the
Personality of Godhead to achieve his desired goal. The impersonalist, instead
of speculating or meditating, can directly execute the routine devotional
service of the Lord and thus easily obtain the desired goal.
The devotees, however, are naturally inclined to become associates of the
Lord and not merge in the spiritual existence, as conceived by the
impersonalist. The devotees, therefore, following their constitutional instincts,
achieve the desired goal of becoming servitors, friends, fathers, mothers or
conjugal lovers of the Lord. The devotional service of the Lord involves nine
transcendental processes, such as hearing and chanting, and by performing
such easy and natural devotional services the devotees achieve the highest
perfectional results, far, far superior to merging into the existence of Brahman.
The devotees are therefore never advised to indulge in speculating upon the
nature of the Supreme or artificially meditating on the the void.
One should not, however, mistakenly think that after the annihilation of
this present body there is no body by which one can associate with the Lord
face to face. The living entity is unborn. It is not that he is manifest with the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
creation of the material body. On the other hand, it is true that the material
body develops only by the desire of the living entity. The evolution of the
material body is due to the desires of the living being. According to the desires
of the living being, the material body develops. So from the spirit soul the
material body comes into existence, generated from the living force. Since the
living being is eternal, he exists just like the air within the body. Air is within
and without the body. Therefore when the external covering, the material
body, is vanquished, the living spark, like the air within the body, continues to
exist. And by the direction of the Lord, because He is the ultimate benefactor,
the living entity is at once awarded the necessary spiritual body befitting his
association with the Lord in the manner of särüpya (equal bodily feature),
sälokya (equal facility to live on the same planet with the Lord), särñöi (equal
possession of opulence like the Lord), and sämépya (equal association with the
Lord).
The Lord is so kind that even if a devotee of the Lord cannot fulfill the
complete course of devotional service unalloyed and uncontaminated by
material association, he is given another chance in the next life by being
awarded a birth in the family of a devotee or rich man so that without being
engaged in the struggle for material existence the devotee can finish the
remaining purification of his existence and thus immediately, after
relinquishing the present body, go back home, back to Godhead. This is
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä.
In this connection detailed information is available in the
Bhagavat-sandarbha of Çréla Jéva Gosvämé Prabhupäda. Once achieving the
spiritual existence, the devotee is eternally situated there, as already discussed
in the previous verse.
TEXT 50
Saae_Ya& Tae_i>aihTaSTaaTa >aGavaNa( ivì>aavNa" )
SaMaaSaeNa hreNaaRNYadNYaSMaaTa( SadSaÀ YaTa( )) 50 ))
so ’yaà te ’bhihitas täta
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhagavän viçva-bhävanaù
samäsena harer nänyad
anyasmät sad-asac ca yat
SYNONYMS
saù—that; ayam—the same; te—unto you; abhihitaù—explained by me;
täta—my dear son; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
viçva-bhävanaù—the creator of the manifested worlds; samäsena—in brief;
hareù—without Hari, the Lord; na—never; anyat—anything else;
anyasmät—being the cause of; sat—manifested or phenomenal;
asat—noumenal; ca—and; yat—whatever there may be.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, I have now explained in brief the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is creator of the manifested worlds. Without Him, Hari, the
Lord, there are no other causes of the phenomenal and noumenal existences.
PURPORT
Since we generally have the experience of the temporary, material world
and conditioned souls trying to lord it over the material worlds, Brahmäjé
explained to Näradadeva that this temporary world is the work of the external
potency of the Lord and that the conditioned souls struggling here for
existence are the marginal potency of the Supreme Lord, the Personality of
Godhead. There is no cause for all these phenomenal activities but Him, Hari,
the Supreme Lord, who is the primeval cause of all causes. This does not mean,
however, that the Lord Himself is distributed impersonally. He is aloof from all
these interactions of the external and marginal potencies. In the Bhagavad-gétä
(9.4) it is confirmed that by His potencies alone He is present everywhere and
anywhere. Everything that is manifested rests on His potency only, but He, as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is always aloof from everything. The
potency and the potent are simultaneously one and different from one
another.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
One should not deprecate the Supreme Lord for the creation of this
miserable world, just as one should not blame the king for creating a
prisonhouse in the government. The prisonhouse is a necessary institution of
the governmental establishment for those who are disobedient to the laws of
the government. Similarly, this material world, full of miseries, is a temporary
creation of the Lord for those who have forgotten Him and are trying to lord it
over the false manifestation. He, however, is always anxious to get the fallen
souls back home, back to Godhead, and for this He has given so many chances
to the conditioned souls via the authoritative scriptures, His representatives,
and personal incarnations also. Since He has no direct attachment to this
material world, He is not to be blamed for its creation.
TEXT 51
wd& >aaGavTa& NaaMa YaNMae >aGavTaaeidTaMa( )
Sa°hae_Ya& iv>aUTaqNaa& TvMaeTad( ivPaul/Iku-å )) 51 ))
idaà bhägavataà näma
yan me bhagavatoditam
saìgraho ’yaà vibhüténäà
tvam etad vipulé kuru
SYNONYMS
idam—this; bhägavatam—the science of Godhead; näma—of the name;
yat—that which; me—unto me; bhagavatä—by the Personality of Godhead;
uditam—enlightened; saìgrahaù—is the accumulation of; ayam—His;
vibhüténäm—of the diverse potencies; tvam—your good self; etat—this science
of Godhead; vipulé—expand; kuru—do it.
TRANSLATION
O Närada, this science of God, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, was spoken to me in
summary by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and it was spoken as the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
accumulation of His diverse potencies. Please expand this science yourself.
PURPORT
The Bhägavatam in a nutshell, spoken by the Personality of Godhead in
about half a dozen verses, which will appear ahead, is the science of God, and
it is the potent representation of the Personality of Godhead. He, being
absolute, is nondifferent from the science of God, Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
Brahmäjé received this science of Godhead from the Lord directly, and he
handed over the same to Närada, who in his turn ordered Çréla Vyäsadeva to
expand it. So the transcendental knowledge of the Supreme Lord is not mental
speculation by the mundane wranglers, but is uncontaminated, eternal, perfect
knowledge beyond the jurisdiction of material modes. The Bhägavata Puräëa is
therefore the direct incarnation of the Lord in the form of transcendental
sound, and one should receive this transcendental knowledge from the bona
fide representative of the Lord in the chain of disciplic succession from the
Lord to Brahmäjé, from Brahmäjé to Närada, from Närada to Vyäsa, from
Vyäsadeva to Çukadeva Gosvämé, from Çukadeva Gosvämé to Süta Gosvämé.
The ripened fruit of the Vedic tree drops from one hand to another without
being broken by falling suddenly from a high branch down to the earth.
Therefore unless one hears the science of Godhead from the bona fide
representative of the disciplic succession, as above mentioned, for one to
understand the theme of the science of Godhead will be a difficult job. It
should never be heard from the professional Bhägavatam reciters who earn
their livelihood by gratifying the senses of the audience.
TEXT 52
YaQaa hraE >aGaviTa Na*<aa& >ai¢->aRivZYaiTa )
SavaRTMaNYai%l/aDaare wiTa SaªLPYa v<aRYa )) 52 ))
yathä harau bhagavati
nåëäà bhaktir bhaviñyati
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sarvätmany akhilädhäre
iti saìkalpya varëaya
SYNONYMS
yathä—as much as; harau—unto the Personality of Godhead; bhagavati—unto
the Lord; nåëäm—for human beings; bhaktiù—devotional service;
bhaviñyati—become enlightened; sarva-ätmani—the Absolute Whole;
akhila-ädhäre—unto the summum bonum; iti—thus; saìkalpya—by
determination; varëaya—describe.
TRANSLATION
Please describe the science of Godhead with determination and in a manner
by which it will be quite possible for the human being to develop transcendental
devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead Hari, the Supersoul of
every living being and the summum bonum source of all energies.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the philosophy of devotional service and the
scientific presentation of man’s relationship with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Prior to the age of Kali there was no need for such a book of
knowledge to know the Lord and His potential energies, but with the
beginning of the age of Kali human society gradually became influenced by
four sinful principles, namely illegitimate connection with women,
intoxication, gambling and unnecessary killing of animals. Because of these
basic sinful acts, man gradually became forgetful of his eternal relation with
God. Therefore man became blind, so to speak, to his ultimate goal of life. The
ultimate goal of life is not to pass a life of irresponsibility like the animals and
indulge in a polished way in the four animal principles, namely eating,
sleeping, fearing and mating. For such a blind human society in the darkness of
ignorance, Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the torchlight to see things in proper
perspective. Therefore it was necessary to describe the science of God from the
very beginning, or from the very birth of the phenomenal world.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
As we have already explained, Çrémad-Bhägavatam is so scientifically
presented that any sincere student of this great science will be able to
understand the science of God simply by reading it with attention or simply by
regularly hearing it from the bona fide speaker. Everyone is hankering after
happiness in life, but in this age the members of human society, blind as they
are, do not have the proper vision that the Personality of Godhead is the
reservoir of all happiness because He is the ultimate source of everything
(janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1]). Happiness in complete perfection without
hindrance can be achieved only by our devotional relationship with Him. And
it is only by His association that we can get free of distressful material
existence. Even those who are after the enjoyment of this material world can
also take shelter of the great science of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and they will be
successful at the end. Närada is therefore requested or ordered by his spiritual
master to present this science with determination and in good plan. Närada
was never advised to preach the principles of Bhägavatam to earn a livelihood;
he was ordered by his spiritual master to take the matter very seriously in a
missionary spirit.
TEXT 53
MaaYaa& v<aRYaTaae_MauZYa wRìrSYaaNauMaaedTa" )
é*<vTa" é[ÖYaa iNaTYa& MaaYaYaaTMaa Na MauùiTa )) 53 ))
mäyäà varëayato ’muñya
éçvarasyänumodataù
çåëvataù çraddhayä nityaà
mäyayätmä na muhyati
SYNONYMS
mäyäm—affairs of the external energy; varëayataù—while describing;
amuñya—of the Lord; éçvarasya—of the Personality of Godhead;
anumodataù—thus appreciating; çåëvataù—thus hearing; çraddhayä—with
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
devotion; nityam—regularly; mäyayä—by the illusory energy; ätmä—the
living entity; na—never; muhyati—becomes illusioned.
TRANSLATION
The Lord’s activities in association with His different energies should be
described, appreciated and heard in accordance with the teachings of the
Supreme Lord. If this is done regularly with devotion and respect, one is sure to
get out of the illusory energy of the Lord.
PURPORT
The science of learning a subject matter seriously is different from the
sentiments of fanatics. Fanatics or fools may consider the Lord’s activities in
relation with the external energy to be useless for them, and they may falsely
claim to be higher participants in the internal energy of the Lord, but factually
the Lord’s activities in relation with the external energy and the internal
energy are equally good. On the other hand, those who are not completely free
from the clutches of the Lord’s external energy should devoutly hear regularly
about the activities of the Lord in relation with the external energy. They
should not foolishly jump up to the activities of the internal energy, falsely
attracted by the Lord’s internal potential activities like His räsa-lélä. The
cheap reciters of the Bhägavatam are very much enthusiastic about the Lord’s
internal potential activities, and the pseudodevotees, absorbed in material
sense enjoyment, falsely jump to the stage of liberated souls and thus fall down
deeply into the clutches of external energy.
Some of them think that to hear about the pastimes of the Lord means to
hear about His activities with the gopés or about His pastimes like lifting the
Govardhana Hill, and they have nothing to do with the Lord’s plenary
expansions as the puruñävatäras and Their pastimes of the creation,
maintenance or annihilation of the material worlds. But a pure devotee knows
that there is no difference between the pastimes of the Lord, either in räsa-lélä
or in creation, maintenance or destruction of the material world. Rather, the
descriptions of such activities of the Lord as the puruñävatäras are specifically
meant for persons who are in the clutches of the external energy. Topics like
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the räsa-lélä are meant for the liberated souls and not for the conditioned
souls. The conditioned souls, therefore, must hear with appreciation and
devotion the Lord’s pastimes in relationship with the external energy, and
such acts are as good as the hearing of räsa-lélä in the liberated stage. A
conditioned soul should not imitate the activities of liberated souls. Lord Çré
Caitanya never indulged in hearing the räsa-léla with ordinary men.
In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the science of God, the first nine cantos prepare
the ground for hearing the Tenth Canto. This will be further explained in the
last chapter of this canto. In the Third Canto it will be more explicit. A pure
devotee of the Lord, therefore, must begin reading or hearing
Çrémad-Bhägavatam from the very beginning, and not from the Tenth Canto.
We have several times been requested by some so-called devotees to take up
the Tenth Canto immediately, but we have refrained from such an action
because we wish to present Çrémad-Bhägavatam as the science of Godhead and
not as a sensuous understanding for the conditioned souls. This is forbidden by
such authorities as Çré Brahmäjé. By reading and hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam
as a scientific presentation, the conditioned souls will gradually be promoted to
the higher status of transcendental knowledge after being freed from the
illusory energy based on sense enjoyment.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Seventh Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Scheduled Incarnations with Specific
Functions.”
Chapter Eight
Questions by King Parékñit
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 1
raJaaevac
b]ø<aa caeidTaae b]øNa( Gau<aa:YaaNae_Gau<aSYa c )
YaSMaE YaSMaE YaQaa Pa[ah Naardae devdXaRNa" )) 1 ))
räjoväca
brahmaëä codito brahman
guëäkhyäne ’guëasya ca
yasmai yasmai yathä präha
närado deva-darçanaù
SYNONYMS
räjä—the King; uväca—inquired; brahmaëä—by Lord Brahmä;
coditaù—being instructed; brahman—O learned brähmaëa (Çukadeva
Gosvämé); guëa-äkhyäne—in narrating the transcendental qualities;
aguëasya—of the Lord, who is without material qualities; ca—and; yasmai
yasmai—and whom; yathä—as much as; präha—explained; näradaù—Närada
Muni; deva-darçanaù—one whose audience is as good as that of any demigod.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé: How did Närada Muni,
whose hearers are as fortunate as those instructed by Lord Brahmä, explain the
transcendental qualities of the Lord, who is without material qualities, and
before whom did he speak?
PURPORT
Devarñi Närada was directly instructed by Brahmäjé, who was also directly
instructed by the Supreme Lord; therefore the instructions imparted by
Närada to his various disciples are as good as those of the Supreme Lord. That
is the way of understanding Vedic knowledge. It comes down from the Lord by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
disciplic succession, and this transcendental knowledge is distributed to the
world by this descending process. There is no chance, however, to receive the
Vedic knowledge from mental speculators. Therefore, wherever Närada Muni
goes, he represents himself as authorized by the Lord, and his appearance is as
good as that of the Supreme Lord. Similarly, the disciplic succession which
strictly follows the transcendental instruction is the bona fide chain of
disciplic succession, and the test for such bona fide spiritual masters is that
there should be no difference between the instruction of the Lord originally
imparted to His devotee and that which is imparted by the authority in the
line of disciplic succession. How Närada Muni distributed the transcendental
knowledge of the Lord will be explained in later cantos.
It will appear also that the Lord existed prior to the material creation, and
therefore His transcendental name, quality, etc., do not represent any material
quality. Whenever, therefore, the Lord is described as aguëa, or without any
quality, it does not mean that He has no quality, but that He has no material
quality, such as the modes of goodness, passion or ignorance, as the
conditioned souls have. He is transcendental to all material conceptions, and
thus He is described as aguëa.
TEXT 2
WTad( veidTauiMaC^aiMa Tatv& Tatvivda& vr )
hrerd(>auTavqYaRSYa k-Qaa l/aek-SauMa®l/a" )) 2 ))
etad veditum icchämi
tattvaà tattva-vidäà vara
harer adbhuta-véryasya
kathä loka-sumaìgaläù
SYNONYMS
etat—this; veditum—to understand; icchämi—I wish; tattvam—truth;
tattva-vidäm—of those who are well versed in the Absolute Truth; vara—O
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
best; hareù—of the Lord; adbhuta-véryasya—of the one who possesses
wonderful potencies; kathäù—narrations; loka—for all planets;
su-maìgaläù—auspicious.
TRANSLATION
The King said: I wish to know. Narrations concerning the Lord, who
possesses wonderful potencies, are certainly auspicious for living beings in all
planets.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is full of narrations of the activities of the
Supreme Lord, is auspicious for all living beings residing in every planet. One
who takes it as belonging to a particular sect is certainly mistaken.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is certainly a very dear scripture for all the devotees of the
Lord, but it is auspicious even for the nondevotees also because it explains that
even the nondevotees hovering under the spell of material energy can be
delivered from such clutches if they hear the narration of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam with devotion and attention from the right source
representing the Lord by disciplic succession.
TEXT 3
k-QaYaSv Maha>aaGa YaQaahMai%l/aTMaiNa )
k*-Z<ae iNaveXYa iNa"Sa®& MaNaSTYa+Yae k-le/vrMa( )) 3 ))
kathayasva mahäbhäga
yathäham akhilätmani
kåñëe niveçya niùsaìgaà
manas tyakñye kalevaram
SYNONYMS
kathayasva—please continue speaking; mahäbhäga—O greatly fortunate one;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yathä—as much as; aham—I; akhila-ätmani—unto the Supreme Soul;
kåñëe—unto Lord Çré Kåñëa; niveçya—having placed; niùsaìgam—being freed
from material qualities; manaù—mind; tyakñye—may relinquish;
kalevaram—body.
TRANSLATION
O greatly fortunate Çukadeva Gosvämé, please continue narrating
Çrémad-Bhägavatam so that I can place my mind upon the Supreme Soul, Lord
Kåñëa, and, being completely freed from material qualities, thus relinquish this
body.
PURPORT
To be fully engaged in hearing the transcendental narration described in
the text of Çrémad-Bhägavatam means to constantly associate with the
Supreme Soul, Çré Kåñëa. And to constantly associate with the Supreme Lord
Kåñëa means to be liberated from the qualities of matter. Lord Kåñëa is like the
sun, and material contamination is like darkness. As the presence of the sun
dissipates darkness, constant engagement in the association of the Lord Çré
Kåñëa frees one from the contamination of the material qualities.
Contamination by the material qualities is the cause of repeated birth and
death, and liberation from material qualities is transcendence. Mahäräja
Parékñit was now a realized soul by this secret of liberation, through the grace
of Çukadeva Gosvämé, for the latter had informed the King that the highest
perfection of life is to be in remembrance of Näräyaëa at the end of life.
Mahäräja Parékñit was destined to give up his body at the end of seven days,
and thus he decided to continue remembering the Lord by His association with
the topics of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and thus to quit his body in full
consciousness of the presence of the Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme Soul.
The hearing of Çrémad-Bhägavatam performed by professional men is
different from the transcendental hearing of Mahäräja Parékñit. Mahäräja
Parékñit was a soul realized in the Absolute Truth, Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of
Godhead. The fruitive materialist is not a realized soul; he wants to derive
some material benefit from his so-called hearing of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Undoubtedly such an audience, hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam from the
professional men, can derive some material benefit as they desire, but that does
not mean that such a pretense of hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam for a week is as
good as the hearing of Mahäräja Parékñit.
It is the duty of the sane to hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam from a self-realized
soul and not be duped by professional men. One should continue such hearing
till the end of one’s life so that one can actually have the transcendental
association of the Lord and thus be liberated simply by hearing
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
Mahäräja Parékñit had already given up all his connections with his
kingdom and family, the most attractive features of materialism, but still he
was conscious of his material body. He wanted to be free of such bondage also
by the constant association of the Lord.
TEXT 4
é*<vTa" é[ÖYaa iNaTYa& Ga*<aTaê SvceiíTaMa( )
k-ale/Na NaaiTadqgaeR<a >aGavaNa( ivXaTae ôid )) 4 ))
çåëvataù çraddhayä nityaà
gåëataç ca sva-ceñöitam
kälena nätidérgheëa
bhagavän viçate hådi
SYNONYMS
çåëvataù—of those who hear; çraddhayä—in earnestness; nityam—regularly,
always; gåëataù—taking the matter; ca—also; sva-ceñöitam—seriously by one’s
own endeavor; kälena—duration; na—not; ati-dérgheëa—very prolonged time;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa; viçate—becomes manifest;
hådi—within one’s heart.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Persons who hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam regularly and are always taking the
matter very seriously will have the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa
manifested in their hearts within a short time.
PURPORT
Cheap devotees or materialistic devotees of the Lord are very much
desirous to see the Lord personally without meeting the requisite
qualifications. Such third-grade devotees should know well that material
attachment and seeing the Lord face to face cannot go together. It is not such
a mechanical process that the professional Bhägavatam reciters can do the job
on behalf of the third-grade materialistic pseudo-devotee. The professional
men are useless in this connection because they are neither self-realized nor
interested in the liberation of the audience. They are simply interested in
maintaining the material establishment of family attachment and earning
some material benefits out of the profession. Mahäräja Parékñit had no more
than seven days to live, but for others Mahäräja Parékñit personally
recommends that one hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam regularly, nityam, always by
one’s own effort and with serious devotion also. That will help one to see the
Lord Çré Kåñëa manifested in one’s heart within no time.
The pseudo-devotee, however, is very anxious to see the Lord according to
his whims, not making any serious effort to hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam regularly
and without detachment from material benefit. That is not the way
recommended by an authority like Mahäräja Parékñit, who heard and benefited
by hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 5
Pa[iví" k-<aRrNDa]e<a SvaNaa& >aavSaraeåhMa( )
DauNaaeiTa XaMal&/ k*-Z<a" Sail/l/SYa YaQaa XarTa( )) 5 ))
praviñöaù karëa-randhreëa
svänäà bhäva-saroruham
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
dhunoti çamalaà kåñëaù
salilasya yathä çarat
SYNONYMS
praviñöaù—thus being entered; karëa-randhreëa—through the holes of the
ears; svänäm—according to one’s liberated position; bhäva—constitutional
relationship; saraù-ruham—the lotus flower; dhunoti—cleanses;
çamalam—material qualities like lust, anger, avarice and hankering;
kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; salilasya—of the
reservoir of waters; yathä—as it were; çarat—the autumn season.
TRANSLATION
The sound incarnation of Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Soul [i.e.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam], enters into the heart of a self-realized devotee, sits on the
lotus flower of his loving relationship, and thus cleanses the dust of material
association, such as lust, anger and hankering. Thus it acts like autumnal rains
upon pools of muddy water.
PURPORT
It is said that a single pure devotee of the Lord can deliver all the fallen
souls of the world. Thus one who is actually in the confidence of a pure
devotee like Närada or Çukadeva Gosvämé and thus is empowered by one’s
spiritual master, as Närada was by Brahmäjé, can not only deliver himself from
the clutches of mäyä, or illusion, but can deliver the whole world by his pure
and empowered devotional strength. The comparison to the autumnal rain
that falls on muddy reservoirs of water is very appropriate. During the rainy
season, all the waters of the rivers become muddy, but in the month of
July-August, the autumn season, when there is a slight rainfall, the muddy
waters of the rivers all over the world become at once clear. By addition of
some chemical, a small reservoir of water like that of a metropolitan
waterworks tank can be cleared, but by such a tiny effort it is not possible to
clear up all the reservoirs of water like the rivers. A powerful pure devotee of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Lord, however, can deliver not only his personal self but also many others
in his association.
In other words, the cleansing of the polluted heart by other methods (like
the culture of empiric knowledge or mystic gymnastics) can simply cleanse
one’s own heart, but devotional service to the Lord is so powerful that it can
cleanse the hearts of the people in general, by the devotional service of the
pure, empowered devotee. A true representative of the Lord like Närada,
Çukadeva Gosvämé, Lord Caitanya, the six Gosvämés and later Çréla
Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura and Çrémad Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, etc.,
can deliver all people by their empowered devotional service.
By sincere efforts to hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam one realizes his constitutional
relationship with the Lord in the transcendental humor of servitude,
friendship, paternal affection or conjugal love, and by such self-realization one
becomes situated at once in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Not
only were all the pure devotees like Närada self-realized souls, but they were
engaged in preaching work automatically by spiritual impetus, and thus they
delivered many poor souls entangled in the material modes. They became so
powerful because they sincerely followed the Bhägavatam principles by regular
hearing and worshiping. By such actions the accumulated material lusts, etc.,
become cleansed by the personal endeavor of the Lord within the heart. The
Lord is always within the heart of the living being, but He becomes manifested
by one’s devotional service.
Purification of the heart by culture of knowledge or mystic yoga may be all
right for the time being for an individual person, but it is like the cleansing of
a small quantity of stagnant water by chemical processes. Such clarification of
water may stand for the time being and the sediments settle down, but by a
slight agitation everything becomes muddy. The idea is that devotional service
to the Lord is the only method of cleansing the heart for good. Whereas other
methods may be superficially good for the time being, there is a risk of
becoming muddy again due to agitation of the mind. Devotional service to the
Lord, with specific attention for hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam regularly and
always, is the best recommended method for liberation from the clutches of
illusion.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 6
DaaETaaTMaa Pauåz" k*-Z<aPaadMaUl&/ Na MauÄiTa )
Mau¢-SavRPair©e-Xa" PaaNQa" SvXar<a& YaQaa )) 6 ))
dhautätmä puruñaù kåñëapäda-
mülaà na muïcati
mukta-sarva-parikleçaù
pänthaù sva-çaraëaà yathä
SYNONYMS
dhauta-ätmä—whose heart has been cleansed; puruñaù—the living being;
kåñëa—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; päda-mülam—the shelter of the
lotus feet; na—never; muïcati—gives up; mukta—liberated; sarva—all;
parikleçaù—of all miseries of life; pänthaù—the traveler; sva-çaraëam—in his
own abode; yathä—as it were.
TRANSLATION
A pure devotee of the Lord whose heart has once been cleansed by the
process of devotional service never relinquishes the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa, for
they fully satisfy him, as a traveler is satisfied at home after a troubled journey.
PURPORT
One who is not a pure devotee of the Supreme Lord Kåñëa is not completely
cleansed in the heart. But a perfectly cleansed person never quits the
devotional service of the Lord. In discharging such devotional service, as
ordered by Brahmäjé to Närada in the preaching of Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
sometimes a representative of the Lord engaged in preaching work meets
various so-called difficulties. This was exhibited by Lord Nityänanda when He
delivered the two fallen souls Jagäi and Mädhäi, and similarly Lord Jesus Christ
was crucified by the nonbelievers. But such difficulties are very gladly suffered
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
by the devotees in preaching because in such activities, although apparently
very severe, the devotees of the Lord feel transcendental pleasure because the
Lord is satisfied. Prahläda Mahäräja suffered greatly, but still he never forgot
the lotus feet of the Lord. This is because a pure devotee of the Lord is so
purified in his heart that he cannot leave the shelter of Lord Kåñëa in any
circumstances. There is no self-interest in such service. The progress of
culturing knowledge by the jïänés or the bodily gymnastics by the yogés are
ultimately given up by the respective performers, but a devotee of the Lord
cannot give up the service of the Lord, for he is ordered by his spiritual master.
Pure devotees like Närada and Nityänanda Prabhu take up the order of the
spiritual master as the sustenance of life. They do not mind what becomes of
the future of their lives. They take the matter very seriously as the order comes
from the higher authority, from the representative of the Lord, or from the
Lord Himself.
The example set herein is very appropriate. A traveler leaves home to
search for wealth in far distant places, sometimes in the forest and sometimes
on the ocean and sometimes on hilltops. Certainly there are many troubles for
the traveler when he is in such unknown places. But all such troubles are at
once mitigated as soon as the sense of his family affection is remembered, and
as soon as he returns home he forgets all such troubles on the way.
A pure devotee of the Lord is exactly in a family tie with the Lord, and
therefore he is undeterred in discharging his duty in a full affectionate tie with
the Lord.
TEXT 7
YadDaaTauMaTaae b]øNa( deharM>aae_SYa DaaTaui>a" )
Yad*C^Yaa heTauNaa va >avNTaae JaaNaTae YaQaa )) 7 ))
yad adhätu-mato brahman
dehärambho ’sya dhätubhiù
yadåcchayä hetunä vä
bhavanto jänate yathä
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
yat—as it is; adhätu-mataù—without being materially constituted;
brahman—O learned brähmaëa; deha—the material body; ärambhaù—the
beginning of; asya—of the living being; dhätubhiù—by matter;
yadåcchayä—without cause, accidental; hetunä—due to some cause;
vä—either; bhavantaù—your good self; jänate—as you may know it; yathä—so
you inform me.
TRANSLATION
O learned brähmaëa, the transcendental spirit soul is different from the
material body. Does he acquire the body accidentally or by some cause? Will
you kindly explain this, for it is known to you.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Parékñit, being a typical devotee, is not only satisfied by
confirming the importance of hearing the Çrémad-Bhägavatam from the
representative of Brahmäjé by disciplic succession, but he is still more anxious
to establish the philosophical basis of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Çrémad-Bhägavatam
is the science of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and as such all questions
that may arise in the mind of a serious student must be cleared by the
statements of the authority. A person on the path of devotional service may
inquire from his spiritual master all about the spiritual position of God and the
living beings. From the Bhagavad-gétä, as well as from the Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
it is known that qualitatively the Lord and the living beings are one. The
living being in the conditioned state of material existence is subjected to many
transmigrations by continuous changing of the material body. But what are the
causes of the material embodiment of the part and parcel of the Lord?
Mahäräja Parékñit inquires about this very important matter for the benefit of
all classes of candidates on the path of self-realization and devotional service
to the Lord.
Indirectly it is confirmed that the Supreme Being, the Lord, makes no such
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
material changes of body. He is spiritually whole, with no difference between
His body and His soul, unlike the conditioned soul. The liberated living beings,
who associate with the Lord in person, are also exactly like the Lord. Only the
conditioned souls awaiting liberation are subjected to change of bodies. How
was the process first begun?
In the process of devotional service, the first step is to take shelter of the
spiritual master and then inquire from the spiritual master all about the
process. This inquiry is essential for immunity to all kinds of offenses on the
path of devotional service. Even if one is fixed in devotional service like
Mahäräja Parékñit, he must still inquire from the realized spiritual master all
about this. In other words, the spiritual master must also be well versed and
learned so that he may be able to answer all these inquiries from the devotees.
Thus one who is not well versed in the authorized scriptures and not able to
answer all such relevant inquiries should not pose as a spiritual master for the
matter of material gain. It is illegal to become a spiritual master if one is unable
to deliver the disciple.
TEXT 8
AaSaqd( YadudraTa( PaÚ& l/aek-Sa&SQaaNal/+a<aMa( )
YaavaNaYa& vE Pauåz wYataavYavE" Pa*Qak(- )
TaavaNaSaaiviTa Pa[ae¢-" Sa&SQaavYavvaiNav )) 8 ))
äséd yad-udarät padmaà
loka-saàsthäna-lakñaëam
yävän ayaà vai puruña
iyattävayavaiù påthak
tävän asäv iti proktaù
saàsthävayavavän iva
SYNONYMS
äsét—as it grew; yat-udarät—from whose abdomen; padmam—lotus flower;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
loka—world; saàsthäna—situation; lakñaëam—possessed of; yävän—as it
were; ayam—this; vai—certainly; puruñaù—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; iyattä—measurement; avayavaiù—by embodiments;
påthak—different; tävän—so; asau—that; iti proktaù—it is so said;
saàsthä—situation; avayavavän—embodiment; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
If the Supreme Personality of Godhead, from whose abdomen the lotus stem
sprouted, is possessed of a gigantic body according to His own caliber and
measurement, then what is the specific difference between the body of the Lord
and those of common living entities?
PURPORT
One should note how Mahäräja Parékñit intelligently put questions before
his spiritual master for scientific understanding of the transcendental body of
the Lord. It has been described in many places before this that the Lord
assumed a gigantic body, like that of Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, from whose hair
pores innumerable universes have generated. The body of Garbhodakaçäyé
Viñëu is described as sprouting the lotus stem within which all the planets of
the universe remain, and at the top of the stem is the lotus flower on which
Lord Brahmä is born. In the creation of the material world the Supreme Lord
undoubtedly assumes a gigantic body, and living entities also get bodies, big or
small, according to necessity. For example, an elephant gets a gigantic body
according to its needs, and so also an ant gets its body according to its needs.
Similarly, if the Personality of Godhead assumes a gigantic body to
accommodate the universes or the planets of a particular universe, there is no
difference in the principle of assuming or accepting a particular type of body
in terms of necessity. A living being and the Lord cannot be distinguished
simply by the difference in the magnitude of the body. So the answer depends
on the specific significance of the body of the Lord, as distinguished from the
body of the common living being.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 9
AJa" Sa*JaiTa >aUTaaiNa >aUTaaTMaa YadNauGa]haTa( )
dd*Xae YaeNa Tad]UPa& Naai>aPaÚSaMauÙv" )) 9 ))
ajaù såjati bhütäni
bhütätmä yad-anugrahät
dadåçe yena tad-rüpaà
näbhi-padma-samudbhavaù
SYNONYMS
ajaù—one who is born without a material source; såjati—creates; bhütäni—all
those materially born; bhüta-ätmä—having a body of matter; yat—whose;
anugrahät—by the mercy of; dadåçe—could see; yena—by whom;
tat-rüpam—His form of body; näbhi—navel; padma—lotus flower;
samudbhavaù—being born of.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä, who was not born of a material source but of the lotus flower
coming out of the navel abdomen of the Lord, is the creator of all those who are
materially born. Of course, by the grace of the Lord, Brahmä was able to see the
form of the Lord.
PURPORT
The first living creature, Brahmä, is called ajaù because he did not take his
birth from the womb of a mother materially born. He was directly born from
the bodily expansion of the lotus flower of the Lord. Thus it is not readily
understandable whether the body of the Lord and that of Brahmä are of the
same quality or different. This must also be clearly understood. One thing is,
however, certain: Brahmä was completely dependent on the mercy of the Lord
because after his birth he could create living beings by the Lord’s grace only,
and he could see the form of the Lord. Whether the form seen by Brahmä is of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the same quality as that of Brahmä is a bewildering question, and Mahäräja
Parékñit wanted to get clear answers from Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé.
TEXT 10
Sa caiPa Ya}a Pauåzae ivìiSQaTYauÙvaPYaYa" )
Mau¤-aTMaMaaYaa& MaaYaeXa" XaeTae SavRGauhaXaYa" )) 10 ))
sa cäpi yatra puruño
viçva-sthity-udbhaväpyayaù
muktvätma-mäyäà mäyeçaù
çete sarva-guhäçayaù
SYNONYMS
saù—He; ca—also; api—as He is; yatra—where; puruñaù—the Personality of
Godhead; viçva—the material worlds; sthiti—maintenance;
udbhava—creation; apyayaù—annihilation; muktvä—without being touched;
ätma-mäyäm—own energy; mäyä-éçaù—the Lord of all energies; çete—does lie
on; sarva-guhä-çayaù—one who lies in everyone s heart.
TRANSLATION
Please also explain the Personality of Godhead, who lies in every heart as the
Supersoul, and as the Lord of all energies, but is untouched by His external
energy.
PURPORT
Undoubtedly the form of the Lord who was seen by Brahmä must be
transcendental, otherwise how could He simply look upon the creative energy
without being touched? It is understood also that the same puruña lies in the
heart of every living entity. This also requires proper explanation.
TEXT 11
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PauåzavYavEl/aeRk-a" SaPaal/a" PaUvRk-iLPaTaa" )
l/aekE-rMauZYaavYava" SaPaalE/iriTa éué[uMa )) 11 ))
puruñävayavair lokäù
sapäläù pürva-kalpitäù
lokair amuñyävayaväù
sa-pälair iti çuçruma
SYNONYMS
puruña—the universal form of the Lord (viräö-puruñaù); avayavaiù—by
different parts of the body; lokäù—the planetary system; sa-päläù—with
respective governors; pürva—formerly; kalpitäù—discussed; lokaiù—by the
different planetary systems; amuñya—His; avayaväù—different parts of the
body; sa-pälaiù—with the governors; iti—thus; çuçruma—I heard.
TRANSLATION
O learned brähmaëa, it was formerly explained that all the planets of the
universe with their respective governors are situated in the different parts of
the gigantic body of the viräö-puruña. I have also heard that the different
planetary systems are supposed to be in the gigantic body of the viräö-puruña.
But what is their actual position ? Will you please explain that?
TEXT 12
YaavaNa( k-LPaae ivk-LPaae va YaQaa k-al/ae_NauMaqYaTae )
>aUTa>aVYa>avC^Bd AaYauMaaRNa& c YaTa( SaTa" )) 12 ))
yävän kalpo vikalpo vä
yathä kälo ’numéyate
bhüta-bhavya-bhavac-chabda
äyur-mänaà ca yat sataù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
yävän—as it is; kalpaù—the duration of time between creation and
annihilation; vikalpaù—subsidiary creation and annihilation; vä—either;
yathä—as also; kälaù—the time; anuméyate—is measured; bhüta—past;
bhavya—future; bhavat—present; çabdaù—sound; äyuù—duration of life;
mänam—measurement; ca—also; yat—which; sataù—of all living beings in all
planets.
TRANSLATION
Also please explain the duration of time between creation and annihilation,
and that of other subsidiary creations, as well as the nature of time, indicated by
the sound of past, present and future. Also, please explain the duration and
measurement of life of the different living beings known as the demigods, the
human beings, etc., in different planets of the universe.
PURPORT
Past, present and future are different features of time to indicate the
duration of life for the universe and all its paraphernalia, including the
different living beings in different planets.
TEXT 13
k-al/SYaaNauGaiTaYaaR Tau l/+YaTae_<vq b*hTYaiPa )
YaavTYa" k-MaRGaTaYaae Yaad*XaqiÜRJaSataMa )) 13 ))
kälasyänugatir yä tu
lakñyate ’ëvé båhaty api
yävatyaù karma-gatayo
yädåçér dvija-sattama
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
kälasya—of eternal time; anugatiù—beginning; yä tu—as they are;
lakñyate—experienced; aëvé—small; båhaté—great; api—even; yävatyaù—as
long as; karma-gatayaù—in terms of the work performed; yädåçéù—as it may;
dvija-sattama—O purest of all brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
O purest of the brähmaëas, please also explain the cause of the different
durations of time, both short and long, as well as the beginning of time,
following the course of action.
TEXT 14
YaiSMaNa( k-MaRSaMaavaYaae YaQaa YaeNaaePaGa*ùTae )
Gau<aaNaa& Gaui<aNaa& cEv Pair<aaMaMa>aqPSaTaaMa( )) 14 ))
yasmin karma-samäväyo
yathä yenopagåhyate
guëänäà guëinäà caiva
pariëämam abhépsatäm
SYNONYMS
yasmin—in which; karma—actions; samäväyaù—accumulation; yathä—as far
as; yena—by which; upagåhyate—takes over; guëänäm—of the different modes
of material nature; guëinäm—of the living beings; ca—also; eva—certainly;
pariëämam—resultant; abhépsatäm—of the desires.
TRANSLATION
Then again, kindly describe how the proportionate accumulation of the
reactions resulting from the different modes of material nature act upon the
desiring living being, promoting or degrading him among the different species of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
life, beginning from the demigods down to the most insignificant creatures.
PURPORT
The actions and reactions of all works in the material modes of nature,
either in the minute form or in the gigantic form, are accumulated, and thus
the result of such accumulated actions and reactions of karma, or work,
become manifested in the same proportion. How such actions and reactions
take place, what the different procedures are, and in what proportion they act
are all subject matters of Mahäräja Parékñit’s inquiries from the great brähmaëa
Çukadeva Gosvämé.
Life in the higher planets, known as the abodes of the denizens of heaven,
is obtained not by the strength of spacecraft (as is now being contemplated by
the inexperienced scientists), but by works done in the mode of goodness.
Even on the very planet where we are now living, there are restrictions
upon the entrance of foreigners into a country where the citizens are more
prosperous. For example, the American government has many restrictions for
the entrance of foreigners from less prosperous countries. The reason is that
the Americans do not wish to share their prosperity with any foreigner who
has not qualified himself as a citizen of America. Similarly, the same mentality
is prevailing in every other planet where there are more intelligent living
beings residing. The higher planetary living conditions are all in the mode of
goodness, and anyone desiring to enter the higher planets like the moon, sun
and Venus must qualify thoroughly by activity in complete goodness.
Mahäräja Parékñit’s inquiries are on the basis of proportionate actions of
goodness which qualify one in this planet to be promoted to the highest
regions of the universe.
Even on this planet of our present residence, one cannot achieve a good
position within the social order without being qualified with proportionate
good work. One cannot forcibly sit on the chair of a high-court judge without
being qualified for the post. Similarly, one cannot enter into the higher
planetary systems without being qualified by good works in this life. Persons
addicted to the habits of passion and ignorance have no chance of entering the
higher planetary systems simply by an electronic mechanism.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
According to the statement of the Bhagavad-gétä (9.25), persons trying to
qualify themselves for promotion to the higher, heavenly planets can go there;
similarly, persons trying for the Pitålokas can go there; similarly, persons trying
to improve the conditions on this earth can also do that, and persons who are
engaged in going back home, back to Godhead, can achieve that result. The
various actions and reactions of work in the mode of goodness are generally
known as pious work with devotional service, culture of knowledge with
devotional service, mystic powers with devotional service and (at last)
devotional service unmixed with any other varieties of goodness. This
unmixed devotional service is transcendental and is called parä bhakti. It alone
can promote a person to the transcendental kingdom of God. Such a
transcendental kingdom is not a myth, but is as factual as the moon. One must
have transcendental qualities to understand the kingdom of God and God
Himself.
TEXT 15
>aUPaaTaal/k-ku-BVYaaeMaGa]hNa+a}a>aU>a*TaaMa( )
SairTSaMaud]ÜqPaaNaa& SaM>avêETadaek-SaaMa( )) 15 ))
bhü-pätäla-kakub-vyomagraha-
nakñatra-bhübhåtäm
sarit-samudra-dvépänäà
sambhavaç caitad-okasäm
SYNONYMS
bhü-pätäla—underneath the land; kakup—the four sides of the heavens;
vyoma—the sky; graha—the planets; nakñatra—the stars; bhübhåtäm—of the
hills; sarit—the river; samudra—the sea; dvépänäm—of the islands;
sambhavaù—appearance; ca—also; etat—their; okasäm—of the inhabitants.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
O best of the brähmaëas, please also describe how the creation of the globes
throughout the universe, the four directions of the heavens, the sky, the
planets, the stars, the mountains, the rivers, the seas and the islands, as well as
their different kinds of inhabitants, takes place.
PURPORT
The inhabitants of different varieties of land, etc., are differently situated,
and not all of them are equal in all respects. The inhabitants of the land are
different from the inhabitants of the water or the sky, and similarly the
inhabitants of the different planets and stars in the sky are also different from
one another. By the laws of the Lord, no place is vacant, but the creatures of
one particular place are different from those of other places. Even in human
society the inhabitants of the jungles or the deserts are different from those of
the cities and villages. They are so made according to different qualities of the
modes of nature. Such adjustment by the laws of nature is not blind. There is a
great plan behind the arrangement. Mahäräja Parékñit requests the great sage
Çukadeva Gosvämé to explain all these authoritatively, in accordance with
proper understanding.
TEXT 16
Pa[Maa<aMa<@k-aeXaSYa baùa>YaNTar>aedTa" )
MahTaa& caNaucirTa& v<aaRé[MaiviNaêYa" )) 16 ))
pramäëam aëòa-koçasya
bähyäbhyantara-bhedataù
mahatäà cänucaritaà
varëäçrama-viniçcayaù
SYNONYMS
pramäëam—extent and measurement; aëòa-koçasya—of the universe;
bähya—outer space; abhyantara—inner space; bhedataù—by division of;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mahatäm—of the great souls; ca—also; anucaritam—character and activities;
varëa—castes; äçrama—orders of life; viniçcayaù—specifically describe.
TRANSLATION
Also, please describe the inner and outer space of the universe by specific
divisions, as well as the character and activities of the great souls, and also the
characteristics of the different classifications of the castes and orders of social
life.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Parékñit is a typical devotee of Lord Kåñëa, and as such he is
anxious to know the complete significance of the creation of the Lord. He
wants to know the inner and outer space of the universal form. It is quite
fitting for the real searcher of knowledge to know all about this. Those who are
of the opinion that the devotees of the Lord are satisfied with mere sentiments
can find in the inquiries of Mahäräja Parékñit good lessons as to how
inquisitive a pure devotee is to know things in their true perfection. The
modern scientist is unable to know about the inner space of the universal
horizon, and what to speak of the space which covers the universe.
Mahäräja Parékñit is not satisfied with only material knowledge. He is
inquisitive about the character and activities of the great souls, the devotees of
the Lord. The glories of the Lord and the glories of His devotees, combined
together, comprise the complete knowledge of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Lord Kåñëa
showed His mother the complete universal creation within His mouth, while
she, completely charmed by her son, wanted to look inside the mouth of the
Lord just to see how much earth the child had eaten. By the grace of the Lord
the devotees are able to see everything in the universe within the mouth of the
Lord.
The very idea of the scientific divisions of four classes of human society and
four orders of life is also inquired about herewith on the basis of individual
personal quality. The four divisions are exactly like the four divisions of one’s
personal body. The parts and parcels of the body are nondifferent from the
body, but by themselves they are only parts. That is the significance of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
whole scientific system of four castes and four social orders. The value of such
scientific divisions of human society can be ascertained only in terms of the
proportionate development of devotional service to the Lord. Any person
employed in government service, including the president, is a part and parcel
of the entire government. Everyone is a government servant, but no one is the
government himself. That is the position of all living entities in the
government of the Supreme Lord. No one can artificially claim the supreme
position of the Lord, but everyone is meant to serve the purpose of the
supreme whole.
TEXT 17
YauGaaiNa YauGaMaaNa& c DaMaaeR Yaê YauGae YauGae )
AvTaaraNaucirTa& YadaêYaRTaMa& hre" )) 17 ))
yugäni yuga-mänaà ca
dharmo yaç ca yuge yuge
avatäränucaritaà
yad äçcaryatamaà hareù
SYNONYMS
yugäni—the different ages; yuga-mänam—the duration of each age; ca—as
well as; dharmaù—the particular occupational duty; yaù ca—and which; yuge
yuge—in each and every yuga, or particular age; avatära—the incarnation;
anucaritam—and the activities of the incarnation; yat—which;
äçcaryatamam—the most wonderful activities; hareù—of the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Please explain all the different ages in the duration of the creation, and also
the duration of such ages. Also tell me about the different activities of the
different incarnations of the Lord in different ages.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa is the original Personality of Godhead, and all the incarnations
of the Supreme Lord, although nondifferent from Him, are emanations from
the Supreme. Mahäräja Parékñit inquired from the great and learned sage
Çukadeva Gosvämé about the different activities of such incarnations so that
the incarnation of the Lord might be confirmed by His activities in the
authoritative scriptures. Mahäräja Parékñit was not to be carried away by the
sentiments of the common man to accept an incarnation of the Lord very
cheaply. Instead he wished to accept the incarnation of the Lord by symptoms
mentioned in the Vedic literatures and confirmed by an äcärya like Çukadeva
Gosvämé. The Lord descends by His internal energy without any obligation to
the laws of material nature, and thus His activities are also uncommon. The
specific activities of the Lord are mentioned, and one should know that the
activities of the Lord and the Lord Himself are identical due to being on the
absolute plane. Thus to hear the activities of the Lord means to associate with
the Lord directly, and association with the Lord directly means purification
from material contamination. We have already discussed this point in the
previous volume.
TEXT 18
Na*<aa& SaaDaar<aae DaMaR" SaivXaezê Yaad*Xa" )
é[e<aqNaa& raJazs<aa& c DaMaR" k*-C^e\zu JaqvTaaMa( )) 18 ))
nåëäà sädhäraëo dharmaù
saviçeñaç ca yädåçaù
çreëénäà räjarñéëäà ca
dharmaù kåcchreñu jévatäm
SYNONYMS
nåëäm—of human society; sädhäraëaù—general; dharmaù—religious
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
affiliation; sa-viçeñaù—specific; ca—also; yädåçaù—as they are; çreëénäm—of
the particular three classes; räjarñéëäm—of the saintly royal order; ca—also;
dharmaù—occupational duty; kåcchreñu—in the matter of distressed
conditions; jévatäm—of the living beings.
TRANSLATION
Please also explain what may generally be the common religious affiliations
of human society, as well as their specific occupational duties in religion, the
classification of the social orders as well as the administrative royal orders, and
the religious principles for one who may be in distress.
PURPORT
The common religion of all classes of human beings, regardless of
whosoever and whatsoever one may be, is devotional service. Even the animals
may be included in devotional service to the Lord, and the best example is set
by Çré Vajräìgajé, or Hanumän, the great devotee of Lord Çré Räma. As we
have already discussed, even the aborigines and cannibals can also be engaged
in the devotional service of the Lord if they happen to be under the guidance
of a genuine devotee of the Lord. In the Skanda Puräëa there is a narration
that a hunter in the jungle became the most enlightened devotee of the Lord
by the guidance of Çré Närada Muni. Therefore devotional service to the Lord
can be equally shared by every living being.
Religious affiliation in terms of different countries and cultural
circumstances is obviously not the common religion of the human being;
rather, the basic principle is devotional service. Even if a particular type of
religious principle does not recognize the supremacy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the followers still have to obey the disciplinary
principles laid down by a particular leader. Such a leader of a religious sect is
never the supreme leader because such a circumstantial leader comes to the
position of leadership after undergoing some penance. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead does not, however, require to be under disciplinary
action to become leader, as we see in the activities of Lord Kåñëa.
The occupational duties of the castes and the orders of society, following
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the principles of livelihood, also depend on the principle of devotional service.
In the Bhagavad-gétä it is stated that a person can achieve the highest
perfection of life simply by awarding the results of his occupational duty unto
the devotional service of the Lord. People following the principles of
devotional service to the Lord can never be put into difficulty, and thus there
cannot be any question of äpad-dharma, or religion in distress. As will be
explained in this book by the greatest authority, Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé,
there is no religion save and except the devotional service of the Lord, though
this may be presented in different forms.
TEXT 19
TatvaNaa& PairSa&:YaaNa& l/+a<a& heTaul/+a<aMa( )
PauåzaraDaNaiviDaYaaeRGaSYaaDYaaiTMak-SYa c )) 19 ))
tattvänäà parisaìkhyänaà
lakñaëaà hetu-lakñaëam
puruñärädhana-vidhir
yogasyädhyätmikasya ca
SYNONYMS
tattvänäm—of the elements that constitute the creation; parisaìkhyänam—of
the number of such elements; lakñaëam—symptoms; hetu-lakñaëam—the
symptoms of the causes; puruña—of the Lord; ärädhana—of devotional service;
vidhiù—rules and regulations; yogasya—of cultivation of the yoga system;
adhyätmikasya—spiritual methods leading to devotional service; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Kindly explain all about the elementary principles of creation, the number of
such elementary principles, their causes, and their development, and also the
process of devotional service and the method of mystic powers.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 20
YaaeGaeìrEìYaRGaiTailR/®>a®STau YaaeiGaNaaMa( )
vedaePavedDaMaaR<aaiMaiTahaSaPaura<aYaae" )) 20 ))
yogeçvaraiçvarya-gatir
liìga-bhaìgas tu yoginäm
vedopaveda-dharmäëäm
itihäsa-puräëayoù
SYNONYMS
yoga-éçvara—of the master of the mystic powers; aiçvarya—opulence;
gatiù—advancement; liìga—astral body; bhaìgaù—detachment; tu—but;
yoginäm—of the mystics; veda—transcendental knowledge;
upaveda—knowledge in pursuance of the Veda indirectly; dharmäëäm—of the
religiosities; itihäsa—history; puräëayoù—of the Puräëas.
TRANSLATION
What are the opulences of the great mystics, and what is their ultimate
realization? How does the perfect mystic become detached from the subtle astral
body? What is the basic knowledge of the Vedic literatures, including the
branches of history and the supplementary Puräëas?
PURPORT
The yogeçvara, or the master of mystic powers, can exhibit eight kinds of
wonders of perfection by becoming smaller than the atom or lighter than a
feather, getting anything and everything he desires, going anywhere and
everywhere he likes, creating even a planet in the sky, etc. There are many
yogeçvaras having different proficiencies in these wonderful powers, and the
topmost of all of them is Lord Çiva. Lord Çiva is the greatest yogé, and he can
perform such wonderful things, far beyond the ordinary living beings. The
devotees of the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, do not directly
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
practice the process of mystic powers, but, by the grace of the Lord, His
devotee can defeat even a great yogeçvara like Durväsä Muni, who picked a
quarrel with Mahäräja Ambaréña and wanted to show the wonderful
achievements of his mystic powers. Mahäräja Ambaréña was a pure devotee of
the Lord, and thus without any effort on his part the Lord saved him from the
wrath of Yogeçvara Durväsä Muni, and the latter was obliged to beg pardon
from the King. Similarly, at the time of Draupadé’s precarious position, when
she was attacked by the Kurus who wanted to see her naked in the open
assembly of the royal order, the Lord saved her from being stripped by
supplying an unlimited length of sari to cover her. And Draupadé knew
nothing of mystic powers. Therefore the devotees are also yogeçvaras by the
unlimited power of the Lord, just as a child is powerful by the strength of the
parents. They do not try to protect themselves by any artificial means, but are
saved by the mercy of the parents.
Mahäräja Parékñit inquired from the learned brähmaëa Çukadeva Gosvämé
about the ultimate destination of such great mystics or how they attain such
extraordinary powers by their own efforts or by the grace of the Lord. He
inquired also about their detachment from the subtle and gross material bodies.
He inquired also about the purports of the Vedic knowledge. As stated in the
Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), the whole purport of all the Vedas is to know the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus become a transcendental loving
servant of the Lord.
TEXT 21
SaMâv" SavR>aUTaaNaa& iv§-Ma" Pa[iTaSax(k]-Ma" )
wíaPaUTaRSYa k-aMYaaNaa& i}avGaRSYa c Yaae iviDa" )) 21 ))
samplavaù sarva-bhütänäà
vikramaù pratisaìkramaù
iñöä-pürtasya kämyänäà
tri-vargasya ca yo vidhiù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
samplavaù—the perfect means or complete devastation; sarva-bhütänäm—of
all living beings; vikramaù—specific power or situation;
pratisaìkramaù—ultimate destruction; iñöä—performance of Vedic rituals;
pürtasya—pious acts in terms of religion; kämyänäm—rituals for economic
development; tri-vargasya—the three means of religion, economic
development and sense satisfaction; ca—also; yaù—whatsoever;
vidhiù—procedures.
TRANSLATION
Please explain unto me how the living beings are generated, how they are
maintained, and how they are annihilated. Tell me also of the advantages and
disadvantages of discharging devotional service unto the Lord. What are the
Vedic rituals and injunctions of the supplementary Vedic rites, and what are
the procedures of religion, economic development and sense satisfaction?
PURPORT
Samplavaù, in the sense of “perfect means,” is employed to denote the
discharging of devotional service, and pratisamplavaù means just the opposite,
or that which destroys the progress of devotional service. One who is firmly
situated in the devotional service of the Lord can very easily execute the
function of conditional life. Living the conditional life is just like plying a boat
in the middle of the ocean. One is completely at the mercy of the ocean, and at
every moment there is every chance of being drowned in the ocean by slight
agitation. If the atmosphere is all right, the boat can ply very easily,
undoubtedly, but if there is some storm, fog, wind or cloud, there is every
possibility of being drowned in the ocean. No one can control the whims of
the ocean, however one may be materially well equipped. One who has crossed
the oceans by ship may have sufficient experience of such dependence upon
the mercy of the ocean. But one can ply over the ocean of material existence
by the grace of the Lord very easily, without any fear of storm or fog. It all
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
depends on the will of the Lord; no one can help if there is some unfortunate
danger in the state of conditional life. The devotees of the Lord, however,
cross the ocean of material existence without anxiety because a pure devotee is
always protected by the Lord (Bg. 9.13). The Lord gives special attention to His
devotees in their activities within material, conditional life (Bg. 9.29).
Therefore everyone should take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord and be a
pure devotee of the Lord by all means.
One should know, therefore, from the expert spiritual master, the
advantages and disadvantages of discharging devotional service, just as
Mahäräja Parékñit asked his spiritual master, Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé.
According to Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, the science of devotional service, one
should not eat more than what he requires to maintain body and soul together.
Vegetable diets and milk are sufficient for maintenance of the human body,
and therefore one has no need to eat anything more to satisfy the palate. One
should also not accumulate money to become puffed up in the material world.
One should earn his livelihood easily and honestly, for it is better to become a
coolie for an honest livelihood than to become a great man in society by hook
and crook. There is no harm if one becomes the richest man in the world by
honest dealings, but one should not sacrifice the honest means of livelihood
simply to accumulate wealth. Such an endeavor is harmful to devotional
service. One should not talk nonsense. A devotee’s business is to earn the
favor of the Lord. Therefore a devotee should always glorify the Lord in His
wonderful creations. A devotee should not decry the creation of the Lord,
defying Him by saying that He has created a false world. The world is not false.
Factually we have to take so many things from the world for our maintenance,
so how we can say that the world is false? Similarly, how can one think of the
Lord as being without form? How can one become formless and at the same
time have all intelligence and consciousness, direct and indirect? So there are
many things for a pure devotee to learn, and he should learn them perfectly
from a bona fide personality like Çukadeva Gosvämé.
The favorable conditions for discharging devotional service are that one
should be very enthusiastic in serving the Lord. The Lord in His form of Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu wanted the cult of devotional service to the Lord to be
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
preached all over the world, in every nook and corner, and therefore a pure
devotee’s duty is to discharge this order as far as possible. Every devotee should
be very enthusiastic, not only in performing his daily rituals of devotional
service, but in trying to preach the cult peacefully by following in the footsteps
of Lord Caitanya. If he is not superficially successful in such an attempt, he
should not be deterred from the discharge of his duty. Success or failure has no
meaning for a pure devotee because he is a soldier in the field. Preaching the
cult of devotional service is something like declaring war against materialistic
life. There are different kinds of materialists, such as the fruitive workers, the
mental speculators, the mystic jugglers, and so many others. All of them are
against the existence of Godhead. They would declare that they are themselves
God, although in every step and in every action they are dependent on the
mercy of the Lord. Therefore a pure devotee may not associate with such gangs
of atheists. A strong devotee of the Lord will not be misled by such atheistic
propaganda of the nondevotees, but a neophyte devotee should be very
cautious about them. A devotee should see to the right discharge of devotional
service under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master and should not stick
only to the formalities. Under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master,
one should see how much service is being executed, and not simply in the
matter of rituals. A devotee should not hanker after anything, but he should be
satisfied with things that may automatically come to him by the will of the
Lord. That should be the principle of a devotional life. And all these principles
are easily learned under the guidance of a spiritual master like Çukadeva
Gosvämé. Mahäräja Parékñit inquired from Çukadeva correctly, and one should
follow his example.
Mahäräja Parékñit inquired about the process of creation, maintenance and
destruction of the material world, the process of Vedic rituals and the method
of executing pious activities in terms of the supplementary Vedas like the
Puräëas and Mahäbhärata. As explained before, the Mahäbhärata is the history
of ancient India, and so also are the Puräëas. Pious acts are prescribed in the
supplementary Vedas (småtis), which specifically mention digging tanks and
wells for the water supply of the people in general. To plant trees on the public
roads, to construct public temples and places of worship of God, to establish
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
places of charity where the poor destitutes can be provided with foodstuff, and
similar activities are called pürta.
Similarly, the process of fulfilling the natural desires for sense gratification
was also inquired about by the King for the benefit of all concerned.
TEXT 22
Yaae vaNauXaaiYaNaa& SaGaR" Paaz<@SYa c SaM>av" )
AaTMaNaae bNDaMaae+aaE c VYavSQaaNa& SvæPaTa" )) 22 ))
yo vänuçäyinäà sargaù
päñaëòasya ca sambhavaù
ätmano bandha-mokñau ca
vyavasthänaà sva-rüpataù
SYNONYMS
yaù—all those; vä—either; anuçäyinäm—merged into the body of the Lord;
sargaù—creation; päñaëòasya—of the infidels; ca—and;
sambhavaù—appearance; ätmanaù—of the living beings;
bandha—conditioned; mokñau—being liberated; ca—also;
vyavasthänam—being situated; sva-rüpataù—in an unconditioned state.
TRANSLATION
Please also explain how, merged in the body of the Lord, living beings are
created, and how the infidels appear in the world. Also please explain how the
unconditioned living entities exist.
PURPORT
The progressive devotee of the Lord must inquire from the bona fide
spiritual master how living entities merged in the body of the Lord again come
back at the time of creation. There are two kinds of living entities. There are
the ever-liberated, unconditioned living beings as well as the ever-conditioned
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
living beings. Of the ever-conditioned living beings, there are two divisions.
They are the faithful and the infidels. Of the faithful there are again two
divisions, namely the devotees and the mental speculators. The mental
speculators desire to merge into the existence of the Lord, or to become one
with the Lord, whereas the devotees of the Lord desire to keep separate
identities and constantly engage in the service of the Lord. The devotees who
are not fully purified, as well as the empiric philosophers, become conditioned
again during the next creation for further purification. Such conditioned souls
become liberated by further progress of devotional service to the Lord.
Mahäräja Parékñit asked all these questions from the bona fide spiritual master
in order to become fully equipped in the science of God.
TEXT 23
YaQaaTMaTaN}aae >aGavaNa( iv§-I@TYaaTMaMaaYaYaa )
ivSa*JYa va YaQaa MaaYaaMaudaSTae Saai+avd( ivi>au" )) 23 ))
yathätma-tantro bhagavän
vikréòaty ätma-mäyayä
visåjya vä yathä mäyäm
udäste säkñivad vibhuù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; ätma-tantraù—independent; bhagavän—the Personality of
Godhead; vikréòati—enjoys His pastimes; ätma-mäyayä—by His internal
potency; visåjya—giving up; vä—as also; yathä—as He desires; mäyäm—the
external potency; udäste—remains; säkñivat—just as the witness; vibhuù—the
almighty.
TRANSLATION
The independent Personality of Godhead enjoys His pastimes by His
internal potency and at the time of annihilation gives them up to the external
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
potency, and He remains a witness to it all.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa, being the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
fountainhead of all other incarnations, is the only independent person. He
enjoys His pastimes by creation as He desires and gives them up to the external
energy at the time of annihilation. By His internal potency only, He kills the
demon Pütanä, even though enjoying His pastimes in the lap of His mother
Yaçodä. And when He desires to leave this world He creates the pastimes of
killing His own family members (Yadu-kula) and remains unaffected by such
annihilation. He is the witness of everything that is happening, and yet He has
nothing to do with anything. He is independent in every respect. Mahäräja
Parékñit desired to know more perfectly, for a pure devotee ought to know well.
TEXT 24
SavRMaeTaÀ >aGavNa( Pa*C^Taae Mae_NauPaUvRXa" )
TatvTaae_hRSYaudahTau| Pa[PaàaYa MahaMauNae )) 24 ))
sarvam etac ca bhagavan
påcchato me ’nupürvaçaù
tattvato ’rhasy udähartuà
prapannäya mahä-mune
SYNONYMS
sarvam—all these; etat—inquiries; ca—also that I have not been able to ask;
bhagavan—O great sage; påcchataù—of the inquisitive; me—myself;
anupürvaçaù—from the beginning; tattvataù—just in accordance with the
truth; arhasi—may kindly be explained; udähartum—as you will let know;
prapannäya—one who is surrounded; mahä-mune—O great sage.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
O great sage, representative of the Lord, kindly satisfy my inquisitiveness in
all that I have inquired from you and all that I may not have inquired from you
from the very beginning of my questionings. Since I am a soul surrendered unto
you, please impart full knowledge in this connection.
PURPORT
The spiritual master is always prepared to impart knowledge to the disciple
and specifically when the disciple is very inquisitive. inquisitiveness on the
part of a disciple is greatly necessary for the progressive disciple. Mahäräja
Parékñit is a typical disciple because he is perfectly inquisitive. If one is not
very inquisitive about self-realization, one need not approach a spiritual master
simply to make a show of discipleship. Not only is Mahäräja Parékñit inquisitive
concerning all he has inquired about, but he is also anxious to know about
what he has not been able to inquire. Factually it is not possible for a man to
inquire about everything from the spiritual master, but the bona fide spiritual
master is able to enlighten the disciple in every way for the disciple’s benefit.
TEXT 25
A}a Pa[Maa<a& ih >avaNa( ParMaeïq YaQaaTMa>aU" )
APare caNauiTaïiNTa PaUveRza& PaUvRJaE" k*-TaMa( )) 25 ))
atra pramäëaà hi bhavän
parameñöhé yathätma-bhüù
apare cänutiñöhanti
pürveñäà pürva-jaiù kåtam
SYNONYMS
atra—in this matter; pramäëam—evidential facts; hi—certainly;
bhavän—yourself; parameñöhé—Brahmä, the creator of the universe; yathä—as;
ätma-bhüù—born directly from the Lord; apare—others; ca—only;
anutiñöhanti—just to follow; pürveñäm—as a matter of custom;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
pürva-jaiù—knowledge suggested by a previous philosopher; kåtam—having
been done.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, you are as good as Brahmä, the original living being. Others
follow custom only, as followed by the previous philosophical speculators.
PURPORT
It may be argued that Çukadeva Gosvämé is not the only authority of
perfect knowledge in transcendence because there are many other sages and
their followers. Contemporary to Vyäsadeva or even prior to him there were
many other great sages, such as Gautama, Kaëäda, Jaimini, Kapila and
Añöävakra, and all of them have presented a philosophical path by themselves.
Pataïjali is also one of them, and all these six great åñis have their own way of
thinking, exactly like the modern philosophers and mental speculators. The
difference between the six philosophical paths put forward by the renowned
sages above mentioned and that of Çukadeva Gosvämé, as presented in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, is that all the six sages mentioned above speak the facts
according to their own thinking, but Çukadeva Gosvämé presents the
knowledge which comes down directly from Brahmäjé, who is known as
ätma-bhüù, or born of and educated by the Almighty Personality of Godhead.
Vedic transcendental knowledge descends directly from the Personality of
Godhead. By His mercy, Brahmä, the first living being in the universe, was
enlightened, and from Brahmäjé, Närada was enlightened, and from Närada,
Vyäsa was enlightened. Çukadeva Gosvämé received such transcendental
knowledge directly from his father, Vyäsadeva. Thus the knowledge, being
received from the chain of disciplic succession, is perfect. One cannot be a
spiritual master in perfection unless and until one has received the same by
disciplic succession. That is the secret of receiving transcendental knowledge.
The six great sages mentioned above may be great thinkers, but their
knowledge by mental speculation is not perfect. However perfect an empiric
philosopher may be in presenting a philosophical thesis, such knowledge is
never perfect because it is produced by an imperfect mind. Such great sages
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
also have their disciplic successions, but they are not authorized because such
knowledge does not come directly from the independent Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Näräyaëa. No one can be independent except Näräyaëa;
therefore no one’s knowledge can be perfect, for everyone’s knowledge is
dependent on the flickering mind. Mind is material and thus knowledge
presented by material speculators is never transcendental and can never
become perfect. Mundane philosophers, being imperfect in themselves,
disagree with other philosophers because a mundane philosopher is not a
philosopher at all unless he presents his own theory. Intelligent persons like
Mahäräja Parékñit do not recognize such mental speculators, however great
they may be, but hear from the authorities like Çukadeva Gosvämé, who is
nondifferent from the Supreme Personality of Godhead by the paramparä
system, as is specially stressed in the Bhagavad-gétä.
TEXT 26
Na Mae_Sav" ParaYaiNTa b]øàNaXaNaadMaq )
iPabTaae_CYauTaPaqYaUzMa( Tad( vaKYaaiBDaiviNa"Sa*TaMa( )) 26 ))
na me ’savaù paräyanti
brahmann anaçanäd amé
pibato ’cyuta-péyüñam
tad väkyäbdhi-viniùsåtam
SYNONYMS
na—never; me—mine; asavaù—life; paräyanti—becomes exhausted;
brahman—O learned brähmaëa; anaçanät amé—because of fasting;
pibataù—because of my drinking; acyuta—of the infallible; péyüñam—nectar;
tat—your; väkya-abdhi—ocean of speech; viniùsåtam—flowing down from.
TRANSLATION
O learned brähmaëa, because of my drinking the nectar of the message of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
infallible Personality of Godhead, which is flowing down from the ocean of your
speeches, I do not feel any sort of exhaustion due to my fasting.
PURPORT
The disciplic succession from Brahmä, Närada, Vyäsa and Çukadeva
Gosvämé is particularly different from others. The disciplic successions from
other sages are simply a waste of time, being devoid of acyuta-kathä, or the
message of the infallible Lord. The mental speculators can present their
theories very nicely by reason and arguments, but such reasons and arguments
are not infallible, for they are defeated by better mental speculators. Mahäräja
Parékñit was not interested in the dry speculation of the flickering mind, but he
was interested in the topics of the Lord because factually he felt that by
hearing such a nectarean message from the mouth of Çukadeva Gosvämé he
was not feeling any exhaustion, even though he was fasting because of his
imminent death.
One can indulge in hearing the mental speculators, but such hearing
cannot endure for any length of time. One will be exhausted very soon from
hearing such hackneyed ways of thinking, and no one in the world can be
satisfied simply by hearing such useless speculations. The message of the Lord,
especially from a personality like Çukadeva Gosvämé, can never be tiring, even
though one may be exhausted from other causes.
In some editions of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the text of the last line of this
verse reads anyatra kupitäd dvijät, which means that the King might be
overwhelmed by the thought of his imminent death by snakebite. The snake is
also twice-born, and its anger is compared to the cursing brähmaëa boy who
was without good intelligence. Mahäräja Parékñit was not at all afraid of death,
for he was fully encouraged by the message of the Lord. One who is fully
absorbed in acyuta-kathä can never be afraid of anything in this world.
TEXT 27
SaUTa ovac
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Sa oPaaMaiN}aTaae raja k-QaaYaaiMaiTa SaTPaTae" )
b]øraTaae >a*Xa& Pa[qTaae ivZ<auraTaeNa Sa&Said )) 27 ))
süta uväca
sa upämantrito räjïä
kathäyäm iti sat-pateù
brahmaräto bhåçaà préto
viñëurätena saàsadi
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Çréla Süta Gosvämé said; saù—he (Çukadeva Gosvämé);
upämantritaù—thus being inquired; räjïä—by the King; kathäyäm—in the
topics; iti—thus; sat-pateù—of the highest truth; brahma-rätaù—Çukadeva
Gosvämé; bhåçam—very much; prétaù—pleased; viñëu-rätena—by Mahäräja
Parékñit; saàsadi—in the meeting.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Thus Çukadeva Gosvämé, being invited by Mahäräja
Parékñit to speak on topics of the Lord Çré Kåñëa with the devotees, was very
much pleased.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam can be legitimately discussed only among the devotees
of the Lord. As the Bhagavad-gétä was authoritatively discussed between Lord
Kåñëa and Arjuna (the Lord and the devotee respectively), similarly
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is the postgraduate study of the Bhagavad-gétä, can
also be discussed between the scholars and devotees like Çukadeva Gosvämé
and Mahäräja Parékñit. Otherwise the real taste of the nectar cannot be
relished. Çukadeva Gosvämé was pleased with Mahäräja Parékñit because he
was not at all tired of hearing the topics of the Lord and was more and more
anxious to hear them on and on with interest. Foolish interpreters
unnecessarily tackle the Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam when they
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
have no access to the subject matter. There is no use in nondevotees’ meddling
with the two topmost Vedic literatures, and therefore Çaìkaräcärya did not
touch Çrémad-Bhägavatam for commentation. In his commentation on the
Bhagavad-gétä, Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya accepted Lord Kåñëa as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but later on he commented from the impersonalist’s
view. But, being conscious of his position, he did not comment on the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé was protected by Lord Kåñëa (vide
Brahma-vaivarta Puräëa), and therefore he is known as Brahmaräta, and
Çrémän Parékñit Mahäräja was protected by Viñëu, and thus he is known as
Viñëuräta. As devotees of the Lord, they are always protected by the Lord. It is
clear also in this connection that a Viñëuräta should hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam
from Brahmaräta and no one else because others misrepresent the
transcendental knowledge and thus spoil one’s valuable time.
TEXT 28
Pa[ah >aaGavTa& NaaMa Paura<a& b]øSaiMMaTaMa( )
b]ø<ae >aGavTPa[ae¢&- b]øk-LPa oPaaGaTae )) 28 ))
präha bhägavataà näma
puräëaà brahma-sammitam
brahmaëe bhagavat-proktaà
brahma-kalpa upägate
SYNONYMS
präha—he said; bhägavatam—the science of the Personality of Godhead;
näma—of the name; puräëam—the supplement of the Vedas;
brahma-sammitam—just in pursuance of the Vedas; brahmaëe—unto Lord
Brahmä; bhagavat-proktam—was spoken by the Personality of Godhead;
brahma-kalpe—the millennium in which Brahmä was first generated;
upägate—just in the beginning.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
He began to reply to the inquiries of Mahäräja Parékñit by saying that the
science of the Personality of Godhead was spoken first by the Lord Himself to
Brahmä when he was first born. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the supplementary
Vedic literature, and it is just in pursuance of the Vedas.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the science of the Personality of Godhead. The
impersonalist always tries to misrepresent the personal feature of the Lord, not
knowing the science of this great knowledge, and Çrémad-Bhägavatam is in
pursuance of the Vedas and scientific knowledge of the Personality of
Godhead. To learn this science one should take shelter of the representative of
Çré Çukadeva and follow in the footsteps of Mahäräja Parékñit without foolishly
attempting to interpret, thereby committing a great offense at the feet of the
Lord. The dangerous ways of interpretations by the nondevotee class of men
have played havoc in understanding the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and the careful
student should be always alert in this matter if he at all wants to learn the
science of Godhead.
TEXT 29
Yad( YaTa( Parqi+ad*z>a" Paa<@UNaaMaNauPa*C^iTa )
AaNauPaUVYaeR<a TaTSavRMaa:YaaTauMauPac§-Mae )) 29 ))
yad yat parékñid åñabhaù
päëòünäm anupåcchati
änupürvyeëa tat sarvam
äkhyätum upacakrame
SYNONYMS
yat yat—whatsoever; parékñit—the King; åñabhaù—the best; päëòünäm—in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the dynasty of Päëòu; anupåcchati—goes on inquiring; änupürvyeëa—the
beginning to the end; tat—all those; sarvam—fully; äkhyätum—to describe;
upacakrame—he just prepared himself.
TRANSLATION
He also prepared himself to reply to all that King Parékñit had inquired from
him. Mahäräja Parékñit was the best in the dynasty of the Päëòus, and thus he
was able to ask the right questions from the right person.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Parékñit asked many questions, some of them very curiously, to
know things as they are, but it is not necessary for the master to answer them
in the order of the disciple’s inquiries, one after the other. But Çukadeva
Gosvämé, experienced teacher that he was, answered all the questions in a
systematic way as they were received from the chain of disciplic succession.
And he answered all of them without exception.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Eighth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Questions by King Parékñit.”
Chapter Nine
Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version
TEXT 1
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
é[qéuk- ovac
AaTMaMaaYaaMa*Tae raJaNa( ParSYaaNau>avaTMaNa" )
Na ga$e=TaaQaRSaMbNDa" SvPand]íuirvaÅSaa )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ätma-mäyäm åte räjan
parasyänubhavätmanaù
na ghaöetärtha-sambandhaù
svapna-drañöur iväïjasä
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; ätma—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; mäyäm—energy; åte—without; räjan—O King; parasya—of the
pure soul; anubhava-ätmanaù—of the purely conscious; na—never; ghaöeta—it
can so happen; artha—meaning; sambandhaù—relation with the material
body; svapna—dream; drañöuù—of the seer; iva—like; aïjasä—completely.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, unless one is influenced by the energy
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no meaning to the relationship
of the pure soul in pure consciousness with the material body. That relationship
is just like a dreamer’s seeing his own body working.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Parékñit’s question as to how a living entity began his material
life, although he is apart from the material body and mind, is perfectly
answered. The spirit soul is distinct from the material conception of his life,
but he is absorbed in such a material conception because of being influenced
by the external energy of the Lord, called ätma-mäyä. This has already been
explained in the First Canto in connection with Vyäsadeva’s realization of the
Supreme Lord and His external energy. The external energy is controlled by
the Lord, and the living entities are controlled by the external energy—by the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
will of the Lord. Therefore, although the living entity is purely conscious in his
pure state, he is subordinate to the will of the Lord in being influenced by the
external energy of the Lord. In the Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) also the same thing is
confirmed; the Lord is present within the heart of every living entity, and all
the living entity’s consciousness and forgetfulness are influenced by the Lord.
Now the next question automatically made will be why the Lord influences
the living entity to such consciousness and forgetfulness. The answer is that
the Lord clearly wishes that every living entity be in his pure consciousness as
a part and parcel of the Lord and thus be engaged in the loving service of the
Lord as he is constitutionally made; but because the living entity is partially
independent also, he may not be willing to serve the Lord, but may try to
become as independent as the Lord is. All the nondevotee living entities are
desirous of becoming equally as powerful as the Lord, although they are not fit
to become so. The living entities are illusioned by the will of the Lord because
they wanted to become like Him. Like a person who thinks of becoming a king
without possessing the necessary qualification, when the living entity desires
to become the Lord Himself, he is put in a condition of dreaming that he is a
king. Therefore the first sinful will of the living entity is to become the Lord,
and the consequent will of the Lord is that the living entity forget his factual
life and thus dream of the land of utopia where he may become one like the
Lord. The child cries to have the moon from the mother, and the mother gives
the child a mirror to satisfy the crying and disturbing child with the reflection
of the moon. Similarly, the crying child of the Lord is given over to the
reflection, the material world, to lord it over as karmé and to give this up in
frustration to become one with the Lord. Both these stages are dreaming
illusions only. There is no necessity of tracing out the history of when the
living entity desired this. But the fact is that as soon as he desired it, he was
put under the control of ätma-mäyä by the direction of the Lord. Therefore
the living entity in his material condition is dreaming falsely that this is
“mine” and this is “I.” The dream is that the conditioned soul thinks of his
material body as “I” or falsely thinks that he is the Lord and that everything in
connection with that material body is “mine.” Thus only in dream does the
misconception of “I” and “mine” persist life after life. This continues life after
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
life, as long as the living entity is not purely conscious of his identity as the
subordinate part and parcel of the Lord.
In his pure consciousness, however, there is no such misconceived dream,
and in that pure conscious state the living entity does not forget that he is
never the Lord, but that he is eternally the servitor of the Lord in
transcendental love.
TEXT 2
bhuæPa wva>aaiTa MaaYaYaa bhuæPaYaa )
rMaMaa<aae Gau<aeZvSYaa MaMaahiMaiTa MaNYaTae )) 2 ))
bahu-rüpa iväbhäti
mäyayä bahu-rüpayä
ramamäëo guëeñv asyä
mamäham iti manyate
SYNONYMS
bahu-rüpaù—multiforms; iva—as it were; äbhäti—manifested; mäyayä—by the
influence of the exterior energy; bahu-rüpayä—in multifarious forms;
ramamäëaù—enjoying as it were; guëeñu—in the modes of different qualities;
asyäù—of the external energy; mama—mine; aham—I; iti—thus;
manyate—thinks.
TRANSLATION
The illusioned living entity appears in so many forms offered by the external
energy of the Lord. While enjoying in the modes of material nature, the encaged
living entity misconceives, thinking in terms of “I” and “mine.”
PURPORT
The different forms of the living entities are different dresses offered by the
illusory, external energy of the Lord according to the modes of nature the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
living being desires to enjoy. The external, material energy is represented by
her three modes, namely goodness, passion and ignorance. So even in the
material nature there is a chance of an independent choice by the living
entity, and according to his choice the material energy offers him different
varieties of material bodies. There are bodies, 1,100,000 worms and reptiles,
1,000,000 forms of birds, together there are 8,400,000 varieties of bodies in
different planets of the universe, and the living entity is traveling by so many
transmigrations according to different modes of enjoying spirit within himself.
Even in one particular body the living entity changes from childhood to
boyhood, from boyhood to youth, from youth to old age and from old age to
another body created by his own action. The living entity creates his own body
by his personal desires, and the external energy of the Lord supplies him the
exact form by which he can enjoy his desires to the fullest extent. The tiger
wanted to enjoy the blood of another animal, and therefore, by the grace of
the Lord, the material energy supplied him the body of the tiger with facilities
for enjoying blood from another animal. Similarly, a living entity desiring to
get the body of a demigod in a higher planet can also get it by the grace of the
Lord. And if he is intelligent enough, he can desire to get a spiritual body to
enjoy the company of the Lord, and he will get it. So the minute freedom of
the living entity can be fully utilized, and the Lord is so kind that He will
award the living entity the same type of body he desires. The living entity’s
desiring is like dreaming of a golden mountain. A person knows what a
mountain is, and he knows also what gold is. Out of his desire only, he dreams
of a golden mountain, and when the dream is over he sees something else in
his presence. He finds in his awakened state that there is neither gold nor a
mountain, and what to speak of a golden mountain.
The different positions of the living entities in the material world under
multifarious manifestations of bodies are due to the misconception of “mine”
and “I.” The karmé thinks of this world as “mine,” and the jïäné thinks “I am”
everything. The whole material conception of politics, sociology, philanthropy,
altruism, etc., conceived by the conditioned souls is on the basis of this
misconceived “I” and “mine,” which are products of a strong desire to enjoy
material life. Identification with the body and the place where the body is
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
obtained under different conceptions of socialism, nationalism, family
affection, and so on and so forth is all due to forgetfulness of the real nature of
the living entity, and the whole misconception of the bewildered living entity
can be removed by the association of Çukadeva Gosvämé and Mahäräja
Parékñit, as all this is explained in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 3
YaihR vav MaihiMan Sve PariSMaNa( k-al/MaaYaYaae" )
rMaeTa GaTaSaMMaaehSTYa¤-aedaSTae Tadae>aYaMa( )) 3 ))
yarhi väva mahimni sve
parasmin käla-mäyayoù
rameta gata-sammohas
tyaktvodäste tadobhayam
SYNONYMS
yarhi—at any time; väva—certainly; mahimni—in the glory; sve—of himself;
parasmin—in the Supreme; käla—time; mäyayoù—of the material energy;
rameta—enjoys; gata-sammohaù—being freed from the misconception;
tyaktvä—giving up; udäste—in fullness; tadä—then; ubhayam—both (the
misconceptions of I and mine).
TRANSLATION
As soon as the living entity becomes situated in his constitutional glory and
begins to enjoy the transcendence beyond time and material energy, he at once
gives up the two misconceptions of life [I and mine] and thus becomes fully
manifested as the pure self.
PURPORT
The two misconceptions of life, namely “I” and “mine,” are verily
manifested in two classes of men. In the lower state the conception of “mine”
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
is very prominent, and in the higher state the misconception of “I” is
prominent. In the animal state of life the misconception of “mine” is
perceivable even in the category of cats and dogs, who fight with one another
with the same misconception of “mine.” In the lower stage of human life the
same misconception is also prominent in the shape of “It is my body,” “It is my
house,” “It is my family,” “It is my caste,” “It is my nation,” “It is my country,”
and so on. And in the higher stage of speculative knowledge, the same
misconception of “mine” is transformed into “I am,” or “It is all I am,” etc.
There are many classes of men comprehending the same misconception of “I”
and “mine’, in different colors. But the real significance of “I” can be realized
only when one is situated in the consciousness of “I am the eternal servitor of
the Lord.” This is pure consciousness, and the whole Vedic literatures teach us
this conception of life.
The misconception of “I am the Lord,” or “I am the Supreme,” is more
dangerous than the misconception of “mine.” Although there are sometimes
directions in the Vedic literatures to think oneself one with the Lord, that
does not mean that one becomes identical with the Lord in every respect.
Undoubtedly there is oneness of the living entity with the Lord in many
respects, but ultimately the living entity is subordinate to the Lord, and he is
constitutionally meant for satisfying the senses of the Lord. The Lord
therefore asks the conditioned souls to surrender unto Him. Had the living
entities not been subordinate to the supreme will, why would the living entity
be asked to surrender? Had the living being been equal in all respects, then
why was he put under the influence of mäyä? We have already discussed many
times that the material energy is controlled by the Lord. The Bhagavad-gétä
(9.10) confirms this controlling power of the Lord over the material nature.
Can a living entity who claims to be as good as the Supreme Being control the
material nature? The foolish “I” would reply that he will do so in the future.
Even accepting that in the future one will be as good a controller of material
nature as the Supreme Being, then why is one now under the control of
material nature? The Bhagavad-gétä says that one can be freed from the control
of the material nature by surrendering unto the Supreme Lord, but if there is
no surrender, then the living entity will never be able to control the material
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
nature. So one must also give up this misconception of “I” by practicing the
way of devotional service or firmly being situated in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord. A poor man without any employment or occupation may
undergo so many troubles in life, but if by chance the same man gets a good
service under the government, he at once becomes happy. There is no profit in
denying the supremacy of the Lord, who is the controller of all energies, but
one should be constitutionally situated in one’s own glory, namely to be
situated in the pure consciousness of being the eternal servitor of the Lord. In
his conditional life the living entity is servant of the illusory mäyä, and in his
liberated state he is the pure, unqualified servant of the Lord. To become
untinged by the modes of material nature is the qualification for entering into
the service of the Lord. As long as one is a servant of mental concoctions, one
cannot be completely free from the disease of “I” and “mine.”
The Supreme Truth is uncontaminated by the illusory energy because He is
the controller of that energy. The relative truths are apt to be engrossed in
illusory energy. The best purpose is served, however, when one is directly
facing the Supreme Truth, as when one faces the sun. The sun overhead in the
sky is full of light, but when the sun is not in the visible sky, all is in darkness.
Similarly, when one is face to face with the Supreme Lord, he is freed from all
illusions, and one who is not so is in the darkness of illusory mäyä. The
Bhagavad-gétä (14.26) confirms this as follows:
mäà ca yo ’vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
So the science of bhakti-yoga, of worshiping the Lord, glorifying the Lord,
hearing the Çrémad-Bhägavatam from the right sources (not from the
professional man but from a person who is Bhägavatam in life) and being
always in the association of pure devotees, should be adopted in earnestness.
One should not be misled by misconceptions of “I” and “mine.” The karmés are
fond of the conception of “mine,” the jïänés are fond of the conception of “I,”
and both of them are unqualified to be free from the bondage of the illusory
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
energy. Çrémad-Bhägavatam and, primarily, the Bhagavad-gétä are both meant
for delivering a person from the misconception of “I” and “mine,” and Çréla
Vyäsadeva transcribed them for the deliverance of the fallen souls. The living
entity has to be situated in the transcendental position where there is no more
influence of time nor of the material energy. In conditioned life the living
entity is subjected to the influence of time in the dream of past, present and
future. The mental speculator tries to conquer the influence of time by future
speculations of becoming Väsudeva or the Supreme Lord himself by means of
culturing knowledge and conquering over ego. But the process is not perfect.
The perfect process is to accept Lord Väsudeva as the Supreme in everything,
and the best perfection in culturing knowledge is to surrender unto Him
because He is the source of everything. Only in that conception can one get
rid of the misconception of I and mine. Both Bhagavad-gétä and the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam confirm it. Çréla Vyäsadeva has specifically contributed to
the illusioned living entities the science of God and the process of bhakti-yoga
in his great literature Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and the conditioned soul should
fully take advantage of this great science.
TEXT 4
AaTMaTatvivéuÖyQa| Yadah >aGavaNa*TaMa( )
b]ø<ae dXaRYaNa( æPaMaVYal/Ik-v]Taad*Ta" )) 4 ))
ätma-tattva-viçuddhy-arthaà
yad äha bhagavän åtam
brahmaëe darçayan rüpam
avyaléka-vratädåtaù
SYNONYMS
ätma-tattva—the science of God or that of the living entity;
viçuddhi—purification; artham—goal; yat—that which; äha—said;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; åtam—in reality; brahmaëe—unto
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord Brahmä; darçayan—by showing; rüpam—eternal form;
avyaléka—without any deceptive motive; vrata—vow; ädåtaù—worshiped.
TRANSLATION
O King, the Personality of Godhead, being very much pleased with Lord
Brahmä because of his nondeceptive penance in bhakti-yoga, presented His
eternal and transcendental form before Brahmä. And that is the objective goal
for purifying the conditioned soul.
PURPORT
Ätma-tattva is the science of both God and the living entity. Both the
Supreme Lord and the living entity are known as ätmä. The Supreme Lord is
called Paramätmä, and the living entity is called the ätmä, the brahma or the
jéva. Both the Paramätmä and the jévätmä, being transcendental to the material
energy, are called ätmä. So Çukadeva Gosvämé explains this verse with the aim
of purifying the truth of both the Paramätmä and the jévätmä. Generally
people have many wrong conceptions about both of them. The wrong
conception of the jévätmä is to identify the material body with the pure soul,
and the wrong conception of Paramätmä is to think Him on an equal level
with the living entity. But both misconceptions can be removed by one stroke
of bhakti-yoga, just as in the sunlight both the sun and the world and
everything within the sunlight are properly seen. In the darkness one cannot
see the sun, nor himself, nor the world. But in the sunlight one can see the
sun, himself and the world around him. Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé therefore says
that for purification of both wrong conceptions, the Lord presented His
eternal form before Brahmäjé, being fully satisfied by Brahmä’s nondeceptive
vow of discharging bhakti-yoga. Except for bhakti-yoga, any method for
realization of ätma-tattva, or the science of ätmä, will prove deceptive in the
long run.
In the Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord says that only by bhakti-yoga can one know
Him perfectly, and then one can enter into the science of God. Brahmäjé
undertook great penance in performing bhakti-yoga, and thus he was able to
see the transcendental form of the Lord. His transcendental form is one
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
hundred percent spiritual, and one can see Him only by spiritualized vision
after proper discharge of tapasya or penance, in pure bhakti-yoga. The form of
the Lord manifested before Brahmä is not one of the forms with which we
have experience in the material world. Brahmäjé did not perform such severe
types of penance just to see a form of material production. Therefore the
question by Mahäräja Parékñit about the form of the Lord is answered. The
form of the Lord is sac-cid-änanda, or eternal, full of knowledge and full of
bliss. But the material form of the living being is neither eternal, nor full of
knowledge, nor blissful. That is the distinction between the form of the Lord
and that of the conditioned soul. The conditioned soul, however, can regain
his form of eternal knowledge and bliss simply by seeing the Lord by means of
bhakti-yoga.
The summary is that due to ignorance the conditioned soul is encaged in
the temporary varieties of material forms. But the Supreme Lord has no such
temporary form like the conditioned souls. He is always possessed of an eternal
form of knowledge and bliss, and that is the difference between the Lord and
the living entity. One can understand this difference by the process of
bhakti-yoga. Brahmä was then told by the Lord the gist of Çrémad-Bhägavatam
in four original verses. Thus Çrémad-Bhägavatam is not a creation of the
mental speculators. The sound of Çrémad-Bhägavatam is transcendental, and
the resonance of Çrémad-Bhägavatam is as good as that of the Vedas. Thus the
topic of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the science of both the Lord and the living
entity. Regular reading or hearing of Çrémad-Bhägavatam is also performance
of bhakti-yoga, and one can attain the highest perfection simply by the
association of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Both Çukadeva Gosvämé and Mahäräja
Parékñit attained perfection through the medium of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 5
Sa Aaiddevae JaGaTaa& Parae Gauå"
SviDaZ<YaMaaSQaaYa iSaSa*+aYaE+aTa )
Taa& NaaDYaGaC^d( d*XaMa}a SaMMaTaa&
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Pa[PaÄiNaMaaR<aiviDaYaRYaa >aveTa( )) 5 ))
sa ädi-devo jagatäà paro guruù
svadhiñëyam ästhäya sisåkñayaikñata
täà nädhyagacchad dåçam atra sammatäà
prapaïca-nirmäëa-vidhir yayä bhavet
SYNONYMS
saù—he; ädi-devaù—the first demigod; jagatäm—of the universe;
paraù—supreme; guruù—spiritual master; svadhiñëyam—his lotus seat;
ästhäya—to find the source of it; sisåkñayä—for the matter of creating the
universal affairs; aikñata—began to think; täm—in that matter; na—could
not; adhyagacchat—understand; dåçam—the direction; atra—therein;
sammatäm—just the proper way; prapaïca—material; nirmäëa—construction;
vidhiù—process; yayä—as much as; bhavet—should be.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, the first spiritual master, supreme in the universe, could not
trace out the source of his lotus seat, and while thinking of creating the material
world, he could not understand the proper direction for such creative work, nor
could he find out the process for such creation.
PURPORT
This verse is the prelude for explaining the transcendental nature of the
form and the abode of the Lord. In the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam it has
already been said that the Supreme Absolute Truth exists in His own abode
without any touch of the deluding energy. Therefore the kingdom of God is
not a myth but factually a different and transcendental sphere of planets
known as the Vaikuëöhas. This will also be explained in this chapter.
Such knowledge of the spiritual sky far above this material sky and its
paraphernalia can be known only by dint of devotional service, or bhakti-yoga.
The power of creation by Lord Brahmä was also achieved by bhakti-yoga.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Brahmäjé was bewildered in the matter of creation, and he could not even
trace out the source of his own existence. But all this knowledge was fully
achieved by him through the medium of bhakti-yoga. By bhakti-yoga one can
know the Lord, and by knowing the Lord as the Supreme, one is able to know
everything else. One who knows the Supreme knows everything else. That is
the version of all Vedas. Even the first spiritual master of the universe was
enlightened by the grace of the Lord, so who else can attain perfect knowledge
of everything without the mercy of the Lord? If anyone desires to seek perfect
knowledge of everything, he must seek the mercy of the Lord, and there is no
other means. To seek knowledge on the strength of one’s personal attempt is a
sheer waste of time.
TEXT 6
Sa icNTaYaNa( Üy+arMaek-daM>a‚
SYauPaaé*<aaed( iÜGaRidTa& vcae iv>au" )
SPaXaeRzu YaTzae@XaMaek-iv&Xa&
iNaiZk-ÄNaaNaa& Na*Pa Yad( DaNa& ivdu" )) 6 ))
sa cintayan dvy-akñaram ekadämbhasy
upäçåëod dvir-gaditaà vaco vibhuù
sparçeñu yat ñoòaçam ekaviàçaà
niñkiïcanänäà nåpa yad dhanaà viduù
SYNONYMS
saù—he; cintayan—while thus thinking; dvi—two; akñaram—syllables;
ekadä—once upon a time; ambhasi—in the water; upäçåëot—heard it nearby;
dviù—twice; gaditam—uttered; vacaù—words; vibhuù—the great; sparçeñu—in
the sparça letters; yat—which; ñoòaçam—the sixteenth; ekaviàçam—and the
twenty-first; niñkiïcanänäm—of the renounced order of life; nåpa—O King;
yat—what is; dhanam—wealth; viduù—as it is known.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
While thus engaged in thinking, in the water, Brahmäjé heard twice from
nearby two syllables joined together. One of the syllables was taken from the
sixteenth and the other from the twenty-first of the sparça alphabets, and both
joined to become the wealth of the renounced order of life.
PURPORT
In Sanskrit language, the consonant alphabets are divided into two
divisions, namely the sparça-varëas and the tälavya-varëas. From ka to ma the
letters are known as the sparça-varëas, and the sixteenth of the group is called
ta, whereas the twenty-first letter is called pa. So when they are joined
together, the word tapa, or penance, is constructed. This penance is the beauty
and wealth of the brähmaëas and the renounced order of life. According to
Bhägavata philosophy, every human being is meant simply for this tapa and for
no other business, because by penance only can one realize his self; and
self-realization, not sense gratification, is the business of human life. This tapa,
or penance, was begun from the very beginning of the creation, and it was first
adopted by the supreme spiritual master, Lord Brahmä. By tapasya only can
one get the profit of human life, and not by a polished civilization of animal
life. The animal does not know anything except sense gratification in the
jurisdiction of eat, drink, be merry and enjoy. But the human being is made to
undergo tapasya for going back to Godhead, back home.
When Lord Brahmä was perplexed about how to construct the material
manifestations in the universe and went down within the water to find out the
means and the source of his lotus seat, he heard the word tapa vibrated twice.
Taking the path of tapa is the second birth of the desiring disciple. The word
upäçåëot is very significant. It is similar to upanayana, or bringing the disciple
nearer to the spiritual master for the path of tapa. So Brahmäjé was thus
initiated by Lord Kåñëa, and this fact is corroborated by Brahmäjé himself in
his book the Brahma-saàhitä. In the Brahma-saàhitä Lord Brahmä has sung in
every verse govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi **. Thus Brahmä was
initiated by the Kåñëa mantra, by Lord Kåñëa Himself, and thus he became a
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Vaiñëava, or a devotee of the Lord, before he was able to construct the huge
universe. It is stated in the Brahma-saàhitä that Lord Brahmä was initiated
into the eighteen-letter Kåñëa mantra, which is generally accepted by all the
devotees of Lord Kåñëa. We follow the same principle because we belong to the
Brahmä sampradäya, directly in the disciplic chain from Brahmä to Närada,
from Närada to Vyäsa, from Vyäsa to Madhva Muni, from Madhva Muni to
Mädhavendra Puré, from Mädhavendra Puré to Éçvara Puré, from Éçvara Puré to
Lord Caitanya and gradually to His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté,
our divine master.
One who is thus initiated in the disciplic succession is able to achieve the
same result or power of creation. Chanting of this holy mantra is the only
shelter of the desireless pure devotee of the Lord. Simply by such tapasya, or
penance, the devotee of the Lord achieves all perfections like Lord Brahmä.
TEXT 7
iNaXaMYa TaÜ¢*-idd*+aYaa idXaae
ivl/aeKYa Ta}aaNYadPaXYaMaaNa" )
SviDaZ<YaMaaSQaaYa ivMa*XYa TaiÖTa&
TaPaSYauPaaidí wvadDae MaNa" )) 7 ))
niçamya tad-vaktå-didåkñayä diço
vilokya tatränyad apaçyamänaù
svadhiñëyam ästhäya vimåçya tad-dhitaà
tapasy upädiñöa ivädadhe manaù
SYNONYMS
niçamya—after hearing; tat—that; vaktå—the speaker; didåkñayä—just to find
out who spoke; diçaù—all sides; vilokya—seeing; tatra—there; anyat—any
other; apaçyamänaù—not to be found; svadhiñëyam—on his lotus seat;
ästhäya—sit down; vimåçya—thinking; tat—it; hitam—welfare; tapasi—in
penance; upädiñöaù—as he was instructed; iva—in pursuance of;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ädadhe—gave; manaù—attention.
TRANSLATION
When he heard the sound, he tried to find the speaker, searching on all
sides. But when he was unable to find anyone besides himself, he thought it
wise to sit down on his lotus seat firmly and give his attention to the execution
of penance, as he was instructed.
PURPORT
To achieve success in life, one should follow the example of Lord Brahmä,
the first living creature in the beginning of creation. After being initiated by
the Supreme Lord to execute tapasya, he was fixed in his determination to do
it, and although he could not find anyone besides himself, he could rightly
understand that the sound was transmitted by the Lord Himself. Brahmä was
the only living being at that time because there was no other creation and
none could be found there except himself. In the beginning of the First Canto,
in the First Chapter, first verse, of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, it has already been
mentioned that Brahmä was initiated by the Lord from within. The Lord is
within every living entity as the Supersoul, and He initiated Brahmä because
Brahmä was willing to receive the initiation. The Lord can similarly initiate
everyone who is inclined to have it.
As already stated, Brahmä is the original spiritual master for the universe,
and since he was initiated by the Lord Himself, the message of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is coming down by disciplic succession, and in order to
receive the real message of Çrémad-Bhägavatam one should approach the
current link, or spiritual master, in the chain of disciplic succession. After
being initiated by the proper spiritual master in that chain of succession, one
should engage himself in the discharge of tapasya in the execution of
devotional service. One should not, however, think himself on the level of
Brahmä to be initiated directly by the Lord from inside because in the present
age no one can be accepted to be as pure as Brahmä. The post of Brahmä to
officiate in the creation of the universe is offered to the most pure living
being, and unless one is so qualified one cannot expect to be treated like
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Brahmäjé directly. But one can have the same facility through unalloyed
devotees of the Lord, through scriptural instructions (as revealed in the
Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam especially), and also through the bona
fide spiritual master available to the sincere soul. The Lord Himself appears as
the spiritual master to a person who is sincere in heart about serving the Lord.
Therefore the bona fide spiritual master who happens to meet the sincere
devotee should be accepted as the most confidential and beloved
representative of the Lord. If a person is posted under the guidance of such a
bona fide spiritual master, it may be accepted without any doubt that the
desiring person has achieved the grace of the Lord.
TEXT 8
idVYa& SahóaBdMaMaaegadXaRNaae
iJaTaaiNal/aTMaa iviJaTaae>aYaeiNd]Ya" )
ATaPYaTa SMaai%l/l/aek-TaaPaNa&
TaPaSTaPaqYaa&STaPaTaa& SaMaaihTa" )) 8 ))
divyaà sahasräbdam amogha-darçano
jitänilätmä vijitobhayendriyaù
atapyata smäkhila-loka-täpanaà
tapas tapéyäàs tapatäà samähitaù
SYNONYMS
divyam—pertaining to the demigods in the higher planets; sahasra—one
thousand; abdam—years; amogha—spotless, without a tinge of impurity;
darçanaù—one who has such a vision of life; jita—controlled; anila—life;
ätmä—mind; vijita—controlled over; ubhaya—both; indriyaù—one who has
such senses; atapyata—executed penance; sma—in the past; akhila—all;
loka—planet; täpanam—enlightening; tapaù—penance; tapéyän—extremely
hard penance; tapatäm—of all the executors of penances; samähitaù—thus
situated.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä underwent penances for one thousand years by the calculations
of the demigods. He heard this transcendental vibration from the sky, and he
accepted it as divine. Thus he controlled his mind and senses, and the penances
he executed were a great lesson for the living entities. Thus he is known as the
greatest of all ascetics.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä heard the occult sound tapa, but he did not see the person
who vibrated the sound. And still he accepted the instruction as beneficial for
him, and therefore he engaged himself in meditation for one thousand celestial
years. One celestial year is equal to 6 x 30 x 12 x 1000 of our years. His
acceptance of the sound was due to his pure vision of the absolute nature of
the Lord. And due to his correct vision, he made no distinction between the
Lord and the Lord’s instruction. There is no difference between the Lord and
sound vibration coming from Him, even though He is not personally present.
The best way of understanding is to accept such divine instruction, and
Brahmä, the prime spiritual master of everyone, is the living example of this
process of receiving transcendental knowledge. The potency of transcendental
sound is never minimized because the vibrator is apparently absent. Therefore
Çrémad-Bhägavatam or Bhagavad-gétä or any revealed scripture in the world is
never to be accepted as an ordinary mundane sound without transcendental
potency.
One has to receive the transcendental sound from the right source, accept
it as a reality and prosecute the direction without hesitation. The secret of
success is to receive the sound from the right source of a bona fide spiritual
master. Mundane manufactured sound has no potency, and as such, seemingly
transcendental sound received from an unauthorized person also has no
potency. One should be qualified enough to discern such transcendental
potency, and either by discriminating or by fortunate chance if one is able to
receive the transcendental sound from the bona fide spiritual master, his path
of liberation is guaranteed. The disciple, however, must be ready to execute the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
order of the bona fide spiritual master as Lord Brahmä executed the
instruction of his spiritual master, the Lord Himself. Following the order of the
bona fide spiritual master is the only duty of the disciple, and this completely
faithful execution of the order of the bona fide spiritual master is the secret of
success.
Lord Brahmä controlled his two grades of senses by means of sense
perception and sense organs because he had to engage such senses in the
execution of the order of the Lord. Therefore controlling the senses means
engaging them in the transcendental service of the Lord. The Lord’s order
descends in disciplic succession through the bona fide spiritual master, and
thus execution of the order of the bona fide spiritual master is factual control
of the senses. Such execution of penance in full faith and sincerity made
Brahmäjé so powerful that he became the creator of the universe. And because
he was able to attain such power, he is called the best amongst all the tapasvés.
TEXT 9
TaSMaE Svl/aek&- >aGavaNa( Sa>aaiJaTa"
SaNdXaRYaaMaaSa Par& Na YaTParMa( )
VYaPaeTaSa&©e-XaivMaaehSaaßSa&
Svd*íviÙPauRåzEri>aíuTaMa( )) 9 ))
tasmai sva-lokaà bhagavän sabhäjitaù
sandarçayäm äsa paraà na yat-param
vyapeta-saìkleça-vimoha-sädhvasaà
sva-dåñöavadbhir puruñair abhiñöutam
SYNONYMS
tasmai—unto him; sva-lokam—His own planet or abode; bhagavän—the
Personality of Godhead; sabhäjitaù—being pleased by the penance of Brahmä;
sandarçayäm äsa—manifested; param—the supreme; na—not; yat—of which;
param—further supreme; vyapeta—completely given up; saìkleça—five kinds
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of material afflictions; vimoha—without illusion; sädhvasam—fear of material
existence; sva-dåñöa-vadbhiù—by those who have perfectly realized the self;
puruñaiù—by persons; abhiñöutam—worshiped by.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, being thus very much satisfied with the
penance of Lord Brahmä, was pleased to manifest His personal abode,
Vaikuëöha, the supreme planet above all others. This transcendental abode of
the Lord is adored by all self-realized persons freed from all kinds of miseries
and fear of illusory existence.
PURPORT
The troubles of penance accepted by Lord Brahmä were certainly in the
line of devotional service (bhakti). Otherwise there was no chance that
Vaikuëöha or svalokam, the Lord’s personal abodes, would become visible to
Brahmäjé. The personal abodes of the Lord, known as Vaikuëöhas, are neither
mythical nor material, as conceived by the impersonalists. But realization of
the transcendental abodes of the Lord is possible only through devotional
service, and thus the devotees enter into such abodes. There is undoubtedly
trouble in executing penance. But the trouble accepted in executing
bhakti-yoga is transcendental happiness from the very beginning, whereas the
trouble of penance in other processes of self-realization (jïäna-yoga,
dhyäna-yoga, etc.), without any Vaikuëöha realization, ends in trouble only
and nothing more. There is no profit in biting husks without grains. Similarly,
there is no profit in executing troublesome penances other than bhakti-yoga
for self-realization.
Executing bhakti-yoga is exactly like sitting on the lotus sprouted out of the
abdomen of the transcendental Personality of Godhead, for Lord Brahmä was
seated there. Brahmäjé was able to please the Lord, and the Lord was also
pleased to show Brahmäjé His personal abode. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, in the
comments of his Krama-sandarbha annotation of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, cites
quotations from the Garga Upaniñad Vedic evidence. It is said that
Yäjïavalkya described the transcendental abode of the Lord to Gärgé, and that
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the abode of the Lord is situated above the highest planet of the universe,
namely Brahmaloka. This abode of the Lord, although described in revealed
scriptures like the Bhagavad-gétä and the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, remains only a
myth for the less intelligent class of men with a poor fund of knowledge.
Herein the word sva-dåñöavadbhiù is very significant. One who has actually
realized his self realizes the transcendental form of one’s self. Impersonal
realization of self and the Supreme is not complete, because it is just an
opposite conception of material personalities. The Personality of Godhead and
the personalities of devotees of the Lord are all transcendental; they do not
have material bodies. The material body is overcast with five kinds of
miserable conditions, namely ignorance, material conception, attachment,
hatred and absorption. As long as one is overwhelmed by those five kinds of
material miseries, there is no question of entering into the Vaikuëöhalokas.
The impersonal conception of one’s self is just the negation of material
personality and is far from the positive existence of personal form. The
personal forms of the transcendental abode will be explained in the following
verses. Brahmäjé also described the highest planet of the Vaikuëöhaloka as
Goloka Våndävana, where the Lord resides as a cowherd boy keeping
transcendental surabhi cows and surrounded by hundreds and thousands of
goddesses of fortune.
cintämaëi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-våkñalakñävåteñu
surabhér abhipälayantam
lakñmé-sahasra-çata-sambhrama-sevyamänaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
(Brahma-saàhitä 5.29)
The statement of the Bhagavad-gétä, yad gatvä na nivartante tad dhäma
paramaà mama [Bg. 15.6], is also confirmed herewith. param means
transcendental Brahman. Therefore, the abode of the Lord is also Brahman,
nondifferent from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is known as
Vaikuëöha, and His abode is also known as Vaikuëöha. Such Vaikuëöha
realization and worship can be made possible by transcendental form and
sense.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 10
Pa[vTaRTae Ya}a rJaSTaMaSTaYaae"
Satv& c iMaé[& Na c k-al/iv§-Ma" )
Na Ya}a MaaYaa ik-MauTaaPare hre‚
rNauv]Taa Ya}a SauraSauraicRTaa" )) 10 ))
pravartate yatra rajas tamas tayoù
sattvaà ca miçraà na ca käla-vikramaù
na yatra mäyä kim utäpare harer
anuvratä yatra suräsurärcitäù
SYNONYMS
pravartate—prevail; yatra—wherein; rajaù tamaù—the modes of passion and
ignorance; tayoù—of both of them; sattvam—the mode of goodness; ca—and;
miçram—mixture; na—never; ca—and; käla—time; vikramaù—influence;
na—neither; yatra—therein; mäyä—illusory, external energy; kim—what;
uta—there is; apare—others; hareù—of the Personality of Godhead;
anuvratäù—devotees; yatra—wherein; sura—by the demigods; asura—and the
demons; arcitäù—worshiped.
TRANSLATION
In that personal abode of the Lord, the material modes of ignorance and
passion do not prevail, nor is there any of their influence in goodness. There is
no predominance of the influence of time, so what to speak of the illusory,
external energy; it cannot enter that region. Without discrimination, both the
demigods and the demons worship the Lord as devotees.
PURPORT
The kingdom of God, or the atmosphere of the Vaikuëöha nature, which is
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
called the tripäd-vibhüti, is three times bigger than the material universes and
is described here, as also in the Bhagavad-gétä, in a nutshell. This universe,
containing billions of stars and planets, is one of the billions of such universes
clustered together within the compass of the mahat-tattva. And all these
millions and billions of universes combined together constitute only one
fourth of the magnitude of the whole creation of the Lord. There is the
spiritual sky also; beyond this sky are the spiritual planets under the names of
Vaikuëöha, and all of them constitute three fourths of the entire creation of
the Lord. God’s creations are always innumerable. Even the leaves of a tree
cannot be counted by a man, nor can the hairs on his head. However, foolish
men are puffed up with the idea of becoming God Himself, though unable to
create a hair of their own bodies. Man may discover so many wonderful
vehicles of journey, but even if he reaches the moon by his much advertised
spacecraft, he cannot remain there. The sane man, therefore, without being
puffed up, as if he were the God of the universe, abides by the instructions of
the Vedic literature, the easiest way to acquire knowledge in transcendence.
So let us know through the authority of Çrémad-Bhägavatam of the nature and
constitution of the transcendental world beyond the material sky. In that sky
the material qualities, especially the modes of ignorance and passion, are
completely absent. The mode of ignorance influences a living entity to the
habit of lust and hankering, and this means that in the Vaikuëöhalokas the
living entities are free from these two things. As confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gétä, in the brahma-bhüta stage of life one becomes free from
hankering and lamentation. Therefore the conclusion is that the inhabitants
of the Vaikuëöha planets are all brahma-bhüta living entities, as distinguished
from the mundane creatures who are all compact in hankering and
lamentation. When one is not in the modes of ignorance and passion, one is
supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness in the material world.
Goodness in the material world also at times becomes contaminated by touches
of the modes of passion and ignorance. In the Vaikuëöhaloka, it is unalloyed
goodness only.
The whole situation there is one of freedom from the illusory manifestation
of the external energy. Although illusory energy is also part and parcel of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Supreme Lord, illusory energy is differentiated from the Lord. The illusory
energy is not, however, false, as claimed by the monist philosophers. The rope
accepted as a snake may be an illusion to a particular person, but the rope is a
fact, and the snake is also a fact. The illusion of water on the hot desert may be
illusion for the ignorant animal searching for water in the desert, but the
desert and water are actual facts. Therefore the material creation of the Lord
may be an illusion to the nondevotee, but to a devotee even the material
creation of the Lord is a fact, as the manifestation of His external energy. But
this energy of the Lord is not all. The Lord has His internal energy also, which
has another creation known to be the Vaikuëöhalokas, where there is no
ignorance, no passion, no illusion and no past and present. With a poor fund
of knowledge one may be unable to understand the existence of such things as
the Vaikuëöha atmosphere, but that does not nullify its existence. That
spacecraft cannot reach these planets does not mean that there are no such
planets, for they are described in the revealed scriptures.
As quoted by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, we can know from the Närada-païcarätra
that the transcendental world or Vaikuëöha atmosphere is enriched with
transcendental qualities. These transcendental qualities, as revealed through
the devotional service of the Lord, are distinct from the mundane qualities of
ignorance, passion and goodness. Such qualities are not attainable by the
nondevotee class of men. In the Padma Puräëa, Uttara-khaëòa, it is stated that
beyond the one-fourth part of God’s creation is the three-fourths
manifestation. The marginal line between the material manifestation and the
spiritual manifestation is the Virajä River, and beyond the Virajä, which is a
transcendental current flowing from the perspiration of the body of the Lord,
there is the three-fourths manifestation of God’s creation. This part is eternal,
everlasting, without deterioration, and unlimited, and it contains the highest
perfectional stage of living conditions. In the Säìkhya-kaumudé it is stated that
unalloyed goodness or transcendence is just opposite to the material modes.
All living entities there are eternally associated without any break, and the
Lord is the chief and prime entity. In the Ägama Puräëas also, the
transcendental abode is described as follows: The associated members there are
free to go everywhere within the creation of the Lord, and there is no limit to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
such creation, particularly in the region of the three-fourths magnitude. Since
the nature of that region is unlimited, there is no history of such association,
nor is there end of it.
The conclusion may be drawn that because of the complete absence of the
mundane qualities of ignorance and passion, there is no question of creation
nor of annihilation. In the material world everything is created, and
everything is annihilated, and the duration of life between the creation and
annihilation is temporary. In the transcendental realm there is no creation
and no destruction, and thus the duration of life is eternal unlimitedly. In
other words, everything in the transcendental world is everlasting, full of
knowledge and bliss without deterioration. Since there is no deterioration,
there is no past, present and future in the estimation of time. It is clearly stated
in this verse that the influence of time is conspicuous by its absence. The
whole material existence is manifested by actions and reactions of elements
which make the influence of time prominent in the matter of past, present and
future. There are no such actions and reactions of cause and effects there, so
the cycle of birth, growth, existence, transformations, deterioration and
annihilation—the six material changes—are not existent there. It is the
unalloyed manifestation of the energy of the Lord, without illusion as
experienced here in the material world. The whole Vaikuëöha existence
proclaims that everyone there is a follower of the Lord. The Lord is the chief
leader there, without any competition for leadership, and the people in general
are all followers of the Lord. It is confirmed in the Vedas, therefore, that the
Lord is the chief leader and all other living entities are subordinate to Him, for
only the Lord satisfies all the needs of all other living entities.
TEXT 11
XYaaMaavdaTaa" XaTaPa}al/aecNaa"
iPaXa®vña" Sauåc" SauPaeXaSa" )
SaveR cTaubaRhv oiNMazNMai<a‚
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Pa[vek-iNaZk-a>ar<aa" SauvcRSa" )) 11 ))
çyämävadätäù çata-patra-locanäù
piçaìga-vasträù surucaù supeçasaù
sarve catur-bähava unmiñan-maëipraveka-
niñkäbharaëäù suvarcasaù
SYNONYMS
çyäma—sky-bluish; avadätäù—glowing; çata-patra—lotus flower;
locanäù—eyes; piçaìga—yellowish; vasträù—clothing; su-rucaù—greatly
attractive; su-peçasaù—growing youthful; sarve—all of them; catuù—four;
bähavaù—hands; unmiñan—rising luster; maëi—pearls; praveka—superior
quality; niñka-äbharaëäù—ornamental medallions; su-varcasaù—effulgent.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of the Vaikuëöha planets are described as having a glowing
sky-bluish complexion. Their eyes resemble lotus flowers, their dress is of
yellowish color, and their bodily features very attractive. They are just the age
of growing youths, they all have four hands, they are all nicely decorated with
pearl necklaces with ornamental medallions, and they all appear to be effulgent.
PURPORT
The inhabitants in Vaikuëöhaloka are all personalities with spiritual bodily
features not to be found in the material world. We can find the descriptions in
the revealed scriptures like Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Impersonal descriptions of
transcendence in the scriptures indicate that the bodily features in
Vaikuëöhaloka are never to be seen in any part of the universe. As there are
different bodily features in different places of a particular planet, or as there
are different bodily features between bodies in different planets, similarly the
bodily features of the inhabitants in Vaikuëöhaloka are completely different
from those in the material universe. For example, the four hands are distinct
from the two hands in this world.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 12
Pa[val/vEdUYaRMa*<aal/vcRSa" )
PairSfu-rTku-<@l/MaaEil/Maail/Na" )) 12 ))
praväla-vaidürya-måëäla-varcasaù
parisphurat-kuëòala-mauli-mälinaù
SYNONYMS
praväla—coral; vaidürya—a special diamond; måëäla—celestial lotus;
varcasaù—rays; parisphurat—blooming; kuëòala—earring; mauli—heads;
mälinaù—with garlands.
TRANSLATION
Some of them are effulgent like coral and diamonds in complexion and have
garlands on their heads, blooming like lotus flowers, and some wear earrings.
PURPORT
There are some inhabitants who have attained the liberation of särüpya, or
possessing bodily features like those of the Personality of Godhead. The
vaidürya diamond is especially meant for the Personality of Godhead, but one
who achieves the liberation of bodily equality with the Lord is especially
favored with such diamonds on his body.
TEXT 13
>a]aiJaZ<aui>aYaR" PairTaae ivraJaTae
l/SaiÜMaaNaavil/i>aMaRhaTMaNaaMa( )
ivÛaeTaMaaNa" Pa[MadaetaMaaÛui>a"
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SaivÛud>a]avil/i>aYaRQaa Na>a" )) 13 ))
bhräjiñëubhir yaù parito viräjate
lasad-vimänävalibhir mahätmanäm
vidyotamänaù pramadottamädyubhiù
savidyud abhrävalibhir yathä nabhaù
SYNONYMS
bhräjiñëubhiù—by the glowing; yaù—the Vaikuëöhalokas;
paritaù—surrounded by; viräjate—thus situated; lasat—brilliant;
vimäna—airplanes; avalibhiù—assemblage; mahä-ätmanäm—of the great
devotees of the Lord; vidyotamänaù—beautiful like lightning;
pramada—ladies; uttama—celestial; adyubhiù—by complexion;
sa-vidyut—with electric lightning; abhrävalibhiù—with clouds in the sky;
yathä—as it were; nabhaù—the sky.
TRANSLATION
The Vaikuëöha planets are also surrounded by various airplanes, all glowing
and brilliantly situated. These airplanes belong to the great mahätmäs or
devotees of the Lord. The ladies are as beautiful as lightning because of their
celestial complexions, and all these combined together appear just like the sky
decorated with both clouds and lightning.
PURPORT
It appears that in the Vaikuëöha planets there are also airplanes brilliantly
glowing, and they are occupied by the great devotees of the Lord with ladies of
celestial beauty as brilliant as lightning. As there are airplanes, so there must
be different types of carriages like airplanes, but they may not be driven
machines, as we have experience in this world. Because everything is of the
same nature of eternity, bliss and knowledge, the airplanes and carriages are of
the same quality as Brahman. Although there is nothing except Brahman, one
should not mistakenly think that there is only void and no variegatedness.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Thinking like that is due to a poor fund of knowledge; otherwise no one would
have such a misconception of voidness in Brahman. As there are airplanes,
ladies and gentlemen, so there must be cities and houses and everything else
just suitable to the particular planets. One should not carry the ideas of
imperfection from this world to the transcendental world and not take into
consideration the nature of the atmosphere, as completely free from the
influence of time, etc., as described previously.
TEXT 14
é[qYaR}a æiPa<YauåGaaYaPaadYaae"
k-raeiTa MaaNa& bhuDaa iv>aUiTai>a" )
Pa[e«& ié[Taa Yaa ku-SauMaak-raNauGaE‚
ivRGaqYaMaaNaa iPa[Yak-MaR GaaYaTaq )) 14 ))
çrér yatra rüpiëy urugäya-pädayoù
karoti mänaà bahudhä vibhütibhiù
preìkhaà çritä yä kusumäkaränugair
vigéyamänä priya-karma gäyaté
SYNONYMS
çréù—the goddess of fortune; yatra—in the Vaikuëöha planets; rüpiëé—in her
transcendental form; urugäya—the Lord, who is sung of by the great devotees;
pädayoù—under the lotus feet of the Lord; karoti—does; mänam—respectful
services; bahudhä—in diverse paraphernalia; vibhütibhiù—accompanied by her
personal associates; preìkham—movement of enjoyment; çritä—taken shelter
of; yä—who; kusumäkara—spring; anugaiù—by the black bees;
vigéyamänä—being followed by the songs; priya-karma—activities of the
dearmost; gäyaté—singing.
TRANSLATION
The goddess of fortune in her transcendental form is engaged in the loving
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
service of the Lord’s lotus feet, and being moved by the black bees, followers of
spring, she is not only engaged in variegated pleasure—service to the Lord,
along with her constant companions—but is also engaged in singing the glories
of the Lord’s activities.
TEXT 15
ddXaR Ta}aai%l/SaaTvTaa& PaiTa&
ié[Ya" PaiTa& YajPaiTa& JaGaTPaiTaMa( )
SauNaNdNaNdPa[bl/ahR<aaidi>a"
SvPaazRdaGa]E" PairSaeivTa& iv>auMa( )) 15 ))
dadarça taträkhila-sätvatäà patià
çriyaù patià yajïa-patià jagat-patim
sunanda-nanda-prabalärhaëädibhiù
sva-pärñadägraiù parisevitaà vibhum
SYNONYMS
dadarça—Brahmä saw; tatra—there (in Vaikuëöhaloka); akhila—entire;
sätvatäm—of the great devotees; patim—the Lord; çriyaù—of the goddess of
fortune; patim—the Lord; yajïa—of sacrifice; patim—the Lord; jagat—of the
universe; patim—the Lord; sunanda—Sunanda; nanda—Nanda;
prabala—Prabala; arhaëa—Arhaëa; ädibhiù—by them; sva-pärñada—own
associates; agraiù—by the foremost; parisevitam—being served in
transcendental love; vibhum—the great Almighty.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä saw in the Vaikuëöha planets the Personality of Godhead, who
is the Lord of the entire devotee community, the Lord of the goddess of fortune,
the Lord of all sacrifices, and the Lord of the universe, and who is served by the
foremost servitors like Nanda, Sunanda, Prabala and Arhaëa, His immediate
associates.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
When we speak of a king it is naturally understood that the king is
accompanied by his confidential associates, like his secretary, private secretary,
aide-de-camp, ministers and advisers. So also when we see the Lord we see Him
with His different energies, associates, confidential servitors, etc. So the
Supreme Lord, who is the leader of all living entities, the Lord of all devotee
sects, the Lord of all opulences, the Lord of sacrifices and the enjoyer of
everything in His entire creation, is not only the Supreme Person, but also is
always surrounded by His immediate associates, all engaged in their loving
transcendental service to Him.
TEXT 16
>a*TYaPa[Saadai>aMau%& d*GaaSav&
Pa[SaàhaSaaå<al/aecNaaNaNaMa( )
ik-rqi$=Na& ku-<@il/Na& cTau>auRJa&
PaqTaa&éuk&- v+aiSa l/i+aTa& ié[Yaa )) 16 ))
bhåtya-prasädäbhimukhaà dåg-äsavaà
prasanna-häsäruëa-locanänanam
kiréöinaà kuëòalinaà catur-bhujaà
pétäàçukaà vakñasi lakñitaà çriyä
SYNONYMS
bhåtya—the servitor; prasäda—affection; abhimukham—favorably facing;
dåk—the very sight; äsavam—an intoxication; prasanna—very much pleased;
häsa—smile; aruëa—reddish; locana—eyes; änanam—face; kiréöinam—with
helmet; kuëòalinam—with earrings; catuù-bhujam—with four hands;
péta—yellow; aàçukam—dress; vakñasi—on the chest; lakñitam—marked;
çriyä—with the goddess of fortune.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, seen leaning favorably towards His loving
servitors, His very sight intoxicating and attractive, appeared to be very much
satisfied. He had a smiling face decorated with an enchanting reddish hue. He
was dressed in yellow robes and wore earrings and a helmet on his head. He had
four hands, and His chest was marked with the lines of the goddess of fortune.
PURPORT
In the Padma Puräëa, Uttara-khaëòa, there is a full description of the
yoga-péöha, or the particular place where the Lord is in audience to His eternal
devotees. In that yoga-péöha, the personifications of religion, knowledge,
opulence and renunciation are all seated at the lotus feet of the Lord. The four
Vedas, namely Åk, Säma, Yajur and Atharva, are present there personally to
advise the Lord. The sixteen energies headed by Caëòa are all present there.
Caëòa and Kumuda are the first two doorkeepers, at the middle door are the
doorkeepers named Bhadra and Subhadra, and at the last door are Jaya and
Vijaya. There are other doorkeepers also, named Kumuda, Kumudäkña,
Puëòaréka, Vämana, Çaìkukarëa, Sarvanetra, Sumukha, etc. The Lord’s palace
is well decorated and protected by the above-mentioned doorkeepers.
TEXT 17
ADYahR<aqYaaSaNaMaaiSQaTa& Par&
v*Ta& cTau"zae@XaPaÄXai¢-i>a" )
Yau¢&- >aGaE" SvEirTar}a caDa]uvE"
Sv Wv DaaMaNa( rMaMaa<aMaqìrMa( )) 17 ))
adhyarhaëéyäsanam ästhitaà paraà
våtaà catuù-ñoòaça-païca-çaktibhiù
yuktaà bhagaiù svair itaratra cädhruvaiù
sva eva dhäman ramamäëam éçvaram
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
adhyarhaëéya—greatly worshipable; äsanam—throne; ästhitam—seated on it;
param—the Supreme; våtam—surrounded by; catuù—four, namely prakåti,
puruña, mahat and ego; ñoòaça—the sixteen; païca—the five; çaktibhiù—by
the energies; yuktam—empowered with; bhagaiù—His opulences;
svaiù—personal; itaratra—other minor prowesses; ca—also;
adhruvaiù—temporary; sve—own; eva—certainly; dhäman—abode;
ramamäëam—enjoying; éçvaram—the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
The Lord was seated on His throne and was surrounded by different
energies like the four, the sixteen, the five, and the six natural opulences, along
with other insignificant energies of the temporary character. But He was the
factual Supreme Lord, enjoying His own abode.
PURPORT
The Lord is naturally endowed with His six opulences. Specifically, He is
the richest, He is the most powerful, He is the most famous, He is the most
beautiful, He is the greatest in knowledge, and He is the greatest renouncer as
well. And for His material creative energies, He is served by four, namely the
principles of prakåti, puruña, mahat-tattva and ego. He is also served by the
sixteen, namely the five elements (earth, water, air, fire and sky), the five
perceptive sense organs (the eye, ear, nose, tongue and skin), and the five
working sense organs (the hand, the leg, the stomach, the evacuation outlet
and the genitals), and the mind. The five includes the sense objects, namely
form, taste, smell, sound and touch. All these twenty-five items serve the Lord
in the material creation, and all of them are personally present to serve the
Lord. The insignificant opulences numbering eight (the añöa-siddhis, attained
by yogés for temporary overlordship) are also under His control, but He is
naturally full with all such powers without any effort, and therefore He is the
Supreme Lord.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The living being, by severe penance and performance of bodily exercises,
can temporarily attain some wonderful power, but that does not make him the
Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord, by His own potency, is unlimitedly more
powerful than any yogé, He is unlimitedly more learned than any jïäné, He is
unlimitedly richer than any wealthy person, He is unlimitedly more beautiful
than any beautiful living being, and He is unlimitedly more charitable than
any philanthropist. He is above all; no one is equal to or greater than Him. Nor
can anyone reach His level of perfection in any of the above powers by any
amount of penance or yogic demonstrations. The yogés are dependent on His
mercy. Out of His immensely charitable disposition He can award some
temporary powers to the yogés because of the yogés hankering after them, but to
His unalloyed devotees, who do not want anything from the Lord save and
except His transcendental service, the Lord is so pleased that He gives Himself
in exchange for unalloyed service.
TEXT 18
TaÕXaRNaaúadPairPlu/TaaNTarae
ôZYataNau" Pa[eMa>araé[ul/aecNa" )
NaNaaMa PaadaMbuJaMaSYa ivìSa*Ga(
YaTa( PaarMah&SYaeNa PaQaaiDaGaMYaTae )) 18 ))
tad-darçanähläda-pariplutäntaro
håñyat-tanuù prema-bharäçru-locanaù
nanäma pädämbujam asya viçva-såg
yat päramahaàsyena pathädhigamyate
SYNONYMS
tat—by that audience of the Lord; darçana—audience; ähläda—joy;
paripluta—overwhelmed; antaraù—within the heart; håñyat—full in ecstasy;
tanuù—body; prema-bhara—in full transcendental love; açru—tears;
locanaù—in the eyes; nanäma—bowed down; päda-ambujam—under the lotus
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
feet; asya—of the Lord; viçva-såk—the creator of the universe; yat—which;
päramahaàsyena—by the great liberated soul; pathä—the path;
adhigamyate—is followed.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, thus seeing the Personality of Godhead in His fullness, was
overwhelmed with joy within his heart, and thus in full transcendental love and
ecstasy, his eyes filled with tears of love. He thus bowed down before the Lord.
That is the way of the highest perfection for the living being [paramahaàsa].
PURPORT
In the beginning of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is stated that this great
literature is meant for the paramahaàsas. Paramo nirmatsaräëäà satäm, i.e.
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam is meant for persons completely free from malice. In
the conditioned life the malicious life begins from the top, namely bearing
malice against the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Personality of
Godhead is an established fact in all the revealed scriptures, and in the
Bhagavad-gétä the personal feature of the Supreme Lord is especially
mentioned, so much so that the last portion of the great literature has
emphatically stressed that one should surrender unto the Personality of
Godhead to be saved from the miseries of life. Unfortunately, persons with
impious backgrounds do not believe in the Personality of Godhead, and
everyone wants to become God himself without any qualification. This
malicious nature in the conditioned soul continues even up to the stage when
a person wants to be one with the Lord, and thus even the greatest of the
empiric philosophers speculating on becoming one with the Supreme Lord
cannot become a paramahaàsa because the malicious mind is there. Therefore
the paramahaàsa stage of life can be attained only by those who are fixed in
the practice of bhakti-yoga. This bhakti-yoga begins if a person has the firm
conviction that simply discharging devotional service to the Lord in full
transcendental love can elevate him to the highest perfectional stage of life.
Brahmäjé believed in this art of bhakti-yoga; he believed in the instruction of
the Lord to execute tapa, and he discharged the function with great penance
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and thus achieved the great success of seeing the Vaikuëöhalokas and the Lord
also by personal experience. No one can reach the abode of the Supreme Lord
by any mechanical means of the mind or machine, but one can reach the
abode of the Vaikuëöhalokas simply by following the process of bhakti-yoga
because the Lord can be realized only through the bhakti-yoga process. Lord
Brahmäjé was actually sitting on his lotus seat, and from there, by executing
the process of bhakti-yoga in great seriousness, he could see the Vaikuëöhalokas
with all variegatedness as well as the Lord in person and His associates.
Following in the footsteps of Lord Brahmä, any person, even up to this day,
can attain the same perfection by following the path of the paramahaàsa as
recommended herein. Lord Caitanya also approved of this method of
self-realization for men in this age. One should first, with all conviction,
believe in the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa, and without making efforts to
realize Him by speculative philosophy, one should prefer to hear about Him
from the Çrémad Bhagavad-gétä and later from the text of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. One should hear such discourses from a person
Bhägavatam and not from the professional man, or from the karmé, jïäné or
yogé. That is the secret of learning the science. One does not need to be in the
renounced order of life; he can remain in his present condition of life, but he
must search out the association of a bona fide devotee of the Lord and hear
from him the transcendental message of the Lord with faith and conviction.
That is the path of the paramahaàsa recommended herein. Amongst various
holy names of the Lord, He is also called ajita, or one who can never be
conquered by anyone else. Yet He can be conquered by the paramahaàsa path,
as practically realized and shown by the great spiritual master Lord Brahmä.
Lord Brahmä has personally recommended this paramahaàsa-panthäù in his
own words as follows:
jïäne prayäsam udapäsya namanta eva
jévanti san-mukharitäà bhavadéya-värtäm
sthäne sthitäù çruti-gatäà tanu-väì-manobhir
ye präyaço ’jita jito ’py asi tais tri-lokyäm
Lord Brahmä said, “O my Lord Kåñëa, a devotee who abandons the path of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
empiric philosophical speculation aimed at merging in the existence of the
Supreme and engages himself in hearing Your glories and activities from a bona
fide sädhu, or saint, and who lives an honest life in the occupational
engagement of his social life, can conquer Your sympathy and mercy even
though You are ajita, or unconquerable.” (Bhäg. 10.14.3) That is the path of the
paramahaàsas, which was personally followed by Lord Brahmä and later
recommended by him for attaining perfect success in life.
TEXT 19
Ta& Pa[qYaMaa<a& SaMauPaiSQaTa& k-iv&
Pa[JaaivSaGaeR iNaJaXaaSaNaahR<aMa( )
b>aaz wRziTSMaTaXaaeicza iGara
iPa[Ya" iPa[Ya& Pa[qTaMaNaa" k-re SPa*XaNa( )) 19 ))
taà préyamäëaà samupasthitaà kavià
prajä-visarge nija-çäsanärhaëam
babhäña éñat-smita-çociñä girä
priyaù priyaà préta-manäù kare spåçan
SYNONYMS
tam—unto Lord Brahmä; préyamäëam—worthy of being dear;
samupasthitam—present before; kavim—the great scholar; prajä—living
entities; visarge—in the matter of creation; nija—His own; çäsana—control;
arhaëam—just suitable; babhäñe—addressed; éñat—mild; smita—smiling;
çociñä—with enlightening; girä—words; priyaù—the beloved; priyam—the
counterpart of love; préta-manäù—being very much pleased; kare—by the
hand; spåçan—shaking.
TRANSLATION
And seeing Brahmä present before Him, the Lord accepted him as worthy to
create living beings, to be controlled as He desired, and thus being much
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
satisfied with him, the Lord shook hands with Brahmä and, slightly smiling,
addressed him thus.
PURPORT
The creation of the material world is not blind or accidental. The living
entities who are ever conditioned, or nitya-baddha, are thus given a chance for
liberation under the guidance of His own representative like Brahmä. The
Lord instructs Brahmä in Vedic knowledge in order to diffuse this knowledge
to the conditioned souls. The conditioned souls are forgetful souls in their
relationship with the Lord, and thus a period of creation and the process of
dissemination of Vedic knowledge are necessary activities of the Lord. Lord
Brahmä has a great responsibility in delivering the conditioned souls, and
therefore he is very dear to the Lord.
Brahmä also does his duty very perfectly, not only by generating the living
entities but also by spreading his party for reclaiming the fallen souls. The
party is called the Brahma-sampradäya, and any member of this party to date is
naturally engaged in reclaiming the fallen souls back to Godhead, back home.
The Lord is very much anxious to get back His parts and parcels, as stated in
the Bhagavad-gétä. No one is more dear than the one who takes the task of
reclaiming the fallen souls back to Godhead.
There are many renegades from the Brahma-sampradäya whose only
business is to make men more forgetful of the Lord and thus entangle them
more and more in material existence. Such persons are never dear to the Lord,
and the Lord sends them deeper into the darkest region of matter so that such
envious demons may not be able to know the Supreme Lord.
Anyone, however, preaching the mission of the Lord in the line of the
Brahma-sampradäya is always dear to the Lord, and the Lord, being satisfied
with such a preacher of the authorized bhakti cult, shakes hands with him in
great satisfaction.
TEXT 20
é[q>aGavaNauvac
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TvYaah& TaaeizTa" SaMYaGa( vedGa>aR iSaSa*+aYaa )
icr& >a*TaeNa TaPaSaa duSTaaez" kU-$=YaaeiGaNaaMa( )) 20 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
tvayähaà toñitaù samyag
veda-garbha sisåkñayä
ciraà bhåtena tapasä
dustoñaù küöa-yoginäm
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the all-beautiful Personality of Godhead said; tvayä—by
you; aham—I am; toñitaù—pleased; samyak—complete;
veda-garbha—impregnated with the Vedas; sisåkñayä—for creating; ciram—for
a long time; bhåtena—accumulated; tapasä—by penance; dustoñaù—very hard
to please; küöa-yoginäm—for the pseudo mystics.
TRANSLATION
The beautiful Personality of Godhead addressed Lord Brahmä: O Brahmä,
impregnated with the Vedas, I am very much pleased with your long
accumulated penance with the desire for creation. Hardly am I pleased with the
pseudo mystics.
PURPORT
There are two kinds of penance: one for sense gratification and the other
for self-realization. There are many pseudo mystics who undergo severe
penances for their own satisfaction, and there are others who undergo severe
penances for the satisfaction of the senses of the Lord. For example, the
penances undertaken to discover nuclear weapons will never satisfy the Lord
because such a penance is never satisfactory. By nature’s own way, everyone
has to meet death, and if such a process of death is accelerated by anyone’s
penances, there is no satisfaction for the Lord. The Lord wants every one of
His parts and parcels to attain eternal life and bliss by coming home to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Godhead, and the whole material creation is meant for that objective. Brahmä
underwent severe penances for that purpose, namely to regulate the process of
creation so that the Lord might be satisfied. Therefore the Lord was very much
pleased with him, and for this Brahmä was impregnated with Vedic knowledge.
The ultimate purpose of Vedic knowledge is to know the Lord and not to
misuse the knowledge for any other purposes. Those who do not utilize Vedic
knowledge for that purpose are known as küöa-yogés, or pseudo
transcendentalists who spoil their lives with ulterior motives.
TEXT 21
vr& vrYa >ad]& Tae vreXa& Maai>avaiH^TaMa( )
b]øH^\eYa"Pairé[aMa" Pau&Saa& MaÕXaRNaaviDa" )) 21 ))
varaà varaya bhadraà te
vareçaà mäbhiväïchitam
brahmaï chreyaù-pariçrämaù
puàsäà mad-darçanävadhiù
SYNONYMS
varam—benediction; varaya—just ask from; bhadram—auspicious; te—unto
you; vara-éçam—the giver of all benediction; mä (mäm)—from Me;
abhiväïchitam—wishing; brahman—O Brahmä; çreyaù—the ultimate success;
pariçrämaù—for all penances; puàsäm—for everyone; mat—My;
darçana—realization; avadhiù—up to the limit of.
TRANSLATION
I wish you good luck. O Brahmä, you may ask from Me, the giver of all
benediction, all that you may desire. You may know that the ultimate
benediction, as the result of all penances, is to see Me by realization.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The ultimate realization of the Supreme Truth is knowing and seeing face
to face the Personality of Godhead. Realization of the impersonal Brahman
and localized Paramätmä features of the Personality of Godhead is not
ultimate realization, When one realizes the Supreme Lord, one does not
struggle hard to perform such penances. The next stage of life is to discharge
devotional service to the Lord just to satisfy Him. In other words, one who has
realized and seen the Supreme Lord has attained all perfection because
everything is included in that highest perfectional stage. The impersonalists
and the pseudo mystics, however, cannot reach this state.
TEXT 22
MaNaqizTaaNau>aavae_Ya& MaMa l/aek-avl/aek-NaMa( )
YaduPaé[uTYa rhiSa ck-QaR ParMa& TaPa" )) 22 ))
manéñitänubhävo ’yaà
mama lokävalokanam
yad upaçrutya rahasi
cakartha paramaà tapaù
SYNONYMS
manéñita—ingenuity; anubhävaù—perception; ayam—this; mama—My;
loka—abode; avalokanam—seeing by actual experience; yat—because;
upaçrutya—hearing; rahasi—in great penance; cakartha—having performed;
paramam—highest; tapaù—penance.
TRANSLATION
The highest perfectional ingenuity is the personal perception of My abodes,
and this has been possible because of your submissive attitude in the
performance of severe penance according to My order.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The highest perfectional stage of life is to know the Lord by actual
perception, by the grace of the Lord. This can be attained by everyone who is
willing to discharge the act of devotional service to the Lord as enjoined in the
revealed scriptures that are standard and accepted by the bona fide äcäryas,
spiritual masters. For example, the Bhagavad-gétä is the approved Vedic
literature accepted by all the great äcäryas, such as Çaìkara, Rämänuja,
Madhva, Caitanya, Viçvanätha, Baladeva, Siddhänta Sarasvaté and many
others. In that Bhagavad-gétä the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, asks that
one always be mindful of Him, always be His devotee, always worship Him
only, and always bow down before the Lord. And by doing so one is sure to go
back home, back to Godhead, without any doubt. In other places also the same
order is there, that one give up all other engagements and fully surrender unto
the Lord without hesitation. And the Lord will give such a devotee all
protection. These are the secrets of attaining the highest perfectional stage.
Lord Brahmä exactly followed these principles without any superiority
complex, and thus he attained the highest perfectional stage of experiencing
the abode of the Lord and the Lord Himself with all His paraphernalia.
Impersonal realization of the effulgence of the Lord’s body is not the highest
perfectional stage, nor is the stage of Paramätmä realization. The word
manéñita is significant. Everyone is falsely or factually proud of his so-called
learning. But the Lord says that the highest perfectional stage of learning is to
know Him and His abode, devoid of all illusion.
TEXT 23
Pa[TYaaidí& MaYaa Ta}a TviYa k-MaRivMaaeihTae )
TaPaae Mae ôdYa& Saa+aadaTMaah& TaPaSaae_Naga )) 23 ))
pratyädiñöaà mayä tatra
tvayi karma-vimohite
tapo me hådayaà säkñäd
ätmähaà tapaso ’nagha
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
pratyädiñöam—ordered; mayä—by Me; tatra—because of; tvayi—unto you;
karma—duty; vimohite—being perplexed; tapaù—penance; me—Me;
hådayam—heart; säkñät—directly; ätmä—life and soul; aham—Myself;
tapasaù—of one who is engaged in penance; anagha—O sinless one.
TRANSLATION
O sinless Brahmä, you may know from Me that it was I who first ordered
you to undergo penance when you were perplexed in your duty. Such penance
is My heart and soul, and therefore penance and I are nondifferent.
PURPORT
The penance by which one can see the Personality of Godhead face to face
is to be understood as devotional service to the Lord and nothing else because
only by discharging devotional service in transcendental love can one
approach the Lord. Such penance is the internal potency of the Lord and is
nondifferent from Him. Such acts of internal potency are exhibited by
nonattachment for material enjoyment. The living entities are encaged in the
conditions of material bondage because of their propensity for overlordship.
But by engagement in the devotional service of the Lord one becomes
detached from this enjoying spirit. The devotees automatically become
detached from worldly enjoyment, and this detachment is the result of perfect
knowledge. Therefore the penance of devotional service includes knowledge
and detachment, and that is the manifestation of the transcendental potency.
One cannot enjoy material illusory prosperity if he desires to return home,
back to Godhead. One who has no information of the transcendental bliss in
the association of the Lord foolishly desires to enjoy this temporary material
happiness. In the Caitanya-caritämåta it is said that if someone sincerely wants
to see the Lord and at the same time wants to enjoy this material world, he is
considered to be a fool only. One who wants to remain here in the material
world for material enjoyment has no business entering into the eternal
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kingdom of God. The Lord favors such a foolish devotee by snatching all that
he may possess in the material world. If such a foolish devotee of the Lord tries
to recoup his position, then the merciful Lord again snatches away all that he
may have possessed. By such repeated failures in material prosperity he
becomes very unpopular with his family members and friends. In the material
world the family members and friends honor persons who are very successful
in accumulating wealth by any means. The foolish devotee of the Lord is thus
put into forcible penance by the grace of the Lord, and at the end the devotee
becomes perfectly happy, being engaged in the service of the Lord. Therefore
penance in devotional service of the Lord, either by voluntary submission or
by being forced by the Lord, is necessary for attaining perfection, and thus
such penance is the internal potency of the Lord.
One cannot, however, be engaged in the penance of devotional service
without being completely free from all sins. As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä,
only a person who is completely free from all reactions of sins can engage
himself in the worship of the Lord. Brahmäjé was sinless, and therefore he
faithfully discharged the advice of the Lord, “tapa tapa,” and the Lord, being
satisfied with him, awarded him the desired result. Therefore only love and
penance combined can please the Lord, and thus one is able to attain His
complete mercy. He directs the sinless, and the sinless devotee attains the
highest perfection of life.
TEXT 24
Sa*JaaiMa TaPaSaEved& Ga]SaaiMa TaPaSaa PauNa" )
ib>aiMaR TaPaSaa ivì& vqYa| Mae duêr& TaPa" )) 24 ))
såjämi tapasaivedaà
grasämi tapasä punaù
bibharmi tapasä viçvaà
véryaà me duçcaraà tapaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
såjämi—I create; tapasä—by the same energy of penance; eva—certainly;
idam—this; grasämi tapasä—I do withdraw also by the same energy;
punaù—again; bibharmi—do maintain; tapasä—by penance; viçvam—the
cosmos; véryam—potency; me—My; duçcaram—severe; tapaù—penance.
TRANSLATION
I create this cosmos by such penance, I maintain it by the same energy, and I
withdraw it all by the same energy. Therefore the potential power is penance
only.
PURPORT
In executing penance, one must be determined to return home, back to
Godhead, and must decide to undergo all types of tribulations for that end.
Even for material prosperity, name and fame, one has to undergo severe types
of penance, otherwise no one can become an important figure in this material
world. Why, then, are there severe types of penance for the perfection of
devotional service? An easygoing life and attainment of perfection in
transcendental realization cannot go together. The Lord is more clever than
any living entity; therefore He wants to see how painstaking the devotee is in
devotional service. The order is received from the Lord, either directly or
through the bona fide spiritual master, and to execute that order, however
painstaking, is the severe type of penance. One who follows the principle
rigidly is sure to achieve success in attaining the Lord’s mercy.
TEXT 25
b]øaevac
>aGavNa( SavR>aUTaaNaaMaDYa+aae_viSQaTaae GauhaMa( )
ved ùPa[iTaåÖeNa Pa[jaNaeNa ick-IizRTaMa( )) 25 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
brahmoväca
bhagavan sarva-bhütänäm
adhyakño ’vasthito guhäm
veda hy apratiruddhena
prajïänena cikérñitam
SYNONYMS
brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; bhagavan—O my Lord; sarva bhütänäm—of
all living entities; adhyakñaù—director; avasthitaù—situated; guhäm—within
the heart; veda—know; hi—certainly; apratiruddhena—without hindrance;
prajïänena—by superintelligence; cikérñitam—endeavors.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: O Personality of Godhead, You are situated in every
living entity’s heart as the supreme director, and therefore You are aware of all
endeavors by Your superior intelligence, without any hindrance whatsoever.
PURPORT
The Bhagavad-gétä confirms that the Lord is situated in everyone’s heart as
the witness, and as such He is the supreme director of sanction. The director is
not the enjoyer of the fruits of action, for without the Lord’s sanction no one
can enjoy. For example, in a prohibited area a habituated drunkard puts
forward his application to the director of drinking, and the director,
considering his case, sanctions only a certain amount of liquor for drinking.
Similarly, the whole material world is full of many drunkards, in the sense that
each and every one of the living entities has something in his mind to enjoy,
and everyone desires the fulfillment of his desires very strongly. The almighty
Lord, being very kind to the living entity, as the father is kind to the son,
fulfills the living entity’s desire for his childish satisfaction. With such desires
in mind, the living entity does not actually enjoy, but he serves the bodily
whims unnecessarily, without profit. The drunkard does not derive any profit
out of drinking, but because he has become a servant of the drinking habit and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
does not wish to get out of it, the merciful Lord gives him all facilities to fulfill
such desires.
The impersonalists recommend that one should become desireless, and
others recommend banishing desires altogether. That is impossible; no one can
banish desires altogether because desiring is the living symptom. Without
having desires a living entity would be dead, which he is not. Therefore, living
conditions and desire go together. perfection of desires may be achieved when
one desires to serve the Lord, and the Lord also desires that every living entity
banish all personal desires and cooperate with His desires. That is the last
instruction of the Bhagavad-gétä. Brahmäjé agreed to this proposal, and
therefore he is given the responsible post of creating generations in the vacant
universe. Oneness with the Lord therefore consists of dovetailing one’s desires
with the desires of the Supreme Lord. That makes for the perfection of all
desires.
The Lord, as the Supersoul in the heart of every living being, knows what is
in the mind of each living entity, and no one can do anything without the
knowledge of the Lord within. By His superior intelligence, the Lord gives
everyone the chance to fulfill his desires to the fullest extent, and the resultant
reaction is also awarded by the Lord.
TEXT 26
TaQaaiPa NaaQaMaaNaSYa NaaQa NaaQaYa NaaiQaTaMa( )
Paravre YaQaa æPae JaaNaqYaa& Tae TvæiPa<a" )) 26 ))
tathäpi näthamänasya
nätha näthaya näthitam
parävare yathä rüpe
jänéyäà te tv arüpiëaù
SYNONYMS
tathä api—in spite of that; näthamänasya—of the one who is asking for;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
nätha—O Lord; näthaya—please award; näthitam—as it is desired;
para-avare—in the matter of mundane and transcendental; yathä—as it is;
rüpe—in the form; jänéyäm—may it be known; te—Your; tu—but;
arüpiëaù—one who is formless.
TRANSLATION
In spite of that, my Lord, I am praying to You to kindly fulfill my desire.
May I please be informed how, in spite of Your transcendental form, You
assume the mundane form, although You have no such form at all.
TEXT 27
YaQaaTMaMaaYaaYaaeGaeNa NaaNaaXa¢-yuPab*&ihTaMa( )
ivlu/MPaNa( ivSa*JaNa( Ga*õNa( ib>a]daTMaaNaMaaTMaNaa )) 27 ))
yathätma-mäyä-yogena
nänä-çakty-upabåàhitam
vilumpan visåjan gåhëan
bibhrad ätmänam ätmanä
SYNONYMS
yathä—as much as; ätma—own; mäyä—potency; yogena—by combination;
nänä—various; çakti—energy; upabåàhitam—by combination and
permutation; vilumpan—in the matter of annihilation; visåjan—in the matter
of generation; gåhëan—in the matter of acceptance; bibhrat—in the matter of
maintenance; ätmänam—own self; ätmanä—by the self.
TRANSLATION
And [please inform me] how You, by Your own Self, manifest different
energies for annihilation, generation, acceptance and maintenance by
combination and permutation.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The whole manifestation is the Lord Himself by diffusion of His different
energies only, namely the internal, external and marginal, just as the sunlight
is the manifestation of the energy of the sun planet. Such energy is
simultaneously one with and different from the Lord, just as the sunshine is
simultaneously one with and different from the sun planet. The energies are
acting by combination and permutation by the indication of the Lord, and the
acting agents, like Brahmä, Viñëu and Çiva, are also different incarnations of
the Lord. In other words, there is nothing but the Lord, and still the Lord is
different from all such manifestive activities. How it is so will be explained
later on.
TEXT 28
§-I@SYaMaaegaSaªLPa O<aRNaai>aYaRQaae<auRTae )
TaQaa TaiÜzYaa& Daeih MaNaqza& MaiYa MaaDav )) 28 ))
kréòasy amogha-saìkalpa
ürëanäbhir yathorëute
tathä tad-viñayäà dhehi
manéñäà mayi mädhava
SYNONYMS
kréòasi—as You play; amogha—infallible; saìkalpa—determination;
ürëanäbhiù—the spider; yathä—as much as; ürëute—covers; tathä—so and so;
tat-viñayäm—in the subject of all those; dhehi—do let me know;
manéñäm—philosophically; mayi—unto me; mädhava—O master of all
energies.
TRANSLATION
O master of all energies, please tell me philosophically all about them. You
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
play like a spider that covers itself by its own energy, and Your determination is
infallible.
PURPORT
By the inconceivable energy of the Lord, every creative element has its own
potencies, known as the potency of the element, potency of knowledge and
potency of different actions and reactions. By a combination of such potential
energies of the Lord there is the manifestation of creation, maintenance and
annihilation in due course of time and by different agents like Brahmä, Viñëu
and Maheçvara. Brahmä creates, Viñëu maintains, and Lord Çiva destroys. But
all such agents and creative energies are emanations from the Lord, and as
such there is nothing except the Lord, or the one supreme source of different
diversities. The exact example is the spider and spider’s web. The web is
created by the spider, and it is maintained by the spider, and as soon as the
spider likes, the whole thing is wound up within the spider. The spider is
covered within the web. If an insignificant spider is so powerful as to act
according to its will, why can’t the Supreme Being act by His supreme will in
the creation, maintenance and destruction of the cosmic manifestations? By
the grace of the Lord, a devotee like Brahmä, or one in his chain of disciplic
succession, can understand the almighty Personality of Godhead eternally
engaged in His transcendental pastimes in the region of different energies.
TEXT 29
>aGaviC^i+aTaMah& k-rvai<a ùTaiNd]Ta" )
NaehMaaNa" Pa[JaaSaGa| bDYaeYa& YadNauGa]haTa( )) 29 ))
bhagavac-chikñitam ahaà
karaväëi hy atandritaù
nehamänaù prajä-sargaà
badhyeyaà yad-anugrahät
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
bhagavat—by the Personality of Godhead; çikñitam—taught; aham—myself;
karaväëi—by acting; hi—certainly; atandritaù—instrumental; na—never;
ihamänaù—although acting; prajä-sargam—generation of the living entities;
badhyeyam—be conditioned; yat—as a matter of fact; anugrahät—by the
mercy of.
TRANSLATION
Please tell me so that I may be taught in the matter by the instruction of the
Personality of Godhead and may thus act instrumentally to generate living
entities, without being conditioned by such activities.
PURPORT
Brahmäjé does not want to become a speculator dependent on the strength
of his personal knowledge and conditioned to material bondage. Everyone
should know in clear consciousness that one is, in the execution of all
activities, an instrument. A conditioned soul is instrumental in the hands of
the external energy, guëa-mayé mäyä, or the illusory energy of the Lord, and in
the liberated stage the living entity is instrumental to the will of the
Personality of Godhead directly. To be instrumental to the direct will of the
Lord is the natural constitutional position of the living entity, whereas to be
an instrument in the hands of the illusory energy of the Lord is material
bondage for the living entity. In that conditioned state, the living entity
speculates on the Absolute Truth and His different activities. But in the
unconditioned stage the living entity directly receives knowledge from the
Lord, and such a liberated soul acts flawlessly, without any speculative habit.
The Bhagavad-gétä (10.10–11) confirms emphatically that the pure devotees,
who are constantly engaged in the loving transcendental service of the Lord,
are directly advised by the Lord, so much so that the devotee unwaveringly
makes progress on the path home, back to Godhead. Pure devotees of the Lord
are therefore not proud of their definite progress, whereas the nondevotee
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
speculator is in the darkness of illusory energy and is very much proud of his
misleading knowledge based on speculation without any definite path. Lord
Brahmä wanted to be saved from that pitfall of pride, although he was posted
in the most exalted position within the universe.
TEXT 30
YaavTa( Sa%a Sa:YauirveXa Tae k*-Ta"
Pa[JaaivSaGaeR iv>aJaaiMa >aae JaNaMa( )
Aiv©-vSTae Pairk-MaRi<a iSQaTaae
Maa Mae SaMauàÖMadae_JaMaaiNaNa" )) 30 ))
yävat sakhä sakhyur iveça te kåtaù
prajä-visarge vibhajämi bho janam
aviklavas te parikarmaëi sthito
mä me samunnaddha-mado ’ja mäninaù
SYNONYMS
yävat—as it is; sakhä—friend; sakhyuù—unto the friend; iva—like that;
éça—O Lord; te—You; kåtaù—have accepted; prajä—the living entities;
visarge—in the matter of creation; vibhajämi—as I shall do it differently;
bhoù—O my Lord; janam—those who are born; aviklavaù—without being
perturbed; te—Your; parikarmaëi—in the matter of service; sthitaù—thus
situated; mä—may it never be; me—unto me; samunnaddha—resulting arise;
madaù—madness; aja—O unborn one; mäninaù—thus being thought of.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, the unborn, You have shaken hands with me just as a friend
does with a friend [as if equal in position]. I shall be engaged in the creation of
different types of living entities, and I shall be occupied in Your service. I shall
have no perturbation, but I pray that all this may not give rise to pride, as if I
were the Supreme.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä is definitely situated in the humor of friendship with the
Lord. Every living being is eternally related with the Personality of Godhead
in one of five different transcendental humors, namely çänta, däsya, sakhya,
vätsalya and mädhurya. We have already discussed these five kinds of humors
in relationship with the Personality of Godhead. It is clearly exhibited herein
that Lord Brahmä is related to the Personality of Godhead in the
transcendental humor of friendship. A pure devotee may be related with the
Lord in any one of the transcendental humors, even in the humor of
parenthood, but the devotee of the Lord is always a transcendental servitor.
No one is equal to or greater than the Lord. That is the version of the
Bhagavad-gétä. Brahmäjé, although eternally related with the Lord in the
transcendental humor of friendship, and although entrusted with the most
exalted post of creating different grades of living entities, is still conscious of
his position, that he is neither the Supreme Lord nor supremely powerful. It is
possible that some extremely powerful personality, within or without the
universe, may sometimes show more power than the Lord Himself. Still the
pure devotee knows that this power is a vibhüti delegated by the Lord, and such
a delegated powerful living entity is never independent. Çré Hanumänjé
crossed the Indian Ocean by jumping over the sea, and Lord Çré Rämacandra
engaged Himself in marching over the bridge, but this does not mean that
Hanumänjé was more powerful than the Lord. Sometimes the Lord gives
extraordinary powers to His devotee, but the devotee knows always that the
power belongs to the Personality of Godhead and that the devotee is only an
instrument. The pure devotee is never puffed up like the nondevotee class of
men who falsely think that they are God. It is astonishing to see how a person
who is being kicked by the laws of the Lord’s illusory energy at every step can
falsely think of becoming one with the Lord. Such thinking is the last snare of
the illusory energy offered to the conditioned soul. The first illusion is that he
wants to become Lord of the material world by accumulating wealth and
power, but when he is frustrated in that attempt he wants to be one with the
Lord. So both becoming the most powerful man in the material world and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
desiring to become one with the Lord are different illusory snares. And
because the pure devotees of the Lord are surrendered souls, they are above the
illusory snares of mäyä. Because Lord Brahmä is a pure devotee, even though
the first dominating deity in the material world and therefore able to do many
wonderful things, he would never, like the nondevotee with a poor fund of
knowledge, have the audacity to think of becoming one with the Lord. People
with a poor fund of knowledge should take lessons from Brahmä when they are
puffed up with the false notion of becoming God.
Factually Lord Brahmä does not create the living entities. In the beginning
of the creation he is empowered to give different bodily shapes to the living
entities according to their work during the last millennium. Brahmäjé’s duty is
just to wake the living entities from their slumber and to engage them in their
proper duty. The different grades of living entities are not created by Brahmäjé
by his capricious whims, but he is entrusted with the task of giving the living
entities different grades of body so that they can work accordingly. And still
he is conscious that he is only instrumental, so that he may not think of
himself as the Supreme Powerful Lord.
Devotees of the Lord are engaged in the specific duty offered by the Lord,
and such duties are successfully carried out without hindrance because they
are ordained by the Lord. The credit of success goes not to the doer but to the
Lord. But persons with a poor fund of knowledge take the credit of success into
their own accounts and give nothing to the credit of the Lord. That is the
symptom of the nondevotee class of men.
TEXT 31
é[q>aGavaNauvac
jaNa& ParMaGauù& Mae Yad( ivjaNaSaMaiNvTaMa( )
SarhSYa& Tad®& c Ga*ha<a GaidTa& MaYaa )) 31 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
jïänaà parama-guhyaà me
yad vijïäna-samanvitam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sarahasyaà tad-aìgaà ca
gåhäëa gaditaà mayä
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the personality of Godhead said; jïänam—knowledge
acquired; parama—extremely; guhyam—confidential; me—of Me; yat—which
is; vijïäna—realization; samanvitam—coordinated; sa-rahasyam—with
devotional service; tat—of that; aìgam ca—necessary paraphernalia;
gåhäëa—just try to take up; gaditam—explained; mayä—by Me.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead said: Knowledge about Me as described in the
scriptures is very confidential, and it has to be realized in conjunction with
devotional service. The necessary paraphernalia for that process is being
explained by Me. You may take it up carefully.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä is the topmost devotee of the Lord within the universe, and
therefore the Personality of Godhead replied to his four principal inquiries in
four important statements, which are known as the original Bhägavatam in
four verses. These were Brahmä’s questions: (1) What are the forms of the Lord
both in matter and in transcendence? (2) How are the different energies of the
Lord working? (3) How does the Lord play with His different energies? (4)
How may Brahmä be instructed to discharge the duty entrusted to Him? The
prelude to the answers is this verse under discussion, wherein the Lord informs
Brahmä that knowledge of Him, the Supreme Absolute Truth, as it is stated in
the revealed scriptures, is very subtle and cannot be understood unless one is
self-realized by the grace of the Lord. The Lord says that Brahmä may take the
answers as He explains them. This means that transcendental knowledge of
the absolute Supreme Being can be known if it is made known by the Lord
Himself. By the mental speculation of the greatest mundane thinkers, the
Absolute Truth cannot be understood. The mental speculators can reach up to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the standard of impersonal Brahman realization, but, factually, complete
knowledge of transcendence is beyond the knowledge of impersonal Brahman.
Thus it is called the supreme confidential wisdom. Out of many liberated souls,
someone may be qualified to know the Personality of Godhead. In the
Bhagavad-gétä it is also said by the Lord Himself that out of many hundreds of
thousands of people, one may try for perfection in human life, and out of many
liberated souls, one may know Him as He is. Therefore, the knowledge of the
Personality of Godhead may be attained by devotional service only. Rahasyam
means devotional service. Lord Kåñëa instructed Arjuna in the Bhagavad-gétä
because He found Arjuna to be a devotee and friend. Without such
qualifications, one cannot enter into the mystery of the Bhagavad-gétä
Therefore, one cannot understand the Personality of Godhead unless one
becomes a devotee and discharges devotional service. This mystery is love of
Godhead. Therein lies the main qualification for knowing the mystery of the
Personality of Godhead. And to attain the stage of transcendental love of
Godhead, regulative principles of devotional service must be followed. The
regulative principles are called vidhi-bhakti, or the devotional service of the
Lord, and they can be practiced by a neophyte with his present senses. Such
regulative principles are mainly based on hearing and chanting of the glories
of the Lord. And such hearing and chanting of the glories of the Lord can be
made possible in the association of devotees only. Lord Caitanya therefore
recommended five main principles for attaining perfection in the devotional
service of the Lord. The first is association with devotees (hearing); second is
chanting the glories of the Lord; third, hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam from the
pure devotee; fourth, residing in a holy place connected with the Lord; and
fifth, worshiping the Deity of the Lord with devotion. Such rules and
regulations are parts of devotional service. So, as requested by Lord Brahmä,
the personality of Godhead will explain all about the four questions put
forward by Brahmä, and others also which are parts and parcels of the same
questions.
TEXT 32
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
YaavaNah& YaQaa>aavae Yad]UPaGau<ak-MaRk-" )
TaQaEv TatvivjaNaMaSTau Tae MadNauGa]haTa( )) 32 ))
yävän ahaà yathä-bhävo
yad-rüpa-guëa-karmakaù
tathaiva tattva-vijïänam
astu te mad-anugrahät
SYNONYMS
yävän—as I am in eternal form; aham—Myself; yathä—as much as;
bhävaù—transcendental existence; yat—those; rüpa—various forms and
colors; guëa—qualities; karmakaù—activities; tathä—so and so;
eva—certainly; tattva-vijïänam—factual realization; astu—let it be; te—unto
you; mat—My; anugrahät—by causeless mercy.
TRANSLATION
All of Me, namely My actual eternal form and My transcendental existence,
color, qualities and activities—let all be awakened within you by factual
realization, out of My causeless mercy.
PURPORT
The secret of success in understanding the intricacies of knowledge of the
Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, is the causeless mercy of the
Lord. Even in the material world, the father of many sons discloses the secret
of his position to the pet sons. The father discloses the confidence unto the
son whom he thinks worthy. An important man in the social order can be
known by his mercy only. Similarly, one must be very dear to the Lord in order
to know the Lord. The Lord is unlimited; no one can know Him completely,
but one’s advancement in the transcendental loving service of the Lord can
make one eligible to know the Lord. Here we can see that the Lord is
sufficiently pleased with Brahmäjé, and therefore He offers His causeless mercy
to him so that Brahmäjé may have the factual realization of the Lord by His
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mercy only.
In the Vedas also it is said that a person cannot know the Absolute Truth
Personality of Godhead simply by dint of mundane education or intellectual
gymnastics. One can know the Supreme Truth if one has unflinching faith in
the bona fide spiritual master as well as in the Lord. Such a faithful person,
even though illiterate in the mundane sense, can know the Lord automatically
by the mercy of the Lord. In the Bhagavad-gétä also, it is said that the Lord
reserves the right of not being exposed to everyone, and He keeps Himself
concealed from the faithless by His yoga-mäyä potency.
To the faithful the Lord reveals Himself in His form, quality and pastimes.
The Lord is not formless, as wrongly conceived by the impersonalist, but His
form is not like one that we have experienced. The Lord discloses His form,
even to the extent of measurement, to His pure devotees, and that is the
meaning of yävän, as explained by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the greatest scholar of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
The Lord discloses the transcendental nature of His existence. The
mundane wranglers make mundane conceptions of the form of the Lord. It is
said in the revealed scriptures that the Lord has no mundane form; therefore
persons with a poor fund of knowledge conclude that He must be formless.
They cannot distinguish between the mundane form and the spiritual form.
According to them, without a mundane form one must be formless. This
conclusion is also mundane because formlessness is the opposite conception of
form. Negation of the mundane conception does not establish a
transcendental fact. In the Brahma-saàhitä it is said that the Lord has a
transcendental form and that He can utilize any one of His senses for any
purpose. For example, He can eat with His eyes, and He can see with His leg.
In the mundane conception of form, one cannot eat with one’s eyes or see with
his leg. That is the difference between the mundane body and the spiritual
body of sac-cid-änanda. A spiritual body is not formless; it is a different type of
body, of which we cannot conceive with our present mundane senses. Formless
therefore means devoid of mundane form, or possessing a spiritual body of
which the nondevotee can have no conception by the speculative method.
The Lord discloses to the devotee His unlimited varieties of transcendental
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bodies, all identical with one another with different kinds of bodily features.
Some of the transcendental bodies of the Lord are blackish, and some of them
are whitish. Some of them are reddish, and some are yellowish. Some of them
are four-handed and some of them two-handed. Some of them are like the fish,
and some are like the lion. All these different transcendental bodies of the
Lord, without any differential category, are disclosed to the devotees of the
Lord by the mercy of the Lord, and thus the impersonalists’ false arguments
claiming the formlessness of the Supreme Truth do not appeal to a devotee of
the Lord, even though such a devotee may not be very advanced in devotional
service.
The Lord has unlimited numbers of transcendental qualities, and one of
them is His affection for His unalloyed devotee. In the history of the mundane
world we can appreciate His transcendental qualities. The Lord incarnates
Himself for the protection of His devotees and for the annihilation of the
faithless. His activities are in relationship with His devotees.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is full of such activities of the Lord in relationship with
His devotees, and the nondevotees have no knowledge of such pastimes. The
Lord lifted the Govardhana Hill when He was only seven years old and
protected His pure devotees at Våndävana from the wrath of Indra, who was
overflooding the place with rain. Now this lifting of the Govardhana Hill by a
seven-year-old boy may be unbelievable for the faithless, but for the devotees it
is absolutely believable. The devotee believes in the almighty potency of the
Lord, while the faithless say that the Lord is almighty but do not believe it.
Such men with a poor fund of knowledge do not know that the Lord is the
Lord eternally and that one cannot become the Lord by meditation for
millions of years or by mental speculation for billions of years.
The impersonal interpretation of the mundane wranglers is completely
refuted in this verse because it is clearly stated here that the Supreme Lord has
His qualities, form, pastimes and everything that a person has. All these
descriptions of the transcendental nature of the Personality of Godhead are
factual realizations by the devotee of the Lord, and by the causeless mercy of
the Lord they are revealed to His pure devotee, and to no one else.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 33
AhMaevaSaMaevaGa]e NaaNYad( YaTa( SadSaTa( ParMa( )
Paêadh& YadeTaÀ Yaae_viXaZYaeTa Saae_SMYahMa( )) 33 ))
aham eväsam evägre
nänyad yat sad-asat param
paçcäd ahaà yad etac ca
yo ’vaçiñyeta so ’smy aham
SYNONYMS
aham—I, the Personality of Godhead; eva—certainly; äsam—existed;
eva—only; agre—before the creation; na—never; anyat—anything else;
yat—all those; sat—the effect; asat—the cause; param—the supreme;
paçcät—at the end; aham—I, the Personality of Godhead; yat—all these;
etat—creation; ca—also; yaù—everything; avaçiñyeta—remains; saù—that;
asmi—I am; aham—I, the Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä, it is I, the Personality of Godhead, who was existing before the
creation, when there was nothing but Myself. Nor was there the material
nature, the cause of this creation. That which you see now is also I, the
Personality of Godhead, and after annihilation what remains will also be I, the
Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
We should note very carefully that the personality of Godhead is addressing
Lord Brahmä and specifying with great emphasis Himself, pointing out that it
is He, the Personality of Godhead, who existed before the creation, it is He
only who maintains the creation, and it is He only who remains after the
annihilation of the creation. Brahmä is also a creation of the Supreme Lord.
The impersonalist puts forth the theory of oneness in the sense that Brahmä,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
also being the same principle of “I” because he is an emanation from the I, the
Absolute Truth, is identical with the Lord, the principle of I, and that there is
thus nothing more than the principle of I, as explained in this verse.
Accepting the argument of the impersonalist, it is to be admitted that the Lord
is the creator I and that the Brahmä is the created I. Therefore there is a
difference between the two “I’s,” namely the predominator I and the
predominated I. Therefore there are still two I’s, even accepting the argument
of the impersonalist. But we must note carefully that these two I’s are accepted
in the Vedic literature (Kaöhopaniñad) in the sense of quality. The
Kaöhopaniñad says:
nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm
eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän
The creator “I” and the created “I” are both accepted in the Vedas as
qualitatively one because both of them are nityas and cetanas. But the singular
“I” is the creator “I,” and the created “I’s” are of plural number because there
are many “I’s” like Brahmä and those generated by Brahmä. It is the simple
truth. The father creates or begets a son, and the son also creates many other
sons, and all of them may be one as human beings, but at the same time from
the father, the son and the grandsons are all different. The son cannot take
the place of the father, nor can the grandsons. Simultaneously the father, the
son and the grandson are one and different also. As human beings they are
one, but as relativities they are different. Therefore the relativities of the
creator and the created or the predominator and the predominated have been
differentiated in the Vedas by saying that the predominator “I” is the feeder of
the predominated “I’s,” and thus there is a vast difference between the two
principles of “I.”
In another feature of this verse, no one can deny the personalities of both
the Lord and Brahmä. Therefore in the ultimate issue both the predominator
and predominated are persons. This conclusion refutes the conclusion of the
impersonalist that in the ultimate issue everything is impersonal. This
impersonal feature stressed by the less intelligent impersonalist school is
refuted by pointing out that the predominator “I” is the Absolute Truth and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
that He is a person. The predominated “I,” Brahmä, is also a person, but he is
not the Absolute. For realization of one’s self in spiritual psychology it may be
convenient to assume oneself to be the same principle as the Absolute Truth,
but there is always the difference of the predominated and the predominator,
as clearly pointed out here in this verse, which is grossly misused by the
impersonalists. Brahmä is factually seeing face to face his predominator Lord,
who exists in His transcendental eternal form, even after the annihilation of
the material creation. The form of the Lord, as seen by Brahmä, existed before
the creation of Brahmä, and the material manifestation with all the
ingredients and agents of material creation are also energetic expansions of
the Lord, and after the exhibition of the Lord’s energy comes to a close, what
remains is the same Personality of Godhead. Therefore the form of the Lord
exists in all circumstances of creation, maintenance and annihilation. The
Vedic hymns confirm this fact in the statement väsudevo vä idam agra äsén na
brahmä na ca çaìkara eko näräyaëa äsén na brahmä neçäna, etc. Before the
creation there was none except Väsudeva. There was neither Brahmä nor
Çaìkara. Only Näräyaëa was there and no one else, neither Brahmä nor Éçäna.
Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya also confirms in his comments on the Bhagavad-gétä that
Näräyaëa, or the Personality of Godhead, is transcendental to all creation, but
that the whole creation is the product of avyakta. Therefore the difference
between the created and the creator is always there, although both the creator
and created are of the same quality.
The other feature of the statement is that the supreme truth is Bhagavän,
or the Personality of Godhead. The Personality of Godhead and His kingdom
have already been explained. The kingdom of Godhead is not void as
conceived by the impersonalists. The Vaikuëöha planets are full of
transcendental variegatedness, including the four-handed residents of those
planets, with great opulence of wealth and prosperity, and there are even
airplanes and other amenities required for high-grade personalities. Therefore
the Personality of Godhead exists before the creation, and He exists with all
transcendental variegatedness in the Vaikuëöhalokas. The Vaikuëöhalokas,
also accepted in the Bhagavad-gétä as being of the sanätana nature, are not
annihilated even after the annihilation of the manifested cosmos. Those
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
transcendental planets are of a different nature altogether, and that nature is
not subjected to the rules and regulations of material creation, maintenance or
annihilation. The existence of the Personality of Godhead implies the
existence of the Vaikuëöhalokas, as the existence of a king implies the
existence of a kingdom.
In various places in Çrémad-Bhägavatam and in other revealed scriptures the
existence of the Personality of Godhead is mentioned. For example, in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.8.10), Mahäräja Parékñit asks:
sa cäpi yatra puruño
viçva-sthity-udbhaväpyayaù
muktvätma-mäyäà mäyeçaù
çete sarva-guhäçayaù
“How does the Personality of Godhead, the cause of creation, maintenance
and annihilation, who is always freed from the influence of the illusory energy
and is the controller of the same, lie in everyone’s heart?” Similar also is a
question of Vidura’s:
tattvänäà bhagavaàs teñäà
katidhä pratisaìkramaù
tatremaà ka upäséran
ka u svid anuçerate
(Bhäg. 3.7.37)
Çrédhara Svämé explains this in his notes: “During the annihilation of the
creation, who serves the Lord lying on the Çeña, etc.” This means that the
transcendental Lord with all His name, fame, quality and paraphernalia exists
eternally. The same confirmation is also in the Käçé-khaëòa of the Skanda
Puräëa in connection with dhruva-carita. It is said there:
na cyavante ’pi yad-bhaktä
mahatyäà pralayäpadi
ato ’cyuto ’khile loke
sa ekaù sarvago ’vyayaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Even the devotees of the Personality of Godhead are not annihilated
during the period of the entire annihilation of the material world, not to speak
of the Lord Himself. The Lord is ever-existent in all three stages of material
change.
The impersonalist adduces no activity in the Supreme, but in this
discussion between Brahmä and the Supreme Personality of Godhead the Lord
is said to have activities also, as He has His form and quality. The activities of
Brahmä and other demigods during the maintenance of the creation are to be
understood as the activities of the Lord. The king, or the head executive of a
state, may not be seen in the government offices, for he may be engaged in
royal comforts. Yet it should be understood that everything is being done
under his direction and everything is at his command. The Personality of
Godhead is never formless. In the material world He may not be visible in His
personal form to the less intelligent class of men, and therefore He may
sometimes be called formless. But actually He is always in His eternal form in
His Vaikuëöha planets as well as in other planets of the universes as different
incarnations. The example of the sun is very appropriate in this connection.
The sun in the night may not be visible to the eyes of men in the darkness, but
the sun is visible wherever it has risen. That the sun is not visible to the eyes
of the inhabitants of a particular part of the earth does not mean that the sun
has no form.
In the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad (1.4.1) there is the hymn ätmaivedam agra
äsét puruña-vidhaù. This mantra indicates the Supreme Personality of Godhead
(Kåñëa) even before the appearance of the puruña incarnation. In the
Bhagavad-gétä (15.18) it is said that Lord Kåñëa is Puruñottama because He is
the supreme puruña, transcendental even to the puruña-akñara and the
puruña-kñara. The akñara-puruña, or the Mahä-Viñëu, throws His glance over
prakåti, or material nature, but the Puruñottama existed even before that. The
Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad therefore confirms the statement of the
Bhagavad-gétä that Lord Kåñëa is the Supreme Person (Puruñottama).
In some of the Vedas it is also said that in the beginning only the
impersonal Brahman existed. However, according to this verse, the impersonal
Brahman, which is the glowing effulgence of the body of the Supreme Lord,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
may be called the immediate cause, but the cause of all causes, or the remote
cause, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord’s impersonal feature is
existent in the material world because by material senses or material eyes the
Lord cannot be seen or perceived. One has to spiritualize the senses before one
can expect to see or perceive the Supreme Lord. But He is always engaged in
His personal capacity, and He is eternally visible to the inhabitants of
Vaikuëöhaloka, eye to eye. Therefore He is materially impersonal, just as the
executive head of the state may be impersonal in the government offices,
although he is not impersonal in the government house. Similarly, the Lord is
not impersonal in His abode, which is always nirasta-kuhakam, as stated in the
very beginning of the Bhägavatam. Therefore both the impersonal and
personal features of the Lord are acceptable, as mentioned in the revealed
scriptures. This Personality of Godhead is very emphatically explained in the
Bhagavad-gétä in connection with the verse brahmaëo hi pratiñöhäham (Bg.
14.27). Therefore in all ways the confidential part of spiritual knowledge is
realization of the Personality of Godhead, and not His impersonal Brahman
feature. One should therefore have his ultimate aim of realization not in the
impersonal feature but in the personal feature of the Absolute Truth. The
example of the sky within the pot and the sky outside the pot may be helpful to
the student for his realization of the all-pervading quality of the cosmic
consciousness of the Absolute Truth. But that does not mean that the
individual part and parcel of the Lord becomes the Supreme by a false claim. It
means only that the conditioned soul is a victim of the illusory energy in her
last snare. To claim to be one with the cosmic consciousness of the Lord is the
last trap set by the illusory energy, or daivé mäyä. Even in the impersonal
existence of the Lord, as it is in the material creation, one should aspire for
personal realization of the Lord, and that is the meaning of paçcäd ahaà yad
etac ca yo ’vaçiñyeta so ’smy aham.
Brahmäjé also accepted the same truth when he was instructing Närada. He
said:
so ’yaà te ’bhihitas täta
bhagavän viçva-bhävanaù
(Bhäg. 2.7.50)
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
There is no other cause of all causes than the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Hari. Therefore this verse aham eva never indicates anything other
than the Supreme Lord, and one should therefore follow the path of the
Brahma-sampradäya, or the path from Brahmäjé to Närada, to Vyäsadeva, etc.,
and make it a point in life to realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Hari, or Lord Kåñëa. This very confidential instruction to the pure devotees of
the Lord was also given to Arjuna and to Brahmä in the beginning of the
creation. The demigods like Brahmä, Viñëu, Maheçvara, Indra, Candra and
Varuëa are undoubtedly different forms of the Lord for execution of different
functions; the different elemental ingredients of material creation, as well as
the multifarious energies, also may be of the same Personality of Godhead, but
the root of all of them is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. One
should be attached to the root of everything rather than bewildered by the
branches and leaves. That is the instruction given in this verse.
TEXT 34
‰Tae_Qa| YaTa( Pa[TaqYaeTa Na Pa[TaqYaeTa caTMaiNa )
TaiÜÛadaTMaNaae MaaYaa& YaQaa>aaSaae YaQaa TaMa" )) 34 ))
åte ’rthaà yat pratéyeta
na pratéyeta cätmani
tad vidyäd ätmano mäyäà
yathäbhäso yathä tamaù
SYNONYMS
åte—without; artham—value; yat—that which; pratéyeta—appears to be;
na—not; pratéyeta—appears to be; ca—and; ätmani—in relation to Me;
tat—that; vidyät—you must know; ätmanaù—My; mäyäm—illusory energy;
yathä—just as; äbhäsaù—the reflection; yathä—as; tamaù—the darkness.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
O Brahmä, whatever appears to be of any value, if it is without relation to
Me, has no reality. Know it as My illusory energy, that reflection which appears
to be in darkness.
PURPORT
In the previous verse it has already been concluded that in any stage of the
cosmic manifestation—its appearance, its sustenance, its growth, its
interactions of different energies, its deterioration and its disappearance—all
has its basic relation with the existence of the Personality of Godhead. And as
such, whenever there is forgetfulness of this prime relation with the Lord, and
whenever things are accepted as real without being related to the Lord, that
conception is called a product of the illusory energy of the Lord. Because
nothing can exist without the Lord, it should be known that the illusory
energy is also an energy of the Lord. The right conclusion of dovetailing
everything in relationship with the Lord is called yoga-mäyä, or the energy of
union, and the wrong conception of detaching a thing from its relationship
with the Lord is called the Lord’s daivé mäyä, or mahä-mäyä. Both the mäyäs
also have connections with the Lord because nothing can exist without being
related to Him. As such, the wrong conception of detaching relationships from
the Lord is not false but illusory.
Misconceiving one thing for another thing is called illusion. For example,
accepting a rope as a snake is illusion, but the rope is not false. The rope, as it
exists in the front of the illusioned person, is not at all false, but the
acceptance is illusory. Therefore the wrong conception of accepting this
material manifestation as being divorced from the energy of the Lord is
illusion, but it is not false. And this illusory conception is called the reflection
of the reality in the darkness of ignorance. Anything that appears as
apparently not being “produced out of My energy” is called mäyä. The
conception that the living entity is formless or that the Supreme Lord is
formless is also illusion. In the Bhagavad-gétä (2.12) it was said by the Lord in
the midst of the battlefield that the warriors standing in front of Arjuna,
Arjuna himself, and even the Lord had all existed before, they were existing
on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, and they would all continue to be individual
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
personalities in the future also, even after the annihilation of the present body
and even after being liberated from the bondage of material existence. In all
circumstances, the Lord and the living entities are individual personalities,
and the personal features of both the Lord and living beings are never
abolished; only the influence of the illusory energy, the reflection of light in
the darkness, can, by the mercy of the Lord, be removed. In the material world,
the light of the sun is also not independent, nor is that of the moon. The real
source of light is the brahmajyoti, which diffuses light from the transcendental
body of the Lord, and the same light is reflected in varieties of light: the light
of the sun, the light of the moon, the light of fire, or the light of electricity. So
the identity of the self as being unconnected with the Supreme Self, the Lord,
is also illusion, and the false claim “I am the Supreme” is the last illusory snare
of the same mäyä, or the external energy of the Lord.
The Vedänta-sütra in the very beginning affirms that everything is born
from the Supreme, and thus, as explained in the previous verse, all individual
living entities are born from the energy of the supreme living being, the
Personality of Godhead. Brahmä himself was born from the energy of the Lord,
and all other living entities are born from the energy of the Lord through the
agency of Brahmä; none of them has any existence without being dovetailed
with the Supreme Lord.
The independence of the individual living entity is not real independence,
but is just the reflection of the real independence existing in the Supreme
Being, the Lord. The false claim of supreme independence by the conditioned
souls is illusion, and this conclusion is admitted in this verse.
Persons with a poor fund of knowledge become illusioned, and therefore the
so-called scientists, physiologists, empiric philosophers, etc., become dazzled by
the glaring reflection of the sun, moon, electricity, etc., and deny the existence
of the Supreme Lord, putting forward theories and different speculations
about the creation, maintenance and annihilation of everything material. The
medical practitioner may deny the existence of the soul in the physiological
bodily construction of an individual person, but he cannot give life to a dead
body, even though all the mechanisms of the body exist even after death. The
psychologist makes a serious study of the physiological conditions of the brain,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
as if the construction of the cerebral lump were the machine of the
functioning mind, but in the dead body the psychologist cannot bring back the
function of the mind. These scientific studies of the cosmic manifestation or
the bodily construction independent of the Supreme Lord are different
reflective intellectual gymnastics only, but at the end they are all illusion and
nothing more. All such advancement of science and knowledge in the present
context of material civilization is but an action of the covering influence of
the illusory energy. The illusory energy has two phases of existence, namely
the covering influence and the throwing influence. By the throwing influence
the illusory energy throws the living entities into the darkness of ignorance,
and by the covering influence she covers the eyes of men with a poor fund of
knowledge about the existence of the Supreme Person who enlightened the
supreme individual living being, Brahmä. The identity of Brahmä with the
Supreme Lord is never claimed herein, and therefore such a foolish claim by
the man with a poor fund of knowledge is another display of the illusory
energy of the Lord. The Lord says in the Bhagavad-gétä (16.18–20) that
demoniac persons who deny the existence of the Lord are thrown more and
more into the darkness of ignorance, and thus such demoniac persons
transmigrate life after life without any knowledge of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
The sane man, however, is enlightened in the disciplic succession from
Brahmäjé, who was personally instructed by the Lord, or in the disciplic
succession from Arjuna, who was personally instructed by the Lord in the
Bhagavad-gétä. He accepts this statement of the Lord:
ahaà sarvasya prabhavo
mattaù sarvaà pravartate
iti matvä bhajante mäà
budhä bhäva-samanvitäù
(Bg. 10.8)
The Lord is the original source of all emanations, and everything that is
created, maintained and annihilated exists by the energy of the Lord. The sane
man who knows this is actually learned, and therefore he becomes a pure
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
devotee of the Lord, engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
Although the reflectory energy of the Lord displays various illusions to the
eyes of persons with a poor fund of knowledge, the sane person knows clearly
that the Lord can act, even from far, far beyond our vision, by His different
energies, just as fire can diffuse heat and light from a distant place. In the
medical science of the ancient sages, known as the Äyur-veda, there is definite
acceptance of the Lord s supremacy in the following words:
jagad-yoner anicchasya
cid-änandaika-rüpiëaù
puàso ’sti prakåtir nityä
praticchäyeva bhäsvataù
acetanäpi caitanyayogena
paramätmanaù
akarod viçvam akhilam
anityam näöakäkåtim
There is one Supreme Person who is the progenitor of this cosmic
manifestation and whose energy acts as prakåti, or the material nature, dazzling
like a reflection. By such illusory action of prakåti, even dead matter is caused
to move by the cooperation of living energy of the Lord, and the material
world appears like a dramatic performance to the ignorant eyes. The ignorant
person, therefore, may even be a scientist or physiologist in the drama of
prakåti, while the sane person knows prakåti as the illusory energy of the Lord.
By such a conclusion, as confirmed by the Bhagavad-gétä, it is clear that the
living entities are also a display of the Lord’s superior energy (parä prakåti),
just as the material world is a display of the Lord’s inferior energy (aparä
prakåti). The superior energy of the Lord cannot be as good as the Lord,
although there is very little difference between the energy and the possessor of
the energy, or the fire and the heat. Fire is possessed of heat, but heat is not
fire. This simple thing is not understood by the man with a poor fund of
knowledge who falsely claims that the fire and heat are the same. This energy
of the fire (namely heat) is explained here as a reflection, and not directly fire.
Therefore the living energy represented by the living entities is the reflection
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of the Lord, and never the Lord Himself. Being the reflection of the Lord, the
existence of the living entity is dependent on the Supreme Lord, who is the
original light. This material energy may be compared to darkness, as actually it
is darkness, and the activities of the living entities in the darkness are
reflections of the original light. The Lord should be understood by the context
of this verse. Nondependence of both the energies of the Lord is explained as
mäyä, or illusion. No one can make a solution of the darkness of ignorance
simply by the reflection of light. Similarly, no one can come out of material
existence simply by the reflected light of the common man; one has to receive
the light from the original light itself. The reflection of sunlight in the
darkness is unable to drive out the darkness, but the sunlight outside the
reflection can drive out the darkness completely. In darkness no one can see
the things in a room. Therefore a person in the dark is afraid of snakes and
scorpions, although there may not be such things. But in the light the things in
the room can be clearly seen, and the fear of snakes and scorpions is at once
removed. Therefore one has to take shelter of the light of the Lord, as in the
Bhagavad-gétä or the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and not the reflective personalities
who have no touch with the Lord. No one should hear Bhagavad-gétä or
Çrémad-Bhägavatam from a person who does not believe in the existence of the
Lord. Such a person is already doomed, and any association with such a
doomed person makes the associater also doomed.
According to the Padma Puräëa, within the material compass there are
innumerable material universes, and all of them are full of darkness. Any
living being, beginning from the Brahmäs (there are innumerable Brahmäs in
innumerable universes) to the insignificant ant, are all born in darkness, and
they require factual light from the Lord to see Him directly, just as the sun can
be seen only by the direct light of the sun. No lamp or man-made torchlight,
however powerful it may be, can help one see the sun. The sun reveals itself.
Therefore the action of different energies of the Lord, or the Personality of
Godhead Himself, can be realized by the light manifested by the causeless
mercy of the Lord. The impersonalists say that God cannot be seen. God can
be seen by the light of God and not by man-made speculations. Here this light
is specifically mentioned as vidyät, which is an order by the Lord to Brahmä.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
This direct order of the Lord is a manifestation of His internal energy, and this
particular energy is the means of seeing the Lord face to face. Not only
Brahmä but anyone who may be graced by the Lord to see such merciful direct
internal energy can also realize the Personality of Godhead without any
mental speculation.
TEXT 35
YaQaa MahaiNTa >aUTaaiNa >aUTaezUÀavceZvNau )
Pa[ivíaNYaPa[ivíaiNa TaQaa Taezu Na TaeZvhMa( )) 35 ))
yathä mahänti bhütäni
bhüteñüccävaceñv anu
praviñöäny apraviñöäni
tathä teñu na teñv aham
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; mahänti—the universal; bhütäni—elements; bhüteñu
ucca-avaceñu—in the minute and gigantic; anu—after; praviñöäni—entered;
apraviñöäni—not entered; tathä—so; teñu—in them; na—not; teñu—in them;
aham—Myself.
TRANSLATION
O Brahmä, please know that the universal elements enter into the cosmos
and at the same time do not enter into the cosmos; similarly, I Myself also exist
within everything created, and at the same time I am outside of everything.
PURPORT
The great elements of material creation, namely earth, water, fire, air and
ether, all enter into the body of all manifested entities—the seas, mountains,
aquatics, plants, reptiles, birds, beasts, human beings, demigods and everyone
materially manifested—and at the same time such elements are differently
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
situated. In the developed stage of consciousness, the human being can study
both physiological and physical science, but the basic principles of such
sciences are nothing but the material elements and nothing more. The body of
the human being and the body of the mountain, as also the bodies of the
demigods, including Brahmä, are all of the same ingredients—earth, water,
etc.—and at the same time the elements are beyond the body. The elements
were created first, and therefore they entered into the bodily construction
later, but in both circumstances they entered the cosmos and also did not
enter. Similarly, the Supreme Lord, by His different energies, namely the
internal and external, is within everything in the manifested cosmos, and at
the same time He is outside of everything, situated in the kingdom of God
(Vaikuëöhaloka) as described before. This is very nicely stated in the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.37) as follows:
änanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhävitäbhis
täbhir ya eva nija-rüpatayä kaläbhiù
goloka eva nivasaty akhilätma-bhüto
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
“I worship the Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who, by expansion of His
internal potency of transcendental existence, knowledge and bliss, enjoys in
His own and expanded forms. Simultaneously He enters into every atom of the
creation.”
This expansion of His plenary parts is also more definitely explained in the
same Brahma-saàhitä (5.35) as follows:
eko ’py asau racayituà jagad-aëòa-koöià
yac-chaktir asti jagad-aëòa-cayä yad-antaù
aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-sthaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
“I worship the Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who, by one of His
plenary portions, enters into the existence of every universe and every particle
of the atoms and thus unlimitedly manifests His infinite energy all over the
material creation.”
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The impersonalists can imagine or even perceive that the Supreme
Brahman is thus all-pervading, and therefore they conclude that there is no
possibility of His personal form. Herein lies the mystery of His transcendental
knowledge. This mystery is transcendental love of Godhead, and one who is
surcharged with such transcendental love of Godhead can without difficulty
see the Personality of Godhead in every atom and every movable or immovable
object. And at the same time he can see the Personality of Godhead in His
own abode, Goloka, enjoying eternal pastimes with His eternal associates, who
are also expansions of His transcendental existence. This vision is the real
mystery of spiritual knowledge, as stated by the Lord in the beginning
(sarahasyaà tad-aìgaà ca). This mystery is the most confidential part of the
knowledge of the Supreme, and it is impossible for the mental speculators to
discover by dint of intellectual gymnastics. The mystery can be revealed
through the process recommended by Brahmäjé in his Brahma-saàhitä (5.38) as
follows:
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
yaà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
“I worship the original Personality of Godhead, Govinda, whom the pure
devotees, their eyes smeared with the ointment of love of Godhead, always
observe within their hearts. This Govinda, the original Personality of
Godhead, is Çyämasundara with all transcendental qualities.”
Therefore, although He is present in every atom, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead may not be visible to the dry speculators; still the mystery is
unfolded before the eyes of the pure devotees because their eyes are anointed
with love of Godhead. And this love of Godhead can be attained only by the
practice of transcendental loving service of the Lord, and nothing else. The
vision of the devotees is not ordinary; it is purified by the process of devotional
service. In other words, as the universal elements are both within and without,
similarly the Lord’s name, form, quality, pastimes, entourage, etc., as they are
described in the revealed scriptures or as performed in the Vaikuëöhalokas, far,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
far beyond the material cosmic manifestation, are factually being televised in
the heart of the devotee. The man with a poor fund of knowledge cannot
understand, although by material science one can see things far away by means
of television. Factually, the spiritually developed person is able to have the
television of the kingdom of God always reflected within his heart. That is the
mystery of knowledge of the Personality of Godhead.
The Lord can award anyone and everyone liberation (mukti) from the
bondage of material existence, yet He rarely awards the privilege of love of
Godhead, as confirmed by Närada (muktià dadhäti karhicit sma na
bhakti-yogam). This transcendental devotional service of the Lord is so
wonderful that the occupation keeps the deserving devotee always rapt in
psychological activities, without deviation from the absolute touch. Thus love
of Godhead, developed in the heart of the devotee, is a great mystery.
Brahmäjé previously told Närada that the desires of Brahmäjé are never
unfulfilled because he is always absorbed in the transcendental loving service
of the Lord; nor has he any desire in his heart save and except the
transcendental service of the Lord. That is the beauty and mystery of the
process of bhakti-yoga. As the Lord’s desire is infallible because He is acyuta,
similarly the desires of the devotees in the transcendental service of the Lord
are also acyuta, infallible. This is very difficult, however, for the layman to
understand without knowledge of the mystery of devotional service, as it is
very difficult to know the potency of touchstone. As touchstone is rarely
found, a pure devotee of the Lord is also rarely to be seen, even amongst
millions of liberated souls (koöiñv api mahämune). Out of all kinds of
perfections attained by the process of knowledge, yoga perfection in devotional
service is the highest of all and the most mysterious also, even more mysterious
than the eight kinds of mystic perfection attained by the process of yogic
performances. In the Bhagavad-gétä (18.64) the Lord therefore advised Arjuna
about this bhakti-yoga:
sarva-guhyatamaà bhüyaù
çåëu me paramaà vacaù
“Just hear from Me again about the most confidential part of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
instructions in Bhagavad-gétä.” The same was confirmed by Brahmäjé to
Närada in the following words:
idaà bhägavataà näma
yan me bhagavatoditam
saìgraho ’yaà vibhüténäà
tvam etad vipulékuru
Brahmäjé said to Närada, “Whatever I have spoken to you about the
Bhägavatam was explained to me by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
I am advising you to expand these topics nicely so that people may easily
understand the mysterious bhakti-yoga by transcendental loving service to the
Lord.” It is to be noted here that the mystery of bhakti-yoga was disclosed to
Brahmäjé by the Lord Himself. Brahmäjé explained the same mystery to
Närada, Närada explained it to Vyäsa, Vyäsa explained it to Çukadeva
Gosvämé, and that same knowledge is coming down in the unalloyed chain of
disciplic succession. If one is fortunate enough to have received the knowledge
in the transcendental disciplic succession, surely he will have the chance to
understand the mystery of the Lord and that of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the
sound incarnation of the Lord.
TEXT 36
WTaavdev iJajaSYa& TatviJajaSauNaaTMaNa" )
ANvYaVYaiTarek-a>Yaa& YaTa( SYaaTa( SavR}a SavRda )) 36 ))
etävad eva jijïäsyaà
tattva-jijïäsunätmanaù
anvaya-vyatirekäbhyäà
yat syät sarvatra sarvadä
SYNONYMS
etävat—up to this; eva—certainly; jijïäsyam—is to be inquired; tattva—the
Absolute Truth; jijïäsunä—by the student; ätmanaù—of the Self;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
anvaya—directly; vyatirekäbhyäm—indirectly; yat—whatever; syät—it may
be; sarvatra—in all space and time; sarvadä—in all circumstances.
TRANSLATION
A person who is searching after the Supreme Absolute Truth, the
Personality of Godhead, most certainly search for it up to this, in all
circumstances, in all space and time, and both directly and indirectly.
PURPORT
To unfold the mystery of bhakti-yoga, as it is explained in the previous
verse, is the ultimate stage of all inquiries or the highest objective for the
inquisitive. Everyone is searching after self-realization in different ways—by
karma-yoga, by jïäna-yoga, by dhyäna-yoga, by räja-yoga, by bhakti-yoga, etc.
To engage in self-realization is the responsibility of every living entity
developed in consciousness. One who is developed in consciousness certainly
makes inquiries into the mystery of the self, of the cosmic situation and of the
problems of life, in all spheres and fields—social, political, economic, cultural,
religious, moral, etc.—and in their different branches. But here the goal of all
such inquiries is explained.
The Vedänta-sütra philosophy begins with this inquiry about life, and the
Bhägavatam answers such inquiries up to this point, or the mystery of all
inquiries. Lord Brahmä wanted to be perfectly educated by the Personality of
Godhead, and here is the answer by the Lord, finished in four nutshell verses,
from aham eva to this verse, etävad eva. This is the end of all self-realization
processes. Men do not know that the ultimate goal of life is Viñëu, or the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, due to being bewildered by the glaring
reflection in the darkness, and as such everyone is entering into the darkest
region of material existence, driven by the uncontrolled senses. The whole
material existence has sprung up because of sense gratification, desires based
principally on the sex desire, and the result is that in spite of all advancement
of knowledge, the final goal of all the activities of the living entities is sense
gratification. But here is the real goal of life, and everyone should know it by
inquiries put before a bona fide spiritual master expert in the science of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhakti-yoga, or from a living personality of Bhägavatam life. Everyone is
engaged in various kinds of scriptural inquiries, but the Çrémad-Bhägavatam
gives answers to all of the various students of self-realization: this ultimate
objective of life is not to be searched out without great labor or perseverance.
One who is imbued with such sincere inquiries must ask the bona fide spiritual
master in the disciplic succession from Brahmäjé, and that is the direction
given here. Because the mystery was disclosed before Brahmäjé by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the mystery of all such inquiries regarding
self-realization must be put before such a spiritual master, who is directly the
representative of the Lord, acknowledged in that disciplic succession. Such a
bona fide spiritual master is able to clear up the whole thing by evidence from
the revealed scriptures, both direct and indirect. Although everyone is free to
consult the revealed scriptures in this connection, one still requires the
guidance of a bona fide spiritual master, and that is the direction in this verse.
The bona fide spiritual master is the most confidential representative of the
Lord, and one must receive direction from the spiritual master in the same
spirit that Brahmäjé received it from the Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa.
The bona fide spiritual master in that bona fide chain of disciplic succession
never claims to be the Lord Himself, although such a spiritual master is greater
than the Lord in the sense that he can deliver the Lord by his personally
realized experience. The Lord is not to be found simply by education or by a
good fertile brain, but surely He can be found by the sincere student through
the transparent medium of the bona fide spiritual master.
The revealed scriptures give directions directly to this end, but because the
bewildered living entities are blinded by the glaring reflection in the darkness,
they are unable to find the truth of the revealed scriptures. For example, in the
Bhagavad-gétä the whole direction is targeted toward the personality of
Godhead Lord Çré Kåñëa, but for want of a bona fide spiritual master in the
line of Brahmäjé or the direct hearer, Arjuna, there are different distortions of
the revealed knowledge by many unauthorized persons who just want to satisfy
their own whims. Undoubtedly the Bhagavad-gétä is accepted as one of the
most brilliant stars in the horizon of the spiritual sky, yet the interpretations of
this great book of knowledge have so grossly been distorted that every student
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of the Bhagavad-gétä is still in the same darkness of glaring material reflections.
Such students are hardly enlightened by the Bhagavad-gétä. In the Gétä
practically the same instruction is imparted as in the four prime verses of the
Bhägavatam, but due to wrong and fashionable interpretations by unauthorized
persons, one cannot reach the ultimate conclusion. In the Bhagavad-gétä
(18.61) it is clearly said:
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe ’rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
The Lord is situated in the hearts of all living beings (as Paramätmä), and
He is controlling all of them in the material world under the agency of His
external energy. Therefore it is clearly mentioned that the Lord is the supreme
controller and that the living entities are controlled by the Lord. In the same
Bhagavad-gétä (18.65) the Lord directs as follows:
man-manä bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru
mäm evaiñyasi satyaà te
pratijäne priyo ’si me
It is clear from this verse of the Bhagavad-gétä that the direction of the Lord
is that one should be God-minded, a devotee of the Lord, a worshiper of the
Lord, and must offer all obeisances unto Lord Kåñëa. By so doing, the devotee
will undoubtedly go back to Godhead, back to home.
Indirectly it is said that the whole Vedic social construction of human
society is so made that everyone acts as a part and parcel of the complete body
of the Lord. The intelligent class of men, or the brähmaëas, are situated on the
face of the Lord; the administrative class of men, the kñatriyas, are situated on
the arms of the Lord; the productive class of men, the vaiçyas, are situated on
the belt of the Lord; and the laborer class of men, the çüdras, are situated on
the legs of the Lord. Therefore the complete social construction is the body of
the Lord, and all the parts of the body, namely the brähmaëas, the kñatriyas,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the vaiçyas and the çüdras, are meant to serve the Lord’s whole body
conjointly; otherwise the parts become unfit to be coordinated with the
supreme consciousness of oneness. Universal consciousness is factually
achieved by coordinated service of all concerned to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, and that alone can insure total perfection. Therefore even the
great scientists, the great philosophers, the great mental speculators, the great
politicians, the great industrialists, the great social reformers, etc., cannot give
any relief to the restless society of the material world because they do not
know the secret of success as mentioned in this verse of the Bhägavatam,
namely that one must know the mystery of bhakti-yoga. In the Bhagavad-gétä
(7.15) also it is said:
na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù
prapadyante narädhamäù
mäyayäpahåta-jïänä
äsuraà bhävam äçritäù
Because the so-called great leaders of human society are ignorant of this
great knowledge of bhakti-yoga and are always engaged in ignoble acts of sense
gratification, bewildered by the external energy of the Lord, they are stubborn
rebels against the supremacy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they
never agree to surrender unto Him because they are fools, miscreants and the
lowest type of human beings. Such faithless nonbelievers may be highly
educated in the material sense of the term, but factually they are the greatest
fools of the world because by the influence of the external, material nature all
their so-called acquisition of knowledge has been made null and void.
Therefore all advancement of knowledge in the present context of things is
being misused by cats and dogs fighting with one another for sense
gratification, and all acquisition of knowledge in science, philosophy, fine arts,
nationalism, economic development, religion and great activities are being
spoiled by being used as dresses for dead men. There is no utility in the dresses
used for covering a coffin of a dead body save getting false applause from the
ignorant public. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam therefore says again and again that
without attainment of the status of bhakti-yoga, all the activities of human
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
society are to be considered absolute failures only. It is said:
paräbhavas tävad abodha-jäto
yävan na jijïäsata ätma-tattvam
yävat kriyäs tävad idaà mano vai
karmätmakaà yena çaréra-bandhaù
(Bhäg. 5.5.5)
As long as one is blind to inquiring after self-realization, all material
activities, however great they may be, are all different kinds of defeat because
the aim of human life is not fulfilled by such unwanted and profitless
activities. The function of the human body is to attain freedom from material
bondage, but as long as one is fully absorbed in material activities, his mind
will be overwhelmed in the whirlpool of matter, and thus he will continue to
be encaged in material bodies life after life.
evaà manaù karma-vaçaà prayuìkte
avidyayätmany upadhéyamäne
prétir na yävan mayi väsudeve
na mucyate deha-yogena tävat
(Bhäg. 5.5.6)
It is one’s mind that generates different kinds of bodies for suffering
different kinds of material pangs. Therefore as long as the mind is absorbed in
fruitive activities, the mind is understood to be absorbed in nescience, and
thus one is sure to be subjected to material bondage in different bodies again
and again until one develops a transcendental love for Godhead, Väsudeva,
the Supreme Person. To become absorbed in the transcendental name, quality,
form and activities of the Supreme Person, Väsudeva, means to change the
temper of the mind from matter to absolute knowledge, which leads one to the
path of absolute realization and thus frees one from the bondage of material
contact and encagements in different material bodies.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé Prabhupäda therefore comments on the words sarvatra
sarvadä in the sense that the principles of bhakti-yoga, or devotional service to
the Lord, are apt in all circumstances; i.e., bhakti-yoga is recommended in all
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the revealed scriptures, it is performed by all authorities, it is important in all
places, it is useful in all causes and effects, etc. As far as all the revealed
scriptures are concerned, he quotes from the Skanda Puräëa on the topics of
Brahmä and Närada as follows:
saàsäre ’smin mahä-ghore
janma-måtyu-samäkule
püjanaà väsudevasya
tärakaà vädibhiù småtam
In the material world, which is full of darkness and dangers, combined with
birth and death and full of different anxieties, the only way to get out of the
great entanglement is to accept loving transcendental devotional service to
Lord Väsudeva. This is accepted by all classes of philosophers.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé also quotes another common passage, which is found in
three Puräëas, namely the Padma Puräëa, Skanda Puräëa and Liìga Puräëa. It
runs as follows:
äloòya sarva-çästräni
vicärya ca punaù punaù
idam ekaà suniñpannaà
dhyeyo näräyaëaù sadä
“By scrutinizingly reviewing all the revealed scriptures and judging them
again and again, it is now concluded that Lord Näräyaëa is the Supreme
Absolute Truth, and thus He alone should be worshiped.”
The same truth is also indirectly described in the Garuòa Puräëa as follows:
päraà gato ’pi vedänäà
sarva-çästrärtha-vedy api
yo na sarveçvare bhaktas
taà vidyät puruñädhamam
“Even though one may have gone to the other side of all the Vedas, and
even though one is well versed in all the revealed scriptures, if one is not a
devotee of the Supreme Lord, he must be considered the lowest of mankind.”
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Similarly, it is also stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (5.18.12) indirectly as follows:
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
haräv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëä
mano-rathenäsati dhävato bahiù
One who has unflinching devotion unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead must have all the good qualities of the demigods, and contrarily one
who is not a devotee of the Lord must be hovering in the darkness of mental
speculation and thus must be engaged in material impermanence.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.11.18) says:
çabda-brahmaëi niñëäto
na niñëäyät pare yadi
çramas tasya çrama-phalo
hy adhenum iva rakñataù
“One may be well versed in all the transcendental literature of the Vedas,
but if he fails to be acquainted with the Supreme, then it must be concluded
that all of his education is like the burden of a beast or like one’s keeping a cow
without milking capacity.”
Similarly, the liberty of discharging loving transcendental service to the
Lord is invested in everyone, even the women, the çüdras, the forest tribes, or
any other living beings born in sinful conditions.
te vai vidanty atitaranti ca deva-mäyäà
stré-çüdra-hüëa-çabarä api päpa-jéväù
yady adbhuta-krama-paräyaëa-çélaçikñäs
tiryag-janä api kimu çruta-dhäraëä ye
(Bhäg. 2.7.46)
The lowest of human beings can be elevated to the highest stage of
devotional life if they are trained by the bona fide spiritual master well versed
in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. If the lowest can be so
elevated, then what to speak of the highest, who are well versed in the Vedic
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
knowledge? The conclusion is that devotional service to the Lord is open for
all, regardless of who they are. That is the confirmation of its application for
all kinds of performers of the service.
Therefore the devotional service of the Lord with perfect knowledge
through the training of a bona fide spiritual master is advised for everyone,
even if one happens not to be a human being. This is confirmed in the Garuòa
Puräëa as follows:
kéöa-pakñi-mågäëäà ca
harau sannyasta-cetasäm
ürdhväm eva gatià manye
kià punar jïäninäà nåëäm
“Even the worms, birds and beasts are assured of elevation to the highest
perfectional life if they are completely surrendered to the transcendental
loving service of the Lord, so what to speak of the philosophers amongst the
human beings?”
Therefore there is no need to seek properly qualified candidates for
discharging devotional service to the Lord. Let them be either well behaved or
ill trained, let them be either learned or fools, let them be either grossly
attached or in the renounced order of life, let them be liberated souls or
desirous of salvation, let them be inexpert in the discharge of devotional
service or expert in the same, all of them can be elevated to the supreme
position by discharging devotional service under the proper guidance. This is
also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.30,32) as follows:
api cet su-duräcäro
bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù
samyag vyavasito hi saù
mäà hi pärtha vyapäçritya
ye ’pi syuù päpa-yonayaù
striyo vaiçyäs tathä çüdräs
te ’pi yänti paräà gatim
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Even if a person is fully addicted to all sorts of sinful acts, if he happens to
be engaged in the loving transcendental service of the Lord under proper
guidance, he is to be considered the most perfect holy man without a doubt.
And thus any person, whatsoever and whosoever he or she may be—even the
fallen woman, the less intelligent laborer, the dull mercantile man, or even a
man lower than all these—can attain the highest perfection of life by going
back home, back to Godhead, provided he or she takes shelter of the lotus feet
of the Lord in all earnestness. This sincere earnestness is the only qualification
that can lead one to the highest perfectional stage of life, and unless and until
such real earnestness is aroused, there is a difference between cleanliness or
uncleanliness, learning or nonlearning, in the material estimation. Fire is
always fire, and thus if someone touches the fire, knowingly or unknowingly,
the fire will act in its own way without discrimination. The principle is: harir
harati päpäni duñöa-cittair api småtaù. The all-powerful Lord can purify the
devotee of all sinful reactions, just as the sun can sterilize all sorts of infections
by its powerful rays. “Attraction for material enjoyment cannot act upon a
pure devotee of the Lord.” There are hundreds and thousands of aphorisms in
the revealed scriptures. Ätmärämäç ca munayaù: “Even the self-realized souls
are also attracted by the transcendental loving service of the Lord.” Kecit
kevalayä bhaktyä väsudeva-paräyaëäù: [SB 6.1.15] “Simply by hearing and
chanting, one becomes a great devotee of Lord Väsudeva.” Na calati
bhagavat-padäravindäl lavanimiñärdham api sa vaiñëavägryaù: “A person who
does not move from the lotus feet of the Lord even for a moment or a second is
to be considered the greatest of all Vaiñëava s.” Bhagavat-pärñadatäà präpte
mat-sevayä pratétaà te: “The pure devotees are convinced of attaining the
association of the Personality of Godhead, and thus they are always engaged in
the transcendental loving service of the Lord.” Therefore in all continents, in
all planets, in all universes, devotional service to the Lord, or bhakti-yoga, is
current, and that is the statement of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam and allied
scriptures. Everywhere means in every part of the creation of the Lord. The
Lord can be served by all the senses, or even simply by the mind. The South
Indian brähmaëa who served the Lord simply on the strength of his mind also
factually realized the Lord. Success is guaranteed for a devotee who fully
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
engages any one of his senses in the mode of devotional service. The Lord can
be served by any ingredient, even the most common commodity—a flower, a
leaf, a fruit or a little water, which are available in any part of the universe and
without cost—and thus the Lord is served universally by the universal entities.
He can be served simply by hearing, He can be served simply by chanting or
reading about His activities, He can be served simply by adoring Him and
accepting Him.
In the Bhagavad-gétä it is stated that one can serve the Lord by offering the
result of one’s own work; it does not matter what one does. Generally men may
say that whatever they are doing is inspired by God, but that is not all. One
should actually work on behalf of God as a servant of God. The Lord says in
the Bhagavad-gétä (9.27):
yat karoñi yad açnäsi
yaj juhoñi dadäsi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kuruñva mad-arpaëam
Do whatever you like or whatever may be easier for you to do, eat whatever
you may eat, sacrifice whatever you can sacrifice, give whatever you may give
in charity, and do whatever you may undertake in penance, but everything
must be done for Him only. If you do business or if you accept some
employment, do so on behalf of the Lord. Whatever you may eat, you may offer
the same to the Lord and be assured that He will return the food after eating it
Himself. He is the complete whole, and therefore whatever He may eat as
offered by the devotee is accepted because of the devotee’s love, but again it is
returned as prasäda for the devotee so that he can be happy by eating. In other
words, be a servant of God and live peacefully in that consciousness, ultimately
returning home, back to Godhead.
It is said in the Skanda Puräëa:
yasya småtyä ca nämoktyä
tapo-yajïa-kriyädiñu
nünaà sampürëatäm eti
sadyo vande tam acyutam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
“I offer my obeisances unto Him, the infallible, because simply by either
remembering Him or vibrating His holy name one can attain the perfection of
all penances, sacrifices or fruitive activities, and this process can be universally
followed.” It is enjoined (Bhäg. 2.3.10):
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
Though a person be full of desires or have no desires, he may follow this
path of infallible bhakti-yoga for complete perfection.” One need not be
anxious to propitiate each and every demigod and goddess because the root of
all of them is the Personality of Godhead. As by pouring water on the root of
the tree one serves and enlivens all the branches and leaves, so by rendering
service unto the Supreme Lord one automatically serves every god and goddess
without extraneous effort. The Lord is all-pervading, and therefore service
unto Him is also all-pervading. This fact is corroborated in the Skanda Puräëa
as follows:
arcite deva-deveçe
çaìkha-cakra-gadä-dhare
arcitäù sarva-deväù syur
yataù sarva-gato hariù
When the Supreme Lord, the personality of Godhead, who carries in His
hands a conchshell, wheel, club and lotus flower, is worshiped, certainly all
other demigods are worshiped automatically because Hari, the personality of
Godhead, is all-pervading. Therefore, in all cases, namely nominative,
objective, causative, dative, ablative, possessive and supportive, everyone is
benefited by such transcendental loving service to the Lord. The man who
worships the Lord, the Lord Himself who is worshiped, the cause for which the
Lord is worshiped, the source of supply, the place where such worship is done,
etc.—everything is benefited by such an action.
Even during the annihilation of the material world, the process of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhakti-yoga can be applied. Kälena nañöä pralaye väëéyam: the Lord is
worshiped in devastation because He protects the Vedas from being
annihilated. He is worshiped in every millennium or yuga. As it is said in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (12.3.52):
kåte yad dhyäyato viñëuà
tretäyäà yajato makhaiù
dväpare paricaryäyäà
kalau tad dhari-kértanät
In the Viñëu Puräëa it is written:
sa hänis tan mahac chidraà
sa mohaù sa ca vibhramaù
yan-muhürtaà kñaëaà väpi
väsudevaà na cintayet
“If even for a moment remembrance of Väsudeva, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, is missed, that is the greatest loss, that is the greatest illusion, and
that is the greatest anomaly.” The Lord can be worshiped in all stages of life.
For instance, even in the wombs of their mothers Mahäräja Prahläda and
Mahäräja Parékñit worshiped the Lord; even in his very childhood, at the age of
only five years, Dhruva Mahäräja worshiped the Lord; even in full youth,
Mahäräja Ambaréña worshiped the Lord; and even at the last stage of his
frustration and old age Mahäräja Dhåtaräñöra worshiped the Lord. Ajämila
worshiped the Lord even at the point of death, and Citraketu worshiped the
Lord even in heaven and in hell. In the Narasiàha Puräëa it is said that as the
hellish inhabitants began to chant the holy name of the Lord they began to be
elevated from hell towards heaven. Durväsä Muni has also supported this view:
mucyeta yan-nämny udite närako ’pi. “Simply by chanting the holy name of the
Lord the inhabitants of hell became released from their hellish persecution.”
So the conclusion of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, as given by Çukadeva Gosvämé to
Mahäräja Parékñit, is:
etan nirvidyamänänäm
icchatäm akuto-bhayam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yoginäà nåpa nirëétaà
harer nämänukértanam
“O King, it is finally decided that everyone, namely those in the renounced
order of life, the mystics, and the enjoyers of fruitive work, should chant the
holy name of the Lord fearlessly to achieve the desired success in their
pursuits.” (Bhäg. 2.1.11)
Similarly, as indicated indirectly in various places in revealed scriptures:
1. Even though one is well versed in all the Vedas and scriptures, if one is
not a devotee of the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, he is
considered to be the lowest of mankind.
2. In the Garuòa Puräëa, Båhan-näradéya Puräëa and Padma Puräëa, the
same is repeated: What is the use of Vedic knowledge and penances for one
who is devoid of devotional service to the Lord?
3. What is the comparison of thousands of prajäpatis to one devotee of the
Lord?
4. Çukadeva Gosvämé said (Bhäg. 2.4.17) that neither the ascetic, nor one
who is greatly munificent, nor one who is famous, nor the great philosopher,
nor the great occultist, nor anyone else can achieve the desired result without
being engaged in the service of the Lord.
5. Even if a place is more glorious than heaven, if there is no glorification of
the Lord of Vaikuëöha or His pure devotee, it should at once be quitted.
6. The pure devotee refuses to accept all the five different types of
liberation in order to be engaged in the service of the Lord.
The final conclusion, therefore, is that the glories of the Lord must be
always and everywhere proclaimed. One should hear about His glories, one
should chant about His glories, and one should always remember His glories
because that is the highest perfectional stage of life. As far as fruitive work is
concerned, it is limited to an enjoyable body; as far as yoga is concerned, it is
limited to the acquirement of mystic power; as far as empiric philosophy is
concerned, it is limited to the attainment of transcendental knowledge; and as
far as transcendental knowledge is concerned, it is limited to attainment of
salvation. Even if they are adopted, there is every chance of discrepancies in
discharging the particular type of functions. But adoption of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
transcendental devotional service of the Lord has no limit, nor is there fear of
falling down. The process automatically reaches the final stage by the grace of
the Lord. In the preliminary stage of devotional service there is an apparent
requisite for knowledge, but in the higher stage there is no necessity of such
knowledge. The best and guaranteed path of progress is therefore engagement
in bhakti-yoga, pure devotional service.
The cream of Çrémad-Bhägavatam in the foregoing four çlokas is sometimes
squeezed out by the impersonalist for different interpretations in their favor,
but it should be carefully noted that the four çlokas were first described by the
Personality of Godhead Himself, and thus the impersonalist has no scope to
enter into them because he has no conception of the Personality of Godhead.
Therefore, the impersonalist may squeeze out any interpretations from them,
but such interpretations will never be accepted by those who are taught in the
disciplic succession from Brahmä, as will be cleared up in the following verses.
Besides that, the çruti confirms that the Supreme Truth Absolute Personality
of Godhead never reveals Himself to anyone who is falsely proud of his
academic knowledge. The çruti-mantra clearly says (Kaöha Upaniñad 1.2.23):
näyam ätmä pravacanena labhyo
na medhayä na bahudhä çrutena
yam evaiña våëute tena labhyas
tasyaiña ätmä vivåëute tanuà sväm
The whole matter is explained by the Lord Himself, and one who has no
approach to the Lord in His personal feature can rarely understand the
purport of Çrémad-Bhägavatam without being taught by the bhägavatas in the
disciplic succession.
TEXT 37
WTaNMaTa& SaMaaiTaï ParMae<a SaMaaiDaNaa )
>avaNa( k-LPaivk-LPaezu Na ivMauùiTa k-ihRicTa( )) 37 ))
etan mataà samätiñöha
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
parameëa samädhinä
bhavän kalpa-vikalpeñu
na vimuhyati karhicit
SYNONYMS
etat—this; matam—the conclusion; samätiñöha—remain fixed; parameëa—by
the supreme; samädhinä—concentration of the mind; bhavän—yourself;
kalpa—intermediate devastation; vikalpeñu—in the final devastation; na
vimuhyati—will never bewilder; karhicit—anything like complacence.
TRANSLATION
O Brahmä, just follow this conclusion by fixed concentration of mind, and
no pride will disturb you, neither in the partial nor in the final devastation.
PURPORT
As in the Bhagavad-gétä, Tenth Chapter, the Personality of Godhead, Lord
Kåñëa, has summarized the whole text in four verses, namely, ahaà sarvasya
prabhavaù, etc., so the complete Çrémad-Bhägavatam has also been summarized
in four verses, as aham eväsam evägre, etc. Thus the secret purpose of the most
important Bhägavatite conclusion has been explained by the original speaker
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, who was also the original speaker of the
Bhagavad-gétä, the Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa. There are many
grammarians and nondevotee material wranglers who have tried to present
false interpretations of these four verses of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam but the
Lord Himself advised Brahmäjé not to be deviated from the fixed conclusion
the Lord had taught him. The Lord was the teacher of the nucleus of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam in four verses, and Brahmä was the receiver of the
knowledge. Misinterpretation of the word aham by the word jugglery of the
impersonalist should not disturb the mind of the strict followers of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the text of the Personality of
Godhead and His unalloyed devotees, who are also known as the bhägavatas,
and any outsider should have no access to this confidential literature of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
devotional service. But unfortunately the impersonalist, who has no relation to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, sometimes tries to interpret
Çrémad-Bhägavatam by his poor fund of knowledge in grammar and dry
speculation. Therefore, the Lord warns Brahmä (and, through Brahmä, all
future devotees of the Lord in the disciplic succession of Brahmä) that one
should never be misled by the conclusion of the so-called grammarians or by
other men with a poor fund of knowledge, but must always fix the mind
properly, via the paramparä system. No one should try to give a new
interpretation by dint of mundane knowledge. And the first step, therefore, in
pursuance of the system of knowledge received by Brahmä, is to approach a
bona fide guru who is the representative of the Lord following the paramparä
system. No one should try to squeeze out his own meaning b imperfect
mundane knowledge. The guru, or the bona fide spiritual master, is competent
to teach the disciple in the right path with reference to the context of all
authentic Vedic literature. He does not attempt to juggle words to bewilder the
student. The bona fide spiritual master, by his personal activities, teaches the
disciple the principles of devotional service. Without personal service, one
would go on speculating like the impersonalists and dry speculators life after
life and would be unable to reach the final conclusion. By following the
instructions of the bona fide spiritual master in conjunction with the
principles of revealed scriptures, the student will rise to the plane of complete
knowledge, which will be exhibited by development of detachment from the
world of sense gratification. The mundane wranglers are surprised that one
can detach himself from the world of sense gratification, and thus any attempt
to be fixed in God realization appears to them to be mysticism. This
detachment from the sensory world is called the brahma-bhüta stage of
realization, the preliminary stage of transcendental devotional life (parä
bhaktiù). The brahma-bhüta stage of life is also known as the ätmäräma stage,
in which one is fully self-satisfied and does not hanker for the world of sense
enjoyment. This stage of full satisfaction is the proper situation for
understanding the transcendental knowledge of the Personality of Godhead.
The Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.20) affirms this:
evaà prasanna-manaso
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhagavad-bhakti-yogataù
bhagavat-tattva-vijïänaà
mukta-saìgasya jäyate
Thus in the completely satisfied stage of life, exhibited by full detachment
from the world of sense enjoyment as a result of performing devotional service,
one can understand the science of God in the liberated stage.
In this stage of full satisfaction and detachment from the sensory world, one
can know the mystery of the science of God with all its confidential
intricacies, and not by grammar or academic speculation. Because Brahmä
qualified himself for such reception, the Lord was pleased to disclose the
purpose of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. This direct instruction by the Lord to any
devotee who is detached from the world of sense gratification is possible, as
stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (10.10):
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
Unto the devotees who are constantly engaged in the Lord’s transcendental
loving service (préti-pürvakam), the Lord, out of His causeless mercy upon the
devotee, gives direct instructions so that the devotee may make accurate
progress on the path returning home, back to Godhead. One should not,
therefore, try to understand these four verses of Çrémad-Bhägavatam by mental
speculation. Rather, by direct perception of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one is able to know all about His abode, Vaikuëöha, as was seen and
experienced by Brahmäjé. Such Vaikuëöha realization is possible by any
devotee of the Lord situated in the transcendental position as a result of
devotional service.
In the Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad (çruti) it is said, gopa-veço me puruñaù
purastäd ävirbabhuva: the Lord appeared before Brahmä as a cowboy, that is, as
the original Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, Govinda, who is later
described by Brahmäjé in his Brahma-saàhitä (5.29):
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
cintämaëi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-våkñalakñävåteñu
surabhér abhipälayantam
lakñmé-sahasra-çata-sambhrama-sevyamänaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
Brahmäjé desires to worship the original personality of Godhead, Lord Çré
Kåñëa, who resides in the topmost Vaikuëöha planet, known as Goloka
Våndävana, where He is in the habit of keeping surabhi cows as a cowboy and
where He is served by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune (the
gopés) with love and respect.
Therefore Lord Çré Kåñëa is the original form of the Supreme Lord (kåñëas
tu bhagavän svayam). This is also clear from this instruction. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is Lord Kåñëa, and not directly Näräyaëa or the
puruña-avatäras, which are subsequent manifestations. Therefore
Çrémad-Bhägavatam means consciousness of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Lord Çré Kåñëa, and Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the sound representation
of the Lord as much as the Bhagavad-gétä is. Thus the conclusion is that
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the science of the Lord in which the Lord and His abode
are perfectly realized.
TEXT 38
é[qéuk- ovac
SaMPa[idXYaEvMaJaNaae JaNaaNaa& ParMaeiïNaMa( )
PaXYaTaSTaSYa Tad( æPaMaaTMaNaae NYaå<aÖir" )) 38 ))
çré-çuka uväca
sampradiçyaivam ajano
janänäà parameñöhinam
paçyatas tasya tad rüpam
ätmano nyaruëad dhariù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; sampradiçya—fully instructing
Brahmäjé; evam—thus; ajanaù—the Supreme Lord; janänäm—of the living
entities; parameñöhinam—unto the supreme leader, Brahmä; paçyataù—while
he was seeing; tasya—His; tat rüpam—that transcendental form; ätmanaù—of
the Absolute; nyaruëat—disappeared; hariù—the Lord, the Personality of
Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said to Mahäräja Parékñit: The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Hari, after being seen in His transcendental form, instructing
Brahmäjé, the leader of the living entities, disappeared.
PURPORT
In this verse it is clearly mentioned that the Lord is ajanaù, or the Supreme
Person, and that He was showing His transcendental form (ätmano rüpam) to
Brahmäjé while instructing him in the summarization of Çrémad-Bhägavatam in
four verses. He is ajanaù, or the Supreme Person, amongst janänäm, or all
persons. All living entities are individual persons, and amongst all such
persons Lord Hari is supreme, as confirmed in the çruti-mantra, nityo nityänäà
cetanaç cetanänäm. So there is no place for impersonal features in the
transcendental world as there are impersonal features in the material world.
Whenever there is cetana, or knowledge, the personal feature comes in. In the
spiritual world everything is full of knowledge, and therefore everything in the
transcendental world, the land, the water, the tree, the mountain, the river,
the man, the animal, the bird—everything—is of the same quality, namely
cetana, and therefore everything there is individual and personal.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam gives us this information as the supreme Vedic literature,
and it was personally instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to
Brahmäjé so that the leader of the living entities might broadcast the message
to all in the universe in order to teach the supreme knowledge of bhakti-yoga.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Brahmäjé in his turn instructed Närada, his beloved son, the same message of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and Närada, in his turn, taught the same to Vyäsadeva,
who again taught it to Çukadeva Gosvämé. Through Çukadeva Gosvämé’s grace
and by the mercy of Mahäräja Parékñit we are all given Çrémad-Bhägavatam
perpetually to learn the science of the Absolute Personality of Godhead, Lord
Kåñëa.
TEXT 39
ANTaihRTaeiNd]YaaQaaRYa hrYae ivihTaaÅil/" )
SavR>aUTaMaYaae ivì& SaSaJaeRd& Sa PaUvRvTa( )) 39 ))
antarhitendriyärthäya
haraye vihitäïjaliù
sarva-bhütamayo viçvaà
sasarjedaà sa pürvavat
SYNONYMS
antarhita—on the disappearance; indriya-arthäya—unto the Personality of
Godhead, the objective of all senses; haraye—unto the Lord; vihita-aïjaliù—in
folded hands; sarva-bhüta—all living entities; mayaù—full of; viçvam—the
universe; sasarja—created; idam—this; saù—he (Brahmäjé);
pürva-vat—exactly like before.
TRANSLATION
On the disappearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, who is
the object of transcendental enjoyment for the senses of devotees, Brahmä, with
folded hands, began to re-create the universe, full with living entities, as it was
previously.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is the object for fulfilling the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
senses of all living entities. Illusioned by the glaring reflection of the external
energy, the living entities worship the senses instead of engaging them
properly in fulfilling the desires of the Supreme.
In the Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya (13.2) there is the following verse:
akñëoù phalaà tvädåça-darçanaà hi
tanoù phalaà tvädåça-gätra-saìgaù
jihvä-phalaà tvädåça-kértanaà hi
sudurlabhä bhägavatä hi loke
“O devotee of the Lord, the purpose of the visual sense is fulfilled simply by
seeing you, and to touch your body is the fulfillment of bodily touch. The
tongue is meant for glorifying your qualities because in this world a pure
devotee of the Lord is very difficult to find.”
Originally the senses of the living entity were awarded for this purpose,
namely to engage them in the transcendental loving service of the Lord or that
of His devotees, but the conditioned souls, illusioned by the material energy,
became captivated by sense enjoyment. Therefore the whole process of God
consciousness is meant to rectify the conditional activities of the senses and to
re-engage them in the direct service of the Lord. Lord Brahmä thus engaged
his senses in the Lord by re-creating the conditioned living entities to act in
the re-created universe. This material universe is thus created and annihilated
by the will of the Lord. It is created to give the conditioned soul a chance to
act to return home, back to Godhead, and servants like Brahmäjé, Näradajé,
Vyäsajé and their company become busy with the same purpose of the Lord: to
reclaim the conditioned souls from the field of sense gratification and return
them to the normal stage of engaging the senses in service of the Lord. Instead
of doing so, i.e. converting the actions of the senses, the impersonalists began
to make the conditioned souls sense-less, and the Lord also senseless. That is
improper treatment for the conditioned souls. The diseased condition of the
senses may be treated by curing the defect, but not uprooting the senses
altogether. When there is some disease in the eyes, the eyes may be cured to
see properly. Plucking out the eyes is no treatment. Similarly, the whole
material disease is based on the process of sense gratification, and liberation
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
from the diseased condition is re-engagement of the senses to see the beauty of
the Lord, hear His glories, and act on His account. Thus Brahmäjé created the
universal activities again.
TEXT 40
Pa[JaaPaiTaDaRMaRPaiTarek-da iNaYaMaaNa( YaMaaNa( )
>ad]& Pa[JaaNaaMaiNvC^àaiTaïTa( SvaQaRk-aMYaYaa )) 40 ))
prajäpatir dharma-patir
ekadä niyamän yamän
bhadraà prajänäm anvicchann
ätiñöhat svärtha-kämyayä
SYNONYMS
prajä-patiù—the forefather of all living entities; dharma-patiù—the father of
religious life; ekadä—once upon a time; niyamän—rules and regulations;
yamän—principles of control; bhadram—welfare; prajänäm—of the living
beings; anvicchan—desiring; ätiñöhat—situated; sva-artha—own interest;
kämyayä—so desiring.
TRANSLATION
Thus once upon a time the forefather of living entities and the father of
religiousness, Lord Brahmä, situated himself in acts of regulative principles,
desiring self-interest for the welfare of all living entities.
PURPORT
One cannot be situated in an exalted position without having undertaken a
regulative life of rules and regulations. An unrestricted life of sense
gratification is animal life, and Lord Brahmä, in order to teach all concerned
within the jurisdiction of his generations, taught the same principles of sense
control for executing higher duties. He desired the welfare of all as servants of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
God, and anyone desiring the welfare of the members of his family and
generations must conduct a moral, religious life. The highest life of moral
principles is to become a devotee of the Lord because a pure devotee of the
Lord has all the good qualities of the Lord. On the other hand, one who is not
a devotee of the Lord, however qualified he may be in the mundane sense of
the term, cannot be qualified with any good quality worthy of the name. The
pure devotees of the Lord, like Brahmä and persons in the chain of disciplic
succession, do not do anything to instruct their subordinates without acting
accordingly themselves.
TEXT 41
Ta& Naard" iPa[YaTaMaae irKQaadaNaaMaNauv]Ta" )
éué[UzMaa<a" Xaqle/Na Pa[é[Yae<a dMaeNa c )) 41 ))
taà näradaù priyatamo
rikthädänäm anuvrataù
çuçrüñamäëaù çélena
praçrayeëa damena ca
SYNONYMS
tam—unto him; näradaù—the great sage Närada; priyatamaù—very dear;
riktha-ädänäm—of the inheritor sons; anuvrataù—very obedient;
çuçrüñamäëaù—always ready to serve; çélena—by good behavior;
praçrayeëa—by meekness; damena—by sense control; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Närada, the most dear of the inheritor sons of Brahmä, always ready to serve
his father, strictly follows the instructions of his father by his mannerly
behavior, meekness and sense control.
TEXT 42
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
MaaYaa& ivividzNa( ivZ<aaeMaaRYaeXaSYa MahaMauiNa" )
Maha>aaGavTaae raJaNa( iPaTar& PaYaRTaaezYaTa( )) 42 ))
mäyäà vividiñan viñëor
mäyeçasya mahä-muniù
mahä-bhägavato räjan
pitaraà paryatoñayat
SYNONYMS
mäyäm—energies; vividiñan—desiring to know; viñëoù—of the Personality of
Godhead; mäyä-éçasya—of the master of all energies; mahä-muniù—the great
sage; mahä-bhägavataù—the first-class devotee of the Lord; räjan—O King;
pitaram—unto his father; paryatoñayat—very much pleased.
TRANSLATION
Närada very much pleased his father and desired to know all about the
energies of Viñëu, the master of all energies, for Närada was the greatest of all
sages and greatest of all devotees, O King.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä, being the creator of all living beings in the universe, is
originally the father of several well-known sons, like Dakña, the catuù-sanas,
and Närada. In three departments of human knowledge disseminated by the
Vedas, namely fruitive work (karma-käëòa), transcendental knowledge
(jïäna-käëòa), and devotional service (upäsanä-käëòa), Devarñi Närada
inherited from his father Brahmä devotional service, whereas Dakña inherited
from his father fruitive work, and Sanaka, Sanätana, etc., inherited from their
father information about jïäna-käëòa, or transcendental knowledge. But out
of them all, Närada is described here as the most beloved son of Brahmä
because of good behavior, obedience, meekness and readiness to render service
unto the father. And Närada is famous as the greatest of all sages because of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
his being the greatest of all devotees. Närada is the spiritual master of many
famous devotees of the Lord. He is the spiritual master of Prahläda, Dhruva
and Vyäsa, down to the forest animal hunter Kiräta. His only business is to
turn everyone to the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Therefore all
these features of Närada make him the dearmost son of his father, and all this
is due to Närada’s being a first-class devotee of the Lord. The devotees are
always anxious to know more and more about the Supreme Lord, the master of
all energies. As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (10.9):
mac-cittä mad-gata-präëä
bodhayantaù parasparam
kathayantaç ca mäà nityaà
tuñyanti ca ramanti ca
The Supreme Lord is unlimited, and His energies are also unlimited. No
one can know them completely. Brahmäjé, being the greatest living entity
within this universe and being directly instructed by the Lord, must know
more than anyone within this universe, although such knowledge may not be
complete. Thus it is the duty of everyone to ask about the unlimited Lord from
the spiritual master in the disciplic succession of Brahmä, which descends from
Närada to Vyäsa, from Vyäsa to Çukadeva and so on.
TEXT 43
Tauí& iNaXaaMYa iPaTar& l/aek-aNaa& Pa[iPaTaaMahMa( )
devizR" PairPaPa[C^ >avaNa( YaNMaaNauPa*C^iTa )) 43 ))
tuñöaà niçämya pitaraà
lokänäà prapitämaham
devarñiù paripapraccha
bhavän yan mänupåcchati
SYNONYMS
tuñöam—satisfied; niçämya—after seeing; pitaram—the father; lokänäm—of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the whole universe; prapitämaham—the great-grandfather; devarñiù—the great
sage Närada; paripapraccha—inquired; bhavän—yourself; yat—as it is;
mä—from me; anupåcchati—inquiring.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Närada also inquired in detail from his father, Brahmä, the
great-grandfather of all the universe, after seeing him well satisfied.
PURPORT
The process of understanding spiritual or transcendental knowledge from
the realized person is not exactly like asking an ordinary question from the
schoolmaster. The schoolmasters in the modern days are paid agents for giving
some information, but the spiritual master is not a paid agent. Nor can he
impart instruction without being authorized. In the Bhagavad-gétä (4.34), the
process of understanding transcendental knowledge is directed as follows:
tad viddhi praëipätena
paripraçnena sevayä
upadekñyanti te jïänaà
jïäninas tattva-darçinaù
Arjuna was advised to receive transcendental knowledge from the realized
person by surrender, questions and service. Receiving transcendental
knowledge is not like exchanging dollars; such knowledge has to be received by
service to the spiritual master. As Brahmäjé received the knowledge directly
from the Lord by satisfying Him fully, similarly one has to receive the
transcendental knowledge from the spiritual master by satisfying him. The
spiritual master’s satisfaction is the means of assimilating transcendental
knowledge. One cannot understand transcendental knowledge simply by
becoming a grammarian. The Vedas declare (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.23):
yasya deve parä bhaktir
yathä deve tathä gurau
tasyaite kathitä hy arthäù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
prakäçante mahätmanaù
[ÇU 6.23(11)]
“Only unto one who has unflinching devotion to the Lord and to the
spiritual master does transcendental knowledge become automatically
revealed.” Such relationship between the disciple and the spiritual master is
eternal. One who is now the disciple is the next spiritual master. And one
cannot be a bona fide and authorized spiritual master unless one has been
strictly obedient to his spiritual master. Brahmäjé, as a disciple of the Supreme
Lord, received the real knowledge and imparted it to his dear disciple Närada,
and similarly Närada, as spiritual master, handed over this knowledge to Vyäsa
and so on. Therefore the so-called formal spiritual master and disciple are not
facsimiles of Brahmä and Närada or Närada and Vyäsa. The relationship
between Brahmä and Närada is reality, while the so-called formality is the
relation between the cheater and cheated. It is clearly mentioned herewith
that Närada is not only well behaved, meek and obedient, but also
self-controlled. One who is not self-controlled, specifically in sex life, can
become neither a disciple nor a spiritual master. One must have disciplinary
training in controlling speaking, anger, the tongue, the mind, the belly and the
genitals. One who has controlled the particular senses mentioned above is
called a gosvämé. Without becoming a gosvämé one can become neither a
disciple nor a spiritual master. The so-called spiritual master without sense
control is certainly the cheater, and the disciple of such a so-called spiritual
master is the cheated.
One should not think of Brahmäjé as a dead great-grandfather, as we have
experience on this planet. He is the oldest great-grandfather, and he is still
living, and Närada is also living. The age of the inhabitants of the Brahmaloka
planet is mentioned in the Bhagavad-gétä. The inhabitants of this small planet
earth can hardly calculate even the duration of one day of Brahmä.
TEXT 44
TaSMaa wd& >aaGavTa& Paura<a& dXal/+a<aMa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Pa[ae¢&- >aGavTaa Pa[ah Pa[qTa" Pau}aaYa >aUTak*-Ta( )) 44 ))
tasmä idaà bhägavataà
puräëaà daça-lakñaëam
proktaà bhagavatä präha
prétaù puträya bhüta-kåt
SYNONYMS
tasmai—thereupon; idam—this; bhägavatam—the glories of the Lord or the
science of the Lord; puräëam—Vedic supplement; daça-lakñaëam—ten
characteristics; proktam—described; bhagavatä—by the Personality of
Godhead; präha—said; prétaù—in satisfaction; puträya—unto the son;
bhüta-kåt—the creator of the universe.
TRANSLATION
Thereupon the supplementary Vedic literature, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which
was described by the Personality of Godhead and which contains ten
characteristics, was told with satisfaction by the father [Brahmä] to his son
Närada.
PURPORT
Although the Çrémad-Bhägavatam was spoken in four verses, it had ten
characteristics, which will be explained in the next chapter. In the four verses
it is first said that the Lord existed before the creation, and thus the beginning
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam includes the Vedänta aphorism janmädy asya [SB
1.1.1]. Janmädy asya is the beginning, yet the four verses in which it is said that
the Lord is the root of everything that be, beginning from the creation up to
the supreme abode of the Lord, naturally explain the ten characteristics. One
should not misunderstand by wrong interpretations that the Lord spoke only
four verses and that therefore all the rest of the 17,994 verses are useless. The
ten characteristics, as will be explained in the next chapter, require so many
verses just to explain them properly. Brahmäjé had also advised Närada
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
previously that he should expand the idea he had heard from Brahmäjé. Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu instructed this to Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé in a nutshell, but
the disciple Rüpa Gosvämé expanded this very elaborately, and the same
subject was further expanded by Jéva Gosvämé and even further by Çré
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura. We are just trying to follow in the footsteps
of all these authorities. So Çrémad-Bhägavatam is not like ordinary fiction or
mundane literature. It is unlimited in strength, and however one may expand
it according to one’s own ability, Bhägavatam still cannot be finished by such
expansion. Çrémad-Bhägavatam, being the sound representation of the Lord, is
simultaneously explained in four verses and in four billion verses all the same,
inasmuch as the Lord is smaller than the atom and bigger than the unlimited
sky. Such is the potency of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 45
Naard" Pa[ah MauNaYae SarSvTYaaSTa$e= Na*Pa )
DYaaYaTae b]ø ParMa& VYaaSaaYaaiMaTaTaeJaSae )) 45 ))
näradaù präha munaye
sarasvatyäs taöe nåpa
dhyäyate brahma paramaà
vyäsäyämita-tejase
SYNONYMS
näradaù—the great sage Närada; präha—instructed; munaye—unto the great
sage; sarasvatyäù—of the River Sarasvaté; taöe—on the bank; nåpa—O King;
dhyäyate—unto the meditative; brahma—Absolute Truth; paramam—the
Supreme; vyäsäya—unto Çréla Vyäsadeva; amita—unlimited; tejase—unto the
powerful.
TRANSLATION
In succession, O King, the great sage Närada instructed Çrémad-Bhägavatam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
unto the unlimitedly powerful Vyäsadeva, who meditated in devotional service
upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, on the bank of
the River Sarasvaté.
PURPORT
In the Fifth Chapter of the First Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Närada
instructed the great sage Vyäsadeva as follows:
atho mahä-bhäga bhavän amogha-dåk
çuci-çraväù satya-rato dhåta-vrataù
urukramasyäkhila-bandha-muktaye
samädhinänusmara tad viceñöitam
“O greatly fortunate, pious philosopher, your name and fame are universal,
and you are fixed in the Absolute Truth with spotless character and infallible
vision. I ask you to meditate upon the activities of the Personality of Godhead,
whose activities are unparalleled.”
So in the disciplic succession of the Brahma-sampradäya, the practice of
yoga meditation is not neglected. But because the devotees are bhakti-yogés,
they do not undertake the trouble to meditate upon the impersonal Brahman;
as indicated here, they meditate on brahma paramam, or the Supreme
Brahman. Brahman realization begins from the impersonal effulgence, but by
further progress of such meditation, manifestation of the Supreme Soul,
Paramätmä realization, takes place. And progressing further, realization of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is fixed. Çré Närada Muni, as the spiritual
master of Vyäsadeva, knew very well the position of Vyäsadeva, and thus he
certified the qualities of Çréla Vyäsadeva as fixed in the Absolute Truth with
great vow, etc. Närada advised meditation upon the transcendental activities
of the Lord. Impersonal Brahman has no activities, but the Personality of
Godhead has many activities, and all such activities are transcendental,
without any tinge of material quality. If the activities of the Supreme Brahman
were material activities, then Närada would not have advised Vyäsadeva to
meditate upon them. And the paraà brahma is Lord Çré Kåñëa, as confirmed in
the Bhagavad-gétä. In the Tenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä, when Arjuna
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
realized the factual position of Lord Kåñëa, he addressed Lord Kåñëa in the
following words:
paraà brahma paraà dhäma
pavitraà paramaà bhavän
puruñaà çäçvataà divyam
ädi-devam ajaà vibhum
[Bg. 10.12]
ähus tväm åñayaù sarve
devarñir näradas tathä
asito devalo vyäsaù
svayaà caiva bravéñi me
Arjuna summarized the purpose of the Bhagavad-gétä by his realization of
Lord Çré Kåñëa and thus said, “My dear Personality of Godhead, You are the
Supreme Absolute Truth, the Original Person in the eternal form of bliss and
knowledge, and this is confirmed by Närada, Asita, Devala and Vyäsadeva,
and, above all, Your personal self has also confirmed it.” (Bg. 10.12–13)
When Vyäsadeva fixed his mind in meditation, he did it in bhakti-yoga
trance and actually saw the Supreme Person with mäyä, the illusory energy, in
contraposition. As we have discussed before, the Lord’s mäyä, or illusion, is
also a representation because mäyä has no existence without the Lord.
Darkness is not independent of light. Without light, no one can experience
the contraposition of darkness. However, this mäyä, or illusion, cannot
overcome the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but stands apart from Him
(apäçrayam).
Therefore, perfection of meditation is realization of the Personality of
Godhead along with His transcendental activities. Meditation on the
impersonal Brahman is a troublesome business for the meditator, as confirmed
in the Bhagavad-gétä (12.5): kleço ’dhikataras teñäm avyaktäsakta-cetasäm.
TEXT 46
YaduTaah& TvYaa Pa*íae vEraJaaTa( PauåzaiddMa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
YaQaaSaqtaduPaa:YaaSTae Pa[énaNaNYaa&ê k*-TSNaXa" )) 46 ))
yad utähaà tvayä påñöo
vairäjät puruñäd idam
yathäsét tad upäkhyäste
praçnän anyäàç ca kåtsnaçaù
SYNONYMS
yat—what; uta—is, however; aham—I; tvayä—by you; påñöaù—I am asked;
vairäjät—from the universal form; puruñät—from the Personality of Godhead;
idam—this world; yathä—as it; äsét—was; tat—that; upäkhyäste—I shall
explain; praçnän—all the questions; anyän—others; ca—as well as;
kåtsnaçaù—in great detail.
TRANSLATION
O King, your questions as to how the universe became manifested from the
gigantic form of the Personality of Godhead, as well as other questions, I shall
answer in detail by explanation of the four verses already mentioned.
PURPORT
As stated in the beginning of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, this great
transcendental literature is the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic knowledge,
and therefore all questions that can be humanly possible regarding the
universal affairs, beginning from its creation, are all answered in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The answers depend only on the qualification of the
person who explains them. The ten divisions of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, as
explained by the great speaker Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, are the limitation of
all questions, and intelligent persons will derive all intellectual benefits from
them by proper utilization.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Ninth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version.”
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Chapter Ten
Bhägavatam Is the Answer to All Questions
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
A}a SaGaaeR ivSaGaRê SQaaNa& Paaez<aMaUTaYa" )
MaNvNTareXaaNauk-Qaa iNaraeDaae Maui¢-raé[Ya" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
atra sargo visargaç ca
sthänaà poñaëam ütayaù
manvantareçänukathä
nirodho muktir äçrayaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atra—in this
Çrémad-Bhägavatam; sargaù—statement of the creation of the universe;
visargaù—statement of subcreation; ca—also; sthänam—the planetary systems;
poñaëam—protection; ütayaù—the creative impetus; manvantara—changes of
Manus; éça-anukathäù—the science of God; nirodhaù—going back home, back
to Godhead; muktiù—liberation; äçrayaù—the summum bonum.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam there are ten
divisions of statements regarding the following: the creation of the universe,
subcreation, planetary systems, protection by the Lord, the creative impetus,
the change of Manus, the science of God, returning home, back to Godhead,
liberation, and the summum bonum.
TEXT 2
dXaMaSYa ivéuÖyQa| NavaNaaiMah l/+a<aMa( )
v<aRYaiNTa MahaTMaaNa" é[uTaeNaaQaeRNa caÅSaa )) 2 ))
daçamasya viçuddhy-arthaà
navänäm iha lakñaëam
varëayanti mahätmänaù
çrutenärthena cäïjasä
SYNONYMS
daçamasya—of the summum bonum; viçuddhi—isolation; artham—purpose;
navänäm—of the other nine; iha—in this Çrémad-Bhägavatam;
lakñaëam—symptoms; varëayanti—they describe; mahä-ätmänaù—the great
sages; çrutena—by Vedic evidences; arthena—by direct explanation; ca—and;
aïjasä—summarily.
TRANSLATION
To isolate the transcendence of the summum bonum, the symptoms of the
rest are described sometimes by Vedic inference, sometimes by direct
explanation, and sometimes by summary explanations given by the great sages.
TEXT 3
>aUTaMaa}aeiNd]YaiDaYaa& JaNMa SaGaR odaôTa" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
b]ø<aae Gau<avEzMYaaiÜSaGaR" PaaEåz" SMa*Ta" )) 3 ))
bhüta-mätrendriya-dhiyäà
janma sarga udähåtaù
brahmaëo guëa-vaiñamyäd
visargaù pauruñaù småtaù
SYNONYMS
bhüta—the five gross elements (the sky, etc.); mäträ—objects perceived by the
senses; indriya—the senses; dhiyäm—of the mind; janma—creation;
sargaù—manifestation; udähåtaù—is called the creation; brahmaëaù—of
Brahmä, the first puruña; guëa-vaiñamyät—by interaction of the three modes
of nature; visargaù—re-creation; pauruñaù—resultant activities; småtaù—it is
so known.
TRANSLATION
The elementary creation of sixteen items of matter—namely the five
elements [fire, water, land, air and sky], sound, form, taste, smell, touch, and
the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, skin and mind—is known as sarga, whereas
subsequent resultant interaction of the modes of material nature is called
visarga.
PURPORT
In order to explain the ten divisional symptoms of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
there are seven continuous verses. The first of these under reference pertains
to the sixteen elementary manifestations of earth, water, etc., with material
ego composed of material intelligence and mind. The subsequent creation is a
result of the reactions of the above-mentioned sixteen energies of the first
puruña, the Mahä-Viñëu incarnation of Govinda, as later explained by Brahmä
in his treatise Brahma-saàhitä (5.47) as follows:
yaù käraëärëava-jale bhajati sma yoganidräm
ananta-jagad-aëòa-sa-roma-küpaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ädhära-çaktim avalambya paräà sva-mürtià
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
The first puruña incarnation of Govinda, Lord Kåñëa, known as the
Mahä-Viñëu, goes into a yoga-nidrä mystic sleep, and the innumerable
universes are situated in potency in each and every hair hole of His
transcendental body.
As mentioned in the previous verse, çrutena (or with reference to the Vedic
conclusions), the creation is made possible from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead directly by manifestation of His particular energies. Without such a
Vedic reference, the creation appears to be a product of material nature. This
conclusion comes from a poor fund of knowledge. From Vedic reference it is
concluded that the origin of all energies (namely internal, external and
marginal) is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And as explained
hereinbefore, the illusory conclusion is that creation is made by the inert
material nature. The Vedic conclusion is transcendental light, whereas the
non-Vedic conclusion is material darkness. The internal potency of the
Supreme Lord is identical with the Supreme Lord, and the external potency is
enlivened in contact with the internal potency. The parts and parcels of the
internal potency which react in contact with the external potency are called
the marginal potency, or the living entities.
Thus the original creation is directly from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, or Parambrahman, and the secondary creation, as a reactionary
result of the original ingredients, is made by Brahmä. Thus the activities of the
whole universe are started.
TEXT 4
iSQaiTavOEku-<#=ivJaYa" Paaez<a& TadNauGa]h" )
MaNvNTarai<a SaÖMaR OTaYa" k-MaRvaSaNaa" )) 4 ))
sthitir vaikuëöha-vijayaù
poñaëaà tad-anugrahaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
manvantaräëi sad-dharma
ütayaù karma-väsanäù
SYNONYMS
sthitiù—the right situation; vaikuëöha-vijayaù—the victory of the Lord of
Vaikuëöha; poñaëam—maintenance; tat-anugrahaù—His causeless mercy;
manvantaräëi—the reign of the Manus; sat-dharmaù—perfect occupational
duty; ütayaù—impetus to work; karma-väsanäù—desire for fruitive work.
TRANSLATION
The right situation for the living entities is to obey the laws of the Lord and
thus be in perfect peace of mind under the protection of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The Manus and their laws are meant to give right
direction in life. The impetus for activity is the desire for fruitive work.
PURPORT
This material world is created, maintained for some time, and again
annihilated by the will of the Lord. The ingredients for creation and the
subordinate creator, Brahmä, are first created by Lord Viñëu in His first and
second incarnations. The first puruña incarnation is Mahä-Viñëu, and the
second puruña incarnation is the Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, from whom Brahmä is
created. The third puruña avatära is the Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, who lives as the
Supersoul of everything in the universe and maintains the creation generated
by Brahmä. Çiva is one of the many sons of Brahmä, and he annihilates the
creation. Therefore the original creator of the universe is Viñëu, and He is also
the maintainer of the created beings by His causeless mercy. As such, it is the
duty of all conditioned souls to acknowledge the victory of the Lord and thus
become pure devotees and live peacefully in this world, where miseries and
dangers are always in existence. The conditioned souls, who take this material
creation as the place for satisfaction of the senses and thus are illusioned by
the external energy of Viñëu, remain again to be subjected to the laws of
material nature, creation and destruction.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
In the Bhagavad-gétä it is said that beginning from the topmost planet of
this universe down to the lowest planet, Pätälaloka, all are destructible, and
the conditioned souls may travel in space either by good or bad work or by
modern spacecraft, but they are sure to die everywhere, although the duration
of life in different planets is different. The only means to attain eternal life is
to go back home, back to Godhead, where there is no more rebirth as in the
material planets. The conditioned souls, being unaware of this very simple fact
because of forgetting their relationship with the Lord of Vaikuëöha, try to plan
out a permanent life in this material world. Being illusioned by the external
energy, they thus become engaged in various types of economic and religious
development, forgetting that they are meant for going back home, back to
Godhead. This forgetfulness is so strong due to the influence of mäyä that the
conditioned souls do not at all want to go back to Godhead. By sense
enjoyment they become victims of birth and death repeatedly and thus spoil
human lives which are chances for going back to Viñëu. The directive
scriptures made by the Manus in different ages and millenniums are called
sad-dharma, good guidance for the human beings, who should take advantage
of all the revealed scriptures for their own interest, to make life’s successful
termination. The creation is not false, but it is a temporary manifestation just
to give a chance for the conditioned souls to go back to Godhead. The desire to
go back to Godhead and functions performed in that direction form the right
path of work. When such a regulative path is accepted, the Lord gives all
protection to His devotees by His causeless mercy, while the nondevotees risk
their own activities to bind themselves in a chain of fruitive reactions. The
word sad-dharma is significant in this connection. Sad-dharma, or duty
performed for going back to Godhead and thus becoming His unalloyed
devotee, is the only pious activity; all others may pretend to be pious, but
actually they are not. It is for this reason only that the Lord advises in the
Bhagavad-gétä that one give up all so-called religious activities and completely
engage in the devotional service of the Lord to become free from all anxieties
due to the dangerous life of material existence. To work situated in sad-dharma
is the right direction of life. One’s aim of life should be to go back home, back
to Godhead, and not be subjected to repeated births and deaths in the material
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
world by getting good or bad bodies for temporary existence. Herein lies the
intelligence of human life, and one should desire the activities of life in that
way.
TEXT 5
AvTaaraNaucirTa& hreêaSYaaNauviTaRNaaMa( )
Pau&SaaMaqXak-Qaa" Pa[ae¢-a NaaNaa:YaaNaaePab*&ihTaa" )) 5 ))
avatäränucaritaà
hareç cäsyänuvartinäm
puàsäm éça-kathäù proktä
nänäkhyänopabåàhitäù
SYNONYMS
avatära—incarnation of Godhead; anucaritam—activities; hareù—of the
Personality of Godhead; ca—also; asya—of His; anuvartinäm—followers;
puàsäm—of the persons; éça-kathäù—the science of God; proktäù—is said;
nänä—various; äkhyäna—narrations; upabåàhitäù—described.
TRANSLATION
The science of God describes the incarnations of the Personality of Godhead
and His different activities together with the activities of His great devotees.
PURPORT
During the course of the existence of the cosmic manifestation, the
chronology of history is created, recording the activities of the living entities.
People in general have a tendency to learn the history and narrations of
different men and times, but due to a lack of knowledge in the science of
Godhead, they are not apt to study the history of the incarnations of the
Personality of Godhead. It should always be remembered that the material
creation is created for the salvation of the conditioned souls. The merciful
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord, out of His causeless mercy, descends to various planets in the material
world and acts for the salvation of the conditioned souls. That makes the
history and narrations worth reading. Çrémad-Bhägavatam offers such
transcendental topics of the Lord in relationship with great devotees.
Therefore the topics of the devotees and the Lord are to be given respectful
aural reception.
TEXT 6
iNaraeDaae_SYaaNauXaYaNaMaaTMaNa" Sah Xai¢-i>a" )
Maui¢-ihRTvaNYaQaaæPa& SvæPae<a VYaviSQaiTa" )) 6 ))
nirodho ’syänuçayanam
ätmanaù saha çaktibhiù
muktir hitvänyathä rüpaà
sva-rüpeëa vyavasthitiù
SYNONYMS
nirodhaù—the winding up of the cosmic manifestation; asya—of His;
anuçayanam—the lying down of the puruña incarnation Mahä-Viñëu in mystic
slumber; ätmanaù—of the living entities; saha—along with; çaktibhiù—with
the energies; muktiù—liberation; hitvä—giving up; anyathä—otherwise;
rüpam—form; sva-rüpeëa—in constitutional form; vyavasthitiù—permanent
situation.
TRANSLATION
The merging of the living entity, along with his conditional living tendency,
with the mystic lying down of the Mahä-Viñëu is called the winding up of the
cosmic manifestation. Liberation is the permanent situation of the form of the
living entity after he gives up the changeable gross and subtle material bodies.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
As we have discussed several times, there are two types of living entities.
Most of them are ever liberated, or nitya-muktas, while some of them are ever
conditioned. The ever-conditioned souls are apt to develop a mentality of
lording over the material nature, and therefore the material cosmic creation is
manifested to give the ever-conditioned souls two kinds of facilities. One
facility is that the conditioned soul can act according to his tendency to lord it
over the cosmic manifestation, and the other facility gives the conditioned
soul a chance to come back to Godhead. So after the winding up of the cosmic
manifestation, most of the conditioned souls merge into the existence of the
Mahä-Viñëu Personality of Godhead, lying in His mystic slumber, to be created
again in the next creation. But some of the conditioned souls, who follow the
transcendental sound in the form of Vedic literatures and are thus able to go
back to Godhead, attain spiritual and original bodies after quitting the
conditional gross and subtle material bodies. The material conditional bodies
develop out of the living entities’ forgetfulness of their relationship with
Godhead, and during the course of the cosmic manifestation, the conditioned
souls are given a chance to revive their original status of life with the help of
revealed scriptures, so mercifully compiled by the Lord in His different
incarnations. Reading or hearing of such transcendental literatures helps one
become liberated even in the conditional state of material existence. All the
Vedic literatures aim at devotional service to the Personality of Godhead, and
as soon as one is fixed upon this point, he at once becomes liberated from
conditional life. The material gross and subtle forms are simply due to the
conditioned soul’s ignorance and as soon as he is fixed in the devotional
service of the Lord, he becomes eligible to be freed from the conditioned state.
This devotional service is transcendental attraction for the Supreme on
account of His being the source of all pleasing humors. Everyone is after some
pleasure of humor for enjoyment, but does not know the supreme source of all
attraction (raso vai saù rasaà hy eväyaà labdhvänandé bhavati). The Vedic
hymns inform everyone about the supreme source of all pleasure; the unlimited
fountainhead of all pleasure is the Personality of Godhead, and one who is
fortunate enough to get this information through transcendental literatures
like Çrémad-Bhägavatam becomes permanently liberated to occupy his proper
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
place in the kingdom of God.
TEXT 7
Aa>aaSaê iNaraeDaê YaTaae_STYaDYavSaqYaTae )
Sa Aaé[Ya" Par& b]ø ParMaaTMaeiTa XaBÛTae )) 7 ))
äbhäsaç ca nirodhaç ca
yato ’sty adhyavaséyate
sa äçrayaù paraà brahma
paramätmeti çabdyate
SYNONYMS
äbhäsaù—the cosmic manifestation; ca—and; nirodhaù—and its winding up;
ca—also; yataù—from the source; asti—is; adhyavaséyate—become manifested;
saù—He; äçrayaù—reservoir; param—the Supreme; brahma—Being;
paramätmä—the Supersoul; iti—thus; çabdyate—called.
TRANSLATION
The supreme one who is celebrated as the Supreme Being or the Supreme
Soul is the supreme source of the cosmic manifestation as well as its reservoir
and winding up. Thus He is the Supreme Fountainhead, the Absolute Truth.
PURPORT
Synonyms for the supreme source of all energies, as explained in the very
beginning of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, are janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1], vadanti
tat tattva-vidas tattvaà yaj jïänam advayam/ brahmeti paramätmeti bhagavän iti
çabdyate, called Parambrahma, Paramätmä or Bhagavän. The word iti used here
in this verse completes the synonyms and thus indicates Bhagavän. This will
be further explained in the later verses, but this Bhagavän ultimately means
Lord Kåñëa because the Çrémad-Bhägavatam has already accepted the Supreme
Personality of Godhead as Kåñëa. Kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam. The original
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
source of all energies, or the summum bonum, is the Absolute Truth, which is
called Parambrahma, etc., and Bhagavän is the last word of the Absolute
Truth. But even with the synonyms for Bhagavän, such as Näräyaëa, Viñëu
and Puruña, the last word is Kåñëa, as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä: ahaà
sarvasya prabhavo mattaù samaà pravartate [Bg. 10.8], etc. Besides that, the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the representation of Lord Kåñëa as a sound incarnation
of the Lord.
kåñëe sva-dhämopagate
dharma-jïänädibhiù saha
kalau nañöa-dåçäm eñaù
puräëärko ’dhunoditaù
(Bhäg. 1.3.43)
Thus by general conclusion Lord Kåñëa is the ultimate source of all
energies, and the word Kåñëa means that. And to explain Kåñëa or the science
of Kåñëa, the Çrémad-Bhägavatam has been prepared. In the First Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam this truth is indicated in the questions and answers by
Süta Gosvämé and great sages like Çaunaka, and in the First and Second
Chapters of the canto this is explained. In the Third Chapter this subject is
more explicit, and in the Fourth Chapter even more explicit. In the Second
Canto the Absolute Truth as the personality of Godhead is further
emphasized, and the indication is the Supreme Lord Kåñëa. The summary of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam in four verses, as we have already discussed, is succinct.
This Supreme Personality of Godhead in the ultimate issue is confirmed by
Brahmä in his Brahma-saàhitä as éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù [Bs. 5.1]. So it is concluded in the Third Canto of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The complete subject matter is elaborately explained in
the Tenth and Eleventh Cantos of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. In the matter of
the changes of the Manus or manvantaras, such as the
Sväyambhuva-manvantara and Cäkñuña-manvantara, as they are discussed in
the Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Cantos of Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
Lord Kåñëa is indicated. In the Eighth Canto the Vaivasvata-manvantara
explains the same subject indirectly, and in the Ninth Canto the same purport
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
is there. In the Twelfth Canto the same is further explained, specifically
regarding the different incarnations of the Lord. Thus it is concluded by
studying the complete Çrémad-Bhägavatam that Lord Çré Kåñëa is the ultimate
summum bonum, or the ultimate source of all energy. And according to the
grades of worshipers, the indications of the nomenclature may be differently
explained as Näräyaëa, Brahmä, Paramätmä, etc.
TEXT 8
Yaae_DYaaiTMak-ae_Ya& Pauåz" Saae_SaavevaiDadEivk-" )
YaSTa}aae>aYaivC^ed" Pauåzae ùaiDa>aaEiTak-" )) 8 ))
yo ’dhyätmiko ’yaà puruñaù
so ’säv evädhidaivikaù
yas tatrobhaya-vicchedaù
puruño hy ädhibhautikaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; adhyätmikaù—is possessed of the sense organs; ayam—this;
puruñaù—personality; saù—he; asau—that; eva—also;
adhidaivikaù—controlling deity; yaù—that which; tatra—there; ubhaya—of
both; vicchedaù—separation; puruñaù—person; hi—for; ädhibhautikaù—the
visible body or the embodied living entity.
TRANSLATION
The individual person possessing different instruments of senses is called the
adhyätmic person, and the individual controlling deity of the senses is called
adhidaivic. The embodiment seen on the eyeballs is called the adhibhautic
person.
PURPORT
The supreme controlling summum bonum is the personality of Godhead in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
His plenary portion of Paramätmä, or the Supersoul manifestation. In the
Bhagavad-gétä (10.42) it is said:
athavä bahunaitena
kià jïätena tavärjuna
viñöabhyäham idaà kåtsnam
ekäàçena sthito jagat
All the controlling deities like Viñëu, Brahmä and Çiva are different
manifestations of the Paramätmä feature of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Çré Kåñëa, who exhibits himself in such manners by entering into
each and every universe generated from Him. But still apparently there are
divisions of the controller and controlled. For example, in the food-controlling
department the controller of food is a person made of the same ingredients as
the person who is controlled. Similarly, each and every individual in the
material world is controlled by the higher demigods. For example, we have our
senses, but the senses are controlled by superior controlling deities. We cannot
see without light, and the supreme controller of light is the sun. The sun-god is
in the sun planet, and we, the individual human beings or any other being on
this earth, are all controlled by the sun-god as far as our eyes are concerned.
Similarly, all the senses we have are controlled by the superior demigods, who
are also as much living entities as we are, but one is empowered while the other
is controlled. The controlled living entity is called the adhyätmic person, and
the controller is called the adhidaivic person. All these positions in the
material world are due to different fruitive activities. Any individual living
being can become the sun-god or even Brahmä or any other god in the upper
planetary system by a higher grade of pious work, and similarly one becomes
controlled by the higher demigods by lower grades of fruitive activities. So
every individual living entity is subject to the supreme control of the
Paramätmä, who puts everyone in different positions of the controller and the
controlled.
That which distinguishes the controller and controlled, i.e. the material
body, is called the adhibhautic puruña. The body is sometimes called puruña, as
confirmed in the Vedas in the following hymn: sa vä eña puruño
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
’nna-rasamayaù. This body is called the anna-rasa embodiment. This body
depends on food. The living entity which is embodied does not eat anything,
however, because the owner is spirit in essence. The material body requires
replacement of matter for the wearing and tearing of the mechanical body.
Therefore the distinction between the individual living entity and controlling
planetary deities is in the anna-rasamaya body. The sun may have a gigantic
body, and the man may have a smaller body, but all these visible bodies are
made of matter; nonetheless, the sun-god and the individual person, who are
related as the controller and the controlled, are the same spiritual parts and
parcels of the Supreme Being, and it is the Supreme Being who places different
parts and parcels in different positions. And thus the conclusion is that the
Supreme Person is the shelter of all.
TEXT 9
Wk-Maek-Tara>aave Yada NaaePal/>aaMahe )
i}aTaYa& Ta}a Yaae ved Sa AaTMaa Svaé[Yaaé[Ya" )) 9 ))
ekam ekataräbhäve
yadä nopalabhämahe
tritayaà tatra yo veda
sa ätmä sväçrayäçrayaù
SYNONYMS
ekam—one; ekatara—another; abhäve—in the absence of; yadä—because;
na—does not; upalabhämahe—perceptible; tritayam—in three stages;
tatra—there; yaù—the one; veda—who knows; saù—he; ätmä—the Supersoul;
sva—own; äçraya—shelter; äçrayaù—of the shelter.
TRANSLATION
All three of the above-mentioned stages of different living entities are
interdependent. In the absence of one, another is not understood. But the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Supreme Being who sees every one of them as the shelter of the shelter is
independent of all, and therefore He is the supreme shelter.
PURPORT
There are innumerable living entities, one dependent on the other in the
relationship of the controlled and the controller. But without the medium of
perception, no one can know or understand who is the controlled and who is
the controller. For example, the sun controls the power of our vision, we can
see the sun because the sun has its body, and the sunlight is useful only because
we have eyes. Without our having eyes, the sunlight is useless, and without
sunlight the eyes are useless. Thus they are interdependent, and none of them
is independent. Therefore the natural question arises concerning who made
them interdependent. The one who has made such a relationship of
interdependence must be ultimately completely independent. As stated in the
beginning of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the ultimate source of all
interdependent objectives is the complete independent subject. This ultimate
source of all interdependence is the Supreme Truth or Paramätmä, the
Supersoul, who is not dependent on anything else. He is sväçrayäçrayaù. He is
only dependent on His self, and thus He is the supreme shelter of everything.
Although Paramätmä and Brahman are subordinate to Bhagavän, because
Bhagavän is Puruñottama or the Superperson, He is the source of the Supersoul
also. In the Bhagavad-gétä (15.18) Lord Kåñëa says that He is the Puruñottama
and the source of everything, and thus it is concluded that Çré Kåñëa is the
ultimate source and shelter of all entities, including the Supersoul and
Supreme Brahman. Even accepting that there is no difference between the
Supersoul and the individual soul, the individual soul is dependent on the
Supersoul for being liberated from the illusion of material energy. The
individual is under the clutches of illusory energy, and therefore although
qualitatively one with the Supersoul, he is under the illusion of identifying
himself with matter. And to get out of this illusory conception of factual life,
the individual soul has to depend on the Supersoul to be recognized as one
with Him. In that sense also the Supersoul is the supreme shelter. And there is
no doubt about it.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The individual living entity, the jéva, is always dependent on the Supersoul,
Paramätmä, because the individual soul forgets his spiritual identity whereas
the Supersoul, Paramätmä, does not forget His transcendental position. In the
Bhagavad-gétä these separate positions of the jéva-ätmä and the Paramätmä are
specifically mentioned. In the Fourth Chapter, Arjuna, the jéva soul, is
represented as forgetful of his many, many previous births, but the Lord, the
Supersoul, is not forgetful. The Lord even remembers when He taught the
Bhagavad-gétä to the sun-god some billions of years before. The Lord can
remember such millions and billions of years, as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä
(7.26) as follows:
vedähaà samatétäni
vartamänäni cärjuna
bhaviñyäëi ca bhütäni
mäà tu veda na kaçcana
The Lord in His eternal blissful body of knowledge is fully aware of all that
happened in the past, that which is going on at the present and also what will
happen in the future. But in spite of His being the shelter of both the
Paramätmä and Brahman, persons with a poor fund of knowledge are unable to
understand Him as He is.
The propaganda of the identity of cosmic consciousness with the
consciousness of the individual living entities is completely misleading because
even such a person or individual soul as Arjuna could not remember his past
deeds, although he is always with the Lord. And what can the tiny ordinary
man, falsely claiming to be one with the cosmic consciousness, know about his
past, present and future?
TEXT 10
Pauåzae_<@& iviNai>aRÛ YadaSaaE Sa iviNaGaRTa" )
AaTMaNaae_YaNaMaiNvC^àPaae_óa+aqC^uic" éucq" )) 10 ))
puruño ’ëòaà vinirbhidya
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yadäsau sa vinirgataù
ätmano ’yanam anvicchann
apo ’sräkñéc chuciù çucéù
SYNONYMS
puruñaù—the Supreme Person, Paramätmä; aëòam—the universes;
vinirbhidya—making them each separately situated; yadä—when; asau—the
same; saù—He (the Lord); vinirgataù—came out; ätmanaù—of Himself;
ayanam—lying in place; anvicchan—desiring; apaù—water; asräkñét—created;
çuciù—the most pure; çucéù—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
After separating the different universes, the gigantic universal form of the
Lord [Mahä-Viñëu], which came out of the causal ocean, the place of
appearance for the first puruña-avatära, entered into each of the separate
universes, desiring to lie on the created transcendental water [Garbhodaka].
PURPORT
After analysis of the living entities and the Supreme Lord, Paramätmä, the
independent source of all other living beings, Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé is now
presenting the prime necessity for devotional service to the Lord, which is the
only occupational business of all living entities. The Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa
and all His plenary portions and extensions of plenary portions are
nondifferent from one another, and thus the supreme independence is in each
and every one of them. In order to prove this, Çukadeva Gosvämé (as promised
to King Parékñit) describes herein the independence of the puruña-avatära
Personality of Godhead, even in the sphere of the material creation. Such
activities of the Lord are also transcendental, and therefore they are also lélä,
or pastimes, of the absolute Lord. Such pastimes of the Lord are very
conducive to the hearers for self-realization in the field of devotional service.
Some may argue, why not then relish the transcendental lélä of the Lord as
exhibited in the land of Mathurä and Våndävana, which are sweeter than
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
anything in the world? Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura replies that the
pastimes of the Lord in Våndävana are meant to be relished by advanced
devotees of the Lord. Neophyte devotees will misunderstand such supreme
transcendental activities of the Lord, and therefore the Lord’s pastimes in the
material sphere related to creation, maintenance and destruction are verily
relishable by the präkåta, or mundane devotees of the Lord. As the yoga system
mainly based on bodily exercises is meant for the person who is too much
attached to the bodily conception of existence, similarly the Lord’s pastimes
related to the creation and destruction of the material world are for those who
are too materially attached. For such mundane creatures the functions of the
body and the functions of the cosmic world through physical laws in
relationship with the Lord are also therefore included in understanding of the
lawmaker, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The scientists explain the
material functions by so many technological terms of material law, but such
blind scientists forget the lawmaker. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam points out the
lawmaker. One should not be amazed by the mechanical arrangement of the
complicated engine or dynamo, but one should praise the engineer who creates
such a wonderful working machine. That is the difference between the
devotee and the nondevotee. Devotees are always full with praising the Lord,
who directs the physical laws. In the Bhagavad-gétä (9.10) the direction of the
Lord upon the material nature is described as follows:
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sacaräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
“The material nature full of physical laws is one of My different energies;
therefore it is neither independent nor blind. Because I am transcendentally
all-powerful, simply by My glancing over material nature, the physical laws of
nature work so wonderfully. The actions and reactions of the physical laws
work on that account, and thus the material world is created, maintained and
annihilated again and again.”
Men with a poor fund of knowledge, however, become astonished by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
studying the physical laws both within the construction of the individual body
and within the cosmic manifestation, and foolishly they decry the existence of
God, taking it for granted that the physical laws are independent, without any
metaphysical control. The Bhagavad-gétä (9.11) replies to this foolishness in the
following words:
avajänanti mäà müòhä
mänuñéà tanum äçritam
paraà bhävam ajänanto
mama bhüta-maheçvaram
“The foolish men [müòhäù] do not know the Personality of Godhead in His
eternal form of bliss and knowledge.” The foolish man thinks of the
transcendental body of the Lord as something like his own, and therefore he
cannot think of the unlimited controlling power of the Lord, who is not visible
in the acting of the physical laws. The Lord is, however, visible to the naked
eyes of people in general when He descends Himself by His own personal
potency. Lord Kåñëa incarnated Himself as He is and played very wonderful
parts as the Lord Himself, and the Bhagavad-gétä concerns such wonderful
actions and knowledge. Yet foolish men will not accept Lord Kåñëa as the
Supreme Lord. Generally they consider the infinitesimal and infinite features
of the Lord because they themselves are unable to become either the
infinitesimal or the infinite, but one should know that the infinite and
infinitesimal sizes of the Lord are not His highest glories. The most wonderful
manifestation of the Lord’s power is exhibited when the infinite Lord becomes
visible to our eyes as one of us. Yet His activities are different from those of
the finite beings. Lifting a mountain at the age of seven years and marrying
sixteen thousand wives in the prime of His youth are some of the examples of
His infinite energy, but the müòhas, after seeing them or hearing about them,
decry them as legendary and take the Lord as one of them. They cannot
understand that the Lord Çré Kåñëa, although in the form of a human being by
His own potency, is still the Supreme Lord with full potency as the supreme
controller.
When, however, the müòhas give submissive and aural reception to the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
messages of the Lord as in the Çrémad Bhagavad-gétä or in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam through the channel of disciplic succession, such müòhas
also become devotees of the Lord by the grace of His pure devotees. And for
this reason only, either in the Bhagavad-gétä or in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the
pastimes of the Lord in the material world are delineated for the benefit of
those men with a poor fund of knowledge.
TEXT 11
TaaSvvaTSaqTa( SvSa*íaSau Sahó&PairvTSaraNa( )
TaeNa NaaraYa<aae NaaMa YadaPa" PauåzaeÙva" )) 11 ))
täsv avätsét sva-såñöäsu
sahasraà parivatsarän
tena näräyaëo näma
yad äpaù puruñodbhaväù
SYNONYMS
täsu—in that; avätsét—resided; sva—own; såñöäsu—in the matter of creation;
sahasram—one thousand; parivatsarän—years of His measurement; tena—for
that reason; näräyaëaù—the Personality of Godhead named Näräyaëa;
näma—name; yat—because; äpaù—water; puruña-udbhaväù—emanated from
the Supreme Person.
TRANSLATION
That Supreme Person is not impersonal and therefore is distinctively a nara,
or person. Therefore the transcendental water created from the Supreme Nara
is known as nära. And because He lies down on that water, He is known as
Näräyaëa.
TEXT 12
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
d]VYa& k-MaR c k-al/ê Sv>aavae Jaqv Wv c )
YadNauGa]hTa" SaiNTa Na SaiNTa YaduPae+aYaa )) 12 ))
dravyaà karma ca kälaç ca
svabhävo jéva eva ca
yad-anugrahataù santi
na santi yad-upekñayä
SYNONYMS
dravyam—physical elements; karma—action; ca—and; kälaù—time; ca—also;
sva-bhävaù jévaù—the living entities; eva—certainly; ca—also; yat—whose;
anugrahataù—by the mercy of; santi—exist; na—does not; santi—exist;
yat-upekñayä—by negligence.
TRANSLATION
One should definitely know that all material ingredients, activities, time and
modes, and the living entities who are meant to enjoy them all, exist by His
mercy only, and as soon as He does not care for them, everything becomes
nonexistent.
PURPORT
The living entities are the enjoyers of the material ingredients, time, modes,
etc., because they want to lord it over the material nature. The Lord is the
supreme enjoyer, and the living entities are meant to assist the Lord in His
enjoyment and thus participate in the transcendental enjoyment of everyone.
The enjoyer and the enjoyed both participate in enjoyment, but, deluded by
the illusory energy, the living entities want to become the enjoyer like the
Lord, although they are not meant for such enjoyment. The jévas, the living
entities, are mentioned in the Bhagavad-gétä as the Lord’s superior nature, or
parä prakåti, and so also it is mentioned in the Viñëu Puräëa. Therefore the
living entities are never the puruñas, or the factual enjoyers. As such, the spirit
of enjoyment by the living entity in the material world is false. In the spiritual
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
world the living entities are pure in nature, and therefore they are associates
in the enjoyment of the Supreme Lord. In the material world the spirit of
enjoyment of the living entities by dint of their own actions (karma) gradually
fades by the laws of nature, and thus the illusory energy dictates in the ears of
the conditioned souls that they should become one with the Lord. This is the
last snare of the illusory energy. When the last illusion is also cleared off by the
mercy of the Lord, the living entity again becomes reinstated in his original
position and thus becomes actually liberated. For this attainment of liberation
from the material clutches, the Lord creates the material world, maintains it
for some time (one thousand years of His measurement, as stated in the
previous verse), and then again annihilates it by His will. The living entities
are therefore completely dependent on the mercy of the Lord, and all their
so-called enjoyments by scientific improvement are crushed into dust when
the Lord desires.
TEXT 13
Wk-ae NaaNaaTvMaiNvC^Na( YaaeGaTaLPaaTa( SaMauiTQaTa" )
vqYa| ihr<MaYa& devae MaaYaYaa VYaSa*JaTa( i}aDaa )) 13 ))
eko nänätvam anvicchan
yoga-talpät samutthitaù
véryaà hiraëmayaà devo
mäyayä vyasåjat tridhä
SYNONYMS
ekaù—He, one alone; nänätvam—varieties; anvicchan—so desiring;
yoga-talpät—from the bedstead of mystic slumber; samutthitaù—thus
generated; véryam—the semina; hiraëmayam—golden hue; devaù—the
demigod; mäyayä—by the external energy; vyasåjat—perfectly created;
tridhä—in three features.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The Lord, while lying on His bed of mystic slumber, generated the seminal
symbol, golden in hue, through external energy out of His desire to manifest
varieties of living entities from Himself alone.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä (9.7–8) the creation and annihilation of the material
world are stated as follows:
sarva-bhütäni kaunteya
prakåtià yänti mämikäm
kalpa-kñaye punas täni
kalpädau visåjämy aham
prakåtià sväm avañöabhya
visåjämi punaù punaù
bhüta-grämam imaà kåtsnam
avaçaà prakåter vaçät
“At the end of each millennium the creative forces, namely the material
nature and the living entities who struggle in the material nature, all merge
together into the transcendental body of the Lord, and again when the Lord
desires to manifest them, all of them are again displayed by the Lord.
“Therefore the material nature is working under the control of the Lord.
All of them, under the agency of material nature and under the control of the
Lord, are thus repeatedly created and annihilated by the will of the Lord.”
As such, before the creation or manifestation of the material cosmic world,
the Lord exists as total energy (mahä-samañöi), and thus desiring Himself to be
diffused to many, He expands Himself further into multitotal energy (samañöi).
From the multitotal energy He further expands Himself into individuals in
three dimensions, namely adhyätmic, adhidaivic and adhibhautic, as explained
before (vyañöi). As such, the whole creation and the creative energies are
nondifferent and different simultaneously. Because everything is an
emanation from Him (the Mahä-Viñëu or Mahä-samañöi), nothing of the
cosmic energies is different from Him; but all such expanded energies have
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
specific functions and display as designed by the Lord, and therefore they are
simultaneously different from the Lord. The living entities are also similar
energy (marginal potency) of the Lord, and thus they are simultaneously one
with and different from Him.
At the stage of nonmanifestation, the living energies remain potent in the
Lord, and when they are let loose in the cosmic manifestation they are
exhibited differently in terms of different desires under the modes of nature.
Such differential manifestations of the living energies are conditional states of
the living entities. The liberated living entities, however, in the sanätana
(eternal) manifestation, are unconditionally surrendered souls, and therefore
they are not subject to the conditions of creation and annihilation. So this
creation takes place by the glance of the Lord from His bedstead of mystic
slumber. And thus all the universes and the lord of the universe, Brahmä, are
again and again manifested and annihilated.
TEXT 14
AiDadEvMaQaaDYaaTMaMaiDa>aUTaiMaiTa Pa[>au" )
AQaEk&- PaaEåz& vqYa| i}aDaai>aÛTa TaC^*<au )) 14 ))
adhidaivam athädhyätmam
adhibhütam iti prabhuù
athaikaà pauruñaà véryaà
tridhäbhidyata tac chåëu
SYNONYMS
adhidaivam—the controlling entities; atha—now; adhyätmam—the controlled
entities; adhibhütam—the material bodies; iti—thus; prabhuù—the Lord;
atha—in this way; ekam—one only; pauruñam—of His Lordship;
véryam—potency; tridhä—in three; abhidyata—divided; tat—that; çåëu—just
hear from me.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Just hear from me how the potency of His Lordship divides one into three,
called the controlling entities, the controlled entities and the material bodies, in
the manner mentioned above.
TEXT 15
ANTa"Xarqr Aak-aXaaTa( PauåzSYa ivceíTa" )
AaeJa" Sahae bl&/ Jaje TaTa" Pa[a<aae MahaNaSau" )) 15 ))
antaù çaréra äkäçät
puruñasya viceñöataù
ojaù saho balaà jajïe
tataù präëo mahän asuù
SYNONYMS
antaù çarére—within the body; äkäçät—from the sky; puruñasya—of
Mahä-Viñëu; viceñöataù—while so trying, or willing; ojaù—the energy of the
senses; sahaù—mental force; balam—bodily strength; jajïe—generated;
tataù—thereafter; präëaù—the living force; mahän asuù—the fountainhead of
everyone’s life.
TRANSLATION
From the sky situated within the transcendental body of the manifesting
Mahä-Viñëu, sense energy, mental force and bodily strength are all generated,
as well as the sum total of the fountainhead of the total living force.
TEXT 16
ANauPa[a<aiNTa Ya& Pa[a<aa" Pa[a<aNTa& SavRJaNTauzu )
APaaNaNTaMaPaaNaiNTa NardeviMavaNauGaa" )) 16 ))
anupräëanti yaà präëäù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
präëantaà sarva-jantuñu
apänantam apänanti
nara-devam ivänugäù
SYNONYMS
anupräëanti—follow the living symptoms; yam—whom; präëäù—senses;
präëantam—endeavoring; sarva-jantuñu—in all living entities;
apänantam—stop endeavoring; apänanti—all others stop; nara-devam—a
king; iva—like; anugäù—the followers.
TRANSLATION
As the followers of a king follow their lord, similarly when the total energy
is in motion, all other living entities move, and when the total energy stops
endeavoring, all other living entities stop sensual activities.
PURPORT
The individual living entities are completely dependent on the total energy
of the supreme puruña. No one has independent existence, just as no electric
lamp has independent effulgence. Each and every electrical instrument
depends fully on the total powerhouse, the total powerhouse depends on the
reservoir of water for generating electricity, water depends on the clouds, the
clouds depend on the sun, the sun depends on creation, and the creation
depends on the movement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of all causes.
TEXT 17
Pa[a<aeNaai+aPaTaa +auTa( Ta*@NTara JaaYaTae iv>aae" )
iPaPaaSaTaae Ja+aTaê Pa[ax(Mau%& iNari>aÛTa )) 17 ))
präëenäkñipatä kñut tåò
antarä jäyate vibhoù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
pipäsato jakñataç ca
präì mukhaà nirabhidyata
SYNONYMS
präëena—by the living force; äkñipatä—being agitated; kñut—hunger;
tåö—thirst; antarä—from within; jäyate—generates; vibhoù—of the Supreme;
pipäsataù—being desirous to quench the thirst; jakñataù—being desirous to
eat; ca—and; präk—at first; mukham—the mouth; nirabhidyata—was opened.
TRANSLATION
The living force, being agitated by the viräö-puruña, generated hunger and
thirst, and when He desired to drink and eat, the mouth opened.
PURPORT
The process by which all living beings in the womb of the mother develop
their sense organs and sense perceptions appears to follow the same principles
in the case of the viräö-puruña, the sum total of all living entities. Therefore
the supreme cause of all generation is not impersonal or without desire. The
desires for all kinds of sense perception and sense organs exist in the Supreme,
and thus they take place in the individual persons. This desire is the nature of
the supreme living being, the Absolute Truth. Because He has the sum total of
all mouths, the individual living entities have mouths. Similarly with all other
senses and sense organs. Here the mouth is the symbolic representation of all
sense organs, for the same principles apply to the others also.
TEXT 18
Mau%TaSTaalu/ iNai>aRà& iJaûa Ta}aaePaJaaYaTae )
TaTaae NaaNaarSaae Jaje iJaûYaa Yaae_iDaGaMYaTae )) 18 ))
mukhatas tälu nirbhinnaà
jihvä tatropajäyate
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tato nänä-raso jajïe
jihvayä yo ’dhigamyate
SYNONYMS
mukhataù—from the mouth; tälu—the palate; nirbhinnam—being generated;
jihvä—the tongue; tatra—thereupon; upajäyate—becomes manifested;
tataù—thereupon; nänä-rasaù—various tastes; jajïe—became manifested;
jihvayä—by the tongue; yaù—which; adhigamyate—become relished.
TRANSLATION
From the mouth the palate became manifested, and thereupon the tongue
was also generated. After this all the different tastes came into existence so that
the tongue can relish them.
PURPORT
This gradual process of evolution suggests the explanation of the
controlling deities (adhidaiva) because Varuëa is the controlling deity for all
relishable juices. Therefore the mouth becomes the resting place for the
tongue, which tastes all the different juices, of which the controlling deity is
Varuëa. This suggests, therefore, that Varuëa was also generated along with
the development of the tongue. The tongue and the palate, being
instrumental, are adhibhütam, or forms of matter, but the functioning deity,
who is a living entity, is adhidaiva, whereas the person undergoing the
function is adhyätma. Thus the three categories are also explained as to their
birth after the opening of the mouth of the viräö-puruña. The four principles
mentioned in this verse serve to explain the three main principles, namely the
adhyätma, adhidaiva and adhibhutam, as explained before.
TEXT 19
ivv+aaeMauR%Taae >aUManae viövaRGa( VYaaôTa& TaYaae" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Jale/ cETaSYa Sauicr& iNaraeDa" SaMaJaaYaTa )) 19 ))
vivakñor mukhato bhümno
vahnir väg vyähåtaà tayoù
jale caitasya suciraà
nirodhaù samajäyata
SYNONYMS
vivakñoù—when there was a need to speak; mukhataù—from the mouth;
bhümnaù—of the Supreme; vahniù—fire or the controlling deity of fire;
väk—vibration; vyähåtam—speeches; tayoù—by both; jale—in the water;
ca—however; etasya—of all these; suciram—a very, very long time;
nirodhaù—suspension; samajäyata—did continue.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme desired to speak, speeches were vibrated from the mouth.
Then the controlling deity Fire was generated from the mouth. But when He
was lying in the water, all these functions remained suspended.
PURPORT
The peculiarity of the gradual development of the different senses is
simultaneously supported by their controlling deities. It is to be understood,
therefore, that the activities of the sense organs are controlled by the will of
the Supreme. The senses are, so to speak, offering a license for the conditioned
souls, who are to use them properly under the control of the controlling deity
deputed by the Supreme Lord. One who violates such controlling regulations
has to be punished by degradation to a lower status of life. Consider, for
example, the tongue and its controlling deity, Varuëa. The tongue is meant for
eating, and men, animals and birds each have their different tastes because of
different licenses. The taste of human beings and that of the swine are not on
the same level. The controlling deity, however, awards or certifies a particular
type of body when the particular living entity develops a taste in terms of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
different modes of nature. If the human being develops taste without
discrimination, as does the swine, then the controlling deity is certainly
certified for the next term to award him the body of a swine. The swine
accepts any kind of foodstuff, including stools, and a human being who has
developed such indiscriminate taste must be prepared for a degraded life in the
next life. Such a life is also God’s grace because the conditioned soul desired a
body like that for perfectly tasting a particular type of foodstuff. If a man gets
the body of a swine it must be considered the grace of the Lord because the
Lord awards the facility. After death the next body is offered by superior
control, not blindly. A human being, therefore, must be on his guard as to
what sort of body he is going to have in the next life. An irresponsible life of
indiscrimination is risky, and that is the declaration of all scriptures.
TEXT 20
NaaiSake- iNari>aÛeTaa& daeDaUYaiTa Na>aSviTa )
Ta}a vaYauGaRNDavhae ga]a<aae NaiSa iJaga*+aTa" )) 20 ))
näsike nirabhidyetäà
dodhüyati nabhasvati
tatra väyur gandha-vaho
ghräëo nasi jighåkñataù
SYNONYMS
näsike—in the nostrils; nirabhidyetäm—being developed; dodhüyati—rapidly
blowing; nabhasvati—air respiration; tatra—thereupon; väyuù—air;
gandha-vahaù—smelling odor; ghräëaù—sense of smell; nasi—in the nose;
jighåkñataù—desiring to smell odors.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, when the supreme puruña desired to smell odors, the nostrils and
respiration were generated, the nasal instrument and odors came into existence,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and the controlling deity of air, carrying smell, also became manifested.
PURPORT
The nasal instrument, odor, and the controlling deity air, smelling, etc., all
became manifested simultaneously when the Lord desired to smell. The Vedic
mantras confirm this statement in the Upaniñads’ statement that everything is
first desired by the Supreme before the subordinate living entity can act upon
it. The living entity can see only when the Lord sees, the living entity can
smell when the Lord smells, and so on. The idea is that the living entity
cannot do anything independently. He can simply think of doing something
independently, but he cannot act independently. This independence in
thinking is there by the grace of the Lord, but the thinking can be given shape
by the grace of the Lord, and therefore the common saying is that man
proposes and God disposes. The whole explanation is on the subject of the
absolute dependence of the living entities and absolute independence of the
Supreme Lord. Less intelligent persons claiming to be on an equal level with
God must first prove themselves to be absolute and independent, and then
they must substantiate their claim to being one with God.
TEXT 21
YadaTMaiNa iNaral/aek-MaaTMaaNa& c idd*+aTa" )
iNai>aRàe ùi+a<aq TaSYa JYaaeiTaê+auGauR<aGa]h" )) 21 ))
yadätmani nirälokam
ätmänaà ca didåkñataù
nirbhinne hy akñiëé tasya
jyotiç cakñur guëa-grahaù
SYNONYMS
yadä—while; ätmani—unto Himself; nirälokam—without any light;
ätmänam—His own transcendental body; ca—also other bodily forms;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
didåkñataù—desired to look upon; nirbhinne—due to being sprouted; hi—for;
akñiëé—of the eyes; tasya—of Him; jyotiù—the sun; cakñuù—the eyes;
guëa-grahaù—the power of seeing.
TRANSLATION
Thus when everything existed in darkness, the Lord desired to see Himself
and all that was created. Then the eyes, the illuminating god Sun, the power of
vision and the object of sight all became manifested.
PURPORT
The universe is by nature dense darkness, and therefore the total creation is
called tamas, or darkness. The night is the real feature of the universe, for then
one cannot see anything, including oneself. The Lord, out of His causeless
mercy, first desired to see Himself and all the creation as well, and thus the sun
became manifested, the power of vision for all living entities became possible,
and the objects of vision were also manifested. This means that the whole
phenomenal world became visible after the creation of the sun.
TEXT 22
baeDYaMaaNaSYa ‰izi>araTMaNaSTaiÂga*+aTa" )
k-<aaOE c iNari>aÛeTaa& idXa" é[ae}a& Gau<aGa]h" )) 22 ))
bodhyamänasya åñibhir
ätmanas taj jighåkñataù
karëau ca nirabhidyetäà
diçaù çrotraà guëa-grahaù
SYNONYMS
bodhyamänasya—desiring to understand; åñibhiù—by the authorities;
ätmanaù—of the Supreme Being; tat—that; jighåkñataù—when He desired to
take up; karëau—the ears; ca—also; nirabhidyetäm—became manifested;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
diçaù—the direction or the god of air; çrotram—the power of hearing;
guëa-grahaù—and the objects of hearing.
TRANSLATION
By development of the desire of the great sages to know, the ears, the power
of hearing, the controlling deity of hearing, and the objects of hearing became
manifested. The great sages desired to hear about the Self.
PURPORT
As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, by advancement of knowledge one should
try to know about the Supreme Lord, the summum bonum of everything.
Knowledge does not mean knowledge only of the laws of nature or physical
knowledge, which are working by the direction of the Lord. The scientists are
eager to hear about the physical laws working in material nature. They are
eager to hear through the medium of radio and television about things taking
place far away from them on other planets, but they should know that the
power of hearing and the instruments for hearing were given to them by the
Lord for hearing about the Self, or about the Lord. Unfortunately the power of
hearing is misused in hearing the vibrations of mundane affairs. The great
sages were interested in hearing about the Lord through Vedic knowledge and
nothing more. That is the beginning of aural reception of knowledge.
TEXT 23
vSTauNaae Ma*duk-ai#=NYal/gauGauvaeRZ<aXaqTaTaaMa( )
iJaga*+aTaSTvx( iNai>aRàa TaSYaa& raeMaMahqåha" )
Ta}a caNTabRihvaRTaSTvca l/BDaGau<aae v*Ta" )) 23 ))
vastuno mådu-käöhinyalaghu-
gurv-oñëa-çétatäm
jighåkñatas tvaì nirbhinnä
tasyäà roma-mahé-ruhäù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tatra cäntar bahir vätas
tvacä labdha-guëo våtaù
SYNONYMS
vastunaù—of all matter; mådu—softness; käöhinya—hardness;
laghu—lightness; guru—heaviness; oñëa—warmness; çétatäm—coldness;
jighåkñataù—desiring to perceive; tvak—the touch sensation;
nirbhinnä—distributed; tasyäm—in the skin; roma—hairs on the body;
mahé-ruhäù—as well as the trees, the controlling deities; tatra—there;
ca—also; antaù—within; bahiù—outside; vätaù tvacä—the sense of touch or
the skin; labdha—having been perceived; guëaù—objects of sense perception;
våtaù—generated.
TRANSLATION
When there was a desire to perceive the physical characteristics of matter,
such as softness, hardness, warmth, cold, lightness and heaviness, the
background of sensation, the skin, the skin pores, the hairs on the body and
their controlling deities (the trees) were generated. Within and outside the skin
is a covering of air through which sense perception became prominent.
PURPORT
The physical characteristics of matter, such as softness, are subjects of sense
perception, and thus physical knowledge is the subject matter of the touch
sensation. One can measure the temperature of matter by touching with the
hand, and one can measure the weight of an object by lifting it with the hand
and thus estimate its heaviness or lightness. The skin, the skin pores and the
hairs on the body are all interdependent with the touch sensation. The air
blowing within and outside the skin is also an object of sense perception. This
sense perception is also a source of knowledge, and therefore it is suggested
here that physical or physiological knowledge is subordinate to the knowledge
of the Self, as above mentioned. Knowledge of Self can expand to the
knowledge of phenomena, but physical knowledge cannot lead to knowledge of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Self.
There is, however, an intimate relation between the hairs on the body and
the vegetation on the body of the earth. The vegetables are nourishment for
the skin both as food and medicine, as stated in the Third Canto: tvacam asya
vinirbhinnäà viviçur dhiñëyam oñadhéù.
TEXT 24
hSTaaE ååhTauSTaSYa NaaNaak-MaRick-IzRYaa )
TaYaaeSTau bl/vaiNaNd] AadaNaMau>aYaaé[YaMa( )) 24 ))
hastau ruruhatus tasya
nänä-karma-cikérñayä
tayos tu balavän indra
ädänam ubhayäçrayam
SYNONYMS
hastau—the hands; ruruhatuù—manifested; tasya—His; nänä—various;
karma—work; cikérñayä—being so desirous; tayoù—of them; tu—however;
balavän—to give strength; indraù—the demigod in heaven;
ädänam—activities of the hand; ubhaya-äçrayam—dependent on both the
demigod and the hand.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter when the Supreme Person desired to perform varieties of work,
the two hands and their controlling strength, and Indra, the demigod in heaven,
became manifested, as also the acts dependent on both the hands and the
demigod.
PURPORT
In every item we can note with profit that the sense organs of the living
entity are never independent at any stage. The Lord is known as the Lord of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the senses (Håñékeça). Thus the sense organs of the living entities are
manifested by the will of the Lord, and each organ is controlled by a certain
type of demigod. No one, therefore, can claim any proprietorship of the senses.
The living entity is controlled by the senses, the senses are controlled by the
demigods, and the demigods are the servants of the Supreme Lord. That is the
arrangement in the system of creation. The whole thing is controlled
ultimately by the Supreme Lord, and there is no independence either of the
material nature or of the living entity. The illusioned living entity who claims
to be the lord of his senses is under the clutches of the external energy of the
Lord. As long as a living entity continues to be puffed up by his tiny existence,
he is to be understood to be under the stringent control of the external energy
of the Lord, and there is no question of liberation from the clutches of illusion
(mäyä), however much one may declare himself a liberated soul.
TEXT 25
GaiTa& iJaGaqzTa" PaadaE ååhaTae_i>ak-aiMak-aMa( )
PaÙya& Yaj" SvYa& hVYa& k-MaRi>a" i§-YaTae Na*i>a" )) 25 ))
gatià jigéñataù pädau
ruruhäte ’bhikämikäm
padbhyäà yajïaù svayaà havyaà
karmabhiù kriyate nåbhiù
SYNONYMS
gatim—movement; jigéñataù—so desiring; pädau—the legs; ruruhäte—being
manifested; abhikämikäm—purposeful; padbhyäm—from the legs;
yajïaù—Lord Viñëu; svayam—personally Himself; havyam—the duties;
karmabhiù—by one’s occupational duty; kriyate—caused to be done;
nåbhiù—by different human beings.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Thereupon, because of His desiring to control movement, His legs became
manifested, and from the legs the controlling deity named Viñëu was generated.
By His personal supervision of this act, all varieties of human being are busily
engaged in dutiful occupational sacrifice.
PURPORT
Every human being is engaged in his particular occupational duty, and such
activities are visible as men go hither and thither. This is very prominently
visible in big cities of the world: people are going all over the cities with great
concern, from one place to another. This movement is not limited only to the
cities, but is also visible outside the cities from one place to another, or from
one city to another, by different means of vehicles. Men are moving by cars
and rails on the roads, by subways within the earth and by planes in the sky for
the purpose of business success. But in all these movements the real purpose is
to earn wealth for comfortable life. For this comfortable life the scientist is
engaged, the artist is engaged, the engineer is engaged, the technician is
engaged, all in different branches of human activity. But they do not know
how to make the activities purposeful to fulfill the mission of human life.
Because they do not know this secret, all their activities are targeted towards
the goal of sense gratification without control, and therefore by all this
business they are unknowingly entering into the deep regions of darkness.
Because they have been captivated by the external energy of the Supreme
Lord, they have completely forgotten the Supreme Lord Viñëu, and thus they
have taken it for granted that this life, as presently manifested under the
conditions of material nature, is all in all for enjoying the highest amount of
sense gratification. But such a wrong conception of life cannot give anyone
the desired peace of mind, and thus in spite of all advancement in knowledge
by use of the resources of nature, no one is happy in this material civilization.
The secret is that at every step they should try to execute sacrifices toward the
path of world peace. The Bhagavad-gétä (18.45–46) also advises the same secret
in the following verses.
sve sve karmaëy abhirataù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
saàsiddhià labhate naraù
sva-karma-nirataù siddhià
yathä vindati tac chåëu
yataù pravåttir bhütänäà
yena sarvam idaà tatam
sva-karmaëä tam abhyarcya
siddhià vindati mänavaù
The Lord said to Arjuna: “Just hear from Me how one can attain the
highest perfection in life simply by discharging his specified occupational duty.
Man can attain the highest perfection of life by worshiping the Supreme Lord
and by performing sacrifice for the sake of the Supreme Lord Viñëu, who is
all-pervading and by whose control every living being acquires his desired
facilities, according to his personal propensity.”
There is no harm in having different propensities in life because every
human being is proportionately independent to chalk out the plan of his life
by different occupations, but one should make it a point in his life to know
perfectly well that he is not independent absolutely. One is certainly under the
control of the Supreme Lord and under different agencies. Knowing this, one
should make it a point that by his work and the result of his labor he serves the
Supreme Lord as prescribed by the authorities expert in the transcendental
loving service of the Supreme Lord Viñëu. For performing such occupational
duties of life the leg is the most important instrument of the body because
without the help of the legs one cannot move from one place to another, and
therefore the Lord has special control over the legs of all human beings, which
are meant for performing yajïas.
TEXT 26
iNari>aÛTa iXaénae vE Pa[JaaNaNdaMa*TaaiQaRNa" )
oPaSQa AaSaqTa( k-aMaaNaa& iPa[Ya& Tadu>aYaaé[YaMa( )) 26 ))
nirabhidyata çiçno vai
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
prajänandämåtärthinaù
upastha äsét kämänäà
priyaà tad-ubhayäçrayam
SYNONYMS
nirabhidyata—came out; çiçnaù—the genitals; vai—certainly;
prajä-änanda—sex pleasure; amåta-arthinaù—aspiring to taste the nectar;
upasthaù—the male or female organ; äsét—came into existence; kämänäm—of
the lustful; priyam—very dear; tat—that; ubhaya-äçrayam—shelter for both.
TRANSLATION
Thereupon, for sexual pleasure, begetting offspring and tasting heavenly
nectar, the Lord developed the genitals, and thus there is the genital organ and
its controlling deity, the Prajäpati. The object of sexual pleasure and the
controlling deity are under the control of the genitals of the Lord.
PURPORT
The heavenly pleasure for the conditioned soul is sexual pleasure, and this
pleasure is tasted by the genitals. The woman is the object of sexual pleasure,
and both the sense perception of sexual pleasure and the woman are controlled
by the Prajäpati, who is under the control of the Lord’s genitals. The
impersonalist must know from this verse that the Lord is not impersonal, for
He has His genitals, on which all the pleasurable objects of sex depend. No one
would have taken the trouble to maintain children if there were no taste of
heavenly nectar by means of sexual intercourse. This material world is created
to give the conditioned souls a chance for rejuvenation for going back home,
back to Godhead, and therefore generation of the living being is necessary for
upkeep of the purpose of creation. Sexual pleasure is an impetus for such
action, and as such one can even serve the Lord in the act of such sexual
pleasure. The service is counted when the children born of such sexual
pleasure are properly trained in God consciousness. The whole idea of material
creation is to revive the dormant God consciousness of the living entity. In
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
forms of life other than the human form, sexual pleasure is prominent without
any motive of service for the mission of the Lord. But in the human form of
life the conditioned soul can render service to the Lord by creating progeny
suitable for the attainment of salvation. One can beget hundreds of children
and enjoy the celestial pleasure of sexual intercourse, provided he is able to
train the children in God consciousness. Otherwise begetting children is on
the level of the swine. Rather, the swine is more expert than the human being
because the swine can beget a dozen piglets at a time, whereas the human
being can give birth to only one at a time. So one should always remember that
the genitals, sexual pleasure, the woman and the offspring are all related in the
service of the Lord, and one who forgets this relationship in the service of the
Supreme Lord becomes subjected to the threefold miseries of material
existence by the laws of nature. Perception of sexual pleasure is there even in
the body of the dog, but there is no sense of God consciousness. The human
form of life is distinct from that of the dog by the perception of God
consciousness.
TEXT 27
oiTSaSa*+aaeDaaRTauMal&/ iNari>aÛTa vE GaudMa( )
TaTa" PaaYauSTaTaae iMa}a oTSaGaR o>aYaaé[Ya" )) 27 ))
utsisåkñor dhätu-malaà
nirabhidyata vai gudam
tataù päyus tato mitra
utsarga ubhayäçrayaù
SYNONYMS
utsisåkñoù—desiring to evacuate; dhätu-malam—refuse of eatables;
nirabhidyata—became open; vai—certainly; gudam—the evacuating hole;
tataù—thereafter; päyuù—the evacuating sense organ; tataù—thereafter;
mitraù—the controlling demigod; utsargaù—the substance evacuated;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ubhaya—both; äçrayaù—shelter.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, when He desired to evacuate the refuse of eatables, the
evacuating hole, anus, and the sensory organ thereof developed along with the
controlling deity Mitra. The sensory organ and the evacuating substance are
both under the shelter of the controlling deity.
PURPORT
Even in the matter of evacuating stool, the refuse is controlled, so how can
the living entity claim to be independent?
TEXT 28
AaiSaSa*PSaae" Paur" PauYaaR Naai>aÜarMaPaaNaTa" )
Ta}aaPaaNaSTaTaae Ma*TYau" Pa*Qa¤-Mau>aYaaé[YaMa( )) 28 ))
äsisåpsoù puraù puryä
näbhi-dväram apänataù
taträpänas tato måtyuù
påthaktvam ubhayäçrayam
SYNONYMS
äsisåpsoù—desiring to go everywhere; puraù—in different bodies;
puryäù—from one body; näbhi-dväram—the navel or abdominal hole;
apänataù—was manifested; tatra—thereupon; apänaù—stopping of the vital
force; tataù—thereafter; måtyuù—death; påthaktvam—separately;
ubhaya—both; äçrayam—shelter.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, when He desired to move from one body to another, the navel
and the air of departure and death were combinedly created. The navel is the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
shelter for both, namely death and the separating force.
PURPORT
The präëa-väyu continues the life, and the apäna-väyu stops the living
force. Both the vibrations are generated from the abdominal hole, the navel.
This navel is the joint from one body to the other. Lord Brahmä was born of
the abdominal hole of Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu as a separate body, and the same
principle is followed even in the birth of any ordinary body. The body of the
child develops from the body of the mother, and when the child is separated
from the body of the mother, it is separated by cutting the navel joint. And
that is the way the Supreme Lord manifested Himself as separated many. The
living entities are therefore separated parts, and thus they have no
independence.
TEXT 29
AaidTSaaeràPaaNaaNaaMaaSaNa( ku-+YaN}aNaa@Ya" )
NaÛ" SaMaud]aê TaYaaeSTauií" PauiíSTadaé[Yae )) 29 ))
äditsor anna-pänänäm
äsan kukñy-antra-näòayaù
nadyaù samudräç ca tayos
tuñöiù puñöis tad-äçraye
SYNONYMS
äditsoù—desiring to have; anna-pänänäm—of food and drink; äsan—there
became; kukñi—the abdomen; antra—the intestines; näòayaù—and the
arteries; nadyaù—the rivers; samudräù—seas; ca—also; tayoù—of them;
tuñöiù—sustenance; puñöiù—metabolism; tat—of them; äçraye—the source.
TRANSLATION
When there was a desire to have food and drink, the abdomen and the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
intestines and also the arteries became manifested. The rivers and seas are the
source of their sustenance and metabolism.
PURPORT
The controlling deities of the intestines are the rivers, and those of the
arteries, the seas. Fulfillment of the belly with food and drink is the cause of
sustenance, and the metabolism of the food and drink replaces the waste of the
bodily energies. Therefore, the body’s health is dependent on healthy actions
of the intestines and the arteries. The rivers and the seas, being the controlling
deities of the two, keep the intestines and the arteries in healthy order.
TEXT 30
iNaidDYaaSaaeraTMaMaaYaa& ôdYa& iNari>aÛTa )
TaTaae MaNaêNd] wiTa SaªLPa" k-aMa Wv c )) 30 ))
nididhyäsor ätma-mäyäà
hådayaà nirabhidyata
tato manaç candra iti
saìkalpaù käma eva ca
SYNONYMS
nididhyäsoù—being desirous to know; ätma-mäyäm—own energy;
hådayam—the location of the mind; nirabhidyata—was manifested;
tataù—thereafter; manaù—the mind; candraù—the controlling deity of the
mind, the moon; iti—thus; saìkalpaù—determination; kämaù—desire; eva—as
much as; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
When there was a desire to think about the activities of His own energy,
then the heart (the seat of the mind), the mind, the moon, determination and
all desire became manifested.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The heart of every living entity is the seat of the Supersoul, Paramätmä, a
plenary expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Without His
presence the living entity cannot get into the working energy according to his
past deeds. The living entities who are conditioned in the material world are
manifested in the creation in terms of respective inclinations inherent in
them, and the requisite material body is offered to each and every one of them
by the material energy under the direction of the Supersoul. This is explained
in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.10). When, therefore, the Supersoul is situated in the
heart of the conditioned soul, the requisite mind is manifested in the
conditioned soul, and he becomes conscious of his occupation as one is
conscious of his duty after waking up from slumber. Therefore the material
mind of the living entity develops when the Supersoul sits on his heart, after
which the mind, the controlling deity (moon), and then the activities of the
mind (namely thinking, feeling and willing) all take place. The activities of
the mind cannot begin without the manifestation of the heart, and the heart
becomes manifested when the Lord wants to see the activities of the material
creation.
TEXT 31
TvKcMaRMaa&SaåiDarMaedaeMaÂaiSQaDaaTav" )
>aUMYaáeJaaeMaYaa" Saá Pa[a<aae VYaaeMaaMbuvaYaui>a" )) 31 ))
tvak-carma-mäàsa-rudhiramedo-
majjästhi-dhätavaù
bhümy-ap-tejomayäù sapta
präëo vyomämbu-väyubhiù
SYNONYMS
tvak—the thin layer on the skin; carma—skin; mäàsa—flesh; rudhira—blood;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
medaù—fat; majjä—marrow; asthi—bone; dhätavaù—elements; bhümi—earth;
ap—water; tejaù—fire; mayäù—predominating; sapta—seven;
präëaù—breathing air; vyoma—sky; ambu—water; väyubhiù—by the air.
TRANSLATION
The seven elements of the body, namely the thin layer on the skin, the skin
itself, the flesh, blood, fat, marrow and bone, are all made of earth, water and
fire, whereas the life breath is produced by the sky, water and air.
PURPORT
The construction of the whole material world is prominently made by three
elements, namely earth, water and fire. But the living force is produced by sky,
air and water. So water is the common element in both the gross and subtle
forms of all material creation, and it should be noted herewith that due to
necessity, water, being most prominent in the material creation, is the
principal element of all the five. This material body is thus an embodiment of
the five elements, and the gross manifestation is perceived because of three,
namely earth, water, and fire. Sensations of touch are perceived due to the
thin layer on the skin, and bone is as good as hard stone. The breathing air of
life is produced of sky, air and water, and therefore open air, regular bath and
ample space in which to live are favorable for healthy vitality. Fresh produce
from the earth like grains and vegetables, as well as fresh water and heat, is
good for the upkeep of the gross body.
TEXT 32
Gau<aaTMak-aNaqiNd]Yaai<a >aUTaaidPa[>ava Gau<aa" )
MaNa" SavRivk-araTMaa buiÖivRjaNaæiPa<aq )) 32 ))
guëätmakänéndriyäëi
bhütädi-prabhavä guëäù
manaù sarva-vikärätmä
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
buddhir vijïäna-rüpiëé
SYNONYMS
guëa-ätmakäni—attached to the qualities; indriyäëi—the senses;
bhüta-ädi—material ego; prabhaväù—influenced by; guëäù—the modes of
material nature; manaù—the mind; sarva—all; vikära—affection (happiness
and distress); ätmä—form; buddhiù—intelligence; vijïäna—deliberation;
rüpiëé—featuring.
TRANSLATION
The sense organs are attached to the modes of material nature, and the
modes of material nature are products of the false ego. The mind is subjected to
all kinds of material experiences (happiness and distress), and the intelligence is
the feature of the mind’s deliberation.
PURPORT
Illusioned by the material nature, the living entity identifies with false ego.
More clearly, when the living entity is entrapped by the material body, he at
once identifies with the bodily relationships, forgetting his own identity as
spirit soul. This false ego associates with different modes of material nature,
and thus the senses become attached to the modes of material nature. Mind is
the instrument for feeling different material experiences, but intelligence is
deliberative and can change everything for the better. The intelligent person,
therefore, can attain salvation from the illusion of material existence by
proper use of intelligence. An intelligent person can detect the awkward
position of material existence and thus begin to inquire as to what he is, why
he is subjected to different kinds of miseries, and how to get rid of all miseries,
and thus, by good association, an advanced intelligent person can turn towards
the better life of self-realization. It is advised, therefore, that an intelligent
person associate with the great sages and saints who are on the path of
salvation. By such association, one can receive instructions which are able to
slacken the conditioned soul’s attachment for matter, and thus the intelligent
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
man gradually gets rid of the illusion of matter and false ego and is promoted to
the real life of eternity, knowledge and bliss.
TEXT 33
WTaÙGavTaae æPa& SQaUl&/ Tae VYaaôTa& MaYaa )
Maùaidi>aêavr<aEríi>abRihrav*TaMa( )) 33 ))
etad bhagavato rüpaà
sthülaà te vyähåtaà mayä
mahy-ädibhiç cävaraëair
añöabhir bahir ävåtam
SYNONYMS
etat—all these; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; rüpam—form;
sthülam—gross; te—unto you; vyähåtam—explained; mayä—by me; mahé—the
planets; ädibhiù—and so on; ca—unlimitedly; avaraëaiù—by coverings;
añöabhiù—by eight; bahiù—external; ävåtam—covered.
TRANSLATION
Thus by all this, the external feature of the Personality of Godhead is
covered by gross forms such as those of planets, which were explained to you by
me.
PURPORT
As explained in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.4), the separated material energy of
the Personality of Godhead is covered by eight kinds of material coverings:
earth, water, fire, air, sky, mind, intelligence and false ego. All these are
emanations from the Personality of Godhead as His external energy. These
coverings are just like the covering of clouds for the sun. The cloud is a
creation of the sun, yet it actually covers the eyes so that one cannot see the
sun. The sun cannot be covered by the clouds. The cloud can at utmost extend
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
a few hundreds of miles in the sky, but the sun is far greater than millions of
miles. So a hundred-mile covering is not competent to cover millions of miles.
Therefore, one of the various energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
cannot, of course, cover the Lord. But these coverings are created by Him to
cover the eyes of the conditioned souls who want to lord it over the material
nature. Actually the conditioned souls are covered by the illusory creative
cloud of matter, and the Lord reserves the right of not being exposed to their
eyes. Because they have no eyes of transcendental vision and because they
cannot see the Personality of Godhead, they therefore deny the existence of
the Lord and the transcendental form of the Lord. The covering of the
gigantic material feature is accepted by such men with a poor fund of
knowledge, and how this is so is explained in the following verse.
TEXT 34
ATa" Par& SaU+MaTaMaMaVYa¢&- iNaivRXaez<aMa( )
ANaaidMaDYaiNaDaNa& iNaTYa& vax(MaNaSa" ParMa( )) 34 ))
ataù paraà sükñmatamam
avyaktaà nirviçeñaëam
anädi-madhya-nidhanaà
nityaà väì-manasaù param
SYNONYMS
ataù—therefore; param—transcendental; sükñmatamam—finer than the
finest; avyaktam—unmanifested; nirviçeñaëam—without material features;
anädi—without beginning; madhya—without an intermediate stage;
nidhanam—without end; nityam—eternal; väk—words; manasaù—of the
mind; param—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
Therefore beyond this [gross manifestation] is a transcendental
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
manifestation finer than the finest form. It has no beginning, no intermediate
stage and no end; therefore it is beyond the limits of expression or mental
speculation and is distinct from the material conception.
PURPORT
The gross external body of the Supreme is manifested at certain intervals,
and thus the external feature or form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is not the eternal form of the Lord, which has no beginning, no intermediate
stage and no end. Anything which has a beginning, interim and end is called
material. The material world is begun from the Lord, and thus the form of the
Lord, before the beginning of the material world, is certainly transcendental to
the finest, or the finer material conception. The ether in the material world is
considered to be the finest. Finer than the ether is mind, intelligence, and
false ego. But all eight of the outward coverings are explained as outer
coverings of the Absolute Truth. The Absolute Truth is therefore beyond the
expression and speculation of the material conception. He is certainly
transcendental to all material conceptions. This is called nirviçeñaëam. One
should not, however, misunderstand nirviçeñaëam as being without any
transcendental qualifications. Viçeñaëam means qualities. Therefore nir added
to it means that he has no material qualities or variegatedness. This nullifying
expression is described in four transcendental qualifications, namely
unmanifested, transcendental, eternal, and beyond the conception of mind or
word. Beyond the limits of words means negation of the material conception.
Unless one is transcendentally situated, it is not possible to know the
transcendental form of the Lord.
TEXT 35
AMauNaq >aGavd]UPae MaYaa Tae ùNauvi<aRTae )
o>ae AiPa Na Ga*õiNTa MaaYaaSa*íe ivPaiêTa" )) 35 ))
amuné bhagavad-rüpe
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mayä te hy anuvarëite
ubhe api na gåhëanti
mäyä-såñöe vipaçcitaù
SYNONYMS
amuné—all these; bhagavat—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
rüpe—in the forms; mayä—by me; te—unto you; hi—certainly;
anuvarëite—described respectively; ubhe—both; api—also; na—never;
gåhëanti—accepts; mäyä—external; såñöe—being so manifested;
vipaù-citaù—the learned one who knows.
TRANSLATION
Neither of the above forms of the Lord, as just described unto you from the
material angle of vision, is accepted by the pure devotees of the Lord who know
Him well.
PURPORT
The impersonalists think of the Absolute Personality of Godhead in two
different ways, as above mentioned. On the one hand they worship the Lord in
His viçva-rüpa, or all-pervading universal form, and on the other they think of
the Lord’s unmanifested, indescribable, subtle form. The theories of pantheism
and monism are respectively applicable to these two conceptions of the
Supreme as gross and subtle, but both of them are rejected by the learned pure
devotees of the Lord because they are aware of the factual position. This is
very clearly mentioned in the Eleventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä, which
records Arjuna’s experience of the viçva-rüpa of the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa.
adåñöa-pürvaà håñito ’smi dåñövä
bhayena ca pravyathitaà mano me
tad eva me darçaya deva rüpaà
praséda deveça jagan-niväsa
(Bg. 11.45)
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Arjuna, as a pure devotee of the Lord, never previously saw the
contemplated universal form of the Lord (viçva-rüpa), but when he did see it,
his curiosities were satisfied. But he was not happy to see such a form of the
Lord because of his attachment as a pure devotee. He was afraid to see the
gigantic form of the Lord. He therefore prayed to the Lord to assume His
four-handed Näräyaëa or Kåñëa form, which alone could please Arjuna.
Undoubtedly the Lord has the supreme potency to exhibit Himself in
multifarious forms, but the pure devotees of the Lord are interested in His
forms as eternally exhibited in the abode of the Lord, known as the
tripäd-vibhüti or kingdom of God. The Lord in the tripäd-vibhüti abode exhibits
Himself in two forms, either with four hands or with two hands. The
viçva-rüpa exhibited in the material manifestation has unlimited hands and
unlimited dimensions with everything unlimited. The pure devotees of the
Lord worship Him in His Vaikuëöha forms as Näräyaëa or Kåñëa. Sometimes
the same Vaikuëöha forms of the Lord are in the material world also by His
grace as Çré Räma, Çré Kåñëa, Çré Narasiàhadeva, etc., and thus the pure
devotees also worship them. Usually the features shown in the material world
have no existence in the Vaikuëöha planets, and thus they are not accepted by
the pure devotees. What the pure devotees worship from the very beginning
are eternal forms of the Lord existing in the Vaikuëöha planets. The
nondevotee impersonalists imagine the material forms of the Lord, and
ultimately they merge in the impersonal brahmajyoti of the Lord, whereas the
pure devotees of the Lord are worshipers of the Lord both in the beginning
and also in the perfect stage of salvation, eternally. The worship of the pure
devotee never stops, whereas the worship of the impersonalist stops after his
attainment of salvation, when he merges in the impersonal form of the Lord
known as the brahmajyoti. Therefore the pure devotees of the Lord are
described here as vipaçcita, or the learned who are in the knowledge of the
Lord perfectly.
TEXT 36
Sa vaCYavack-TaYaa >aGavaNa( b]øæPaDa*k(- )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
NaaMaæPai§-Yaa Datae Sak-MaaRk-MaRk-" Par" )) 36 ))
sa väcya-väcakatayä
bhagavän brahma-rüpa-dhåk
näma-rüpa-kriyä dhatte
sakarmäkarmakaù paraù
SYNONYMS
saù—He; väcya—by His forms and activities; väcakatayä—by His
transcendental qualities and entourage; bhagavän—the Personality of
Godhead; brahma—absolute; rüpa-dhåk—by accepting visible forms;
näma—name; rüpa—form; kriyä—pastimes; dhatte—accepts;
sa-karma—engaged in work; akarmakaù—without being affected;
paraù—transcendence.
TRANSLATION
He, the Personality of Godhead, manifests Himself in a transcendental form,
being the subject of His transcendental name, quality, pastimes, entourage and
transcendental variegatedness. Although He is unaffected by all such activities,
He appears to be so engaged.
PURPORT
Whenever there is a need of material creation, the transcendental
Personality of Godhead accepts forms in the material world for creation,
maintenance and destruction. One should be intelligent enough to know His
activities in truth and not be biased to conclude that He descends to the
material world by accepting a form created by material nature. Any form
accepted from the material nature has its affection for everything done in the
material world. A conditioned soul who accepts a material form for undergoing
a certain term of material activities is subjected to the laws of matter. But here
in this verse it is clearly stated that although the forms and activities of the
Lord appear to be the same as those of a conditioned soul, they are
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
supernatural and impossible for the conditioned soul. He, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is always unaffected by such activities. In the
Bhagavad-gétä (4.14) the Lord says:
na mäà karmäëi limpanti
na me karma-phale spåhä
iti mäà yo ’bhijänäti
karmabhir na sa badhyate
The Lord is never affected by the activities which He apparently performs
by His different incarnations and personalities, nor does He have any desire to
achieve success by fruitive activities. The Lord is full by His different
potencies of wealth, strength, fame, beauty, knowledge and renunciation, and
thus He has no reason for physical exertion like the conditioned soul.
Therefore an intelligent person who can distinguish between the
transcendental activities of the Lord and the activities of the conditioned souls
is also not bound by the reactions of activities. The Lord as Viñëu, Brahmä and
Çiva conducts the three modes of material nature. From Viñëu is born Brahmä,
and from Brahmä is born Çiva. Sometimes Brahmä is a separated part of Viñëu,
and sometimes Brahmä is Viñëu Himself. Thus Brahmä creates the different
species of life all over the universe, which means that the Lord creates the
whole manifestation either by Himself or through the agency of His authorized
deputies.
TEXTS 37–40
Pa[JaaPaTaqNMaNaUNa( devaNa*zqNa( iPaTa*Ga<aaNa( Pa*Qak(- )
iSaÖcar<aGaNDavaRNa( ivÛaDa]aSaurGauùk-aNa( )) 37 ))
ik-àraPSarSaae NaaGaaNa( SaPaaRNa( ik-MPauåzaàraNa( )
MaaTa› r+a"iPaXaaca&ê Pa[eTa>aUTaivNaaYak-aNa( )) 38 ))
kU-ZMaa<@aeNMaadveTaal/aNa( YaaTauDaaNaaNa( Ga]haNaiPa )
%GaaNMa*GaaNa( PaéUNa( v*+aaNa( iGarqà*Pa SarqSa*PaaNa( )) 39 ))
iÜivDaaêTauivRDaa Yae_NYae Jal/SQal/Na>aaEk-Sa" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ku-Xal/aku-Xal/a iMaé[a" k-MaR<aa& GaTaYaiSTvMaa" )) 40 ))
prajä-patén manün devän
åñén pitå-gaëän påthak
siddha-cäraëa-gandharvän
vidyädhräsura-guhyakän
kinnaräpsaraso nägän
sarpän kimpuruñän narän
mätè rakñaù-piçäcäàç ca
preta-bhüta-vinäyakän
küñmäëòonmäda-vetälän
yätudhänän grahän api
khagän mågän paçün våkñän
girén nåpa sarésåpän
dvi-vidhäç catur-vidhä ye ’nye
jala-sthala-nabhaukasaù
kuçaläkuçalä miçräù
karmaëäà gatayas tv imäù
SYNONYMS
prajä-patén—Brahmä and his sons like Dakña and others; manün—the
periodical heads like Vaivasvata Manu; devän—like Indra, Candra and
Varuëa; åñén—like Bhågu and Vasiñöha; pitå-gaëän—the inhabitants of the
Pitä planets; påthak—separately; siddha—the inhabitants of the Siddha planet;
cäraëa—the inhabitants of the Cäraëa planet; gandharvän—the inhabitants
of the Gandharva planets; vidyädhra—the inhabitants of the Vidyädhara
planet; asura—the atheists; guhyakän—the inhabitants of the Yakña planet;
kinnara—the inhabitants of the Kinnara planet; apsarasaù—the beautiful
angels of the Apsarä planet; nägän—the serpentine inhabitants of Nägaloka;
sarpän—the inhabitants of Sarpaloka (snakes); kimpuruñän—the
monkey-shaped inhabitants of the Kimpuruña planet; narän—the inhabitants
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of earth; mätå—the inhabitants of Mätåloka; rakñaù—the inhabitants of the
demoniac planet; piçäcän—the inhabitants of Piçäcaloka; ca—also; preta—the
inhabitants of Pretaloka; bhüta—the evil spirits; vinäyakän—the goblins;
küñmäëòa—will-o’-the-wisp; unmäda—lunatics; vetälän—the jinn;
yätudhänän—a particular type of evil spirit; grahän—the good and evil stars;
api—also; khagän—the birds; mågän—the forest animals; paçün—the
household animals; våkñän—the ghosts; girén—the mountains; nåpa—O King;
sarésåpän—reptiles; dvi-vidhäù—the moving and the standing living entities;
catuù-vidhäù—living entities born from embryos, eggs, perspiration and seeds;
ye—others; anye—all; jala—water; sthala—land; nabha-okasaù—birds;
kuçala—in happiness; akuçaläù—in distress; miçräù—in mixed happiness and
distress; karmaëäm—according to one’s own past deeds; gatayaù—as result of;
tu—but; imäù—all of them.
TRANSLATION
O King, know from me that all living entities are created by the Supreme
Lord according to their past deeds. This includes Brahmä and his sons like
Dakña, the periodical heads like Vaivasvata Manu, the demigods like Indra,
Candra and Varuëa, the great sages like Bhågu, Vyäsa and Vasiñöha, the
inhabitants of Pitåloka and Siddhaloka, the Cäraëas, Gandharvas, Vidyädharas,
Asuras, Yakñas, Kinnaras and angels, the serpentines, the monkey-shaped
Kimpuruñas, the human beings, the inhabitants of Mätåloka, the demons,
Piçäcas, ghosts, spirits, lunatics and evil spirits, the good and evil stars, the
goblins, the animals in the forest, the birds, the household animals, the reptiles,
the mountains, the moving and standing living entities, the living entities born
from embryos, from eggs, from perspiration and from seeds, and all others,
whether they be in the water, land or sky, in happiness, in distress or in mixed
happiness and distress. All of them, according to their past deeds, are created by
the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
The varieties of living entities are mentioned in this list, and, with no
exception from the topmost planet down to the lowest planet of the universe,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
all of them in different species of life are created by the Almighty Father,
Viñëu. Therefore no one is independent of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. In the Bhagavad-gétä (14.4) the Lord therefore claims all living
entities as His offspring in the following verse:
sarva-yoniñu kaunteya
mürtayaù sambhavanti yäù
täsäà brahma mahad yonir
ahaà béja-pradaù pitä
The material nature is compared to the mother. Although every living
being is seen to come out of the mother’s body, it is still a fact that the mother
is not the ultimate cause of such a birth. The father is the ultimate cause of
birth. Without the father’s seed, no mother can give birth to a child. Therefore
the living beings in different varieties of forms and positions within the
innumerable universes are all born of the seeds of the Almighty Father, the
Personality of Godhead, and only to the man with a poor fund of knowledge
they appear to be born of the material nature. Being under the material energy
of the Supreme Lord, all living entities beginning from Brahmä down to the
insignificant ant are manifested in different bodies according to their past
deeds.
The material nature is one of the energies of the Lord (Bg. 7.4). The
material nature is inferior in comparison to the living entities, the superior
nature. The superior nature and inferior nature of the Lord combine to
manifest all universal affairs.
Some of the living entities are relatively happy in better conditions of life,
whereas others are in distressed conditions of life. But factually, none of them
are actually happy in material conditional life. No one can be happy in prison
life, although one may be a first-class prisoner and another a third-class
prisoner. The intelligent person should not try to be promoted from third-class
prison life to first-class prison life, but should try to be released from the prison
altogether. One may be promoted to first-class prisoner, but the same first-class
prisoner is again degraded to a third-class prisoner in the next term. One
should try to be free from prison life and go back home, back to Godhead. That
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
is the real goal for all types of living entities.
TEXT 41
Satv& rJaSTaMa wiTa iTaó" SaurNa*Naark-a" )
Ta}aaPYaekE-k-Xaae raJaNa( i>aÛNTae GaTaYaiñDaa )
YadEkE-k-Tarae_NYaa>Yaa& Sv>aav oPahNYaTae )) 41 ))
sattvaà rajas tama iti
tisraù sura-nå-närakäù
taträpy ekaikaço räjan
bhidyante gatayas tridhä
yadaikaikataro ’nyäbhyäà
sva-bhäva upahanyate
SYNONYMS
sattvam—the mode of goodness; rajaù—the mode of passion; tamaù—the
mode of darkness; iti—thus; tisraù—the three; sura—demigod; nå—human
being; närakäù—one who is suffering hellish conditions; tatra api—even
there; ekaikaçaù—another; räjan—O King; bhidyante—divide into;
gatayaù—movements; tridhä—three; yadä—at that time; ekaikataraù—one in
relation with another; anyäbhyäm—from the other; sva-bhävaù—habit;
upahanyate—develops.
TRANSLATION
According to the different modes of material nature—the mode of goodness,
the mode of passion and the mode of darkness—there are different living
creatures, who are known as demigods, human beings and hellish living entities.
O King, even a particular mode of nature, being mixed with the other two, is
divided into three, and thus each kind of living creature is influenced by the
other modes and acquires its habits also.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The living entities individually are being conducted by a particular mode of
nature, but at the same time there is every chance of their being influenced by
the other two. Generally, all conditioned souls in the material encagement are
influenced by the mode of passion because every one of them is trying to lord
it over the material nature to fulfill his individual desire. But in spite of the
individual mode of passion, there is always the chance of being influenced by
the other modes of nature by association. If one is in good association he can
develop the mode of goodness, and if in bad association he may develop the
mode of darkness or ignorance. Nothing is stereotyped. One can change his
habit by good or bad association, and one has to become intelligent enough to
discriminate between good and bad. The best association is the service of the
devotees of the Lord, and by that association one can become the highest
qualified man by the grace of the Lord’s pure devotees. As we have already
seen in the life of Çréla Närada Muni, he became the topmost devotee of the
Lord simply by the association of pure devotees of the Lord. By birth he was
the son of a maidservant and had no knowledge of his father and no academic
education, even of the lowest status. But simply by associating with the
devotees and by eating the remnants of their foodstuff, he gradually developed
the transcendental qualities of the devotees. By such association, his taste for
chanting and hearing the transcendental glories of the Lord became
prominent, and because the glories of the Lord are nondifferent from the Lord,
he got direct association with the Lord by means of sound representation.
Similarly, there is the life of Ajämila (Sixth Canto), who was the son of a
brähmaëa and was educated and trained properly in the discharge of the duties
of a brähmaëa, but who in spite of all this, because he contacted the bad
association of a prostitute, was put into the path of the lowest quality of
caëòäla, or the last position for a human being. Therefore the Bhägavatam
always recommends the association of the mahat, or the great soul, for opening
the gate of salvation. To associate with persons engaged in lording it over the
material world means to enter into the darkest region of hell. One should try
to raise himself by the association of the great soul. That is the way of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
perfection of life.
TEXT 42
Sa Wved& JaGaÖaTaa >aGavaNa( DaMaRæPaDa*k(- )
PauZ<aaiTa SQaaPaYaNa( ivì& iTaYaRx(NarSauraidi>a" )) 42 ))
sa evedaà jagad-dhätä
bhagavän dharma-rüpa-dhåk
puñëäti sthäpayan viçvaà
tiryaì-nara-surädibhiù
SYNONYMS
saù—He; eva—certainly; idam—this; jagat-dhätä—the maintainer of the
entire universe; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
dharma-rüpa-dhåk—assuming the form of religious principles;
puñëäti—maintains; sthäpayan—after establishing; viçvam—the universes;
tiryak—living entities lower than the human beings; nara—the human beings;
sura-ädibhiù—by the demigodly incarnations.
TRANSLATION
He, the Personality of Godhead, as the maintainer of all in the universe,
appears in different incarnations after establishing the creation, and thus He
reclaims all kinds of conditioned souls amongst the humans, the nonhumans and
the demigods.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead Viñëu incarnates Himself in different
societies of living entities to reclaim them from the clutches of illusion, and
such activities of the Lord are not limited only to human society. He
incarnates Himself even as a fish, hog, tree and many other forms, but less
intelligent persons who have no knowledge of Him deride Him even if He is in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
human society as a human being. The Lord therefore says in the Bhagavad-gétä
(9.11):
avajänanti mäà müòhä
mänuñéà tanum äçritam
paraà bhävam ajänanto
mama bhüta-maheçvaram
As we have already discussed in the previous verses, it is concluded that the
Lord is never a product of the material creation. His transcendental position is
always unchanged. He is the eternal form of knowledge and bliss, and He
executes His almighty will by His different energies. As such, He is never the
subject of reactions for any of His acts. He is transcendental to all such
conceptions of actions and reactions. Even if He is visible in the material
world, the exhibition is only of His internal energy, for He is above the good
and bad conceptions of this material world. In the material world the fish or
the hog may be considered lower than the man, but when the Lord appears as a
fish or hog, He is neither of them in the material conception. It is His causeless
mercy that He appears in every society or species of life, but He is never to be
considered one of them. Conceptions of the material world such as good and
bad, lower and upper, important and insignificant, are estimations of the
material energy, and the Supreme Lord is transcendental to all such
conceptions. The words paraà bhävam, or transcendental nature, can never be
compared to the material conception. We should not forget that the potencies
of the Almighty Lord are always the same and do not decrease because the
Lord assumes the form of a lower animal. There is no difference between Lord
Çré Räma, Lord Çré Kåñëa and His incarnations as a fish and hog. He is
all-pervading and simultaneously localized at any and every place. But the
foolish person with a poor fund of knowledge, for want of that paraà bhävam
of the Lord, cannot understand how the Supreme Lord can take the form of a
man or a fish. One compares everything to one’s own standard of knowledge,
as the frog in the well considers the sea to be like the well. The frog in the well
cannot even think of the sea, and when such a frog is informed of the
greatness of the sea, it takes the conception of the sea as being a little greater
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
than the well. As such, one who is foolish about the transcendental science of
the Lord will find it difficult to understand how Lord Viñëu can equally
manifest Himself in every society of living entities.
TEXT 43
TaTa" k-al/aiGanåd]aTMaa YaTSa*íiMadMaaTMaNa" )
SaiàYaC^iTa TaTa( k-ale/ gaNaaNaqk-iMavaiNal/" )) 43 ))
tataù kälägni-rudrätmä
yat såñöam idam ätmanaù
sanniyacchati tat käle
ghanänékam ivänilaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter, at the end; käla—destruction; agni—fire; rudra-ätmä—in
the form of Rudra; yat—whatever; såñöam—created; idam—all these;
ätmanaù—of His own; sam—completely; niyacchati—annihilates; tat käle—at
the end of the millennium; ghana-anékam—bunches of clouds; iva—like that
of; anilaù—air.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, at the end of the millennium, the Lord Himself in the form of
Rudra, the destroyer, will annihilate the complete creation as the wind displaces
the clouds.
PURPORT
This creation is very appropriately compared to clouds. Clouds are created
or situated in the sky, and when they are displaced they remain in the same
sky without manifestation. Similarly, the whole creation is made by the
Supreme Personality of God in His form of Brahmä, it is maintained by Him in
the form of Viñëu, and it is destroyed by Him in the form of Rudra, or Çiva, all
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
in due course. This creation, maintenance and destruction are nicely
explained in the Bhagavad-gétä (8.19–20) as follows:
bhüta-grämaù sa eväyaà
bhütvä bhütvä praléyate
rätry-ägame ’vaçaù pärtha
prabhavaty ahar-ägame
paras tasmät tu bhävo ’nyo
’vyakto ’vyaktät sanätanaù
yaù sa sarveñu bhüteñu
naçyatsu na vinaçyati
The nature of the material world is that it is first created very nicely, then
it develops very nicely and stays for a great number of years (even beyond the
calculation of the greatest mathematician), but after that it is again destroyed
during the night of Brahmä, without any resistance, and at the end of the
night of Brahmä it is again manifested as a creation to follow the same
principles of maintenance and destruction. The foolish conditioned soul who
has taken this temporary world as a permanent settlement has to learn
intelligently why such creation and destruction take place. The fruitive actors
in the material world are very enthusiastic in the creation of big enterprises,
big houses, big empires, big industries and so many big, big things out of the
energy and ingredients supplied by the material agent of the Supreme Lord.
With such resources, and at the cost of valuable energy, the conditioned soul
creates, satisfies his whims, but unwillingly has to depart from all his creations
and enter into another phase of life to create again and again. To give hope to
such foolish conditioned souls who waste their energy in this temporary
material world, the Lord gives information that there is another nature, which
is eternally existent without being occasionally created or destroyed, and that
the conditioned soul can understand what he should do and how his valuable
energy may be utilized. Instead of wasting his energy in matter, which is sure to
be destroyed in due course by the supreme will, the conditioned soul should
utilize his energy in the devotional service of the Lord so that he can be
transferred to the other, eternal nature, where there is no birth, no death, no
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
creation, no destruction, but permanent life instead, full of knowledge and
unlimited bliss. The temporary creation is thus exhibited and destroyed just to
give information to the conditioned soul who is attached to temporary things.
It is also meant to give him a chance for self-realization, and not for sense
gratification, which is the prime aim of all fruitive actors.
TEXT 44
wTQaM>aaveNa k-iQaTaae >aGavaNa( >aGavtaMa" )
NaeTQaM>aaveNa ih Par& d]íuMahRiNTa SaUrYa" )) 44 ))
ittham-bhävena kathito
bhagavän bhagavattamaù
nettham-bhävena hi paraà
drañöum arhanti sürayaù
SYNONYMS
ittham—in these features; bhävena—the matter of creation and destruction;
kathitaù—described; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
bhagavat-tamaù—by the great transcendentalists; na—not; ittham—in this;
bhävena—features; hi—only; param—most glorious; drañöum—to see;
arhanti—deserve; sürayaù—great devotees.
TRANSLATION
The great transcendentalists thus describe the activities of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but the pure devotees deserve to see more glorious
things in transcendence, beyond these features.
PURPORT
The Lord is not only the creator and destroyer of the material
manifestations of His different energies. He is more than a simple creator and
destroyer, for there is His feature of änanda, or His pleasure feature. This
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
pleasure feature of the Lord is understood by the pure devotees only, and not
by others. The impersonalist is satisfied simply by understanding the
all-pervasive influence of the Lord. This is called Brahman realization. Greater
than the impersonalist is the mystic who sees the Lord situated in his heart as
Paramätmä, the partial representation of the Lord. But there are pure devotees
who take part in the direct pleasure (änanda) potency of the Lord by factual
reciprocation of loving service. The Lord in His abode called the Vaikuëöha
planets, which are eternal manifestations, always remains with His associates
and enjoys transcendental loving services by His pure devotees in different
transcendental humors. The pure devotees of the Lord thus undergo a practice
of that devotional service to the Lord during the manifestation of the creation
and take full advantage of the manifestation by qualifying themselves to enter
into the kingdom of God. The Bhagavad-gétä (18.55) confirms this:
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä
viçate tad-anantaram
By development of pure devotional service one can factually know the Lord
as He is and thus be trained in the bona fide service of the Lord and be allowed
to enter into the direct association of the Lord in so many capacities. The
highest glorious association with the Lord is made possible in the planet of
Goloka Våndävana, where Lord Kåñëa enjoys Himself with the gopés and His
favorite animals, the surabhi cows. A description of this transcendental land of
Kåñëa is given in the Brahma-saàhitä, which is considered by Lord Çré
Caitanya to be the most authentic literature in this connection.
TEXT 45
NaaSYa k-MaRi<a JaNMaadaE ParSYaaNauivDaqYaTae )
k-Ta*RTvPa[iTazeDaaQa| MaaYaYaaraeiPaTa& ih TaTa( )) 45 ))
näsya karmaëi janmädau
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
parasyänuvidhéyate
kartåtva-pratiñedhärthaà
mäyayäropitaà hi tat
SYNONYMS
na—never; asya—of the creation; karmaëi—in the matter of;
janma-ädau—creation and destruction; parasya—of the Supreme;
anuvidhéyate—it is so described; kartåtva—engineering;
pratiñedha-artham—counteract; mäyayä—by the external energy; äropitam—is
manifested; hi—for; tat—the creator.
TRANSLATION
There is no direct engineering by the Lord for the creation and destruction
of the material world. What is described in the Vedas about His direct
interference is simply to counteract the idea that material nature is the creator.
PURPORT
The Vedic direction for the creation, maintenance and destruction of the
material world is this: yato vä imäni bhütäni jäyante. yena jätäni jévanti. yat
prayanty abhisaàviçanti, i.e., everything is created by Brahman, after creation
everything is maintained by Brahman, and after annihilation everything is
conserved in Brahman. Gross materialists without any knowledge of Brahman,
Paramätmä or Bhagavän conclude material nature to be the ultimate cause of
the material manifestation, and the modern scientist also shares this view that
the material nature is the ultimate cause of all the manifestations of the
material world. This view is refuted by all Vedic literature. The Vedänta
philosophy mentions that Brahman is the fountainhead of all creation,
maintenance and destruction, and Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the natural
commentation on the Vedänta philosophy, says, janmädy asya yato ’nvayäd
itarataç cärtheñv abhijïaù svaräö [SB 1.1.1], etc.
Inert matter is undoubtedly energy with potential to interact, but it has no
initiative of its own. Çrémad-Bhägavatam therefore comments on the aphorism
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
janmädy asya by saying abhijïaù and svaräö, i.e., the Supreme Brahman is not
inert matter, but He is supreme consciousness and is independent. Therefore
inert matter cannot be the ultimate cause of the creation, maintenance and
destruction of the material world. Superficially material nature appears to be
the cause of creation, maintenance and destruction, but material nature is set
into motion for creation by the supreme conscious being, the Personality of
Godhead. He is the background of all creation, maintenance and destruction,
and this is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.10):
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
The material nature is one of the energies of the Lord, and she can work
under the direction of the Lord (adhyakñeëa). When the Lord throws His
transcendental glance over the material nature, then only can the material
nature act, as a father contacts the mother, who is then able to conceive a
child. Although it appears to the layman that the mother gives birth to the
child, the experienced man knows that the father gives birth to the child. The
material nature therefore produces the moving and standing manifestations of
the material world after being contacted by the supreme father, and not
independently. Considering material nature to be the cause of creation,
maintenance, etc., is called “the logic of nipples on the neck of a goat.” The
Caitanya-caritämåta by Çréla Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja Gosvämé describes this logic
of ajä-gala-stana-nyäya as follows (as explained by His Divine Grace Çré
Çrémad Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Gosvämé Mahäräja): “The material nature,
as the material cause, is known as pradhäna, and as efficient cause is known as
mäyä. But since it is inert matter, it is not the remote cause of creation.”
Kaviräja Gosvämé states as follows:
ataeva kåñëa müla-jagat-käraëa
prakåti——käraëa yaiche ajä-gala-stana
(Cc. Ädi 5.61)
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Because Käraëärëavaçäyé Viñëu is a plenary expansion of Kåñëa, it is He
who electrifies the matter to put it in motion. The example of electrification is
quite appropriate. A piece of iron is certainly not fire, but when the iron is
made red-hot, certainly it has the quality of fire through its burning capacity.
Matter is compared to the piece of iron, and it is electrified or made red-hot by
the glance or manipulation of the supreme consciousness of Viñëu. Only by
such electrification is the energy of matter displayed in various actions and
reactions. Therefore the inert matter is neither efficient nor the material
cause of the cosmic manifestation. Çré Kapiladeva has said:
yatholmukäd visphuliìgäd
dhümäd väpi sva-sambhavät
apy ätmatvenäbhimatäd
yathägniù påthag ulmukät
(Bhäg. 3.28.40)
The original fire, its flame, its sparks and its smoke are all one, for fire is
still fire yet is different from the flame, flame is different from sparks, and
sparks are different from the smoke. In every one of them, namely in the
flames, in the sparks and in the smoke, the integrity of fire is present, yet all of
them are differently situated with different positions. The cosmic
manifestation is compared to the smoke because when smoke passes over the
sky so many forms appear, resembling many known and unknown
manifestations. The sparks are compared to living entities, and the flames are
compared to material nature (pradhäna). One must know that each and every
one of them is effective simply because of being empowered by the quality of
the original fire. Therefore all of them, namely the material nature, the cosmic
manifestation and the living entities, are but different energies of the Lord
(fire). Therefore those who accept the material nature as the cosmic
manifestation’s original cause (prakåti, the cause of creation according to
Säìkhya philosophy) are not correct in their conclusion. The material nature
has no separate existence without the Lord. Therefore, setting aside the
Supreme Lord as the cause of all causes is the logic of ajä-gala-stana-nyäya, or
trying to milk the nipples on the neck of a goat. The nipples on the neck of a
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
goat may seem like sources of milk, but to try to get milk from such nipples will
be foolish.
TEXT 46
AYa& Tau b]ø<a" k-LPa" Saivk-LPa odaôTa" )
iviDa" SaaDaar<aae Ya}a SaGaaR" Pa[ak*-TavEk*-Taa" )) 46 ))
ayaà tu brahmaëaù kalpaù
savikalpa udähåtaù
vidhiù sädhäraëo yatra
sargäù präkåta-vaikåtäù
SYNONYMS
ayam—this process of creation and annihilation; tu—but; brahmaëaù—of
Brahmä; kalpaù—his one day; sa-vikalpaù—along with the duration of the
universes; udähåtaù—exemplified; vidhiù—regulative principles;
sädhäraëaù—in summary; yatra—wherein; sargäù—creation; präkåta—in the
matter of material nature; vaikåtäù—disbursement.
TRANSLATION
This process of creation and annihilation described in summary herein is the
regulative principle during the duration of Brahmä’s one day. It is also the
regulative principle in the creation of mahat, in which the material nature is
dispersed.
PURPORT
There are three different types of creation, called mahä-kalpa, vikalpa and
kalpa. In the mahä-kalpa the Lord assumes the first puruña incarnation as
Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu with all the potencies of the mahat-tattva and the
sixteen principles of creative matter and instruments. The creative
instruments are eleven, the ingredients are five, and all of them are products
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of mahat, or materialistic ego. These creations by the Lord in His feature of
Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu are called mahä-kalpa. The creation of Brahmä and
dispersion of the material ingredients are called vikalpa, and the creation by
Brahmä in each day of his life is called kalpa. Therefore each day of Brahmä is
called a kalpa, and there are thirty kalpas in terms of Brahmä’s days. This is
also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (8.17) as follows:
sahasra-yuga-paryantam
ahar yad brahmaëo viduù
rätià yuga-sahasräntäà
te ’ho-rätra-vido janäù
In the upper planetary system the duration of one complete day and night is
equal to one complete year of this earth. This is accepted even by the modern
scientist and attested by the astronauts. Similarly, in the region of still higher
planetary systems the duration of day and night is still greater than in the
heavenly planets. The four yugas are calculated in terms of the heavenly
calendars and accordingly are twelve thousand years in terms of the heavenly
planets. This is called a divya-yuga, and one thousand divya-yugas make one
day of Brahmä. The creation during the day of Brahmä is called kalpa, and the
creation of Brahmä is called vikalpa. When vikalpas are made possible by the
breathing of Mahä-Viñëu, this is called a mahä-kalpa. There are regular and
systematic cycles of these mahä-kalpas, vikalpas and kalpas. In answer to
Mahäräja Parékñit’s question about them, Çukadeva Gosvämé answered in the
Prabhäsa-khaëòa of the Skanda Puräëa. They are as follows:
prathamaù çveta-kalpaç ca
dvitéyo néla-lohitaù
vämadevas tåtéyas tu
tato gäthäntaro ’paraù
rauravaù païcamaù proktaù
ñañöhaù präëa iti småtaù
saptamo ’tha båhat-kalpaù
kandarpo ’ñöama ucyate
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sadyotha navamaù kalpa
éçäno daçamaù småtaù
dhyäna ekädaçaù proktas
tathä särasvato ’paraù
trayodaça udänas tu
garuòo ’tha caturdaçaù
kaurmaù païcadaço jïeyaù
paurëamäsé prajäpateù
ñoòaço närasiàhas tu
samädhis tu tato ’paraù
ägneyo viñëujaù sauraù
soma-kalpas tato ’paraù
dväviàço bhävanaù proktaù
supumän iti cäparaù
vaikuëöhaç cärñöiñas tadvad
valé-kalpas tato ’paraù
saptaviàço ’tha vairäjo
gauré-kalpas tathäparaù
mäheçvaras tathä proktas
tripuro yatra ghätitaù
pitå-kalpas tathä cänte
yaù kuhür brahmaëaù småtä
Therefore the thirty kalpas of Brahmä are: (1) Çveta-kalpa, (2) Nélalohita,
(3) Vämadeva, (4) Gäthäntara, (5) Raurava, (6) Präëa, (7) Båhat-kalpa, (8)
Kandarpa, (9) Sadyotha, (10) Éçäna, (11) Dhyäna, (12) Särasvata, (13) Udäna,
(14) Garuòa, (15) Kaurma, (16) Närasiàha, (17) Samädhi, (18) Ägneya, (19)
Viñëuja, (20) Saura, (21) Soma-kalpa, (22) Bhävana, (23) Supuma, (24)
Vaikuëöha, (25) Arciña, (26) Valé-kalpa, (27) Vairäja, (28) Gauré-kalpa, (29)
Mäheçvara, (30) Paitå-kalpa.
These are Brahmä’s days only, and he has to live months and years up to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
one hundred, so we can just imagine how many creations there are in kalpas
only. Then again there are vikalpas, which are generated by the breathing of
Mahä-Viñëu, as stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (yasyaika-niçvasita-kälam
athävalambya jévanti loma-vilajä jagadaëòa-näthäù [Bs. 5.48]). The Brahmäs
live only during the breathing period of Mahä-Viñëu. So the exhaling and
inhaling of Viñëu are mahä-kalpas, and all these are due to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, for no one else is the master of all creations.
TEXT 47
PairMaa<a& c k-al/SYa k-LPal/+a<aivGa]hMa( )
YaQaa PaurSTaaÜya:YaaSYae PaaÚ& k-LPaMaQaae é*<au )) 47 ))
parimäëaà ca kälasya
kalpa-lakñaëa-vigraham
yathä purastäd vyäkhyäsye
pädmaà kalpam atho çåëu
SYNONYMS
parimäëam—measurement; ca—also; kälasya—of time; kalpa—a day of
Brahmä; lakñaëa—symptoms; vigraham—form; yathä—as much as;
purastät—hereafter; vyäkhyäsye—shall be explained; pädmam—by the name
Pädma; kalpam—the duration of a day; atho—thus; çåëu—just hear.
TRANSLATION
O King, I shall in due course explain the measurement of time in its gross
and subtle features with the specific symptoms of each, but for the present let
me explain unto you the Pädma-kalpa.
PURPORT
The present duration of a kalpa of Brahmä is called the Varäha-kalpa or
Çvetavaräha-kalpa because the incarnation of the Lord as Varäha took place
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
during the creation of Brahmä, who was born on the lotus coming out of the
abdomen of Viñëu. Therefore this Varäha-kalpa is also called Pädma-kalpa,
and this is testified by äcäryas like Jéva Gosvämé as well as Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura in pursuance of the first commentator, Svämé Çrédhara.
So there is no contradiction between the Varäha and the Pädma-kalpa of
Brahmä.
TEXT 48
XaaENak- ovac
Yadah Naae >avaNa( SaUTa +ataa >aaGavTaaetaMa" )
ccar TaqQaaRiNa >auvSTYa¤-a bNDaUNa( SauduSTYaJaaNa( )) 48 ))
çaunaka uväca
yad äha no bhavän süta
kñattä bhägavatottamaù
cacära térthäni bhuvas
tyaktvä bandhün sudustyajän
SYNONYMS
çaunakaù uväca—Çré Çaunaka Muni said; yat—as; äha—you said; naù—unto
us; bhavän—your good self; süta—O Süta; kñattä—Vidura;
bhägavata-uttamaù—one of the topmost devotees of the Lord;
cacära—practiced; térthäni—places of pilgrimage; bhuvaù—on the earth;
tyaktvä—leaving aside; bandhün—all relatives; su-dustyajän—very difficult to
give up.
TRANSLATION
Çaunaka Åñi, after hearing all about the creation, inquired from Süta
Gosvämé about Vidura, for Süta Gosvämé had previously informed him how
Vidura left home, leaving aside all his relatives, who were very difficult to
leave.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The åñis headed by Çaunaka were more anxious to know about Vidura, who
met Maitreya Åñi while traveling to the pilgrimage sites of the world.
TEXTS 49–50
+atau" k-aEXaarveSTaSYa Sa&vadae_DYaaTMaSa&ié[Ta" )
YaÜa Sa >aGava&STaSMaE Pa*íSTatvMauvac h )) 49 ))
b]Uih NaSTaidd& SaaEMYa ivdurSYa ivceiíTaMa( )
bNDauTYaaGaiNaiMata& c YaQaEvaGaTavaNa( PauNa" )) 50 ))
kñattuù kauçäraves tasya
saàvädo ’dhyätma-saàçritaù
yad vä sa bhagaväàs tasmai
påñöas tattvam uväca ha
brühi nas tad idaà saumya
vidurasya viceñöitam
bandhu-tyäga-nimittaà ca
yathaivägatavän punaù
SYNONYMS
kñattuù—of Vidura; kauçäraveù—as that of Maitreya; tasya—their;
saàvädaù—news; adhyätma—in the matter of transcendental knowledge;
saàçritaù—full of; yat—which; vä—anything else; saù—he; bhagavän—His
Grace; tasmai—unto him; påñöaù—inquired; tattvam—the truth;
uväca—answered; ha—in the past; brühi—please tell; naù—unto us;
tat—those matters; idam—here; saumya—O gentle one; vidurasya—of Vidura;
viceñöitam—activities; bandhu-tyäga—renouncing the friends; nimittam—the
cause of; ca—also; yathä—as; eva—also; ägatavän—came back; punaù—again
(at home).
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Çaunaka Åñi said: Let us know, please, what topics were discussed between
Vidura and Maitreya, who talked on transcendental subjects, and what was
inquired by Vidura and replied by Maitreya. Also please let us know the reason
for Vidura’s giving up the connection of his family members, and why he again
came home. Please also let us know the activities of Vidura while he was in the
places of pilgrimage.
PURPORT
Çré Süta Gosvämé was narrating the topics of the creation and destruction
of the material world, but it appears that the åñis headed by Çaunaka were more
inclined to hear of transcendental subjects, which are on a higher level than
the physical. There are two classes of men, namely those too addicted to the
gross body and the material world, and others, on the higher level, who are
interested more in transcendental knowledge. Çrémad-Bhägavatam gives
facility to everyone, both to the materialist and to the transcendentalist. By
hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam in the matter of the Lord’s glorious activities both
in the material world and in the transcendental world, men can derive equal
benefit. The materialists are more interested in the physical laws and how they
are acting, and they see wonders in those physical glamors. Sometimes, due to
physical glamors, they forget the glories of the Lord. They should know
definitely that physical activities and their wonders are all initiated by the
Lord. The rose in the garden gradually takes its shape and color to become
beautiful and sweet not by a blind physical law, although it appears like that.
Behind that physical law is the direction of the complete consciousness of the
Supreme Lord, otherwise things cannot take shape so systematically. The artist
draws a picture of a rose very nicely with all attention and artistic sense, and
yet it does not become as perfect as the real rose. If that is the real fact, how
can we say that the real rose has taken its shape without intelligence behind
the beauty? This sort of conclusion is due to a poor fund of knowledge. One
must know from the above description of creation and annihilation that the
supreme consciousness, being omnipresent, can take care of everything with
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
perfect attention. That is the fact of the omnipresence of the Supreme Lord.
Persons, still more foolish than the gross materialists, however, claim to be
transcendentalists and claim to have such supreme all-pervading
consciousness, but offer no proof. Such foolish persons cannot know what is
going on behind the next wall, yet they are falsely proud of possessing the
cosmic, all-pervading consciousness of the Supreme Person. For them also,
hearing of Çrémad-Bhägavatam is a great help. It will open their eyes to see that
simply by claiming supreme consciousness one does not become supremely
conscious. One has to prove in the physical world that he has such supreme
consciousness. The åñis of Naimiñäraëya, however, were above the gross
materialists and the false transcendentalists, and thus they were always
anxious to know the real truth in transcendental matters, as discussed by
authorities.
TEXT 51
SaUTa ovac
raja Parqi+aTaa Pa*íae YadvaecNMahaMauiNa" )
TaÜae_i>aDaaSYae é*<auTa raj" Pa[énaNauSaarTa" )) 51 ))
süta uväca
räjïä parékñitä påñöo
yad avocan mahä-muniù
tad vo ’bhidhäsye çåëuta
räjïaù praçnänusärataù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé replied; räjïä—by the King; parékñitä—by
Parékñit; påñöaù—as asked; yat—what; avocat—spoke; mahä-muniù—the great
sage; tat—that very thing; vaù—unto you; abhidhäsye—I shall explain;
çåëuta—please hear; räjïaù—by the King; praçna—question; anusärataù—in
accordance with.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé explained: I shall now explain to you the very subjects
explained by the great sage in answer to King Parékñit’s inquiries. Please hear
them attentively.
PURPORT
Any question that is put forward may be answered by quoting the authority,
and that satisfies the saner section. That is the system even in the law court.
The best lawyer gives evidence from the past judgment of the court without
taking much trouble to establish his case. This is called the paramparä system,
and learned authorities follow it without manufacturing rubbish
interpretations.
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
(Brahma-saàhitä 5.1)
Let us all obey the Supreme Lord, whose hand is in everything, without
exception.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Tenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Bhägavatam Is the Answer to All Questions.”
END OF THE SECOND CANTO
Srimad Bhagavatam Second Canto
“The Cosmic Manifestation”
e-book
This e-book and others are available for download at:
www.e-vedas.com
Hard bound books may be purchased at:
www.thekrishnastore.com
Email comments or questions to:
comments@evedas.com
This e-book was completed on November 16,2005
e-books copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved
www.krishna.com
Distributed by e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers