"Srimad Bhagavatam Seventh Canto"
by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE:
This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of this book, and is NOT FOR
RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only,
under the "fair use" guidelines established by international copyright laws. You
may use this electronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your
own private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, student
papers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluation copy to
others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyright information intact and
do not add or subtract anything to this file and its contents. You may not reproduce
more than ten percent (10%) of this book in any medium without the express
written permission from the copyright holders.
Reference any excerpts in the following way: “Excerpted from “Srimad
Bhagavatam Seventh Canto” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy
of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.krishna.com.”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2004 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90034, USA. All
rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluate
dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,
www.krishna.com.

About the Author
His Divine Grace AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most
distinguished teacher of Vedic religion and thought, is the author of
Bhagavad-gita As It Is, Srimad-Bhagavatam, The Sri Isopanisad and many
other English versions of Vedic literature. He is the Founder-Arcarya of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness, which has hundreds of
centers throughout the world.
For more information about His Divine Grace visit:
http://www.krishna.com/newsite/main.php?id=7
1
1. The Supreme Lord Is Equal to Everyone
In this chapter, in response to a question by Mahäräja Parékñit, Çukadeva
Gosvämé gives his conclusions concerning how the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, although the Supersoul, friend and protector of everyone, killed the
Daityas, the demons, for the sake of Indra, the King of heaven. In his
statements, he totally refutes the arguments of people in general who accuse
the Supreme Lord of partiality. Çukadeva Gosvämé proves that because the
body of the conditioned soul is infected by the three qualities of nature,
dualities arise such as enmity and friendship, attachment and detachment. For
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, however, there are no such dualities.
Even eternal time cannot control the activities of the Lord. Eternal time is
created by the Lord, and it acts under His control. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, therefore, is always transcendental to the influence of the modes of
nature, mäyä, the Lord's external energy, which acts in creation and
annihilation. Thus all the demons killed by the Supreme Lord attain salvation
immediately.
The second question raised by Parékñit Mahäräja concerns how Çiçupäla,
although inimical toward Kåñëa from his very childhood and always
blaspheming Kåñëa, attained salvation in oneness when Kåñëa killed him.
Çukadeva Gosvämé explains that because of their offenses at the feet of
devotees, two attendants of the Lord in Vaikuëöha named Jaya and Vijaya
became Hiraëyakaçipu and Hiraëyäkña in Satya-yuga, Rävaëa and
Kumbhakarëa in the next yuga, Tretä-yuga, and Çiçupäla and Dantavakra at
the end of Dväpara-yuga. Because of their fruitive acts, Jaya and Vijaya agreed
to become the Lord's enemies, and when killed in that mentality, they attained
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
2
salvation in oneness. Thus even if one thinks of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in envy, he attains salvation. What then is to be said of devotees who
always engage in the Lord's service with love and faith?
TEXT 1
é[qraJaaevac
SaMa" iPa[Ya" Sauôd(b]øNa( >aUTaaNaa& >aGavaNa( SvYaMa( )
wNd]SYaaQaeR k-Qa& dETYaaNavDaqiÜzMaae YaQaa )) 1 ))
çré-räjoväca
samaù priyaù suhåd brahman
bhütänäà bhagavän svayam
indrasyärthe kathaà daityän
avadhéd viñamo yathä
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—Mahäräja Parékñit said; samaù—equal; priyaù—beloved;
suhåt—friend; brahman—O brähmaëa (Çukadeva); bhütänäm—toward all
living entities; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord, Viñëu; svayam—Himself;
indrasya—of Indra; arthe—for the benefit; katham—how; daityän—the
demons; avadhét—killed; viñamaù—partial; yathä—as if.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit inquired: My dear brähmaëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Viñëu, being everyone's well-wisher, is equal and extremely dear to
everyone. How, then, did He become partial like a common man for the sake of
Indra and thus kill Indra's enemies? How can a person equal to everyone be
partial to some and inimical toward others?
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
3
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (9.29) the Lord says, samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu na me dveñyo
'sti na priyaù: "I am equal to everyone. No one is dear to Me, nor is anyone My
enemy." In the previous canto, however, it has been observed that the Lord
sided with Indra by killing the demons on his account (hata-puträ ditiù
çakra-pärñëi-gräheëa viñëunä). Therefore, the Lord was clearly partial to Indra,
although He is the Supersoul in everyone's heart. The soul is extremely dear to
everyone, and similarly the Supersoul is also dear to everyone. Thus there
cannot be any faulty action on the part of the Supersoul. The Lord is always
kind to all living entities, irrespective of form and situation, yet He took the
side of Indra just like an ordinary friend. This was the subject of Parékñit
Mahäräja's inquiry. As a devotee of Lord Kåñëa, he knew very well that Kåñëa
cannot be partial to anyone, but when he saw that Kåñëa acted as the enemy of
the demons, he was somewhat doubtful. Therefore he posed this question to
Çukadeva Gosvämé for a clear answer.
A devotee cannot accept that Lord Viñëu has material qualifications.
Mahäräja Parékñit knew perfectly well that Lord Viñëu, being transcendental,
has nothing to do with material qualities, but to confirm his conviction he
wanted to hear from the authority Çukadeva Gosvämé. Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura says, samasya kathaà vaiñamyam: since the Lord is equally
disposed toward everyone, how can He be partial? Priyasya katham asureñu
préty-abhävaù. The Lord, being the Supersoul, is extremely dear to everyone.
Why, then, should the Lord display unsympathetic behavior toward the asuras?
How is this impartial? Suhådaç ca kathaà teñv asauhärdam. Since the Lord says
that He is suhådaà sarva-bhütänäm [Bg. 5.29], the well-wisher of all living
entities, how could He act with partiality by killing demons? These questions
arose in the heart of Parékñit Mahäräja, and therefore he inquired from
Çukadeva Gosvämé.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
4
TEXT 2
Na ùSYaaQaR" SaurGa<aE" Saa+aaià"é[eYaSaaTMaNa" )
NaEvaSaure>Yaae ivÜezae NaaeÜeGaêaGau<aSYa ih )) 2 ))
na hy asyärthaù sura-gaëaiù
säkñän niùçreyasätmanaù
naiväsurebhyo vidveño
nodvegaç cäguëasya hi
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—certainly; asya—His; arthaù—benefit, interest;
sura-gaëaiù—with the demigods; säkñät—personally; niùçreyasa—of the
highest bliss; ätmanaù—whose nature; na—not; eva—certainly;
asurebhyaù—for the demons; vidveñaù—envy; na—not; udvegaù—fear;
ca—and; aguëasya—who possesses no material qualities; hi—certainly.
TRANSLATION
Lord Viñëu Himself, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the reservoir of
all pleasure. Therefore, what benefit would He derive from siding with the
demigods? What interest would He fulfill in this way? Since the Lord is
transcendental, why should He fear the asuras, and how could He be envious of
them?
PURPORT
We should always remember the distinction between spiritual and material.
That which is material is infected by material qualities, but these qualities
cannot touch that which is spiritual, or transcendental. Kåñëa is absolute,
whether He is in the material world or spiritual world. When we see partiality
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
5
in Kåñëa, this vision is due to His external energy. Otherwise how could His
enemies attain salvation after being killed by Him? Everyone who deals with
the Supreme Personality of Godhead gradually acquires the qualities of the
Lord. The more one advances in spiritual consciousness, the less he is affected
by the duality of material qualities. The Supreme Lord, therefore, must
certainly be freed from these qualities. His enmity and friendship are external
features presented by the material energy. He is always transcendental. He is
absolute, whether He kills or bestows His favor.
Envy and friendship arise in one who is imperfect. We fear our enemies
because in the material world we are always in need of help. The Lord,
however, does not need anyone's help, for He is ätmäräma. The Lord says in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.26):
patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà
yo me bhaktyä prayacchati
tad ahaà bhakty-upahåtam
açnämi prayatätmanaù
"If a devotee offers Me with devotion a little leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I
shall accept it." Why does the Lord say this? Is He dependent on the offering of
the devotee? He is not actually dependent, but He likes to be dependent upon
His devotee. This is His mercy. Similarly, He does not fear the asuras. Thus
there is no question of partiality in the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 3
wiTa Na" SauMaha>aaGa NaaraYa<aGau<aaNa( Pa[iTa )
Sa&XaYa" SauMahaÅaTaSTaÙva&X^etauMahRiTa )) 3 ))
iti naù sumahä-bhäga
näräyaëa-guëän prati
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
6
saàçayaù sumahäï jätas
tad bhaväàç chettum arhati
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; naù—our; su-mahä-bhäga—O glorious one; näräyaëa-guëän—the
qualities of Näräyaëa; prati—toward; saàçayaù—doubt; su-mahän—very
great; jätaù—born; tat—that; bhavän—Your Lordship; chettum arhati—please
dispel.
TRANSLATION
O greatly fortunate and learned brähmaëa, whether Näräyaëa is partial or
impartial has become a subject of great doubt. Kindly dispel my doubt with
positive evidence that Näräyaëa is always neutral and equal to everyone.
PURPORT
Since Lord Näräyaëa is absolute, His transcendental qualities are described
as one. Thus His punishments and His offerings of favor are both of the same
value. Essentially, His inimical actions are not displays of enmity toward His
so-called enemies, but in the material field one thinks that Kåñëa is favorable
to devotees and unfavorable to nondevotees. When Kåñëa finally instructs in
Bhagavad-gétä, sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66],
this is meant not only for Arjuna but for every living entity within this
universe.
TEXTS 4-5
é[q‰izåvac
SaaDau Pa*í& MaharaJa hreêirTaMad(>auTaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
7
Yad( >aaGavTaMaahaTMYa& >aGavÙi¢-vDaRNaMa( )) 4 ))
GaqYaTae ParMa& Pau<YaMa*izi>aNaaRrdaidi>a" )
NaTva k*-Z<aaYa MauNaYae k-QaiYaZYae hre" k-QaaMa( )) 5 ))
çré-åñir uväca
sädhu påñöaà mahäräja
hareç caritam adbhutam
yad bhägavata-mähätmyaà
bhagavad-bhakti-vardhanam
géyate paramaà puëyam
åñibhir näradädibhiù
natvä kåñëäya munaye
kathayiñye hareù kathäm
SYNONYMS
çré-åñiù uväca—the sage Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; sädhu—excellent;
påñöam—inquiry; mahä-räja—O great King; hareù—of the Supreme Lord,
Hari; caritam—activities; adbhutam—wonderful; yat—from which;
bhägavata—of the Lord's devotee (Prahläda); mähätmyam—the glories;
bhagavat-bhakti—devotion to the Lord; vardhanam—increasing; géyate—is
sung; paramam—foremost; puëyam—pious; åñibhiù—by the sages;
närada-ädibhiù—headed by Çré Närada Muni; natvä—after offering
obeisances; kåñëäya—to Kåñëa Dvaipäyana Vyäsa; munaye—the great sage;
kathayiñye—I shall narrate; hareù—of Hari; kathäm—the topics.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, you have put before
me an excellent question. Discourses concerning the activities of the Lord, in
which the glories of His devotees are also found, are extremely pleasing to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
8
devotees. Such wonderful topics always counteract the miseries of the
materialistic way of life. Therefore great sages like Närada always speak upon
Çrémad-Bhägavatam because it gives one the facility to hear and chant about the
wonderful activities of the Lord. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto
Çréla Vyäsadeva and then begin describing topics concerning the activities of
Lord Hari.
PURPORT
In this verse Çukadeva Gosvämé offers his respectful obeisances kåñëäya
munaye, which means to Kåñëa Dvaipäyana Vyäsa. One must first offer one's
respectful obeisances to one's spiritual master. Çukadeva Gosvämé's spiritual
master is his father, Vyäsadeva, and therefore he first offers his respectful
obeisances to Kåñëa Dvaipäyana Vyäsa and then begins describing topics of
Lord Hari.
Whenever there is an opportunity to hear about the transcendental
activities of the Lord, we must take it. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu recommends,
kértanéyaù sadä hariù: [Cc. Ädi 17.31] one should always engage in kåñëa-kathä
by chanting and talking about Kåñëa and hearing about Him. That is the only
occupation of a Kåñëa conscious person.
TEXT 6
iNaGauR<aae_iPa ùJaae_VYa¢-ae >aGavaNa( Pa[k*-Tae" Par" )
SvMaaYaaGau<aMaaivXYa baDYabaDak-Taa& GaTa" )) 6 ))
nirguëo 'pi hy ajo 'vyakto
bhagavän prakåteù paraù
sva-mäyä-guëam äviçya
bädhya-bädhakatäà gataù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
9
SYNONYMS
nirguëaù—without material qualities; api—although; hi—certainly;
ajaù—unborn; avyaktaù—unmanifest; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord;
prakåteù—to material nature; paraù—transcendental; sva-mäyä—of His own
energy; guëam—material qualities; äviçya—entering; bädhya—obligation;
bädhakatäm—the condition of being obliged; gataù—accepts.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, is always transcendental to
material qualities, and therefore He is called nirguëa, or without qualities.
Because He is unborn, He does not have a material body to be subjected to
attachment and hatred. Although the Lord is always above material existence,
through His spiritual potency He appeared and acted like an ordinary human
being, accepting duties and obligations, apparently like a conditioned soul.
PURPORT
So-called attachment, detachment and obligations pertain to the material
nature, which is an emanation from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but
whenever the Lord descends and acts in this material world, He does so in His
spiritual position. Although His activities materially appear different,
spiritually they are absolute and nondifferent. Thus it is an imposition upon
the Supreme Lord to say that He is envious of anyone or friendly to anyone.
In Bhagavad-gétä (9.11) the Lord clearly says, avajänanti mäà müòhä
mänuñéà tanum äçritam: "Fools deride Me when I descend in a human form."
Kåñëa appears on this earth or within this universe without any change in His
spiritual body or spiritual qualities. Indeed, He is never influenced by the
material qualities. He is always free from such qualities, but He appears to act
under material influence. This understanding is äropita, or an imposition.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
10
Therefore Kåñëa says, janma karma ca me divyam: [Bg. 4.9] whatever He does,
being always transcendental, has nothing to do with material qualities. Evaà
yo vetti tattvataù: only devotees can understand the truth of how He acts. The
fact is that Kåñëa is never partial to anyone. He is always equal to everyone,
but because of imperfect vision, influenced by material qualities, one imposes
material qualities upon Kåñëa, and when one does so he becomes a mudha, a
fool. When one can properly understand the truth, one becomes devoted and
nirguëa, free from material qualities. Simply by understanding the activities of
Kåñëa one can become transcendental, and as soon as one is transcendental he
is fit to be transferred to the transcendental world. Tyaktvä dehaà punar
janma naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna: [Bg. 4.9] one who understands the activities of
the Lord in truth is transferred to the spiritual world after he gives up his
material body.
TEXT 7
Satv& rJaSTaMa wiTa Pa[k*-TaeNaaRTMaNaae Gau<aa" )
Na Taeza& YauGaPad]aJaNa( haSa oçaSa Wv va )) 7 ))
sattvaà rajas tama iti
prakåter nätmano guëäù
na teñäà yugapad räjan
hräsa ulläsa eva vä
SYNONYMS
sattvam—the mode of goodness; rajaù—the mode of passion; tamaù—the
mode of ignorance; iti—thus; prakåteù—of material nature; na—not;
ätmanaù—of the spirit soul; guëäù—qualities; na—not; teñäm—of them;
yugapat—simultaneously; räjan—O King; hräsaù—diminution;
ulläsaù—prominence; eva—certainly; vä—or.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
11
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, the material qualities—sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and
tamo-guëa—all belong to the material world and do not even touch the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. These three guëas cannot act by increasing or
decreasing simultaneously.
PURPORT
The original position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is one of
equality. There is no question of His being influenced by sattva-guëa,
rujo-guëa or tamo-guëa, for these material qualities cannot touch the Supreme
Lord. The Lord is therefore called the supreme éçvara. Éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù:
[Bs. 5.1] He is the supreme controller. He controls the material qualities (daivé
hy eñä guëa-mayé mama mäyä [Bg. 7.14]). Mayädhyakñena prakåtiù süyate: [Bg.
9.10] material nature (prakåti) works under His order. How, then, can He be
under the qualities of prakåti? Kåñëa is never influenced by the material
qualities. Therefore there is no question of partiality in the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 8
JaYak-ale/ Tau SatvSYa devzsNa( rJaSaae_SauraNa( )
TaMaSaae Ya+ar+aa&iSa TaTk-al/aNauGau<aae_>aJaTa( )) 8 ))
jaya-käle tu sattvasya
devarñén rajaso 'surän
tamaso yakña-rakñäàsi
tat-kälänuguëo 'bhajat
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
12
SYNONYMS
jaya-käle—in the time of prominence; tu—indeed; sattvasya—of goodness;
deva—the demigods; åñén—and the sages; rajasaù—of passion; asurän—the
demons; tamasaù—of ignorance; yakña-rakñäàsi—the Yakñas and Räkñasas;
tat-käla-anuguëaù—according to the particular time; abhajat—fostered.
TRANSLATION
When the quality of goodness is prominent, the sages and demigods flourish
with the help of that quality, with which they are infused and surcharged by
the Supreme Lord. Similarly, when the mode of passion is prominent the
demons flourish, and when ignorance is prominent the Yakñas and Räkñasas
flourish. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is present in everyone's heart,
fostering the reactions of sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not partial to anyone. The
conditioned soul is under the influence of the various modes of material
nature, and behind material nature is the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
but one's victory and loss under the influence of sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and
tamo-guëa are reactions of these modes, not of the Supreme Lord's partiality.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, in the Bhägavata-sandarbha, has clearly said:
sattvädayo na santéçe
yatra ca präkåtä guëäù
sa çuddhaù sarva-çuddhebhyaù
pumän ädhyaù prasédatu
hlädiné sandhiné samvit
tvayy ekä sarva-saàsthitau
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
13
hläda-täpa-karé miçrä
tvayi no guëa-varjite
According to this statement of the Bhägavata-sandarbha, the Supreme Lord,
being always transcendental to the material qualities, is never affected by the
influence of these qualities. This same characteristic is also present in the
living being, but because he is conditioned by material nature, even the
pleasure potency of the Lord is manifested in the conditioned soul as
troublesome. In the material world the pleasure enjoyed by the conditioned
soul is followed by many painful conditions. For instance, we have seen that in
the two great wars, which were conducted by the rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa,
both parties were actually ruined. The German people declared war against the
English to ruin them, but the result was that both parties were ruined.
Although the Allies were apparently victorious, at least on paper, actually
neither of them were victorious. Therefore it should be concluded that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is not partial to anyone. Everyone works
under the influence of various modes of material nature, and when the various
modes are prominent, the demigods or demons appear victorious under the
influence of these modes.
Everyone enjoys the fruits of his qualitative activities. This is also
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (14.11-13):
sarva-dväreñu dehe 'smin
prakäça upajäyate
jïänaà yadä tadä vidyäd
vivåddhaà sattvam ity uta
lobhaù pravåttir ärambhaù
karmaëäm açamaù spåhä
rajasy etäni jäyante
vivåddhe bharatarñabha
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
14
aprakäço 'pravåttiç ca
pramädo moha eva ca
tamasy etäni jäyante
vivåddhe kuru-nandana
"The manifestations of the modes of goodness can be experienced when all the
gates of the body are illumined by knowledge.
"O chief of the Bhäratas, when there is an increase in the mode of passion,
the symptoms of great attachment, uncontrollable desire, hankering, and
intense endeavor develop.
"O son of Kuru, when there is an increase in the mode of ignorance,
madness, illusion, inertia and darkness are manifested."
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is present in everyone's heart,
simply gives the results of the increase in the various qualities, but He is
impartial. He supervises victory and loss, but He does not take part in them.
The various modes of material nature do not work all at once. The
interactions of these modes are exactly like seasonal changes. Sometimes there
is an increment of rajo-guëa, sometimes of tamo-guëa and sometimes
sattva-guëa. Generally the demigods are surcharged with sattva-guëa, and
therefore when the demons and the demigods fight, the demigods are
victorious because of the prominence of their sattva-guëa qualities. However,
this is not the partiality of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 9
JYaaeiTaraidirva>aaiTa SaºaTaaà ivivCYaTae )
ivdNTYaaTMaaNaMaaTMaSQa& MaiQaTva k-vYaae_NTaTa" )) 9 ))
jyotir-ädir iväbhäti
saìghätän na vivicyate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
15
vidanty ätmänam ätma-sthaà
mathitvä kavayo 'ntataù
SYNONYMS
jyotiù—fire; ädiù—and other elements; iva—just as; äbhäti—appear;
saìghätät—from the bodies of demigods and others; na—not; vivicyate—are
distinguished; vidanti—perceive; ätmänam—the Supersoul;
ätma-stham—situated in the heart; mathitvä—by discerning; kavayaù—expert
thinkers; antataù—within.
TRANSLATION
The all-pervading Personality of Godhead exists within the heart of every
living being, and an expert thinker can perceive how He is present there to a
large or small extent. Just as one can understand the supply of fire in wood, the
water in a waterpot, or the sky within a pot, one can understand whether a
living entity is a demon or a demigod by understanding that living entity's
devotional performances. A thoughtful man can understand how much a person
is favored by the Supreme Lord by seeing his actions.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (10.41) the Lord says:
yad yad vibhütimat sattvaà
çrémad ürjitam eva vä
tat tad evävagaccha tvaà
mama tejo-'àça-sambhavam
"Know that all beautiful, glorious and mighty creations spring from but a spark
of My splendor." We have the practical experience of seeing that one person is
able to do very wonderful things whereas another cannot do those same things
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
16
and cannot even do things that require only a little common sense. Therefore,
how much a devotee has been favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead
can be tested by the activities the devotee has performed. In Bhagavad-gétä
(10.10) the Lord also says:
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
[Bg. 10.10]
"To those who are constantly devoted and who worship Me with love, I give
the understanding by which they can come to Me." This is very practical. A
teacher instructs the student if the student is capable of taking more and more
instructions. Otherwise, in spite of being instructed by the teacher, the
student cannot make strides in his understanding. This has nothing to do with
partiality. When Kåñëa says teñäà satata-yuktänäà bhajatäà préti-pürvakam/
dadämi buddhi-yogaà tam, this indicates that Kåñëa is prepared to give
bhakti-yoga to everyone, but one must be capable of receiving it. That is the
secret. Thus when a person exhibits wonderful devotional activities, a
thoughtful man understands that Kåñëa has been more favorable to this
devotee.
This is not difficult to understand, but envious persons do not accept that
Kåñëa has bestowed His favor upon a particular devotee in accordance with his
advanced position. Such foolish persons become envious and try to minimize
an advanced devotee's activities. That is not Vaiñëavism. A Vaiñëava should
appreciate the service rendered to the Lord by other Vaiñëavas. Therefore a
Vaiñëava is described in Çrémad-Bhägavatam as nirmatsara. Vaiñëavas are
never envious of other Vaiñëavas or of anyone else, and therefore they are
called nirmatsaräëäà satäm.
As Bhagavad-gétä informs us, one can understand how one is saturated with
sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa or tamo-guëa. In the examples given herewith, fire
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
17
represents the mode of goodness. One can understand the constitution of a
container for wood, petrol or other inflammable substances by the quantity of
the fire. Similarly, water represents rajo-guëa, the mode of passion. A small
skin and the vast Atlantic Ocean both contain water, and by seeing the
quantity of water in a container one can understand the size of the container.
The sky represents the mode of ignorance. The sky is present in a small
earthen pot and also in outer space. Thus by proper judgment one can see who
is a devatä, or demigod, and who is an asura, Yakña or Räkñasa according to the
quantities of sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa. One cannot judge whether
a person is a devatä, an asura or a Räkñasa by seeing him, but a sane man can
understand this by the activities such a person performs. A general description
is given in the Padma Puräëa: viñëu-bhaktaù småto daiva äsuras tad-viparyayaù.
A devotee of Lord Viñëu is a demigod, whereas an asura or Yakña is just the
opposite. An asura is not a devotee of Lord Viñëu; instead, for his sense
gratification he is a devotee of the demigods, bhütas, pretas and so on. Thus
one can judge who is a devatä, who is a Räkñasa and who is an asura by how
they conduct their activities.
The word ätmänam in this verse means paramätmänam. The Paramätmä, or
Supersoul, is situated in the core of everyone's heart (antataù). This is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (18.61). Éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna
tiñöhati. The éçvara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, being situated in
everyone's heart, gives directions to everyone in terms of one's capabilities in
taking the instructions. The instructions of Bhagavad-gétä are open to
everyone, but some people understand them properly, whereas others
understand them so improperly that they cannot even believe in the existence
of Kåñëa, although reading Kåñëa's book. Although the Gétä says çré-bhagavän
uväca, indicating that Kåñëa spoke, they cannot understand Kåñëa. This is due
to their misfortune or incapability, which is caused by rajo-guëa and
tamo-guëa, the modes of passion and ignorance. It is because of these modes
that they cannot even understand Kåñëa, whereas an advanced devotee like
Arjuna understands Him and glorifies Him, saying, paraà brahma paraà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
18
dhäma pavitraà paramaà bhavän: [Bg. 10.12] "You are the Supreme Brahman,
the supreme abode and purifier." Kåñëa is open to everyone, but one needs the
capability to understand Him.
By external features one cannot understand who is favored by Kåñëa and
who is not. According to one's attitude, Kåñëa becomes one's direct adviser, or
Kåñëa becomes unknown. This is not Kåñëa's partiality; it is His response to
one's ability to understand Him. According to one's receptiveness—whether
one be a devatä, asura, Yakña or Räkñasa—Kåñëa's quality is proportionately
exhibited. This proportionate exhibition of Kåñëa's power is misunderstood by
less intelligent men to be Kåñëa's partiality, but actually it is no such thing.
Kåñëa is equal to everyone, and according to one's ability to receive the favor
of Kåñëa, one advances in Kåñëa consciousness. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura gives a practical example in this connection. In the sky there are
many luminaries. At night, even in darkness, the moon is extremely brilliant
and can be directly perceived. The sun is also extremely brilliant. When
covered by clouds, however, these luminaries are not distinctly visible.
Similarly, the more one advances in sattva-guëa, the more his brilliance is
exhibited by devotional service, but the more one is covered by rajo-guëa and
tamo-guëa, the less visible his brilliance, for he is covered by these qualities.
The visibility of one's qualities does not depend on the partiality of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; it is due to various coverings in different
proportions. Thus one can understand how far he has advanced in terms of
sattva-guëa and how much he is covered by rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa.
TEXT 10
Yada iSaSa*+au" Paur AaTMaNa" Parae
rJa" Sa*JaTYaez Pa*Qak(- SvMaaYaYaa )
Satv& ivic}aaSau irr&Saurqìr"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
19
XaiYaZYaMaa<aSTaMa wRrYaTYaSaaE )) 10 ))
yadä sisåkñuù pura ätmanaù paro
rajaù såjaty eña påthak sva-mäyayä
sattvaà viciträsu riraàsur éçvaraù
çayiñyamäëas tama érayaty asau
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; sisåkñuù—desiring to create; puraù—material bodies;
ätmanaù—for the living entities; paraù—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; rajaù—the mode of passion; såjati—manifests; eñaù—He;
påthak—separately, predominantly; sva-mäyayä—by His own creative energy;
sattvam—the mode of goodness; viciträsu—in various types of bodies;
riraàsuù—desiring to act; éçvaraù—the Personality of Godhead;
çayiñyamäëaù—being about to conclude; tamaù—the mode of ignorance;
érayati—causes to rise; asau—that Supreme.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead creates different types of bodies,
offering a particular body to each living entity according to his character and
fruitive actions, the Lord revives all the qualities of material
nature—sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa. Then, as the Supersoul, He
enters each body and influences the qualities of creation, maintenance and
annihilation, using sattva-guëa for maintenance, rajo-guëa for creation and
tamo-guëa for annihilation.
PURPORT
Although material nature is conducted by the three qualities—sattva-guëa,
rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa—nature is not independent. As the Lord says in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
20
Bhagavad-gétä (9.10):
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunté, and it is
producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is
created and annihilated again and again." The different changes in the
material world take place as actions and reactions of the three guëas, but above
the three guëas is their director, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the
various types of bodies given to the living entities by material nature
(yanträrüòhäni mäyayä), either sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa or tamo-guëa is
prominent. The body is produced by material nature according to the direction
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore it is said here, yadä sisåkñuù
pura ätmanaù paraù, indicating that the body is certainly created by the Lord.
Karmaëä daiva-netreëa: [SB 3.31.1] according to the karma of the living entity,
a body is prepared under the Supreme Lord's supervision. Whether the body is
of sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa or tamo-guëa, everything is done by the direction of
the Supreme Lord through the agency of the external energy (påthak
sva-mäyayä). In this way, in different types of bodies, the Lord (éçvara) gives
directions as Paramätmä, and again, to destroy the body, He employs the
tamo-guëa. This is the way the living entities receive different types of bodies.
TEXT 11
k-al&/ crNTa& Sa*JaTaqXa Aaé[Ya& )
Pa[DaaNaPauM>Yaa& Nardev SaTYak*-Ta( )) 11 ))
kälaà carantaà såjatéça äçrayaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
21
pradhäna-pumbhyäà nara-deva satya-kåt
SYNONYMS
kälam—time; carantam—moving; såjati—creates; éçaù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; äçrayam—shelter; pradhäna—for the material energy;
pumbhyäm—and the living entity; nara-deva—O ruler of men; satya—true;
kåt—creator.
TRANSLATION
O great King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the controller of the
material and spiritual energies, who is certainly the creator of the entire cosmos,
creates the time factor to allow the material energy and the living entity to act
within the limits of time. Thus the Supreme Personality is never under the time
factor nor under the material energy.
PURPORT
One should not think that the Lord is dependent on the time factor. He
actually creates the situation by which material nature acts and by which the
conditioned soul is placed under material nature. Both the conditioned soul
and the material nature act within the time factor, but the Lord is not subject
to the actions and reactions of time, for time has been created by Him. To be
more clear, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that creation,
maintenance and annihilation are all under the supreme will of the Lord.
In Bhagavad-gétä (4.7) the Lord says:
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
22
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bhärata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend
Myself." Since Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the controller of
everything, when He appears He is not within the limitations of material time
(janma karma ca me divyam [Bg. 4.9]). In this verse the words kälaà carantaà
såjatéça äçrayam indicate that although the Lord acts within time, whether
sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa or tamo-guëa is prominent, one should not think that
the Lord is under time's control. Time is within His control, for He creates
time to act in a certain way; He is not working under the control of time. The
creation of the material world is one of the Lord's pastimes. Everything is fully
under His control. Since creation takes place when rajo-guëa is prominent, the
Lord creates the necessary time to give facilities for rajo-guëa. Similarly, He
also creates the necessary times for maintenance and annihilation. Thus this
verse establishes that the Lord is not under the limitations of time.
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä, éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù: Kåñëa is the
supreme controller. Sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù: [Bs. 5.1] He possesses a blissful,
spiritual body. Anädiù: He is not subordinate to anything. As the Lord
confirms in Bhagavad-gétä (7.7), mattaù parataraà nänyat kiïcid asti
dhanaïjaya: "O conqueror of wealth [Arjuna], there is no truth superior to
Me." Nothing can be above Kåñëa, for He is the controller and creator of
everything.
The Mäyävädé philosophers say that this material world is mithyä, false, and
that one should therefore not bother about this mithyä creation (brahma
satyaà jagan mithyä). But this is not correct. Here it is said, satya-kåt: whatever
is created by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, satyaà param, cannot be
called mithyä. The cause of the creation is satya, true, so how can the effect of
the cause be mithyä? The very word satya-kåt is used to establish that
everything created by the Lord is factual, never false. The creation may be
temporary, but it is not false.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
23
TEXT 12
Ya Wz raJaàiPa k-al/ wRiXaTaa
Satv& SauraNaqk-iMavEDaYaTYaTa" )
TaTPa[TYaNaqk-aNaSauraNa( SauriPa[Yaae
rJaSTaMaSk-aNa( Pa[iMa<aaeTYauåé[va" )) 12 ))
ya eña räjann api käla éçitä
sattvaà suränékam ivaidhayaty ataù
tat-pratyanékän asurän sura-priyo
rajas-tamaskän pramiëoty uruçraväù
SYNONYMS
yaù—which; eñaù—this; räjan—O King; api—even; kälaù—time; éçitä—the
Supreme Lord; sattvam—the mode of goodness; sura-anékam—numbers of
demigods; iva—certainly; edhayati—causes to increase; ataù—hence;
tat-pratyanékän—inimical to them; asurän—the demons; sura-priyaù—being
the friend of the demigods; rajaù-tamaskän—covered by passion and
ignorance; pramiëoti—destroys; uru-çraväù—whose glories are widespread.
TRANSLATION
O King, this time factor enhances the sattva-guëa. Thus although the
Supreme Lord is the controller, He favors the demigods, who are mostly
situated in sattva-guëa. Then the demons, who are influenced by tamo-guëa,
are annihilated. The Supreme Lord induces the time factor to act in different
ways, but He is never partial. Rather, His activities are glorious, and therefore
He is called Uruçravä.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
24
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.29), samo'haà sarva-bhüteñu na me dveñyo
'sti na priyaù: "I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all." The
Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be partial; He is always equal to
everyone. Therefore when the demigods are favored and the demons killed,
this is not His partiality but the influence of the time factor. A good example
in this regard is that an electrician connects both a heater and a cooler to the
same electrical energy. The cause of the heating and cooling is the electrician's
manipulation of the electrical energy according to his desire, but factually the
electrician has nothing to do with causing heat or cold, nor with the
enjoyment or suffering that results.
There have been many historical incidents in which the Lord killed a
demon, but the demon attained a higher position by the mercy of the Lord.
Pütanä is an example. Pütanä's purpose was to kill Kåñëa. Aho baké yaà
stana-käla-küöam. She approached the house of Nanda Mahäräja with the
purpose of killing Kåñëa by smearing poison on her breast, yet when she was
killed she attained the highest position, achieving the status of Kåñëa's mother.
Kåñëa is so kind and impartial that because he sucked Pütanä's breast, He
immediately accepted her as His mother. This superfluous activity of killing
Pütanä did not diminish the Lord's impartiality. He is suhådaà
sarva-bhütänäm, the friend of everyone. Therefore partiality cannot apply to
the character of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who always maintains
His position as the supreme controller. The Lord killed Pütanä as an enemy,
but because of His being the supreme controller, she attained an exalted
position as His mother. Çréla Madhva Muni therefore remarks, käle käla-viñaye
'péçitä. dehädi-käraëatvät suränékam iva sthitaà sattvam. Ordinarily a murderer
is hanged, and in the Manu-saàhitä it is said that a king bestows mercy upon a
murderer by killing him, thus saving him from various kinds of suffering.
Because of his sinful activities, such a murderer is killed by the mercy of the
king. Kåñëa, the supreme judge, deals with matters in a similar way because He
is the supreme controller. The conclusion, therefore, is that the Lord is always
impartial and always very kind to all living entities.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
25
TEXT 13
A}aEvaedaôTa" PaUvRiMaiTahaSa" SaurizR<aa )
Pa[qTYaa Maha§-TaaE raJaNa( Pa*C^Tae_JaaTaXa}ave )) 13 ))
atraivodähåtaù pürvam
itihäsaù surarñiëä
prétyä mahä-kratau räjan
påcchate 'jäta-çatrave
SYNONYMS
atra—in this connection; eva—certainly; udähåtaù—was recited;
pürvam—previously; itihäsaù—an old story; sura-åñiëä—by the great sage
Närada; prétyä—with joy; mahä-kratau—at the great Räjasüya sacrifice;
räjan—O King; påcchate—to the inquiring; ajäta-çatrave—Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, who had no enemy.
TRANSLATION
Formerly, O King, when Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was performing the Räjasüya
sacrifice, the great sage Närada, responding to his inquiry, recited historical
facts showing how the Supreme Personality of Godhead is always impartial,
even when killing demons. In this regard he gave a vivid example.
PURPORT
This relates to how the Lord exhibited His impartiality even when killing
Çiçupäla in the arena of the Räjasüya yajïa performed by Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
26
TEXTS 14-15
d*îa Mahad(>auTa& raJaa raJaSaUYae Maha§-TaaE )
vaSaudeve >aGaviTa SaaYauJYa& ceid>aU>auJa" )) 14 ))
Ta}aaSaqNa& Saur‰iz& raJaa Paa<@uSauTa" §-TaaE )
PaPa[C^ iviSMaTaMaNaa MauNaqNaa& é*<vTaaiMadMa( )) 15 ))
dåñövä mahädbhutaà räjä
räjasüye mahä-kratau
väsudeve bhagavati
säyujyaà cedibhü-bhujaù
taträsénaà sura-åñià
räjä päëòu-sutaù kratau
papraccha vismita-manä
munénäà çåëvatäm idam
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—after seeing; mahä-adbhutam—greatly wonderful; räjä—the King;
räjasüye—called Räjasüya; mahä-kratau—at the great sacrifice; väsudeve—into
Väsudeva; bhagavati—the Personality of Godhead; säyujyam—merging;
cedibhü-bhujaù—of Çiçupäla, the King of Cedi; tatra—there; äsénam—seated;
sura-åñim—Närada Muni; räjä—the King; päëòu-sutaù—Yudhiñöhira, the son
of Päëòu; kratau—at the sacrifice; papraccha—asked; vismita-manäù—being
struck with wonder; munénäm—in the presence of the sages;
çåëvatäm—listening; idam—this.
TRANSLATION
O King, at the Räjasüya sacrifice, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, the son of
Mahäräja Päëòu, personally saw Çiçupäla merge into the body of the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
27
Lord, Kåñëa. Therefore, struck with wonder, he inquired about the reason for
this from the great sage Närada, who was seated there. While he inquired, all
the sages present also heard him ask his question.
TEXT 16
é[qYauiDaiïr ovac
Ahae ATYad(>auTa& ùeTaÕulR/>aEk-aiNTaNaaMaiPa )
vaSaudeve Pare Tatve Pa[aiáêEÛSYa iviÜz" )) 16 ))
çré-yudhiñöhira uväca
aho aty-adbhutaà hy etad
durlabhaikäntinäm api
väsudeve pare tattve
präptiç caidyasya vidviñaù
SYNONYMS
çré-yudhiñöhiraù uväca—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira said; aho—oh;
ati-adbhutam—very wonderful; hi—certainly; etat—this; durlabha—difficult
to attain; ekäntinäm—for the transcendentalists; api—even; väsudeve—in
Väsudeva; pare—the supreme; tattve—Absolute Truth; präptiù—the
attainment; caidyasya—of Çiçupäla; vidviñaù—envious.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira inquired: It is very wonderful that the demon Çiçupäla
merged into the body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead even though
extremely envious. This säyujya-mukti is impossible to attain even for great
transcendentalists. How then did the enemy of the Lord attain it?
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
28
PURPORT
There are two classes of transcendentalists—the jïänés and the bhaktas.
The bhaktas do not aspire to merge into the existence of the Lord, but the
jïänés do. Çiçupäla, however, was neither a jïäné nor a bhakta, yet simply by
envy of the Lord he attained an exalted position by merging into the Lord's
body. Certainly this was astonishing, and therefore Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira
inquired about the cause for the Lord's mysterious mercy to Çiçupäla.
TEXT 17
WTaÜeidTauiMaC^aMa" SavR Wv vYa& MauNae )
>aGaviàNdYaa veNaae iÜJaESTaMaiSa PaaiTaTa" )) 17 ))
etad veditum icchämaù
sarva eva vayaà mune
bhagavan-nindayä veno
dvijais tamasi pätitaù
SYNONYMS
etat—this; veditum—to know; icchämaù—desire; sarve—all; eva—certainly;
vayam—we; mune—O great sage; bhagavat-nindayä—because of blaspheming
the Lord; venaù—Vena, the father of Påthu Mahäräja; dvijaiù—by the
brähmaëas; tamasi—into hell; pätitaù—was thrown.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, we are all eager to know the cause for this mercy of the Lord. I
have heard that formerly a king named Vena blasphemed the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and that all the brähmaëas consequently obliged him to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
29
go to hell. Çiçupäla should also have been sent to hell. How then did he merge
into the Lord's existence?
TEXT 18
dMagaaezSauTa" PaaPa Aar>Ya k-l/>aaz<aaTa( )
SaMPa[TYaMazs GaaeivNde dNTav§-ê duMaRiTa" )) 18 ))
damaghoña-sutaù päpa
ärabhya kala-bhäñaëät
sampraty amarñé govinde
dantavakraç ca durmatiù
SYNONYMS
damaghoña-sutaù—Çiçupäla, the son of Damaghoña; päpaù—sinful;
ärabhya—beginning; kala-bhäñaëät—from the unclear speech of a child;
samprati—even until now; amarñé—envious; govinde—toward Çré Kåñëa;
dantavakraù—Dantavakra; ca—also; durmatiù—evil-minded.
TRANSLATION
From the very beginning of his childhood, when he could not even speak
properly, Çiçupäla, the most sinful son of Damaghoña, began blaspheming the
Lord, and he continued to be envious of Çré Kåñëa until death. Similarly, his
brother Dantavakra continued the same habits.
TEXT 19
XaPaTaaerSak*-iÜZ<au& Yad(b]ø ParMaVYaYaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
30
iì}aae Na JaaTaae iJaûaYaa& NaaNDa& ivivXaTauSTaMa" )) 19 ))
çapator asakåd viñëuà
yad brahma param avyayam
çvitro na jäto jihväyäà
nändhaà viviçatus tamaù
SYNONYMS
çapatoù—of both Çiçupäla and Dantavakra, who were blaspheming;
asakåt—repeatedly; viñëum—Lord Kåñëa; yat—which; brahma param—the
Supreme Brahman; avyayam—without diminution; çvitraù—white leprosy;
na—not; jätaù—appeared; jihväyäm—on the tongue; na—not; andham—dark;
viviçatuù—they did enter; tamaù—hell.
TRANSLATION
Although these two men—Çiçupäla and Dantavakra—repeatedly blasphemed
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu [Kåñëa], the Supreme
Brahman, they were quite healthy. Indeed, their tongues were not attacked by
white leprosy, nor did they enter the darkest region of hellish life. We are
certainly most surprised by this.
PURPORT
Kåñëa is described by Arjuna in Bhagavad-gétä (10.12) as follows: paraà
brahma paraà dhäma pavitraà paramaà bhavän. "You are the Supreme
Brahman, the supreme abode and purifier." Herein this is confirmed. Viñëuà
yad brahma param avyayam. The Supreme Viñëu is Kåñëa. Kåñëa is the cause of
Viñëu, not vice versa. Similarly, Brahman is not the cause of Kåñëa; Kåñëa is
the cause of Brahman. Therefore Kåñëa is the Parabrahman (yad brahma
param avyayam).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
31
TEXT 20
k-Qa& TaiSMaNa( >aGaviTa durvGa]aùDaaMaiNa )
PaXYaTaa& SavRl/aek-aNaa& l/YaMaqYaTaurÅSaa )) 20 ))
kathaà tasmin bhagavati
duravagrähya-dhämani
paçyatäà sarva-lokänäà
layam éyatur aïjasä
SYNONYMS
katham—how; tasmin—that; bhagavati—in the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; duravagrähya—difficult to attain; dhämani—whose nature;
paçyatäm—looked on; sarva-lokänäm—while all the people; layam
éyatuù—became absorbed; aïjasä—easily.
TRANSLATION
How was it possible for Çiçupäla and Dantavakra in the presence of many
exalted persons, to enter very easily into the body of Kåñëa, whose nature is
difficult to attain?.
PURPORT
Çiçupäla and Dantavakra were formerly Jaya and Vijaya, the doorkeepers of
Vaikuëöha. Merging into the body of Kåñëa was not their final destination. For
some time they remained merged, and later they received the liberations of
särüpya and sälokya, living on the same planet as the Lord in the same bodily
form. The çästras give evidence that if one blasphemes the Supreme Lord, his
punishment is to remain in hellish life for many millions of years more than
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
32
one suffers by killing many brähmaëas. Çiçupäla, however, instead of entering
hellish life, immediately and very easily received säyujya-mukti. That such a
privilege had been offered to Çiçupäla was not merely a story. Everyone saw it
happen; there was no scarcity of evidence. How did it happen? Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira was very much surprised.
TEXT 21
WTad( >a]aMYaiTa Mae buiÖdsPaaicRirv vaYauNaa )
b]UùeTadd(>auTaTaMa& >aGavaNù}a k-ar<aMa( )) 21 ))
etad bhrämyati me buddhir
dépärcir iva väyunä
brühy etad adbhutatamaà
bhagavän hy atra käraëam
SYNONYMS
etat—concerning this; bhrämyati—is flickering; me—my;
buddhiù—intelligence; dépa-arciù—the flame of a candle; iva—like;
väyunä—by the wind; brühi—please tell; etat—this; adbhutatamam—most
wonderful; bhagavän—possessing all knowledge; hi—indeed; atra—here;
käraëam—the cause.
TRANSLATION
This matter is undoubtedly very wonderful. Indeed, my intelligence has
become disturbed, just as the flame of a candle is disturbed by a blowing wind.
O Närada Muni, you know everything. Kindly let me know the cause of this
wonderful event.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
33
PURPORT
The çästras enjoin, tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum eväbhigacchet: [MU 1.2.12(1)]
when one is perplexed by the difficult problems of life, to solve them one must
approach a guru like Närada or his representative in the disciplic succession.
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira therefore requested Närada to explain the cause for
such a wonderful event.
TEXT 22
é[qbadraYai<aåvac
rajSTaÜc Aak-<YaR Naardae >aGavaNa*iz" )
Tauí" Pa[ah TaMaa>aaZYa é*<vTYaaSTaTSad" k-Qaa" )) 22 ))
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
räjïas tad vaca äkarëya
närado bhagavän åñiù
tuñöaù präha tam äbhäñya
çåëvatyäs tat-sadaù kathäù
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; räjïaù—of the King
(Yudhiñöhira); tat—those; vacaù—words; äkarëya—after hearing;
näradaù—Närada Muni; bhagavän—powerful; åñiù—sage; tuñöaù—being
satisfied; präha—spoke; tam—him; äbhäñya—after addressing; çåëvatyäù
tat-sadaù—in the presence of the assembly members; kathäù—the topics.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After hearing the request of Mahäräja
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
34
Yudhiñöhira, Närada Muni, the most powerful spiritual master, who knew
everything, was very pleased. Thus he replied in the presence of everyone
taking part in the yajïa.
TEXT 23
é[qNaard ovac
iNaNdNaSTavSaTk-arNYa¡-araQa| k-le/vrMa( )
Pa[DaaNaParYaae raJaàivveke-Na k-iLPaTaMa( )) 23 ))
çré-närada uväca
nindana-stava-satkäranyakkärärthaà
kalevaram
pradhäna-parayo räjann
avivekena kalpitam
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; nindana—blasphemy;
stava—praise; satkära—honor; nyakkära—dishonor; artham—for the purpose
of; kalevaram—body; pradhäna-parayoù—of nature and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; räjan—O King; avivekena—without discrimination;
kalpitam—created.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Çré Näradajé said: O King, blasphemy and praise,
chastisement and respect, are experienced because of ignorance. The body of the
conditioned soul is planned by the Lord for suffering in the material world
through the agency of the external energy.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
35
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (18.61) it is said:
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of
material energy." A material body is manufactured by the external energy
according to the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
conditioned soul, being seated on this machine, wanders throughout the
universe, and because of his bodily conception of life he only suffers. Actually
the suffering of being blasphemed and the enjoyment of being praised, the
acceptance of a good welcome or of chastisement by harsh words, are felt in
the material conception of life; but since the body of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is not material but sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], He is
unaffected by insults or greetings, blasphemy or prayers. Being always
unaffected and complete, He does not feel extra pleasure when offered nice
prayers by the devotee, although the devotee benefits by offering prayers to
the Lord. Indeed, the Lord is very kind to His so-called enemy because one
who always thinks of the Personality of Godhead as an enemy also benefits,
although he thinks of the Lord adversely. If a conditioned soul, thinking of the
Lord as an enemy or a friend, somehow or other becomes attached to the Lord,
he receives great benefit.
TEXT 24
ih&Saa Tadi>aMaaNaeNa d<@PaaåZYaYaaeYaRQaa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
36
vEzMYaiMah >aUTaaNaa& MaMaahiMaiTa PaaiQaRv )) 24 ))
hiàsä tad-abhimänena
daëòa-päruñyayor yathä
vaiñamyam iha bhütänäà
mamäham iti pärthiva
SYNONYMS
hiàsä—suffering; tat—of this; abhimänena—by the false conception;
daëòa-päruñyayoù—when there is punishment and chastisement; yathä—just
as; vaiñamyam—misconception; iha—here (in this body); bhütänäm—of the
living entities; mama-aham—mine and I; iti—thus; pärthiva—O lord of the
earth.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the conditioned soul, being in the bodily conception of life,
considers his body to be his self and considers everything in relationship with
the body to be his. Because he has this wrong conception of life, he is subjected
to dualities like praise and chastisement.
PURPORT
Only when a conditioned soul accepts the body as himself does he feel the
effects of chastisement or praise. Then he determines one person to be his
enemy and another his friend and wants to chastise the enemy and welcome
the friend. This creation of friends and enemies is a result of one's bodily
conception of life.
TEXT 25
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
37
YaiàbÖae_i>aMaaNaae_Ya& TaÜDaaTPa[ai<aNaa& vDa" )
TaQaa Na YaSYa kE-vLYaadi>aMaaNaae_i%l/aTMaNa" )
ParSYa dMak-TauRihR ih&Saa ke-NaaSYa k-LPYaTae )) 25 ))
yan-nibaddho 'bhimäno 'yaà
tad-vadhät präëinäà vadhaù
tathä na yasya kaivalyäd
abhimäno 'khilätmanaù
parasya dama-kartur hi
hiàsä kenäsya kalpyate
SYNONYMS
yat—in which; nibaddhaù—bound; abhimänaù—false conception; ayam—this;
tat—of that (body); vadhät—from the annihilation; präëinäm—of the living
beings; vadhaù—annihilation; tathä—similarly; na—not; yasya—of whom;
kaivalyät—because of being absolute, one without a second; abhimänaù—false
conception; akhila-ätmanaù—of the Supersoul of all living entities;
parasya—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dama-kartuù—the supreme
controller; hi—certainly; hiàsä—harm; kena—how; asya—His; kalpyate—is
performed.
TRANSLATION
Because of the bodily conception of life, the conditioned soul thinks that
when the body is annihilated the living being is annihilated. Lord Viñëu, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the supreme controller, the Supersoul of all
living entities. Because He has no material body, He has no false conception of
"I and mine." It is therefore incorrect to think that He feels pleasure or pain
when blasphemed or offered prayers. This is impossible for Him. Thus He has
no enemy and no friend. When He chastises the demons it is for their good, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
38
when He accepts the prayers of the devotees it is for their good. He is affected
neither by prayers nor by blasphemy.
PURPORT
Because of being covered by material bodies, the conditioned souls,
including even greatly learned scholars and falsely educated professors, all
think that as soon as the body is finished, everything is finished. This is due to
their bodily conception of life. Kåñëa has no such bodily conception, nor is His
body different from His self. Therefore, since Kåñëa has no material
conception of life, how can He be affected by material prayers and
accusations? Kåñëa's body is described herewith as kaivalya, nondifferent from
Himself. Since everyone has a material bodily conception of life, if Kåñëa had
such a conception what would be the difference between Kåñëa and the
conditioned soul? Kåñëa's instructions in Bhagavad-gétä are accepted as final
because He does not possess a material body. As soon as one has a material
body he has four deficiencies, but since Kåñëa does not possess a material body,
He has no deficiencies. He is always spiritually conscious and blissful. Éçvaraù
paramaù kåñëaù sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù [Bs. 5.1]: His form is eternal, blissful
knowledge. Sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù, änanda-cinmaya-rasa and kaivalya are
the same.
Kåñëa can expand Himself as Paramätmä in the core of everyone's heart. In
Bhagavad-gétä (13.3) this is confirmed. Kñetra-jïaà cäpi mäà viddhi
sama-kñetreñu bhärata: the Lord is the Paramätmä—the ätmä or Superself of
all individual souls. Therefore it must naturally be concluded that He has no
defective bodily conceptions. Although situated in everyone's body, He has no
bodily conception of life. He is always free from such conceptions, and thus He
cannot be affected by anything in relation to the material body of the jéva.
Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (16.19):
tän ahaà dviñataù krürän
saàsäreñu narädhamän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
39
kñipämy ajasram açubhän
äsuréñv eva yoniñu
"Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are
cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species
of life." Whenever the Lord punishes persons like demons, however, such
punishment is meant for the good of the conditioned soul. The conditioned
soul, being envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, may accuse Him,
saying, "Kåñëa is bad, Kåñëa is a thief" and so on, but Kåñëa, being kind to all
living entities, does not consider such accusations. Instead, He takes account
of the conditioned soul's chanting of "Kåñëa, Kåñëa" so many times. He
sometimes punishes such demons for one life by putting them in a lower
species, but then, when they have stopped accusing Him, they are liberated in
the next life because of chanting Kåñëa's name constantly. Blaspheming the
Supreme Lord or His devotee is not at all good for the conditioned soul, but
Kåñëa, being very kind, punishes the conditioned soul in one life for such
sinful activities and then takes him back home, back to Godhead. The vivid
example for this is Våträsura, who was formerly Citraketu Mahäräja, a great
devotee. Because he derided Lord Çiva, the foremost of all devotees, he had to
accept the body of a demon called Våtra, but then he was taken back to
Godhead. Thus when Kåñëa punishes a demon or conditioned soul, He stops
that soul's habit of blaspheming Him, and when the soul becomes completely
pure, the Lord takes him back to Godhead.
TEXT 26
TaSMaaÜEraNaubNDaeNa iNavOE„„re<a >aYaeNa va )
òehaTk-aMaeNa va YauHJYaaTa(-k-QaiÄàe+aTae Pa*Qak(- )) 26 ))
tasmäd vairänubandhena
nirvaireëa bhayena vä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
40
snehät kämena vä yuïjyät
kathaïcin nekñate påthak
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; vaira-anubandhena—by constant enmity; nirvaireëa—by
devotion; bhayena—by fear; vä—or; snehät—from affection; kämena—by lusty
desires; vä—or; yuïjyät—one should concentrate; kathaïcit—somehow or
other; na—not; ékñate—sees; påthak—something else.
TRANSLATION
Therefore by enmity or by devotional service, by fear, by affection or by
lusty desire—by all of these or any one of them—if a conditioned soul
somehow or other concentrates his mind upon the Lord, the result is the same,
for the Lord, because of His blissful position, is never affected by enmity or
friendship.
PURPORT
From this verse one should not conclude that because Kåñëa is unaffected
by favorable prayers or unfavorable blasphemy one should therefore blaspheme
the Supreme Lord. This is not the regulative principle. Bhakti-yoga means
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanam: [Cc. Madhya 19.167] one should serve Kåñëa very
favorably. This is the real injunction. Here it is said that although an enemy
thinks of Kåñëa unfavorably, the Lord is unaffected by such antidevotional
service. Thus He offers His benedictions even to Çiçupäla and similarly
inimical conditioned souls. This does not mean, however, that one should be
inimical toward the Lord. The stress is given to the favorable execution of
devotional service, not purposeful blasphemy of the Lord. It is said:
nindäà bhagavataù çåëvaàs
tat-parasya janasya vä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
41
tato näpaiti yaù so 'pi
yäty adhaù sukåtäc cyutaù
One who hears blasphemy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His
devotees should immediately take action or should leave. Otherwise he will be
put into hellish life perpetually. There are many such injunctions. Therefore
as a regulative principle one should not be unfavorable toward the Lord but
always favorably inclined toward Him.
Çiçupäla's achievement of oneness with the Supreme Lord was different
because Jaya and Vijaya, from the very beginning of their material existence,
were ordained to treat the Supreme Lord as an enemy for three lives and then
return home, back to Godhead. Jaya and Vijaya inwardly knew that Kåñëa is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but they purposely became His enemies
to be delivered from material life. From the very beginning of their lives they
thought of Lord Kåñëa as an enemy, and even though blaspheming Lord Kåñëa,
they chanted the holy name of Kåñëa constantly along with their inimical
thoughts. Thus they were purified because of chanting the holy name of Kåñëa.
It is to be understood that even a blasphemer can be freed from sinful
activities by chanting the holy name of the Lord. Certainly, therefore, freedom
is assured for a devotee who is always favorable to the service of the Lord. This
will be clear from the following verse. By rapt attention fixed upon Kåñëa, one
is purified, and thus one is delivered from material life.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has very nicely explained the word
bhayena, which means "by fear." When the gopés went to Kåñëa in the dead of
night, they certainly feared chastisement by their relatives—their husbands,
brothers and fathers—but nonetheless, not caring for their relatives, they
went to Kåñëa. There was certainly fear, but this fear could not check their
devotional service to Kåñëa.
One should not mistakenly think that Lord Kåñëa must be worshiped by an
inimical attitude like that of Çiçupäla. The injunction is änukülyasya grahaëaà
prätikülyasya varjanam: one should give up unfavorable activities and accept
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
42
only favorable conditions in devotional service. Generally, if one blasphemes
the Supreme Personality of Godhead he is punished. As the Lord says in
Bhagavad-gétä (16.19):
tän ahaà dviñataù krürän
saàsäreñu narädhamän
kñipämy ajasram açubhän
äsuréñv eva yoniñu
There are many such injunctions. One should not try to worship Kåñëa
unfavorably; otherwise he must be punished, at least for one life, to be purified.
As one should not try to be killed by embracing an enemy, a tiger or a snake,
one should not blaspheme the Supreme Personality of Godhead and become
His enemy in order to be put into hellish life.
The purpose of this verse is to emphasize that even the enemy of the Lord
can be delivered, not to speak of His friend. Çréla Madhväcärya also says in
many ways that one should not blaspheme Lord Viñëu through one's mind,
words or actions, for a blasphemer will go to hellish life along with his
forefathers.
karmaëä manasä väcä
yo dviñyäd viñëum avyayam
majjanti pitaras tasya
narake çäçvatéù samäù
In Bhagavad-gétä (16.19-20) the Lord says:
tän ahaà dviñataù krürän
saàsäreñu narädhamän
kñipämy ajasram açubhän
äsuréñv eva yoniñu
äsuréà yonim äpannä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
43
müòhä janmani janmani
mäm apräpyaiva kaunteya
tato yänty adhamäà gatim
"Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are
cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species
of life. Attaining repeated birth amongst the species of demoniac life, such
persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the most
abominable type of existence." One who blasphemes the Lord is put into a
family of asuras, in which there is every chance of forgetting the service of the
Lord. Lord Kåñëa further states in Bhagavad-gétä (9.11-12):
avajänanti mäà müòhä
mänuñéà tanum äçritam
paraà bhävam ajänanto
mama bhüta-maheçvaram
Müòhas, rascals, blaspheme the Supreme Lord because He appears exactly like
a human being. They do not know the unlimited opulence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
moghäçä mogha-karmäëo
mogha-jïänä vicetasaù
räkñasém äsuréà caiva
prakåtià mohinéà çritäù
Anything done by those who have taken the attitude of enemies will be baffled
(moghäçäù). If these enemies try to be liberated or to merge into the existence
of Brahman, if they desire to be elevated to the higher planetary systems as
karmés, or even if they desire to return home, back to Godhead, they will
certainly be baffled.
As for Hiraëyakaçipu, although he was extremely inimical toward the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he always thought of his son, who was a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
44
great devotee. Therefore by the grace of his son, Prahläda Mahäräja,
Hiraëyakaçipu was also delivered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
hiraëyakaçipuç cäpi
bhagavan-nindayä tamaù
vivakñur atyagät sünoù
prahlädasyänubhävataù
The conclusion is that one should not give up pure devotional service. For
one's own benefit, one should not imitate Hiraëyakaçipu or Çiçupäla. This is
not the way to achieve success.
TEXT 27
YaQaa vEraNaubNDaeNa MaTYaRSTaNMaYaTaaiMaYaaTa( )
Na TaQaa >ai¢-YaaeGaeNa wiTa Mae iNaiêTaa MaiTa" )) 27 ))
yathä vairänubandhena
martyas tan-mayatäm iyät
na tathä bhakti-yogena
iti me niçcitä matiù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; vaira-anubandhena—by constant enmity; martyaù—a person;
tat-mayatäm—absorption in Him; iyät—may attain; na—not; tathä—in a like
manner; bhakti-yogena—by devotional service; iti—thus; me—my;
niçcitä—definite; matiù—opinion.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: By devotional service one cannot achieve such
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
45
intense absorption in thought of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as one
can through enmity toward Him. That is my opinion.
PURPORT
Çrémän Närada Muni, the topmost pure devotee, praises Kåñëa's enemies
like Çiçupäla because their minds are always completely absorbed in Kåñëa.
Indeed, he thinks himself deficient in the inspiration of being feelingly
absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness. This does not mean, however, that the
enemies of Kåñëa are more elevated than Kåñëa's pure devotees. In the
Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 5.205) Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja Gosvämé also thinks of
himself in such a humble way:
jagäi mädhäi haite muïi se päpiñöha
puréñera kéöa haite muïi se laghiñöha
"I am a worse sinner than Jagäi and Mädhäi and am even lower than the worms
in the stool." A pure devotee always thinks himself more deficient than
everyone else. If a devotee approaches Çrématé Rädhäräëé to offer some service
to Kåñëa, even Çrématé Rädhäräëé thinks that the devotee is greater than She.
Thus Närada Muni says that according to his opinion the enemies of Kåñëa are
better situated because they are fully absorbed in thoughts of Kåñëa in terms of
killing Him, just as a very lusty man always thinks of women and their
association.
The essential point in this connection is that one should be fully absorbed
in thoughts of Kåñëa, twenty-four hours a day. There are many devotees in
räga-märga, which is exhibited in Våndävana. Whether in däsya-rasa,
sakhya-rasa, vätsalya-rasa or mädhurya-rasa, all the devotees of Kåñëa are
always overwhelmed by thoughts of Kåñëa. When Kåñëa is away from
Våndävana tending the cows in the forest, the gopés, in the mädhurya-rasa, are
always absorbed in thoughts of how Kåñëa walks in the forest. The soles of His
feet are so soft that the gopés would not dare keep His lotus feet on their soft
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
46
breasts. Indeed, they consider their breasts a very hard place for the lotus feet
of Kåñëa, yet those lotus feet wander in the forest, which is full of thorny
plants. The gopés are absorbed in such thoughts at home, although Kåñëa is
away from them. Similarly, when Kåñëa plays with His young friends, mother
Yaçodä is very much disturbed by thoughts that Kåñëa, because of always
playing and not taking His food properly, must be getting weak. These are
examples of the exalted ecstasy felt in Kåñëa's service as manifested in
Våndävana. This service is indirectly praised by Närada Muni in this verse.
Especially for the conditioned soul, Närada Muni recommends that one
somehow or other be absorbed in thoughts of Kåñëa, for that will save one from
all the dangers of material existence. Full absorption in thought of Kåñëa is the
highest platform of bhakti-yoga.
TEXTS 28-29
k-I$=" PaeXaSk*-Taa åÖ" ku-@yaYaa& TaMaNauSMarNa( )
Sa&rM>a>aYaYaaeGaeNa ivNdTae TaTSvæPaTaaMa( )) 28 ))
Wv& k*-Z<ae >aGaviTa MaaYaaMaNauJa wRìre )
vEre<a PaUTaPaaPMaaNaSTaMaaPaurNauicNTaYaa )) 29 ))
kéöaù peçaskåtä ruddhaù
kuòyäyäà tam anusmaran
saàrambha-bhaya-yogena
vindate tat-svarüpatäm
evaà kåñëe bhagavati
mäyä-manuja éçvare
vaireëa püta-päpmänas
tam äpur anucintayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
47
SYNONYMS
kéöaù—the grassworm; peçaskåtä—by a bee; ruddhaù—confined; kuòyäyäm—in
a hole in a wall; tam—that (bee); anusmaran—thinking of;
saàrambha-bhaya-yogena—through intense fear and enmity; vindate—attains;
tat—of that bee; sva-rüpatäm—the same form; evam—thus; kåñëe—in Kåñëa;
bhagavati—the Personality of Godhead; mäyä-manuje—who appeared by His
own energy in His eternal humanlike form; éçvare—the Supreme; vaireëa—by
enmity; püta-päpmänaù—those purified of sins; tam—Him; äpuù—attained;
anucintayä—by thinking of.
TRANSLATION
A grassworm confined in a hole of a wall by a bee always thinks of the bee in
fear and enmity and later becomes a bee simply because of such remembrance.
Similarly, if the conditioned souls somehow or other think of Kåñëa, who is
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], they will become free from their sins. Whether
thinking of Him as their worshipable Lord or an enemy, because of constantly
thinking of Him they will regain their spiritual bodies.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (4.10) the Lord says:
véta-räga-bhaya-krodhä
man-mayä mäm upäçritäù
bahavo jïäna-tapasä
pütä mad-bhävam ägatäù
"Being freed from attachment, fear and anger, being fully absorbed in Me and
taking refuge in Me, many, many persons in the past became purified by
knowledge of Me—and thus they all attained transcendental love for Me."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
48
There are two ways of constantly thinking of Kåñëa—as a devotee and as an
enemy. A devotee, of course, by his knowledge and tapasya, becomes free from
fear and anger and becomes a pure devotee. Similarly, an enemy, although
thinking of Kåñëa inimically, thinks of Him constantly and also becomes
purified. This is confirmed elsewhere in Bhagavad-gétä (9.30), where the Lord
says:
api cet su-duräcäro
bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù
samyag vyavasito hi saù
"Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he engages in devotional
service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly situated." A
devotee undoubtedly worships the Lord with rapt attention. Similarly, if an
enemy (suduräcäraù) always thinks of Kåñëa, he also becomes a purified
devotee. The example given here concerns the grassworm that becomes beelike
because of constantly thinking of the bee that forces it to enter a hole. By
always thinking of the bee in fear, the grassworm starts to become a bee. This
is a practical example. Lord Kåñëa appears within this material world for two
purposes—pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm: [Bg. 4.8] to protect the
devotees and annihilate the demons. The sädhus and devotees certainly think
of the Lord always, but duñkåtés, the demons like Kaàsa and Çiçupäla, also
think of Kåñëa in terms of killing Him. By thinking of Kåñëa, both the demons
and devotees attain liberation from the clutches of material mäyä.
This verse uses the word mäyä-manuje. When Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, appears in His original spiritual potency (sambhavämy
ätma-mäyayä [Bg. 4.6]), He is not forced to accept a form made by material
nature. Therefore the Lord is addressed as éçvara, the controller of mäyä. He is
not controlled by mäyä. When a demon continuously thinks of Kåñëa because
of enmity toward Him, he is certainly freed from the sinful reactions of his life.
To think of Kåñëa in any way, in terms of His name, form, qualities,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
49
paraphernalia or anything pertaining to Him, is beneficial for everyone.
Såëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù [SB 1.2.17]. Thinking of
Kåñëa, hearing the holy name of Kåñëa or hearing the pastimes of Kåñëa will
make one pure, and then he will become a devotee. Our Kåñëa consciousness
movement is therefore trying to introduce the system of somehow or other
letting everyone hear the holy name of Kåñëa and take Kåñëa's prasäda. Thus
one will gradually become a devotee, and his life will be successful.
TEXT 30
k-aMaad( ÜezaÙYaaTòehaÛQaa >a¢-yeìre MaNa" )
AaveXYa Tadga& ihTva bhvSTaÓiTa& GaTaa" )) 30 ))
kämäd dveñäd bhayät snehäd
yathä bhaktyeçvare manaù
äveçya tad-aghaà hitvä
bahavas tad-gatià gatäù
SYNONYMS
kämät—from lust; dveñät—from hatred; bhayät—from fear; snehät—from
affection; yathä—as well as; bhaktyä—by devotion; éçvare—in the Supreme;
manaù—the mind; äveçya—absorbing; tat—of that; agham—sin; hitvä—giving
up; bahavaù—many; tat—of that; gatim—path of liberation; gatäù—attained.
TRANSLATION
Many, many persons have attained liberation simply by thinking of Kåñëa
with great attention and giving up sinful activities. This great attention may be
due to lusty desires, inimical feelings, fear, affection or devotional service. I
shall now explain how one receives Kåñëa's mercy simply by concentrating
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
50
one's mind upon Him.
PURPORT
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.33.39):
vikréòitaà vraja-vadhübhir idaà ca viñëoù
çraddhänvito 'nuçåëuyäd atha varëayed yaù
bhaktià paräà bhagavati pratilabhya kämaà
håd-rogam äçv apahinoty acireëa dhéraù
If a bona fide listener hears of Kåñëa's pastimes with the gopés, which seem to
be lusty affairs, the lusty desires in his heart, which constitute the heart disease
of the conditioned soul, will be vanquished, and he will become a most exalted
devotee of the Lord. If one who hears of the gopés' lusty behavior with Kåñëa
becomes free from lusty desires, certainly the gopés who approached Kåñëa
became free from all such desires. Similarly, Çiçupäla and others who were very
much envious of Kåñëa and who constantly thought of Kåñëa became free from
envy. Nanda Mahäräja and mother Yaçodä were fully absorbed in Kåñëa
consciousness because of affection. When the mind is somehow or other fully
absorbed in Kåñëa, the material part is very soon vanquished, and the spiritual
part—attraction to Kåñëa—becomes manifest. This indirectly confirms that if
one thinks of Kåñëa enviously, simply because of thinking of Kåñëa he becomes
free from all sinful reactions and thus becomes a pure devotee. Examples of
this are given in the following verse.
TEXT 31
GaaePYa" k-aMaaÙYaaTk&-Saae ÜezaÀEÛadYaae Na*Paa" )
SaMbNDaad( v*Z<aYa" òehaÛUYa& >a¢-ya vYa& iv>aae )) 31 ))
gopyaù kämäd bhayät kaàso
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
51
dveñäc caidyädayo nåpäù
sambandhäd våñëayaù snehäd
yüyaà bhaktyä vayaà vibho
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—the gopés; kämät—out of lusty desires; bhayät—out of fear;
kaàsaù—King Kaàsa; dveñät—out of envy; caidya-ädayaù—Çiçupäla and
others; nåpäù—kings; sambandhät—out of kinship; våñëayaù—the Våñëis or
the Yädavas; snehät—out of affection; yüyam—you (the Päëòavas);
bhaktyä—by devotional service; vayam—we; vibho—O great King.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Yudhiñöhira, the gopés by their lusty desires, Kaàsa by his
fear, Çiçupäla and other kings by envy, the Yadus by their familial relationship
with Kåñëa, you Päëòavas by your great affection for Kåñëa, and we, the
general devotees, by our devotional service, have obtained the mercy of Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Different persons achieve different types of mukti-säyujya, sälokya, särüpya,
sämépya and särñöi—according to their own intense desire, which is called
bhäva. Thus it is described here that the gopés, by their lusty desires, which
were based upon their intense love for Kåñëa, became the most beloved
devotees of the Lord. Although the gopés at Våndävana expressed their lusty
desires in relationship with a paramour (parakéya-rasa), they actually had no
lusty desires. This is significant of spiritual advancement. Their desires
appeared lusty, but actually they were not the lusty desires of the material
world. Caitanya-caritämåta compares the desires of the spiritual and material
world to gold and iron. Both gold and iron are metal, but there is a vast
difference in their value. The lusty desires of the gopés for Kåñëa are compared
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
52
to gold, and material lusty desires are compared to iron.
Kaàsa and other enemies of Kåñëa merged into the existence of Brahman,
but why should Kåñëa's friends and devotees have the same position? Kåñëa's
devotees attain the association of the Lord as His constant companions, either
in Våndävana or in the Vaikuëöha planets. Similarly, although Närada Muni
wanders in the three worlds, he has exalted devotion for Näräyaëa
(aiçvaryamän). The Våñëis and Yadus and the father and mother of Kåñëa in
Våndävana all have familial relationships with Kåñëa; Kåñëa's foster father and
mother in Våndävana, however, are more exalted than Vasudeva and Devaké.
TEXT 32
k-TaMaae_iPa Na veNa" SYaaTPaÄaNaa& Pauåz& Pa[iTa )
TaSMaaTa( ke-NaaPYauPaaYaeNa MaNa" k*-Z<ae iNaveXaYaeTa( )) 32 ))
katamo 'pi na venaù syät
païcänäà puruñaà prati
tasmät kenäpy upäyena
manaù kåñëe niveçayet
SYNONYMS
katamaù api—anyone; na—not; venaù—the atheistic King Vena; syät—would
adopt; païcänäm—of the five (previously mentioned); puruñam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; prati—in regard to; tasmät—therefore; kenäpi—by
any; upäyena—means; manaù—the mind; kåñëe—in Kåñëa; niveçayet—one
should fix.
TRANSLATION
Somehow or other, one must consider the form of Kåñëa very seriously.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
53
Then, by one of the five different processes mentioned above, one can return
home, back to Godhead. Atheists like King Vena, however, being unable to
think of Kåñëa's form in any of these five ways, cannot attain salvation.
Therefore, one must somehow think of Kåñëa, whether in a friendly way or
inimically.
PURPORT
Impersonalists and atheists always try to circumvent the form of Kåñëa.
Great politicians and philosophers of the modern age even try to banish Kåñëa
from Bhagavad-gétä. Consequently, for them there is no salvation. But Kåñëa's
enemies think, "Here is Kåñëa, my enemy. I have to kill Him." They think of
Kåñëa in His actual form, and thus they attain salvation. Devotees, therefore,
who constantly think of Kåñëa's form, are certainly liberated. The only
business of the Mäyävädé atheists is to make Kåñëa formless, and consequently,
because of this severe offense at the lotus feet of Kåñëa, they cannot expect
salvation. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says in this connection: tena
çiçupälädi-bhinnaù pratiküla-bhävaà didhéñur yena iva narakaà yätéti bhävaù.
Except for Çiçupäla, those who go against the regulative principles cannot
attain salvation and are surely destined for hellish life. The regulative
principle is that one must always think of Kåñëa, whether as a friend or enemy.
TEXT 33
MaaTa*ZvóeYaae vêEÛae dNTav§-ê Paa<@v )
PaazRdPa[vraE ivZ<aaeivRPa[XaaPaaTPadCYauTaaE )) 33 ))
mätå-ñvasreyo vaç caidyo
dantavakraç ca päëòava
pärñada-pravarau viñëor
vipra-çäpät pada-cyutau
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
54
SYNONYMS
mätå-svasreyaù—the son of the mother's sister (Çiçupäla); vaù—your;
caidyaù—King Çiçupäla; dantavakraù—Dantavakra; ca—and; päëòava—O
Päëòava; pärñada-pravarau—two exalted attendants; viñëoù—of Viñëu;
vipra—by brähmaëas; çäpät—because of a curse; pada—from their position in
Vaikuëöha; cyutau—fallen.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: O best of the Päëòavas, your two cousins Çiçupäla
and Dantavakra, the sons of your maternal aunt, were formerly associates of
Lord Viñëu, but because they were cursed by brähmaëas, they fell from
Vaikuëöha to this material world.
PURPORT
Çiçupäla and Dantavakra were not ordinary demons, but were formerly
personal associates of Lord Viñëu. They apparently fell to this material world,
but actually they came to assist the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
nourishing His pastimes within this world.
TEXT 34
é[qYauiDaiïr ovac
k-Id*Xa" k-SYa va XaaPaae hirdaSaai>aMaXaRNa" )
Aé[ÖeYa wva>aaiTa hrerek-aiNTaNaa& >av" )) 34 ))
çré-yudhiñöhira uväca
kédåçaù kasya vä çäpo
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
55
hari-däsäbhimarçanaù
açraddheya iväbhäti
harer ekäntinäà bhavaù
SYNONYMS
çré-yudhiñöhiraù uväca—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira said; kédåçaù—what kind of;
kasya—whose; vä—or; çäpaù—curse; hari-däsa—the servant of Hari;
abhimarçanaù—overcoming; açraddheyaù—incredible; iva—as if;
äbhäti—appears; hareù—of Hari; ekäntinäm—of those exclusively devoted as
exalted attendants; bhavaù—birth.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira inquired: What kind of great curse could affect even
liberated viñëu-bhaktas, and what sort of person could curse even the Lord's
associates? For unflinching devotees of the Lord to fall again to this material
world is impossible. I cannot believe this.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (8.16) the Lord clearly states, mäm upetya tu kaunteya
punar janma na vidyate: one who is purified of material contamination and
returns home, back to Godhead, does not return to this material world.
Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9) Kåñëa says:
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
56
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, therefore, was
surprised that a pure devotee could return to this material world. This is
certainly a very important question.
TEXT 35
deheiNd]YaaSauhqNaaNaa& vEku-<#=PaurvaiSaNaaMa( )
dehSaMbNDaSaMbÖMaeTada:YaaTauMahRiSa )) 35 ))
dehendriyäsu-hénänäà
vaikuëöha-pura-väsinäm
deha-sambandha-sambaddham
etad äkhyätum arhasi
SYNONYMS
deha—of a material body; indriya—material senses; asu—life breath;
hénänäm—of those devoid; vaikuëöha-pura—of Vaikuëöha; väsinäm—of the
residents; deha-sambandha—in a material body; sambaddham—bondage;
etat—this; äkhyätum arhasi—please describe.
TRANSLATION
The bodies of the inhabitants of Vaikuëöha are completely spiritual, having
nothing to do with the material body, senses or life air. Therefore, kindly
explain how associates of the Personality of Godhead were cursed to descend in
material bodies like ordinary persons.
PURPORT
This very significant question would be difficult for an ordinary person to
answer, but Närada Muni, being an authority, could answer it. Therefore
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
57
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira inquired from him, saying, etad äkhyätum arhasi: "only
you can explain the reason." From authoritative sources it can be discerned
that associates of Lord Viñëu who descend from Vaikuëöha do not actually fall.
They come with the purpose of fulfilling the desire of the Lord, and their
descent to this material world is comparable to that of the Lord. The Lord
comes to this material world through the agency of His internal potency, and
similarly, when a devotee or associate of the Lord descends to this material
world, he does so through the action of the spiritual energy. Any pastime
conducted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is an arrangement by
yogamäyä, not mahämäyä. Therefore it is to be understood that when Jaya and
Vijaya descended to this material world, they came because there was
something to be done for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Otherwise it is
a fact that no one falls from Vaikuëöha.
Of course, a living entity who desires säyujya-mukti remains in Kåñëa's
Brahman effulgence, which is dependent on Kåñëa's body (brahmaëo hi
pratiñöhäham [Bg. 14.27]). Such an impersonalist who takes shelter of the
Brahman effulgence must surely fall down. This is stated in the çästra (SB
10.2.32):
ye 'nye 'ravindäkña vimukta-mäninas
tvayy asta-bhäväd aviçuddha-buddhayaù
äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù
patanty adho 'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù
"O Lord, the intelligence of those who think themselves liberated but who
have no devotion is impure. Even though they rise to the highest point of
liberation by dint of severe penances and austerities, they are sure to fall down
again into material existence, for they do not take shelter at Your lotus feet."
The impersonalists cannot reach the Vaikuëöha planets to become associates
of the Lord, and therefore, according to their desires, Kåñëa gives them
säyujya-mukti. However, since säyujya-mukti is partial mukti, they must fall
again to this material world. When it is said that the individual soul falls from
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
58
Brahmaloka, this applies to the impersonalist.
From authoritative sources it is learned that Jaya and Vijaya were sent to
this material world to fulfill the Lord's desire to fight. The Lord also sometimes
wants to fight, but who can fight with the Lord but a very confidential devotee
of the Lord? Jaya and Vijaya descended to this world to fulfill the Lord's desire.
Therefore in each of their three births—first as Hiraëyäkña and
Hiraëyakaçipu, second as Rävaëa and Kumbhakarëa, and third as Çiçupäla and
Dantavakra—the Lord personally killed them. In other words, these associates
of the Lord, Jaya and Vijaya, descended to the material world to serve the Lord
by fulfilling His desire to fight. Otherwise, as Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira says,
açraddheya iväbhäti: the statement that a servant of the Lord could fall from
Vaikuëöha seems unbelievable. How Jaya and Vijaya came to this material
world is explained by Närada Muni as follows.
TEXT 36
é[qNaard ovac
Wk-da b]ø<a" Pau}aa ivZ<aul/aek&- Yad*C^Yaa )
SaNaNdNaadYaae JaGMauêrNTaae >auvNa}aYaMa( )) 36 ))
çré-närada uväca
ekadä brahmaëaù puträ
viñëu-lokaà yadåcchayä
sanandanädayo jagmuç
caranto bhuvana-trayam
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; ekadä—once upon a time;
brahmaëaù—of Lord Brahmä; puträù—the sons; viñëu—of Lord Viñëu;
lokam—the planet; yadåcchayä—by chance; sanandana-ädayaù—Sanandana
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
59
and the others; jagmuù—went; carantaù—traveling about;
bhuvana-trayam—the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
The great saint Närada said: Once upon a time when the four sons of Lord
Brahmä named Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanätana and Sanat-kumära were
wandering throughout the three worlds, they came by chance to Viñëuloka.
TEXT 37
PaÄzËaYaNaa>aaR>aa" PaUveRzaMaiPa PaUvRJaa" )
idGvaSaSa" iXaXaUNa( MaTva Üa"SQaaE TaaNa( Pa[TYazeDaTaaMa( )) 37 ))
païca-ñaòòhäyanärbhäbhäù
pürveñäm api pürvajäù
dig-väsasaù çiçün matvä
dväù-sthau tän pratyañedhatäm
SYNONYMS
païca-ñaö-dhä—five or six years; äyana—approaching; arbha-äbhäù—like
boys; pürveñäm—the ancients of the universe (Maréci and the rest); api—even
though; pürva-jäù—born before; dik-väsasaù—being naked; çiçün—children;
matvä—thinking; dväù-sthau—the two gate guards, Jaya and Vijaya;
tän—them; pratyañedhatäm—forbade.
TRANSLATION
Although these four great sages were older than Brahmä's other sons like
Maréci, they appeared like small naked children only five or six years old. When
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
60
Jaya and Vijaya saw them trying to enter Vaikuëöhaloka, these two
gatekeepers, thinking them ordinary children, forbade them to enter.
PURPORT
In this regard, Çréla Madhväcärya says in his Tantra-sära:
dväù-sthäv ity anenädhikära-sthatvam uktam
adhikära-sthitäç caiva
vimuktäç ca dvidhä janäù
viñëu-loka-sthitäs teñäà
vara-çäpädi-yoginaù
adhikära-sthitäà muktià
niyataà präpnuvanti ca
vimukty-anantaraà teñäà
vara-çäpädayo nanu
dehendriyäsu-yuktaç ca
pürvaà paçcän na tair yutäù
apy abhimänibhis teñäà
devaiù svätmottamair yutäù
The purport is that the personal associates of Lord Viñëu in Vaikuëöhaloka are
always liberated souls. Even if sometimes cursed or blessed, they are always
liberated and never contaminated by the material modes of nature. Before
their liberation to Vaikuëöhaloka they possessed material bodies, but once they
come to Vaikuëöha they no longer have them. Therefore even if the associates
of Lord Viñëu sometimes descend as if cursed, they are always liberated.
TEXT 38
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
61
AXaPaNa( ku-iPaTaa Wv& Yauva& vaSa& Na cahRQa" )
rJaSTaMaae>Yaa& rihTae PaadMaUle/ MaDauiÜz" )
PaaiPaïaMaaSaurq& YaaeiNa& bail/XaaE YaaTaMaaìTa" )) 38 ))
açapan kupitä evaà
yuväà väsaà na cärhathaù
rajas-tamobhyäà rahite
päda-müle madhudviñaù
päpiñöhäm äsuréà yonià
bäliçau yätam äçv ataù
SYNONYMS
açapan—cursed; kupitäù—being full of anger; evam—thus; yuväm—you two;
väsam—residence; na—not; ca—and; arhathaù—deserve;
rajaù-tamobhyäm—from passion and ignorance; rahite—free; päda-müle—at
the lotus feet; madhu-dviñaù—of Viñëu, the slayer of the Madhu demon;
päpiñöhäm—most sinful; äsurém—demoniac; yonim—to a womb; bäliçau—O
you two fools; yätam—go; äçu—quickly hereafter; ataù—therefore.
TRANSLATION
Thus checked by the doorkeepers Jaya and Vijaya, Sanandana and the other
great sages very angrily cursed them. "You two foolish doorkeepers," they said.
"Being agitated by the material qualities of passion and ignorance, you are unfit
to live at the shelter of Madhudviña's lotus feet, which are free from such
modes. It would be better for you to go immediately to the material world and
take your birth in a family of most sinful asuras."
TEXT 39
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
62
Wv& XaáaE Sv>avNaaTa( PaTaNTaaE TaaE k*-Paalu/i>a" )
Pa[ae¢-aE PauNaJaRNMai>ava| i}ai>al/aeRk-aYa k-LPaTaaMa( )) 39 ))
evaà çaptau sva-bhavanät
patantau tau kåpälubhiù
proktau punar janmabhir väà
tribhir lokäya kalpatäm
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; çaptau—being cursed; sva-bhavanät—from their abode,
Vaikuëöha; patantau—falling down; tau—those two (Jaya and Vijaya);
kåpälubhiù—by the merciful sages (Sanandana, etc.); proktau—addressed;
punaù—again; janmabhiù—with births; väm—your; tribhiù—three;
lokäya—for the position; kalpatäm—let it be possible.
TRANSLATION
While Jaya and Vijaya, thus cursed by the sages, were falling to the material
world, they were addressed as follows by the same sages, who were very kind to
them. "O doorkeepers, after three births you will be able to return to your
positions in Vaikuëöha, for then the duration of the curse will have ended."
TEXT 40
JajaTae TaaE idTae" Pau}aaE dETYadaNavviNdTaaE )
ihr<Yak-iXaPauJYaeRïae ihr<Yaa+aae_NauJaSTaTa" )) 40 ))
jajïäte tau diteù putrau
daitya-dänava-vanditau
hiraëyakaçipur jyeñöho
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
63
hiraëyäkño 'nujas tataù
SYNONYMS
jajïäte—were born; tau—the two; diteù—of Diti; putrau—the sons;
daitya-dänava—by all the demons; vanditau—being worshiped;
hiraëyakaçipuù—Hiraëyakaçipu; jyeñöhaù—the elder;
hiraëyäkñaù—Hiraëyäkña; anujaù—the younger; tataù—thereafter.
TRANSLATION
These two associates of the Lord-Jaya and Vijaya—later descended to the
material world, taking birth as the two sons of Diti, Hiraëyakaçipu being the
elder and Hiraëyäkña the younger. They were very much respected by the
Daityas and Dänavas [demoniac species].
TEXT 41
hTaae ihr<Yak-iXaPauhRir<aa iSa&hæiPa<aa )
ihr<Yaa+aae DaraeÖare ib>a]Taa XaaEk-r& vPau" )) 41 ))
hato hiraëyakaçipur
hariëä siàha-rüpiëä
hiraëyäkño dharoddhäre
bibhratä çaukaraà vapuù
SYNONYMS
hataù—killed; hiraëyakaçipuù—Hiraëyakaçipu; hariëä—by Hari, Viñëu;
siàha-rüpiëä—in the form of a lion (Lord Narasiàha);
hiraëyäkñaù—Hiraëyäkña; dharä-uddhäre—to lift the earth;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
64
bibhratä—assuming; çaukaram—the boarlike; vapuù—form.
TRANSLATION
Appearing as Nåsiàhadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Hari,
killed Hiraëyakaçipu. When the Lord delivered the planet earth, which had
fallen in the Garbhodaka Ocean, Hiraëyäkña tried to hinder Him, and then the
Lord, as Varäha, killed Hiraëyäkña.
TEXT 42
ihr<Yak-iXaPau" Pau}a& Pa[úad& ke-XaviPa[YaMa( )
iJagaa&Saurk-raeàaNaa YaaTaNaa Ma*TYauheTave )) 42 ))
hiraëyakaçipuù putraà
prahlädaà keçava-priyam
jighäàsur akaron nänä
yätanä måtyu-hetave
SYNONYMS
hiraëyakaçipuù—Hiraëyakaçipu; putram—son; prahlädam—Prahläda
Mahäräja; keçava-priyam—the beloved devotee of Keçava; jighäàsuù—desirous
of killing; akarot—enacted; nänä—various; yätanäù—tortures; måtyu—death;
hetave—to cause.
TRANSLATION
Desiring to kill his son Prahläda, who was a great devotee of Lord Viñëu,
Hiraëyakaçipu tortured him in many ways.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
65
TEXT 43
Ta& SavR>aUTaaTMa>aUTa& Pa[XaaNTa& SaMadXaRNaMa( )
>aGavtaeJaSaa SPa*í& NaaXa¥-aeÖNTauMauÛMaE" )) 43 ))
taà sarva-bhütätma-bhütaà
praçäntaà sama-darçanam
bhagavat-tejasä spåñöaà
näçaknod dhantum udyamaiù
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; sarva-bhüta-ätma-bhütam—the soul in all entities;
praçäntam—peaceful and without hatred, etc.; sama-darçanam—equal to
everyone; bhagavat-tejasä—with the power of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; spåñöam—protected; na—not; açaknot—was able; hantum—to kill;
udyamaiù—by great attempts and various weapons.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, the Supersoul of all living entities, is sober, peaceful and equal to
everyone. Since the great devotee Prahläda was protected by the Lord's potency,
Hiraëyakaçipu was unable to kill him, in spite of endeavoring to do so in
various ways.
PURPORT
In this verse the word sarva-bhütätma-bhütam is very significant. Éçvaraù
sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati: [Bg. 18.61] the Lord is equally situated
in the core of everyone's heart. Thus He cannot be envious of anyone or
friendly to anyone; for Him everyone is the same. Although He is sometimes
seen to punish someone, this is exactly like a father's punishing his child for
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
66
the child's welfare. The Supreme Lord's punishment is also a manifestation of
the Lord's equality. Therefore the Lord is described as praçäntaà
sama-darçanam. Although the Lord has to execute His will properly, He is
equipoised in all circumstances. He is equally disposed toward everyone.
TEXT 44
TaTaSTaaE ra+aSaaE JaaTaaE ke-iXaNYaa& ivé[v"SauTaaE )
rav<a" ku-M>ak-<aRê SavRl/aek-aePaTaaPaNaaE )) 44 ))
tatas tau räkñasau jätau
keçinyäà viçravaù-sutau
rävaëaù kumbhakarëaç ca
sarva-lokopatäpanau
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; tau—the two doorkeepers (Jaya and Vijaya);
räkñasau—demons; jätau—born; keçinyäm—in the womb of Keçiné;
viçravaù-sutau—the sons of Viçravä; rävaëaù—Rävaëa;
kumbhakarëaù—Kumbhakarëa; ca—and; sarva-loka—to all people;
upatäpanau—giving misery.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the same Jaya and Vijaya, the two doorkeepers of Lord Viñëu,
took birth as Rävaëa and Kumbhakarëa, begotten by Viçravä in the womb of
Keçiné. They were extremely troublesome to all the people of the universe.
TEXT 45
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
67
Ta}aaiPa ragavae >aUTva NYahNaC^aPaMau¢-Yae )
raMavqYa| é[aeZYaiSa Tv& MaakR-<@eYaMau%aTa( Pa[>aae )) 45 ))
taträpi räghavo bhütvä
nyahanac chäpa-muktaye
räma-véryaà çroñyasi tvaà
märkaëòeya-mukhät prabho
SYNONYMS
tatra api—thereupon; räghavaù—as Lord Rämacandra; bhütvä—manifesting;
nyahanat—killed; çäpa-muktaye—for freedom from the curse;
räma-véryam—the prowess of Lord Räma; çroñyasi—will hear; tvam—you;
märkaëòeya-mukhät—from the lips of the sage Märkaëòeya; prabho—O lord.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: My dear King, just to relieve Jaya and Vijaya of
the brähmaëas' curse, Lord Rämacandra appeared in order to kill Rävaëa and
Kumbhakarëa. It will be better for you to hear narrations about Lord
Rämacandra's activities from Märkaëòeya.
TEXT 46
Taav}a +ai}aYaaE JaaTaaE MaaTa*ZvóaTMaJaaE Tav )
ADauNaa XaaPaiNaMauR¢-aE k*-Z<ac§-hTaa&hSaaE )) 46 ))
täv atra kñatriyau jätau
mätå-ñvasrätmajau tava
adhunä çäpa-nirmuktau
kåñëa-cakra-hatäàhasau
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
68
SYNONYMS
tau—the two; atra—here, in the third birth; kñatriyau—kñatriyas or kings;
jätau—born; mätå-svaså-ätma-jau—the sons of the mother's sister; tava—your;
adhunä—now; çäpa-nirmuktau—freed from the curse; kåñëa-cakra—by the
disc weapon of Kåñëa; hata—destroyed; aàhasau—whose sins.
TRANSLATION
In their third birth, the same Jaya and Vijaya appeared in a family of
kñatriyas as your cousins, the sons of your aunt. Because Lord Kåñëa has struck
them with His disc, all their sinful reactions have been destroyed, and now they
are free from the curse.
PURPORT
In their last birth, Jaya and Vijaya did not become demons or Räkñasas.
Instead they took birth in a very exalted kñatriya family related to Kåñëa's
family. They became first cousins of Lord Kåñëa and were practically on an
equal footing with Him. By personally killing them with His own disc, Lord
Kåñëa destroyed whatever sinful reactions were left in them because of the
curse of the brähmaëas. Närada Muni explained to Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira that
by entering Kåñëa's body, Çiçupäla reentered Vaikuëöhaloka as the Lord's
associate. Everyone had seen this incident.
TEXT 47
vEraNaubNDaTaqv]e<a DYaaNaeNaaCYauTaSaaTMaTaaMa( )
NaqTaaE PauNahR„re" Paaì| JaGMaTauivRZ<auPaazRdaE )) 47 ))
vairänubandha-tévreëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
69
dhyänenäcyuta-sätmatäm
nétau punar hareù pärçvaà
jagmatur viñëu-pärñadau
SYNONYMS
vaira-anubandha—bond of hatred; tévreëa—consisting of acute; dhyänena—by
meditation; acyuta-sätmatäm—to the effulgence of the infallible Lord;
nétau—attained; punaù—again; hareù—of Hari; pärçvam—the proximity;
jagmatuù—they reached; viñëu-pärñadau—the gatekeeper associates of Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
These two associates of Lord Viñëu—Jaya and Vijaya—maintained a feeling
of enmity for a very long time. Because of always thinking of Kåñëa in this way,
they regained the shelter of the Lord, having returned home, back to Godhead.
PURPORT
Whatever their position, certainly Jaya and Vijaya always thought of Kåñëa.
Therefore at the end of the mausala-lélä, these two associates of the Lord
returned to Kåñëa. There is no difference between Kåñëa's body and
Näräyaëa's body. Therefore although they visibly entered the body of Kåñëa,
they actually reentered Vaikuëöhaloka as the doorkeepers of Lord Viñëu.
Through Lord Kåñëa's body, they returned to Vaikuëöha, although they
seemed to have attained säyujya-mukti in Kåñëa's body.
TEXT 48
é[qYauiDaiïr ovac
ivÜezae diYaTae Pau}ae k-QaMaaSaqNMahaTMaiNa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
70
b]Uih Mae >aGavNYaeNa Pa[úadSYaaCYauTaaTMaTaa )) 48 ))
çré-yudhiñöhira uväca
vidveño dayite putre
katham äsén mahätmani
brühi me bhagavan yena
prahlädasyäcyutätmatä
SYNONYMS
çré-yudhiñöhiraù uväca—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira said; vidveñaù—hatred;
dayite—for his own beloved; putre—son; katham—how; äsét—there was;
mahä-ätmani—the great soul, Prahläda; brühi—please tell; me—unto me;
bhagavan—O exalted sage; yena—by which; prahlädasya—of Prahläda
Mahäräja; acyuta—to Acyuta; ätmatä—great attachment.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira inquired: O my lord, Närada Muni, why was there
such enmity between Hiraëyakaçipu and his beloved son Prahläda Mahäräja?
How did Prahläda Mahäräja become such a great devotee of Lord Kåñëa? Kindly
explain this to me.
PURPORT
All the devotees of Lord Kåñëa are called acyutätmä because they follow in
the footsteps of Prahläda Mahäräja. Acyuta refers to the infallible Lord Viñëu,
whose heart is always infallible. Because the devotees are attached to the
infallible, they are called acyutätmä.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, First Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Supreme Lord Is Equal to Everyone."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
71
2. Hiraëyakaçipu, King of the Demons
As described in this chapter, after the annihilation of Hiraëyäkña,
Hiraëyäkña's sons and his brother Hiraëyakaçipu were very much aggrieved.
Hiraëyakaçipu reacted very sinfully by trying to diminish the religious
activities of people in general. However, he instructed his nephews about a
history just to diminish their aggrievement.
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared as the boar and killed
Hiraëyakaçipu's brother Hiraëyäkña, Hiraëyakaçipu was very much aggrieved.
In anger, he accused the Supreme Personality of Godhead of being partial to
His devotees and derided the Lord's appearance as Varäha to kill his brother.
He began to agitate all the demons and Räkñasas and disturb the ritualistic
ceremonies of the peaceful sages and other inhabitants of earth. For want of
the performance of yajïa, sacrifice, the demigods began wandering unseen on
earth.
After finishing the ritualistic funeral ceremonies of his brother,
Hiraëyakaçipu began speaking to his nephews, quoting from the çästras about
the truth of life. To pacify them, he spoke as follows: "My dear nephews, for
heroes to die before the enemy is glorious. According to their different fruitive
activities, living entities come together within this material world and are
again separated by the laws of nature. We should always know, however, that
the spirit soul, which is different from the body, is eternal, unadjustable, pure,
all-pervading and aware of everything. When bound by the material energy,
the soul takes birth in higher or lower species of life according to varying
association and in this way receives various types of bodies in which to suffer
or enjoy. One's affliction by the conditions of material existence is the cause of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
72
happiness and distress; there are no other causes, and one should not be
aggrieved upon seeing the superficial actions of karma."
Hiraëyakaçipu then related a historical incident concerning a King Suyajïa
who resided in the country named Uçénara. When the King was killed, his
queens, overwhelmed with grief, received instructions, which Hiraëyakaçipu
quoted to his nephews. Hiraëyakaçipu related an account of a kuliìga bird
pierced by the arrow of a hunter while lamenting for his wife, who had also
been shot by the same hunter. By narrating these stories, Hiraëyakaçipu
pacified his nephews and other relatives and relieved them of lamentation.
Thus having been pacified, Diti and Ruñäbhänu, Hiraëyakaçipu's mother and
sister-in-law, engaged their minds in spiritual understanding.
TEXT 1
é[qNaard ovac
>a]aTaYaeRv& iviNahTae hir<aa §-ae@MaUiTaRNaa )
ihr<Yak-iXaPaU raJaNa( PaYaRTaPYad]uza éuca )) 1 ))
çré-närada uväca
bhrätary evaà vinihate
hariëä kroòa-mürtinä
hiraëyakaçipü räjan
paryatapyad ruñä çucä
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; bhrätari—when the brother
(Hiraëyäkña); evam—thus; vinihate—was killed; hariëä—by Hari;
kroòa-mürtinä—in the form of the boar, Varäha;
hiraëyakaçipuù—Hiraëyakaçipu; räjan—O King; paryatapyat—was afflicted;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
73
ruñä—by anger; çucä—by grief.
TRANSLATION
Çré Närada Muni said: My dear King Yudhiñöhira, when Lord Viñëu, in the
form of Varäha, the boar, killed Hiraëyäkña, Hiraëyäkña's brother
Hiraëyakaçipu was extremely angry and began to lament.
PURPORT
Yudhiñöhira had inquired from Närada Muni why Hiraëyakaçipu was so
envious of his own son Prahläda. Närada Muni began narrating the story by
explaining how Hiraëyakaçipu had become a staunch enemy of Lord Viñëu.
TEXT 2
Aah ced& åza PaU<aR" SaNdídXaNaC^d" )
k-aePaaeJJvl/Ùya& c+au>Yaa| iNarq+aNa( DaUMa]MaMbrMa( )) 2 ))
äha cedaà ruñä pürëaù
sandañöa-daçana-cchadaù
kopojjvaladbhyäà cakñurbhyäà
nirékñan dhümram ambaram
SYNONYMS
äha—said; ca—and; idam—this; ruñä—with anger; pürëaù—full;
sandañöa—bitten; daçana-chadaù—whose lips; kopa-ujjvaladbhyäm—blazing
with anger; cakñurbhyäm—with eyes; nirékñan—looking over;
dhümram—smoky; ambaram—the sky.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
74
TRANSLATION
Filled with rage and biting his lips, Hiraëyakaçipu gazed at the sky with eyes
that blazed in anger, making the whole sky smoky. Thus he began to speak.
PURPORT
As usual, the demon is envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
inimical toward Him. These were Hiraëyakaçipu's external bodily features as
he considered how to kill Lord Viñëu and devastate His kingdom,
Vaikuëöhaloka.
TEXT 3
k-ral/d&í\aeGa]d*íya duZPa[e+Ya>a]uku-$=qMau%" )
éUl/MauÛMYa SadiSa daNavaiNadMab]vqTa( )) 3 ))
karäla-daàñörogra-dåñöyä
duñprekñya-bhrukuöé-mukhaù
çülam udyamya sadasi
dänavän idam abravét
SYNONYMS
karäla-daàñöra—with terrible teeth; ugra-dåñöyä—and fierce glance;
duñprekñya—horrible to see; bhru-kuöé—with frowning eyebrows;
mukhaù—whose face; çülam—trident; udyamya—raising; sadasi—in the
assembly; dänavän—to the demons; idam—this; abravét—spoke.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
75
Exhibiting his terrible teeth, fierce glance and frowning eyebrows, terrible to
see, he took up his weapon, a trident, and thus began speaking to his associates,
the assembled demons.
TEXTS 4-5
>aae >aae daNavdETaeYaa iÜMaUDa|S}Ya+a XaMbr )
XaTabahae hYaGa]qv NaMauce Paak- wLvl/ )) 4 ))
ivPa[ictae MaMa vc" Paul/aeMaNa( Xaku-NaadYa" )
é*<auTaaNaNTar& SaveR i§-YaTaaMaaéu Maa icrMa( )) 5 ))
bho bho dänava-daiteyä
dvimürdhaàs tryakña çambara
çatabäho hayagréva
namuce päka ilvala
vipracitte mama vacaù
puloman çakunädayaù
çåëutänantaraà sarve
kriyatäm äçu mä ciram
SYNONYMS
bhoù—O; bhoù—O; dänava-daiteyäù—Dänavas and Daityas;
dvi-mürdhan—Dvimürdha (two-headed); tri-akña—Tryakña (three-eyed);
çambara—Çambara; çata-bäho—Çatabähu (hundred-armed);
hayagréva—Hayagréva (horse-headed); namuce—Namuci; päka—Päka;
ilvala—Ilvala; vipracitte—Vipracitti; mama—my; vacaù—words;
puloman—Puloma; çakuna—Çakuna; ädayaù—and others; çåëuta—just hear;
anantaram—after that; sarve—all; kriyatäm—let it be done; äçu—quickly;
mä—do not; ciram—delay.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
76
TRANSLATION
O Dänavas and Daityas! O Dvimürdha, Tryakña, Çambara and Çatabähu ! O
Hayagréva, Namuci, Päka and Ilvala! O Vipracitti, Puloman, Çakuna and other
demons! All of you, kindly hear me attentively and then act according to my
words without delay.
TEXT 6
SaPaÒEgaaRiTaTa" +aud]E>a]aRTaa Mae diYaTa" SauôTa( )
PaaiZ<aRGa]ahe<a hir<aa SaMaeNaaPYauPaDaavNaE" )) 6 ))
sapatnair ghätitaù kñudrair
bhrätä me dayitaù suhåt
pärñëi-gräheëa hariëä
samenäpy upadhävanaiù
SYNONYMS
sapatnaiù(2)-by the enemies; ghätitaù—killed; kñudraiù—insignificant in
power; bhrätä—brother; me—my; dayitaù—very dear; suhåt—well-wisher;
pärñëi-gräheëa—attacking from the rear; hariëä—by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; samena—equal to everyone (both the demigods and demons);
api—although; upadhävanaiù—by the worshipers, the demigods.
TRANSLATION
My insignificant enemies the demigods have combined to kill my very dear
and obedient well-wisher, my brother Hiraëyäkña. Although the Supreme Lord,
Viñëu, is always equal to both of us—namely, the demigods and the
demons—this time, being devoutly worshiped by the demigods, He has taken
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
77
their side and helped them kill Hiraëyäkña.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (9.29), samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu: the Lord is
equal to all living entities. Since the demigods and demons are both living
entities, how is it possible that the Lord was partial to one class of living beings
and opposed to another? Actually it is not possible for the Lord to be partial.
Nonetheless, since the demigods, the devotees, always strictly follow the
Supreme Lord's orders, because of sincerity they are victorious over the
demons, who know that the Supreme Lord is Viñëu but do not follow His
instructions. Because of constantly remembering the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Viñëu, the demons generally attain säyujya-mukti after death. The
demon Hiraëyakaçipu accused the Lord of being partial because the demigods
worshiped Him, but in fact the Lord, like the government, is not partial at all.
The government is not partial to any citizen, but if a citizen is law-abiding he
receives abundant opportunities from the state laws to live peacefully and
fulfill his real interests.
TEXTS 7-8
TaSYa TYa¢-Sv>aavSYa ga*<aeMaaRYaavNaaEk-Sa" )
>aJaNTa& >aJaMaaNaSYa bal/SYaevaiSQaraTMaNa" )) 7 ))
MaC^Ul/i>aàGa]qvSYa >aUir<aa åiDare<a vE )
ASa*iKPa[Ya& TaPaRiYaZYae >a]aTar& Mae GaTaVYaQa" )) 8 ))
tasya tyakta-svabhävasya
ghåëer mäyä-vanaukasaù
bhajantaà bhajamänasya
bälasyevästhirätmanaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
78
mac-chüla-bhinna-grévasya
bhüriëä rudhireëa vai
asåk-priyaà tarpayiñye
bhrätaraà me gata-vyathaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead);
tyakta-svabhävasya—who has given up His natural position (of being equal to
everyone); ghåëeù—most abominable; mäyä—under the influence of the
illusory energy; vana-okasaù—behaving exactly like an animal in the jungle;
bhajantam—unto the devotee engaged in devotional service;
bhajamänasya—being worshiped; bälasya—a child; iva—like;
asthira-ätmanaù—who is always restless and changing; mat—my; çüla—by the
trident; bhinna—separated; grévasya—whose neck; bhüriëä—profuse;
rudhireëa—by blood; vai—indeed; asåk-priyam—who was fond of blood;
tarpayiñye—I shall please; bhrätaram—brother; me—my;
gata-vyathaù—becoming peaceful myself.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has given up His natural tendency of
equality toward the demons and demigods. Although He is the Supreme Person,
now, influenced by mäyä, He has assumed the form of a boar to please His
devotees, the demigods, just as a restless child leans toward someone. I shall
therefore sever Lord Viñëu's head from His trunk by my trident, and with the
profuse blood from His body I shall please my brother Hiraëyäkña, who was so
fond of sucking blood. Thus shall I too be peaceful.
PURPORT
The defect of the demoniac mentality is expressed in this verse very clearly.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
79
Hiraëyakaçipu thought that Viñëu also becomes partial, like a child whose
mind is not steady or resolute. The Lord can change His mind at any time,
Hiraëyakaçipu thought, and therefore His words and activities are like those of
children. Actually, because the demons are ordinary human beings, their
minds change, and being materially conditioned, they think that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is conditioned also. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä
(9.11), avajänanti mäà müòhä mänuñéà tanum äçritam: "Fools deride Me when
I descend in a human form."
Demons always think that Viñëu can be killed. Therefore, being absorbed in
thoughts of Viñëu's form to kill Him, at least they have the opportunity to
think of Viñëu unfavorably. Although they are not devotees, their thinking of
Viñëu is effective, and thus they generally attain säyujya-mukti. Because the
demons consider the Supreme Lord an ordinary living being, they think that
they can kill Lord Viñëu as one might kill an ordinary person. Another fact
disclosed herein is that demons are very much fond of sucking blood. Indeed,
all of them are meat-eaters and bloodsuckers.
Hiraëyakaçipu accused the Supreme Lord of having a restless mind like that
of a small child who can be induced to do anything if simply offered some
cakes and läòòus. Indirectly, this indicates the true position of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.26):
patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà
yo me bhaktyä prayacchati
tad ahaà bhakty-upahåtam
açnämi prayatätmanaù
"If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will
accept it." The Lord accepts the offerings of devotees because of their
transcendental love. Because they are in love with the Supreme Lord, they do
not eat anything without offering it first to the Lord. The Lord does not
hanker for a small leaf or flower; He has enough to eat. Indeed, He is feeding
all living entities. Nonetheless, because He is very merciful and is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
80
bhakta-vatsala, very favorable to the devotees, He certainly eats whatever they
offer Him with love and devotion. This quality should not be misjudged to be
childish. The highest quality of the Supreme Lord is that He is bhakta-vatsala;
in other words, He is always extremely pleased with His devotees. As for the
word mäyä, when used in reference to the dealings of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and His devotees, this word means "affection." The actions of the
Lord to favor His devotees are not disqualifications but signs of His natural
affection.
As for rudhira, or the blood of Lord Viñëu, since there is no possibility of
severing Lord Viñëu's head from His body, there is no question of blood. But
the garland that decorates Viñëu's body is as red as blood. When the demons
achieve säyujya-mukti and leave behind their sinful activities, they are blessed
by Viñëu's garland, which is red like blood. After attaining säyujya-mukti, the
demons are sometimes promoted to the Vaikuëöha world, where they receive
the reward of the Lord's garland prasäda.
TEXT 9
TaiSMaNa( kU-$e=_ihTae Naíe k*-taMaUle/ vNaSPaTaaE )
iv$=Paa wv éuZYaiNTa ivZ<auPa[a<aa idvaEk-Sa" )) 9 ))
tasmin küöe 'hite nañöe
kåtta-müle vanas-patau
viöapä iva çuñyanti
viñëu-präëä divaukasaù
SYNONYMS
tasmin—when He; küöe—the most deceitful; ahite—enemy; nañöe—is finished;
kåtta-müle—having its roots cut off; vanas-patau—a tree; viöapäù—the
branches and leaves; iva—like; çuñyanti—dry up; viñëu-präëäù—whose life is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
81
Lord Viñëu; diva-okasaù—the demigods.
TRANSLATION
When the root of a tree is cut and the tree falls down, its branches and twigs
automatically dry up. Similarly, when I have killed this diplomatic Viñëu, the
demigods, for whom Lord Viñëu is the life and soul, will lose the source of their
life and wither away.
PURPORT
The difference between the demigods and the demons is here explained.
The demigods always follow the instructions of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, whereas the demons simply plan to disturb or kill Him. Nevertheless,
sometimes the demons very much appreciate the full dependence of the
demigods upon the mercy of the Lord. This is indirect glorification of the
demigods by the demons.
TEXT 10
TaavÛaTa >auv& YaUYa& b]ø+a}aSaMaeiDaTaaMa( )
SaUdYaß& TaPaaeYajSvaDYaaYav]TadaiNaNa" )) 10 ))
tävad yäta bhuvaà yüyaà
brahma-kñatra-samedhitäm
südayadhvaà tapo-yajïasvädhyäya-
vrata-däninaù
SYNONYMS
tävat—as long as (I am engaged in the matter of killing Viñëu); yäta—go;
bhuvam—to the planet earth; yüyam—all of you; brahma-kñatra—of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
82
brähmaëas and kñatriyas; samedhitäm—made prosperous by the activities
(brahminical culture and Vedic government); südayadhvam—just destroy;
tapaù—the performers of austerities; yajïa—sacrifices; svädhyäya—study of
Vedic knowledge; vrata—the regulative vows; däninaù—and those giving
charity.
TRANSLATION
While I am engaged in the business of killing Lord Viñëu, go down to the
planet earth, which is flourishing due to brahminical culture and a kñatriya
government. These people engage in austerity, sacrifice, Vedic study, regulative
vows, and charity. Destroy all the people thus engaged!
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu's main purpose was to disturb the demigods. He planned first
to kill Lord Viñëu so that with Lord Viñëu's death the demigods would
automatically weaken and die. Another of his plans was to disturb the
residents of the planet earth. The peace and prosperity of the residents of
earth, and all the other planets, were maintained by the brähmaëas and
kñatriyas. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.13), cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà
guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù: "According to the three modes of material nature and
the work ascribed to them, the four divisions of human society were created by
Me." On all the planets there are different types of residents, but the Lord
recommends, referring especially to the planet earth, which is inhabited by
human beings, that society be divided into four varëas-brähmaëa, kñatriya,
vaiçya and çüdra. Before the advent of Lord Kåñëa on this earth, it is
understood that the earth was managed by the brähmaëas and kñatriyas. The
duty of the brähmaëas is to cultivate çamaù (peacefulness), damaù
(self-control), titikñä (tolerance), satyam (truthfulness), çaucam (cleanliness)
and ärjavam (simplicity), and then to advise the kñatriya kings how to rule the
country or planet. Following the instructions of the brähmaëas, the kñatriyas
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
83
should engage the populace in austerity, sacrifices, Vedic study and adherence
to the rules and regulations established by Vedic principles. They should also
arrange for charity to be given to the brähmaëas, sannyäsés and temples. This is
the godly arrangement of brahminical culture.
People are inclined to offer yajïa because unless sacrifices are offered there
will be insufficient rain (yajïäd bhavati parjanyaù [Bg. 3.14]), which will
hamper agricultural activities (parjanyäd anna-sambhavaù). By introducing
brahminical culture, therefore, a kñatriya government should engage people in
performing yajïa, studying the Vedas and giving charity. Thus the people will
receive their necessities for life very easily, and there will be no disturbances
in society. In this regard, Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (3.12):
iñöän bhogän hi vo devä
däsyante yajïa-bhävitäù
tair dattän apradäyaibhyo
yo bhuìkte stena eva saù
"In charge of the various necessities of life, the demigods, being satisfied by the
performance of yajïa [sacrifice], supply all necessities to man. But he who
enjoys these gifts, without offering them to the demigods in return, is certainly
a thief."
The demigods are authorized supplying agents who act on behalf of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu. Therefore, they must be satisfied by
the performance of prescribed yajïas. In the Vedas, there are different kinds of
yajïas prescribed for different kinds of demigods, but all are ultimately offered
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For one who cannot understand what
the Personality of Godhead is, sacrifice to the demigods is recommended.
According to the different material qualities of the persons concerned,
different types of yajïas are recommended in the Vedas. Worship of different
demigods is also on the same basis—namely, according to different qualities.
For example, the meat-eaters are recommended to worship the goddess Kälé,
the ghastly form of material nature, and before the goddess the sacrifice of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
84
animals is recommended. But for those in the mode of goodness, the
transcendental worship of Viñëu is recommended. Ultimately, all yajïas are
meant for gradual promotion to the transcendental position. For ordinary
men, at least five yajïas, known as païca-mahäyajïa, are necessary.
One should know, however, that all the necessities of life that human
society requires are supplied by the demigod agents of the Lord. No one can
manufacture anything. Consider, for example, all the eatables of human
society. These eatables include grains, fruits, vegetables, milk and sugar for
persons in the mode of goodness, and also eatables for the nonvegetarians,
such as meats, none of which can be manufactured by men. Then again, take
for example, heat, light, water and air, which are also necessities of life—none
of them can be manufactured by human society. Without the Supreme Lord,
there can be no profuse sunlight, moonlight, rainfall or breeze, without which
no one can live. Obviously, our life is dependent on supplies from the Lord.
Even for our manufacturing enterprises, we require so many raw materials like
metal, sulphur, mercury, manganese and so many essentials—all of which are
supplied by the agents of the Lord, with the purpose that we should make
proper use of them to keep ourselves fit and healthy for the purpose of
self-realization, leading to the ultimate goal of life, namely, liberation from the
material struggle for existence. This aim of life is attained by performance of
yajïas. If we forget the purpose of human life and simply take supplies from the
agents of the Lord for sense gratification and become more and more
entangled in material existence, which is not the purpose of creation, certainly
we become thieves, and therefore we are punished by the laws of material
nature. A society of thieves can never be happy, for they have no aim in life.
The gross materialist thieves have no ultimate goal of life. They are simply
directed to sense gratification; nor do they have knowledge of how to perform
yajïas. Lord Caitanya, however, inaugurated the easiest performance of yajïa,
namely the saìkértana-yajïa, which can be performed by anyone in the world
who accepts the principles of Kåñëa consciousness.
Hiraëyakaçipu planned to kill the inhabitants of earth so that yajïa would
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
85
stop and the demigods, being disturbed, would die automatically when Lord
Viñëu, the yajïeçvara, was killed. These were the demoniac plans of
Hiraëyakaçipu, who was expert in such activities.
TEXT 11
ivZ<auiÜRJai§-YaaMaUl/ae Yajae DaMaRMaYa" PauMaaNa( )
devizRiPaTa*>aUTaaNaa& DaMaRSYa c ParaYa<aMa( )) 11 ))
viñëur dvija-kriyä-mülo
yajïo dharmamayaù pumän
devarñi-pitå-bhütänäà
dharmasya ca paräyaëam
SYNONYMS
viñëuù—Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dvija—of the
brähmaëas and kñatriyas; kriyä-mülaù—whose root is the performance of yajïa
and the ritualistic ceremonies mentioned in the Vedas; yajïaù—personified
yajïa (Lord Viñëu, who is known as the yajïa-puruña); dharma-mayaù—full of
religious principles; pumän—the Supreme Person; deva-åñi—of the demigods
and great åñis like Vyäsadeva and Närada; pitå—of the forefathers;
bhütänäm—and of all other living entities; dharmasya—of the religious
principles; ca—also; paräyaëam—the shelter.
TRANSLATION
The basic principle of brahminical culture is to satisfy Lord Viñëu, the
personification of sacrificial and ritualistic ceremonies. Lord Viñëu is the
personified reservoir of all religious principles, and He is the shelter of all the
demigods, the great pitäs, and the people in general. When the brähmaëas are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
86
killed, no one will exist to encourage the kñatriyas to perform yajïas, and thus
the demigods, not being appeased by yajïa, will automatically die.
PURPORT
Since Viñëu is the central point of brahminical culture, Hiraëyakaçipu's
plan was to kill Viñëu, for if Viñëu were killed, naturally the brahminical
culture would also be lost. With brahminical culture lost, yajïa would no
longer be performed, and for want of yajïa the regular distribution of rainfall
would cease (yajïäd bhavati parjanyaù [Bg. 3.14]). Thus there would be
disturbances all over the world, and naturally the demigods would be defeated.
From this verse we get a clear indication of how human society is disturbed
when the Vedic Äryan civilization is killed and the Vedic ritualistic
ceremonies performed by the brähmaëas are stopped. Kalau çüdra-sambhavaù:
because the population of the modern world consists mostly of çüdras, the
brahminical culture is now lost and is extremely difficult to reestablish in a
proper way. Therefore Lord Caitanya has recommended the chanting of the
holy name of the Lord, which will revive brahminical culture very easily.
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
Because of the increment in demoniac population, people have lost
brahminical culture. Nor is there a kñatriya government. Instead, the
government is a democracy in which any çüdra can be voted into taking up the
governmental reigns and capture the power to rule. Because of the poisonous
effects of Kali-yuga, the çästra (SB 12.2.13) says, dasyu-präyeñu räjasu: the
government will adopt the policies of dasyus, or plunderers. Thus there will be
no instructions from the brähmaëas, and even if there are brahminical
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
87
instructions, there will be no kñatriya rulers who can follow them. Aside from
Satya-yuga, even formerly, in the days when demons were flourishing,
Hiraëyakaçipu planned to destroy the brahminical culture and the kñatriya
government and thus create chaos all over the world. Although in Satya-yuga
this plan was very difficult to execute, in Kali-yuga, which is full of çüdras and
demons, the brahminical culture is lost and can be revived only by the
chanting of the mahä-mantra. Therefore the Kåñëa consciousness movement,
or the Hare Kåñëa movement, has been inaugurated to revive brahminical
culture very easily so that people may become happy and peaceful in this life
and prepare for elevation in the next. In this regard, Çréla Madhväcärya quotes
this verse from the Brahmäëòa Puräëa:
vipra-yajïädi-mülaà tu
harir ity äsuraà matam
harir eva hi sarvasya
mülaà samyaì mato nåpa
"O King, the demons think that Hari, Lord Viñëu, exists because of the
brähmaëas and yajïa, but factually Hari is the cause of everything including
the brähmaëas and yajïa." Therefore, through the popularizing of hari-kértana,
or the saìkértana movement, the brahminical culture and kñatriya government
will automatically come back, and people will be extremely happy.
TEXT 12
Ya}a Ya}a iÜJaa Gaavae veda v<aaRé[Mai§-Yaa" )
Ta& Ta& JaNaPad& YaaTa SaNdqPaYaTa v*êTa )) 12 ))
yatra yatra dvijä gävo
vedä varëäçrama-kriyäù
taà taà janapadaà yäta
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
88
sandépayata våçcata
SYNONYMS
yatra yatra—wherever; dvijäù—the brähmaëas; gävaù—the protected cows;
vedäù—the Vedic culture; varëa-äçrama—of the Äryan civilization of four
varëas and four äçramas; kriyäù—the activities; tam tam—that;
jana-padam—to the city or town; yäta—go; sandépayata—set fire; våçcata—cut
down (all the trees).
TRANSLATION
Immediately go wherever there is good protection for the cows and
brähmaëas and wherever the Vedas are studied in terms of the varëäçrama
principles. Set fire to those places and cut from the roots the trees there, which
are the source of life.
PURPORT
The picture of a proper human civilization is indirectly described here. In a
perfect human civilization there must be a class of men fully trained as perfect
brähmaëas. Similarly, there must be kñatriyas to rule the country very nicely
according to the injunctions of the çästras, and there must be vaiçyas who can
protect the cows. The word gävaù indicates that cows should be given
protection. Because the Vedic civilization is lost, cows are not protected, but
instead indiscriminately killed in slaughterhouses. Such are the acts of
demons. Therefore this is a demoniac civilization. The varëäçrama-dharma
mentioned here is essential for human civilization. Unless there is a brähmaëa
to guide, a kñatriya to rule perfectly, and a perfect vaiçya to produce food and
protect the cows, how will people live peacefully? It is impossible.
Another point is that trees also should be given protection. During its
lifetime, a tree should not be cut for industrial enterprises. In Kali-yuga, trees
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
89
are indiscriminately and unnecessarily cut for industry, in particular for paper
mills that manufacture a profuse quantity of paper for the publication of
demoniac propaganda, nonsensical literature, huge quantities of newspapers
and many other paper products. This is a sign of a demoniac civilization. The
cutting of trees is prohibited unless necessary for the service of Lord Viñëu.
Yajïärthät karmaëo'nyatra loko'yaà karma-bandhanaù: [Bg. 3.9]) "work done
as a sacrifice for Lord Viñëu must be performed, otherwise work binds one to
this material world." But if the paper mills stop producing paper, one may
argue, how can our ISKCON literature be published? The answer is that the
paper mills should manufacture paper only for the publication of ISKCON
literature because ISKCON literature is published for the service of Lord
Viñëu. This literature clarifies our relationship with Lord Viñëu, and therefore
the publication of ISKCON literature is the performance of yajïa. Yajïärthät
karmaëo 'nyatra loko 'yaà karma-bandhanaù [Bg. 3.9]). Yajïa must be
performed, as indicated by the superior authorities. The cutting of trees simply
to manufacture paper for the publication of unwanted literature is the greatest
sinful act.
TEXT 13
wiTa Tae >aTa*RiNadeRXaMaadaYa iXarSaad*Taa" )
TaQaa Pa[JaaNaa& k-dNa& ivdDau" k-dNaiPa[Yaa" )) 13 ))
iti te bhartå-nirdeçam
ädäya çirasädåtäù
tathä prajänäà kadanaà
vidadhuù kadana-priyäù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; te—they; bhartå—of the master; nirdeçam—the direction;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
90
ädäya—receiving; çirasä—with their heads; ädåtäù—respecting; tathä—so
also; prajänäm—of all the citizens; kadanam—persecution;
vidadhuù—executed; kadana-priyäù—who are expert in persecuting others.
TRANSLATION
Thus the demons, being fond of disastrous activities, took Hiraëyakaçipu's
instructions on their heads with great respect and offered him obeisances.
According to his directions, they engaged in envious activities directed against
all living beings.
PURPORT
The followers of demoniac principles, as described here, are thoroughly
envious of the general populace. In the present day, scientific advancement
exemplifies such envy. The discovery of nuclear energy has been disastrous to
people in general because demons all over the world are manufacturing
nuclear weapons. The word kadana-priyäù is very significant in this regard.
The demoniac persons who want to kill the Vedic culture are extremely
envious of the feeble citizens, and they act in such a way that ultimately their
discoveries will be inauspicious for everyone (jagato 'hitäù). The Sixteenth
Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä fully explains how the demons engage in sinful
activities for the destruction of the populace.
TEXT 14
PaurGa]aMav]JaaeÛaNa+ae}aaraMaaé[Maak-raNa( )
%e$=%vR$=gaaeza&ê ddhu" PataNaaiNa c )) 14 ))
pura-gräma-vrajodyänakñeträrämäçramäkarän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
91
kheöa-kharvaöa-ghoñäàç ca
dadahuù pattanäni ca
SYNONYMS
pura—cities and towns; gräma—villages; vraja—pasturing grounds;
udyäna—gardens; kñetra—agricultural fields; äräma—natural forests;
äçrama—hermitages of saintly persons; äkarän—and mines (that produce
valuable metals to maintain brahminical culture); kheöa—farm villages;
kharvaöa—mountain villages; ghoñän—the little villages of cowherds; ca—and;
dadahuù—they burned; pattanäni—the capitals; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The demons set fire to the cities, villages, pasturing grounds, cowpens,
gardens, agricultural fields and natural forests. They burned the hermitages of
the saintly persons, the important mines that produced valuable metals, the
residential quarters of the agriculturalists, the mountain villages, and the
villages of the cow protectors, the cowherd men. They also burned the
government capitals.
PURPORT
The word udyäna refers to places where trees are especially grown to
produce fruits and flowers, which are most important for human civilization.
Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.26):
patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà
yo me bhaktyä prayacchati
tad ahaà bhakty-upahåtam
açnämi prayatätmanaù
"If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
92
accept it." Fruits and flowers are very much pleasing to the Lord. If one wants
to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he can simply offer fruits and
flowers, and the Lord will be pleased to accept them. Our only duty is to please
the Supreme Godhead (saàsiddhir hari-toñaëam [SB 1.2.13]). Whatever we do
and whatever our occupation, our main purpose should be to please the
Supreme Lord. All the paraphernalia mentioned in this verse is especially
meant for the satisfaction of the Lord, not the satisfaction of one's senses. The
government—indeed, the entire society—should be structured in such a way
that everyone can be trained to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
But unfortunately, especially in this age, na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum:
[SB 7.5.31] people do not know that the highest goal of human life is to please
Lord Viñëu. On the contrary, like demons, they simply plan to kill Viñëu and
be happy by sense gratification.
TEXT 15
ke-icT%iNa}aEibRi>adu" SaeTauPa[ak-arGaaePauraNa( )
AaJaqVYaa&iêiC^duv*R+aaNa( ke-icTParéuPaa<aYa" )
Pa[adhHa( Xar<aaNYaeke- Pa[JaaNaa& Jvil/TaaeLMaukE-" )) 15 ))
kecit khanitrair bibhiduù
setu-präkära-gopurän
äjévyäàç cicchidur våkñän
kecit paraçu-päëayaù
prädahaï çaraëäny eke
prajänäà jvalitolmukaiù
SYNONYMS
kecit—some of the demons; khanitraiù—with digging instruments;
bibhiduù—broke to pieces; setu—bridges; präkära—protective walls;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
93
gopurän—city gates; äjévyän—the source of livelihood; cicchiduù—cut down;
våkñän—trees; kecit—some; paraçu-päëayaù—taking axes in hand;
prädahan—burned down; çaraëäni—the dwellings; eke—other demons;
prajänäm—of the citizens; jvalita—blazing; ulmukaiù—with firebrands.
TRANSLATION
Some of the demons took digging instruments and broke down the bridges,
the protective walls and the gates [gopuras] of the cities. Some took axes and
began cutting the important trees that produced mango, jackfruit and other
sources of food. Some of the demons took firebrands and set fire to the
residential quarters of the citizens.
PURPORT
The cutting of trees is generally prohibited. In particular, trees that produce
nice fruit for the maintenance of human society should not be cut. In different
countries there are different types of fruit trees. In India the mango and
jackfruit trees are prominent, and in other places there are mango trees,
jackfruit trees, coconut trees and berry trees. Any tree that produces nice fruit
for the maintenance of the people should not be cut at all. This is a çästric
injunction.
TEXT 16
Wv& ivPa[k*-Tae l/aeke- dETYaeNd]aNaucrEMauRhu" )
idv& deva" PairTYaJYa >auiv ceårl/i+aTaa" )) 16 ))
evaà viprakåte loke
daityendränucarair muhuù
divaà deväù parityajya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
94
bhuvi cerur alakñitäù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; viprakåte—being disturbed; loke—when all the people;
daitya-indra-anucaraiù—by the followers of Hiraëyakaçipu, the King of the
Daityas; muhuù—again and again; divam—the heavenly planets; deväù—the
demigods; parityajya—giving up; bhuvi—on the planet earth; ceruù—wandered
(to see the extent of the disturbances); alakñitäù—unseen by the demons.
TRANSLATION
Thus disturbed again and again by the unnatural occurrences caused by the
followers of Hiraëyakaçipu, all the people had to cease the activities of Vedic
culture. Not receiving the results of yajïa, the demigods also became disturbed.
They left their residential quarters in the heavenly planets and, unobserved by
the demons, began wandering on the planet earth to see the disasters.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, the performance of yajïa brings reciprocal good
fortune for both the human beings and the demigods. When the performances
of yajïa were stopped by the disturbances of the demons, the demigods were
naturally bereft of the results of yajïa and hampered in executing their
respective duties. Therefore they came down to the planet earth to see how
people had become disturbed and to consider what to do.
TEXT 17
ihr<Yak-iXaPau>a]aRTau" SaMPareTaSYa du"i%Ta" )
k*-Tva k-$=aedk-adqiNa >a]aTa*Pau}aaNaSaaNTvYaTa( )) 17 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
95
hiraëyakaçipur bhrätuù
samparetasya duùkhitaù
kåtvä kaöodakädéni
bhrätå-puträn asäntvayat
SYNONYMS
hiraëyakaçipuù—Hiraëyakaçipu; bhrätuù—of the brother;
samparetasya—deceased; duùkhitaù—being very much distressed;
kåtvä—performing; kaöodaka-ädéni—ceremonies observed after a death;
bhrätå-puträn—the sons of his brother; asäntvayat—pacified.
TRANSLATION
After performing the ritualistic observances for the death of his brother,
Hiraëyakaçipu, being extremely unhappy, tried to pacify his nephews.
TEXTS 18-19
Xaku-iNa& XaMbr& Da*ií& >aUTaSaNTaaPaNa& v*k-Ma( )
k-al/Naa>a& MahaNaa>a& hirXMaé[uMaQaaeTk-cMa( )) 18 ))
TaNMaaTar& åza>aaNau& idiTa& c JaNaNaq& iGara )
ë+<aYaa deXak-al/j wdMaah JaNaeìr )) 19 ))
çakunià çambaraà dhåñöià
bhütasantäpanaà våkam
kälanäbhaà mahänäbhaà
hariçmaçrum athotkacam
tan-mätaraà ruñäbhänuà
ditià ca jananéà girä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
96
çlakñëayä deça-käla-jïa
idam äha janeçvara
SYNONYMS
çakunim—Çakuni; çambaram—Çambara; dhåñöim—Dhåñöi;
bhütasantäpanam—Bhütasantäpana; våkam—Våka; kälanäbham—Kälanäbha;
mahänäbham—Mahänäbha; hariçmaçrum—Hariçmaçru; atha—as well as;
utkacam—Utkaca; tat-mätaram—their mother; ruñäbhänum—Ruñäbhänu;
ditim—Diti; ca—and; jananém—his own mother; girä—by words;
çlakñëayä—very sweet; deça-käla-jïaù—who was expert in understanding the
time and situation; idam—this; äha—said; jana-éçvara—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, Hiraëyakaçipu was extremely angry, but since he was a great
politician, he knew how to act according to the time and situation. With sweet
words he began pacifying his nephews, whose names were Çakuni, Çambara,
Dhåñöi, Bhütasantäpana, Våka, Kälanäbha, Mahänäbha, Hariçmaçru and
Utkaca. He also consoled their mother, his sister-in-law, Ruñäbhänu, as well as
his own mother, Diti. He spoke to them all as follows.
TEXT 20
é[qihr<Yak-iXaPauåvac
AMbaMb he vDaU" Pau}aa vqr& MaahRQa XaaeicTauMa( )
irPaaeri>aMau%e ëagYa" éUra<aa& vDa wRiPSaTa" )) 20 ))
çré-hiraëyakaçipur uväca
ambämba he vadhüù puträ
véraà märhatha çocitum
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
97
ripor abhimukhe çläghyaù
çüräëäà vadha épsitaù
SYNONYMS
çré-hiraëyakaçipuù uväca—Hiraëyakaçipu said; amba amba—my mother, my
mother; he—O; vadhüù—my sister-in-law; puträù—O sons of my brother;
véram—the hero; mä—not; arhatha—you deserve; çocitum—to lament about;
ripoù—of the enemy; abhimukhe—in front; çläghyaù—glorious; çüräëäm—of
those who are actually great; vadhaù—killing; épsitaù—desired.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu said: My dear mother, sister-in-law and nephews, you should
not lament for the death of the great hero, for a hero's death in front of his
enemy is glorious and desirable.
TEXT 21
>aUTaaNaaiMah Sa&vaSa" Pa[PaaYaaiMav Sauv]Tae )
dEveNaEk-}a NaqTaaNaaMauàqTaaNaa& Svk-MaRi>a" )) 21 ))
bhütänäm iha saàväsaù
prapäyäm iva suvrate
daivenaikatra nétänäm
unnétänäà sva-karmabhiù
SYNONYMS
bhütänäm—of all living entities; iha—in this material world; saàväsaù—the
living together; prapäyäm—in a place for drinking cold water; iva—like;
su-vrate—O my gentle mother; daivena—by the superior arrangement;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
98
ekatra—in one place; nétänäm—of those brought; unnétänäm—of those led
apart; sva-karmabhiù—by their own reactions.
TRANSLATION
My dear mother, in a restaurant or place for drinking cold water, many
travelers are brought together, and after drinking water they continue to their
respective destinations. Similarly, living entities join together in a family, and
later, as a result of their own actions, they are led apart to their destinations.
PURPORT
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
"The bewildered soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself the doer of activities, which are in actuality carried out
by nature." (Bg. 3.27) All living entities act exactly according to the directions
of prakåti, material nature, because in the material world we are fully under a
higher control. All the living entities in this material world have come here
only because they wanted to be equal to Kåñëa in enjoyment and have thus
been sent here to be conditioned by material nature in different degrees. In
the material world a so-called family is a combination of several persons in one
home to fulfill the terms of their imprisonment. As criminal prisoners scatter
as soon as their terms are over and they are released, all of us who have
temporarily assembled as family members will continue to our respective
destinations. Another example given is that family members are like straws
carried together by the waves of a river. Sometimes such straws mix together
in whirlpools, and later, dispersed again by the same waves, they float alone in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
99
the water.
Although Hiraëyakaçipu was a demon, he had Vedic knowledge and
understanding. Thus the advice given to his family members—his
sister-in-law, mother and nephews—was quite sound. The demons are
considered highly elevated in knowledge, but because they do not use their
good intelligence for the service of the Lord, they are called demons. The
demigods, however, act very intelligently to satisfy the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This is confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.13) as follows:
ataù pumbhir dvija-çreñöhä
varëäçrama-vibhägaçaù
svanuñöhitasya dharmasya
saàsiddhir hari-toñaëam
"O best among the twice-born, it is therefore concluded that the highest
perfection one can achieve, by discharging his prescribed duties [dharma]
according to caste divisions and orders of life, is to please the Lord Hari." To
become a demigod or to become godly, whatever one's occupation, one must
satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 22
iNaTYa AaTMaaVYaYa" éuÖ" SavRGa" SavRivTPar" )
Datae_SaavaTMaNaae il/(r)& MaaYaYaa ivSa*JaNGau<aaNa( )) 22 ))
nitya ätmävyayaù çuddhaù
sarvagaù sarva-vit paraù
dhatte 'säv ätmano liìgaà
mäyayä visåjan guëän
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
100
nityaù—eternal; ätmä—spirit soul; avyayaù—inexhaustible; çuddhaù—with no
material tinge; sarva-gaù—qualified to go anywhere in the material or spiritual
worlds; sarva-vit—full of knowledge; paraù—transcendental to material
conditions; dhatte—accepts; asau—that ätmä, or living being; ätmanaù—of
the self; liìgam—a body; mäyayä—by the material energy; visåjan—creating;
guëän—various material qualities.
TRANSLATION
The spirit soul, the living entity, has no death, for he is eternal and
inexhaustible. Being free from material contamination, he can go anywhere in
the material or spiritual worlds. He is fully aware and completely different from
the material body, but because of being misled by misuse of his slight
independence, he is obliged to accept subtle and gross bodies created by the
material energy and thus be subjected to so-called material happiness and
distress. Therefore, no one should lament for the passing of the spirit soul from
the body.
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu very intelligently described the position of the soul. The soul
is never the body, but is always completely different from the body. Being
eternal and inexhaustible, the soul has no death, but when the same pure soul
desires to enjoy the material world independently, he is placed under the
conditions of material nature and must therefore accept a certain type of body
and suffer the pains and pleasures thereof. This is also described by Kåñëa in
Bhagavad-gétä (13.22). Käraëaà guëa-saìgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni janmasu: the
living entity is born in different families or species of life because of being
infected by the modes of material nature. When conditioned by material
nature, the living entity must accept a certain type of body, which is offered by
nature under the direction of the Supreme Lord.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
101
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of
the material energy." (Bg. 18.61) The body is just like a machine, and according
to the living entity's karma, he is offered a particular type of machine to move
here and there under the control of material nature. This continues until he
surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead (mäm eva ye prapadyante
mäyäm etäà taranti te [Bg. 7.14]). Until he surrenders, the conditioned soul is
carried from life to life by the arrangement of material nature.
TEXT 23
YaQaaM>aSaa Pa[cl/Taa Tarvae_iPa cl/a wv )
c+auza >a]aMYaMaa<aeNa d*XYaTae cl/Taqv >aU" )) 23 ))
yathämbhasä pracalatä
taravo 'pi calä iva
cakñuñä bhrämyamäëena
dåçyate calatéva bhüù
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; ambhasä—by water; pracalatä—moving; taravaù—the trees (on
the bank of the river); api—also; caläù—moving; iva—as if; cakñuñä—by the
eye; bhrämyamäëena—moving; dåçyate—is seen; calaté—moving; iva—as if;
bhüù—the ground.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
102
TRANSLATION
Because of the movements of the water, the trees on the bank of a river,
when reflected on the water, seem to move. Similarly, when the eyes move
because of some mental derangement, the land appears to move also.
PURPORT
Sometimes, because of mental derangement, the land appears to be moving.
A drunkard, for example, or a person with heart disease, sometimes feels that
the land is moving. Similarly, the reflections of trees in a flowing river also
appear to move. These are the actions of mäyä. Actually the living entity does
not move (sthäëur acalo 'yam). The living entity does not take birth or accept
death, but because of the transient subtle and gross bodies, the living entity
appears to move from one place to another or be dead and gone forever. As the
great Bengali Vaiñëava poet, Jagadänanda Paëòita, has said:
piçäcé päile yena mati-cchanna haya
mäyä-grasta jévera haya se bhäva udaya
According to this statement from the Prema-vivarta, when a living entity is
conditioned by material nature, he is exactly like a person haunted by a ghost.
One should therefore understand the fixed position of the spirit soul and how
he is carried away by the waves of material nature to different bodies and
different situations under lamentation and hankering. One achieves the
success of life when he understands the constitutional position of his self and
is undisturbed by the conditions created by material nature (prakåteù
kriyamäëäni guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù [Bg. 3.27]).
TEXT 24
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
103
Wv& Gau<aE>a]aRMYaMaa<ae MaNaSYaivk-l/" PauMaaNa( )
YaaiTa TaTSaaMYaTaa& >ad]e ùil/(r)ae il/(r)vaiNav )) 24 ))
evaà guëair bhrämyamäëe
manasy avikalaù pumän
yäti tat-sämyatäà bhadre
hy aliìgo liìgavän iva
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; guëaiù—by the modes of material nature;
bhrämyamäëe—when shaken; manasi—the mind; avikalaù—changeless;
pumän—the living entity; yäti—approaches; tat-sämyatäm—the same
condition of agitation as the mind; bhadre—O my gentle mother; hi—indeed;
aliìgaù—without a subtle or gross body; liìga-vän—possessing a material body;
iva—as if.
TRANSLATION
In the same way, O my gentle mother, when the mind is agitated by the
movements of the modes of material nature, the living entity, although freed
from all the different phases of the subtle and gross bodies, thinks that he has
changed from one condition to another.
PURPORT
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.84.13):
yasyätma-buddhiù kuëape tri-dhätuke
sva-dhéù kalaträdiñu bhauma-ijya-dhéù
yat-tértha-buddhiù salile na karhicij
janeñv abhijïeñu sa eva go-kharaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
104
"A human being who identifies the body made of three elements as the self,
who considers the by-products of the body to be his kinsmen, who considers
the land of his birth worshipable, and who goes to a place of pilgrimage simply
to bathe rather than to meet men of transcendental knowledge there, is to be
considered like a cow or an ass." Although Hiraëyakaçipu was a great demon,
he was not as foolish as the population of the modern world. Hiraëyakaçipu
had clear knowledge of the spirit soul and the subtle and gross bodies, but now
we are so degraded that everyone, including the exalted scientists,
philosophers and other leaders, is under the bodily conception of life, which is
condemned in the çästras. Sa eva go-kharaù: [SB 10.84.13] such persons are
nothing but cows and asses.
Hiraëyakaçipu advised his family members that although the gross body of
his brother Hiraëyäkña was dead and they were aggrieved because of this, they
should not lament for the great soul of Hiraëyäkña, who had already attained
his next destination. Ätmä, the spirit soul, is always unchanged (avikalaù
pumän). We are spirit souls, but when carried away by mental activities
(manodharma), we suffer from so-called material conditions of life. This
generally happens to nondevotees. Haräv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëäù:
nondevotees may possess exalted material qualities, but because they are
foolish they have no good qualifications. The designations of the conditioned
soul in the material world are decorations of the dead body. The conditioned
soul has no information of the spirit and its exalted existence beyond the
effects of the material condition.
TEXTS 25-26
Wz AaTMaivPaYaaRSaae ùil/(r)e il/(r)>aavNaa )
Wz iPa[YaaiPa[YaEYaaeRGaae ivYaaeGa" k-MaRSa&Sa*iTa" )) 25 ))
SaM>avê ivNaaXaê Xaaek-ê ivivDa" SMa*Ta" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
105
Aivvek-ê icNTaa c ivvek-aSMa*iTarev c )) 26 ))
eña ätma-viparyäso
hy aliìge liìga-bhävanä
eña priyäpriyair yogo
viyogaù karma-saàsåtiù
sambhavaç ca vinäçaç ca
çokaç ca vividhaù småtaù
avivekaç ca cintä ca
vivekäsmåtir eva ca
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; ätma-viparyäsaù—bewilderment of the living being; hi—indeed;
aliìge—in that which does not possess a material body;
liìga-bhävanä—accepting the material body to be the self; eñaù—this;
priya—with those who are very dear; apriyaiù—and with those who are not
dear (enemies, those not in the family, etc.); yogaù—connection;
viyogaù—separation; karma—the fruits of action; saàsåtiù—the material
condition of life; sambhavaù—accepting birth; ca—and; vinäçaù—accepting
death; ca—and; çokaù—lamentation; ca—and; vividhaù—varieties;
småtaù—mentioned in scripture; avivekaù—lack of discrimination; ca—and;
cintä—anxiety; ca—also; viveka—of proper discrimination;
asmåtiù—forgetfulness; eva—indeed; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
In his bewildered state, the living entity, accepting the body and mind to be
the self, considers some people to be his kinsmen and others to be outsiders.
Because of this misconception, he suffers. Indeed, the accumulation of such
concocted material ideas is the cause of suffering and so-called happiness in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
106
material world. The conditioned soul thus situated must take birth in different
species and work in various types of consciousness, thus creating new bodies.
This continued material life is called saàsära. Birth, death, lamentation,
foolishness and anxiety are due to such material considerations. Thus we
sometimes come to a proper understanding and sometimes fall again to a wrong
conception of life.
TEXT 27
A}aaPYaudahrNTaqMaiMaiTahaSa& PauraTaNaMa( )
YaMaSYa Pa[eTabNDaUNaa& Sa&vad& Ta& iNabaeDaTa )) 27 ))
aträpy udäharantémam
itihäsaà purätanam
yamasya preta-bandhünäà
saàvädaà taà nibodhata
SYNONYMS
atra—in this connection; api—indeed; udäharanti—they cite; imam—this;
itihäsam—history; purätanam—very old; yamasya—of Yamaräja, the
superintendent of death, who gives judgment after death;
preta-bandhünäm—of the friends of a dead man; saàvädam—discussion;
tam—that; nibodhata—try to understand.
TRANSLATION
In this regard, an example is given from an old history. This involves a
discourse between Yamaräja and the friends of a dead person. Please hear it
attentively.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
107
PURPORT
The words itihäsaà purätanam mean "an old history." The Puräëas are not
chronologically recorded, but the incidents mentioned in the Puräëas are
actual histories of bygone ages. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the Mahä-Puräëa, the
essence of all the Puräëas. The Mäyävädé scholars do not accept the Puräëas,
but Çréla Madhväcärya and all other authorities accept them as the
authoritative histories of the world.
TEXT 28
oXaqNareZv>aUd]aJaa SauYaj wiTa ivé[uTa" )
SaPaÒEiNaRhTaae YauÖe jaTaYaSTaMauPaaSaTa )) 28 ))
uçénareñv abhüd räjä
suyajïa iti viçrutaù
sapatnair nihato yuddhe
jïätayas tam upäsata
SYNONYMS
uçénareñu—in the state known as Uçénara; abhüt—there was; räjä—a king;
suyajïaù—Suyajïa; iti—thus; viçrutaù—celebrated; sapatnaiù—by enemies;
nihataù—killed; yuddhe—in war; jïätayaù—the kinsmen; tam—him;
upäsata—sat around.
TRANSLATION
In the state known as Uçénara there was a celebrated King named Suyajïa.
When the King was killed in battle by his enemies, his kinsmen sat down
around the dead body and began to lament the death of their friend.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
108
TEXTS 29-31
ivXaq<aRrÒk-vc& iv>a]ía>ar<aóJaMa( )
XariNai>aRàôdYa& XaYaaNaMaSa*Gaaivl/Ma( )) 29 ))
Pa[k-I<aRke-Xa& ßSTaa+a& r>aSaa dídC^dMa( )
rJa"ku-<#=Mau%aM>aaeJa& i^àaYauDa>auJa& Ma*Dae )) 30 ))
oXaqNareNd]& iviDaNaa TaQaa k*-Ta&
PaiTa& MaihZYa" Pa[SaMaq+Ya du"i%Taa" )
hTaa" SMa NaaQaeiTa k-rEårae >a*Xa&
ganNTYaae MauhuSTaTPadYaaeåPaaPaTaNa( )) 31 ))
viçérëa-ratna-kavacaà
vibhrañöäbharaëa-srajam
çara-nirbhinna-hådayaà
çayänam asåg-ävilam
prakérëa-keçaà dhvastäkñaà
rabhasä dañöa-dacchadam
rajaù-kuëöha-mukhämbhojaà
chinnäyudha-bhujaà mådhe
uçénarendraà vidhinä tathä kåtaà
patià mahiñyaù prasamékñya duùkhitäù
hatäù sma nätheti karair uro bhåçaà
ghnantyo muhus tat-padayor upäpatan
SYNONYMS
viçérëa—scattered here and there; ratna—made of jewels;
kavacam—protective armor; vibhrañöa—fallen off; äbharaëa—ornaments;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
109
srajam—garlands; çara-nirbhinna—pierced by arrows; hådayam—the heart;
çayänam—lying down; asåk-ävilam—smeared with blood; prakérëa-keçam—his
hair loosened and scattered; dhvasta-akñam—his eyes obscured; rabhasä—with
anger; dañöa—bitten; dacchadam—his lips; rajaù-kuëöha—covered with dust;
mukha-ambhojam—his face, which had formerly resembled a lotus flower;
chinna—cut off; äyudha-bhujam—his arms and weapons; mådhe—on the
battlefield; uçénara-indram—the master of the state of Uçénara; vidhinä—by
providence; tathä—thus; kåtam—forced into this position; patim—the
husband; mahiñyaù—the queens; prasamékñya—seeing; duùkhitäù—very much
aggrieved; hatäù—killed; sma—certainly; nätha—O husband; iti—thus;
karaiù—with the hands; uraù—the breast; bhåçam—constantly;
ghnantyaù—pounding; muhuù—again and again; tat-padayoù—at the feet of
the King; upäpatan—fell down.
TRANSLATION
His golden, bejeweled armor smashed, his ornaments and garlands fallen
from their places, his hair scattered and his eyes lusterless, the slain King lay on
the battlefield, his entire body smeared with blood, his heart pierced by the
arrows of the enemy. When he died he had wanted to show his prowess, and
thus he had bitten his lips, and his teeth remained in that position. His
beautiful lotuslike face was now black and covered with dust from the
battlefield. His arms, with his sword and other weapons, were cut and broken.
When the queens of the King of Uçénara saw their husband lying in that
position, they began crying, "O lord, now that you have been killed, we also
have been killed." Repeating these words again and again, they fell down,
pounding their breasts, at the feet of the dead King.
PURPORT
As stated here, rabhasä dañöa-dacchadam: the dead King, while fighting in
anger, bit his lips to show his prowess, but nonetheless he was killed by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
110
providence (vidhinä). This proves that we are controlled by higher authorities;
our personal power or endeavor is not always supreme. We must therefore
accept the position offered to us by the order of the Supreme.
TEXT 32
ådTYa oÀEdRiYaTaax(iga]PaªJa&
iSaÄNTYa AóE" ku-cku-x(ku-Maaå<aE" )
ivóSTake-Xaa>ar<aa" éuc& Na*<aa&
Sa*JaNTYa Aa§-NdNaYaa ivle/iPare )) 32 ))
rudatya uccair dayitäìghri-paìkajaà
siïcantya asraiù kuca-kuìkumäruëaiù
visrasta-keçäbharaëäù çucaà nåëäà
såjantya äkrandanayä vilepire
SYNONYMS
rudatyaù—crying; uccaiù—very loudly; dayita—of their beloved husband;
aìghri-paìkajam—the lotus feet; siïcantyaù—moistening; asraiù—with tears;
kuca-kuìkuma-aruëaiù—which were red from the kuìkuma covering their
breasts; visrasta—scattered; keça—hair; äbharaëäù—and ornaments;
çucam—grief; nåëäm—of the people in general; såjantyaù—creating;
äkrandanayä—by crying very pitiably; vilepire—began to lament.
TRANSLATION
As the queens loudly cried, their tears glided down their breasts, becoming
reddened by kuìkuma powder, and fell upon the lotus feet of their husband.
Their hair became disarrayed, their ornaments fell, and in a way that evoked
sympathy from the hearts of others, the queens began lamenting their husband's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
111
death.
TEXT 33
Ahae ivDaa}aak-å<aeNa Na" Pa[>aae
>avaNa( Pa[<aqTaae d*GaGaaecra& dXaaMa( )
oXaqNara<aaMaiSa v*itad" Paura
k*-Taae_DauNaa YaeNa éuca& ivvDaRNa" )) 33 ))
aho vidhäträkaruëena naù prabho
bhavän praëéto dåg-agocaräà daçäm
uçénaräëäm asi våttidaù purä
kåto 'dhunä yena çucäà vivardhanaù
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; vidhäträ—by providence; akaruëena—who is merciless; naù—our;
prabho—O lord; bhavän—Your Lordship; praëétaù—taken away; dåk—of
sight; agocaräm—beyond the range; daçäm—to a state; uçénaräëäm—to the
inhabitants of the state of Uçénara; asi—you were; våtti-daù—giving
livelihood; purä—formerly; kåtaù—finished; adhunä—now; yena—by whom;
çucäm—of lamentation; vivardhanaù—increasing.
TRANSLATION
O lord, you have now been removed by cruel providence to a state beyond
our sight. You had previously sustained the livelihood of the inhabitants of
Uçénara, and thus they were happy, but your condition now is the cause of
their unhappiness.
TEXT 34
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
112
TvYaa k*-TajeNa vYa& MahqPaTae
k-Qa& ivNaa SYaaMa SauôtaMaeNa Tae )
Ta}aaNauYaaNa& Tav vqr PaadYaae"
éué[UzTaqNaa& idXa Ya}a YaaSYaiSa )) 34 ))
tvayä kåtajïena vayaà mahé-pate
kathaà vinä syäma suhåttamena te
tatränuyänaà tava véra pädayoù
çuçrüñaténäà diça yatra yäsyasi
SYNONYMS
tvayä—you; kåtajïena—a most grateful personality; vayam—we; mahé-pate—O
King; katham—how; vinä—without; syäma—shall exist; suhåt-tamena—the
best of our friends; te—of you; tatra—there; anuyänam—the following;
tava—of you; véra—O hero; pädayoù—of the lotus feet; çuçrüñaténäm—of
those engaging in the service; diça—please order; yatra—where; yäsyasi—you
will go.
TRANSLATION
O King, O hero, you were a very grateful husband and the most sincere
friend of all of us. How shall we exist without you? O hero, wherever you are
going, please direct us there so that we may follow in your footsteps and engage
again in your service. Let us go along with you!
PURPORT
Formerly, a kñatriya king was generally the husband of many wives, and
after the death of the king, especially in the battlefield, all the queens would
agree to accept saha-märaëa, dying with the husband who was their life. When
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
113
Päëòu Mahäräja, the father of the Päëòavas, died, his two wives—namely, the
mother of Yudhiñöhira, Bhéma and Arjuna and the mother of Nakula and
Sahadeva—were both ready to die in the fire with their husband. Later, after a
compromise was arranged, Kunté stayed alive to care for the little children, and
the other wife, Mädré, was allowed to die with her husband. This system of
saha-märaëa continued in India even until the time of British rule, but later it
was discouraged, since the attitude of wives gradually changed with the
advancement of Kali-yuga. Thus the system of saha-märaëa has practically
been abolished. Nevertheless, within the past fifty years I have seen the wife of
a medical practitioner voluntarily accept death immediately when her husband
died. Both the husband and wife were taken in procession in the mourning
cart. Such intense love of a chaste wife for her husband is a special case.
TEXT 35
Wv& ivl/PaTaqNaa& vE PairGa*ù Ma*Ta& PaiTaMa( )
AiNaC^TaqNaa& iNahaRrMak-aeR_STa& Sa&NYavTaRTa )) 35 ))
evaà vilapaténäà vai
parigåhya måtaà patim
anicchaténäà nirhäram
arko 'staà sannyavartata
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; vilapaténäm—of the lamenting queens; vai—indeed;
parigåhya—taking on their laps; måtam—the dead; patim—husband;
anicchaténäm—not desiring; nirhäram—the carrying out of the body for the
funeral ceremony; arkaù—the sun; astam—the setting position;
sannyavartata—passed away.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
114
TRANSLATION
The time was appropriate for the body to be burned, but the queens, not
allowing it to be taken away, continued lamenting for the dead body, which
they kept on their laps. In the meantime, the sun completed its movements for
setting in the west.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic system, if a person dies during the daytime it is
customary for his funeral ceremony to be performed before the sun sets,
regardless of whether he is burned or buried, and if he dies at night the funeral
must be completed before the next sunrise. Apparently the queens continued
lamenting for the dead body, the lump of matter, and would not allow it to be
taken away for burning. This illustrates the strong grip of illusion among
foolish persons who consider the body the self. Women are generally
considered less intelligent. Because of ignorance only, the queens thought of
the dead body as their husband and somehow or other thought that if the body
were kept their husband would remain with them. Such a conception of the
self is certainly for go-khara-cows and asses. We have actually seen that
sometimes when a cow's calf has died the milkman cheats the cow by
presenting before her the dead body of her calf. Thus the cow, who would not
otherwise allow milking, licks the dead body of the calf and allows herself to be
milked. This substantiates the description of the çästra that a foolish man in
the bodily concept of life is like a cow. Not only do foolish men and women
consider the body the self, but we have even seen that the dead body of a
so-called yogé was kept for days by his disciples, who thought that their guru
was in samädhi. When decomposition began and a bad smell unfortunately
began to overwhelm the yogic power, the disciples allowed the dead body of
the so-called yogé to be burned. Thus the bodily concept of life is extremely
strong among foolish persons, who are compared to cows and asses. Nowadays,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
115
great scientists are trying to freeze dead bodies so that in the future these
frozen bodies may again be brought to life. The incident narrated by
Hiraëyakaçipu from history must have taken place millions of years ago
because Hiraëyakaçipu lived millions of years ago and was even then quoting
from history. Thus the incident occurred before Hiraëyakaçipu's lifetime, but
the same ignorance in the bodily concept of life is still prevalent, not only
among laymen but even among scientists who think they will be able to revive
frozen corpses.
Apparently the queens did not want to deliver the dead body for burning
because they were afraid of dying with the dead body of their husband.
TEXT 36
Ta}a h Pa[eTabNDaUNaaMaaé[uTYa PairdeivTaMa( )
Aah TaaNa( bal/k-ae >aUTva YaMa" SvYaMauPaaGaTa" )) 36 ))
tatra ha preta-bandhünäm
äçrutya paridevitam
äha tän bälako bhütvä
yamaù svayam upägataù
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; ha—certainly; preta-bandhünäm—of the friends and relatives of
the dead King; äçrutya—hearing; paridevitam—the loud lamentation (so loud
that it could be heard from the planet of Yamaräja); äha—said; tän—unto
them (the lamenting queens); bälakaù—a boy; bhütvä—becoming;
yamaù—Yamaräja, the superintendent of death; svayam—personally;
upägataù—after coming.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
116
TRANSLATION
While the queens were lamenting for the dead body of the King, their loud
cries were heard even from the abode of Yamaräja. Assuming the body of a boy,
Yamaräja personally approached the relatives of the dead body and advised them
as follows.
PURPORT
Sometimes the living entity is forced to give up his body and enter another
one according to the judgment of Yamaräja. It is difficult, however, for the
conditioned soul to enter another body unless the present dead body is
annihilated through cremation or some other means. The living being has
attachment for the present body and does not want to enter another, and thus
in the interim he remains a ghost. If a living being who has already left his
body has been pious, Yamaräja, just to give him relief, will give him another
body. Since the living being in the body of the King had some attachment to
his body, he was hovering as a ghost, and therefore Yamaräja, as a special
consideration, approached the lamenting relatives to instruct them personally.
Yamaräja approached them as a child because a child is not restricted but is
granted admittance anywhere, even to the palace of a king. Besides this, the
child was speaking philosophy. People are very much interested in hearing
philosophy when it is spoken by a child.
TEXT 37
é[qYaMa ovac
Ahae AMaqza& vYaSaaiDak-aNaa&
ivPaXYaTaa& l/aek-iviDa& ivMaaeh" )
Ya}aaGaTaSTa}a GaTa& MaNauZYa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
117
SvYa& SaDaMaaR AiPa XaaecNTYaPaaQaRMa( )) 37 ))
çré-yama uväca
aho améñäà vayasädhikänäà
vipaçyatäà loka-vidhià vimohaù
yaträgatas tatra gataà manuñyaà
svayaà sadharmä api çocanty apärtham
SYNONYMS
çré-yamaù uväca—Çré Yamaräja said; aho—alas; améñäm—of these; vayasä—by
age; adhikänäm—of those advanced; vipaçyatäm—seeing every day;
loka-vidhim—the law of nature (that everyone dies); vimohaù—the
bewilderment; yatra—from where; ägataù—came; tatra—there;
gatam—returned; manuñyam—the man; svayam—themselves;
sa-dharmäù—similar in nature (prone to die); api—although; çocanti—they
lament; apärtham—uselessly.
TRANSLATION
Çré Yamaräja said: Alas, how amazing it is! These persons, who are older
than me, have full experience that hundreds and thousands of living entities
have taken birth and died. Thus they should understand that they also are apt
to die, yet still they are bewildered. The conditioned soul comes from an
unknown place and returns after death to that same unknown place. There is
no exception to this rule, which is conducted by material nature. Knowing this,
why do they uselessly lament?
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (2.28):
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
118
avyaktädéni bhütäni
vyakta-madhyäni bhärata
avyakta-nidhanäny eva
tatra kä paridevanä
"All created beings are unmanifest in their beginning, manifest in their
interim state, and unmanifest again when they are annihilated. So what need
is there for lamentation?"
Accepting that there are two classes of philosophers, one believing in the
existence of the soul and the other not believing in its existence, there is no
cause for lamentation in either case. Nonbelievers in the existence of the soul
are called atheists by followers of Vedic wisdom. Yet even if for argument's
sake we accept the atheistic theory, there is still no cause for lamentation.
Apart from the separate existence of the soul, the material elements remain
unmanifested before creation. From this subtle state of unmanifestation comes
manifestation, just as from ether, air is generated; from air, fire is generated;
from fire, water is generated; and from water, earth becomes manifested. From
the earth, many varieties of manifestations take place. For example, a big
skyscraper is manifested from the earth. When it is dismantled, the
manifestation becomes again unmanifested and remains as atoms in the
ultimate stage. The law of conservation of energy remains, but in the course of
time things are manifested and unmanifested—that is the difference. Then
what cause is there for lamentation, in either manifestation or
unmanifestation? Somehow or other, even in the unmanifested stage, things
are not lost. Both at the beginning and at the end, all elements remain
unmanifested, and this does not make any real material difference.
If we accept the Vedic conclusion as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (antavanta
ime dehäù) that these material bodies are perishable in due course of time
(nityasyoktäù çarériëaù) but that the soul is eternal, then we must remember
always that the body is like a dress; therefore why lament the changing of a
dress? The material body has no factual existence in relation to the eternal
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
119
soul. It is something like a dream. In a dream we may think of flying in the sky
or sitting on a chariot as a king, but when we wake up we can see that we are
neither in the sky nor seated on the chariot. The Vedic wisdom encourages
self-realization on the basis of the nonexistence of the material body.
Therefore, in either case, whether one believes in the existence of the soul or
one does not believe in the existence of the soul, there is no cause for
lamentation for loss of the body.
In the Mahäbhärata it is said, adarçanäd ihäyätaù punaç cädarçanaà gataù.
This statement could support the theory of the atheistic scientist that the child
in the womb of the mother has no life but is simply a lump of matter. To follow
this theory, if the lump of matter is aborted by a surgical operation, no life is
killed; the body of a child is like a tumor, and if a tumor is operated upon and
thrown away, no sin is involved. The same argument could be put forward in
regard to the King and his queens. The body of the King was manifested from
an unmanifested source, and again it became unmanifested from
manifestation. Since the manifestation exists only in the middle—between the
two points of unmanifestation—why should one cry for the body manifested
in the interim?
TEXT 38
Ahae vYa& DaNYaTaMaa Yad}a
TYa¢-a" iPaTa*>Yaa& Na ivicNTaYaaMa" )
A>a+YaMaa<aa Abl/a v*k-aidi>a"
Sa ri+aTaa r+aiTa Yaae ih Ga>aeR )) 38 ))
aho vayaà dhanyatamä yad atra
tyaktäù pitåbhyäà na vicintayämaù
abhakñyamäëä abalä våkädibhiù
sa rakñitä rakñati yo hi garbhe
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
120
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; vayam—we; dhanya-tamäù—most fortunate; yat—because;
atra—at the present moment; tyaktäù—left alone, without protection;
pitåbhyäm—by both father and mother; na—not; vicintayämaù—worry;
abhakñyamäëäù—not being eaten; abaläù—very weak; våka-ädibhiù—by tigers
and other ferocious animals; saù—He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead);
rakñitä—will protect; rakñati—has protected; yaù—who; hi—indeed;
garbhe—within the womb.
TRANSLATION
It is wonderful that these elderly women do not have a higher sense of life
than we do. Indeed, we are most fortunate, for although we are children and
have been left to struggle in material life, unprotected by father and mother,
and although we are very weak, we have not been vanquished or eaten by
ferocious animals. Thus we have a firm belief that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who has given us protection even in the womb of the mother, will
protect us everywhere.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (18.61), éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna
tiñöhati: the Lord is present in the core of everyone's heart. Thus the Lord gives
protection to everyone and gives the different types of bodies the living entity
wants to enjoy. Everything is done by the order of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Therefore one should not lament the birth and death of a living
being, which have been arranged by the Supreme Lord. Lord Kåñëa says in
Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam
apohanaà ca: "I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come
remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." One must act according to the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
121
direction of the Lord within the heart, but because the conditioned soul wants
to act independently, the Lord gives him the facility to act and experience the
reactions. The Lord says, sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja:
[Bg. 18.66] "Give up all other duties and simply surrender unto Me." One who
does not abide by the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is given
the facility to enjoy this material world. Instead of restricting him, the Lord
gives the conditioned soul the opportunity to enjoy so that by mature
experience, after many, many births (bahünäà janmanäm ante [Bg. 7.19]), he
will understand that surrender to the lotus feet of Väsudeva is the only duty of
all living beings.
TEXT 39
Ya wC^YaeXa" Sa*JaTaqdMaVYaYaae
Ya Wv r+aTYavlu/MPaTae c Ya" )
TaSYaabl/a" §-I@NaMaahurqiXaTau‚
êracr& iNaGa]hSa°he Pa[>au" )) 39 ))
ya icchayeçaù såjatédam avyayo
ya eva rakñaty avalumpate ca yaù
tasyäbaläù kréòanam ähur éçituç
caräcaraà nigraha-saìgrahe prabhuù
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; icchayä—by His will (without being forced by anyone); éçaù—the
supreme controller; såjati—creates; idam—this (material world);
avyayaù—remaining as He is (not having lost His own existence because of
having created so many material manifestations); yaù—who; eva—indeed;
rakñati—maintains; avalumpate—annihilates; ca—also; yaù—who; tasya—of
Him; abaläù—O poor women; kréòanam—the playing; ähuù—they say;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
122
éçituù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; cara-acaram—moving and
not moving; nigraha—in destruction; saìgrahe—or in protection;
prabhuù—fully able.
TRANSLATION
The boy addressed the women: O weak women! Only by the will of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is never diminished, is the entire world
created, maintained and again annihilated. This is the verdict of the Vedic
knowledge. This material creation, consisting of the moving and nonmoving, is
exactly like His plaything. Being the Supreme Lord, He is completely
competent to destroy and protect.
PURPORT
In this regard the queens might argue, "If our husband was protected by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead when in the womb, why has he not been
given protection now?" To this question the answer is, ya icchayeçaù såjatédam
avyayo ya eva rakñaty avalumpate ca yaù. One cannot argue with the activities
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is always free, and therefore
He can protect and can also annihilate. He is not our order carrier; whatever
He likes He will do. Therefore He is the Supreme Lord. The Lord does not
create this material world at anyone's request, and therefore He can annihilate
everything merely by His will. That is His supremacy. If one argues, "Why does
He act in this way?" the answer is that He can do so because He is supreme. No
one can question His activities. If one argues, "What is the purpose of this
sinful creation and annihilation?" the answer is that to prove His omnipotence
He can do anything, and no one can question Him. If He were answerable to
us concerning why He does something and why He does not, His supremacy
would be curtailed.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
123
TEXT 40
PaiQa CYauTa& iTaïiTa idíri+aTa&
Ga*he iSQaTa& TaiÜhTa& ivNaXYaiTa )
JaqvTYaNaaQaae_iPa Tadqi+aTaae vNae
Ga*he_i>aGauáae_SYa hTaae Na JaqviTa )) 40 ))
pathi cyutaà tiñöhati diñöa-rakñitaà
gåhe sthitaà tad-vihataà vinaçyati
jévaty anätho 'pi tad-ékñito vane
gåhe 'bhigupto 'sya hato na jévati
SYNONYMS
pathi—on the public road; cyutam—some possession dropped; tiñöhati—it
remains; diñöa-rakñitam—protected by destiny; gåhe—at home;
sthitam—although situated; tat-vihatam—struck by the will of the Supreme;
vinaçyati—it is lost; jévati—remains alive; anäthaù api—although without a
protector; tat-ékñitaù—being protected by the Lord; vane—in the forest;
gåhe—at home; abhiguptaù—well hidden and protected; asya—of this one;
hataù—struck; na—not; jévati—lives.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes one loses his money on a public street, where everyone can see it,
and yet his money is protected by destiny and not seen by others. Thus the man
who lost it gets it back. On the other hand, if the Lord does not give protection,
even money maintained very securely at home is lost. If the Supreme Lord gives
one protection, even though one has no protector and is in the jungle, one
remains alive, whereas a person well protected at home by relatives and others
sometimes dies, no one being able to protect him.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
124
PURPORT
These are examples of the supremacy of the Lord. Our plans to protect or
annihilate do not act, but whatever He thinks of doing actually happens. The
examples given in this regard are practical. Everyone has had such practical
experiences, and there are also many other clear examples. For instance,
Prahläda Mahäräja said that a child is certainly dependent on his father and
mother, but in spite of their presence, the child is harassed in many ways.
Sometimes, in spite of a supply of good medicine and an experienced
physician, a patient does not survive. Therefore, since everything is dependent
on the free will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, our only duty is to
surrender unto Him and seek His protection.
TEXT 41
>aUTaaiNa TaESTaEiNaRJaYaaeiNak-MaRi>a‚
>aRviNTa k-ale/ Na >aviNTa SavRXa" )
Na Ta}a haTMaa Pa[k*-TaaviPa iSQaTa‚
STaSYaa Gau<aErNYaTaMaae ih bDYaTae )) 41 ))
bhütäni tais tair nija-yoni-karmabhir
bhavanti käle na bhavanti sarvaçaù
na tatra hätmä prakåtäv api sthitas
tasyä guëair anyatamo hi badhyate
SYNONYMS
bhütäni—all the bodies of the living entities; taiù taiù—their own respective;
nija-yoni—causing their own bodies; karmabhiù—by past activities;
bhavanti—appear; käle—in due course of time; na bhavanti—disappear;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
125
sarvaçaù—in all respects; na—not; tatra—there; ha—indeed; ätmä—the soul;
prakåtau—within this material world; api—although; sthitaù—situated;
tasyäù—of her (the material energy); guëaiù—by different modes;
anya-tamaù—most different; hi—indeed; badhyate—is bound.
TRANSLATION
Every conditioned soul receives a different type of body according to his
work, and when the engagement is finished the body is finished. Although the
spirit soul is situated in subtle and gross material bodies in different forms of
life, he is not bound by them, for he is always understood to be completely
different from the manifested body.
PURPORT
Here it is very plainly explained that God is not responsible for the living
entity's accepting different types of bodies. One has to accept a body according
to the laws of nature and one's own karma. Therefore the Vedic injunction is
that a person engaged in material activities should be given directions by
which he can intelligently apply his activities to the service of the Lord to
become free from the material bondage of repeated birth and death
(sva-karmaëä tam abhyarcya siddhià vindati mänavaù [Bg. 18.46]). The Lord is
always ready to give directions. Indeed, His directions are elaborately given in
Bhagavad-gétä. If we take advantage of these directions, then in spite of our
being conditioned by the laws of material nature, we shall become free to
attain our original constitution (mäm eva ye prapadyante mäyäm etäà taranti te
[Bg. 7.14]). We should have firm faith that the Lord is supreme and that if we
surrender to Him, He will take charge of us and indicate how we can get out of
material life and return home, back to Godhead. Without such surrender, one
is obliged to accept a certain type of body according to his karma, sometimes as
an animal, sometimes a demigod and so on. Although the body is obtained and
lost in due course of time, the spirit soul does not actually mix with the body,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
126
but is subjugated by the particular modes of nature with which he is sinfully
associated. Spiritual education changes one's consciousness so that one simply
carries out the orders of the Supreme Lord and becomes free from the
influence of the modes of material nature.
TEXT 42
wd& Xarqr& PauåzSYa MaaehJa&
YaQaa Pa*QaG>aaEiTak-MaqYaTae Ga*hMa( )
YaQaaEdkE-" PaaiQaRvTaEJaSaEJaRNa"
k-ale/Na JaaTaae ivk*-Taae ivNaXYaiTa )) 42 ))
idaà çaréraà puruñasya mohajaà
yathä påthag bhautikam éyate gåham
yathaudakaiù pärthiva-taijasair janaù
kälena jäto vikåto vinaçyati
SYNONYMS
idam—this; çaréram—body; puruñasya—of the conditioned soul;
moha-jam—born of ignorance; yathä—just as; påthak—separate;
bhautikam—material; éyate—is seen; gåham—a house; yathä—just as;
udakaiù—with water; pärthiva—with earth; taijasaiù—and with fire;
janaù—the conditioned soul; kälena—in due course of time; jätaù—born;
vikåtaù—transformed; vinaçyati—is vanquished.
TRANSLATION
Just as a householder, although different from the identity of his house,
thinks his house to be identical with him, so the conditioned soul, due to
ignorance, accepts the body to be himself, although the body is actually
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
127
different from the soul. This body is obtained through a combination of portions
of earth, water and fire, and when the earth, water and fire are transformed in
the course of time, the body is vanquished. The soul has nothing to do with this
creation and dissolution of the body.
PURPORT
We transmigrate from one body to another in bodies that are products of
our illusion, but as spirit souls we always exist separately from material,
conditional life. The example given here is that a house or car is always
different from its owner, but because of attachment the conditioned soul
thinks it to be identical with him. A car or house is actually made of material
elements; as long as the material elements combine together properly, the car
or house exists, and when they are disassembled the house or the car is
disassembled. The spirit soul, however, always remains as he is.
TEXT 43
YaQaaNal/ae daåzu i>aà wRYaTae
YaQaaiNal/ae dehGaTa" Pa*Qak(- iSQaTa" )
YaQaa Na>a" SavRGaTa& Na SaÂTae
TaQaa PauMaaNa( SavRGau<aaé[Ya" Par" )) 43 ))
yathänalo däruñu bhinna éyate
yathänilo deha-gataù påthak sthitaù
yathä nabhaù sarva-gataà na sajjate
tathä pumän sarva-guëäçrayaù paraù
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; analaù—the fire; däruñu—in wood; bhinnaù—separate;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
128
éyate—is perceived; yathä—just as; anilaù—the air; deha-gataù—within the
body; påthak—separate; sthitaù—situated; yathä—just as; nabhaù—the sky;
sarva-gatam—all-pervading; na—not; sajjate—mix; tathä—similarly;
pumän—the living entity; sarva-guëa-äçrayaù—although now the shelter of
the modes of material nature; paraù—transcendental to material
contamination.
TRANSLATION
As fire, although situated in wood, is perceived to be different from the
wood, as air, although situated within the mouth and nostrils, is perceived to be
separate, and as the sky, although all-pervading, never mixes with anything, so
the living entity, although now encaged within the material body, of which it is
the source, is separate from it.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä the Supreme Personality of Godhead has explained that
the material energy and spiritual energy both emanate from Him. The material
energy is described as me bhinnä prakåtir añöadhä [Bg. 7.4], the eight separated
energies of the Lord. But although the eight gross and subtle material
energies—namely, earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false
ego—are stated to be bhinnä, separate from the Lord, actually they are not. As
fire appears separate from wood and as the air flowing through the nostrils and
mouth of the body appear separate from the body, so the Paramätmä, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, appears separate from the living being but is
actually separate and not separate simultaneously. This is the philosophy of
acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(3) propounded by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
According to the reactions of karma, the living being appears separate from
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but actually he is very intimately related
with the Lord. Consequently, even though we now seem neglected by the
Lord, He is actually always alert to our activities. Under all circumstances,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
129
therefore, we should simply depend on the supremacy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and thus revive our intimate relationship with Him.
We must depend upon the authority and control of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 44
SauYajae NaNvYa& XaeTae MaU!a YaMaNauXaaecQa )
Ya" é[aeTaa Yaae_Nauv¢e-h Sa Na d*XYaeTa k-ihRicTa( )) 44 ))
suyajïo nanv ayaà çete
müòhä yam anuçocatha
yaù çrotä yo 'nuvakteha
sa na dåçyeta karhicit
SYNONYMS
suyajïaù—the king named Suyajïa; nanu—indeed; ayam—this; çete—lies;
müòhäù—O foolish people; yam—whom; anuçocatha—you cry for; yaù—he
who; çrotä—the hearer; yaù—he who; anuvaktä—the speaker; iha—in this
world; saù—he; na—not; dåçyeta—is visible; karhicit—at any time.
TRANSLATION
Yamaräja continued: O lamenters, you are all fools! The person named
Suyajïa, for whom you lament, is still lying before you and has not gone
anywhere. Then what is the cause for your lamentation? Previously he heard
you and replied to you, but now, not finding him, you are lamenting. This is
contradictory behavior, for you have never actually seen the person within the
body who heard you and replied. There is no need for your lamentation, for the
body you have always seen is lying here.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
130
PURPORT
This instruction by Yamaräja in the form of a boy is understandable even
for a common man. A common man who considers the body the self is
certainly comparable to an animal (yasyätma-buddhiù kuëape tri-dhätuke. .. sa
eva go-kharaù [SB 10.84.13]). But even a common man can understand that
after death a person is gone. Although the body is still there, a dead man's
relatives lament that the person has gone away, for a common man sees the
body but cannot see the soul. As described in Bhagavad-gétä, dehino 'smin yathä
dehe: [Bg. 2.13] the soul, the proprietor of the body, is within. After death,
when the breath within the nostrils has stopped, one can understand that the
person within the body, who was hearing and replying, has now gone.
Therefore, in effect, the common man concludes that actually the spirit soul
was different from the body and has now gone away. Thus even a common
man, coming to his senses, can know that the real person who was within the
body and was hearing and replying was never seen. For that which was never
seen, what is the need of lamentation?
TEXT 45
Na é[aeTaa NaaNauv¢-aYa& Mau:Yaae_PYa}a MahaNaSau" )
YaiSTvheiNd]YavaNaaTMaa Sa caNYa" Pa[a<adehYaae" )) 45 ))
na çrotä nänuvaktäyaà
mukhyo 'py atra mahän asuù
yas tv ihendriyavän ätmä
sa cänyaù präëa-dehayoù
SYNONYMS
na—not; çrotä—the listener; na—not; anuvaktä—the speaker; ayam—this;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
131
mukhyaù—chief; api—although; atra—in this body; mahän—the great;
asuù—life air; yaù—he who; tu—but; iha—in this body;
indriya-vän—possessing all the sense organs; ätmä—the soul; saù—he;
ca—and; anyaù—different; präëa-dehayoù—from the life air and the material
body.
TRANSLATION
In the body the most important substance is the life air, but that also is
neither the listener nor the speaker. Beyond even the life air, the soul also can
do nothing, for the Supersoul is actually the director, in cooperation with the
individual soul. The Supersoul conducting the activities of the body is different
from the body and living force.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead distinctly says in Bhagavad-gétä
(15.15), sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: "I
am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge
and forgetfulness." Although the ätmä, or soul, is present in every material
body (dehino 'smin yathä dehe [Bg. 2.13]), he is not actually the chief person
acting through the senses, mind and so on. The soul can merely act in
cooperation with the Supersoul because it is the Supersoul who gives him
directions to act or not to act (mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca [Bg. 15.15]).
One cannot act without His sanction, for the Supersoul is upadrañöä and
anumantä, the witness and sanctioner. One who studies carefully, under the
direction of a bona fide spiritual master, can understand the real knowledge
that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is actually the conductor of all the
activities of the individual soul, and the controller of their results as well.
Although the individual soul possesses the indriyas, or senses, he is not actually
the proprietor, for the proprietor is the Supersoul. Consequently the Supersoul
is called Håñékeça, and the individual soul is advised by the direction of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
132
Supersoul to surrender to Him and thus be happy (sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja). Thus he can become immortal and be transferred to
the spiritual kingdom, where he will achieve the highest success of an eternal,
blissful life of knowledge. In conclusion, the individual soul is different from
the body, senses, living force and the airs within the body, and above him is
the Supersoul, who gives the individual soul all facilities. The individual soul
who renders everything to the Supersoul lives very happily within the body.
TEXT 46
>aUTaeiNd]YaMaNaaeil/(r)aNa( dehaNauÀavcaNa( iv>au" )
>aJaTYauTSa*JaiTa ùNYaSTaÀaiPa SveNa TaeJaSaa )) 46 ))
bhütendriya-mano-liìgän
dehän uccävacän vibhuù
bhajaty utsåjati hy anyas
tac cäpi svena tejasä
SYNONYMS
bhüta—by the five material elements; indriya—the ten senses; manaù—and
the mind; liìgän—characterized; dehän—gross material bodies;
ucca-avacän—high class and low class; vibhuù—the individual soul, which is
the lord of the body and senses; bhajati—achieves; utsåjati—gives up;
hi—indeed; anyaù—being different; tat—that; ca—also; api—indeed;
svena—by his own; tejasä—power of advanced knowledge.
TRANSLATION
The five material elements, the ten senses and the mind all combine to form
the various parts of the gross and subtle bodies. The living entity comes in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
133
contact with his material bodies, whether high or low, and later gives them up
by his personal prowess. This strength can be perceived in a living entity's
personal power to possess different types of bodies.
PURPORT
The conditioned soul has knowledge, and if he wants to fully utilize the
gross and subtle bodies for his real advancement in life, he can do so. It is
therefore said here that by his high intelligence (svena tejasä), by the superior
power of superior knowledge achieved from the right source—the spiritual
master, or äcärya—he can give up his conditional life in a material body and
return home, back to Godhead. However, if he wants to keep himself in the
darkness of this material world, he can do so. The Lord confirms this as follows
in Bhagavad-gétä (9.25):
yänti deva-vratä devän
pitèn yänti pitå-vratäù
bhütäni yänti bhütejyä
yänti mad-yäjino 'pi mäm
"Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those
who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; those who
worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship Me will live with
Me."
The human form of body is valuable. One can use this body to go to the
higher planetary systems, to Pitåloka, or he can remain in this lower planetary
system, but if one tries he can also return home, back to Godhead. This
prowess is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the Supersoul.
Therefore the Lord says, mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: [Bg. 15.15] "From
Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." If one wants to receive
real knowledge from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can become
free from bondage to repeated acceptance of material bodies. If one takes to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
134
the devotional service of the Lord and surrenders unto Him, the Lord is
prepared to give one directions by which to return home, back to Godhead,
but if one foolishly wants to keep himself in darkness, he can continue in a life
of material existence.
TEXT 47
Yaaviç(r)aiNvTaae ùaTMaa TaavTa( k-MaRiNabNDaNaMa( )
TaTaae ivPaYaRYa" (c)e-Xaae MaaYaaYaaeGaae_NauvTaRTae )) 47 ))
yäval liìgänvito hy ätmä
tävat karma-nibandhanam
tato viparyayaù kleço
mäyä-yogo 'nuvartate
SYNONYMS
yävat—as long as; liìga-anvitaù—covered by the subtle body; hi—indeed;
ätmä—the soul; tävat—that long; karma—of fruitive activities;
nibandhanam—bondage; tataù—from that; viparyayaù—reversal (wrongly
thinking the body to be the self); kleçaù—misery; mäyä-yogaù—a strong
relationship with the external, illusory energy; anuvartate—follows.
TRANSLATION
As long as the spirit soul is covered by the subtle body, consisting of the
mind, intelligence and false ego, he is bound to the results of his fruitive
activities. Because of this covering, the spirit soul is connected with the
material energy and must accordingly suffer material conditions and reversals,
continually, life after life.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
135
PURPORT
The living entity is bound by the subtle body, consisting of the mind,
intelligence and false ego. At the time of death, therefore, the position of the
mind becomes the cause for the next body. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä
(8.6), yaà yaà väpi smaran bhävaà tyajaty ante kalevaram: at the time of death
the mind sets the criteria for the spirit soul's being carried to another type of
body. If a living being resists the dictation of the mind and engages the mind
in the loving service of the Lord, the mind cannot degrade him. The duty of all
human beings, therefore, is to keep the mind always engaged at the lotus feet
of the Lord (sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]). When the mind is
engaged at the lotus feet of Kåñëa, the intelligence is purified, and then the
intelligence gets inspiration from the Supersoul (dadämi buddhi-yogaà tam).
Thus the living entity makes progress toward liberation from material bondage.
The individual living soul is subject to the laws of fruitive activity, but the
Supersoul, Paramätmä, is not affected by the fruitive activities of the
individual soul. As confirmed in the Vedic Upaniñad, the Paramätmä and the
jévätmä, who are likened to two birds, are sitting in the body. The jévätmä is
enjoying or suffering by eating the fruits of the bodily activities, but the
Paramätmä, who is free from such bondage, witnesses and sanctions the
activities of the individual soul as the individual soul desires.
TEXT 48
ivTaQaai>aiNaveXaae_Ya& Yad( Gau<aeZvQaRd*Gvc" )
YaQaa MaNaaerQa" SvPan" SavRMaEiNd]Yak&- Ma*za )) 48 ))
vitathäbhiniveço 'yaà
yad guëeñv artha-dåg-vacaù
yathä manorathaù svapnaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
136
sarvam aindriyakaà måñä
SYNONYMS
vitatha—fruitless; abhiniveçaù—the conception; ayam—this; yat—which;
guëeñu—in the modes of material nature; artha—as a fact; dåk-vacaù—the
seeing and talking of; yathä—just as; manorathaù—a mental concoction
(daydream); svapnaù—a dream; sarvam—everything; aindriyakam—produced
by the senses; måñä—false.
TRANSLATION
It is fruitless to see and talk of the material modes of nature and their
resultant so-called happiness and distress as if they were factual. When the
mind wanders during the day and a man begins to think himself extremely
important, or when he dreams at night and sees a beautiful woman enjoying
with him, these are merely false dreams. Similarly, the happiness and distress
caused by the material senses should be understood to be meaningless.
PURPORT
The happiness and distress derived from the activities of the material senses
are not actual happiness and distress. Therefore Bhagavad-gétä speaks of
happiness that is transcendental to the material conception of life (sukham
ätyantikaà yat tad buddhi-grähyam aténdriyam [Bg. 6.21]). When our senses are
purified of material contamination, they become aténdriya, transcendental
senses, and when the transcendental senses are engaged in the service of the
master of the senses, Håñékeça, one can derive real transcendental pleasure.
Whatever distress or happiness we manufacture by mental concoction through
the subtle mind has no reality, but is simply a mental concoction. One should
therefore not imagine so-called happiness through mental concoction. Rather,
the best course is to engage the mind in the service of the Lord, Håñékeça, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
137
thus feel real blissful life.
There is a Vedic statement apäma-somam amåtä abhüma apsarobhir
viharäma. With reference to such a conception, one wants to go to the
heavenly planets to enjoy with the young girls there and drink soma-rasa.
Such imaginary pleasure, however, has no value. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (7.23), antavat tu phalaà teñäà tad bhavaty alpa-medhasäm:
"Men of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are limited
and temporary." Even if by fruitive activity or worship of the demigods one is
elevated to the higher planetary systems for sense enjoyment, his situation is
condemned in Bhagavad-gétä as antavat, perishable. The happiness one enjoys
in this way is like the pleasure of embracing a young woman in a dream; for
some time it may be pleasing, but actually the basic principle is false. The
mental concoctions of happiness and distress in this material world are
compared to dreams because of their falseness. All thoughts of obtaining
happiness by using the material senses have a false background and therefore
have no meaning.
TEXT 49
AQa iNaTYaMaiNaTYa& va Naeh XaaeciNTa TaiÜd" )
NaaNYaQaa XaKYaTae k-Tau| Sv>aav" XaaecTaaiMaiTa )) 49 ))
atha nityam anityaà vä
neha çocanti tad-vidaù
nänyathä çakyate kartuà
sva-bhävaù çocatäm iti
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; nityam—the eternal spirit soul; anityam—the temporary
material body; vä—or; na—not; iha—in this world; çocanti—they lament for;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
138
tat-vidaù—those who are advanced in knowledge of the body and soul;
na—not; anyathä—otherwise; çakyate—is able; kartum—to do;
sva-bhävaù—the nature; çocatäm—of those prone to lamentation; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Those who have full knowledge of self-realization, who know very well that
the spirit soul is eternal whereas the body is perishable, are not overwhelmed by
lamentation. But persons who lack knowledge of self-realization certainly
lament. Therefore it is difficult to educate a person in illusion.
PURPORT
According to the mémäàsä philosophers, everything is eternal, nitya, and
according to the Säìkhya philosophers everything is mithyä, or
anitya—impermanent. Nonetheless, without real knowledge of ätma—, the
soul, such philosophers must be bewildered and must continue to lament as
çüdras. Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé therefore said to Parékñit Mahäräja:
çrotavyädéni räjendra
nåëäà santi sahasraçaù
apaçyatäm ätma-tattvaà
gåheñu gåha-medhinäm
"Those who are materially engrossed, being blind to knowledge of the ultimate
truth, have many subjects for hearing in human society, O Emperor." (SB 2.1.2)
For ordinary persons engaged in material activities there are many, many
subject matters to understand because such persons do not understand
self-realization. One must therefore be educated in self-realization so that
under any circumstances in life he will remain steady in his vows.
TEXT 50
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
139
lu/BDak-ae iviPaNae k-iêTPai+a<aa& iNaiMaRTaae_NTak-" )
ivTaTYa Jaal&/ ivdDae Ta}a Ta}a Pa[l/ae>aYaNa( )) 50 ))
lubdhako vipine kaçcit
pakñiëäà nirmito 'ntakaù
vitatya jälaà vidadhe
tatra tatra pralobhayan
SYNONYMS
lubdhakaù—hunter; vipine—in the forest; kaçcit—some; pakñiëäm—of birds;
nirmitaù—appointed; antakaù—killer; vitatya—spreading; jälam—a net;
vidadhe—captured; tatra tatra—here and there; pralobhayan—luring with
food.
TRANSLATION
There was once a hunter who lured birds with food and captured them after
spreading a net. He lived as if appointed by death personified as the killer of the
birds.
PURPORT
This is another incident from the histories.
TEXT 51
ku-il/(r)iMaQauNa& Ta}a ivcrTSaMad*XYaTa )
TaYaae" ku-il/(r)q SahSaa lu/BDake-Na Pa[l/aei>aTaa )) 51 ))
kuliìga-mithunaà tatra
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
140
vicarat samadåçyata
tayoù kuliìgé sahasä
lubdhakena pralobhitä
SYNONYMS
kuliìga-mithunam—a pair of (male and female) birds known as kuliìga;
tatra—there (where the hunter was hunting); vicarat—wandering;
samadåçyata—he saw; tayoù—of the pair; kuliìgé—the female bird;
sahasä—suddenly; lubdhakena—by the hunter; pralobhitä—allured.
TRANSLATION
While wandering in the forest, the hunter saw a pair of kuliìga birds. Of the
two, the female was captivated by the hunter's lure.
TEXT 52
SaaSaÂTa iSacSTaN}Yaa& MaihZYa" k-al/YaiN}aTaa )
ku-il/(r)STaa& TaQaaPaàa& iNarq+Ya >a*Xadu"i%Ta" )
òehadk-LPa" k*-Pa<a" k*-Pa<aa& PaYaRdevYaTa( )) 52 ))
säsajjata sicas tantryäà
mahiñyaù käla-yantritä
kuliìgas täà tathäpannäà
nirékñya bhåça-duùkhitaù
snehäd akalpaù kåpaëaù
kåpaëäà paryadevayat
SYNONYMS
sä—the female bird; asajjata—trapped; sicaù—of the net; tantryäm—in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
141
rope; mahiñyaù—O queens; käla-yantritä—being forced by time; kuliìgaù—the
male kuliìga bird; täm—her; tathä—in that condition; äpannäm—captured;
nirékñya—seeing; bhåça-duùkhitaù—very unhappy; snehät—out of affection;
akalpaù—unable to do anything; kåpaëaù—the poor bird; kåpaëäm—the poor
wife; paryadevayat—began to lament for.
TRANSLATION
O queens of Suyajïa, the male kuliìga bird, seeing his wife put into the
greatest danger in the grip of Providence, became very unhappy. Because of
affection, the poor bird, being unable to release her, began to lament for his
wife.
TEXT 53
Ahae Ak-å<aae dev" iñYaak-å<aYaa iv>au" )
k*-Pa<a& MaaMaNauXaaecNTYaa dqNaYaa ik&- k-irZYaiTa )) 53 ))
aho akaruëo devaù
striyäkaruëayä vibhuù
kåpaëaà mäm anuçocantyä
dénayä kià kariñyati
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; akaruëaù—most unkind; devaù—providence; striyä—with my wife;
äkaruëayä—who is fully compassionate; vibhuù—the Supreme Lord;
kåpaëam—poor; mäm—me; anuçocantyä—lamenting for; dénayä—poor;
kim—what; kariñyati—shall do.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
142
TRANSLATION
Alas, how merciless is Providence! My wife, unable to be helped by anyone,
is in such an awkward position and lamenting for me. What will Providence
gain by taking away this poor bird? What will be the profit?
TEXT 54
k-aMa& NaYaTau Maa& dev" ik-MaDaeRNaaTMaNaae ih Mae )
dqNaeNa JaqvTaa du"%MaNaeNa ivDauraYauza )) 54 ))
kämaà nayatu mäà devaù
kim ardhenätmano hi me
dénena jévatä duùkham
anena vidhuräyuñä
SYNONYMS
kämam—as He likes; nayatu—let Him take away; mäm—me; devaù—the
Supreme Lord; kim—what use; ardhena—with half; ätmanaù—of the body;
hi—indeed; me—my; dénena—poor; jévatä—living; duùkham—in suffering;
anena—this; vidhura-äyuñä—having a lifetime full of affliction.
TRANSLATION
If unkind Providence takes away my wife, who is half my body, why should
He not take me also? What is the use of my living with half of my body,
bereaved by loss of my wife? What shall I gain in this way?
TEXT 55
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
143
k-Qa& TvJaaTaPa+aa&STaaNa( MaaTa*hqNaaNa( ib>aMYaRhMa( )
MaNd>aaGYaa" Pa[Taq+aNTae Naq@e Mae MaaTar& Pa[Jaa" )) 55 ))
kathaà tv ajäta-pakñäàs tän
mätå-hénän bibharmy aham
manda-bhägyäù pratékñante
néòe me mätaraà prajäù
SYNONYMS
katham—how; tu—but; ajäta-pakñän—who have not grown wings to fly;
tän—them; mätå-hénän—bereft of their mother; bibharmi—shall maintain;
aham—I; manda-bhägyäù—very unfortunate; pratékñante—they await;
néòe—in the nest; me—my; mätaram—their mother; prajäù—baby birds.
TRANSLATION
The unfortunate baby birds, bereft of their mother, are waiting in the nest
for her to feed them. They are still very small and have not yet grown their
wings. How shall I be able to maintain them?
PURPORT
The bird is lamenting for the mother of his children because the mother
naturally maintains and cares for the children. Yamaräja, however, in the guise
of a small boy, has already explained that although his mother left him uncared
for and wandering in the forest, the tigers and other ferocious animals had not
eaten him. The real fact is that if the Supreme Personality of Godhead
protects one, even though one be motherless and fatherless, one can be
maintained by the good will of the Lord. Otherwise, if the Supreme Lord does
not give one protection, one must suffer in spite of the presence of his father
and mother. Another example is that sometimes a patient dies in spite of a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
144
good physician and good medicine. Thus without the protection of the Lord
one cannot live, with or without parents.
Another point in this verse is that fathers and mothers have protective
feelings for their children even in bird and beast society, not to speak of
human society. Kali-yuga, however, is so degraded that a father and mother
even kill their children in the womb on the plea of their scientific knowledge
that within the womb the child has no life. Prestigious medical practitioners
give this opinion, and therefore the father and mother of this day kill their
children within the womb. How degraded human society has become! Their
scientific knowledge is so advanced that they think that within the egg and
the embryo there is no life. Now these so-called scientists are receiving Nobel
Prizes for advancing the theory of chemical evolution. But if chemical
combinations are the source of life, why don't the scientists manufacture
something like an egg through chemistry and put it in an incubator so that a
chicken will come out? What is their answer? With their scientific knowledge
they are unable to create even an egg. Such scientists are described in
Bhagavad-gétä as mäyayäpahåta jïänäù [Bg. 7.15], fools whose real knowledge
has been taken away. They are not men of knowledge, but they pose as
scientists and philosophers, although their so-called theoretical knowledge
cannot produce practical results.
TEXT 56
Wv& ku-il/(r)& ivl/PaNTaMaaraTa(
iPa[YaaivYaaeGaaTaurMaé[uk-<#=Ma( )
Sa Wv Ta& Xaaku-iNak-" Xare<a
ivVYaaDa k-al/Pa[ihTaae ivl/INa" )) 56 ))
evaà kuliìgaà vilapantam ärät
priyä-viyogäturam açru-kaëöham
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
145
sa eva taà çäkunikaù çareëa
vivyädha käla-prahito vilénaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; kuliìgam—the bird; vilapantam—while lamenting; ärät—from a
distance; priyä-viyoga—because of the loss of his wife; äturam—very aggrieved;
açru-kaëöham—with tears in the eyes; saù—he (that hunter); eva—indeed;
tam—him (the male bird); çäkunikaù—who could kill even a vulture;
çareëa—by an arrow; vivyädha—pierced; käla-prahitaù—being moved by time;
vilénaù—hidden.
TRANSLATION
Because of the loss of his wife, the kuliìga bird lamented with tears in his
eyes. Meanwhile, following the dictations of mature time, the hunter, who was
very carefully hidden in the distance, released his arrow, which pierced the
body of the kuliìga bird and killed him.
TEXT 57
Wv& YaUYaMaPaXYaNTYa AaTMaaPaaYaMabuÖYa" )
NaENa& Pa[aPSYaQa XaaecNTYa" PaiTa& vzRXaTaEriPa )) 57 ))
evaà yüyam apaçyantya
ätmäpäyam abuddhayaù
nainaà präpsyatha çocantyaù
patià varña-çatair api
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; yüyam—you; apaçyantyaù—not seeing; ätma-apäyam—own
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
146
death; abuddhayaù—O ignorant ones; na—not; enam—him; präpsyatha—you
will obtain; çocantyaù—lamenting for; patim—your husband; varña-çataiù—for
a hundred years; api—even.
TRANSLATION
Thus Yamaräja, in the guise of a small boy, told all the queens: You are all so
foolish that you lament but do not see your own death. Afflicted by a poor fund
of knowledge, you do not know that even if you lament for your dead husband
for hundreds of years, you will never get him back alive, and in the meantime
your lives will be finished.
PURPORT
Yamaräja once asked Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, "What is the most wonderful
thing within this world?" Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira replied (Mahäbhärata,
Vana-parva 313.116):
ahany ahani bhütäni
gacchantéha yamälayam
çeñäù sthävaram icchanti
kim äçcaryam ataù param
Hundreds and thousands of living entities meet death at every moment, but a
foolish living being nonetheless thinks himself deathless and does not prepare
for death. This is the most wonderful thing in this world. Everyone has to die
because everyone is fully under the control of material nature, yet everyone
thinks that he is independent, that whatever he likes he can do, that he will
never meet death but live forever, and so on. So-called scientists are making
various plans by which living entities in the future can live forever, but while
they are thus pursuing such scientific knowledge, Yamaräja, in due course of
time, will take them away from their business of so-called research.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
147
TEXT 58
é[qihr<Yak-iXaPauåvac
bal/ Wv& Pa[vdiTa SaveR iviSMaTaceTaSa" )
jaTaYaae MaeiNare SavRMaiNaTYaMaYaQaaeiTQaTaMa( )) 58 ))
çré-hiraëyakaçipur uväca
bäla evaà pravadati
sarve vismita-cetasaù
jïätayo menire sarvam
anityam ayathotthitam
SYNONYMS
çré-hiraëyakaçipuù uväca—Çré Hiraëyakaçipu said; bäle—while Yamaräja in
the form of a boy; evam—thus; pravadati—was speaking very philosophically;
sarve—all; vismita—struck with wonder; cetasaù—their hearts; jïätayaù—the
relatives; menire—they thought; sarvam—everything material;
anityam—temporary; ayathä-utthitam—arisen from temporary phenomena.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu said: While Yamaräja, in the form of a small boy, was
instructing all the relatives surrounding the dead body of Suyajïa, everyone was
struck with wonder by his philosophical words. They could understand that
everything material is temporary, not continuing to exist.
PURPORT
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (2.18). Antavanta ime dehä nityasyoktäù
çarériëaù: the body is perishable, but the soul within the body is imperishable.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
148
Therefore the duty of those advanced in knowledge in human society is to
study the constitutional position of the imperishable soul and not waste the
valuable time of human life in merely maintaining the body and not
considering life's real responsibility. Every human being should try to
understand how the spirit soul can be happy and where he can attain an
eternal, blissful life of knowledge. Human beings are meant to study these
subject matters, not to be absorbed in caring for the temporary body, which is
sure to change. No one knows whether he will receive a human body again;
there is no guarantee, for according to one's work one may get any body, from
that of a demigod to that of a dog. In this regard, Çréla Madhväcärya
comments:
ahaà mamäbhimänäditva-
yathottham anityakam
mahadädi yathotthaà ca
nityä cäpi yathotthitä
asvatantraiva prakåtiù
sva-tantro nitya eva ca
yathärtha-bhütaç ca para
eka eva janärdanaù
Only Janärdana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is ever existing, but His
creation, the material world, is temporary. Therefore everyone who is
captivated by the material energy and absorbed in thinking "I am this body,
and everything belonging to this body is mine" is in illusion. One should think
only of being eternally a part of Janärdana, and one's endeavor in this material
world, especially in this human form of life, should be to attain the association
of Janärdana by going back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 59
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
149
YaMa WTaduPaa:YaaYa Ta}aEvaNTarDaqYaTa )
jaTaYaae ih SauYajSYa c§u-YaRTSaaMParaiYak-Ma( )) 59 ))
yama etad upäkhyäya
tatraiväntaradhéyata
jïätayo hi suyajïasya
cakrur yat sämparäyikam
SYNONYMS
yamaù—Yamaräja in the form of a boy; etat—this; upäkhyäya—instructing;
tatra—there; eva—indeed; antaradhéyata—disappeared; jïätayaù—the
relatives; hi—indeed; suyajïasya—of King Suyajïa; cakruù—performed;
yat—which is; sämparäyikam—the funeral ceremony.
TRANSLATION
After instructing all the foolish relatives of Suyajïa, Yamaräja, in the form
of a boy, disappeared from their vision. Then the relatives of King Suyajïa
performed the ritualistic funeral ceremonies.
TEXT 60
ATa" XaaecTa Maa YaUYa& Par& caTMaaNaMaev va )
k- AaTMaa k-" Parae va}a SvqYa" PaarKYa Wv va )
SvParai>aiNaveXaeNa ivNaajaNaeNa deihNaaMa( )) 60 ))
ataù çocata mä yüyaà
paraà cätmänam eva vä
ka ätmä kaù paro vätra
svéyaù pärakya eva vä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
150
sva-paräbhiniveçena
vinäjïänena dehinäm
SYNONYMS
ataù—therefore; çocata—lament for; mä—do not; yüyam—all of you;
param—another; ca—and; ätmänam—yourself; eva—certainly; vä—or;
kaù—who; ätmä—self; kaù—who; paraù—other; vä—or; atra—in this
material world; svéyaù—one's own; pärakyaù—for others; eva—indeed; vä—or;
sva-para-abhiniveçena—consisting of absorption in the bodily concept of
oneself and others; vinä—besides; ajïänena—the lack of knowledge;
dehinäm—of all the embodied living entities.
TRANSLATION
Therefore none of you should be aggrieved for the loss of the
body—whether your own or those of others. Only in ignorance does one make
bodily distinctions, thinking "Who am I? Who are the others? What is mine?
What is for others?"
PURPORT
In this material world, the conception of self-preservation is the first law of
nature. According to this conception, one should be interested in his personal
safety and should then consider society, friendship, love, nationality,
community and so on, which have all developed because of the bodily
conception of life and a lack of knowledge of the spirit soul. This is called
ajïäna. As long as human society is in darkness and ignorance, men will
continue to make huge arrangements in the bodily conception of life. This is
described by Prahläda Mahäräja as bharam. In the materialistic conception,
modern civilization makes enormous arrangements for huge roads, houses,
mills and factories, and this is man's conception of the advancement of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
151
civilization. People do not know, however, that at any time they themselves
may be kicked out of the scene and forced to accept bodies that have nothing
to do with these enormous houses, palaces, roads and automobiles. Therefore
when Arjuna was thinking in terms of his bodily relationships with his
kinsmen, Kåñëa immediately chastised him, saying, kutas tvä kaçmalam idaà
viñame samupasthitam anärya juñöam: "This bodily conception of life is
befitting the anäryas, the non-Äryans, who are not advanced in knowledge."
An Äryan civilization is a civilization advanced in spiritual knowledge. Not
merely by stamping oneself an Äryan does one become an Äryan. To keep
oneself in the deepest darkness concerning spiritual knowledge and at the
same time claim to be an Äryan is a non-Äryan position. In this connection,
Çréla Madhväcärya quotes as follows from the Brahma-vaivarta Puräëa:
ka ätmä kaù para iti dehädy-apekñayä
na hi dehädir ätmä syän
na ca çatrur udéritaù
ato daihika-våddhau vä
kñaye vä kià prayojanam
yas tu deha-gato jévaù
sa hi näçaà na gacchati
tataù çatru-vivåddhau ca
sva-näçe çocanaà kutaù
dehädi-vyatiriktau tu
jéveçau pratijänatä
ata ätma-vivåddhis tu
väsudeve ratiù sthirä
çatru-näças tathäjïänanäço
nänyaù kathaïcana
The purport is that as long as we are in this human form of body, our duty is to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
152
understand the soul within the body. The body is not the self; we are different
from the body, and therefore there is no question of friends, enemies or
responsibilities in terms of the bodily conception of life. One should not be
very anxious about the body's changing from childhood to boyhood, from
boyhood to old age and then to apparent annihilation. Rather, one should be
very seriously concerned about the soul within the body and how to release the
soul from the material clutches. The living entity within the body is never
annihilated; therefore one should surely know that whether one has many
friends or many enemies, his friends cannot help him, and his enemies cannot
do him any harm. One should know that he is a spirit soul (ahaà
brahmäsmi(4)) and that the constitutional position of the soul is unaffected by
the changes of the body. In all circumstances, everyone, as a spirit soul, must
be a devotee of Lord Viñëu and should not be concerned with bodily
relationships, whether with friends or with enemies. One should know that
neither we ourselves nor our enemies in the bodily conception of life are ever
killed.
TEXT 61
é[qNaard ovac
wiTa dETYaPaTaevaRKYa& idiTarak-<YaR Saòuza )
Pau}aXaaek&- +a<aatYa¤-a Tatve ictaMaDaarYaTa( )) 61 ))
çré-närada uväca
iti daitya-pater väkyaà
ditir äkarëya sasnuñä
putra-çokaà kñaëät tyaktvä
tattve cittam adhärayat
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
153
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; iti—thus; daitya-pateù—of the King
of the demons; väkyam—the speech; ditiù—Diti, the mother of Hiraëyakaçipu
and Hiraëyäkña; äkarëya—hearing; sa-snuñä—with the wife of Hiraëyäkña;
putra-çokam—the great bereavement for her son, Hiraëyäkña;
kñaëät—immediately; tyaktvä—giving up; tattve—in the real philosophy of
life; cittam—heart; adhärayat—engaged.
TRANSLATION
Çré Närada Muni continued: Diti, the mother of Hiraëyakaçipu and
Hiraëyäkña, heard the instructions of Hiraëyakaçipu along with her
daughter-in-law, Ruñäbhänu, Hiraëyäkña's wife. She then forgot her grief over
her son's death and thus engaged her mind and attention in understanding the
real philosophy of life.
PURPORT
When a relative dies one certainly becomes very much interested in
philosophy, but when the funeral ceremony is over one again becomes
attentive to materialism. Even Daityas, who are materialistic persons,
sometimes think of philosophy when some relative meets death. The technical
term for this attitude of the materialistic person is çmaçäna-vairägya, or
detachment in a cemetery or place of cremation. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä, four classes of men receive an understanding of spiritual life
and God—ärta (the distressed), jijïäsu (the inquisitive), arthärthé (one who
desires material gains) and jïäné (one who is searching for knowledge).
Especially when one is very much distressed by material conditions, one
becomes interested in God. Therefore Kuntédevé said in her prayers to Kåñëa
that she preferred distress to a happy mood of life. In the material world, one
who is happy forgets Kåñëa, or God, but sometimes, if one is actually pious but
in distress, he remembers Kåñëa. Queen Kuntédevé therefore preferred distress
because it is an opportunity for remembering Kåñëa. When Kåñëa was leaving
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
154
Kuntédevé for His own country, Kuntédevé regretfully said that she was better
off in distress because Kåñëa was always present, whereas now that the
Päëòavas were situated in their kingdom, Kåñëa was going away. For a devotee,
distress is an opportunity to remember the Supreme Personality of Godhead
constantly.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Second Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Hiraëyakaçipu, King of the Demons."
3. Hiraëyakaçipu's Plan to Become Immortal
This chapter describes how Hiraëyakaçipu performed a severe type of
austerity for material benefit, thus causing great distress throughout the
universe. Even Lord Brahmä, the chief personality within this universe,
became somewhat disturbed and personally went to see why Hiraëyakaçipu was
engaged in such a severe austerity.
Hiraëyakaçipu wanted to become immortal. He wanted not to be conquered
by anyone, not to be attacked by old age and disease, and not to be harassed by
any opponent. Thus he wanted to become the absolute ruler of the entire
universe. With this desire, he entered the valley of Mandara Mountain and
began practicing a severe type of austerity and meditation. Seeing
Hiraëyakaçipu engaged in this austerity, the demigods returned to their
respective homes, but while Hiraëyakaçipu was thus engaged, a kind of fire
began blazing from his head, disturbing the entire universe and its inhabitants,
including the birds, beasts and demigods. When all the higher and lower
planets became too hot to live on, the demigods, being disturbed, left their
abodes in the higher planets and went to see Lord Brahmä, praying to him that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
155
he curtail this unnecessary heat. The demigods disclosed to Lord Brahmä
Hiraëyakaçipu's ambition to become immortal, overcoming his short duration
of life, and to be the master of all the planetary systems, even Dhruvaloka.
Upon hearing about the purpose of Hiraëyakaçipu's austere meditation,
Lord Brahmä, accompanied by the great sage Bhågu and great personalities like
Dakña, went to see Hiraëyakaçipu. He then sprinkled water from his
kamaëòalu, a type of waterpot, upon Hiraëyakaçipu's head.
Hiraëyakaçipu, the King of the Daityas, bowed down before Lord Brahmä,
the creator of this universe, offering respectful obeisances again and again and
offering prayers. When Lord Brahmä agreed to give him benedictions, he
prayed not be killed by any living entity, not to be killed in any place, covered
or uncovered, not to die in the daytime or at night, not to be killed by any
weapon, on land or in the air, and not to be killed by any human being,
animal, demigod or any other entity, living or nonliving. He further prayed for
supremacy over the entire universe and requested the eight yogic perfections,
such as aëimä and laghimä.
TEXT 1
é[qNaard ovac
ihr<Yak-iXaPaU raJaàJaeYaMaJaraMarMa( )
AaTMaaNaMaPa[iTaÜNÜMaek-raJa& VYaiDaTSaTa )) 1 ))
çré-närada uväca
hiraëyakaçipü räjann
ajeyam ajarämaram
ätmänam apratidvandvam
eka-räjaà vyadhitsata
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
156
çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; hiraëyakaçipuù—the demoniac king
Hiraëyakaçipu; räjan—O King Yudhiñöhira; ajeyam—unconquerable by any
enemy; ajara—without old age or disease; amaram—immortal;
ätmänam—himself; apratidvandvam—without any rival or opponent;
eka-räjam—the one king of the universe; vyadhitsata—desired to become.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni said to Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira: The demoniac king
Hiraëyakaçipu wanted to be unconquerable and free from old age and dwindling
of the body. He wanted to gain all the yogic perfections like aëimä and laghimä,
to be deathless, and to be the only king of the entire universe, including
Brahmaloka.
PURPORT
Such are the goals of the austerities performed by demons. Hiraëyakaçipu
wanted to receive a benediction from Lord Brahmä so that in the future he
would be able to conquer Lord Brahmä's abode. Similarly, another demon
received a benediction from Lord Çiva but later wanted to kill Lord Çiva
through that same benediction. Thus self-interested persons, by demoniac
austerity, want to kill even their benedictors, whereas the Vaiñëava wants to
remain an ever-existing servant of the Lord and never to occupy the post of
the Lord. Through säyujya-mukti, which is generally demanded by asuras, one
merges into the existence of the Lord, but although one sometimes thus
achieves the goal of the theory of monism, one falls down again to struggle in
material existence.
TEXT 2
Sa TaePae MaNdrd]ae<Yaa& TaPa" ParMadaå<aMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
157
OßRbahuNaR>aaed*ií" Paadax(Gauïaié[TaaviNa" )) 2 ))
sa tepe mandara-droëyäà
tapaù parama-däruëam
ürdhva-bähur nabho-dåñöiù
pädäìguñöhäçritävaniù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); tepe—performed; mandara-droëyäm—in a valley of
Mandara Hill; tapaù—austerity; parama—most; däruëam—difficult;
ürdhva—raising; bähuù—arms; nabhaù—toward the sky; dåñöiù—his vision;
päda-aìguñöha—with the big toes of his feet; äçrita—resting on; avaniù—the
ground.
TRANSLATION
In the valley of Mandara Hill, Hiraëyakaçipu began performing his
austerities by standing with his toes on the ground, keeping his arms upward
and looking toward the sky. This position was extremely difficult, but he
accepted it as a means to attain perfection.
TEXT 3
Ja$=adqiDaiTa>aq reJae Sa&vTaaRkR- wva&éui>a" )
TaiSMa&STaPaSTaPYaMaaNae deva" SQaaNaaiNa >aeiJare )) 3 ))
jaöä-dédhitibhé reje
saàvartärka iväàçubhiù
tasmiàs tapas tapyamäne
deväù sthänäni bhejire
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
158
SYNONYMS
jaöä-dédhitibhiù—by the effulgence of the hair on his head; reje—was shining;
saàvarta-arkaù—the sun at the time of destruction; iva—like; aàçubhiù—by
the beams; tasmin—when he (Hiraëyakaçipu); tapaù—austerities;
tapyamäne—was engaged in; deväù—all the demigods who were wandering
throughout the universe to see Hiraëyakaçipu's demoniac activities;
sthänäni—to their own places; bhejire—returned.
TRANSLATION
From the hair on Hiraëyakaçipu's head there emanated an effulgent light as
brilliant and intolerable as the rays of the sun at the time of dissolution. Seeing
the performance of such austere penances, the demigods, who had been
wandering throughout the planets, now returned to their respective homes.
TEXT 4
TaSYa MaUDanR" SaMaud(>aUTa" SaDaUMaae_iGanSTaPaaeMaYa" )
TaqYaRGaUßRMaDaael/aek-aNa( Pa[aTaPaiÜZvGaqirTa" )) 4 ))
tasya mürdhnaù samudbhütaù
sadhümo 'gnis tapomayaù
téryag ürdhvam adho lokän
prätapad viñvag éritaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—his; mürdhnaù—from the head; samudbhütaù—generated;
sa-dhümaù—with smoke; agniù—fire; tapaù-mayaù—because of severe
austerities; téryak—sideways; ürdhvam—upward; adhaù—downward;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
159
lokän—all the planets; prätapat—heated; viñvak—all around;
éritaù—spreading.
TRANSLATION
Because of Hiraëyakaçipu's severe austerities, fire came from his head, and
this fire and its smoke spread throughout the sky, encompassing the upper and
lower planets, which all became extremely hot.
TEXT 5
cu+au>auNaRÛudNvNTa" SaÜqPaaid]êcal/ >aU" )
iNaPaeTau" SaGa]haSTaara JaJvlu/ê idXaae dXa )) 5 ))
cukñubhur nady-udanvantaù
sadvépädriç cacäla bhüù
nipetuù sagrahäs tärä
jajvaluç ca diço daça
SYNONYMS
cukñubhuù—became agitated; nadé-udanvantaù—the rivers and oceans;
sa-dvépa—with the islands; adriù—and mountains; cacäla—trembled;
bhüù—the surface of the globe; nipetuù—fell; sa-grahäù—with the planets;
täräù—the stars; jajvaluù—blazed; ca—also; diçaù daça—the ten directions.
TRANSLATION
Because of the power of his severe austerities, all the rivers and oceans were
agitated, the surface of the globe, with its mountains and islands, began
trembling, and the stars and planets fell. All directions were ablaze.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
160
TEXT 6
TaeNa Taáa idv& TYa¤-a b]øl/aek&- YaYau" Saura" )
Daa}ae ivjaPaYaaMaaSaudeRvdev JaGaTPaTae )
dETYaeNd]TaPaSaa Taáa idiv SQaaTau& Na Xa¥u-Ma" )) 6 ))
tena taptä divaà tyaktvä
brahmalokaà yayuù suräù
dhätre vijïäpayäm äsur
deva-deva jagat-pate
daityendra-tapasä taptä
divi sthätuà na çaknumaù
SYNONYMS
tena—by that (fire of austerity); taptäù—burned; divam—their residential
quarters in the upper planets; tyaktvä—giving up; brahma-lokam—to the
planet where Lord Brahmä lives; yayuù—went; suräù—the demigods;
dhätre—unto the chief of this universe, Lord Brahmä; vijïäpayäm
äsuù—submitted; deva-deva—O chief of the demigods; jagat-pate—O master
of the universe; daitya-indra-tapasä—by the severe austerity performed by the
King of the Daityas, Hiraëyakaçipu; taptäù—roasted; divi—on the heavenly
planets; sthätum—to stay; na—not; çaknumaù—we are able.
TRANSLATION
Scorched and extremely disturbed because of Hiraëyakaçipu's severe
penances, all the demigods left the planets where they reside and went to the
planet of Lord Brahmä, where they informed the creator as follows: O lord of
the demigods, O master of the universe, because of the fire emanating from
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
161
Hiraëyakaçipu's head as a result of his severe austerities, we have become so
disturbed that we could not stay in our planets but have come to you.
TEXT 7
TaSYa caePaXaMa& >aUMaNa( ivDaeih Yaid MaNYaSae )
l/aek-a Na Yaavà&+YaiNTa bil/haraSTavai>a>aU" )) 7 ))
tasya copaçamaà bhüman
vidhehi yadi manyase
lokä na yävan naìkñyanti
bali-häräs taväbhibhüù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of this; ca—indeed; upaçamam—the cessation; bhüman—O great
personality; vidhehi—please execute; yadi—if; manyase—you think it right;
lokäù—all the inhabitants of the various planets; na—not; yävat—as long as;
naìkñyanti—will be lost; bali-häräù—who are obedient to the worship;
tava—of you; abhibhüù—O chief of all the universe.
TRANSLATION
O great person, chief of the universe, if you think it proper, kindly stop
these disturbances, meant to destroy everything, before all your obedient
subjects are annihilated.
TEXT 8
TaSYaaYa& ik-l/ SaªLPaêrTaae duêr& TaPa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
162
é[UYaTaa& ik&- Na ividTaSTavaQaaiPa iNaveidTaMa( )) 8 ))
tasyäyaà kila saìkalpaç
carato duçcaraà tapaù
çrüyatäà kià na viditas
taväthäpi niveditam
SYNONYMS
tasya—his; ayam—this; kila—indeed; saìkalpaù—determination;
carataù—who is executing; duçcaram—very difficult; tapaù—austerity;
çrüyatäm—let it be heard; kim—what; na—not; viditaù—known; tava—of
you; athäpi—still; niveditam—submitted.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu has undertaken a most severe type of austerity. Although his
plan is not unknown to you, kindly listen as we submit his intentions.
TEXTS 9-10
Sa*îa cracriMad& TaPaaeYaaeGaSaMaaiDaNaa )
ADYaaSTae SavRiDaZ<Yae>Ya" ParMaeïq iNaJaaSaNaMa( )) 9 ))
Tadh& vDaRMaaNaeNa TaPaaeYaaeGaSaMaaiDaNaa )
k-al/aTMaNaaeê iNaTYaTvaTSaaDaiYaZYae TaQaaTMaNa" )) 10 ))
såñövä caräcaram idaà
tapo-yoga-samädhinä
adhyäste sarva-dhiñëyebhyaù
parameñöhé nijäsanam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
163
tad ahaà vardhamänena
tapo-yoga-samädhinä
kälätmanoç ca nityatvät
sädhayiñye tathätmanaù
SYNONYMS
såñövä—creating; cara—moving; acaram—and not moving; idam—this;
tapaù—of austerity; yoga—and mystic power; samädhinä—by practicing the
trance; adhyäste—is situated in; sarva-dhiñëyebhyaù—than all the planets,
including the heavenly planets; parameñöhé—Lord Brahmä; nija-äsanam—his
own throne; tat—therefore; aham—I; vardhamänena—by dint of increasing;
tapaù—austerity; yoga—mystic powers; samädhinä—and trance; käla—of
time; ätmanoù—and of the soul; ca—and; nityatvät—from the eternality;
sädhayiñye—shall achieve; tathä—so much; ätmanaù—for my personal self.
TRANSLATION
"The supreme person within this universe, Lord Brahmä, has gotten his
exalted post by dint of severe austerities, mystic power and trance.
Consequently, after creating the universe, he has become the most worshipable
demigod within it. Since I am eternal and time is eternal, I shall endeavor for
such austerity, mystic power and trance for many, many births, and thus I shall
occupy the same post occupied by Lord Brahmä.
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu's determination was to occupy the post of Lord Brahmä, but
this was impossible because Brahmä has a long duration of life. As confirmed
in Bhagavad-gétä (8.17), sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaëo viduù: one
thousand yugas equals one day of Brahmä. The duration of Brahmä's life is
extremely great, and consequently it was impossible for Hiraëyakaçipu to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
164
occupy that post. Nonetheless, his decision was that since the self (ätmä) and
time are both eternal, if he could not occupy that post in one lifetime he would
continue to execute austerities life after life so that sometime he would be able
to do so.
TEXT 11
ANYaQaed& ivDaaSYae_hMaYaQaaPaUvRMaaeJaSaa )
ik-MaNYaE" k-al/iNaDaURTaE" k-LPaaNTae vEZ<avaidi>a" )) 11 ))
anyathedaà vidhäsye 'ham
ayathä pürvam ojasä
kim anyaiù käla-nirdhütaiù
kalpänte vaiñëavädibhiù
SYNONYMS
anyathä—just the opposite; idam—this universe; vidhäsye—shall make;
aham—I; ayathä—inappropriate; pürvam—as it was before; ojasä—by dint of
the power of my austerity; kim—what use; anyaiù—with other;
käla-nirdhütaiù—vanquished in due course of time; kalpa-ante—at the end of
the millennium; vaiñëava-ädibhiù—with planets like Dhruvaloka or
Vaikuëöhaloka.
TRANSLATION
"By dint of my severe austerities, I shall reverse the results of pious and
impious activities. I shall overturn all the established practices within this
world. Even Dhruvaloka will be vanquished at the end of the millennium.
Therefore, what is the use of it? I shall prefer to remain in the position of
Brahmä."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
165
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu's demoniac determination was explained to Lord Brahmä by
the demigods, who informed him that Hiraëyakaçipu wanted to overturn all
the established principles. After executing severe austerities, people within
this material world are promoted to the heavenly planets, but Hiraëyakaçipu
wanted them to be unhappy, suffering because of the diplomatic feelings of the
demigods, even in the heavenly planets. He wanted those who were harassed
in this world by material transactions to be unhappy for the same reason, even
in the heavenly planets. Indeed, be wanted to introduce such harassment
everywhere. One might ask how this would be possible, since the universal
order has been established since time immemorial, but Hiraëyakaçipu was
proud to declare that he would be able to do everything by the power of his
tapasya. He even wanted to make the Vaiñëavas' position insecure. These are
some of the symptoms of asuric determination.
TEXT 12
wiTa éué[uMa iNabRNDa& TaPa" ParMaMaaiSQaTa" )
ivDaTSvaNaNTar& Yau¢&- SvYa& i}a>auvNaeìr )) 12 ))
iti çuçruma nirbandhaà
tapaù paramam ästhitaù
vidhatsvänantaraà yuktaà
svayaà tri-bhuvaneçvara
SYNONYMS
iti—in this way; çuçruma—we have heard; nirbandham—strong
determination; tapaù—austerity; paramam—very severe; ästhitaù—is situated
in; vidhatsva—please take steps; anantaram—as soon as possible;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
166
yuktam—befitting; svayam—yourself; tri-bhuvana-éçvara—O master of the
three worlds.
TRANSLATION
O lord, we have heard from reliable sources that in order to obtain your post,
Hiraëyakaçipu is now engaged in severe austerity. You are the master of the
three worlds. Please, without delay, take whatever steps you deem appropriate.
PURPORT
In the material world, a servant is provided for by the master but is always
planning how to capture the master's post. There have been many instances of
this in history. Especially in India during the Mohammedan rule, many
servants, by plans and devices, took over the posts of their masters. It is
learned from Caitanya literature that one big Zamindar, Subuddhi Räya, kept
a Mohammedan boy as a servant. Of course, he treated the boy as his own
child, and sometimes, when the boy would steal something, the master would
chastise him by striking him with a cane. There was a mark on the boy's back
from this chastisement. Later, after that boy had by crooked means become
Hussain Shah, Nawab of Bengal, one day his wife saw the mark on his back
and inquired about it. The Nawab replied that in his childhood he had been a
servant of Subuddhi Räya, who had punished him because of some mischievous
activities. Upon hearing this, the Nawab's wife immediately became agitated
and requested her husband to kill Subuddhi Räya. Nawab Hussain Shah, of
course, was very grateful to Subuddhi Räya and therefore refused to kill him,
but when his wife requested him to turn Subuddhi Räya into a Mohammedan,
the Nawab agreed. Taking some water from his waterpot, he sprinkled it upon
Subuddhi Räya and declared that Subuddhi Räya had now become a
Mohammedan. The point is that this Nawab had been an ordinary menial
servant of Subuddhi Räya but was somehow or other able to occupy the
supreme post of Nawab of Bengal. This is the material world. Everyone is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
167
trying to become master through various devices, although everyone is servant
of his senses. Following this system, a living entity, although servant of his
senses, tries to become master of the whole universe. Hiraëyakaçipu was a
typical example of this, and Brahmä was informed by the demigods of his
intentions.
TEXT 13
TavaSaNa& iÜJaGava& PaarMaeïy& JaGaTPaTae )
>avaYa é[eYaSae >aUTYaE +aeMaaYa ivJaYaaYa c )) 13 ))
taväsanaà dvija-gaväà
pärameñöhyaà jagat-pate
bhaväya çreyase bhütyai
kñemäya vijayäya ca
SYNONYMS
tava—your; äsanam—position on the throne; dvija—of the brahminical
culture or the brähmaëas; gaväm—of the cows; pärameñöhyam—supreme;
jagat-pate—O master of the whole universe; bhaväya—for improvement;
çreyase—for the ultimate happiness; bhütyai—for increasing the opulence;
kñemäya—for the maintenance and good fortune; vijayäya—for the victory
and increasing prestige; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
O Lord Brahmä, your position within this universe is certainly most
auspicious for everyone, especially the cows and brähmaëas. Brahminical
culture and the protection of cows can be increasingly glorified, and thus all
kinds of material happiness, opulence and good fortune will automatically
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
168
increase. But unfortunately, if Hiraëyakaçipu occupies your seat, everything
will be lost.
PURPORT
In this verse the words dvija-gaväà pärameñöhyam indicate the most exalted
position of the brähmaëas, brahminical culture and the cows. In Vedic culture,
the welfare of the cows and the welfare of the brähmaëas are essential.
Without a proper arrangement for developing brahminical culture and
protecting cows, all the affairs of administration will go to hell. Being afraid
that Hiraëyakaçipu would occupy the post of Brahmä, all the demigods were
extremely disturbed. Hiraëyakaçipu was a well-known demon, and the
demigods knew that if demons and Räkñasas were to occupy the supreme post,
brahminical culture and protection of cows would come to an end. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (5.29), the original proprietor of everything is Lord Kåñëa
(bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà sarva-loka-maheçvaram). The Lord, therefore,
knows particularly well how to develop the material condition of the living
entities within this material world. In every universe there is one Brahmä
engaged on behalf of Lord Kåñëa, as confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (tene
brahma hådaya ädi-kavaye). The principal creator in each brahmäëòa is Lord
Brahmä, who imparts Vedic knowledge to his disciples and sons. On every
planet, the king or supreme controller must be a representative of Brahmä.
Therefore, if a Räkñasa, or demon, were situated in Brahmä's post, then the
entire arrangement of the universe, especially the protection of the
brahminical culture and cows, would be ruined. All the demigods anticipated
this danger, and therefore they went to request Lord Brahmä to take
immediate steps to thwart Hiraëyakaçipu's plan.
In the beginning of creation, Lord Brahmä was attacked by two
demons—Madhu and Kaiöabha—but Kåñëa saved him. Therefore Kåñëa is
addressed as madhu-kaiöabha-hantå. Now again, Hiraëyakaçipu was trying to
replace Brahmä. The material world is so situated that even the position of
Lord Brahmä, not to speak of ordinary living entities, is sometimes in danger.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
169
Nonetheless, until the time of Hiraëyakaçipu, no one had tried to replace Lord
Brahmä. Hiraëyakaçipu, however, was such a great demon that he maintained
this ambition.
The word bhütyai means "for increasing opulence," and the word çreyase
refers to ultimately returning home, back to Godhead. In spiritual
advancement, one's material position improves at the same time that the path
of liberation becomes clear and one is freed from material bondage. If one is
situated in an opulent position in spiritual advancement, his opulence never
decreases. Therefore such a spiritual benediction is called bhüti or vibhüti.
Kåñëa confirms this in Bhagavad-gétä (10.41). Yad yad vibhütimat sattvaà. ..
mama tejo-'àça-sambhavam: if a devotee advances in spiritual consciousness
and thus becomes materially opulent also, his position is a special gift from the
Lord. Such opulence is never to be considered material. At the present,
especially on this planet earth, the influence of Lord Brahmä has decreased
considerably, and the representatives of Hiraëyakaçipu—the Räkñasas and
demons—have taken charge. Therefore there is no protection of brahminical
culture and cows, which are the basic prerequisites for all kinds of good
fortune. This age is very dangerous because society is being managed by
demons and Räkñasas.
TEXT 14
wiTa ivjaiPaTaae devE>aRGavaNaaTMa>aUNa*RPa )
PairTaae >a*Gaud+aaÛEYaRYaaE dETYaeìraé[MaMa( )) 14 ))
iti vijïäpito devair
bhagavän ätmabhür nåpa
parito bhågu-dakñädyair
yayau daityeçvaräçramam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
170
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; vijïäpitaù—informed; devaiù—by all the demigods; bhagavän—the
most powerful; ätma-bhüù—Lord Brahmä, who was born from the lotus flower;
nåpa—O King; paritaù—being surrounded; bhågu—by Bhågu; dakña—Dakña;
ädyaiù—and others; yayau—went; daitya-éçvara—of Hiraëyakaçipu, the King
of the Daityas; äçramam—to the place of austerity.
TRANSLATION
O King, being thus informed by the demigods, the most powerful Lord
Brahmä, accompanied by Bhågu, Dakña and other great sages, immediately
started for the place where Hiraëyakaçipu was performing his penances and
austerities.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä was waiting for the austerities performed by Hiraëyakaçipu to
mature so that he could go there and offer benedictions according to
Hiraëyakaçipu's desire. Now, taking the opportunity of being accompanied by
all the demigods and great saintly persons, Brahmä went there to award him
the benediction he desired.
TEXTS 15-16
Na ddXaR Pa[iTaC^à& vLMaqk-Ta*<ak-IckE-" )
iPaPaqil/k-ai>aracq<a| MaedSTvx(Maa&SaXaaei<aTaMa( )) 15 ))
TaPaNTa& TaPaSaa l/aek-aNa( YaQaa>a]aiPaihTa& rivMa( )
ivl/+Ya iviSMaTa" Pa[ah hSa&STa& h&SavahNa" )) 16 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
171
na dadarça praticchannaà
valméka-tåëa-kécakaiù
pipélikäbhir äcérëaà
medas-tvaì-mäàsa-çoëitam
tapantaà tapasä lokän
yathäbhräpihitaà ravim
vilakñya vismitaù präha
hasaàs taà haàsa-vähanaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; dadarça—saw; praticchannam—covered; valméka—by an anthill;
tåëa—grass; kécakaiù—and bamboo sticks; pipélikäbhiù—by the ants;
äcérëam—eaten all around; medaù—whose fat; tvak—skin; mäàsa—the flesh;
çoëitam—and blood; tapantam—heating; tapasä—by a severe type of penance;
lokän—all the three worlds; yathä—just as; abhra—by clouds;
apihitam—covered; ravim—the sun; vilakñya—seeing; vismitaù—struck with
wonder; präha—said; hasan—smiling; tam—to him; haàsa-vähanaù—Lord
Brahmä, who rides a swan airplane.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, who is carried by a swan airplane, at first could not see where
Hiraëyakaçipu was, for Hiraëyakaçipu's body was covered by an anthill and by
grass and bamboo sticks. Because Hiraëyakaçipu had been there for a long time,
the ants had devoured his skin, fat, flesh and blood. Then Lord Brahmä and the
demigods spotted him, resembling a cloud—covered sun, heating all the world
by his austerity. Struck with wonder, Lord Brahmä began to smile and then
addressed him as follows.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
172
The living entity can live merely by his own power, without the help of
skin, marrow, bone, blood and so on, because it is said, asaìgo'yaà
puruñaù—the living entity has nothing to do with the material covering.
Hiraëyakaçipu performed a severe type of tapasya, austerity, for many long
years. Indeed, it is said that he performed the tapasya for one hundred
heavenly years. Since one day of the demigods equals six of our months,
certainly this was a very long time. By nature's own way, his body had been
almost consumed by earthworms, ants and other parasites, and therefore even
Brahmä was at first unable to see him. Later, however, Brahmä could ascertain
where Hiraëyakaçipu was, and Brahmä was struck with wonder to see
Hiraëyakaçipu's extraordinary power to execute tapasya. Anyone would
conclude that Hiraëyakaçipu was dead because his body was covered in so
many ways, but Lord Brahmä, the supreme living being in this universe, could
understand that Hiraëyakaçipu was alive but covered by material elements.
It is also to be noted that although Hiraëyakaçipu performed this austerity
for a long, long time, he was nonetheless known as a Daitya and Räkñasa. It
will be seen from verses to follow that even great saintly persons could not
perform such a severe type of austerity. Why then was he called a Räkñasa and
Daitya? It is because whatever he did was for his own sense gratification. His
son Prahläda Mahäräja was only five years old, and so what could Prahläda do?
Yet simply by performing a little devotional service according to the
instructions of Närada Muni, Prahläda became so dear to the Lord that the
Lord came to save him, whereas Hiraëyakaçipu, in spite of all his austerities,
was killed. This is the difference between devotional service and all other
methods of perfection. One who performs severe austerities for sense
gratification is fearful to the entire world, whereas a devotee who performs
even a slight amount of devotional service is a friend to everyone (suhådaà
sarva-bhütänäm [Bg. 5.29]). Since the Lord is the well-wisher of every living
entity and since a devotee assumes the qualities of the Lord, a devotee also acts
for everyone's good fortune by performing devotional service. Thus although
Hiraëyakaçipu performed such a severe austerity, he remained a Daitya and a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
173
Räkñasa, whereas Prahläda Mahäräja, although born of the same Daitya father,
became the most exalted devotee and was personally protected by the Supreme
Lord. Bhakti is therefore called sarvopädhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170],
indicating that a devotee is freed from all material designations, and
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam [Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(5)], situated in a
transcendental position, free from all material desires.
TEXT 17
é[qb]øaevac
oitaïaeitaï >ad]& Tae TaPa"iSaÖae_iSa k-aXYaPa )
vrdae_hMaNauPa[aáae iv]YaTaaMaqiPSaTaae vr" )) 17 ))
çré-brahmoväca
uttiñöhottiñöha bhadraà te
tapaù-siddho 'si käçyapa
varado 'ham anupräpto
vriyatäm épsito varaù
SYNONYMS
çré-brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; uttiñöha—please get up; uttiñöha—get up;
bhadram—good fortune; te—unto you; tapaù-siddhaù—perfect in executing
austerities; asi—you are; käçyapa—O son of Kaçyapa; vara-daù—the giver of
benediction; aham—I; anupräptaù—arrived; vriyatäm—let it be submitted;
épsitaù—desired; varaù—benediction.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: O son of Kaçyapa Muni, please get up, please get up. All
good fortune unto you. You are now perfect in the performance of your
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
174
austerities, and therefore I may give you a benediction. You may now ask from
me whatever you desire, and I shall try to fulfill your wish.
PURPORT
Çréla Madhväcärya quotes from the Skanda Puräëa, which says that
Hiraëyakaçipu, having become a devotee of Lord Brahmä, who is known as
Hiraëyagarbha, and having undergone a severe austerity to please him, is also
known as Hiraëyaka. Räkñasas and demons worship various demigods, such as
Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, just to take the post of these demigods. This we
have already explained in previous verses.
TEXT 18
Ad]a+aMahMaeTa& Tae ôTSaar& Mahdd(>auTaMa( )
d&Xa>ai+aTadehSYa Pa[a<aa ùiSQazu XaerTae )) 18 ))
adräkñam aham etaà te
håt-säraà mahad-adbhutam
daàça-bhakñita-dehasya
präëä hy asthiñu çerate
SYNONYMS
adräkñam—have personally seen; aham—I; etam—this; te—your;
håt-säram—power of endurance; mahat—very great; adbhutam—wonderful;
daàça-bhakñita—eaten by worms and ants; dehasya—whose body;
präëäù—the life air; hi—indeed; asthiñu—in the bones; çerate—is taking
shelter.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
175
I have been very much astonished to see your endurance. In spite of being
eaten and bitten by all kinds of worms and ants, you are keeping your life air
circulating within your bones. Certainly this is wonderful.
PURPORT
It appears that the soul can exist even through the bones, as shown by the
personal example of Hiraëyakaçipu. When great yogés are in samädhi, even
when their bodies are buried and their skin, marrow, blood and so on have all
been eaten, if only their bones remain they can exist in a transcendental
position. Very recently an archaeologist published findings indicating that
Lord Christ, after being buried, was exhumed and that he then went to
Kashmir. There have been many actual examples of yogés' being buried in
trance and exhumed alive and in good condition several hours later. A yogé
can keep himself alive in a transcendental state even if buried not only for
many days but for many years.
TEXT 19
NaETaTPaUvRzRYaê§u-NaR k-irZYaiNTa caPare )
iNarMbuDaaRrYaeTPa[a<aaNa( k-ae vE idVYaSaMaa" XaTaMa( )) 19 ))
naitat pürvarñayaç cakrur
na kariñyanti cäpare
nirambur dhärayet präëän
ko vai divya-samäù çatam
SYNONYMS
na—not; etat—this; pürva-åñayaù—the sages before you, such as Bhågu;
cakruù—executed; na—nor; kariñyanti—will execute; ca—also; apare—others;
nirambuù—without drinking water; dhärayet—can sustain; präëän—the life
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
176
air; kaù—who; vai—indeed; divya-samäù—celestial years; çatam—one
hundred.
TRANSLATION
Even saintly persons like Bhågu, born previously, could not perform such
severe austerities, nor will anyone in the future be able to do so. Who within
these three worlds can sustain his life without even drinking water for one
hundred celestial years?
PURPORT
It appears that even if a yogé does not drink a drop of water, he can live for
many, many years by the yogic process, though his outer body be eaten by ants
and moths.
TEXT 20
VYavSaaYaeNa Tae_NaeNa duZk-re<a MaNaiSvNaaMa( )
TaPaaeiNaïeNa >avTaa iJaTaae_h& idiTaNaNdNa )) 20 ))
vyavasäyena te 'nena
duñkareëa manasvinäm
tapo-niñöhena bhavatä
jito 'haà diti-nandana
SYNONYMS
vyavasäyena—by determination; te—your; anena—this; duñkareëa—difficult
to perform; manasvinäm—even for great sages and saintly persons;
tapaù-niñöhena—aimed at executing austerity; bhavatä—by you;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
177
jitaù—conquered; aham—I; diti-nandana—O son of Diti.
TRANSLATION
My dear son of Diti, with your great determination and austerity you have
done what was impossible even for great saintly persons, and thus I have
certainly been conquered by you.
PURPORT
In regard to the word jitaù, Çréla Madhva Muni gives the following
quotation from the Çabda-nirëaya: paräbhütaà vaça-sthaà ca jitabhid ucyate
budhaiù. "If one comes under someone else's control or is defeated by another,
he is called jitaù." Hiraëyakaçipu's austerity was so great and wonderful that
even Lord Brahmä agreed to be conquered by him.
TEXT 21
TaTaSTa AaiXaz" SavaR ddaMYaSaurPau(r)v )
MaTaRSYa Tae ùMaTaRSYa dXaRNa& Naaf-l&/ MaMa )) 21 ))
tatas ta äçiñaù sarvä
dadämy asura-puìgava
martasya te hy amartasya
darçanaà näphalaà mama
SYNONYMS
tataù—because of this; te—unto you; äçiñaù—benedictions; sarväù—all;
dadämi—I shall give; asura-puìgava—O best of the asuras; martasya—of one
who is destined to die; te—such as you; hi—indeed; amartasya—of one who
does not die; darçanam—the audience; na—not; aphalam—without results;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
178
mama—my.
TRANSLATION
O best of the asuras, for this reason I am now prepared to give you all
benedictions, according to your desire. I belong to the celestial world of
demigods, who do not die like human beings. Therefore, although you are
subject to death, your audience with me will not go in vain.
PURPORT
It appears that human beings and asuras are subject to death, whereas
demigods are not. The demigods who reside with Lord Brahmä in Satyaloka go
to Vaikuëöhaloka in their present bodily constructions at the time of the
dissolution. Therefore although Hiraëyakaçipu had undergone severe
austerities, Lord Brahmä predicted that he had to die; he could not become
immortal or even gain equal status with the demigods. The great austerities
and penances he had performed for so many years could not give him
protection from death. This was foretold by Lord Brahmä.
TEXT 22
é[qNaard ovac
wTYau¤-aid>avae devae >ai+aTaa(r)& iPaPaqil/kE-" )
k-Ma<@lu/Jale/NaaE+aiÕVYaeNaaMaaegaraDaSaa )) 22 ))
çré-närada uväca
ity uktvädi-bhavo devo
bhakñitäìgaà pipélikaiù
kamaëòalu-jalenaukñad
divyenämogha-rädhasä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
179
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; iti—thus; uktvä—saying;
ädi-bhavaù—Lord Brahmä, the original living creature within this universe;
devaù—the principal demigod; bhakñita-aìgam—Hiraëyakaçipu's body, which
had been almost completely eaten; pipélikaiù—by the ants; kamaëòalu—from
the special waterpot in the hands of Lord Brahmä; jalena—by water;
aukñat—sprinkled; divyena—which was spiritual, not ordinary;
amogha—without fail; rädhasä—whose power.
TRANSLATION
Çré Närada Muni continued: After speaking these words to Hiraëyakaçipu,
Lord Brahmä, the original being of this universe, who is extremely powerful,
sprinkled transcendental, infallible, spiritual water from his kamaëòalu upon
Hiraëyakaçipu's body, which had been eaten away by ants and moths. Thus he
enlivened Hiraëyakaçipu.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä is the first created being within this universe and is
empowered by the Supreme Lord to create. Tene brahma hådä ya ädi-kavaye:
[SB 1.1.1] the ädi deva, or ädi-kavi—the first living creature—was personally
taught by the Supreme Personality of Godhead through the heart. There was
no one to teach him, but since the Lord is situated within Brahmä's heart,
Brahmä was educated by the Lord Himself. Lord Brahmä, being especially
empowered, is infallible in doing whatever he wants. This is the meaning of
the word amogha rädhasä. He desired to restore Hiraëyakaçipu's original body,
and therefore, by sprinkling transcendental water from his waterpot, he
immediately did so.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
180
TEXT 23
Sa TaTk-Ick-vLMaqk-aTa( SahAaeJaaebl/aiNvTa" )
SavaRvYavSaMPaàae vJa]Sa&hNaNaae Yauva )
oiTQaTaSTaáheMaa>aae iv>aavSauirvEDaSa" )) 23 ))
sa tat kécaka-valmékät
saha-ojo-balänvitaù
sarvävayava-sampanno
vajra-saàhanano yuvä
utthitas tapta-hemäbho
vibhävasur ivaidhasaù
SYNONYMS
saù—Hiraëyakaçipu; tat—that; kécaka-valmékät—from the anthill and bamboo
grove; sahaù—mental strength; ojaù—strength of the senses; bala—and
sufficient bodily strength; anvitaù—endowed with; sarva—all; avayava—the
limbs of the body; sampannaù—fully restored; vajra-saàhananaù—having a
body as strong as a thunderbolt; yuvä—young; utthitaù—arisen;
tapta-hema-äbhaù—whose bodily luster became like molten gold;
vibhävasuù—fire; iva—like; edhasaù—from fuel wood.
TRANSLATION
As soon as he was sprinkled with the water from Lord Brahmä's waterpot,
Hiraëyakaçipu arose, endowed with a full body with limbs so strong that they
could bear the striking of a thunderbolt. With physical strength and a bodily
luster resembling molten gold, he emerged from the anthill a completely young
man, just as fire springs from fuel wood.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
181
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu was revitalized, so much so that his body was quite
competent to tolerate the striking of thunderbolts. He was now a young man
with a strong body and a very beautiful bodily luster resembling molten gold.
This is the rejuvenation that took place because of his severe austerity and
penance.
TEXT 24
Sa iNarq+YaaMbre dev& h&SavahMauPaiSQaTaMa( )
NaNaaMa iXarSaa >aUMaaE TaÕXaRNaMahaeTSav" )) 24 ))
sa nirékñyämbare devaà
haàsa-väham upasthitam
nanäma çirasä bhümau
tad-darçana-mahotsavaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); nirékñya—seeing; ambare—in the sky; devam—the
supreme demigod; haàsa-väham—who rides a swan airplane;
upasthitam—situated before him; nanäma—offered obeisances; çirasä—with
his head; bhümau—on the ground; tat-darçana—by seeing Lord Brahmä;
mahä-utsavaù—very much pleased.
TRANSLATION
Seeing Lord Brahmä present before him in the sky, carried by his swan
airplane, Hiraëyakaçipu was extremely pleased. He immediately fell flat with
his head on the ground and began to express his obligation to the lord.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
182
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.23-24):
ye 'py anya-devatä-bhaktä
yajante çraddhayänvitäù
te 'pi mäm eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-pürvakam
ahaà hi sarva-yajïänäà
bhoktä ca prabhur eva ca
na tu mäm abhijänanti
tattvenätaç cyavanti te
"Whatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kunté, is really meant
for Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding. I am the only
enjoyer and the only object of sacrifice. Those who do not recognize My true
transcendental nature fall down."
In effect, Kåñëa says, "Persons engaged in the worship of demigods are not
very intelligent, although such worship is indirectly offered to Me." For
example, when a man pours water on the leaves and branches of a tree without
pouring water on the root, he does so without sufficient knowledge or without
observing regulative principles. The process of watering a tree is to pour water
on the root. Similarly, the process of rendering service to different parts of the
body is to supply food to the stomach. The demigods are, so to speak, different
officers and directors in the government of the Supreme Lord. One has to
follow the laws made by the government, not by the officers or directors.
Similarly, everyone is to offer his worship to the Supreme Lord only. That will
automatically satisfy the different officers and directors of the Lord. The
officers and directors are engaged as representatives of the government, and to
offer some bribe to the officers and directors is illegal. This is stated in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
183
Bhagavad-gétä as avidhi-pürvakam. In other words, Kåñëa does not approve the
unnecessary worship of the demigods.
In Bhagavad-gétä it is clearly stated that there are many types of yajïa
performances recommended in the Vedic literatures, but actually all of them
are meant for satisfying the Supreme Lord. Yajïa means Viñëu. In the Third
Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä it is clearly stated that one should work only for
satisfying Yajïa, or Viñëu. The perfectional form of human civilization, known
as varëäçrama-dharma, is specifically meant for satisfying Viñëu. Therefore,
Kåñëa says, "I am the enjoyer of all sacrifices because I am the supreme master."
However, less intelligent persons, without knowing this fact, worship demigods
for temporary benefit. Therefore they fall down to material existence and do
not achieve the desired goal of life. If, however, anyone has any material desire
to be fulfilled, he had better pray for it to the Supreme Lord (although that is
not pure devotion), and he will thus achieve the desired result.
Although Hiraëyakaçipu offered his obeisances unto Lord Brahmä, he was
strongly inimical toward Lord Viñëu. This is the symptom of an asura. Asuras
worship the demigods as being separate from the Lord, not knowing that all
the demigods are powerful because of being servants of the Lord. If the
Supreme Lord were to withdraw the powers of the demigods, the demigods
would no longer be able to offer benedictions to their worshipers. The
difference between a devotee and a nondevotee, or asura, is that a devotee
knows that Lord Viñëu is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and that
everyone derives power from Him. Without worshiping the demigods for
particular powers, a devotee worships Lord Viñëu, knowing that if he desires a
particular power he can get that power while acting as Lord Viñëu's devotee.
Therefore in the çästra (SB 2.3.10) it is recommended:
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
184
"A person who has broader intelligence, whether he be full of material desires,
free from material desires, or desiring liberation, must by all means worship the
supreme whole, the Personality of Godhead." Even if a person has material
desires, instead of worshiping the demigods he should pray to the Supreme
Lord so that his connection with the Supreme Lord will be established and he
will be saved from becoming a demon or a nondevotee. In this regard, Çréla
Madhväcärya gives the following quotation from the Brahma-tarka:
eka-sthänaika-käryatväd
viñëoù prädhänyatas tathä
jévasya tad-adhénatvän
na bhinnädhikåtaà vacaù
Since Viñëu is the Supreme, by worshiping Viñëu one can fulfill all one's
desires. There is no need to divert one's attention to any demigod.
TEXT 25
oTQaaYa Pa[aÅil/" Pa[û wR+aMaa<aae d*Xaa iv>auMa( )
hzaRé[uPaul/k-aeÙedae iGara GaÓdYaaGa*<aaTa( )) 25 ))
utthäya präïjaliù prahva
ékñamäëo dåçä vibhum
harñäçru-pulakodbhedo
girä gadgadayägåëät
SYNONYMS
utthäya—getting up; präïjaliù—with folded hands; prahvaù—in a humble
manner; ékñamäëaù—seeing; dåçä—with his eyes; vibhum—the supreme
person within this universe; harña—of jubilation; açru—with tears;
pulaka—with hairs standing on the body; udbhedaù—enlivened; girä—by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
185
words; gadgadayä—faltering; agåëät—prayed.
TRANSLATION
Then, getting up from the ground and seeing Lord Brahmä before him, the
head of the Daityas was overwhelmed by jubilation. With tears in his eyes, his
whole body shivering, he began praying in a humble mood, with folded hands
and a faltering voice, to satisfy Lord Brahmä.
TEXTS 26-27
é[qihr<Yak-iXaPauåvac
k-LPaaNTae k-al/Sa*íeNa Yaae_NDaeNa TaMaSaav*TaMa( )
Ai>aVYaNaGa( JaGaidd& SvYaHJYaaeiTa" Svraeicza )) 26 ))
AaTMaNaa i}av*Taa ced& Sa*JaTYaviTa lu/MPaiTa )
rJa"SatvTaMaaeDaaMane ParaYa MahTae NaMa" )) 27 ))
çré-hiraëyakaçipur uväca
kalpänte käla-såñöena
yo 'ndhena tamasävåtam
abhivyanag jagad idaà
svayaïjyotiù sva-rociñä
ätmanä tri-våtä cedaà
såjaty avati lumpati
rajaù-sattva-tamo-dhämne
paräya mahate namaù
SYNONYMS
çré-hiraëyakaçipuù uväca—Hiraëyakaçipu said; kalpa-ante—at the end of every
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
186
day of Lord Brahmä; käla-såñöena—created by the time factor; yaù—he who;
andhena—by dense darkness; tamasä—by ignorance; ävåtam—covered;
abhivyanak—manifested; jagat—cosmic manifestation; idam—this;
svayam-jyotiù—self-effulgent; sva-rociñä—by his bodily rays; ätmanä—by
himself; tri-våtä—conducted by the three modes of material nature; ca—also;
idam—this material world; såjati—creates; avati—maintain s;
lumpati—annihilates; rajaù—of the mode of passion; sattva—the mode of
goodness; tamaù—and the mode of ignorance; dhämne—unto the supreme
lord; paräya—unto the supreme; mahate—unto the great; namaù—my
respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the supreme lord within this
universe. At the end of each day of his life, the universe is fully covered with
dense darkness by the influence of time, and then again, during his next day,
that self-effulgent lord, by his own effulgence, manifests, maintains and
destroys the entire cosmic manifestation through the material energy, which is
invested with the three modes of material nature. He, Lord Brahmä, is the
shelter of those modes of nature—sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa.
PURPORT
The words abhivyanag jagad idam refer to he who creates this cosmic
manifestation. The original creator is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa (janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1]); Lord Brahmä is the secondary creator.
When Lord Brahmä is empowered by Lord Kåñëa as the engineer to create the
phenomenal world, he becomes the supremely powerful feature within this
universe. The total material energy is created by Kåñëa, and later, taking
advantage of all that has necessarily been created, Lord Brahmä engineers the
entire phenomenal universe. At the end of Lord Brahmä's day, everything up
to Svargaloka is inundated with water, and the next morning, when there is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
187
darkness in the universe, Brahmä again brings the phenomenal manifestation
into existence. Therefore he is described here as he who manifests this
universe.
Trén guëän våëoti: Lord Brahmä takes advantage of the three modes of
material nature. prakåti, material nature, is described here as tri-våtä, the
source of the three material modes. Çréla Madhväcärya comments in this
connection that tri-våtä means prakåtyä. Thus Lord Kåñëa is the original
creator, and Lord Brahmä is the original engineer.
TEXT 28
NaMa AaÛaYa bqJaaYa jaNaivjaNaMaUTaRYae )
Pa[a<aeiNd]YaMaNaaebuiÖivk-arEVYaRi¢-MaqYauze )) 28 ))
nama ädyäya béjäya
jïäna-vijïäna-mürtaye
präëendriya-mano-buddhivikärair
vyaktim éyuñe
SYNONYMS
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances; ädyäya—unto the original living
creature; béjäya—the seed of the cosmic manifestation; jïäna—of knowledge;
vijïäna—and of practical application; mürtaye—unto the deity or form;
präëa—of the life air; indriya—of the senses; manaù—of the mind; buddhi—of
the intelligence; vikäraiù—by transformations; vyaktim—manifestation;
éyuñe—who has obtained.
TRANSLATION
I offer my obeisances to the original personality within this universe, Lord
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
188
Brahmä, who is cognizant and who can apply his mind and realized intelligence
in creating this cosmic manifestation. It is because of his activities that
everything within the universe is visible. He is therefore the cause of all
manifestations.
PURPORT
The Vedänta-sütra begins by declaring that the Absolute Person is the
original source of all creation (janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1]). One may ask
whether Lord Brahmä is the Supreme Absolute Person. No, the Supreme
Absolute Person is Kåñëa. Brahmä receives his mind, intelligence, materials
and everything else from Kåñëa, and then he becomes the secondary creator,
the engineer of this universe. In this regard we may note that the creation does
not take place accidentally, because of the explosion of a chunk. Such
nonsensical theories are not accepted by Vedic students. The first created
living being is Brahmä, who is endowed with perfect knowledge and
intelligence by the Lord. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, tene brahma hådä ya
ädi-kavaye: [SB 1.1.1] although Brahmä is the first created being, he is not
independent, for he receives help from the Supreme Personality of Godhead
through his heart. There is no one but Brahmä at the time of creation, and
therefore he receives his intelligence directly from the Lord through the heart.
This has been discussed in the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
Lord Brahmä is described in this verse as the original cause of the cosmic
manifestation, and this applies to his position in the material world. There are
many, many such controllers, all of whom are created by the Supreme Lord,
Viñëu. This is illustrated by an incident described in Caitanya-caritämåta.
When the Brahmä of this particular universe was invited by Kåñëa to Dvärakä,
he thought that he was the only Brahmä. Therefore when Kåñëa inquired from
His servant which Brahmä was at the door to visit, Lord Brahmä was surprised.
He replied that of course Lord Brahmä, the father of the four Kumäras, was
waiting at the door. Later, Lord Brahmä asked Kåñëa why He had inquired
which Brahmä had come. He was then informed that there are millions of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
189
other Brahmäs because there are millions of universes. Kåñëa then called all
the Brahmäs, who immediately came to visit Him. The catur-mukha Brahmä,
the four-headed Brahmä of this universe, thought himself a very insignificant
creature in the presence of so many Brahmäs with so many heads. Thus
although there is a Brahmä who is the engineer of each universe, Kåñëa is the
original source of all of them.
TEXT 29
TvMaqiXaze JaGaTaSTaSQauzê
Pa[a<aeNa Mau:YaeNa PaiTa" Pa[JaaNaaMa( )
ictaSYa ictaEMaRNawiNd]Yaa<aa&
PaiTaMaRhaNa( >aUTaGau<aaXaYaeXa" )) 29 ))
tvam éçiñe jagatas tasthuñaç ca
präëena mukhyena patiù prajänäm
cittasya cittair mana-indriyäëäà
patir mahän bhüta-guëäçayeçaù
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; éçiñe—actually control; jagataù—of the moving being;
tasthuñaù—of the being that is dull or stationed in one place; ca—and;
präëena—by the living force; mukhyena—the origin of all activities;
patiù—master; prajänäm—of all living entities; cittasya—of the mind;
cittaiù—by the consciousness; manaù—of the mind; indriyäëäm—and of the
two kinds of senses (acting and knowledge-gathering); patiù—the master;
mahän—great; bhüta—of the material elements; guëa—and the qualities of
the material elements; äçaya—of desires; éçaù—the supreme master.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
190
TRANSLATION
Your Lordship, being the origin of the life of this material world, is the
master and controller of the living entities, both moving and stationary, and you
inspire their consciousness. You maintain the mind and the acting and
knowledge-acquiring senses, and therefore you are the great controller of all the
material elements and their qualities, and you are the controller of all desires.
PURPORT
In this verse it is clearly indicated that the original source of everything is
life. Brahmä was instructed by the supreme life, Kåñëa. Kåñëa is the supreme
living entity (nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm (Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13)), and
Brahmä is also a living entity, but the original source of Brahmä is Kåñëa.
Therefore Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.7), mattaù parataraà nänyat kiïcid
asti dhanaïjaya: "O Arjuna, there is no truth superior to Me." Kåñëa is the
original source of Brahmä, who is the original source of this universe. Brahmä
is a representative of Kåñëa, and therefore all the qualities and activities of
Kåñëa are also present in Lord Brahmä.
TEXT 30
Tv& SaáTaNTaUNa( ivTaNaaeiz TaNva
}aYYaa cTauhaeR}ak-ivÛYaa c )
TvMaek- AaTMaaTMavTaaMaNaaid‚
rNaNTaPaar" k-ivrNTaraTMaa )) 30 ))
tvaà sapta-tantün vitanoñi tanvä
trayyä catur-hotraka-vidyayä ca
tvam eka ätmätmavatäm anädir
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
191
ananta-päraù kavir antarätmä
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; sapta-tantün—the seven kinds of Vedic ritualistic ceremonies,
beginning from the agniñöoma-yajïa; vitanoñi—spread; tanvä—by your body;
trayyä—the three Vedas; catuù-hotraka—of the four kinds of Vedic priests,
known as hotä, adhvaryu, brahma and udgätä; vidyayä—by the necessary
knowledge; ca—also; tvam—you; ekaù—one; ätmä—the Supersoul;
ätma-vatäm—of all living entities; anädiù—without beginning;
ananta-päraù—without end; kaviù—the supreme inspirer; antaù-ätmä—the
Supersoul within the core of the heart.
TRANSLATION
My dear lord, by your form as the Vedas personified and through knowledge
relating to the activities of all the yajïic brähmaëas, you spread the Vedic
ritualistic ceremonies of the seven kinds of sacrifices, headed by agniñöoma.
Indeed, you inspire the yajïic brähmaëas to perform the rituals mentioned in
the three Vedas. Being the Supreme Soul, the Supersoul of all living entities,
you are beginningless, endless and omniscient, beyond the limits of time and
space.
PURPORT
The Vedic ritualistic ceremonies, the knowledge thereof, and the person
who agrees to perform them are inspired by the Supreme Soul. As confirmed
in Bhagavad-gétä, mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: [Bg. 15.15] from the Lord
come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness. The Supersoul is situated in
everyone's heart (sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöaù, éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati [Bg. 18.61]), and when one is advanced in Vedic
knowledge, the Supersoul gives him directions. Acting as Supersoul, the Lord
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
192
gives inspiration to a suitable person to perform the Vedic ritualistic
ceremonies. In this connection, four classes of priests, known as åtvik, are
required. They are mentioned as hotä, adhvaryu, brahma and udgätä.
TEXT 31
TvMaev k-al/ae_iNaiMazae JaNaaNaa‚
MaaYaulR/vaÛvYavE" i+a<aaeiz )
kU-$=SQa AaTMaa ParMaeïyJaae Maha&‚
STv& Jaqvl/aek-SYa c Jaqv AaTMaa )) 31 ))
tvam eva kälo 'nimiño janänäm
äyur lavädy-avayavaiù kñiëoñi
küöa-stha ätmä parameñöhy ajo mahäàs
tvaà jéva-lokasya ca jéva ätmä
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; eva—indeed; kälaù—unlimited time; animiñaù—unblinking;
janänäm—of all living entities; äyuù—the duration of life;
lava-ädi—consisting of seconds, moments, minutes and hours; avayavaiù—by
different parts; kñiëoñi—reduce; küöa-sthaù—without being affected by
anything; ätmä—the Supersoul; parameñöhé—the Supreme Lord; ajaù—the
unborn; mahän—the great; tvam—you; jéva-lokasya—of this material world;
ca—also; jévaù—the cause of life; ätmä—the Supersoul.
TRANSLATION
O my lord, Your Lordship is eternally awake, seeing everything that
happens. As eternal time, you reduce the duration of life for all living entities
through your different parts, such as moments, seconds, minutes and hours.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
193
Nonetheless, you are unchanged, resting in one place as the Supersoul, witness
and Supreme Lord, the birthless, all-pervading controller who is the cause of
life for all living entities.
PURPORT
In this verse the word küöa-stha is very important. Although the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is situated everywhere, He is the central unchanging
point. Éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati: [Bg. 18.61] the Lord is
situated in full in the core of everyone's heart. As indicated in the Upaniñads
by the word ekatvam, although there are millions and millions of living
entities, the Lord is situated as the Supersoul in every one of them.
Nonetheless, He is one in many. As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä, advaitam
acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam: [Bs. 5.33] He has many forms, yet they are
advaita—one and unchanging. Since the Lord is all-pervading, He is also
situated in eternal time. The living entities are described as parts and parcels
of the Lord because He is the life and soul of all living entities, being situated
within their hearts as the antaryämé, as enunciated by the philosophy of
inconceivable oneness and difference (acintya-bhedäbheda). Since the living
entities are part of God, they are one in quality with the Lord, yet they are
different from Him. The Supersoul, who inspires all living entities to act, is
one and changeless. There are varieties of subjects, objects and activities, yet
the Lord is one.
TEXT 32
Tvta" Par& NaaParMaPYaNaeJa‚
deJaÀ ik-iÄd( VYaiTair¢-MaiSTa )
ivÛa" k-l/aSTae TaNavê SavaR
ihr<YaGa>aaeR_iSa b*hiT}aPa*ï" )) 32 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
194
tvattaù paraà näparam apy anejad
ejac ca kiïcid vyatiriktam asti
vidyäù kaläs te tanavaç ca sarvä
hiraëyagarbho 'si båhat tri-påñöhaù
SYNONYMS
tvattaù—from you; param—higher; na—not; aparam—lower; api—even;
anejat—not moving; ejat—moving; ca—and; kiïcit—anything;
vyatiriktam—separate; asti—there is; vidyäù—knowledge; kaläù—its parts;
te—of you; tanavaù—features of the body; ca—and; sarväù—all;
hiraëya-garbhaù—the one who keeps the universe within his abdomen;
asi—you are; båhat—greater than the greatest; tri-påñöhaù—transcendental to
the three modes of material nature.
TRANSLATION
There is nothing separate from you, whether it be better or lower, stationary
or moving. The knowledge derived from the Vedic literatures like the
Upaniñads, and from all the sub-limbs of the original Vedic knowledge, form
your external body. You are Hiraëyagarbha, the reservoir of the universe, but
nonetheless, being situated as the supreme controller, you are transcendental to
the material world, which consists of the three modes of material nature.
PURPORT
The word param means "the supreme cause," and aparam means "the effect."
The supreme cause is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the effect is
material nature. The living entities, both moving and nonmoving, are
controlled by the Vedic instructions in art and science, and therefore they are
all expansions of the external energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is the center as the Supersoul. The brahmäëòas, the universes, exist
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
195
during the duration of a breath of the Supreme Lord (yasyaika-niçvasita-kälam
athävalambya jévanti loma-vilajä jagad-aëòa-näthäù [Bs. 5.48]). Thus they are
also within the womb of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mahä-Viñëu.
Nothing, therefore, is separate from the Supreme Lord. This is the philosophy
of acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(6).
TEXT 33
VYa¢&- iv>aae SQaUl/iMad& Xarqr&
YaeNaeiNd]YaPa[a<aMaNaaeGau<aa&STvMa( )
>au¿e iSQaTaae DaaMaiNa PaarMaeïye
AVYa¢- AaTMaa Pauåz" Paura<a" )) 33 ))
vyaktaà vibho sthülam idaà çaréraà
yenendriya-präëa-mano-guëäàs tvam
bhuìkñe sthito dhämani pärameñöhye
avyakta ätmä puruñaù puräëaù
SYNONYMS
vyaktam—manifested; vibho—O my lord; sthülam—cosmic manifestation;
idam—this; çaréram—external body; yena—by which; indriya—the senses;
präëa—the life air; manaù—the mind; guëän—transcendental qualities;
tvam—you; bhuìkñe—enjoy; sthitaù—situated; dhämani—in your own abode;
pärameñöhye—the supreme; avyaktaù—not manifested through ordinary
knowledge; ätmä—the soul; puruñaù—the supreme person; puräëaù—the
oldest.
TRANSLATION
O my lord, being changelessly situated in your own abode, you expand your
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
196
universal form within this cosmic manifestation, thus appearing to taste the
material world. You are Brahman, the Supersoul, the oldest, the Personality of
Godhead.
PURPORT
It is said that the Absolute Truth appears in three features—namely,
impersonal Brahman, localized Supersoul and ultimately the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. The cosmic manifestation is the gross material
body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who enjoys the taste of the
material mellows by expanding His parts and parcels, the living entities, who
are qualitatively one with Him. The Supreme Personality of Godhead,
however, is situated in the Vaikuëöha planets, where He enjoys the spiritual
mellows. Therefore the one Absolute Truth, Bhagavän, pervades all by His
material cosmic manifestation, the spiritual Brahman effulgence, and His
personal existence as the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 34
ANaNTaaVYa¢-æPae<a YaeNaedMai%l&/ TaTaMa( )
icdicC^i¢-Yau¢-aYa TaSMaE >aGavTae NaMa" )) 34 ))
anantävyakta-rüpeëa
yenedam akhilaà tatam
cid-acic-chakti-yuktäya
tasmai bhagavate namaù
SYNONYMS
ananta-avyakta-rüpeëa—by the unlimited, unmanifested form; yena—by
which; idam—this; akhilam—total aggregate; tatam—expanded; cit—with
spiritual; acit—and material; çakti—potency; yuktäya—unto him who is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
197
endowed; tasmai—unto him; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme, who in his
unlimited, unmanifested form has expanded the cosmic manifestation, the form
of the totality of the universe. He possesses external and internal energies and
the mixed energy called the marginal potency, which consists of all the living
entities.
PURPORT
The Lord is endowed with unlimited potencies (paräsya çaktir vividhaiva
çrüyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]), which are summarized as three, namely
external, internal and marginal. The external potency manifests this material
world, the internal potency manifests the spiritual world, and the marginal
potency manifests the living entities, who are mixtures of internal and
external. The living entity, being part and parcel of Parabrahman, is actually
internal potency, but because of being in contact with the material energy, he
is an emanation of material and spiritual energies. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is above the material energy and is engaged in spiritual pastimes. The
material energy is only an external manifestation of His pastimes.
TEXT 35
Yaid daSYaSYai>aMaTaaNa( vraNMae vrdaetaMa )
>aUTae>YaSTviÜSa*íe>Yaae Ma*TYauMaaR >aUNMaMa Pa[>aae )) 35 ))
yadi däsyasy abhimatän
varän me varadottama
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
198
bhütebhyas tvad-visåñöebhyo
måtyur mä bhün mama prabho
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; däsyasi—you will give; abhimatän—the desired;
varän—benedictions; me—unto me; varada-uttama—O best of all benedictors;
bhütebhyaù—from living entities; tvat—by you; visåñöebhyaù—who are created;
måtyuù—death; mä—not; bhüt—let there be; mama—my; prabho—O my lord.
TRANSLATION
O my lord, O best of the givers of benediction, if you will kindly grant me
the benediction I desire, please let me not meet death from any of the living
entities created by you.
PURPORT
After being created from the navel of Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, Lord Brahmä,
the original created living being within the universe, created many other
different types of living entities to reside in this universe. Therefore, from the
beginning of creation, the living entities were born of a superior living entity.
Ultimately, Kåñëa is the supreme living being, the father of all others. Ahaà
béja-pradaù pitä: [Bg. 14.4] He is the seed-giving father of all living entities.
Thus far, Hiraëyakaçipu has adored Lord Brahmä as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and has expected to become immortal by the
benediction of Lord Brahmä. Now, however, having come to understand that
even Lord Brahmä is not immortal because at the end of the millennium Lord
Brahmä will also die, Hiraëyakaçipu is very carefully asking him for
benedictions that will be almost as good as immortality. His first proposal is
that he not be killed by any of the different forms of living entities created by
Lord Brahmä within this material world.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
199
TEXT 36
NaaNTabRihidRva Na¢-MaNYaSMaadiPa caYauDaE" )
Na >aUMaaE NaaMbre Ma*TYauNaR NarENaR Ma*GaEriPa )) 36 ))
näntar bahir divä naktam
anyasmäd api cäyudhaiù
na bhümau nämbare måtyur
na narair na mågair api
SYNONYMS
na—not; antaù—inside (the palace or home); bahiù—outside the home;
divä—during the daytime; naktam—during the night; anyasmät—from any
others beyond Lord Brahmä; api—even; ca—also; ayudhaiù—by any weapons
used within this material world; na—nor; bhümau—on the ground; na—not;
ambare—in the sky; måtyuù—death; na—not; naraiù—by any men; na—nor;
mågaiù—by any animal; api—also.
TRANSLATION
Grant me that I not die within any residence or outside any residence,
during the daytime or at night, nor on the ground or in the sky. Grant me that
my death not be brought by any being other than those created by you, nor by
any weapon, nor by any human being or animal.
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu was very much afraid of Viñëu's becoming an animal to kill
him because his brother had been killed by Viñëu when the Lord took the
shape of a boar. He was therefore very careful to guard against all kinds of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
200
animals. But even without taking the shape of an animal, Viñëu could kill him
by hurling His Sudarçana cakra, which can go anywhere without the Lord's
physical presence. Therefore Hiraëyakaçipu was careful to guard against all
kinds of weapons. He guarded against all kinds of time, space and countries
because he was afraid of being killed by someone else in another land. There
are many other planets, higher and lower, and therefore he prayed for the
benediction of not being killed by any resident of any of these planets. There
are three original deities—Brahmä, Viñëu and Maheçvara. Hiraëyakaçipu
knew that Brahmä would not kill him, but he also wanted not to be killed by
Lord Viñëu or Lord Çiva. Consequently, he prayed for such a benediction.
Thus Hiraëyakaçipu thought himself securely protected from any kind of
death caused by any living entity within this universe. He also carefully
guarded against natural death, which might take place within his house or
outside of the house.
TEXTS 37-38
VYaSaui>avaRSauMaiÙvaR SauraSaurMahaerGaE" )
APa[iTaÜNÜTaa& YauÖe Wek-PaTYa& c deihNaaMa( )) 37 ))
SaveRza& l/aek-Paal/aNaa& MaihMaaNa& YaQaaTMaNa" )
TaPaaeYaaeGaPa[>aava<aa& Yaà irZYaiTa k-ihRicTa( )) 38 ))
vyasubhir väsumadbhir vä
suräsura-mahoragaiù
apratidvandvatäà yuddhe
aika-patyaà ca dehinäm
sarveñäà loka-pälänäà
mahimänaà yathätmanaù
tapo-yoga-prabhäväëäà
yan na riñyati karhicit
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
201
SYNONYMS
vyasubhiù—by things that have no life; vä—or; asumadbhiù—by entities that
have life; vä—or; sura—by the demigods; asura—the demons;
mahä-uragaiù—by the great serpents who live on the lower planets;
apratidvandvatäm—without a rival; yuddhe—in battle;
aika-patyam—supremacy; ca—and; dehinäm—over those who have material
bodies; sarveñäm—of all; loka-pälänäm—the predominating deities of all
planets; mahimänam—the glory; yathä—just as; ätmanaù—of yourself;
tapaù-yoga-prabhäväëäm—of those whose power is obtained by austerities and
the practice of mystic yoga; yat—which; na—never; riñyati—is destroyed;
karhicit—at any time.
TRANSLATION
Grant me that I not meet death from any entity, living or nonliving. Grant
me, further, that I not be killed by any demigod or demon or by any great snake
from the lower planets. Since no one can kill you in the battlefield, you have no
competitor. Therefore, grant me the benediction that I too may have no rival.
Give me sole lordship over all the living entities and presiding deities, and give
me all the glories obtained by that position. Furthermore, give me all the mystic
powers attained by long austerities and the practice of yoga, for these cannot be
lost at any time.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä obtained his supreme position due to long austerities and
penances, mystic yoga, meditation and so on. Hiraëyakaçipu wanted a similar
position. The ordinary powers achieved by mystic yoga, austerities and other
processes are sometimes vanquished, but the powers obtained by the mercy of
the Lord are never vanquished. Hiraëyakaçipu, therefore, wanted a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
202
benediction that would never be vanquished.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Third Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Hiraëyakaçipu's Plan to Become Immortal."
4. Hiraëyakaçipu Terrorizes the Universe
This chapter fully describes how Hiraëyakaçipu obtained power from Lord
Brahmä and misused it by harassing all the living entities within this universe.
By severe austerities, Hiraëyakaçipu satisfied Lord Brahmä and obtained
the benedictions he desired. After he received these benedictions, his body,
which had been almost entirely consumed, was revived with full beauty and a
luster like gold. Nonetheless, he continued to be envious of Lord Viñëu, unable
to forget Lord Viñëu's having killed his brother. Hiraëyakaçipu conquered
everyone in the ten directions and the three worlds and brought all living
entities, both demigods and asuras, under his control. Becoming the master of
all places, including the residence of Indra, whom he had driven out, he began
enjoying life in great luxury and thus became mad. All the demigods but Lord
Viñëu, Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva came under his control and began serving
him, but despite all his material power he was dissatisfied because he was
always puffed up, proud of transgressing the Vedic regulations. All the
brähmaëas were dissatisfied with him, and they cursed him with
determination. Eventually, all the living entities within the universe,
represented by the demigods and sages, prayed to the Supreme Lord for relief
from Hiraëyakaçipu's rule.
Lord Viñëu informed the demigods that they and the other living entities
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
203
would be saved from the fearful conditions created by Hiraëyakaçipu. Since
Hiraëyakaçipu was the oppressor of all the demigods, the followers of the
Vedas, the cows, the brähmaëas and the religious, saintly persons, and since he
was envious of the Supreme Lord, he would naturally be killed very soon.
Hiraëyakaçipu's last exploit would be to torment his own son Prahläda, who
was a mahä-bhägavata, an exalted Vaiñëava. Then his life would end. When
the demigods were thus reassured by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
everyone was satisfied, knowing that the miseries inflicted upon them by
Hiraëyakaçipu would come to an end.
Finally, Närada Muni describes the characteristics of Prahläda Mahäräja,
the son of Hiraëyakaçipu, and describes how his father envied his own
qualified son. In this way the chapter ends.
TEXT 1
é[qNaard ovac
Wv& v*Ta" XaTaDa*iTaihRr<Yak-iXaPaaerQa )
Pa[adatataPaSaa Pa[qTaae vra&STaSYa SaudulR/>aaNa( )) 1 ))
çré-närada uväca
evaà våtaù çata-dhåtir
hiraëyakaçipor atha
prädät tat-tapasä préto
varäàs tasya sudurlabhän
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; evam—thus; våtaù—solicited;
çata-dhåtiù—Lord Brahmä; hiraëyakaçipoù—of Hiraëyakaçipu; atha—then;
prädät—delivered; tat—his; tapasä—by the difficult austerities; prétaù—being
pleased; varän—benedictions; tasya—unto Hiraëyakaçipu;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
204
su-durlabhän—very rarely obtained.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: Lord Brahmä was very much satisfied by
Hiraëyakaçipu's austerities, which were difficult to perform. Therefore, when
solicited for benedictions, he indeed granted them, although they were rarely to
be achieved.
TEXT 2
é[qb]øaevac
TaaTaeMae dulR/>aa" Pau&Saa& YaaNa( v*<aqze vraNa( MaMa )
TaQaaiPa ivTaraMYa(r) vraNa( YaÛiPa dulR/>aaNa( )) 2 ))
çré-brahmoväca
täteme durlabhäù puàsäà
yän våëéñe varän mama
tathäpi vitarämy aìga
varän yadyapi durlabhän
SYNONYMS
çré-brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; täta—O dear son; ime—all these;
durlabhäù—very rarely obtained; puàsäm—by men; yän—those which;
våëéñe—you ask; varän—benedictions; mama—from me; tathäpi—still;
vitarämi—I shall deliver; aìga—O Hiraëyakaçipu; varän—the benedictions;
yadyapi—although; durlabhän—not generally available.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
205
Lord Brahmä said: O Hiraëyakaçipu, these benedictions for which you have
asked are difficult to obtain for most men. Nonetheless, O my son, I shall grant
you them although they are generally not available.
PURPORT
Material benedictions are not always exactly worthy of being called
benedictions. If one possesses more and more, a benediction itself may become
a curse, for just as achieving material opulence in this material world requires
great strength and endeavor, maintaining it also requires great endeavor. Lord
Brahmä informed Hiraëyakaçipu that although he was ready to offer him
whatever he had asked, the result of the benedictions would be very difficult
for Hiraëyakaçipu to maintain. Nonetheless, since Brahmä had promised, he
wanted to grant all the benedictions asked. The word durlabhän indicates that
one should not take benedictions one cannot enjoy peacefully.
TEXT 3
TaTaae JaGaaMa >aGavaNMaaegaaNauGa]hae iv>au" )
PaUiJaTaae_SaurvYaeR<a STaUYaMaaNa" Pa[JaeìrE" )) 3 ))
tato jagäma bhagavän
amoghänugraho vibhuù
püjito 'sura-varyeëa
stüyamänaù prajeçvaraiù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; jagäma—departed; bhagavän—the most powerful, Lord
Brahmä; amogha—without failure; anugrahaù—whose benediction;
vibhuù—the Supreme within this universe; püjitaù—being worshiped;
asura-varyeëa—by the most exalted demon (Hiraëyakaçipu);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
206
stüyamänaù—being praised; prajä-éçvaraiù—by many demigods, the masters of
different regions.
TRANSLATION
Then Lord Brahmä, who awards infallible benedictions, departed, being
worshiped by the best of the demons, Hiraëyakaçipu, and being praised by great
sages and saintly persons.
TEXT 4
Wv& l/BDavrae dETYaae ib>a]ÖeMaMaYa& vPau" )
>aGavTYak-raed( Üez& >a]aTauvRDaMaNauSMarNa( )) 4 ))
evaà labdha-varo daityo
bibhrad dhemamayaà vapuù
bhagavaty akarod dveñaà
bhrätur vadham anusmaran
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; labdha-varaù—having obtained his desired boon;
daityaù—Hiraëyakaçipu; bibhrat—acquiring; hema-mayam—possessing the
luster of gold; vapuù—a body; bhagavati—unto Lord Viñëu, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; akarot—maintained; dveñam—envy; bhrätuù
vadham—the killing of his brother; anusmaran—always thinking of.
TRANSLATION
The demon Hiraëyakaçipu, having thus been blessed by Lord Brahmä and
having acquired a lustrous golden body, continued to remember the death of his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
207
brother and therefore be envious of Lord Viñëu.
PURPORT
A demoniac person, in spite of acquiring all the opulences possible to
obtain in this universe, continues to be envious of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXTS 5-7
Sa iviJaTYa idXa" SavaR l/aek-a&ê }aqNa( MahaSaur" )
devaSaurMaNauZYaeNd]GaNDavRGaå@aerGaaNa( )) 5 ))
iSaÖcar<aivÛaDa]aNa*zqNa( iPaTa*PaTaqNa( MaNaUNa( )
Ya+ar+a"iPaXaaceXaaNa( Pa[eTa>aUTaPaTaqNaiPa )) 6 ))
SavRSatvPaTaqiÅTva vXaMaaNaqYa ivìiJaTa( )
Jahar l/aek-Paal/aNaa& SQaaNaaiNa Sah TaeJaSaa )) 7 ))
sa vijitya diçaù sarvä
lokäàç ca trén mahäsuraù
deväsura-manuñyendragandharva-
garuòoragän
siddha-cäraëa-vidyädhrän
åñén pitå-patén manün
yakña-rakñaù-piçäceçän
preta-bhüta-patén api
sarva-sattva-patéï jitvä
vaçam änéya viçva-jit
jahära loka-pälänäà
sthänäni saha tejasä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
208
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); vijitya—conquering; diçaù—the directions;
sarväù—all; lokän—planetary systems; ca—and; trén—three (upper, lower and
middle); mahä-asuraù—the great demon; deva—the demigods; asura—the
demons; manuñya—of the human beings; indra—the kings; gandharva—the
Gandharvas; garuòa—the Garuòas; uragän—the great serpents; siddha—the
Siddhas; cäraëa—the Cäraëas; vidyädhrän—the Vidyädharas; åñén—the great
sages and saintly persons; pitå-patén—Yamaräja and the other leaders of the
Pitäs; manün—all the different Manus; yakña—the Yakñas; rakñaù—the
Räkñasas; piçäca-éçän—the leaders of Piçäcaloka; preta—of the Pretas;
bhüta—and of the Bhütas; patén—the masters; api—also;
sarva-sattva-patén—the masters of all the different planets; jitvä—conquering;
vaçam änéya—bringing under control; viçva-jit—the conqueror of the whole
universe; jahära—usurped; loka-pälänäm—of the demigods who manage the
universal affairs; sthänäni—the places; saha—with; tejasä—all their power.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu became the conqueror of the entire universe. Indeed, that
great demon conquered all the planets in the three worlds-upper, middle and
lower-including the planets of the human beings, the Gandharvas, the Garuòas,
the great serpents, the Siddhas, Cäraëas and Vidyädharas, the great saints,
Yamaräja, the Manus, the Yakñas, the Räkñasas, the Piçäcas and their masters,
and the masters of the ghosts and Bhütas. He defeated the rulers of all the other
planets where there are living entities and brought them under his control.
Conquering the abodes of all, he seized their power and influence.
PURPORT
The word garuòa in this verse indicates that there are planets of great birds
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
209
like Garuòa. Similarly, the word uraga indicates that there are planets of
enormous serpents. Such a description of the various planets of the universe
may challenge modern scientists who think that all planets but this earth are
vacant. These scientists claim to have launched excursions to the moon, where
they have found no living entities but only big craters full of dust and stone,
although in fact the moon is so brilliant that it acts like the sun in illuminating
the entire universe. Of course, it is not possible to convince modern scientists
of the Vedic information about the universe. Nonetheless, we are not very
much impressed by the words of scientists who say that all other planets are
vacant and that only the earth is full of living entities.
TEXT 8
devaeÛaNaié[Yaa JauíMaDYaaSTae SMa i}aiPaíPaMa( )
MaheNd]>avNa& Saa+aaiàiMaRTa& ivìk-MaR<aa )
}aEl/aeKYal/+MYaaYaTaNaMaDYauvaSaai%l/iÖRMaTa( )) 8 ))
devodyäna-çriyä juñöam
adhyäste sma tri-piñöapam
mahendra-bhavanaà säkñän
nirmitaà viçvakarmaëä
trailokya-lakñmy-äyatanam
adhyuväsäkhilarddhimat
SYNONYMS
deva-udyäna—of the famous garden of the demigods; çriyä—by the opulences;
juñöam—enriched; adhyäste sma—remained in; tri-piñöapam—the higher
planetary system, where various demigods live; mahendra-bhavanam—the
palace of Indra, the King of heaven; säkñät—directly; nirmitam—constructed;
viçvakarmaëä—by the famous architect of the demigods, Viçvakarmä;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
210
trailokya—of all the three worlds; lakñmé-äyatanam—the residence of the
goddess of fortune; adhyuväsa—lived in; akhila-åddhi-mat—possessing the
opulence of the entire universe.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu, who possessed all opulence, began residing in heaven, with
its famous Nandana garden, which is enjoyed by the demigods. In fact, he
resided in the most opulent palace of Indra, the King of heaven. The palace had
been directly constructed by the demigod architect Viçvakarmä and was as
beautifully made as if the goddess of fortune of the entire universe resided
there.
PURPORT
From this description it appears that all the heavenly planets of the upper
planetary system are thousands upon thousands of times more opulent than
the lower planetary system in which we live. Viçvakarmä, the famous heavenly
architect, is known as the constructor of many wonderful buildings in the
upper planets, where there are not only beautiful buildings, but also many
opulent gardens and parks, which are described as nandana-devodyäna, gardens
quite fit to be enjoyed by the demigods. This description of the upper planetary
system and its opulences is to be understood from authoritative scriptures like
the Vedic literatures. Telescopes and the other imperfect instruments of
scientists are inadequate for evaluating the upper planetary system. Although
such instruments are needed because the vision of the so-called scientists is
imperfect, the instruments themselves are also imperfect. Therefore the upper
planets cannot be appraised by imperfect men using imperfect man-made
instruments. Direct information received from the Vedic literature, however,
is perfect, We therefore cannot accept the statement that there are no opulent
residences on planets other than this earth.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
211
TEXTS 9-12
Ya}a ivd]uMaSaaePaaNaa MahaMaark-Taa >auv" )
Ya}a Sf-ai$=k-ku-@yaiNa vEdUYaRSTaM>aPa»Ya" )) 9 ))
Ya}a ic}aivTaaNaaiNa PaÚraGaaSaNaaiNa c )
PaYa"fe-NaiNa>aa" XaYYaa Mau¢-adaMaPairC^da" )) 10 ))
kU-JaiÙNaURPaurEdeRVYa" XaBdYaNTYa wTaSTaTa" )
rÒSQal/Izu PaXYaiNTa SaudTaq" SauNdr& Mau%Ma( )) 11 ))
TaiSMaNMaheNd]>avNae Mahabl/ae
MahaMaNaa iNaiJaRTal/aek- Wk-ra$( )
reMae_i>avNÛax(iga]YauGa" Sauraidi>a"
Pa[TaaiPaTaEæiJaRTac<@XaaSaNa" )) 12 ))
yatra vidruma-sopänä
mahä-märakatä bhuvaù
yatra sphäöika-kuòyäni
vaidürya-stambha-paìktayaù
yatra citra-vitänäni
padmarägäsanäni ca
payaù-phena-nibhäù çayyä
muktädäma-paricchadäù
küjadbhir nüpurair devyaù
çabda-yantya itas tataù
ratna-sthaléñu paçyanti
sudatéù sundaraà mukham
tasmin mahendra-bhavane mahä-balo
mahä-manä nirjita-loka eka-räö
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
212
reme 'bhivandyäìghri-yugaù surädibhiù
pratäpitair ürjita-caëòa-çäsanaù
SYNONYMS
yatra—where (the residential quarters of King Indra); vidruma-sopänäù—steps
made of coral; mahä-märakatäù—emerald; bhuvaù—floors; yatra—where;
sphäöika—crystal; kuòyäni—walls; vaidürya—of vaidürya stone; stambha—of
pillars; paìktayaù—lines; yatra—where; citra—wonderful; vitänäni—canopies;
padmaräga—bedecked with rubies; äsanäni—seats; ca—also; payaù—of milk;
phena—the foam; nibhäù—just like; çayyäù—beds; muktädäma—of pearls;
paricchadäù—having borders; küjadbhiù—jingling; nüpuraiù—with ankle bells;
devyaù—celestial ladies; çabda-yantyaù—making sweet vibrations; itaù
tataù—here and there; ratna-sthaléñu—in places bedecked with jewels and
gems; paçyanti—see; su-datéù—having nice teeth; sundaram—very beautiful;
mukham—faces; tasmin—in that; mahendra-bhavane—the residential quarters
of the heavenly King; mahä-balaù—the most powerful; mahä-manäù—highly
thoughtful; nirjita-lokaù—having everyone under his control; eka-räö—the
powerful dictator; reme—enjoyed; abhivandya—worshiped;
aìghri-yugaù—whose two feet; sura-ädibhiù—by the demigods;
pratäpitaiù—being disturbed; ürjita—more than expected; caëòa—severe;
çäsanaù—whose ruling.
TRANSLATION
The steps of King Indra's residence were made of coral, the floor was
bedecked with invaluable emeralds, the walls were of crystal, and the columns
of vaidürya stone. The wonderful canopies were beautifully decorated, the seats
were bedecked with rubies, and the silk bedding, as white as foam, was
decorated with pearls. The ladies of the palace, who were blessed with beautiful
teeth and the most wonderfully beautiful faces, walked here and there in the
palace, their ankle bells tinkling melodiously, and saw their own beautiful
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
213
reflections in the gems. The demigods, however, being very much oppressed,
had to bow down and offer obeisances at the feet of Hiraëyakaçipu, who
chastised the demigods very severely and for no reason. Thus Hiraëyakaçipu
lived in the palace and severely ruled everyone.
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu was so powerful in the heavenly planets that all the
demigods except Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva and Lord Viñëu were forced to
engage in his service. Indeed, they were afraid of being severely punished if
they disobeyed him. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté has compared Hiraëyakaçipu
to Mahäräja Vena, who was also atheistic and scornful of the ritualistic
ceremonies mentioned in the Vedas. Yet Mahäräja Vena was afraid of some of
the great sages such as Bhågu, whereas Hiraëyakaçipu ruled in such a way that
everyone feared him but Lord Viñëu, Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva.
Hiraëyakaçipu was so alert against being burnt to ashes by the anger of great
sages like Bhågu that by dint of austerity he surpassed their power and placed
even them under his subordination. It appears that even in the higher
planetary systems, to which people are promoted by pious activities,
disturbances are created by asuras like Hiraëyakaçipu. No one in the three
worlds can live in peace and prosperity without disturbance.
TEXT 13
TaMa(r) Mata& MaDauNaaeåGaiNDaNaa
ivv*taTaaMa]a+aMaXaeziDaZ<YaPaa" )
oPaaSaTaaePaaYaNaPaai<ai>aivRNaa
i}ai>aSTaPaaeYaaeGabl/aEJaSaa& PadMa( )) 13 ))
tam aìga mattaà madhunoru-gandhinä
vivåtta-tämräkñam açeña-dhiñëya-päù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
214
upäsatopäyana-päëibhir vinä
tribhis tapo-yoga-balaujasäà padam
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Hiraëyakaçipu); aìga—O dear King; mattam—intoxicated;
madhunä—by wine; uru-gandhinä—strong-smelling; vivåtta—rolling;
tämra-akñam—having eyes like copper; açeña-dhiñëya-päù—the principal men
of all the planets; upäsata—worshiped; upäyana—full with paraphernalia;
päëibhiù—by their own hands; vinä—without; tribhiù—the three principal
deities (Lord Viñëu, Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva); tapaù—of austerity;
yoga—mystic power; bala—bodily strength; ojasäm—and power of the senses;
padam—the abode.
TRANSLATION
O my dear King, Hiraëyakaçipu was always drunk on strong-smelling wines
and liquors, and therefore his coppery eyes were always rolling. Nonetheless,
because he had powerfully executed great austerities in mystic yoga, although
he was abominable, all but the three principal demigods—Lord Brahmä, Lord
Çiva and Lord Viñëu—personally worshiped him to please him by bringing him
various presentations with their own hands.
PURPORT
In the Skanda Puräëa there is this description: upäyanaà daduù sarve vinä
devän hiraëyakaù. Hiraëyakaçipu was so powerful that everyone but the three
principal demigods—namely Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva and Lord
Viñëu—engaged in his service. Madhväcärya says, ädityä vasavo rudräs
tri-vidhä hi surä yataù. There are three kinds of demigods—the Ädityas, the
Vasus and the Rudras—beneath whom are the other demigods, like the Maruts
and Sädhyas (marutaç caiva viçve ca sädhyäç caiva ca tad-gatäù). Therefore all
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
215
the demigods are called tri-piñöapa, and the same word tri applies to Lord
Brahmä, Lord Çiva and Lord Viñëu.
TEXT 14
JaGauMaRheNd]aSaNaMaaeJaSaa iSQaTa&
ivìavSauSTauMbuårSMadadYa" )
GaNDavRiSaÖa ‰zYaae_STauvNMauhu‚
ivRÛaDaraêaPSarSaê Paa<@v )) 14 ))
jagur mahendräsanam ojasä sthitaà
viçvävasus tumburur asmad-ädayaù
gandharva-siddhä åñayo 'stuvan muhur
vidyädharäç cäpsarasaç ca päëòava
SYNONYMS
jaguù—sung of the glories; mahendra-äsanam—the throne of King Indra;
ojasä—by personal power; sthitam—situated on; viçvävasuù—the chief singer
of the Gandharvas; tumburuù—another Gandharva singer;
asmat-ädayaù—including ourselves (Närada and others also glorified
Hiraëyakaçipu); gandharva—the inhabitants of Gandharva-loka; siddhäù—the
inhabitants of Siddhaloka; åñayaù—the great sages and saintly persons;
astuvan—offered prayers; muhuù—again and again; vidyädharäù—the
inhabitants of Vidyädhara-loka; ca—and; apsarasaù—the inhabitants of
Apsaroloka; ca—and; päëòava—O descendant of Päëòu.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, descendant of Päëòu, by dint of his personal
power, Hiraëyakaçipu, being situated on the throne of King Indra, controlled
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
216
the inhabitants of all the other planets. The two Gandharvas Viçvävasu and
Tumburu, I myself and the Vidyädharas, Apsaräs and sages all offered prayers
to him again and again just to glorify him.
PURPORT
The asuras sometimes become so powerful that they can engage even
Närada Muni and similar devotees in their service. This does not mean that
Närada was subordinate to Hiraëyakaçipu. Sometimes, however, it so happens
in this material world that great personalities, even great devotees, can also be
controlled by the asuras.
TEXT 15
Sa Wv v<aaRé[iMai>a" §-Taui>a>aURirdi+a<aE" )
wJYaMaaNaae hiv>aaRGaaNaGa]hqTa( SveNa TaeJaSaa )) 15 ))
sa eva varëäçramibhiù
kratubhir bhüri-dakñiëaiù
ijyamäno havir-bhägän
agrahét svena tejasä
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); eva—indeed; varëa-äçramibhiù—by persons who
strictly followed the regulative principles of the four varëas and four äçramas;
kratubhiù—by ritualistic ceremonies; bhüri—abundant; dakñiëaiù—offered
with gifts; ijyamänaù—being worshiped; haviù-bhägän—the portions of the
oblations; agrahét—usurped; svena—by his own; tejasä—prowess.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
217
Being worshiped by sacrifices offered with great gifts by those who strictly
followed the principles of varëa and äçrama, Hiraëyakaçipu, instead of offering
shares of the oblations to the demigods, accepted them himself.
TEXT 16
Ak*-íPaCYaa TaSYaaSaqTa( SaáÜqPavTaq Mahq )
TaQaa k-aMadugaa Gaavae NaaNaaêYaRPad& Na>a" )) 16 ))
akåñöa-pacyä tasyäsét
sapta-dvépavaté mahé
tathä käma-dughä gävo
nänäçcarya-padaà nabhaù
SYNONYMS
akåñöa-pacyä—bearing grains without being cultivated or plowed; tasya—of
Hiraëyakaçipu; äsét—was; sapta-dvépa-vaté—consisting of seven islands;
mahé—the earth; tathä—so much so; käma-dughäù—which can deliver as
much milk as one desires; gävaù—cows; nänä—various;
äçcarya-padam—wonderful things; nabhaù—the sky.
TRANSLATION
As if in fear of Hiraëyakaçipu, the planet earth, which consists of seven
islands, delivered food grains without being plowed. Thus it resembled cows like
the surabhi of the spiritual world or the käma-dughä of heaven. The earth
yielded sufficient food grains, the cows supplied abundant milk, and outer space
was beautifully decorated with wonderful phenomena.
TEXT 17
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
218
rÒak-raê rÒaEgaa&STaTPaTNYaêaehuæiMaRi>a" )
+aarSaqDauga*Ta+aaEd]diDa+aqraMa*Taaedk-a" )) 17 ))
ratnäkaräç ca ratnaughäàs
tat-patnyaç cohur ürmibhiù
kñära-sédhu-ghåta-kñaudradadhi-
kñérämåtodakäù
SYNONYMS
ratnäkaräù—the seas and oceans; ca—and; ratna-oghän—various kinds of
gems and valuable stones; tat-patnyaù—the wives of the oceans and seas,
namely the rivers; ca—also; ühuù—carried; ürmibhiù—by their waves;
kñära—the salt ocean; sédhu—the ocean of wine; ghåta—the ocean of clarified
butter; kñaudra—the ocean of sugarcane juice; dadhi—the ocean of yogurt;
kñéra—the ocean of milk; amåta—and the very sweet ocean; udakäù—water.
TRANSLATION
By the flowing of their waves, the various oceans of the universe, along with
their tributaries, the rivers, which are compared to their wives, supplied various
kinds of gems and jewels for Hiraëyakaçipu's use. These oceans were the oceans
of salt water, sugarcane juice, wine, clarified butter, milk, yogurt, and sweet
water.
PURPORT
The water of the seas and oceans of this planet, of which we have
experience, are salty, but other planets within the universe contain oceans of
sugarcane juice, liquor, ghee, milk and sweet water. The rivers are figuratively
described as wives of the oceans and seas because they glide down to the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
219
oceans and seas as tributaries, like the wives attached to their husbands.
Modern scientists attempt excursions to other planets, but they have no
information of how many different types of oceans and seas there are within
the universe. According to their experience, the moon is full of dust, but this
does not explain how it gives us soothing rays from a distance of millions of
miles. As far as we are concerned, we follow the authority of Vyäsadeva and
Çukadeva Gosvämé, who have described the universal situation according to
the Vedic literature. These authorities differ from modern scientists who
conclude from their imperfect sensual experience that only this planet is
inhabited by living beings whereas the other planets are all vacant or full of
dust.
TEXT 18
XaEl/a d]ae<aqi>ara§-I@& SavRTauRzu Gau<aaNa( d]uMaa" )
dDaar l/aek-Paal/aNaaMaek- Wv Pa*QaGGau<aaNa( )) 18 ))
çailä droëébhir äkréòaà
sarvartuñu guëän drumäù
dadhära loka-pälänäm
eka eva påthag guëän
SYNONYMS
çailäù—the hills and mountains; droëébhiù—with the valleys between them;
äkréòam—pleasure grounds for Hiraëyakaçipu; sarva—all; åtuñu—in the
seasons of the year; guëän—different qualities (fruits and flowers);
drumäù—the plants and trees; dadhära—executed; loka-pälänäm—of the
other demigods in charge of different departments of natural activity;
ekaù—alone; eva—indeed; påthak—different; guëän—qualities.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
220
TRANSLATION
The valleys between the mountains became fields of pleasure for
Hiraëyakaçipu, by whose influence all the trees and plants produced fruits and
flowers profusely in all seasons. The qualities of pouring water, drying and
burning, which are all qualities of the three departmental heads of the
universe—namely Indra, Väyu and Agni—were all directed by Hiraëyakaçipu
alone, without assistance from the demigods.
PURPORT
It is said in the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, tejo-väri-mådäà yathä
vinimayaù: this material world is conducted by fire, water and earth, which
combine and take shape. Here it is mentioned that the three modes of nature
(påthag guëän) act under the direction of different demigods. For example,
King Indra is in charge of pouring water, the demigod Väyu controls the air
and dries up the water, whereas the demigod controlling fire burns everything.
Hiraëyakaçipu, however, by dint of his austere performance of mystic yoga,
became so powerful that he alone took charge of everything, without
assistance from the demigods.
TEXT 19
Sa wTQa& iNaiJaRTak-ku-bek-ra@( ivzYaaNa( iPa[YaaNa( )
YaQaaePaJaaez& >auÅaNaae NaaTa*PYadiJaTaeiNd]Ya" )) 19 ))
sa itthaà nirjita-kakub
eka-räò viñayän priyän
yathopajoñaà bhuïjäno
nätåpyad ajitendriyaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
221
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); ittham—thus; nirjita—conquered; kakup—all
directions within the universe; eka-räö—the one emperor of the whole
universe; viñayän—material sense objects; priyän—very pleasing;
yathä-upajoñam—as much as possible; bhuïjänaù—enjoying; na—did not;
atåpyat—was satisfied; ajita-indriyaù—being unable to control the senses.
TRANSLATION
In spite of achieving the power to control in all directions and in spite of
enjoying all types of dear sense gratification as much as possible, Hiraëyakaçipu
was dissatisfied because instead of controlling his senses he remained their
servant.
PURPORT
This is an example of asuric life. Atheists can advance materially and create
an extremely comfortable situation for the senses, but because they are
controlled by the senses, they cannot be satisfied. This is the effect of modern
civilization. Materialists are very much advanced in enjoying money and
women, yet dissatisfaction prevails within human society because human
society cannot be happy and peaceful without Kåñëa consciousness. As far as
material sense gratification is concerned, materialists may go on increasing
their enjoyment as far as they can imagine, but because people in such a
material condition are servants of their senses, they cannot be satisfied.
Hiraëyakaçipu was a vivid example of this dissatisfied state of humanity.
TEXT 20
WvMaEìYaRMataSYa d*áSYaaeC^añviTaRNa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
222
k-al/ae MahaNa( VYaTaqYaaYa b]øXaaPaMauPaeYauz" )) 20 ))
evam aiçvarya-mattasya
dåptasyocchästra-vartinaù
kälo mahän vyatéyäya
brahma-çäpam upeyuñaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; aiçvarya-mattasya—of one who was intoxicated by opulences;
dåptasya—greatly proud; ut-çästra-vartinaù—transgressing the regulative
principles mentioned in the çästras; kälaù—duration of time; mahän—a great;
vyatéyäya—passed; brahma-çäpam—a curse by exalted brähmaëas;
upeyuñaù—having obtained.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu thus passed a long time being very much proud of his
opulences and transgressing the laws and regulations mentioned in the
authoritative çästras. He was therefore subjected to a curse by the four
Kumäras, who were great brähmaëas.
PURPORT
There have been many instances in which demons, after achieving material
opulences, have become extremely proud, so much so that they have
transgressed the laws and regulations given in the authoritative çästras.
Hiraëyakaçipu acted in this way. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (16.23):
yaù çästra-vidhim utsåjya
vartate käma-kärataù
na sa siddhim aväpnoti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
223
na sukhaà na paräà gatim
"He who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to his own whims
attains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the supreme destination." The
word çästra refers to that which controls our activities. We cannot violate or
transgress the laws and regulative principles mentioned in the çästras.
Bhagavad-gétä repeatedly confirms this.
tasmäc chästraà pramäëaà te
käryäkärya-vyavasthitau
jïätvä çästra-vidhänoktaà
karma kartum ihärhasi
"One should understand what is duty and what is not duty by the regulations
of the scriptures. Knowing such rules and regulations, one should act so that he
may gradually be elevated." (Bg. 16.24) One should act according to the
direction of the çästra, but the material energy is so powerful that as soon as
one becomes materially opulent, he begins to transgress the çästric laws. As
soon as one transgresses the laws of çästra, he immediately enters upon the
path of destruction.
TEXT 21
TaSYaaeGa]d<@Sa&ivGana" SaveR l/aek-a" SaPaal/k-a" )
ANYa}aal/BDaXar<aa" Xar<a& YaYaurCYauTaMa( )) 21 ))
tasyogra-daëòa-saàvignäù
sarve lokäù sapälakäù
anyaträlabdha-çaraëäù
çaraëaà yayur acyutam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
224
SYNONYMS
tasya—of him (Hiraëyakaçipu); ugra-daëòa—by the very fearful chastisement;
saàvignäù—disturbed; sarve—all; lokäù—the planets; sa-pälakäù—with their
principal rulers; anyatra—anywhere else; alabdha—not obtaining;
çaraëäù—shelter; çaraëam—for shelter; yayuù—approached; acyutam—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Everyone, including the rulers of the various planets, was extremely
distressed because of the severe punishment inflicted upon them by
Hiraëyakaçipu. Fearful and disturbed, unable to find any other shelter, they at
last surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (5.29):
bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram
suhådaà sarva-bhütänäà
jïätvä mäà çäntim åcchati
"The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and austerities,
the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the benefactor and
well-wisher of all living entities, attains peace from the pangs of material
miseries." The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is actually the best
friend of everyone. In a condition of distress or misery, one wants to seek
shelter of a well-wishing friend. The well-wishing friend of the perfect order is
Lord Çré Kåñëa. Therefore all the inhabitants of the various planets, being
unable to find any other shelter, were obliged to seek shelter at the lotus feet
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
225
of the supreme friend. If from the very beginning we seek shelter of the
supreme friend, there will be no cause of danger. It is said that if a dog is
swimming in the water and one wants to cross the ocean by catching hold of
the dog's tail, certainly he is foolish. Similarly, if in distress one seeks shelter of
a demigod, he is foolish, for his efforts will be fruitless. In all circumstances,
one should seek shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then there
will be no danger under any circumstances.
TEXTS 22-23
TaSYaE NaMaae_STau k-aïaYaE Ya}aaTMaa hirrqìr" )
YaÓTva Na iNavTaRNTae XaaNTaa" Sa&NYaaiSaNaae_Mal/a" )) 22 ))
wiTa Tae Sa&YaTaaTMaaNa" SaMaaihTaiDaYaae_Mal/a" )
oPaTaSQauôRzqke-Xa& iviNad]a vaYau>aaeJaNaa" )) 23 ))
tasyai namo 'stu käñöhäyai
yaträtmä harir éçvaraù
yad gatvä na nivartante
çäntäù sannyäsino 'maläù
iti te saàyatätmänaù
samähita-dhiyo 'maläù
upatasthur håñékeçaà
vinidrä väyu-bhojanäù
SYNONYMS
tasyai—unto that; namaù—our respectful obeisances; astu—let there be;
käñöhäyai—direction; yatra—wherein; ätmä—the Supersoul; hariù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; éçvaraù—the supreme controller;
yat—which; gatvä—approaching; na—never; nivartante—return;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
226
çäntäù—peaceful; sannyäsinaù—saintly persons in the renounced order of life;
amaläù—pure; iti—thus; te—they; saàyata-ätmänaù—having controlled
minds; samähita—steadied; dhiyaù—intelligences; amaläù—purified;
upatasthuù—worshiped; håñékeçam—the master of the senses;
vinidräù—without sleeping; väyu-bhojanäù—eating only air.
TRANSLATION
"Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto that direction where the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated, where those purified souls in the
renounced order of life, the great saintly persons, go, and from which, having
gone, they never return." Without sleep, fully controlling their minds, and
living on only their breath, the predominating deities of the various planets
began worshiping Håñékeça with this meditation.
PURPORT
The two words tasyai käñöhäyai are very significant. Everywhere, in every
direction, in every heart and in every atom, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is situated in His features as Brahman and Paramätmä. Then what is
the purpose of saying tasyai käñöhäyai—"in that direction where Hari is
situated?" During Hiraëyakaçipu's time, his influence was everywhere, but he
could not force his influence into the places where the Supreme Personality of
Godhead had His pastimes. For example, on this earth there are such places as
Våndävana and Ayodhyä, which are called dhämas. In the dhäma, there is no
influence from Kali-yuga or any demon. If one takes shelter of such a dhäma,
worship of the Lord becomes very easy, and resultant spiritual advancement
quickly takes place. In fact, in India one may still go to Våndävana and similar
places to achieve the results of spiritual activities quickly.
TEXT 24
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
227
TaezaMaaivr>aUÜa<aq AæPaa MaegaiNa"SvNaa )
SaàadYaNTaq k-ku->a" SaaDaUNaaMa>aYaªrq )) 24 ))
teñäm ävirabhüd väëé
arüpä megha-niùsvanä
sannädayanté kakubhaù
sädhünäm abhayaìkaré
SYNONYMS
teñäm—in front of all of them; ävirabhüt—appeared; väëé—a voice;
arüpä—without a form; megha-niùsvanä—resounding like the sound of a
cloud; sannädayanté—causing to vibrate; kakubhaù—all directions;
sädhünäm—of the saintly persons; abhayaìkaré—driving away the fearful
situation.
TRANSLATION
Then there appeared before them a transcendental sound vibration,
emanating from a personality not visible to material eyes. The voice was as
grave as the sound of a cloud, and it was very encouraging, driving away all
fear.
TEXTS 25-26
Maa >aEí ivbuDaé[eïa" SaveRza& >ad]MaSTau v" )
MaÕXaRNa& ih >aUTaaNaa& SavRé[eYaaePaPataYae )) 25 ))
jaTaMaeTaSYa daEraTMYa& dETaeYaaPaSadSYa YaTa( )
TaSYa XaaiNTa& k-irZYaaiMa k-al&/ TaavTPa[Taq+aTa )) 26 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
228
mä bhaiñöa vibudha-çreñöhäù
sarveñäà bhadram astu vaù
mad-darçanaà hi bhütänäà
sarva-çreyopapattaye
jïätam etasya daurätmyaà
daiteyäpasadasya yat
tasya çäntià kariñyämi
kälaà tävat pratékñata
SYNONYMS
mä—do not; bhaiñöa—fear; vibudha-çreñöhäù—O best of learned persons;
sarveñäm—of all; bhadram—the good fortune; astu—let there be; vaù—unto
you; mat-darçanam—the seeing of Me (or offering of prayers to Me or hearing
about Me, all of which are absolute); hi—indeed; bhütänäm—of all living
entities; sarva-çreya—of all good fortune; upapattaye—for the attainment;
jïätam—known; etasya—of this; daurätmyam—the nefarious activities;
daiteya-apasadasya—of the great demon, Hiraëyakaçipu; yat—which;
tasya—of this; çäntim—cessation; kariñyämi—I shall make; kälam—time;
tävat—until that; pratékñata—just wait.
TRANSLATION
The voice of the Lord vibrated as follows: O best of learned persons, do not
fear! I wish all good fortune to you. Become My devotees by hearing and
chanting about Me and offering Me prayers, for these are certainly meant to
award benedictions to all living entities. I know all about the activities of
Hiraëyakaçipu and shall surely stop them very soon. Please wait patiently until
that time.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
229
Sometimes people are very much eager to see God. In considering the word
mad-darçanam, "seeing Me," which is mentioned in this verse, one should note
that in Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says, bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti [Bg. 18.55]. In
other words, the ability to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead or
to see Him or talk with Him depends on one's advancement in devotional
service, which is called bhakti. In bhakti there are nine different activities:
çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù smaraëaà päda-sevanam/ arcanaà vandanaà
däsyaà sakhyam ätma-nivedanam [SB 7.5.23]. Because all these devotional
activities are absolute, there is no fundamental difference between worshiping
the Deity in the temple, seeing Him and chanting His glories. Indeed, all of
these are ways of seeing Him, for everything done in devotional service is a
means of direct contact with the Lord. The vibration of the Lord's voice
appeared in the presence of all the devotees, and although the person vibrating
the sound was unseen to them, they were meeting or seeing the Lord because
they were offering prayers and because the vibration of the Lord was present.
Contrary to the laws of the material world, there is no difference between
seeing the Lord, offering prayers and hearing the transcendental vibration.
Pure devotees, therefore, are fully satisfied by glorifying the Lord. Such
glorification is called kértana. Performing kértana and hearing the vibration of
the sound Hare Kåñëa is actually seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead
directly. One must realize this position, and then one will be able to
understand the absolute nature of the Lord's activities.
TEXT 27
Yada devezu vedezu Gaaezu ivPa[ezu SaaDauzu )
DaMaeRMaiYa c ivÜez" Sa va Aaéu ivNaXYaiTa )) 27 ))
yadä deveñu vedeñu
goñu vipreñu sädhuñu
dharme mayi ca vidveñaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
230
sa vä äçu vinaçyati
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; deveñu—unto the demigods; vedeñu—unto the Vedic scriptures;
goñu—unto the cows; vipreñu—unto the brähmaëas; sädhuñu—unto the saintly
persons; dharme—unto religious principles; mayi—unto Me, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; ca—and; vidveñaù—envious; saù—such a person;
vai—indeed; äçu—very soon; vinaçyati—is vanquished.
TRANSLATION
When one is envious of the demigods, who represent the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, of the Vedas, which give all knowledge, of the cows,
brähmaëas, Vaiñëavas and religious principles, and ultimately of Me, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he and his civilization will be vanquished
without delay.
TEXT 28
iNavOEraYa Pa[XaaNTaaYa SvSauTaaYa MahaTMaNae )
Pa[hadaYa Yada d]uùeÖiNaZYae_iPa vraeiJaRTaMa( )) 28 ))
nirvairäya praçäntäya
sva-sutäya mahätmane
prahrädäya yadä druhyed
dhaniñye 'pi varorjitam
SYNONYMS
nirvairäya—who is without enemies; praçäntäya—very sober and peaceful;
sva-sutäya—unto his own son; mahä-ätmane—who is a great devotee;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
231
prahrädäya—Prahläda Mahäräja; yadä—when; druhyet—will commit violence;
haniñye—I shall kill; api—although; vara-ürjitam—blessed by the boons of
Lord Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
When Hiraëyakaçipu teases the great devotee Prahläda, his own son, who is
peaceful and sober and who has no enemy, I shall kill Hiraëyakaçipu
immediately, despite the benedictions of Brahmä.
PURPORT
Of all sinful activities, an offense to a pure devotee, or Vaiñëava, is the most
severe. An offense at the lotus feet of a Vaiñëava is so disastrous that Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu has compared it to a mad elephant that enters a garden
and causes great havoc by uprooting many plants and trees. If one is an
offender at the lotus feet of a brähmaëa or Vaiñëava, his offenses uproot all his
auspicious activities. One should therefore very carefully guard against
committing vaiñëava-aparädha, or offenses at the lotus feet of a Vaiñëava. Here
the Lord clearly says that although Hiraëyakaçipu had received benedictions
from Lord Brahmä, these benedictions would be null and void as soon as he
committed an offense at the lotus feet of Prahläda Mahäräja, his own son. A
Vaiñëava like Prahläda Mahäräja is described herein as nirvaira, having no
enemies. Elsewhere in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.25.21) it is said, ajäta-çatravaù
çäntäù sädhavaù sädhu-bhüñaëäù: a devotee has no enemies, he is peaceful, he
abides by the scriptures, and all his characteristics are sublime. A devotee does
not create enmity with anyone, but if someone becomes his enemy, that person
will be vanquished by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, despite whatever
benedictions he may have received from other sources. Hiraëyakaçipu was
certainly enjoying the fruitful results of his austerities, but here the Lord says
that as soon as he committed an offense at the lotus feet of Prahläda Mahäräja
he would be ruined. One's longevity, opulence, beauty, education and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
232
whatever else one may possess as a result of pious activities cannot protect one
if one commits an offense at the lotus feet of a Vaiñëava. Despite whatever one
possesses, if one offends the lotus feet of a Vaiñëava he will be vanquished.
TEXT 29
é[qNaard ovac
wTYau¢-a l/aek-Gauå<aa Ta& Pa[<aMYa idvaEk-Sa" )
NYavTaRNTa GaTaaeÜeGaa MaeiNare caSaur& hTaMa( )) 29 ))
çré-närada uväca
ity uktä loka-guruëä
taà praëamya divaukasaù
nyavartanta gatodvegä
menire cäsuraà hatam
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—the great saint Närada Muni said; iti—thus;
uktäù—addressed; loka-guruëä—by the supreme spiritual master of everyone;
tam—unto Him; praëamya—offering obeisances; divaukasaù—all the
demigods; nyavartanta—returned; gata-udvegäù—relieved of all anxieties;
menire—they considered; ca—also; asuram—the demon (Hiraëyakaçipu);
hatam—killed.
TRANSLATION
The great saint Närada Muni continued: When the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the spiritual master of everyone, thus reassured all the demigods
living in the heavenly planets, they offered their respectful obeisances unto
Him and returned, confident that the demon Hiraëyakaçipu was now
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
233
practically dead.
PURPORT
The less intelligent men who are always busy worshiping the demigods
should note that when the demigods are harassed by the demons, they
approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead for relief. Since the demigods
resort to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, why should the worshipers of
the demigods not approach the Supreme Lord for whatever benefits they
desire? Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.3.10) says:
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"Whether one desires everything or nothing, or whether he desires to merge
into the existence of the Lord, he is intelligent only if he worships Lord Kåñëa,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by rendering transcendental loving
service." Whether one is a karmé, jïäné or yogé, if one wants a particular
benediction fulfilled, even if it be material, one should approach the Supreme
Lord and pray to Him, for then it will be fulfilled. There is no need to
approach any demigod separately for the fulfillment of any desire.
TEXT 30
TaSYa dETYaPaTae" Pau}aaêTvar" ParMaad(>auTaa" )
Pa[hadae_>aUNMaha&STaeza& Gau<aEMaRhduPaaSak-" )) 30 ))
tasya daitya-pateù puträç
catväraù paramädbhutäù
prahrädo 'bhün mahäàs teñäà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
234
guëair mahad-upäsakaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of him (Hiraëyakaçipu); daitya-pateù—the King of the Daityas;
puträù—sons; catväraù—four; parama-adbhutäù—very qualified and
wonderful; prahrädaù—the one named Prahläda; abhüt—was; mahän—the
greatest; teñäm—of all of them; guëaiù—with transcendental qualities;
mahat-upäsakaù—being an unalloyed devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu had four wonderful, well-qualified sons, of whom the one
named Prahläda was the best. Indeed, Prahläda was a reservoir of all
transcendental qualities because he was an unalloyed devotee of the Personality
of Godhead.
PURPORT
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
"In one who has unflinching devotional faith in Kåñëa, all the good qualities of
Kåñëa and the demigods are consistently manifest." (SB 5.18.12) Prahläda
Mahäräja is praised herein for having all good qualities because of worshiping
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, a pure devotee, who has no
motives, has all good qualities, material and spiritual. If one is spiritually
advanced, being a staunch, liberal devotee of the Lord, all good qualities are
manifest in his body. On the other hand, haräv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëäù:
if one is not a devotee, even if he has some materially good qualities, they have
no value. That is the verdict of the Vedas.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
235
TEXTS 31-32
b]ø<Ya" Xaql/SaMPaà" SaTYaSaNDaae iJaTaeiNd]Ya" )
AaTMavTSavR>aUTaaNaaMaek-iPa[YaSauôtaMa" )) 31 ))
daSavTSaàTaaYaaRx(iga]" iPaTa*vÕqNavTSal/"
>a]aTa*vTSad*Xae iòGDaae GauåZvqìr>aavNa" )
ivÛaQaRæPaJaNMaa!yae MaaNaSTaM>aivviJaRTa" )) 32 ))
brahmaëyaù çéla-sampannaù
satya-sandho jitendriyaù
ätmavat sarva-bhütänäm
eka-priya-suhåttamaù
däsavat sannatäryäìghriù
pitåvad déna-vatsalaù
bhrätåvat sadåçe snigdho
guruñv éçvara-bhävanaù
vidyärtha-rüpa-janmäòhyo
mäna-stambha-vivarjitaù
SYNONYMS
brahmaëyaù—cultured as a good brähmaëa; çéla-sampannaù—possessing all
good qualities; satya-sandhaù—determined to understand the Absolute Truth;
jita-indriyaù—fully controlling the senses and mind; ätma-vat—like the
Supersoul; sarva-bhütänäm—of all living entities; eka-priya—the one beloved;
suhåt-tamaù—the best friend; däsa-vat—like a menial servant;
sannata—always obedient; ärya-aìghriù—at the lotus feet of great persons;
pitå-vat—exactly like a father; déna-vatsalaù—kind to the poor;
bhrätå-vat—exactly like a brother; sadåçe—to his equals; snigdhaù—very
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
236
affectionate; guruñu—unto the spiritual masters; éçvara-bhävanaù—who are
considered exactly like the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vidyä—education; artha—riches; rüpa—beauty; janma—aristocracy or
nobility; äòhyaù—endowed with; mäna—pride; stambha—impudence;
vivarjitaù—completely free from.
TRANSLATION
[The qualities of Mahäräja Prahläda, the son of Hiraëyakaçipu, are described
herewith.] He was completely cultured as a qualified brähmaëa, having very
good character and being determined to understand the Absolute Truth. He had
full control of his senses and mind. Like the Supersoul, he was kind to every
living entity and was the best friend of everyone. To respectable persons he
acted exactly like a menial servant, to the poor he was like a father, to his
equals he was attached like a sympathetic brother, and he considered his
teachers, spiritual masters and older Godbrothers to be as good as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He was completely free from unnatural pride that
might have arisen from his good education, riches, beauty, aristocracy and so
on.
PURPORT
These are some of the qualifications of a Vaiñëava. A Vaiñëava is
automatically a brähmaëa because a Vaiñëava has all the good qualities of a
brähmaëa.
çamo damas tapaù çaucaà
kñäntir ärjavam eva ca
jïänaà vijïänam ästikyaà
brahma-karma svabhäva-jam
"Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty, wisdom,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
237
knowledge, and religiousness-these are the qualities by which the brähmaëas
work." (Bg. 18.42) These qualities are manifest in the body of a Vaiñëava.
Therefore a perfect Vaiñëava is also a perfect brähmaëa, as indicated here by
the words brahmaëyaù çéla-sampannaù. A Vaiñëava is always determined to
understand the Absolute Truth, and to understand the Absolute Truth one
needs to have full control over his senses and mind. Prahläda Mahäräja
possessed all these qualities. A Vaiñëava is always a well-wisher to everyone.
The six Gosvämés, for example, are described in this way: dhérädhéra
jana-priyau. They were popular with both the gentle and the ruffians. A
Vaiñëava must be equal to everyone, regardless of one's position. Ätmavat: a
Vaiñëava should be like Paramätmä. Éçvaraù sama-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna
tiñöhati. Paramätmä does not hate anyone; indeed, He is in the heart of a
brähmaëa, but he is also even in the heart of a pig. As the moon never refuses
to distribute its pleasing rays even to the home of a caëòäla, a Vaiñëava never
refuses to act for everyone's welfare. Therefore a Vaiñëava is always obedient
to the spiritual master (ärya). The word ärya refers to one who is advanced in
knowledge. One who is deficient in knowledge cannot be called ärya. At the
present, however, the word ärya is used to refer to those who are godless. This
is the unfortunate situation of Kali-yuga.
The word guru refers to the spiritual master who initiates his disciple into
advancement in the science of Kåñëa, or Kåñëa consciousness, as stated by
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura (çré-bhagavan-mantropadeçake guräv ity
arthaù).
TEXT 33
NaaeiÜGanictaae VYaSaNaezu iNa"SPa*h"
é[uTaezu d*íezu Gau<aeZvvSTaud*k(- )
daNTaeiNd]YaPa[a<aXarqrDaq" Sada
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
238
Pa[XaaNTak-aMaae rihTaaSaurae_Saur" )) 33 ))
nodvigna-citto vyasaneñu niùspåhaù
çruteñu dåñöeñu guëeñv avastu-dåk
däntendriya-präëa-çaréra-dhéù sadä
praçänta-kämo rahitäsuro 'suraù
SYNONYMS
na—not; udvigna—agitated; cittaù—whose consciousness; vyasaneñu—in
dangerous conditions; niùspåhaù—without desire; çruteñu—in things heard of
(especially elevation to heavenly planets because of pious activities);
dåñöeñu—as well as in temporal things seen; guëeñu—the objects of sense
gratification under the modes of material nature; avastu-dåk—seeing as if
insubstantial; dänta—controlling; indriya—the senses; präëa—the living
force; çaréra—the body; dhéù—and intelligence; sadä—always;
praçänta—quieted; kämaù—whose material desires; rahita—completely devoid
of; asuraù—demoniac nature; asuraù—although born in a demoniac family.
TRANSLATION
Although Prahläda Mahäräja was born in a family of asuras, he himself was
not an asura but a great devotee of Lord Viñëu. Unlike the other asuras, he was
never envious of Vaiñëavas. He was not agitated when put into danger, and he
was neither directly nor indirectly interested in the fruitive activities described
in the Vedas. Indeed, he considered everything material to be useless, and
therefore he was completely devoid of material desires. He always controlled his
senses and life air, and being of steady intelligence and determination, he
subdued all lusty desires.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
239
From this verse we discover that a man is not qualified or disqualified
simply by birth. Prahläda Mahäräja was an asura by birth, yet he possessed all
the qualities of a perfect brähmaëa (brahmaëyaù çéla-sampannaù). Anyone can
become a fully qualified brähmaëa under the direction of a spiritual master.
Prahläda Mahäräja provided a vivid example of how to think of the spiritual
master and accept his directions calmly.
TEXT 34
YaiSMaNMahd(Gau<aa raJaNa( Ga*ùNTae k-ivi>aMauRhu" )
Na Tae_DauNaaiPaDaqYaNTae YaQaa >aGavTaqìre )) 34 ))
yasmin mahad-guëä räjan
gåhyante kavibhir muhuù
na te 'dhunä pidhéyante
yathä bhagavatéçvare
SYNONYMS
yasmin—in whom; mahat-guëäù—exalted transcendental qualities; räjan—O
King; gåhyante—are glorified; kavibhiù—by persons who are thoughtful and
advanced in knowledge; muhuù—always; na—not; te—these; adhunä—today;
pidhéyante—are obscured; yathä—just as; bhagavati—in the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; éçvare—the supreme controller.
TRANSLATION
O King, Prahläda Mahäräja's good qualities are still glorified by learned
saints and Vaiñëavas. As all good qualities are always found existing in the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, they also exist forever in His devotee
Prahläda Mahäräja.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
240
PURPORT
From authoritative scripture it is learned that Prahläda Mahäräja still lives
in Vaikuëöhaloka as well as within this material world on the planet Sutala.
This transcendental quality of existing simultaneously in different places is
another qualification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Goloka eva
nivasaty akhilätma-bhütaù: [Bs. 5.37] the Lord appears in the core of everyone's
heart, yet He exists on His own planet, Goloka Våndävana. A devotee acquires
qualities almost the same as those of the Lord because of unalloyed devotional
service. Ordinary living beings cannot be so qualified, but a devotee can be
qualified like the Supreme Personality of Godhead, not in full but partially.
TEXT 35
Ya& SaaDauGaaQaaSadiSa irPavae_iPa Saura Na*Pa )
Pa[iTaMaaNa& Pa[ku-vRiNTa ik-MauTaaNYae >avad*Xaa" )) 35 ))
yaà sädhu-gäthä-sadasi
ripavo 'pi surä nåpa
pratimänaà prakurvanti
kim utänye bhavädåçäù
SYNONYMS
yam—whom; sädhu-gäthä-sadasi—in an assembly where saintly persons gather
or exalted characteristics are discussed; ripavaù—persons who were supposed
to have been Prahläda Mahäräja's enemies (even such a devotee as Prahläda
Mahäräja had enemies, including even his own father); api—even; suräù—the
demigods (the demigods are enemies of the demons, and since Prahläda
Mahäräja was born in a family of demons, the demigods should have been his
enemies); nåpa—O King Yudhiñöhira; pratimänam—a substantial example of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
241
the best among the devotees; prakurvanti—they make; kim uta—what to speak
of; anye—others; bhavädåçäù—exalted personalities such as yourself.
TRANSLATION
In any assembly where there are discourses about saints and devotees, O
King Yudhiñöhira, even the enemies of the demons, namely the demigods, what
to speak of you, would cite Prahläda Mahäräja as an example of a great devotee.
TEXT 36
Gau<aErl/MaSa&:YaeYaEMaaRhaTMYa& TaSYa SaUCYaTae )
vaSaudeve >aGaviTa YaSYa NaESaiGaRk-I riTa" )) 36 ))
guëair alam asaìkhyeyair
mähätmyaà tasya sücyate
väsudeve bhagavati
yasya naisargiké ratiù
SYNONYMS
guëaiù—with spiritual qualities; alam—what need; asaìkhyeyaiù—which are
innumerable; mähätmyam—the greatness; tasya—of him (Prahläda Mahäräja);
sücyate—is indicated; väsudeve—to Lord Kåñëa, the son of Vasudeva;
bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yasya—of whom;
naisargiké—natural; ratiù—attachment.
TRANSLATION
Who could list the innumerable transcendental qualities of Prahläda
Mahäräja? He had unflinching faith in Väsudeva, Lord Kåñëa [the son of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
242
Vasudeva], and unalloyed devotion to Him. His attachment to Lord Kåñëa was
natural because of his previous devotional service. Although his good qualities
cannot be enumerated, they prove that he was a great soul [mahätmä].
PURPORT
In his prayers to the ten incarnations, Jayadeva Gosvämé says, keçava
dhåta-narahari-rüpa jaya jagad-éça hare. Prahläda Mahäräja was a devotee of
Lord Nåsiàha, who is Keçava, Kåñëa Himself. Therefore when this verse says
väsudeve bhagavati, one should understand that Prahläda Mahäräja's
attachment for Nåsiàhadeva was attachment for Kåñëa, Väsudeva, the son of
Vasudeva. Prahläda Mahäräja, therefore, is described as a great mahätmä. As
the Lord Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gétä (7.19):
bahünäà janmanäm ante
jïänavän mäà prapadyate
väsudevaù sarvam iti
sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù
"After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders
unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great
soul is very rare." A great devotee of Kåñëa, the son of Vasudeva, is a great soul
very rarely to be found. Prahläda Mahäräja's attachment for Kåñëa will be
explained in the next verse. Kåñëa-graha-gåhétätmä. Prahläda Mahäräja's heart
was always filled with thoughts of Kåñëa. Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja is the
ideal devotee in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 37
NYaSTa§-I@Nak-ae bal/ae Ja@vtaNMaNaSTaYaa )
k*-Z<aGa]hGa*hqTaaTMaa Na ved JaGadqd*XaMa( )) 37 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
243
nyasta-kréòanako bälo
jaòavat tan-manastayä
kåñëa-graha-gåhétätmä
na veda jagad édåçam
SYNONYMS
nyasta—having given up; kréòanakaù—all sportive activities or tendencies for
childhood play; bälaù—a boy; jaòa-vat—as if dull, without activities;
tat-manastayä—by being fully absorbed in Kåñëa; kåñëa-graha—by Kåñëa, who
is like a strong influence (like a graha, or planetary influence);
gåhéta-ätmä—whose mind was fully attracted; na—not; veda—understood;
jagat—the entire material world; édåçam—like this.
TRANSLATION
From the very beginning of his childhood, Prahläda Mahäräja was
uninterested in childish playthings. Indeed, he gave them up altogether and
remained silent and dull, being fully absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness. Since his
mind was always affected by Kåñëa consciousness, he could not understand how
the world goes on being fully absorbed in the activities of sense gratification.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja is the vivid example of a great person fully absorbed in
Kåñëa consciousness. In Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 8.274) it is said:
sthävara-jaìgama dekhe, nä dekhe tära mürti
sarvatra haya nija iñöa-deva-sphürti
A fully Kåñëa conscious person, although situated in this material world, does
not see anything but Kåñëa, anywhere and everywhere. This is the sign of a
mahä-bhägavata. The mahä-bhägavata sees Kåñëa everywhere because of his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
244
attitude of pure love for Kåñëa. As confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.38):
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
yaà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the devotee
whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in His eternal form
of Çyämasundara, situated within the heart of the devotee." An exalted
devotee, or mahätmä, who is rarely to be seen, remains fully conscious of Kåñëa
and constantly sees the Lord within the core of his heart. It is sometimes said
that when one is influenced by evil stars like Saturn, Rähu or Ketu, he cannot
make advancement in any prospective activity. In just the opposite way,
Prahläda Mahäräja was influenced by Kåñëa, the supreme planet, and thus he
could not think of the material world and live without Kåñëa consciousness.
That is the sign of a mahä-bhägavata. Even if one is an enemy of Kåñëa, a
mahä-bhägavata sees him to be also engaged in Kåñëa's service. Another crude
example is that everything appears yellow to the jaundiced eye. Similarly, to a
mahä-bhägavata, everyone but himself appears to be engaged in Kåñëa's service.
Prahläda Mahäräja is the approved mahä-bhägavata, the supreme devotee.
In the previous verse it was stated that he had natural attachment (naisargiké
ratiù). The symptoms of such natural attachment for Kåñëa are described in
this verse. Although Prahläda Mahäräja was only a boy, he had no interest in
playing. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.2.42), viraktir anyatra ca: the
symptom of perfect Kåñëa consciousness is that one loses interest in all
material activities. For a small boy to give up playing is impossible, but
Prahläda Mahäräja, being situated in first-class devotional service, was always
absorbed in a trance of Kåñëa consciousness. Just as a materialistic person is
always absorbed in thoughts of material gain, a mahä-bhägavata like Prahläda
Mahäräja is always absorbed in thoughts of Kåñëa.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
245
TEXT 38
AaSaqNa" PaYaR$=àénNa( XaYaaNa" Pa[iPabNa( b]uvNa( )
NaaNauSaNData WTaaiNa GaaeivNdPairriM>aTa" )) 38 ))
äsénaù paryaöann açnan
çayänaù prapiban bruvan
nänusandhatta etäni
govinda-parirambhitaù
SYNONYMS
äsénaù—while sitting; paryaöan—while walking; açnan—while eating;
çayänaù—while lying down; prapiban—while drinking; bruvan—while talking;
na—not; anusandhatte—knew; etäni—all these activities; govinda—by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who enlivens the senses;
parirambhitaù—being embraced.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja was always absorbed in thought of Kåñëa. Thus, being
always embraced by the Lord, he did not know how his bodily necessities, such
as sitting, walking, eating, lying down, drinking and talking, were being
automatically performed.
PURPORT
A small child, while being cared for by his mother, does not know how the
needs of the body for eating, sleeping, lying down, passing water and
evacuating are being fulfilled. He is simply satisfied to be on the lap of his
mother. Similarly, Prahläda Mahäräja was exactly like a small child, being
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
246
cared for by Govinda. The necessary activities of his body were performed
without his knowledge. As a father and mother care for their child, Govinda
cared for Prahläda Mahäräja, who remained always absorbed in thoughts of
Govinda. This is Kåñëa consciousness. Prahläda Mahäräja is the vivid example
of perfection in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 39
Kvicd]udiTa vEku-<#=icNTaaXabl/ceTaNa" )
KvicÖSaiTa TaiÀNTaaúad oÓaYaiTa KvicTa( )) 39 ))
kvacid rudati vaikuëöhacintä-
çabala-cetanaù
kvacid dhasati tac-cintähläda
udgäyati kvacit
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; rudati—cries; vaikuëöha-cintä—by thoughts of Kåñëa;
çabala-cetanaù—whose mind was bewildered; kvacit—sometimes;
hasati—laughs; tat-cintä—by thoughts of Him; ählädaù—being jubilant;
udgäyati—chants very loudly; kvacit—sometimes.
TRANSLATION
Because of advancement in Kåñëa consciousness, he sometimes cried,
sometimes laughed, sometimes expressed jubilation and sometimes sang loudly.
PURPORT
This verse further clarifies the comparison of a devotee to a child. If a
mother leaves her small child in his bed or cradle and goes away to attend to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
247
some family duties, the child immediately understands that his mother has
gone away, and therefore he cries. But as soon as the mother returns and cares
for the child, the child laughs and becomes jubilant. Similarly, Prahläda
Mahäräja, being always absorbed in thoughts of Kåñëa, sometimes felt
separation, thinking, "Where is Kåñëa?" This is explained by Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu. Çünyäyitaà jagat sarvaà govinda-viraheëa me. When an exalted
devotee feels that Kåñëa is invisible, having gone away, he cries in separation,
and sometimes, when he sees that Kåñëa has returned to care for him, he
laughs, just as a child sometimes laughs upon understanding that his mother is
taking care of him. These symptoms are called bhäva. In The Nectar of
Devotion, various bhävas, ecstatic conditions of a devotee, are fully described.
These bhävas are visible in the activities of a perfect devotee.
TEXT 40
NadiTa KvicduTk-<#=ae ivl/Âae Na*TYaiTa KvicTa( )
KvictaÙavNaaYau¢-STaNMaYaae_Nauck-ar h )) 40 ))
nadati kvacid utkaëöho
vilajjo nåtyati kvacit
kvacit tad-bhävanä-yuktas
tanmayo 'nucakära ha
SYNONYMS
nadati—exclaims loudly (addressing the Lord, "O Kåñëa"); kvacit—sometimes;
utkaëöhaù—being anxious; vilajjaù—without shame; nåtyati—he dances;
kvacit—sometimes; kvacit—sometimes; tat-bhävanä—with thoughts of Kåñëa;
yuktaù—being absorbed; tat-mayaù—thinking as if he had become Kåñëa;
anucakära—imitated; ha—indeed.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
248
TRANSLATION
Sometimes, upon seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Prahläda
Mahäräja would loudly call in full anxiety. He sometimes lost his shyness in
jubilation and began dancing in ecstasy, and sometimes, being fully absorbed in
thoughts of Kåñëa, he felt oneness and imitated the pastimes of the Lord.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja sometimes felt that the Lord was far away from him and
therefore called Him loudly. When he saw that the Lord was before him, he
was fully jubilant. Sometimes, thinking himself one with the Supreme, he
imitated the Lord's pastimes, and in separation from the Lord he would
sometimes show symptoms of madness. These feelings of a devotee would not
be appreciated by impersonalists. One must go further and further into
spiritual understanding. The first realization is impersonal Brahman, but one
must go still further to realize Paramätmä and eventually the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is worshiped by the transcendental feelings of a
devotee in a relationship of çänta, däsya, sakhya, vätsalya or mädhurya. Here
the feelings of Prahläda Mahäräja were in the mellow of vätsalya, filial love
and affection. As a child cries when left by his mother, when Prahläda
Mahäräja felt that the Lord was away from him he began to cry (nadati).
Again, a devotee like Prahläda sometimes sees that the Lord is coming from a
long distance to pacify him, like a mother responding to a child, saying, "My
dear child, do not cry. I am coming." Then the devotee, without being ashamed
due to his surroundings and circumstances, begins to dance, thinking, "Here is
my Lord! My Lord is coming!" Thus the devotee, in full ecstasy, sometimes
imitates the pastimes of the Lord, just as the cowherd boys used to imitate the
behavior of the jungle animals. However, he does not actually become the
Lord. Prahläda Mahäräja achieved the spiritual ecstasies described herein by
his advancement in spiritual understanding.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
249
TEXT 41
KvicduTPaul/k-STaUZ<aqMaaSTae Sa&SPaXaRiNav*RTa" )
ASPaNdPa[<aYaaNaNdSail/l/aMaqil/Tae+a<a" )) 41 ))
kvacid utpulakas tüñëém
äste saàsparça-nirvåtaù
aspanda-praëayänandasalilämélitekñaëaù
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; utpulakaù—with the hairs of his body standing on end;
tüñëém—completely silent; äste—remains; saàsparça-nirvåtaù—feeling great
joy by contact with the Lord; aspanda—steady; praëaya-änanda—due to
transcendental bliss from a relationship of love; salila—filled with tears;
ämélita—half-closed; ékñaëaù—whose eyes.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes, feeling the touch of the Lord's lotus hands, he became spiritually
jubilant and remained silent, his hairs standing on end and tears gliding down
from his half-closed eyes because of his love for the Lord.
PURPORT
When a devotee feels separation from the Lord, he becomes eager to see
where the Lord is, and sometimes when he feels pangs of separation, tears flow
incessantly from his half-closed eyes. As stated by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu in
His Çikñäñöaka, yugäyitaà nimeñeëa cakñuñä prävåñäyitam. The words cakñuñä
prävåñäyitam refer to tears falling incessantly from the devotee's eyes. These
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
250
symptoms, which appear in pure devotional ecstasy, were visible in the body of
Prahläda Mahäräja.
TEXT 42
Sa otaMaëaek-PadarivNdYaae‚
iNaRzevYaaik-ÄNaSa(r)l/BDaYaa )
TaNvNa( Para& iNav*RiTaMaaTMaNaae Mauhu‚
dRu"Sa(r)dqNaSYa MaNa" XaMa& VYaDaaTa( )) 42 ))
sa uttama-çloka-padäravindayor
niñevayäkiïcana-saìga-labdhayä
tanvan paräà nirvåtim ätmano muhur
duùsaìga-dénasya manaù çamaà vyadhät
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Prahläda Mahäräja); uttama-çloka-pada-aravindayoù—to the lotus
feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is worshiped by
transcendental prayers; niñevayä—by constant service; akiïcana—of devotees
who have nothing to do with the material world; saìga—in the association;
labdhayä—obtained; tanvan—expanding; paräm—highest; nirvåtim—bliss;
ätmanaù—of the spirit soul; muhuù—constantly; duùsaìga-dénasya—of a
person poor in spiritual understanding due to bad association; manaù—the
mind; çamam—peaceful; vyadhät—made.
TRANSLATION
Because of his association with perfect, unalloyed devotees who had nothing
to do with anything material, Prahläda Mahäräja constantly engaged in the
service of the Lord's lotus feet. By seeing his bodily features when he was in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
251
perfect ecstasy, persons very poor in spiritual understanding became purified. In
other words, Prahläda Mahäräja bestowed upon them transcendental bliss.
PURPORT
Apparently Prahläda Mahäräja was placed in circumstances in which he
was always tortured by his father. In such material conditions, one cannot
have an undisturbed mind, but since bhakti is unconditional (ahaituky
apratihatä), Prahläda Mahäräja was never disturbed by the chastisements of
Hiraëyakaçipu. On the contrary, the bodily symptoms of his ecstatic love for
the Supreme Personality of Godhead turned the minds of his friends, who had
also been born in atheistic families. Instead of being disturbed by the torments
of his father, Prahläda influenced these friends and cleansed their minds. A
devotee is never contaminated by material conditions, but persons subjected to
material conditions can become spiritually advanced and blissful upon seeing
the behavior of a pure devotee.
TEXT 43
TaiSMaNMaha>aaGavTae Maha>aaGae MahaTMaiNa )
ihr<Yak-iXaPaU raJaàk-raedgaMaaTMaJae )) 43 ))
tasmin mahä-bhägavate
mahä-bhäge mahätmani
hiraëyakaçipü räjann
akarod agham ätmaje
SYNONYMS
tasmin—unto him; mahä-bhägavate—an exalted devotee of the Lord;
mahä-bhäge—most fortunate; mahä-ätmani—whose mind was very broad;
hiraëyakaçipuù—the demon Hiraëyakaçipu; räjan—O King;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
252
akarot—performed; agham—very great sin; ätma-je—to his own son.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Yudhiñöhira, the demon Hiraëyakaçipu tormented this
exalted, fortunate devotee, although Prahläda was his own son.
PURPORT
When a demon like Hiraëyakaçipu, despite his elevated position due to
severe austerities, begins to tease a devotee, he begins falling down, and the
results of his austerities dwindle. One who oppresses a pure devotee loses all
the results of his austerities, penances and pious activities. Since
Hiraëyakaçipu was now inclined to chastise his most exalted devotee son,
Prahläda Mahäräja, his opulences began dwindling.
TEXT 44
é[qYauiDaiïr ovac
devzR WTaidC^aMaae veidTau& Tav Sauv]Ta )
YadaTMaJaaYa éuÖaYa iPaTaadaTa( SaaDave ùgaMa( )) 44 ))
çré-yudhiñöhira uväca
devarña etad icchämo
vedituà tava suvrata
yad ätmajäya çuddhäya
pitädät sädhave hy agham
SYNONYMS
çré-yudhiñöhiraù uväca—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira inquired; deva-åñe—O best
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
253
saintly person among the demigods; etat—this; icchämaù—we wish;
veditum—to know; tava—from you; su-vrata—having the determination for
spiritual advancement; yat—because; ätma-jäya—unto his own son;
çuddhäya—who was pure and exalted; pitä—the father, Hiraëyakaçipu;
adät—gave; sädhave—a great saint; hi—indeed; agham—trouble.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira said: O best of the saints among the demigods, O best
of spiritual leaders, how did Hiraëyakaçipu give so much trouble to Prahläda
Mahäräja, the pure and exalted saint, although Prahläda was his own son? I
wish to know about this subject from you.
PURPORT
To know about the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the characteristics
of His pure devotee, one must inquire from authorities like Devarñi Närada.
One cannot inquire about transcendental subject matters from a layman. As
stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.25.25), satäà prasaìgän mama vérya-saàvido
bhavanti håt-karëa-rasäyanäù kathäù: only by association with devotees can
one authoritatively understand the position of the Lord and His devotees. A
devotee like Närada Muni is addressed as suvrata. Su means "good," and vrata
means "vow." Thus the word suvrata refers to a person who has nothing to do
with the material world, which is always bad. One cannot understand anything
spiritual from a materialistic scholar puffed up with academic knowledge. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä (18.55), bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti: one must try to
understand Kåñëa by devotional service and from a devotee. Therefore
Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja was quite right in wanting to learn further about
Prahläda Mahäräja from Çré Närada Muni.
TEXT 45
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
254
Pau}aaNa( ivPa[iTakU-l/aNa( SvaNa( iPaTar" Pau}avTSal/a" )
oPaal/>aNTae iXa+aaQa| NaEvagaMaParae YaQaa )) 45 ))
puträn vipratikülän svän
pitaraù putra-vatsaläù
upälabhante çikñärthaà
naivägham aparo yathä
SYNONYMS
puträn—sons; vipratikülän—who act against the will of the father; svän—their
own; pitaraù—fathers; putra-vatsaläù—being very affectionate to the children;
upälabhante—chastise; çikña-artham—to teach them lessons; na—not;
eva—indeed; agham—punishment; aparaù—an enemy; yathä—like.
TRANSLATION
A father and mother are always affectionate to their children. When the
children are disobedient the parents chastise them, not due to enmity but only
for the child's instruction and welfare. How did Hiraëyakaçipu, the father of
Prahläda Mahäräja, chastise such a noble son? This is what I am eager to know.
TEXT 46
ik-MauTaaNauvXaaNa( SaaDaU&STaad*XaaNa( GauådevTaaNa( )
WTaTa( k-aETaUhl&/ b]øàSMaak&- ivDaMa Pa[>aae )
iPaTau" Pau}aaYa Yad( Üezae Mar<aaYa Pa[YaaeiJaTa" )) 46 ))
kim utänuvaçän sädhüàs
tädåçän guru-devatän
etat kautühalaà brahmann
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
255
asmäkaà vidhama prabho
pituù puträya yad dveño
maraëäya prayojitaù
SYNONYMS
kim uta—much less; anuvaçän—to obedient and perfect sons; sädhün—great
devotees; tädåçän—of that sort; guru-devatän—honoring the father as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; etat—this; kautühalam—doubt;
brahman—O brähmaëa; asmäkam—of us; vidhama—dissipate; prabho—O my
lord; pituù—of the father; puträya—unto the son; yat—which; dveñaù—envy;
maraëäya—for killing; prayojitaù—applied.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira further inquired: How was it possible for a father to
be so violent toward an exalted son who was obedient, well-behaved and
respectful to his father? O brähmaëa, O master, I have never heard of such a
contradiction as an affectionate father's punishing his noble son with the
intention of killing him. Kindly dissipate our doubts in this regard.
PURPORT
In the history of human society, an affectionate father is rarely found to
chastise a noble and devoted son. Therefore Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira wanted
Närada Muni to dissipate his doubt.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Fourth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled, "Hiraëyakaçipu Terrorizes the Universe."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
256
5. Prahläda Mahäräja, the Saintly Son of Hiraëyakaçipu
Prahläda Mahäräja did not carry out the orders of his teachers, for he was
always engaged in worshiping Lord Viñëu. As described in this chapter,
Hiraëyakaçipu tried to kill Prahläda Mahäräja, even by having a snake bite
him and by putting him under the feet of elephants, yet he was unsuccessful.
Hiraëyakaçipu's spiritual master, Çukräcärya, had two sons named Ñaëòa
and Amarka, to whom Prahläda Mahäräja was entrusted for education.
Although the teachers tried to educate the boy Prahläda in politics, economics
and other material activities, he did not care for their instructions. Instead, he
continued to be a pure devotee. Prahläda Mahäräja never liked the idea of
discriminating between one's friends and enemies. Because he was spiritually
inclined, he was equal toward everyone.
Once upon a time, Hiraëyakaçipu inquired from his son what the best thing
was that he had learned from his teachers. Prahläda Mahäräja replied that a
man engrossed in the material consciousness of duality, thinking, "This is
mine, and that belongs to my enemy," should give up his householder life and
go to the forest to worship the Supreme Lord.
When Hiraëyakaçipu heard from his son about devotional service, he
decided that this small boy had been polluted by some friend in school. Thus
he advised the teachers to take care of the boy so that he would not become a
Kåñëa conscious devotee. However, when the teachers inquired from Prahläda
Mahäräja why he was going against their teachings, Prahläda Mahäräja taught
the teachers that the mentality of ownership is false and that he was therefore
trying to become an unalloyed devotee of Lord Viñëu. The teachers, being very
angry at this answer, chastised and threatened the boy with many fearful
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
257
conditions. They taught him to the best of their ability and then brought him
before his father.
Hiraëyakaçipu affectionately took his son Prahläda on his lap and then
inquired from him what the best thing was that he had learned from his
teachers. As usual, Prahläda Mahäräja began praising the nine processes of
devotional service, such as çravaëam and kértanam. Thus the King of the
demons, Hiraëyakaçipu, being extremely angry, chastised the teachers, Ñaëòa
and Amarka, for having wrongly trained Prahläda Mahäräja. The so-called
teachers informed the King that Prahläda Mahäräja was automatically a
devotee and did not listen to their instructions. When they proved themselves
innocent, Hiraëyakaçipu inquired from Prahläda where he had learned
viñëu-bhakti. Prahläda Mahäräja replied that those who are attached to family
life do not develop Kåñëa consciousness, either personally or collectively.
Instead, they suffer repeated birth and death in this material world and
continue simply chewing the chewed. Prahläda explained that the duty of
every man is to take shelter of a pure devotee and thus become eligible to
understand Kåñëa consciousness.
Enraged at this answer, Hiraëyakaçipu threw Prahläda Mahäräja from his
lap. Since Prahläda was so treacherous that he had become a devotee of Viñëu,
who had killed his uncle Hiraëyäkña, Hiraëyakaçipu asked his assistants to kill
him. The assistants of Hiraëyakaçipu struck Prahläda with sharp weapons,
threw him under the feet of elephants, subjected him to hellish conditions,
threw him from the peak of a mountain and tried to kill him in thousands of
other ways, but they were unsuccessful. Hiraëyakaçipu therefore became
increasingly afraid of his son Prahläda Mahäräja and arrested him. The sons of
Hiraëyakaçipu's spiritual master, Çukräcärya, began teaching Prahläda in their
own way, but Prahläda Mahäräja did not accept their instructions. While the
teachers were absent from the classroom, Prahläda Mahäräja began to preach
Kåñëa consciousness in the school, and by his instructions all his class friends,
the sons of the demons, became devotees like him.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
258
TEXT 1
é[qNaard ovac
PaaEraeihTYaaYa >aGavaNa( v*Ta" k-aVYa" ik-l/aSaurE" )
z<@aMak-aOE SauTaaE TaSYa dETYaraJaGa*haiNTake- )) 1 ))
çré-närada uväca
paurohityäya bhagavän
våtaù kävyaù kiläsuraiù
ñaëòämarkau sutau tasya
daitya-räja-gåhäntike
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—the great saint Närada said; paurohityäya—to work as
priest; bhagavän—the most powerful; våtaù—chosen; kävyaù—Çukräcärya;
kila—indeed; asuraiù—by the demons; ñaëòa-amarkau—Ñaëòa and Amarka;
sutau—sons; tasya—of him; daitya-räja—of the King of the demons,
Hiraëyakaçipu; gåha-antike—near the residence.
TRANSLATION
The great saint Närada Muni said: The demons, headed by Hiraëyakaçipu,
accepted Çukräcärya as their priest for ritualistic ceremonies. Çukräcärya's two
sons, Ñaëòa and Amarka, lived near Hiraëyakaçipu's palace.
PURPORT
The beginning of the life story of Prahläda is recounted as follows.
Çukräcärya became the priest of the atheists, especially Hiraëyakaçipu, and
thus his two sons, Ñaëòa and Amarka, resided near Hiraëyakaçipu's residence.
Çukräcärya should not have become the priest of Hiraëyakaçipu because
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
259
Hiraëyakaçipu and his followers were all atheists. A brähmaëa should become
the priest of a person interested in the advancement of spiritual culture. The
very name Çukräcärya, however, indicates a person interested in obtaining
benefits for his sons and descendants, regardless of how the money comes. A
real brähmaëa would not become a priest for atheistic men.
TEXT 2
TaaE raja Pa[aiPaTa& bal&/ Pa[úad& NaYak-aeivdMa( )
Paa#=YaaMaaSaTau" Paa#yaNaNYaa&êaSaurbal/k-aNa( )) 2 ))
tau räjïä präpitaà bälaà
prahlädaà naya-kovidam
päöhayäm äsatuù päöhyän
anyäàç cäsura-bälakän
SYNONYMS
tau—those two (Ñaëòa and Amarka); räjïä—by the King; präpitam—sent;
bälam—the boy; prahlädam—named Prahläda; naya-kovidam—who was aware
of moral principles; päöhayäm äsatuù—instructed; päöhyän—books of material
knowledge; anyän—other; ca—also; asura-bälakän—sons of the asuras.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja was already educated in devotional life, but when his
father sent him to those two sons of Çukräcärya to be educated, they accepted
him at their school along with the other sons of the asuras.
TEXT 3
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
260
Yata}a Gauå<aa Pa[ae¢&- éué[uve_NauPaPaa#= c )
Na SaaDau MaNaSaa MaeNae SvParaSad(Ga]haé[YaMa( )) 3 ))
yat tatra guruëä proktaà
çuçruve 'nupapäöha ca
na sädhu manasä mene
sva-paräsad-grahäçrayam
SYNONYMS
yat—which; tatra—there (in the school); guruëä—by the teachers;
proktam—instructed; çuçruve—heard; anupapäöha—recited; ca—and;
na—not; sädhu—good; manasä—by the mind; mene—considered; sva—of
one's own; para—and of others; asat-graha—by the bad philosophy;
äçrayam—which was supported.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda certainly heard and recited the topics of politics and economics
taught by the teachers, but he understood that political philosophy involves
considering someone a friend and someone else an enemy, and thus he did not
like it.
PURPORT
Politics involves accepting one group of men as enemies and another group
as friends. Everything in politics is based on this philosophy, and the entire
world, especially at the present, is engrossed in it. The public is concerned with
friendly countries and friendly groups or enemy countries and enemy groups,
but as stated in Bhagavad-gétä, a learned person does not make distinctions
between enemies and friends. Devotees, especially, do not create friends and
enemies. A devotee sees that every living being is part and parcel of Kåñëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
261
(mamaiväàço jéva-bhütaù [15.7]). Therefore a devotee treats friends and
enemies equally by trying to educate them both in Kåñëa consciousness. Of
course, atheistic men do not follow the instructions of pure devotees, but
instead consider a devotee their enemy. A devotee, however, never creates a
situation of friendship and enmity. Although Prahläda Mahäräja was obliged
to hear the instructions of Ñaëòa and Amarka, he did not like the philosophy
of friends and enemies, which forms the basis of politics. He was not interested
in this philosophy.
TEXT 4
Wk-daSaurra$( Pau}aMaªMaaraePYa Paa<@v )
PaPa[C^ k-QYaTaa& vTSa MaNYaTae SaaDau YaÙvaNa( )) 4 ))
ekadäsura-räö putram
aìkam äropya päëòava
papraccha kathyatäà vatsa
manyate sädhu yad bhavän
SYNONYMS
ekadä—once upon a time; asura-räö—the Emperor of the asuras; putram—his
son; aìkam—on the lap; äropya—placing; päëòava—O Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira;
papraccha—inquired; kathyatäm—let it be told; vatsa—my dear son;
manyate—considers; sädhu—the best; yat—that which; bhavän—your good
self.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Yudhiñöhira, once upon a time the King of the demons,
Hiraëyakaçipu, took his son Prahläda on his lap and very affectionately
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
262
inquired: My dear son, please let me know what you think is the best of all the
subjects you have studied from your teachers.
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu did not ask his young son anything that would be very
difficult for him to answer; instead, he gave the boy a chance to speak plainly
about whatever he thought might be best. Prahläda Mahäräja, of course, being
a perfect devotee, knew everything and could say what the best part of life is.
In the Vedas it is said, yasmin vijïäte samam evaà vijïätaà bhavati: if one
properly understands God, he can understand any subject matter very nicely.
Sometimes we have to challenge big scientists and philosophers, but by the
grace of Kåñëa we emerge successful. It is impossible, practically speaking, for
ordinary men to challenge scientists or philosophers concerning genuine
knowledge, but a devotee can challenge them because the best of everything is
known to a devotee by the grace of Kåñëa. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä
(10.11):
teñäm evänukampärtham
aham ajïäna-jaà tamaù
näçayämy ätma-bhäva-stho
jïäna-dépena bhäsvatä
Kåñëa, who is situated in the core of everyone's heart as the Supersoul,
dissipates all the ignorance from the heart of a devotee. As a special favor, He
enlightens the devotee with all knowledge by putting before him the torch of
light. Prahläda Mahäräja, therefore, knew the best of knowledge, and when his
father inquired from him, Prahläda gave him that knowledge. Prahläda
Mahäräja was able to solve the most difficult parts of problems because of his
advanced Kåñëa consciousness. Therefore he replied as follows.
TEXT 5
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
263
é[qPa[úad ovac
TaTSaaDau MaNYae_SaurvYaR deihNaa&
Sada SaMauiÜGaniDaYaaMaSad(Ga]haTa( )
ihTvaTMaPaaTa& Ga*hMaNDakU-Pa&
vNa& GaTaae YaÖirMaaé[YaeTa )) 5 ))
çré-prahläda uväca
tat sädhu manye 'sura-varya dehinäà
sadä samudvigna-dhiyäm asad-grahät
hitvätma-pätaà gåham andha-küpaà
vanaà gato yad dharim äçrayeta
SYNONYMS
çré-prahlädaù uväca—Prahläda Mahäräja replied; tat—that; sädhu—very good,
or the best part of life; manye—I think; asura-varya—O King of the asuras;
dehinäm—of persons who have accepted the material body; sadä—always;
samudvigna—full of anxieties; dhiyäm—whose intelligence;
asat-grahät—because of accepting the temporary body or bodily relations as
real (thinking "I am this body, and everything belonging to this body is mine");
hitvä—giving up; ätma-pätam—the place where spiritual culture or
self-realization is stopped; gåham—the bodily concept of life, or household life;
andha-küpam—which is nothing but a blind well (where there is no water but
one nonetheless searches for water); vanam—to the forest; gataù—going;
yat—which; harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; äçrayeta—may take
shelter of.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja replied: O best of the asuras, King of the demons, as far
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
264
as I have learned from my spiritual master, any person who has accepted a
temporary body and temporary household life is certainly embarrassed by
anxiety because of having fallen in a dark well where there is no water but only
suffering. One should give up this position and go to the forest [vana]. More
clearly, one should go to Våndävana, where only Kåñëa consciousness is
prevalent, and should thus take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu thought that Prahläda, being nothing but a small boy with
no actual experience, might reply with something pleasing but nothing
practical. Prahläda Mahäräja, however, being an exalted devotee, had acquired
all the qualities of education.
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
haräv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëä
manorathenäsati dhävato bahiù
"One who has unflinching devotional faith in Kåñëa consistently manifests all
the good qualities of Kåñëa and the demigods. However, he who has no
devotion to the Supreme Personality of Godhead has no good qualifications
because he is engaged by mental concoction in material existence, which is the
external feature of the Lord." (SB 5.18.12) So-called educated philosophers and
scientists who are simply on the mental platform cannot distinguish between
what is actually sat, eternal, and what is asat, temporary. The Vedic injunction
is asato mä jyotir gama: everyone should give up the platform of temporary
existence and approach the eternal platform. The soul is eternal, and topics
concerning the eternal soul are actually knowledge. Elsewhere it is said,
apaçyatäm ätma-tattvaà gåheñu gåha-medhinäm: [SB 2.1.2] those who are
attached to the bodily conception of life and who thus stick to life as a
gåhastha, or householder, on the platform of material sense enjoyment, cannot
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
265
see the welfare of the eternal soul. Prahläda Mahäräja confirmed this by saying
that if one wants success in life, he should immediately understand from the
right sources what his self-interest is and how he should mold his life in
spiritual consciousness. One should understand himself to be part and parcel
of Kåñëa and thus completely take shelter of His lotus feet for guaranteed
spiritual success. Everyone in the material world is in the bodily conception,
struggling hard for existence, life after life. Prahläda Mahäräja therefore
recommended that to stop this material condition of repeated birth and death,
one should go to the forest (vana).
In the varëäçrama system, one first becomes a brahmacäré, then a gåhastha, a
vänaprastha and finally a sannyäsé. Going to the forest means accepting
vänaprastha life, which is between gåhastha life and sannyäsa. As confirmed in
the Viñëu Puräëa (3.8.9), varëäçramäcäravatä puruñeëa paraù pumän viñëur
ärädhyate: [Cc. Madhya 8.58] by accepting the institution of varëa and äçrama,
one can very easily elevate himself to the platform of worshiping Viñëu, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Otherwise, if one remains in the bodily
conception, one must rot within this material world, and his life will be a
failure. Society must have divisions of brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra,
and for spiritual advancement one must gradually develop as a brahmacäré,
gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsé. Prahläda Mahäräja recommended that his
father accept vänaprastha life because as a gåhastha he was becoming
increasingly demoniac due to bodily attachment. Prahläda recommended to his
father that accepting vänaprastha life would be better than going deeper and
deeper into gåham andha-küpam, the blind well of life as a gåhastha. In our
Kåñëa consciousness movement we therefore invite all the elderly persons of
the world to come to Våndävana and stay there in retired life, making
advancement in spiritual consciousness, Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 6
é[qNaard ovac
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
266
é[uTva Pau}aiGarae dETYa" ParPa+aSaMaaihTaa" )
JahaSa buiÖbaRl/aNaa& i>aÛTae ParbuiÖi>a" )) 6 ))
çré-närada uväca
çrutvä putra-giro daityaù
para-pakña-samähitäù
jahäsa buddhir bälänäà
bhidyate para-buddhibhiù
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; çrutvä—hearing; putra-giraù—the
instructive words of his son; daityaù—Hiraëyakaçipu; para-pakña—on the side
of the enemy; samähitäù—full of faith; jahäsa—laughed; buddhiù—the
intelligence; bälänäm—of small boys; bhidyate—is polluted;
para-buddhibhiù—by instructions from the enemy's camp.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: When Prahläda Mahäräja spoke about the path of
self-realization in devotional service, thus being faithful to the camp of his
father's enemies, Hiraëyakaçipu, the King of the demons, heard Prahläda's
words and he laughingly said, "Thus is the intelligence of children spoiled by
the words of the enemy."
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu, being a demon, would always consider Lord Viñëu and His
devotees to be his enemies. Therefore the word para-pakña ("on the side of the
enemy") is used here. Hiraëyakaçipu never agreed with the words of Viñëu, or
Kåñëa. Rather, he was angered by the intelligence of a Vaiñëava. Lord Viñëu,
Lord Kåñëa, says, sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
267
18.66]—"Give up all other duties and surrender unto Me"—but demons like
Hiraëyakaçipu never agree to do this. Therefore Kåñëa says:
na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù
prapadyante narädhamäù
mäyayäparhåta-jïänä
äsuraà bhävam äçritäù
"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose
knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of
demons, do not surrender unto Me." (Bg. 7.15) The asura-bhäva, the atheistic
nature, is directly represented by Hiraëyakaçipu. Such persons, being müòha
and narädhama—fools and rascals, the lowest of men—would never accept
Viñëu as the Supreme and surrender to Him. Hiraëyakaçipu naturally became
increasingly angry that his son Prahläda was being influenced by the camp of
the enemies. He therefore asked that saintly persons like Närada not be
allowed within the residential quarters of his son, for otherwise Prahläda
would be further spoiled by Vaiñëava instructions.
TEXT 7
SaMYaiGvDaaYaRTaa& bal/ae GauåGaehe iÜJaaiTai>a" )
ivZ<auPa+aE" Pa[iTaC^àENaR i>aÛeTaaSYa DaqYaRQaa )) 7 ))
samyag vidhäryatäà bälo
guru-gehe dvi-jätibhiù
viñëu-pakñaiù praticchannair
na bhidyetäsya dhér yathä
SYNONYMS
samyak—completely; vidhäryatäm—let him be protected; bälaù—this boy of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
268
tender age; guru-gehe—in the guru-kula, the place where children are sent to
be instructed by the guru; dvi-jätibhiù—by brähmaëas; viñëu-pakñaiù—who are
on the side of Viñëu; praticchannaiù—disguised in different dresses; na
bhidyeta—may not be influenced; asya—of him; dhéù—the intelligence;
yathä—so that.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu advised his assistants: My dear demons, give complete
protection to this boy at the guru-kula where he is instructed, so that his
intelligence will not be further influenced by Vaiñëavas who may go there in
disguise.
PURPORT
In our Kåñëa consciousness movement, the tactic of dressing oneself like an
ordinary karmé is necessary because everyone in the demoniac kingdom is
against the Vaiñëava teachings. Kåñëa consciousness is not at all to the liking
of the demons of the present age. As soon as they see a Vaiñëava dressed in
saffron garments with beads on his neck and tilaka on his forehead, they are
immediately irritated. They criticize the Vaiñëavas by sarcastically saying Hare
Kåñëa, and some people also chant Hare Kåñëa sincerely. In either case, since
Hare Kåñëa is absolute, whether one chants it jokingly or sincerely, it will have
its effect. The Vaiñëavas are pleased when the demons chant Hare Kåñëa
because this shows that the Hare Kåñëa movement is taking ground. The
greater demons, like Hiraëyakaçipu, are always prepared to chastise the
Vaiñëavas, and they try to make arrangements so that Vaiñëavas will not come
to sell their books and preach Kåñëa consciousness. Thus what was done by
Hiraëyakaçipu long, long ago is still being done. That is the way of
materialistic life. Demons or materialists do not at all like the advancement of
Kåñëa consciousness, and they try to hinder it in many ways. Yet the preachers
of Kåñëa consciousness must go forward—in their Vaiñëava dress or any other
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
269
dress—for the purpose of preaching. Cäëakya Paëòita says that if an honest
person deals with a great cheater, it is necessary for him to become a cheater
also, not for the purpose of cheating but to make his preaching successful.
TEXT 8
Ga*hMaaNaqTaMaahUYa Pa[had& dETYaYaaJak-a" )
Pa[XaSYa ë+<aYaa vaca SaMaPa*C^NTa SaaMai>a" )) 8 ))
gåham änétam ähüya
prahrädaà daitya-yäjakäù
praçasya çlakñëayä väcä
samapåcchanta sämabhiù
SYNONYMS
gåham—to the place of the teachers (Ñaëòa and Amarka); änétam—brought;
ähüya—calling; prahrädam—Prahläda; daitya-yäjakäù—the priests of the
demon Hiraëyakaçipu; praçasya—by pacifying; çlakñëayä—with a very mild;
väcä—voice; samapåcchanta—they questioned; sämabhiù—by very agreeable
words.
TRANSLATION
When Hiraëyakaçipu's servants brought the boy Prahläda back to the
guru-kula [the place where the brähmaëas taught the boys], the priests of the
demons, Ñaëòa and Amarka, pacified him. With very mild voices and
affectionate words, they inquired from him as follows.
PURPORT
Ñaëòa and Amarka, the priests of the demons, were eager to know from
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
270
Prahläda Mahäräja who the Vaiñëavas were that came to instruct him in Kåñëa
consciousness. Their purpose was to discover the names of these Vaiñëavas. In
the beginning they did not threaten the boy because when threatened he
might not identify the real culprits. Therefore they very mildly and peacefully
inquired as follows.
TEXT 9
vTSa Pa[had >ad]& Tae SaTYa& k-QaYa Maa Ma*za )
bal/aNaiTa ku-TaSTau>YaMaez buiÖivPaYaRYa" )) 9 ))
vatsa prahräda bhadraà te
satyaà kathaya mä måñä
bälän ati kutas tubhyam
eña buddhi-viparyayaù
SYNONYMS
vatsa—O dear son; prahräda—Prahläda; bhadram te—all blessings and good
fortune unto you; satyam—the truth; kathaya—speak; mä—do not; måñä—a
lie; bälän ati—passing over the other demon boys; kutaù—from where;
tubhyam—unto you; eñaù—this; buddhi—of the intelligence;
viparyayaù—pollution.
TRANSLATION
Dear son Prahläda, all peace and good fortune unto you. Kindly do not speak
lies; just reply with the truth. These boys you see are not like you, for they do
not speak in a deviant way. How have you learned these instructions? How has
your intelligence been spoiled in this way?
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
271
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja was still a boy, and therefore his teachers thought that if
they pacified the little boy he would immediately speak the truth, revealing the
secret of how the Vaiñëavas came there to teach him lessons in devotional
service. It was surprising, of course, that in the same school the other boys of
the Daityas were not polluted; only Prahläda Mahäräja was supposedly polluted
by the instructions of the Vaiñëavas. The main duty of the teachers was to
inquire who those Vaiñëavas were that came to teach Prahläda and spoil his
intelligence.
TEXT 10
buiÖ>aed" Park*-Ta oTaahae Tae SvTaae_>avTa( )
>a<YaTaa& é[aeTauk-aMaaNaa& Gauæ<aa& ku-l/NaNdNa )) 10 ))
buddhi-bhedaù para-kåta
utäho te svato 'bhavat
bhaëyatäà çrotu-kämänäà
gurüëäà kula-nandana
SYNONYMS
buddhi-bhedaù—pollution of the intelligence; para-kåtaù—done by the
enemies; utäho—or; te—of you; svataù—by yourself; abhavat—was;
bhaëyatäm—let it be told; çrotu-kämänäm—to us, who are very eager to hear
about it; gurüëäm—all your teachers; kula-nandana—O best of your family.
TRANSLATION
O best of your family, has this pollution of your intelligence been brought
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
272
about by you or by the enemies? We are all your teachers and are very eager to
hear about this. Please tell us the truth.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja's teachers were astonished that a small boy could speak
such exalted Vaiñëava philosophy. Therefore they inquired about the
Vaiñëavas who stealthily taught it to him, in order that these Vaiñëavas might
be arrested and killed in the presence of Prahläda's father, Hiraëyakaçipu.
TEXT 11
é[qPa[had ovac
Par" SvêeTYaSad(Ga]ah" Pau&Saa& YaNMaaYaYaa k*-Ta" )
ivMaaeihTaiDaYaa& d*íSTaSMaE >aGavTae NaMa" )) 11 ))
çré-prahräda uväca
paraù svaç cety asad-grähaù
puàsäà yan-mäyayä kåtaù
vimohita-dhiyäà dåñöas
tasmai bhagavate namaù
SYNONYMS
çré-prahrädaù uväca—Prahläda Mahäräja replied; paraù—an enemy; svaù—a
kinsman or friend; ca—also; iti—thus; asat-grähaù—material conception of
life; puàsäm—of persons; yat—of whom; mäyayä—by the external energy;
kåtaù—created; vimohita—bewildered; dhiyäm—of those whose intelligence;
dåñöaù—practically experienced; tasmai—unto Him; bhagavate—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; namaù—my respectful obeisances.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
273
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja replied: Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose external energy has created the
distinctions of "my friend" and "my enemy" by deluding the intelligence of
men. Indeed, I am now actually experiencing this, although I have previously
heard of it from authoritative sources.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (5.18):
vidyä-vinaya-sampanne
brähmaëe gavi hastini
çuni caiva çvapäke ca
paëòitäù sama-darçinaù
"The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a learned
and gentle brähmaëa, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater [outcaste]."
paëòitäù, those who are actually learned—the equipoised, advanced devotees
who have full knowledge of everything—do not see any living entity as an
enemy or friend. Instead, with broader vision, they see that everyone is part of
Kåñëa, as confirmed by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu (jévera 'svarüpa'
haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa' [Cc. Madhya 20.108]). Every living entity, being part
of the Supreme Lord, is meant to serve the Lord, just as every part of the body
is meant to serve the whole body.
As servants of the Supreme Lord, all living entities are one, but a Vaiñëava,
because of his natural humility, addresses every other living entity as prabhu. A
Vaiñëava sees other servants to be so advanced that he has much to learn from
them. Thus he accepts all other devotees of the Lord as prabhus, masters.
Although everyone is a servant of the Lord, one Vaiñëava servant, because of
humility, sees another servant as his master. Understanding of the master
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
274
begins from understanding of the spiritual master.
yasya prasädäd bhagavat-prasädo
yasyäprasädän na gatiù kuto 'pi **(7)
"By the mercy of the spiritual master one receives the benediction of Kåñëa.
Without the grace of the spiritual master, one cannot make any advancement."
säkñäd-dharitvena samasta-çästrair
uktas tathä bhävyata eva sadbhiù
kintu prabhor yaù priya eva tasya
vande guroù çré-caraëäravindam **(8)
"The spiritual master is to be honored as much as the Supreme Lord because he
is the most confidential servitor of the Lord. This is acknowledged in all
revealed scriptures and followed by all authorities. Therefore I offer my
respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of such a spiritual master, who is a
bona fide representative of Çré Hari [Kåñëa]." The spiritual master, the servant
of God, is engaged in the most confidential service of the Lord, namely
delivering all the conditioned souls from the clutches of mäyä, in which one
thinks, "This person is my enemy, and that one is my friend." Actually the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the friend of all living entities, and all
living entities are eternal servants of the Supreme Lord. Oneness is possible
through this understanding, not through artificially thinking that every one of
us is God or equal to God. The true understanding is that God is the supreme
master and that all of us are servants of the Supreme Lord and are therefore on
the same platform. This had already been taught to Prahläda Mahäräja by his
spiritual master, Närada, but Prahläda was nonetheless surprised by how a
bewildered soul thinks one person his enemy and another his friend.
As long as one adheres to the philosophy of duality, thinking one person a
friend and another an enemy, he should be understood to be in the clutches of
mäyä. The Mäyävädé philosopher who thinks that all living entities are God
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
275
and are therefore one is also mistaken. No one is equal to God. The servant
cannot be equal to the master. According to the Vaiñëava philosophy, the
master is one, and the servants are also one, but the distinction between the
master and servant must continue even in the liberated stage. In the
conditioned stage we think that some living beings are our friends whereas
others are enemies, and thus we are in duality. In the liberated stage, however,
the conception is that God is the master and that all living entities, being
servants of God, are one.
TEXT 12
Sa YadaNauv]Ta" Pau&Saa& PaéubuiÖivRi>aÛTae )
ANYa Wz TaQaaNYaae_hiMaiTa >aedGaTaaSaTaq )) 12 ))
sa yadänuvrataù puàsäà
paçu-buddhir vibhidyate
anya eña tathänyo 'ham
iti bheda-gatäsaté
SYNONYMS
saù—that Supreme Personality of Godhead; yadä—when;
anuvrataù—favorable or pleased; puàsäm—of the conditioned souls;
paçu-buddhiù—the animalistic conception of life ("I am the Supreme, and
everyone is God"); vibhidyate—is destroyed; anyaù—another; eñaù—this;
tathä—as well as; anyaù—another; aham—I; iti—thus; bheda—distinction;
gata—having; asaté—which is disastrous.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead is pleased with the living entity
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
276
because of his devotional service, one becomes a paëòita and does not make
distinctions between enemies, friends and himself. Intelligently, he then thinks,
"Every one of us is an eternal servant of God, and therefore we are not
different from one another."
PURPORT
When Prahläda Mahäräja's teachers and demoniac father asked him how
his intelligence had been polluted, Prahläda Mahäräja said, "As far as I am
concerned, my intelligence has not been polluted. Rather, by the grace of my
spiritual master and by the grace of my Lord, Kåñëa, I have now learned that
no one is my enemy and no one is my friend. We are all actually eternal
servants of Kåñëa, but under the influence of the external energy we think
that we are separately situated from the Supreme Personality of Godhead as
friends and enemies of one another. This mistaken idea has now been
corrected, and therefore, unlike ordinary human beings, I no longer think that
I am God and that others are my friends and enemies. Now I am rightly
thinking that everyone is an eternal servant of God and that our duty is to
serve the supreme master, for then we shall stand on the platform of oneness
as servants."
Demons think of everyone as a friend or enemy, but Vaiñëavas say that
since everyone is a servant of the Lord, everyone is on the same platform.
Therefore a Vaiñëava treats other living entities neither as friends nor as
enemies, but instead tries to spread Kåñëa consciousness, teaching everyone
that we are all one as servants of the Supreme Lord but are uselessly wasting
our valuable lives by creating nations, communities and other groups of friends
and enemies. Everyone should come to the platform of Kåñëa consciousness
and thus feel oneness as a servant of the Lord. Although there are 8,400,000
species of life, a Vaiñëava feels this oneness. The Éçopaniñad advises, ekatvam
anupaçyataù [Éço 7]. A devotee should see the Supreme Personality of Godhead
to be situated in everyone's heart and should also see every living entity as an
eternal servant of the Lord. This vision is called ekatvam, oneness. Although
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
277
there is a relationship of master and servant, both master and servant are one
because of their spiritual identity. This is also ekatvam. Thus the conception of
ekatvam for the Vaiñëava is different from that of the Mäyävädé.
Hiraëyakaçipu asked Prahläda Mahäräja how he had become antagonistic
to his family. When a family member is killed by an enemy, all the members of
the family would naturally be inimical to the murderer, but Hiraëyakaçipu saw
that Prahläda had become friendly with the murderer. Therefore he asked,
"Who has created this kind of intelligence in you? Have you developed this
consciousness by yourself? Since you are a small boy, someone must have
induced you to think this way." Prahläda Mahäräja wanted to reply that an
attitude favorable toward Viñëu can develop only when the Lord is favorable
(sa yadänuvrataù). As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, Kåñëa is the friend of everyone
(suhådaà sama-bhütänäà jïätvä mäà çäntim åcchati). The Lord is never an
enemy to any of the millions of living entities, but is always a friend to
everyone. This is true understanding. If one thinks that the Lord is an enemy,
his intelligence is paçu-buddhi, the intelligence of an animal. He falsely thinks,
"I am different from my enemy, and my enemy is different from me. The
enemy has done this, and therefore my duty is to kill him." This misconception
is described in this verse as bheda-gatäsaté. The actual fact is that everyone is a
servant of the Lord, as confirmed in Caitanya-caritämåta by Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu (jévera 'svarüpa' haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa' [Cc. Madhya 20.108]).
As servants of the Lord, we are one, and there can be no questions of enmity
or friendship. If one actually understands that every one of us is a servant of
the Lord, where is the question of enemy or friend?
Everyone should be friendly for the service of the Lord. Everyone should
praise another's service to the Lord and not be proud of his own service. This is
the way of Vaiñëava thinking, Vaikuëöha thinking. There may be rivalries and
apparent competition between servants in performing service, but in the
Vaikuëöha planets the service of another servant is appreciated, not
condemned. This is Vaikuëöha competition. There is no question of enmity
between servants. Everyone should be allowed to render service to the Lord to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
278
the best of his ability, and everyone should appreciate the service of others.
Such are the activities of Vaikuëöha. Since everyone is a servant, everyone is
on the same platform and is allowed to serve the Lord according to his ability.
As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo mattaù
småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: the Lord is situated in everyone's heart, giving
dictation according to the attitude of the servant. However, the Lord gives
different dictation to the nondevotees and devotees. The nondevotees
challenge the authority of the Supreme Lord, and therefore the Lord dictates
in such a way that the nondevotees forget the Lord's service, life after life, and
are punished by the laws of nature. But when a devotee very sincerely wants to
render service to the Lord, the Lord dictates in a different way. As the Lord
says in Bhagavad-gétä (10.10):
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give the
understanding by which they can come to Me." Everyone is actually a servant,
not an enemy or friend, and everyone is working under different directions
from the Lord, who directs each living entity according to his mentality.
TEXT 13
Sa Wz AaTMaa SvPareTYabuiÖi>a‚
duRrTYaYaaNau§-Ma<aae iNaæPYaTae )
MauùiNTa YaÜTMaRiNa vedvaidNaae
b]øadYaae ùez i>aNaita Mae MaiTaMa( )) 13 ))
sa eña ätmä sva-parety abuddhibhir
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
279
duratyayänukramaëo nirüpyate
muhyanti yad-vartmani veda-vädino
brahmädayo hy eña bhinatti me matim
SYNONYMS
saù—He; eñaù—this; ätmä—Supersoul situated in everyone's heart;
sva-para—this is my own business, and that is someone else's; iti—thus;
abuddhibhiù—by those who have such bad intelligence; duratyaya—very
difficult to follow; anukramaëaù—whose devotional service; nirüpyate—is
ascertained (by scriptures or the instructions of the spiritual master);
muhyanti—are bewildered; yat—of whom; vartmani—on the path;
veda-vädinaù—the followers of Vedic instructions; brahma-ädayaù—the
demigods, beginning from Lord Brahmä; hi—indeed; eñaù—this one;
bhinatti—changes; me—my; matim—intelligence.
TRANSLATION
Persons who always think in terms of "enemy" and "friend" are unable to
ascertain the Supersoul within themselves. Not to speak of them, even such
exalted persons as Lord Brahmä, who are fully conversant with the Vedic
literature, are sometimes bewildered in following the principles of devotional
service. The same Supreme Personality of Godhead who has created this
situation has certainly given me the intelligence to take the side of your
so-called enemy.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja admitted frankly, "My dear teachers, you wrongly think
that Lord Viñëu is your enemy, but because He is favorable toward me, I
understand that He is the friend of everyone. You may think that I have taken
the side of your enemy, but factually He has bestowed a great favor upon me."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
280
TEXT 14
YaQaa >a]aMYaTYaYaae b]øNa( SvYaMaak-zRSaiàDaaE )
TaQaa Mae i>aÛTae ceTaê§-Paa<aeYaRd*C^Yaa )) 14 ))
yathä bhrämyaty ayo brahman
svayam äkarña-sannidhau
tathä me bhidyate cetaç
cakra-päëer yadåcchayä
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; bhrämyati—moves; ayaù—iron; brahman—O brähmaëas;
svayam—itself; äkarña—of a magnet; sannidhau—in the proximity;
tathä—similarly; me—my; bhidyate—is changed; cetaù—consciousness;
cakra-päëeù—of Lord Viñëu, who has a disc in His hand; yadåcchayä—simply
by the will.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëas [teachers], as iron attracted by a magnetic stone moves
automatically toward the magnet, my consciousness, having been changed by
His will, is attracted by Lord Viñëu, who carries a disc in His hand. Thus I
have no independence.
PURPORT
For iron to be attracted by a magnet is natural. Similarly, for all living
entities to be attracted toward Kåñëa is natural, and therefore the Lord's real
name is Kåñëa, meaning He who attracts everyone and everything. The typical
examples of such attraction are found in Våndävana, where everything and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
281
everyone is attracted by Kåñëa. The elderly persons like Nanda Mahäräja and
Yaçodädevé, the friends like Çrédämä, Sudämä and the other cowherd boys, the
gopés like Çrématé Rädhäräëé and Her associates, and even the birds, beasts,
cows and calves are attracted. The flowers and fruits in the gardens are
attracted, the waves of the Yamunä are attracted, and the land, sky, trees,
plants, animals and all other living beings are attracted by Kåñëa. This is the
natural situation of everything in Våndävana.
Just contrary to the affairs of Våndävana is the material world, where no
one is attracted by Kåñëa and everyone is attracted by mäyä. This is the
difference between the spiritual and material worlds. Hiraëyakaçipu, who was
in the material world, was attracted by women and money, whereas Prahläda
Mahäräja, being in his natural position, was attracted by Kåñëa. In replying to
Hiraëyakaçipu's question about why Prahläda Mahäräja had a deviant view,
Prahläda said that his view was not deviant, for the natural position of
everyone is to be attracted by Kåñëa. Hiraëyakaçipu found this view deviant,
Prahläda said, because of being unnaturally unattracted by Kåñëa.
Hiraëyakaçipu therefore needed purification.
As soon as one is purified of material contamination, he is again attracted
by Kåñëa (sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya
19.170]). In the material world, everyone is contaminated by the dirt of sense
gratification and is acting according to different designations, sometimes as a
human being, sometimes a beast, sometimes a demigod or tree, and so on. One
must be cleansed of all these designations. Then one will be naturally attracted
to Kåñëa. The bhakti process purifies the living entity of all unnatural
attractions. When one is purified he is attracted by Kåñëa and begins to serve
Kåñëa instead of serving mäyä. This is his natural position. A devotee is
attracted by Kåñëa, whereas a nondevotee, being contaminated by the dirt of
material enjoyment, is not. This is confirmed by the Lord in Bhagavad-gétä
(7.28):
yeñäà tv anta-gataà päpaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
282
janänäà puëya-karmaëäm
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktä
bhajante mäà dåòha-vratäù
"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful
actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of
delusion, engage themselves in My service with determination." One must be
freed from all the sinful dirt of material existence. Everyone in this material
world is contaminated by material desire. Unless one is free from all material
desire (anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam [Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(9)]), one cannot be
attracted by Kåñëa.
TEXT 15
é[qNaard ovac
WTaavd(b]aø<aaYaae¤-a ivrraMa MahaMaiTa" )
Ta& Saià>aTSYaR ku-iPaTa" SaudqNaae raJaSaevk-" )) 15 ))
çré-närada uväca
etävad brähmaëäyoktvä
viraräma mahä-matiù
taà sannibhartsya kupitaù
sudéno räja-sevakaù
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; etävat—this much; brähmaëäya—unto
the brähmaëas, the sons of Çukräcärya; uktvä—speaking; viraräma—became
silent; mahä-matiù—Prahläda Mahäräja, who possessed great intelligence;
tam—him (Prahläda Mahäräja); sannibhartsya—chastising very harshly;
kupitaù—being angry; su-dénaù—poor in thought, or very much aggrieved;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
283
räja-sevakaù—the servants of King Hiraëyakaçipu.
TRANSLATION
The great saint Närada Muni continued: The great soul Prahläda Mahäräja
became silent after saying this to his teachers, Ñaëòa and Amarka, the seminal
sons of Çukräcärya. These so-called brähmaëas then became angry at him.
Because they were servants of Hiraëyakaçipu, they were very sorry, and to
chastise Prahläda Mahäräja they spoke as follows.
PURPORT
The word çukra means "semen." The sons of Çukräcärya were brähmaëas by
birthright, but an actual brähmaëa is one who possesses the brahminical
qualities. The brähmaëas Ñaëòa and Amarka, being seminal sons of
Çukräcärya, did not actually possess real brahminical qualifications, for they
engaged as servants of Hiraëyakaçipu. An actual brähmaëa is very much
satisfied to see anyone, not to speak of his disciple, become a devotee of Lord
Kåñëa. Such brähmaëas are meant to satisfy the supreme master. A brähmaëa
is strictly prohibited from becoming a servant of anyone else, for that is the
business of dogs and çüdras. A dog must satisfy his master, but a brähmaëa does
not have to satisfy anyone; he is simply meant to satisfy Kåñëa (änukülyena
kåñëänuçélanam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]). That is the real qualification of a
brähmaëa. Because Ñaëòa and Amarka were seminal brähmaëas and had
become servants of such a master as Hiraëyakaçipu, they unnecessarily wanted
to chastise Prahläda Mahäräja.
TEXT 16
AaNaqYaTaaMare ve}aMaSMaak-MaYaXaSk-r" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
284
ku-l/a(r)arSYa dubuRÖeêTauQaaeR_SYaaeidTaae dMa" )) 16 ))
änéyatäm are vetram
asmäkam ayaçaskaraù
kuläìgärasya durbuddheç
caturtho 'syodito damaù
SYNONYMS
änéyatäm—let it be brought; are—oh; vetram—the stick; asmäkam—of us;
ayaçaskaraù—who is bringing defamation; kula-aìgärasya—of he who is like a
cinder in the dynasty; durbuddheù—having bad intelligence; caturthaù—the
fourth; asya—for him; uditaù—declared; damaù—punishment (the stick,
argumentum ad baculum).
TRANSLATION
Oh, please bring me a stick! This Prahläda is damaging our name and fame.
Because of his bad intelligence, he has become like a cinder in the dynasty of
the demons. Now he needs to be treated by the fourth of the four kinds of
political diplomacy.
PURPORT
In political affairs, when a person disobediently agitates against the
government, four principles are used to suppress him—legal orders,
pacification, the offer of a post, or, finally, weapons. When there are no other
arguments, he is punished. In logic, this is called argumentum ad baculum.
When the two seminal brähmaëas Ñaëòa and Amarka failed to extract from
Prahläda Mahäräja the cause for his having opinions different from those of
his father, they called for a stick with which to chastise him to satisfy their
master, Hiraëyakaçipu. Because Prahläda had become a devotee, they
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
285
considered him to be contaminated by bad intelligence and to be the worst
descendant in the family of demons. As it is said, where ignorance is bliss, it is
folly to be wise. In a society or family in which everyone is a demon, for
someone to become a Vaiñëava is certainly folly. Thus Prahläda Mahäräja was
charged with bad intelligence because he was among demons, including his
teachers, who were supposedly brähmaëas.
The members of our Kåñëa consciousness movement are in a position
similar to that of Prahläda Mahäräja. All over the world, ninety-nine percent
of the people are godless demons, and therefore our preaching of Kåñëa
consciousness, following in the footsteps of Prahläda Mahäräja, is always
hampered by many impediments. Because of their fault of being devotees, the
American boys who have sacrificed everything for preaching Kåñëa
consciousness are charged with being members of the CIA. Moreover, the
seminal brähmaëas in India, who say that one can become a brähmaëa only if
born in a brähmaëa family, charge us with ruining the Hindu system of
religion. Of course, the fact is that one becomes a brähmaëa by qualification.
Because we are training Europeans and Americans to become qualified and are
awarding them brahminical status, we are being charged with destroying the
Hindu religion. Nonetheless, confronting all kinds of difficulties, we must
spread the Kåñëa consciousness movement with great determination, like that
of Prahläda Mahäräja. In spite of being the son of the demon Hiraëyakaçipu,
Prahläda never feared the chastisements of the seminal brähmaëa sons of a
demoniac father.
TEXT 17
dETaeYacNdNavNae JaaTaae_Ya& k-<$=k-d]uMa" )
YaNMaUl/aeNMaUl/ParXaaeivRZ<aaeNaaRl/aiYaTaae_>aRk-" )) 17 ))
daiteya-candana-vane
jäto 'yaà kaëöaka-drumaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
286
yan-mülonmüla-paraçor
viñëor näläyito 'rbhakaù
SYNONYMS
daiteya—of the demoniac family; candana-vane—in the sandalwood forest;
jätaù—born; ayam—this; kaëöaka-drumaù—thorn tree; yat—of which;
müla—of the roots; unmüla—in the cutting; paraçoù—who is like an axe;
viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; näläyitaù—the handle; arbhakaù—boy.
TRANSLATION
This rascal Prahläda has appeared like a thorn tree in a forest of sandalwood.
To cut down sandalwood trees, an axe is needed, and the wood of the thorn tree
is very suitable for the handle of such an axe. Lord Viñëu is the axe for cutting
down the sandalwood forest of the family of demons, and this Prahläda is the
handle for that axe.
PURPORT
Thorn trees generally grow in deserted places, not in sandalwood forests,
but the seminal brähmaëas Ñaëòa and Amarka compared the dynasty of the
Daitya Hiraëyakaçipu to a sandalwood forest and compared Prahläda Mahäräja
to a hard, strong thorn tree that could provide the handle of an axe. They
compared Lord Viñëu to the axe itself. An axe alone cannot cut a thorn tree; it
needs a handle, which may be made of the wood of a thorn tree. Thus the
thorn tree of demoniac civilization can be cut to pieces by the axe of
viñëu-bhakti, devotional service to Lord Kåñëa. Some of the members of the
demoniac civilization, like Prahläda Mahäräja, may become the handle for the
axe, to assist Lord Viñëu, and thus the entire forest of demoniac civilization
can be cut to pieces.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
287
TEXT 18
wiTa Ta& ivivDaaePaaYaE>aszYa&STaJaRNaaidi>a" )
Pa[had& Ga]ahYaaMaaSa i}avGaRSYaaePaPaadNaMa( )) 18 ))
iti taà vividhopäyair
bhéñayaàs tarjanädibhiù
prahrädaà grähayäm äsa
tri-vargasyopapädanam
SYNONYMS
iti—in this way; tam—him (Prahläda Mahäräja); vividha-upäyaiù—by various
means; bhéñayan—threatening; tarjana-ädibhiù—by chastisement, threats, etc.;
prahrädam—unto Prahläda Mahäräja; grähayäm äsa—taught;
tri-vargasya—the three goals of life (the paths of religion, economic
development and sense gratification); upapädanam—scripture that presents.
TRANSLATION
Ñaëòa and Amarka, the teachers of Prahläda Mahäräja, chastised and
threatened their disciple in various ways and began teaching him about the
paths of religion, economic development and sense gratification. This is the way
they educated him.
PURPORT
In this verse the words prahrädaà grähayäm äsa are important. The words
grähayäm äsa literally mean that they tried to induce Prahläda Mahäräja to
accept the paths of dharma, artha and käma (religion, economic development
and sense gratification). People are generally preoccupied with these three
concerns, without interest in the path of liberation. Hiraëyakaçipu, the father
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
288
of Prahläda Mahäräja, was simply interested in gold and sense enjoyment. The
word hiraëya means "gold," and kaçipu refers to soft cushions and bedding on
which people enjoy sense gratification. The word prahläda, however, refers to
one who is always joyful in understanding Brahman (brahma-bhütaù
prasannätmä [Bg. 18.54]). Prahläda means prasannätmä, always joyful. Prahläda
was always joyful in worshiping the Lord, but in accordance with the
instructions of Hiraëyakaçipu, the teachers were interested in teaching him
about material things. Materialistic persons think that the path of religion is
meant for improving their material conditions. The materialist goes to a
temple to worship many varieties of demigods just to receive some benediction
to improve his material life. He goes to a sädhu or so-called svämé to take
advantage of an easy method for achieving material opulence. In the name of
religion, the so-called sädhus try to satisfy the senses of the materialists by
showing them shortcuts to material opulence. Sometimes they give some
talisman or blessing. Sometimes they attract materialistic persons by producing
gold. Then they declare themselves God, and foolish materialists are attracted
to them for economic development. As a result of this process of cheating,
others are reluctant to accept a religious process, and instead they advise
people in general to work for material advancement. This is going on all over
the world. Not only now but since time immemorial, no one is interested in
mokña, liberation. There are four principles—dharma (religion), artha
(economic development), käma (sense gratification) and mokña (liberation).
People accept religion to become materially opulent. And why should one be
materially opulent? For sense gratification. Thus people prefer these three
märgas, the three paths of materialistic life. No one is interested in liberation,
and bhagavad-bhakti, devotional service to the Lord, is above even liberation.
Therefore the process of devotional service, Kåñëa consciousness, is extremely
difficult to understand. This will be explained later by Prahläda Mahäräja. The
teachers Ñaëòa and Amarka tried to induce Prahläda Mahäräja to accept the
materialistic way of life, but actually their attempt was a failure.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
289
TEXT 19
TaTa WNa& GauåjaRTva jaTajeYacTauíYaMa( )
dETYaeNd]& dXaRYaaMaaSa MaaTa*Ma*íMal/x(k*-TaMa( )) 19 ))
tata enaà gurur jïätvä
jïäta-jïeya-catuñöayam
daityendraà darçayäm äsa
mätå-måñöam alaìkåtam
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; enam—him (Prahläda Mahäräja); guruù—his teachers;
jïätvä—knowing; jïäta—known; jïeya—which are to be known;
catuñöayam—the four diplomatic principles (säma, the process of pacifying;
däna, the process of giving money in charity; bheda, the principle of dividing;
and daëòa, the principle of punishment); daitya-indram—unto Hiraëyakaçipu,
the King of the Daityas; darçayäm äsa—presented; mätå-måñöam—being
bathed by his mother; alaìkåtam—decorated with ornaments.
TRANSLATION
After some time, the teachers Ñaëòa and Amarka thought that Prahläda
Mahäräja was sufficiently educated in the diplomatic affairs of pacifying public
leaders, appeasing them by giving them lucrative posts, dividing and ruling over
them, and punishing them in cases of disobedience. Then, one day, after
Prahläda's mother had personally washed the boy and dressed him nicely with
sufficient ornaments, they presented him before his father.
PURPORT
It is essential for a student who is going to be a ruler or king to learn the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
290
four diplomatic principles. There is always rivalry between a king and his
citizens. Therefore, when a citizen agitates the public against the king, the
duty of the king is to call him and try to pacify him with sweet words, saying,
"You are very important in the state. Why should you disturb the public with
some new cause for agitation?" If the citizen is not pacified, the king should
then offer him some lucrative post as a governor or minister-any post that
draws a high salary—so that he may be agreeable. If the enemy still goes on
agitating the public, the king should try to create dissension in the enemy's
camp, but if he still continues, the king should employ argumentum ad
baculum—severe punishment—by putting him in jail or placing him before a
firing squad. The teachers appointed by Hiraëyakaçipu taught Prahläda
Mahäräja how to be a diplomat so that he could rule over the citizens very
nicely.
TEXT 20
PaadYaae" PaiTaTa& bal&/ Pa[iTaNaNÛaiXazaSaur" )
PairZvJYa icr& dae>Yaa| ParMaaMaaPa iNav*RiTaMa( )) 20 ))
pädayoù patitaà bälaà
pratinandyäçiñäsuraù
pariñvajya ciraà dorbhyäà
paramäm äpa nirvåtim
SYNONYMS
pädayoù—at the feet; patitam—fallen; bälam—the boy (Prahläda Mahäräja);
pratinandya—encouraging; äçiñä—with blessings ("My dear child, may you live
long and be happy" and so on); asuraù—the demon Hiraëyakaçipu;
pariñvajya—embracing; ciram—for a long time due to affection;
dorbhyäm—with his two arms; paramäm—great; äpa—obtained;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
291
nirvåtim—jubilation.
TRANSLATION
When Hiraëyakaçipu saw that his child had fallen at his feet and was
offering obeisances, as an affectionate father he immediately began showering
blessings upon the child and embraced him with both arms. A father naturally
feels happy to embrace his son, and Hiraëyakaçipu became very happy in this
way.
TEXT 21
AaraePYaaªMavga]aYa MaUDaRNYaé[uk-l/aMbui>a" )
AaiSaÄNa( ivk-SaÜ£-iMadMaah YauiDaiïr )) 21 ))
äropyäìkam avaghräya
mürdhany açru-kalämbubhiù
äsiïcan vikasad-vaktram
idam äha yudhiñöhira
SYNONYMS
äropya—placing; aìkam—on the lap; avaghräya mürdhani—smelling his head;
açru—of tears; kalä-ambubhiù—with water from drops; äsiïcan—moistening;
vikasat-vaktram—his smiling face; idam—this; äha—said; yudhiñöhira—O
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: My dear King Yudhiñöhira, Hiraëyakaçipu seated
Prahläda Mahäräja on his lap and began smelling his head. With affectionate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
292
tears gliding down from his eyes and moistening the child's smiling face, he
spoke to his son as follows.
PURPORT
If a child or disciple falls at the feet of the father or spiritual master, the
superior responds by smelling the head of the subordinate.
TEXT 22
ihr<Yak-iXaPauåvac
Pa[hadaNaUCYaTaa& TaaTa SvDaqTa& ik-iÄdutaMaMa( )
k-ale/NaETaavTaaYauZMaNa( YadiXa+ad(Gaurae>aRvaNa( )) 22 ))
hiraëyakaçipur uväca
prahrädänücyatäà täta
svadhétaà kiïcid uttamam
kälenaitävatäyuñman
yad açikñad guror bhavän
SYNONYMS
hiraëyakaçipuù uväca—King Hiraëyakaçipu said; prahräda—my dear Prahläda;
anücyatäm—let it be told; täta—my dear son; svadhétam—well learned;
kiïcit—something; uttamam—very nice; kälena etävatä—for so much time;
äyuñman—O long-lived one; yat—which; açikñat—has learned; guroù—from
your teachers; bhavän—yourself.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu said: My dear Prahläda, my dear son, O long—lived one, for
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
293
so much time you have heard many things from your teachers. Now please
repeat to me whatever you think is the best of that knowledge.
PURPORT
In this verse, Hiraëyakaçipu inquires from his son what he has learned from
his guru. Prahläda Mahäräja's gurus were of two kinds—Ñaëòa and Amarka,
the sons of Çukräcärya in the seminal disciplic succession, were the gurus
appointed by his father, but his other guru was the exalted Närada Muni, who
had instructed Prahläda when Prahläda was within the womb of his mother.
Prahläda Mahäräja responded to the inquiry of his father with the instructions
he had received from his spiritual master, Närada. Thus there was again a
difference of opinion because Prahläda Mahäräja wanted to relate the best
thing he had learned from his spiritual master, whereas Hiraëyakaçipu
expected to hear about the politics and diplomacy Prahläda had learned from
Ñaëòa and Amarka. Now the dissension between the father and son became
increasingly intense as Prahläda Mahäräja began to say what he had learned
from his guru Närada Muni.
TEXTS 23-24
é[qPa[had ovac
é[v<a& k-ITaRNa& ivZ<aae" SMar<a& PaadSaevNaMa( )
AcRNa& vNdNa& daSYa& Sa:YaMaaTMaiNavedNaMa( )) 23 ))
wiTa Pau&SaaiPaRTaa ivZ<aaE >ai¢-êeàvl/+a<aa )
i§-YaeTa >aGavTYaÖa TaNMaNYae_DaqTaMautaMaMa( )) 24 ))
çré-prahräda uväca
çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù
smaraëaà päda-sevanam
arcanaà vandanaà däsyaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
294
sakhyam ätma-nivedanam
iti puàsärpitä viñëau
bhaktiç cen nava-lakñaëä
kriyeta bhagavaty addhä
tan manye 'dhétam uttamam
SYNONYMS
çré-prahrädaù uväca—Prahläda Mahäräja said; çravaëam—hearing;
kértanam—chanting; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu (not anyone else);
smaraëam—remembering; päda-sevanam—serving the feet;
arcanam—offering worship (with ñoòaçopacära, the sixteen kinds of
paraphernalia); vandanaà—offering prayers; däsyam—becoming the servant;
sakhyam—becoming the best friend; ätma-nivedanam—surrendering
everything, whatever one has; iti—thus; puàsä arpitä—offered by the devotee;
viñëau—unto Lord Viñëu (not to anyone else); bhaktiù—devotional service;
cet—if; nava-lakñaëä—possessing nine different processes; kriyeta—one
should perform; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
addhä—directly or completely; tat—that; manye—I consider;
adhétam—learning; uttamam—topmost.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja said: Hearing and chanting about the transcendental holy
name, form, qualities, paraphernalia and pastimes of Lord Viñëu, remembering
them, serving the lotus feet of the Lord, offering the Lord respectful worship
with sixteen types of paraphernalia, offering prayers to the Lord, becoming His
servant, considering the Lord one's best friend, and surrendering everything
unto Him (in other words, serving Him with the body, mind and
words)—these nine processes are accepted as pure devotional service. One who
has dedicated his life to the service of Kåñëa through these nine methods should
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
295
be understood to be the most learned person, for he has acquired complete
knowledge.
PURPORT
When Prahläda Mahäräja was asked by his father to say something from
whatever he had learned, he considered that what he had learned from his
spiritual master was the best of all teachings whereas what he had learned
about diplomacy from his material teachers, Ñaëòa and Amarka, was useless.
Bhaktiù pareçänubhavo viraktir anyatra ca (SB 11.2.42). This is the symptom of
pure devotional service. A pure devotee is interested only in devotional
service, not in material affairs. To execute devotional service, one should
always engage in hearing and chanting about Kåñëa, or Lord Viñëu. The
process of temple worship is called arcana. How to perform arcana will be
explained herein. One should have complete faith in the words of Kåñëa, who
says that He is the great well-wishing friend of everyone (suhådaà
sarva-bhütänäm [Bg. 5.29]). A devotee considers Kåñëa the only friend. This is
called sakhyam. Puàsärpitä viñëau. The word puàsä means "by all living
entities." There are no distinctions permitting only a man or only a brähmaëa
to offer devotional service to the Lord. Everyone can do so. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.32), striyo vaiçyäs tathä çüdräs te 'pi yänti paräà gatim:
although women, vaiçyas and çüdras are considered less intelligent, they also
can become devotees and return home, back to Godhead.
After performing sacrifices, sometimes a person engaged in fruitive activity
customarily offers the results to Viñëu. But here it is said, bhagavaty addhä: one
must directly offer everything to Viñëu. This is called sannyäsa (not merely
nyäsa). A tridaëòi-sannyäsé carries three daëòas, signifying
kaya-mano-väkya-body, mind and words. All of these should be offered to
Viñëu, and then one can begin devotional service. Fruitive workers first
perform some pious activities and then formally or officially offer the results to
Viñëu. The real devotee, however, first offers his surrender to Kåñëa with his
body, mind and words and then uses his body, mind and words for the service
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
296
of Kåñëa as Kåñëa desires.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura gives the following explanation in
his Tathya. The word çravaëa refers to giving aural reception to the holy name
and descriptions of the Lord's form, qualities, entourage and pastimes as
explained in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Bhagavad-gétä and similar authorized
scriptures. After aurally receiving such messages, one should memorize these
vibrations and repeat them (kértanam). Smaraëam means trying to understand
more and more about the Supreme Lord, and päda-sevanam means engaging
oneself in serving the lotus feet of the Lord according to the time and
circumstances. Arcanam means worshiping Lord Viñëu as one does in the
temple, and vandanam means offering respectful obeisances. Man-manä bhava
mad-bhakto mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. Vandanam means
namaskuru—offering obeisances or offering prayers. Thinking oneself to be
nitya-kåñëa-däsa, everlastingly a servant of Kåñëa, is called däsyam, and
sakhyam means being a well-wisher of Kåñëa. Kåñëa wants everyone to
surrender unto Him because everyone is constitutionally His servant.
Therefore, as a sincere friend of Kåñëa, one should preach this philosophy,
requesting everyone to surrender unto Kåñëa. Ätma-nivedanam means offering
Kåñëa everything, including one's body, mind, intelligence and whatever one
may possess.
One's sincere endeavor to perform these nine processes of devotional
service is technically called bhakti. The word addhä means "directly" One
should not be like the karmés, who perform pious activities and then formally
offer the results to Kåñëa. That is karma-käëòa. One should not aspire for the
results of his pious activities, but should dedicate oneself fully and then act
piously. In other words, one should act for the satisfaction of Lord Viñëu, not
for the satisfaction of his own senses. That is the meaning of the word addhä,
"directly."
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
297
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanaà
bhaktir uttamä
[Cc. Madhya 19.167]
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kåñëa
favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive
activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."
One should simply satisfy Kåñëa, without being influenced by fruitive
knowledge or fruitive activity.
The Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad says that the word bhakti means engagement
in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, not of
anyone else. This Upaniñad describes that bhakti is the offering of devotional
service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To perform devotional
service, one should be relieved of the bodily conception of life and aspirations
to be happy through elevation to the higher planetary systems. In other words,
work performed simply for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord, without any
desire for material benefits, is called bhakti. Bhakti is also called niñkarma, or
freedom from the results of fruitive activity. Bhakti and niñkarma are on the
same platform, although devotional service and fruitive activity appear almost
the same.
The nine different processes enunciated by Prahläda Mahäräja, who
learned them from Närada Muni, may not all be required for the execution of
devotional service; if a devotee performs only one of these nine without
deviation, he can attain the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Sometimes it is found that when one performs one of the processes, other
processes are mixed with it. That is not improper for a devotee. When a
devotee executes any one of the nine processes (nava-lakñaëä), this is
sufficient; the other eight processes are included. Now let us discuss these nine
different processes.
(1) Çravaëam. Hearing of the holy name of the Lord (çravaëam) is the
beginning of devotional service. Although any one of the nine processes is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
298
sufficient, in chronological order the hearing of the holy name of the Lord is
the beginning. Indeed, it is essential. As enunciated by Lord Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, ceto-darpaëa-märjanam: [Cc. Antya 20.12] by chanting the holy
name of the Lord, one is cleansed of the material conception of life, which is
due to the dirty modes of material nature. When the dirt is cleansed from the
core of one's heart, one can realize the form of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead—éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù [Bs. 5.1]. Thus by
hearing the holy name of the Lord, one comes to the platform of
understanding the personal form of the Lord. After realizing the Lord's form,
one can realize the transcendental qualities of the Lord, and when one can
understand His transcendental qualities one can understand the Lord's
associates. In this way a devotee advances further and further toward complete
understanding of the Lord as he awakens in realization of the Lord's holy
name, transcendental form and qualities, His paraphernalia, and everything
pertaining to Him. Therefore the chronological process is çravaëaà kértanaà
viñëoù [SB 7.5.23]. This same process of chronological understanding holds true
in chanting and remembering. When the chanting of the holy name, form,
qualities and paraphernalia is heard from the mouth of a pure devotee, his
hearing and chanting are very pleasing. Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé has forbidden
us to hear the chanting of an artificial devotee or nondevotee.
Hearing from the text of Çrémad-Bhägavatam is considered the most
important process of hearing. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is full of transcendental
chanting of the holy name, and therefore the chanting and hearing of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam are transcendentally full of mellows. The transcendental
holy name of the Lord may be heard and chanted accordingly to the attraction
of the devotee. One may chant the holy name of Lord Kåñëa, or one may chant
the holy name of Lord Räma or Nåsiàhadeva (rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena
tiñöhan [Bs. 5.39]). The Lord has innumerable forms and names, and devotees
may meditate upon a particular form and chant the holy name according to his
attraction. The best course is to hear of the holy name, form and so on from a
pure devotee of the same standard as oneself. In other words, one who is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
299
attached to Kåñëa should chant and hear from other pure devotees who are
also attached to Lord Kåñëa. The same principle applies for devotees attracted
by Lord Räma, Lord Nåsiàha and other forms of the Lord. Because Kåñëa is
the ultimate form of the Lord (kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam [SB 1.3.28]), it is best
to hear about Lord Kåñëa's name, form and pastimes from a realized devotee
who is particularly attracted by the form of Lord Kåñëa. In
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, great devotees like Çukadeva Gosvämé have specifically
described Lord Kåñëa's holy name, form and qualities. Unless one hears about
the holy name, form and qualities of the Lord, one cannot clearly understand
the other processes of devotional service. Therefore Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
recommends that one chant the holy name of Kåñëa. paraà vijayate
çré-kåñëa-saìkértanam. If one is fortunate enough to hear from the mouth of
realized devotees, he is very easily successful on the path of devotional service.
Therefore hearing of the holy name, form and qualities of the Lord is essential.
In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.11) there is this verse:
tad-väg-visargo janatägha-viplavo
yasmin prati-çlokam abaddhavaty api
nämäny anantasya yaço-'ìkitäni yat
çåëvanti gäyanti gåëanti sädhavaù
"Verses describing the name, form and qualities of Anantadeva, the unlimited
Supreme Lord, are able to vanquish all the sinful reactions of the entire world.
Therefore even if such verses are improperly composed, devotees hear them,
describe them and accept them as bona fide and authorized." In this
connection, Çrédhara Svämé has remarked that a pure devotee takes advantage
of another pure devotee by trying to hear from him about the holy name, form
and qualities of the Lord. If there is no such opportunity, he alone chants and
hears the Lord's holy name.
(2) Kértanam. The hearing of the holy name has been described above. Now
let us try to understand the chanting of the holy name, which is the second
item in the consecutive order. It is recommended that such chanting be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
300
performed very loudly. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Närada Muni says that without
shame he began traveling all over the world, chanting the holy name of the
Lord. Similarly, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has advised:
tåëäd api sunécena
taror api sahiñëunä
amäninä mänadena
kértanéyaù sadä hariù
[Cc. Ädi 17.31]
A devotee can very peacefully chant the holy name of the Lord by behaving
more humbly than the grass, being tolerant like a tree and offering respects to
everyone, without expecting honor from anyone else. Such qualifications make
it easier to chant the holy name of the Lord. The process of transcendental
chanting can be easily performed by anyone. Even if one is physically unfit,
classified lower than others, devoid of material qualifications or not at all
elevated in terms of pious activities, the chanting of the holy name is
beneficial. An aristocratic birth, an advanced education, beautiful bodily
features, wealth and similar results of pious activities are all unnecessary for
advancement in spiritual life, for one can very easily advance simply by
chanting the holy name. It is understood from the authoritative source of
Vedic literature that especially in this age, Kali-yuga, people are generally
short-living, extremely bad in their habits, and inclined to accept methods of
devotional service that are not bona fide. Moreover, they are always disturbed
by material conditions, and they are mostly unfortunate. Under the
circumstances, the performance of other processes, such as yajïa, däna, tapaù
and kriyä—sacrifices, charity and so on—are not at all possible. Therefore it is
recommended:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
301
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting
of the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way.
There is no other way." Simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord, one
advances perfectly in spiritual life. This is the best process for success in life. In
other ages, the chanting of the holy name is equally powerful, but especially in
this age, Kali-yuga, it is most powerful. Kértanäd eva kåñëasya mukta-saìgaù
paraà vrajet: [SB 12.3.51] simply by chanting the holy name of Kåñëa, one is
liberated and returns home, back to Godhead. Therefore, even if one is able to
perform other processes of devotional service, one must adopt the chanting of
the holy name as the principal method of advancing in spiritual life. Yajïaiù
saìkértana-präyair yajanti hi sumedhasaù: [SB 11.5.32] those who are very sharp
in their intelligence should adopt this process of chanting the holy names of
the Lord. One should not, however, manufacture different types of chanting.
One should adhere seriously to the chanting of the holy name as
recommended in the scriptures: Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare
Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare.
While chanting the holy name of the Lord, one should be careful to avoid
ten offenses. From Sanat-kumära it is understood that even if a person is a
severe offender in many ways, he is freed from offensive life if he takes shelter
of the Lord's holy name. Indeed, even if a human being is no better than a
two-legged animal, he will be liberated if he takes shelter of the holy name of
the Lord. One should therefore be very careful not to commit offenses at the
lotus feet of the Lord's holy name. The offenses are described as follows: (a) to
blaspheme a devotee, especially a devotee engaged in broadcasting the glories
of the holy name, (b) to consider the name of Lord Çiva or any other demigod
to be equally as powerful as the holy name of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (no one is equal to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, nor is
anyone superior to Him), (c) to disobey the instructions of the spiritual master,
(d) to blaspheme the Vedic literatures and literatures compiled in pursuance of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
302
the Vedic literatures, (e) to comment that the glories of the holy name of the
Lord are exaggerated, (f) to interpret the holy name in a deviant way, (g) to
commit sinful activities on the strength of chanting the holy name, (h) to
compare the chanting of the holy name to pious activities, (i) to instruct the
glories of the holy name to a person who has no understanding of the chanting
of the holy name, (j) not to awaken in transcendental attachment for the
chanting of the holy name, even after hearing all these scriptural injunctions.
There is no way to atone for any of these offenses. It is therefore
recommended that an offender at the feet of the holy name continue to chant
the holy name twenty-four hours a day. Constant chanting of the holy name
will make one free of offenses, and then he will gradually be elevated to the
transcendental platform on which he can chant the pure holy name and thus
become a lover of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
It is recommended that even if one commits offenses, one should continue
chanting the holy name. In other words, the chanting of the holy name makes
one offenseless. In the book Näma-kaumudé it is recommended that if one is an
offender at the lotus feet of a Vaiñëava, he should submit to that Vaiñëava and
be excused; similarly, if one is an offender in chanting the holy name, he
should submit to the holy name and thus be freed from his offenses. In this
connection there is the following statement, spoken by Dakña to Lord Çiva: "I
did not know the glories of your personality, and therefore I committed an
offense at your lotus feet in the open assembly. You are so kind, however, that
you did not accept my offense. Instead, when I was falling down because of
accusing you, you saved me by your merciful glance. You are most great. Kindly
excuse me and be satisfied with your own exalted qualities."
One should be very humble and meek to offer one's desires and chant
prayers composed in glorification of the holy name, such as ayi mukta-kulair
upäsya mänam and nivåtta-tarñair upagéyamänäd [SB 10.1.4]. One should chant
such prayers to become free from offenses at the lotus feet of the holy name.
(3) Smaraëam. After one regularly performs the processes of hearing and
chanting and after the core of one's heart is cleansed, smaraëam,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
303
remembering, is recommended. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.1.11) Çukadeva
Gosvämé tells King Parékñit:
etan nirvidyamänänäm
icchatäm akuto-bhayam
yoginäà nåpa nirëétaà
harer nämänukértanam
"O King, for great yogés who have completely renounced all material
connections, for those who desire all material enjoyment and for those who are
self-satisfied by dint of transcendental knowledge, constant chanting of the
holy name of the Lord is recommended." According to different relationships
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there are varieties of
nämänukértanam, chanting of the holy name, and thus according to different
relationships and mellows there are five kinds of remembering. These are as
follows: (a) conducting research into the worship of a particular form of the
Lord, (b) concentrating the mind on one subject and withdrawing the mind's
activities of thinking, feeling and willing from all other subjects, (c)
concentrating upon a particular form of the Lord (this is called meditation),
(d) concentrating one's mind continuously on the form of the Lord (this is
called dhruvänusmåti, or perfect meditation), and (e) awakening a likening for
concentration upon a particular form (this is called samädhi, or trance).
Mental concentration upon particular pastimes of the Lord in particular
circumstances is also called remembrance. Therefore samädhi, trance, can be
possible in five different ways in terms of one's relationship. Specifically, the
trance of devotees on the stage of neutrality is called mental concentration.
(4) päda-sevanam. According to one's taste and strength, hearing, chanting
and remembrance may be followed by päda-sevanam. One obtains the
perfection of remembering when one constantly thinks of the lotus feet of the
Lord. Being intensely attached to thinking of the Lord's lotus feet is called
päda-sevanam. When one is particularly adherent to the process of
päda-sevanam, this process gradually includes other processes, such as seeing
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
304
the form of the Lord, touching the form of the Lord, circumambulating the
form or temple of the Lord, visiting such places as Jagannätha Puré, Dvärakä
and Mathurä to see the Lord's form, and bathing in the Ganges or Yamunä.
Bathing in the Ganges and serving a pure Vaiñëava are also known as
tadéya-upäsanam. This is also päda-sevanam. The word tadéya means "in
relationship with the Lord." Service to the Vaiñëava, Tulasé, Ganges and
Yamunä are included in päda-sevanam. All these processes of päda-sevanam
help one advance in spiritual life very quickly.
(5) Arcanam. After päda-sevanam comes the process of arcanam, worship of
the Deity. If one is interested in the process of arcanam, one must positively
take shelter of a bona fide spiritual master and learn the process from him.
There are many books for arcana, especially Närada-païcarätra. In this age,
the païcarätra system is particularly recommended for arcana, Deity worship.
There are two systems of arcana—the bhägavata system and päïcarätriké
system. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam there is no recommendation of päïcarätriké
worship because in this Kali-yuga, even without Deity worship, everything can
be perfectly performed simply through hearing, chanting, remembering and
worship of the lotus feet of the Lord. Rüpa Gosvämé states:
çré-viñëoù çravaëe parékñid abhavad vaiyäsakiù kértane
prahlädaù smaraëe tad-aìghri-bhajane lakñméù påthuù püjane
akrüras tv abhivandane kapi-patir däsye 'tha sakhye 'rjunaù
sarvasvätma-nivedane balir abhüt kåñëäptir eñäà param
"Parékñit Mahäräja attained salvation simply by hearing, and Çukadeva
Gosvämé attained salvation simply by chanting. Prahläda Mahäräja attained
salvation by remembering the Lord. The goddess of fortune, Lakñmédevé,
attained perfection by worshiping the Lord's lotus feet. Påthu Mahäräja
attained salvation by worshiping the Deity of the Lord. Akrüra attained
salvation by offering prayers, Hanumän by rendering service, Arjuna by
establishing friendship with the Lord, and Bali Mahäräja by offering
everything to the service of the Lord." All these great devotees served the Lord
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
305
according to a particular process, but every one of them attained salvation and
became eligible to return home, back to Godhead. This is explained in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
It is therefore recommended that initiated devotees follow the principles of
Närada-païcarätra by worshiping the Deity in the temple. Especially for
householder devotees who are opulent in material possessions, the path of
Deity worship is strongly recommended. An opulent householder devotee who
does not engage his hard-earned money in the service of the Lord is called a
miser. One should not engage paid brähmaëas to worship the Deity. If one does
not personally worship the Deity but engages paid servants instead, he is
considered lazy, and his worship of the Deity is called artificial. An opulent
householder can collect luxurious paraphernalia for Deity worship, and
consequently for householder devotees the worship of the Deity is compulsory.
In our Kåñëa consciousness movement there are brahmacärés, gåhasthas,
vänaprasthas and sannyäsés, but the Deity worship in the temple should be
performed especially by the householders. The brahmacärés can go with the
sannyäsés to preach, and the vänaprasthas should prepare themselves for the
next status of renounced life, sannyäsa. Gåhastha devotees, however, are
generally engaged in material activities, and therefore if they do not take to
Deity worship, their falling down is positively assured. Deity worship means
following the rules and regulations precisely. That will keep one steady in
devotional service. Generally householders have children, and then the wives
of the householders should be engaged in caring for the children, just as
women acting as teachers care for the children in a nursery school.
Gåhastha devotees must adopt the arcana-vidhi, or Deity worship according
to the suitable arrangements and directions given by the spiritual master.
Regarding those unable to take to the Deity worship in the temple, there is the
following statement in the Agni Puräëa. Any householder devotee
circumstantially unable to worship the Deity must at least see the Deity
worship, and in this way he may achieve success also. The special purpose of
Deity worship is to keep oneself always pure and clean. Gåhastha devotees
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
306
should be actual examples of cleanliness.
Deity worship should be continued along with hearing and chanting.
Therefore every mantra is preceded by the word namaù. In all the mantras
there are specific potencies, of which the gåhastha devotees must take
advantage. There are many mantras preceded by the word namaù, but if one
chants the holy name of the Lord, he receives the result of chanting namaù
many times. By chanting the holy name of the Lord, one can reach the
platform of love of Godhead. One might ask, then what is the necessity of
being initiated? The answer is that even though the chanting of the holy name
is sufficient to enable one to progress in spiritual life to the standard of love of
Godhead, one is nonetheless susceptible to contamination because of
possessing a material body. Consequently, special stress is given to the
arcana-vidhi. One should therefore regularly take advantage of both the
bhägavata process and päïcarätriké process.
Deity worship has two divisions, namely pure and mixed with fruitive
activities. For one who is steady, Deity worship is compulsory. Observing the
various types of festivals, such as Çré Janmäñöamé, Räma-navamé and
Nåsiàha-caturdaçé, is also included in the process of Deity worship. In other
words, it is compulsory for householder devotees to observe these festivals.
Now let us discuss the offenses in Deity worship. The following are offenses:
(a) to enter the temple with shoes or being carried on a palanquin, (b) not to
observe the prescribed festivals, (c) to avoid offering obeisances in front of the
Deity, (d) to offer prayers in an unclean state, not having washed one's hands
after eating, (e) to offer obeisances with one hand, (f) to circumambulate
directly in front of the Deity, (g) to spread one's legs before the Deity, (h) to sit
before the Deity while holding one's ankles with one's hands, (i) to lie down
before the Deity, (j) to eat before the Deity, (k) to speak lies before the Deity,
(l) to address someone loudly before the Deity, (m) to talk nonsense before the
Deity, (n) to cry before the Deity, (o) to argue before the Deity, (p) to chastise
someone before the Deity, (q) to show someone favor before the Deity, (r) to
use harsh words before the Deity, (s) to wear a woolen blanket before the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
307
Deity, (t) to blaspheme someone before the Deity, (u) to worship someone else
before the Deity, (v) to use vulgar language before the Deity, (w) to pass air
before the Deity, (x) to avoid very opulent worship of the Deity, even though
one is able to perform it, (y) to eat something not offered to the Deity, (z) to
avoid offering fresh fruits to the Deity according to the season, (aa) to offer
food to the Deity which has already been used or from which has first been
given to others (in other words, food should not be distributed to anyone else
until it has been offered to the Deity), (bb) to sit with one's back toward the
Deity, (cc) to offer obeisances to someone else in front of the Deity, (dd) not to
chant proper prayers when offering obeisances to the spiritual master, (ee) to
praise oneself before the Deity, and (ff) to blaspheme the demigods. In the
worship of the Deity, these thirty-two offenses should be avoided.
In the Varäha Puräëa the following offenses are mentioned: (a) to eat in
the house of a rich man, (b) to enter the Deity's room in the dark, (c) to
worship the Deity without following the regulative principles, (d) to enter the
temple without vibrating any sound, (e) to collect food that has been seen by a
dog, (f) to break silence while offering worship to the Deity, (g) to go to the
toilet during the time of worshiping the Deity, (h) to offer incense without
offering flowers, (i) to worship the Deity with forbidden flowers, (j) to begin
worship without having washed one's teeth, (k) to begin worship after sex, (l)
to touch a lamp, dead body or a woman during her menstrual period, or to put
on red or bluish clothing, unwashed clothing, the clothing of others or soiled
clothing. Other offenses are to worship the Deity after seeing a dead body, to
pass air before the Deity, to show anger before the Deity, and to worship the
Deity just after returning from a crematorium. After eating, one should not
worship the Deity until one has digested his food, nor should one touch the
Deity or engage in any Deity worship after eating safflower oil or hing. These
are also offenses.
In other places, the following offenses are listed: (a) to be against the
scriptural injunctions of the Vedic literature or to disrespect within one's heart
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam while externally falsely accepting its principles, (b) to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
308
introduce differing çästras, (c) to chew pan and betel before the Deity, (d) to
keep flowers for worship on the leaf of a castor oil plant, (e) to worship the
Deity in the afternoon, (f) to sit on the altar or to sit on the floor to worship
the Deity (without a seat), (g) to touch the Deity with the left hand while
bathing the Deity, (h) to worship the Deity with a stale or used flower, (i) to
spit while worshiping the Deity, (j) to advertise one's glory while worshiping
the Deity, (k) to apply tilaka to one's forehead in a curved way, (l) to enter the
temple without having washed one's feet, (m) to offer the Deity food cooked by
an uninitiated person, (n) to worship the Deity and offer bhoga to the Deity
within the vision of an uninitiated person or non-Vaiñëava, (o) to offer
worship to the Deity without worshiping Vaikuëöha deities like Gaëeça, (p) to
worship the Deity while perspiring, (q) to refuse flowers offered to the Deity,
(r) to take a vow or oath in the holy name of the Lord.
If one commits any of the above offenses, one must read at least one
chapter of Bhagavad-gétä. This is confirmed in the Skanda-Puräëa,
Avanté-khaëòa. Similarly, there is another injunction, stating that one who
reads the thousand names of Viñëu can be released from all offenses. In the
same Skanda-Puräëa, Revä-khaëòa, it is said that one who recites prayers to
tulasé or sows a tulasé seed is also freed from all offenses. Similarly, one who
worships the çälagräma-çilä can also be relieved of offenses. In the Brahmaëòa
Puräëa it is said that one who worships Lord Viñëu, whose four hands bear a
conchshell, disc, lotus flower and club, can be relieved from the above offenses.
In the Ädi-varäha Puräëa it is said that a worshiper who has committed
offenses may fast for one day at the holy place known as Çaukarava and then
bathe in the Ganges.
In the process of worshiping the Deity it is sometimes enjoined that one
worship the Deity within the mind. In the Padma Puräëa, Uttara-khaëòa, it is
said, "All persons can generally worship within the mind." The Gautaméya
Tantra states, "For a sannyäsé who has no home, worship of the Deity within
the mind is recommended." In the Närada-païcarätra it is stated by Lord
Näräyaëa that worship of the Deity within the mind is called mänasa-püjä,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
309
One can become free from the four miseries by this method. Sometimes
worship from the mind can be independently executed. According to the
instruction of Avirhotra Muni, one of the nava-yogendras, as mentioned in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, one may worship the Deity by chanting all the mantras.
Eight kinds of Deities are mentioned in the çästra, and the mental Deity is one
of them. In this regard, the following description is given in the
Brahma-vaivarta Puräëa.
In the city of Pratiñöhäna-pura, long ago, there resided a brähmaëa who was
poverty-stricken but innocent and not dissatisfied. One day he heard a
discourse in an assembly of brähmaëas concerning how to worship the Deity in
the temple. In that meeting, he also heard that the Deity may be worshiped
within the mind. After this incident, the brähmaëa, having bathed in the
Godävaré River, began mentally worshiping the Deity. He would wash the
temple within his mind, and then in his imagination he would bring water
from all the sacred rivers in golden and silver waterpots. He collected all kinds
of valuable paraphernalia for worship, and he worshiped the Deity very
gorgeously, beginning from bathing the Deity and ending with offering ärati.
Thus he felt great happiness. After many years had passed in this way, one day
within his mind he cooked nice sweet rice with ghee to worship the Deity. He
placed the sweet rice on a golden dish and offered it to Lord Kåñëa, but he felt
that the sweet rice was very hot, and therefore he touched it with his finger.
He immediately felt that his finger had been burned by the hot sweet rice, and
thus he began to lament. While the brähmaëa was in pain, Lord Viñëu in
Vaikuëöha began smiling, and the goddess of fortune inquired from the Lord
why He was smiling. Lord Viñëu then ordered His associates to bring the
brähmaëa to Vaikuëöha. Thus the brähmaëa attained the liberation of
sämépya, the facility of living near the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
(6) Vandanam. Although prayers are a part of Deity worship, they may be
considered separately like the other items, such as hearing and chanting, and
therefore separate statements are given herewith. The Lord has unlimited
transcendental qualities and opulences, and one who feels influenced by the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
310
Lord's qualities in various activities offers prayers to the Lord. In this way he
becomes successful. In this connection, the following are some of the offenses
to be avoided: (a) to offer obeisances on one hand, (b) to offer obeisances with
one's body covered, (c) to show one's back to the Deity, (d) to offer obeisances
on the left side of the Deity, (e) to offer obeisances very near the Deity.
(7) Däsyam. There is the following statement in regard to assisting the Lord
as a servant. After many, many thousands of births, when one comes to
understand that he is an eternal servant of Kåñëa, one can deliver others from
this universe. If one simply continues to think that he is an eternal servant of
Kåñëa, even without performing any other process of devotional service, he
can attain full success, for simply by this feeling one can perform all nine
processes of devotional service.
(8) Sakhyam. In regard to worshiping the Lord as a friend, the
Agastya-saàhitä states that a devotee engaged in performing devotional
service by çravaëam and kértanam sometimes wants to see the Lord personally,
and for this purpose he resides in the temple. Elsewhere there is this statement:
"O my Lord, Supreme Personality and eternal friend, although You are full of
bliss and knowledge, You have become the friend of the residents of
Våndävana. How fortunate are these devotees!" In this statement the word
"friend" is specifically used to indicate intense love. Friendship, therefore, is
better than servitude. In the stage above däsya-rasa, the devotee accepts the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as a friend. This is not at all astonishing, for
when a devotee is pure in heart the opulence of his worship of the Deity
diminishes as spontaneous love for the Personality of Godhead is manifested.
In this regard, Çrédhara Svämé mentions Çrédäma Vipra, who expressed to
himself his feelings of obligation, thinking, "Life after life, may I be connected
with Kåñëa in this friendly attitude."
(9) Ätma-nivedanam. The word Ätma-nivedanam refers to the stage at
which one who has no motive other than to serve the Lord surrenders
everything to the Lord and performs his activities only to please the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Such a devotee is like a cow that is cared for by its
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
311
master. When cared for by its master, a cow is not in anxiety over its
maintenance. Such a cow is always devoted to its master, and it never acts
independently, but only for the master's benefit. Some devotees, therefore,
consider dedication of the body to the Lord to be ätma-nivedanam, and as
stated in the book known as Bhakti-viveka, sometimes dedication of the soul to
the Lord is called ätma-nivedanam. The best examples of ätma-nivedanam are
found in Bali Mahäräja and Ambaréña Mahäräja. Ätma-nivedanam is also
sometimes found in the behavior of Rukmiëédevé at Dvärakä.
TEXT 25
iNaXaMYaETaTSauTavcae ihr<Yak-iXaPauSTada )
GauåPau}aMauvaced& åza Pa[Sfu-irTaaDar" )) 25 ))
niçamyaitat suta-vaco
hiraëyakaçipus tadä
guru-putram uväcedaà
ruñä prasphuritädharaù
SYNONYMS
niçamya—hearing; etat—this; suta-vacaù—speech from his son;
hiraëyakaçipuù—Hiraëyakaçipu; tadä—at that time; guru-putram—unto the
son of Çukräcärya, his spiritual master; uväca—spoke; idam—this; ruñä—with
anger; prasphurita—trembling; adharaù—whose lips.
TRANSLATION
After hearing these words of devotional service from the mouth of his son
Prahläda, Hiraëyakaçipu was extremely angry. His lips trembling, he spoke as
follows to Ñaëòa the son of his guru, Çukräcärya.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
312
TEXT 26
b]øbNDaae ik-MaeTatae ivPa+a& é[YaTaaSaTaa )
ASaar& Ga]aihTaae bal/ae MaaMaNaad*TYa duMaRTae )) 26 ))
brahma-bandho kim etat te
vipakñaà çrayatäsatä
asäraà grähito bälo
mäm anädåtya durmate
SYNONYMS
brahma-bandho—O unqualified son of a brähmaëa; kim etat—what is this;
te—by you; vipakñam—the party of my enemies; çrayatä—taking shelter of;
asatä—most mischievous; asäram—nonsense; grähitaù—taught; bälaù—the
boy; mäm—me; anädåtya—not caring for; durmate—O foolish teacher.
TRANSLATION
O unqualified, most heinous son of a brähmaëa, you have disobeyed my
order and taken shelter of the party of my enemies. You have taught this poor
boy about devotional service! What is this nonsense?
PURPORT
In this verse the word asäram, meaning, "having no substance," is
significant. For a demon there is no substance in the process of devotional
service, but to a devotee devotional service is the only essential factor in life.
Since Hiraëyakaçipu did not like devotional service, the essence of life, he
chastised Prahläda Mahäräja's teachers with harsh words.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
313
TEXT 27
SaiNTa ùSaaDavae l/aeke- duMaOE}aaX^Úveiz<a" )
TaezaMaudeTYaga& k-ale/ raeGa" PaaTaik-NaaiMav )) 27 ))
santi hy asädhavo loke
durmaiträç chadma-veñiëaù
teñäm udety aghaà käle
rogaù pätakinäm iva
SYNONYMS
santi—are; hi—indeed; asädhavaù—dishonest persons; loke—within this
world; durmaiträù—cheating friends; chadma-veñiëaù—wearing false garbs;
teñäm—of all of them; udeti—arises; agham—the reaction of sinful life;
käle—in due course of time; rogaù—disease; pätakinäm—of sinful men;
iva—like.
TRANSLATION
In due course of time, various types of diseases are manifest in those who are
sinful. Similarly, in this world there are many deceptive friends in false garbs,
but eventually, because of their false behavior, their actual enmity becomes
manifest.
PURPORT
Being anxious about the education of his boy Prahläda, Hiraëyakaçipu was
very much dissatisfied. When Prahläda began teaching about devotional
service, Hiraëyakaçipu immediately regarded the teachers as his enemies in the
garb of friends. In this verse the words rogaù pätakinäm iva refer to disease,
which is the most sinful and miserable of the conditions of material life
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
314
(janma-måtyu jarä-vyädhi [Bg. 13.9]). Disease is the symptom of the body of a
sinful person. The småti-çästras say,
brahma-hä kñaya-rogé syät
suräpaù çyävadantakaù
svarëa-häré tu kunakhé
duçcarmä guru-talpagaù
Murderers of brähmaëas are later afflicted by tuberculosis, drunkards become
toothless, those who have stolen gold are afflicted by diseased nails, and sinful
men who have sexual connections with the wife of a superior are afflicted by
leprosy and similar skin diseases.
TEXT 28
é[qGauåPau}a ovac
Na MaTPa[<aqTa& Na ParPa[<aqTa&
SauTaae vdTYaez TaveNd]Xa}aae )
NaESaiGaRk-IYa& MaiTarSYa raJaNa(
iNaYaC^ MaNYau& k-dda" SMa Maa Na" )) 28 ))
çré-guru-putra uväca
na mat-praëétaà na para-praëétaà
suto vadaty eña tavendra-çatro
naisargikéyaà matir asya räjan
niyaccha manyuà kad adäù sma mä naù
SYNONYMS
çré-guru-putraù uväca—the son of Çukräcärya, Hiraëyakaçipu's spiritual
master, said; na—not; mat-praëétam—educated by me; na—nor;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
315
para-praëétam—educated by anyone else; sutaù—the son (Prahläda);
vadati—says; eñaù—this; tava—your; indra-çatro—O enemy of King Indra;
naisargiké—natural; iyam—this; matiù—inclination; asya—of him; räjan—O
King; niyaccha—give up; manyum—your anger; kat—fault; adäù—attribute;
sma—indeed; mä—do not; naù—unto us.
TRANSLATION
The son of Çukräcärya, Hiraëyakaçipu's spiritual master, said: O enemy of
King Indra, O King! Whatever your son Prahläda has said was not taught to
him by me or anyone else. His spontaneous devotional service has naturally
developed in him. Therefore, please give up your anger and do not unnecessarily
accuse us. It is not good to insult a brähmaëa in this way.
TEXT 29
é[qNaard ovac
Gauå<aEv& Pa[iTaPa[ae¢-ae >aUYa AahaSaur" SauTaMa( )
Na ced(GauåMau%qYa& Tae ku-Taae_>ad]aSaTaq MaiTa" )) 29 ))
çré-närada uväca
guruëaivaà pratiprokto
bhüya ähäsuraù sutam
na ced guru-mukhéyaà te
kuto 'bhadräsaté matiù
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; guruëä—by the teacher; evam—thus;
pratiproktaù—being answered; bhüyaù—again; äha—said; asuraù—the great
demon, Hiraëyakaçipu; sutam—unto his son; na—not; cet—if;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
316
guru-mukhé—issued from the mouth of your teacher; iyam—this; te—your;
kutaù—from where; abhadra—O inauspicious one; asaté—very bad;
matiù—inclination.
TRANSLATION
Çré Närada Muni continued: When Hiraëyakaçipu received this reply from
the teacher, he again addressed his son Prahläda. Hiraëyakaçipu said: You
rascal, most fallen of our family, if you have not received this education from
your teachers, where have you gotten it?
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that devotional service is
actually bhadrä saté, not abhadra asaté. In other words, knowledge of devotional
service can be neither inauspicious nor contrary to etiquette. To learn
devotional service is the duty of everyone. Therefore the spontaneous
education of Prahläda Mahäräja is supported as auspicious and perfect.
TEXT 30
é[qPa[had ovac
MaiTaNaR k*-Z<ae ParTa" SvTaae va
iMaQaae_i>aPaÛeTa Ga*hv]TaaNaaMa( )
AdaNTaGaaei>aivRXaTaa& TaiMaó&
PauNa" PauNaêivRTacvR<aaNaaMa( )) 30 ))
çré-prahräda uväca
matir na kåñëe parataù svato vä
mitho 'bhipadyeta gåha-vratänäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
317
adänta-gobhir viçatäà tamisraà
punaù punaç carvita-carvaëänäm
SYNONYMS
çré-prahrädaù uväca—Prahläda Mahäräja said; matiù—inclination; na—never;
kåñëe—unto Lord Kåñëa; parataù—from the instructions of others;
svataù—from their own understanding; vä—either; mithaù—from combined
effort; abhipadyeta—is developed; gåha-vratänäm—of persons too addicted to
the materialistic, bodily conception of life; adänta—uncontrolled; gobhiù—by
the senses; viçatäm—entering; tamisram—hellish life; punaù—again;
punaù—again; carvita—things already chewed; carvaëänäm—who are
chewing.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja replied: Because of their uncontrolled senses, persons too
addicted to materialistic life make progress toward hellish conditions and
repeatedly chew that which has already been chewed. Their inclinations toward
Kåñëa are never aroused, either by the instructions of others, by their own
efforts, or by a combination of both.
PURPORT
In this verse the words matir na kåñëe refer to devotional service rendered
to Kåñëa. So-called politicians, erudite scholars and philosophers who read
Bhagavad-gétä try to twist some meaning from it to suit their material purposes,
but their misunderstandings of Kåñëa will not yield them any profit. Because
such politicians, philosophers and scholars are interested in using
Bhagavad-gétä as a vehicle for adjusting things materially, for them constant
thought of Kåñëa, or Kåñëa consciousness, is impossible (matir na kåñëe). As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä (18.55), bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti: only through
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
318
devotional service can one understand Kåñëa as He is. The so-called politicians
and scholars think of Kåñëa as fictitious. The politician says that his Kåñëa is
different from the Kåñëa depicted in Bhagavad-gétä. Even though he accepts
Kåñëa and Räma as the Supreme he thinks of Räma and Kåñëa as impersonal
because he has no idea of service to Kåñëa. Thus his only business is punaù
punaç carvita-carvaëänäm [SB 7.5.30]—chewing the chewed again and again.
The aim of such politicians and academic scholars is to enjoy this material
world with their bodily senses. Therefore it is clearly stated here that those
who are gåha-vrata, whose only aim is to live comfortably with the body in the
material world, cannot understand Kåñëa. The two expressions gåha-vrata and
carvita-carvaëänäm indicate that a materialistic person tries to enjoy sense
gratification in different bodily forms, life after life, but is still unsatisfied. In
the name of personalism, this ism or that ism, such persons always remain
attached to the materialistic way of life. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.44):
bhogaiçvarya-prasaktänäà
tayäpahåta-cetasäm
vyavasäyätmikä buddhiù
samädhau na vidhéyate
"In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and material
opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolute determination
for devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not take place." Those who
are attached to material enjoyment cannot be fixed in devotional service to
the Lord. They cannot understand Bhagavän, Kåñëa, or His instruction,
Bhagavad-gétä. Adänta-gobhir viçatäà tamisram: [SB 7.5.30] their path actually
leads toward hellish life.
As confirmed by Åñabhadeva, mahat-seväà dväram ähur vimukteù: [SB
5.5.2] one must try to understand Kåñëa by serving a devotee. The word mahat
refers to a devotee.
mahätmänas tu mäà pärtha
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
319
daivéà prakåtim äçritäù
bhajanty ananya-manaso
jïätvä bhütädim avyayam
"O son of Påthä, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the
protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional service
because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, original and
inexhaustible." (Bg. 9.13) A mahätmä is one who is constantly engaged in
devotional service, twenty-four hours a day. As explained in the following
verses, unless one adheres to such a great personality, one cannot understand
Kåñëa. Hiraëyakaçipu wanted to know where Prahläda had gotten this Kåñëa
consciousness. Who had taught him? Prahläda sarcastically replied, "My dear
father, persons like you never understand Kåñëa. One can understand Kåñëa
only by serving a mahat, a great soul. Those who try to adjust material
conditions are said to be chewing the chewed. No one has been able to adjust
material conditions, but life after life, generation after generation, people try
and repeatedly fail. Unless one is properly trained by a mahat—a mahätmä, or
unalloyed devotee of the Lord—there is no possibility of one's understanding
Kåñëa and His devotional service."
TEXT 31
Na Tae ivdu" SvaQaRGaiTa& ih ivZ<au&
duraXaYaa Yae bihrQaRMaaiNaNa" )
ANDaa YaQaaNDaEåPaNaqYaMaaNaa‚
STae_PaqXaTaN}YaaMauådaiMan bÖa" )) 31 ))
na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëuà
duräçayä ye bahir-artha-mäninaù
andhä yathändhair upanéyamänäs
te 'péça-tantryäm uru-dämni baddhäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
320
SYNONYMS
na—not; te—they; viduù—know; sva-artha-gatim—the ultimate goal of life, or
their own real interest; hi—indeed; viñëum—Lord Viñëu and His abode;
duräçayäù—being ambitious to enjoy this material world; ye—who;
bahiù—external sense objects; artha-mäninaù—considering as valuable;
andhäù—persons who are blind; yathä—just as; andhaiù—by other blind men;
upanéyamänäù—being led; te—they; api—although; éça-tantryäm—to the
ropes (laws) of material nature; uru—having very strong; dämni—cords;
baddhäù—bound.
TRANSLATION
Persons who are strongly entrapped by the consciousness of enjoying
material life, and who have therefore accepted as their leader or guru a similar
blind man attached to external sense objects, cannot understand that the goal of
life is to return home, back to Godhead, and engage in the service of Lord
Viñëu. As blind men guided by another blind man miss the right path and fall
into a ditch, materially attached men led by another materially attached man are
bound by the ropes of fruitive labor, which are made of very strong cords, and
they continue again and again in materialistic life, suffering the threefold
miseries.
PURPORT
Since there must always be a difference of opinion between demons and
devotees, Hiraëyakaçipu, when criticized by his son Prahläda Mahäräja, should
not have been surprised that Prahläda Mahäräja differed from his way of life.
Nonetheless, Hiraëyakaçipu was extremely angry and wanted to rebuke his son
for deriding his teacher or spiritual master, who had been born in the
brähmaëa family of the great äcärya Çukräcärya. The word çukra means
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
321
"semen," and äcärya refers to a teacher or guru. Hereditary gurus, or spiritual
masters, have been accepted everywhere since time immemorial, but Prahläda
Mahäräja declined to accept such a seminal guru or take instruction from him.
An actual guru is çrotriya, one who has heard or received perfect knowledge
through paramparä, the disciplic succession. Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja did
not recognize a seminal spiritual master. Such spiritual masters are not at all
interested in Viñëu. Indeed, they are hopeful of material success
(bahir-artha-mäninaù). The word bahiù means "external," artha means
"interest," and mänina means "taking very seriously." Generally speaking,
practically everyone is unaware of the spiritual world. The knowledge of the
materialists is restricted within the four-billion-mile limit of this material
world, which is in the dark portion of the creation; they do not know that
beyond the material world is the spiritual world. Unless one is a devotee of the
Lord, one cannot understand the existence of the spiritual world. Gurus,
teachers, who are simply interested in this material world are described in this
verse as andha, blind. Such blind men may lead many other blind followers
without true knowledge of material conditions, but they are not accepted by
devotees like Prahläda Mahäräja. Such blind teachers, being interested in the
external, material world, are always bound by the strong ropes of material
nature.
TEXT 32
NaEza& MaiTaSTaavduå§-Maax(iga]&
SPa*XaTYaNaQaaRPaGaMaae YadQaR" )
MahqYaSaa& PaadrJaae_i>azek&-
iNaiZk-ÄNaaNaa& Na v*<aqTa YaavTa( )) 32 ))
naiñäà matis tävad urukramäìghrià
spåçaty anarthäpagamo yad-arthaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
322
mahéyasäà päda-rajo-'bhiñekaà
niñkiïcanänäà na våëéta yävat
SYNONYMS
na—not; eñäm—of these; matiù—the consciousness; tävat—that long;
urukrama-aìghrim—the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is famous for performing uncommon activities; spåçati—does touch;
anartha—of unwanted things; apagamaù—the disappearance; yat—of which;
arthaù—the purpose; mahéyasäm—of the great souls (the mahätmäs, or
devotees); päda-rajaù—by the dust of the lotus feet; abhiñekam—consecration;
niñkiïcanänäm—of devotees who have nothing to do with this material world;
na—not; våëéta—may accept; yävat—as long as.
TRANSLATION
Unless they smear upon their bodies the dust of the lotus feet of a Vaiñëava
completely freed from material contamination, persons very much inclined
toward materialistic life cannot be attached to the lotus feet of the Lord, who is
glorified for His uncommon activities. Only by becoming Kåñëa conscious and
taking shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord in this way can one be freed from
material contamination.
PURPORT
Becoming Kåñëa conscious brings about anartha-apagamaù, the
disappearance of all anarthas, the miserable conditions we have unnecessarily
accepted. The material body is the basic principle of these unwanted miserable
conditions. The entire Vedic civilization is meant to relieve one from these
unwanted miseries, but persons bound by the laws of nature do not know the
destination of life. As described in the previous verse, éça-tantryäm uru-dämni
baddhäù: they are conditioned by the three strong modes of material nature.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
323
The education that keeps the conditioned soul bound life after life is called
materialistic education. Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has explained that
materialistic education expands the influence of mäyä. Such an education
induces the conditioned soul to be increasingly attracted to materialistic life
and to stray further and further away from liberation from unwanted miseries.
One may ask why highly educated persons do not take to Kåñëa
consciousness. The reason is explained in this verse. Unless one takes shelter
of a bona fide, fully Kåñëa conscious spiritual master, there is no chance of
understanding Kåñëa. The educators, scholars and big political leaders
worshiped by millions of people cannot understand the goal of life and take to
Kåñëa consciousness, for they have not accepted a bona fide spiritual master
and the Vedas. Therefore in the Muëòaka Upaniñad (3.2.3) it is said, näyam
ätmä pravacanena labhyo na medhayä na bahunä çrutena: one cannot become
self-realized simply by having an academic education, by presenting lectures in
an erudite way (pravacanena labhyaù), or by being an intelligent scientist who
discovers many wonderful things. One cannot understand Kåñëa unless one is
graced by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Only one who has surrendered
to a pure devotee of Kåñëa and taken the dust of his lotus feet can understand
Kåñëa. First one must understand how to get out of the clutches of mäyä. The
only means is to become Kåñëa conscious. And to become Kåñëa conscious
very easily, one must take shelter of a realized soul—a mahat, or
mahätmä—whose only interest is to engage in the service of the Supreme
Lord. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.13):
mahätmänas tu mäà pärtha
daivéà prakåtià äçritäù
bhajanty ananya-manaso
jïätvä bhütädim avyayam
"O son of Påthä, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the
protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional service
because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, original and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
324
inexhaustible." Therefore, to end the unwanted miseries of life, one must
become a devotee.
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
"One who has unflinching devotional faith in Kåñëa consistently manifests all
the good qualities of Kåñëa and the demigods." (SB 5.18.12)
yasya deva parä bhaktir
yathä deve tathä gurau
tasyaite kathitä hy arthäù
prakäçante mahätmanaù
"Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the
spiritual master are all the imports of Vedic knowledge automatically
revealed." (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.23)
yam evaiña våëute tena labhyas
tasyaiña ätmä vivåëute tanüà sväm
"The Lord is obtained only by one whom He Himself chooses. To such a person
He manifests His own form." (Muëòaka Upaniñad 3.2.3)
These are Vedic injunctions. One must take shelter of a self-realized
spiritual master, not a materially educated scholar or politician. One must take
shelter of a niñkiïcana, a person engaged in devotional service and free from
material contamination. That is the way to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 33
wTYau¤-aeParTa& Pau}a& ihr<Yak-iXaPaU åza )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
325
ANDaqk*-TaaTMaa SvaeTSa(r)aiàrSYaTa MahqTale/ )) 33 ))
ity uktvoparataà putraà
hiraëyakaçipü ruñä
andhékåtätmä svotsaìgän
nirasyata mahé-tale
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; uktvä—speaking; uparatam—stopped; putram—the son;
hiraëyakaçipuù—Hiraëyakaçipu; ruñä—with great anger;
andhékåta-ätmä—made blind to self-realization; sva-utsaìgät—from his lap;
nirasyata—threw; mahé-tale—upon the ground.
TRANSLATION
After Prahläda Mahäräja had spoken in this way and become silent,
Hiraëyakaçipu, blinded by anger, threw him off his lap and onto the ground.
TEXT 34
AahaMazRåzaiví" k-zaYaq>aUTal/aecNa" )
vDYaTaaMaaìYa& vDYaae iNa"SaarYaTa NaE‰RTaa" )) 34 ))
ähämarña-ruñäviñöaù
kañäyé-bhüta-locanaù
vadhyatäm äçv ayaà vadhyo
niùsärayata nairåtäù
SYNONYMS
äha—he said; amarña—indignation; ruñä—and by severe anger;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
326
äviñöaù—overpowered; kañäyé-bhüta—becoming exactly like red-hot copper;
locanaù—whose eyes; vadhyatäm—let him be killed; äçu—immediately;
ayam—this; vadhyaù—who is to be killed; niùsärayata—take away;
nairåtäù—O demons.
TRANSLATION
Indignant and angry, his reddish eyes like molten copper, Hiraëyakaçipu said
to his servants: O demons, take this boy away from me! He deserves to be
killed. Kill him as soon as possible!
TEXT 35
AYa& Mae >a]aTa*ha Saae_Ya& ihTva SvaNa( Sauôdae_DaMa" )
iPaTa*VYahNTau" PaadaE Yaae ivZ<aaedaRSavdcRiTa )) 35 ))
ayaà me bhrätå-hä so 'yaà
hitvä svän suhådo 'dhamaù
pitåvya-hantuù pädau yo
viñëor däsavad arcati
SYNONYMS
ayam—this; me—my; bhrätå-hä—killer of the brother; saù—he; ayam—this;
hitvä—giving up; svän—own; suhådaù—well-wishers; adhamaù—very low;
pitåvya-hantuù—of He who killed his uncle Hiraëyäkña; pädau—at the two
feet; yaù—he who; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; däsa-vat—like a servant;
arcati—serves.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
327
This boy Prahläda is the killer of my brother, for he has given up his family
to engage in the devotional service of the enemy, Lord Viñëu, like a menial
servant.
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu considered his son Prahläda Mahäräja to be the killer of his
brother because Prahläda Mahäräja was engaged in the devotional service of
Lord Viñëu. In other words, Prahläda Mahäräja would be elevated to särüpya
liberation, and in that sense he resembled Lord Viñëu. Therefore Prahläda was
to be killed by Hiraëyakaçipu. Devotees, Vaiñëavas, attain the liberations of
särüpya, sälokya, särñöi and sämépya, whereas the Mäyävädés are supposed to
attain the liberation known as säyujya. Säyujya-mukti, however, is not very
secure, whereas särüpya-mukti, sälokya-mukti, särñöi-mukti and sämépya-mukti
are most certain. Although the servants of Lord Viñëu, Näräyaëa, in the
Vaikuëöha planets are equally situated with the Lord, the devotees there know
very well that the Lord is the master whereas they are servants.
TEXT 36
ivZ<aaevaR SaaßSaaE ik&- Nau k-irZYaTYaSaMaÅSa" )
SaaEôd& duSTYaJa& iPa}aaerhaÛ" PaÄhaYaNa" )) 36 ))
viñëor vä sädhv asau kià nu
kariñyaty asamaïjasaù
sauhådaà dustyajaà pitror
ahäd yaù païca-häyanaù
SYNONYMS
viñëoù—unto Viñëu; vä—either; sädhu—good; asau—this; kim—whether;
nu—indeed; kariñyati—will do; asamaïjasaù—not trustworthy;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
328
sauhådam—affectionate relationship; dustyajam—difficult to relinquish;
pitroù—of his father and mother; ahät—gave up; yaù—he who;
païca-häyanaù—only five years old.
TRANSLATION
Although Prahläda is only five years old, even at this young age he has given
up his affectionate relationship with his father and mother. Therefore, he is
certainly untrustworthy. Indeed, it is not at all believable that he will behave
well toward Viñëu.
TEXT 37
Parae_PYaPaTYa& ihTak*-ÛQaaEzDa&
SvdehJaae_PYaaMaYavTSauTaae_ihTa" )
i^NÛatad(r)& YaduTaaTMaNaae_ihTa&
Xaez& Sau%& JaqviTa YaiÜvJaRNaaTa( )) 37 ))
paro 'py apatyaà hita-kåd yathauñadhaà
sva-dehajo 'py ämayavat suto 'hitaù
chindyät tad aìgaà yad utätmano 'hitaà
çeñaà sukhaà jévati yad-vivarjanät
SYNONYMS
paraù—not belonging to the same group or family; api—although; apatyam—a
child; hita-kåt—who is beneficial; yathä—just as; auñadham—remedial herb;
sva-deha-jaù—born of one's own body; api—although; ämaya-vat—like a
disease; sutaù—a son; ahitaù—who is not a well-wisher; chindyät—one should
cut off; tat—that; aìgam—part of the body; yat—which; uta—indeed;
ätmanaù—for the body; ahitam—not beneficial; çeñam—the balance;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
329
sukham—happily; jévati—lives; yat—of which; vivarjanät—by cutting off.
TRANSLATION
Although a medicinal herb, being born in the forest, does not belong to the
same category as a man, if beneficial it is kept very carefully. Similarly, if
someone outside one's family is favorable, he should be given protection like a
son. On the other hand, if a limb of one's body is poisoned by disease, it must be
amputated so that the rest of the body may live happily. Similarly, even one's
own son, if unfavorable, must be rejected, although born of one's own body.
PURPORT
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has instructed all devotees of the Lord to be
humbler than the grass and more tolerant than trees; otherwise there will
always be disturbances to their execution of devotional service. Here is a vivid
example of how a devotee is disturbed by a nondevotee, even though the
nondevotee is an affectionate father. The material world is such that a
nondevotee father becomes an enemy of a devotee son. Having determined to
kill even his son, Hiraëyakaçipu gave the example of amputating a part of one's
body that has become septic and therefore injurious to the rest of the body.
The same example, of course, may also be applied to nondevotees. Cäëakya
Paëòita advises, tyaja durjana-saàsargaà bhaja sädhu-samägamam. Devotees
actually serious about advancing in spiritual life should give up the company of
nondevotees and always keep company with devotees. To be too attached to
material existence is ignorance because material existence is temporary and
miserable. Therefore devotees who are determined to perform tapasya
(penances and austerities) to realize the self, and who are determined to
become advanced in spiritual consciousness, must give up the company of
atheistic nondevotees. Prahläda Mahäräja maintained an attitude of
noncooperation with the philosophy of his father, Hiraëyakaçipu, yet he was
tolerant and humble. Hiraëyakaçipu, however, being a nondevotee, was so
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
330
polluted that he was even prepared to kill his own son. He justified this by
putting forward the logic of amputation.
TEXT 38
SavOEåPaaYaEhRNTaVYa" SaM>aaeJaXaYaNaaSaNaE" )
Sauôiç(r)Dar" Xa}auMauRNaeduRíiMaveiNd]YaMa( )) 38 ))
sarvair upäyair hantavyaù
sambhoja-çayanäsanaiù
suhål-liìga-dharaù çatrur
muner duñöam ivendriyam
SYNONYMS
sarvaiù—by all; upäyaiù—means; hantavyaù—must be killed; sambhoja—by
eating; çayana—lying down; äsanaiù—by sitting; suhåt-liìga-dharaù—who has
assumed the role of a friend; çatruù—an enemy; muneù—of a great sage;
duñöam—uncontrollable; iva—like; indriyam—the senses.
TRANSLATION
Just as uncontrolled senses are the enemies of all yogés engaged in advancing
in spiritual life, this Prahläda, who appears to be a friend, is an enemy because I
cannot control him. Therefore this enemy, whether eating, sitting or sleeping,
must be killed by all means.
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu planned a campaign to kill Prahläda Mahäräja. He would kill
his son by administering poison to him while he was eating, by making him sit
in boiling oil, or by throwing him under the feet of an elephant while he was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
331
lying down. Thus Hiraëyakaçipu decided to kill his innocent child, who was
only five years old, simply because the boy had become a devotee of the Lord.
This is the attitude of nondevotees toward devotees.
TEXTS 39-40
NaE‰RTaaSTae SaMaaidía >a}aaR vE éUl/Paa<aYa" )
iTaGMad&í\k-ral/aSYaaSTaaMa]XMaé[uiXaraeåha" )) 39 ))
NadNTaae >aErv& Naad& i^iNDa i>aNDaqiTa vaidNa" )
AaSaqNa& cahNaHa( éUlE/" Pa[had& SavRMaMaRSau )) 40 ))
nairåtäs te samädiñöä
bharträ vai çüla-päëayaù
tigma-daàñöra-karäläsyäs
tämra-çmaçru-çiroruhäù
nadanto bhairavaà nädaà
chindhi bhindhéti vädinaù
äsénaà cähanaï çülaiù
prahrädaà sarva-marmasu
SYNONYMS
nairåtäù—the demons; te—they; samädiñöäù—being fully advised; bharträ—by
their master; vai—indeed; çüla-päëayaù—having tridents in their hands;
tigma—very sharp; daàñöra—teeth; karäla—and fearful; äsyäù—faces;
tämra-çmaçru—coppery mustaches; çiroruhäù—and hair on the head;
nadantaù—vibrating; bhairavam—fearful; nädam—sound; chindhi—chop;
bhindhi—divide into small parts; iti—thus; vädinaù—speaking; äsénam—who
was sitting silently; ca—and; ahanan—attacked; çülaiù—with their tridents;
prahrädam—Prahläda Mahäräja; sarva-marmasu—on the tender parts of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
332
body.
TRANSLATION
The demons [Räkñasas], the servants of Hiraëyakaçipu, thus began striking
the tender parts of Prahläda Mahäräja's body with their tridents. The demons
all had fearful faces, sharp teeth and reddish, coppery beards and hair, and they
appeared extremely threatening. Making a tumultuous sound, shouting, "Chop
him up! Pierce him!" they began striking Prahläda Mahäräja, who sat silently,
meditating upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 41
Pare b]ø<YaiNadeRXYae >aGavTYai%l/aTMaiNa )
Yau¢-aTMaNYaf-l/a AaSaàPau<YaSYaev SaiT§-Yaa" )) 41 ))
pare brahmaëy anirdeçye
bhagavaty akhilätmani
yuktätmany aphalä äsann
apuëyasyeva sat-kriyäù
SYNONYMS
pare—in the supreme; brahmaëi—absolute; anirdeçye—who is not perceivable
by the senses; bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
akhila-ätmani—the Supersoul of everyone; yukta-ätmani—on he whose mind
was engaged (Prahläda); aphaläù—without effect; äsan—were; apuëyasya—of
a person who has no assets in pious activities; iva—like; sat-kriyäù—good
activities (like the performance of sacrifices or austerities).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
333
TRANSLATION
Even though a person who has no assets in pious activities performs some
good deed, it will have no result. Thus the weapons of the demons had no
tangible effects upon Prahläda Mahäräja because he was a devotee undisturbed
by material conditions and fully engaged in meditating upon and serving the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is unchangeable, who cannot be realized
by the material senses, and who is the soul of the entire universe.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja was constantly and fully engaged in thought of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. As it is said, govinda-parirambhitaù. Prahläda
Mahäräja engaged himself always in meditation, and thus he was protected by
Govinda. Just as a small child on the lap of his father or mother is fully
protected, a devotee, in all conditions, is protected by the Supreme Lord. Does
this mean that when Prahläda Mahäräja was attacked by the demons, the
Räkñasas, Govinda was also attacked by the demons? This is not possible.
There have been many attempts by the demons to hurt or kill the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but He cannot be injured by any material means
because He is always in transcendence. Therefore the words pare brahmaëi are
used here. The demons, the Räkñasas, can neither see nor touch the Supreme
Lord, although they may superficially think that they are striking the Lord's
transcendental body with their material weapons. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is described in this verse as anirdeçye. We cannot understand Him to
be in a particular place, for He is all-pervasive. Moreover, He is akhilätmä, the
active principle of everything, even material weapons. Those who cannot
understand the position of the Lord are unfortunate. They may think that
they can kill the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotee, but all
their attempts will be futile. The Lord knows how to deal with them.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
334
TEXT 42
Pa[YaaSae_PahTae TaiSMaNa( dETYaeNd]" PairXaiªTa" )
ck-ar TaÜDaaePaaYaaiàbRNDaeNa YauiDaiïr )) 42 ))
prayäse 'pahate tasmin
daityendraù pariçaìkitaù
cakära tad-vadhopäyän
nirbandhena yudhiñöhira
SYNONYMS
prayäse—when the endeavor; apahate—futile; tasmin—that;
daitya-indraù—the King of the demons, Hiraëyakaçipu; pariçaìkitaù—very
much afraid (considering how the boy was protected); cakära—executed;
tat-vadha-upäyän—various means for killing him; nirbandhena—with
determination; yudhiñöhira—O King Yudhiñöhira.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Yudhiñöhira, when all the attempts of the demons to kill
Prahläda Mahäräja were futile, the King of the demons, Hiraëyakaçipu, being
most fearful, began contriving other means to kill him.
TEXTS 43-44
idGGaJaEdRNdéUke-Nd]Eri>acaravPaaTaNaE" )
MaaYaai>a" SaiàraeDaEê GardaNaEr>aaeJaNaE" )) 43 ))
ihMavaYviGanSail/lE/" PavRTaa§-Ma<aEriPa
Na XaXaak- Yada hNTauMaPaaPaMaSaur" SauTaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
335
icNTaa& dqgaRTaMaa& Pa[aáSTaTk-Tau| Naa>YaPaÛTa )) 44 ))
dig-gajair dandaçükendrair
abhicärävapätanaiù
mäyäbhiù sannirodhaiç ca
gara-dänair abhojanaiù
hima-väyv-agni-salilaiù
parvatäkramaëair api
na çaçäka yadä hantum
apäpam asuraù sutam
cintäà dérghatamäà präptas
tat-kartuà näbhyapadyata
SYNONYMS
dik-gajaiù—by big elephants trained to smash anything under their feet;
danda-çüka-indraiù—by the biting of the King's poisonous snakes;
abhicära—by destructive spells; avapätanaiù—by causing to fall from the top
of a mountain; mäyäbhiù—by conjuring tricks; sannirodhaiù—by
imprisonment; ca—as well as; gara-dänaiù—by administering poison;
abhojanaiù—by starving; hima—by cold; väyu—wind; agni—fire; salilaiù—and
water; parvata-äkramaëaiù—by crushing with big stones and hills; api—and
also; na çaçäka—was not able; yadä—when; hantum—to kill; apäpam—who
was not at all sinful; asuraù—the demon (Hiraëyakaçipu); sutam—his son;
cintäm—anxiety; dérgha-tamäm—long-standing; präptaù—obtained;
tat-kartum—to do that; na—not; abhyapadyata—achieved.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu could not kill his son by throwing him beneath the feet of big
elephants, throwing him among huge, fearful snakes, employing destructive
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
336
spells, hurling him from the top of a hill, conjuring up illusory tricks,
administering poison, starving him, exposing him to severe cold, winds, fire and
water, or throwing heavy stones to crush him. When Hiraëyakaçipu found that
he could not in any way harm Prahläda, who was completely sinless, he was in
great anxiety about what to do next.
TEXT 45
Wz Mae bûSaaDaU¢-ae vDaaePaaYaaê iNaiMaRTaa" )
TaESTaEd]aeRhErSaÖMaOEMauR¢-" SveNaEv TaeJaSaa )) 45 ))
eña me bahv-asädhükto
vadhopäyäç ca nirmitäù
tais tair drohair asad-dharmair
muktaù svenaiva tejasä
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; me—of me; bahu—many; asädhu-uktaù—ill names;
vadha-upäyäù—many varieties of means to kill him; ca—and;
nirmitäù—devised; taiù—by those; taiù—by those; drohaiù—treacherous;
asat-dharmaiù—abominable actions; muktaù—released; svena—his own;
eva—indeed; tejasä—by prowess.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu thought: I have used many ill names in chastising this boy
Prahläda and have devised many means of killing him, but despite all my
endeavors, he could not be killed. Indeed, he saved himself by his own powers,
without being affected in the least by these treacherous and abominable actions.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
337
TEXT 46
vTaRMaaNaae_ivdUre vE bal/ae_PYaJa@DaqrYaMa( )
Na ivSMariTa Mae_NaaYa| éuNa" XaePa wv Pa[>au" )) 46 ))
vartamäno 'vidüre vai
bälo 'py ajaòa-dhér ayam
na vismarati me 'näryaà
çunaù çepa iva prabhuù
SYNONYMS
vartamänaù—being situated; avidüre—not very far away; vai—indeed;
bälaù—a mere child; api—although; ajaòa-dhéù—complete fearlessness;
ayam—this; na—not; vismarati—forgets; me—my; anäryam—misbehavior;
çunaù çepaù—the curved tail of a dog; iva—exactly like; prabhuù—being able
or potent.
TRANSLATION
Although he is very near to me and is merely a child, he is situated in
complete fearlessness. He resembles a dog's curved tail, which can never be
straightened, because he never forgets my misbehavior and his connection with
his master, Lord Viñëu.
PURPORT
The word çunaù means "of a dog," and çepa means "tail." The example is
ordinary. However one may try to straighten a dog's tail, it is never straight but
always curved. Çunaù çepa is also the name of the second son of Ajégarta. He
was sold to Hariçcandra, but he later took shelter of Viçvämitra, Hariçcandra's
enemy, and never left his side.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
338
TEXT 47
APa[MaeYaaNau>aavae_YaMaku-TaiêÙYaae_Mar" )
NaUNaMaeTaiÜraeDaeNa Ma*TYauMaeR >aivTaa Na va )) 47 ))
aprameyänubhävo 'yam
akutaçcid-bhayo 'maraù
nünam etad-virodhena
måtyur me bhavitä na vä
SYNONYMS
aprameya—unlimited; anubhävaù—glory; ayam—this;
akutaçcit-bhayaù—having no fear from any quarter; amaraù—immortal;
nünam—definitely; etat-virodhena—because of going against him;
måtyuù—death; me—my; bhavitä—may be; na—not; vä—or.
TRANSLATION
I can see that this boy's strength is unlimited, for he has not feared any of
my punishments. He appears immortal. Therefore, because of my enmity
toward him, I shall die. Or maybe this will not take place.
TEXT 48
wiTa TaiÀNTaYaa ik-iÄNãaNaié[YaMaDaaeMau%Ma( )
Xa<@aMak-aRvaEXaNaSaaE iviv¢- wiTa haecTau" )) 48 ))
iti tac-cintayä kiïcin
mläna-çriyam adho-mukham
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
339
çaëòämarkäv auçanasau
vivikta iti hocatuù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; tat-cintayä—with full anxiety because of Prahläda Mahäräja's
position; kiïcit—somewhat; mläna—lost; çriyam—bodily luster;
adhaù-mukham—his face downward; çaëòa-amarkau—Ñaëòa and Amarka;
auçanasau—sons of Çukräcärya; vivikte—in a secret place; iti—thus;
ha—indeed; ücatuù—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Thinking in this way, the King of the Daityas, morose and bereft of bodily
luster, remained silent with his face downward. Then Ñaëòa and Amarka, the
two sons of Çukräcärya, spoke to him in secret.
TEXT 49
iJaTa& TvYaEke-Na JaGaT}aYa& >a]uvae‚
ivRJa*M>a<a}aSTaSaMaSTaiDaZ<YaPaMa( )
Na TaSYa icNTYa& Tav NaaQa c+vhe
Na vE iXaéUNaa& Gau<adaezYaae" PadMa( )) 49 ))
jitaà tvayaikena jagat-trayaà bhruvor
vijåmbhaëa-trasta-samasta-dhiñëyapam
na tasya cintyaà tava nätha cakñvahe
na vai çiçünäà guëa-doñayoù padam
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
340
jitam—conquered; tvayä—by you; ekena—alone; jagat-trayam—the three
worlds; bhruvoù—of the eyebrows; vijåmbhaëa—by the expanding;
trasta—become afraid; samasta—all; dhiñëyapam—the chief persons in every
planet; na—not; tasya—from him; cintyam—to be anxious; tava—of you;
nätha—O master; cakñvahe—we find; na—nor; vai—indeed; çiçünäm—of
children; guëa-doñayoù—of a good quality or fault; padam—the subject matter.
TRANSLATION
O lord, we know that when you simply move your eyebrows, all the
commanders of the various planets are most afraid. Without the help of any
assistant, you have conquered all the three worlds. Therefore, we do not find
any reason for you to be morose and full of anxiety. As for Prahläda, he is
nothing but a child and cannot be a cause of anxiety. After all, his bad or good
qualities have no value.
TEXT 50
wMa& Tau PaaXaEvRå<aSYa bd(ßa
iNaDaeih >aqTaae Na Pal/aYaTae YaQaa )
buiÖê Pau&Saae vYaSaaYaRSaevYaa
Yaavd( Gauå>aaRGaRv AaGaiMaZYaiTa )) 50 ))
imaà tu päçair varuëasya baddhvä
nidhehi bhéto na paläyate yathä
buddhiç ca puàso vayasärya-sevayä
yävad gurur bhärgava ägamiñyati
SYNONYMS
imam—this; tu—but; päçaiù—by the ropes; varuëasya—of the demigod known
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
341
as Varuëa; baddhvä—binding; nidhehi—keep (him); bhétaù—being afraid;
na—not; paläyate—runs away; yathä—so that; buddhiù—the intelligence;
ca—also; puàsaù—of a man; vayasä—by increase of age; ärya—of
experienced, advanced persons; sevayä—by the service; yävat—until;
guruù—our spiritual master; bhärgavaù—Çukräcärya; ägamiñyati—will come.
TRANSLATION
Until the return of our spiritual master, Çukräcärya, arrest this child with
the ropes of Varuëa so that he will not flee in fear. In any case, by the time he
is somewhat grown up and has assimilated our instructions or served our
spiritual master, he will change in his intelligence. Thus there need be no cause
for anxiety.
TEXT 51
TaQaeiTa GauåPau}aae¢-MaNaujaYaedMab]vqTa( )
DaMaaeR ùSYaaePadeíVYaae raja& Yaae Ga*hMaeiDaNaaMa( )) 51 ))
tatheti guru-putroktam
anujïäyedam abravét
dharmo hy asyopadeñöavyo
räjïäà yo gåha-medhinäm
SYNONYMS
tathä—in this way; iti—thus; guru-putra-uktam—advised by Ñaëòa and
Amarka, the sons of Çukräcärya; anujïäya—accepting; idam—this;
abravét—said; dharmaù—the duty; hi—indeed; asya—unto Prahläda;
upadeñöavyaù—to be instructed; räjïäm—of the kings; yaù—which;
gåha-medhinäm—who are interested in householder life.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
342
TRANSLATION
After hearing these instructions of Ñaëòa and Amarka, the sons of his
spiritual master, Hiraëyakaçipu agreed and requested them to instruct Prahläda
in that system of occupational duty which is followed by royal householder
families.
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu wanted Prahläda Mahäräja to be trained as a diplomatic king
in ruling the kingdom, the country or the world, but not to be advised about
renunciation or the renounced order of life. The word dharma here does not
refer to some religious faith. As clearly stated, dharmo hy asyopadeñöavyo
räjïäà yo gåha-medhinäm. There are two kinds of royal families—one whose
members are simply attached to household life and the other consisting of
räjarñis, kings who govern with ruling power but are as good as great saints.
Prahläda Mahäräja wanted to become a räjarñi, whereas Hiraëyakaçipu wanted
him to become a king attached to sense enjoyment (gåha-medhinäm).
Therefore in the Äryan system there is varëäçrama-dharma, by which
everyone should be educated according to his position in society's division of
varëa (brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra) and äçrama (brahmacarya,
gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa).
A devotee purified by devotional service is always in the transcendental
position above the mundane qualities. Thus the difference between Prahläda
Mahäräja and Hiraëyakaçipu was that Hiraëyakaçipu wanted to keep Prahläda
in mundane attachment whereas Prahläda was above the modes of material
nature. As long as one is under the control of material nature, his occupational
duty is different from that of a person not under such control. One's real
dharma, or occupational duty, is described in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (dharmaà tu
säkñäd bhagavat-praëétam [SB 6.3.19]). As described to his order carriers by
Dharmaräja, or Yamaräja, a living being is a spiritual identity, and therefore
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
343
his occupational duty is also spiritual. The real dharma is that which is advised
in Bhagavad-gétä: sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg.
18.66]. One must give up one's material occupational duties, just as one must
give up his material body. Whatever one's occupational duty, even according
to the varëäçrama system, one must give it up and engage in one's spiritual
function. One's real dharma, or occupational duty, is explained by Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu. Jévera 'svarüpa' haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa': [Cc. Madhya 20.108]
every living being is an eternal servant of Kåñëa. That is one's real
occupational duty.
TEXT 52
DaMaRMaQa| c k-aMa& c iNaTara& caNauPaUvRXa" )
Pa[hadaYaaecTaU raJaNa( Pa[ié[TaavNaTaaYa c )) 52 ))
dharmam arthaà ca kämaà ca
nitaräà cänupürvaçaù
prahrädäyocatü räjan
praçritävanatäya ca
SYNONYMS
dharmam—mundane occupational duty; artham—economic development;
ca—and; kämam—sense gratification; ca—and; nitaräm—always; ca—and;
anupürvaçaù—according to order, or from the beginning to the end;
prahrädäya—unto Prahläda Mahäräja; ücatuù—they spoke; räjan—O King;
praçrita—who was humble; avanatäya—and submissive; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Ñaëòa and Amarka systematically and unceasingly taught
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
344
Prahläda Mahäräja, who was very submissive and humble, about mundane
religion, economic development and sense gratification.
PURPORT
There are four processes for human society—dharma, artha, käma and
mokña—and they culminate in liberation. Human society must follow a process
of religion to advance, and on the basis of religion one should try to develop
his economic condition so that he can fulfill his needs for sense gratification
according to the religious rules and regulations. Then liberation from material
bondage will be easier to attain. That is the Vedic process. When one is above
the stages of dharma, artha, käma and mokña, one becomes a devotee. He is
then on the platform from which he is guaranteed not to fall again to material
existence (yad gatvä na nivartante [Bg. 15.6]). As advised in Bhagavad-gétä if
one transcends these four processes and is actually liberated, one engages in
devotional service. Then he is guaranteed not to fall to material existence
again.
TEXT 53
YaQaa i}avGa| Gauåi>araTMaNae oPaiXai+aTaMa( )
Na SaaDau MaeNae TaiC^+aa& ÜNÜaraMaaePavi<aRTaaMa( )) 53 ))
yathä tri-vargaà gurubhir
ätmane upaçikñitam
na sädhu mene tac-chikñäà
dvandvärämopavarëitäm
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; tri-vargam—the three processes (religion, economic development
and sense gratification); gurubhiù—by the teachers; ätmane—unto himself
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
345
(Prahläda Mahäräja); upaçikñitam—instructed; na—not; sädhu—really good;
mene—he considered; tat-çikñäm—the education in that; dvandva-äräma—by
persons taking pleasure in duality (in material enmity and friendship);
upavarëitäm—which is prescribed.
TRANSLATION
The teachers Ñaëòa and Amarka instructed Prahläda Mahäräja in the three
kinds of material advancement called religion, economic development and sense
gratification. Prahläda, however, being situated above such instructions, did not
like them, for such instructions are based on the duality of worldly affairs,
which involve one in a materialistic way of life marked by birth, death, old age
and disease.
PURPORT
The entire world is interested in the materialistic way of life. Indeed,
practically 99.9 percent of the people in the three worlds are uninterested in
liberation or spiritual education. Only the devotees of the Lord, headed by
such great personalities as Prahläda Mahäräja and Närada Muni, are interested
in the real education of spiritual life. One cannot understand the principles of
religion while staying on the material platform. Therefore one must follow
these great personalities. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.3.20):
svayambhür näradaù çambhuù
kumäraù kapilo manuù
prahlädo janako bhéñmo
balir vaiyäsakir vayam
One must follow in the footsteps of such great personalities as Lord Brahmä,
Närada, Lord Çiva, Kapila, Manu, the Kumäras, Prahläda Mahäräja, Bhéñma,
Janaka, Bali Mahäräja, Çukadeva Gosvämé and Yamaräja. Those interested in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
346
spiritual life should follow Prahläda Mahäräja in rejecting the education of
religion, economic development and sense gratification. One should be
interested in spiritual education. Therefore the Kåñëa consciousness
movement is spreading all over the world, following in the footsteps of
Prahläda Mahäräja, who did not like any of the materialistic education he
received from his teachers.
TEXT 54
YadacaYaR" Parav*taae Ga*hMaeDaqYak-MaRSau )
vYaSYaEbaRl/kE-STa}a SaaePahUTa" k*-Ta+a<aE" )) 54 ))
yadäcäryaù parävåtto
gåhamedhéya-karmasu
vayasyair bälakais tatra
sopahütaù kåta-kñaëaiù
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; äcäryaù—the teachers; parävåttaù—became engaged;
gåha-medhéya—of household life; karmasu—in duties; vayasyaiù—by his
friends of the same age; bälakaiù—boys; tatra—there; saù—he (Prahläda
Mahäräja); apahütaù—called; kåta-kñaëaiù—obtaining an opportune moment.
TRANSLATION
When the teachers went home to attend to their household affairs, the
students of the same age as Prahläda Mahäräja would call him to take the
opportunity of leisure hours for play.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
347
In tiffin hours, the hours when the teachers were absent from the
classroom, the students called Prahläda Mahäräja, wanting to play with him.
As will be seen from the following verses, however, Prahläda Mahäräja was not
very much interested in playing. Instead, he wanted to utilize every moment
for advancing in Kåñëa consciousness. Therefore, as indicated in this verse by
the word kåta-kñaëaiù, at the opportune moment when it was possible to
preach about Kåñëa consciousness, Prahläda Mahäräja used the time as follows.
TEXT 55
AQa TaaHa( ë+<aYaa vaca Pa[TYaahUYa MahabuDa" )
ovac ivÜa&STaiàïa& k*-PaYaa Pa[hSaiàv )) 55 ))
atha täï çlakñëayä väcä
pratyähüya mahä-budhaù
uväca vidväàs tan-niñöhäà
kåpayä prahasann iva
SYNONYMS
atha—then; tän—the class friends; çlakñëayä—with very pleasing;
väcä—speech; pratyähüya—addressing; mahä-budhaù—Prahläda Mahäräja,
who was highly learned and advanced in spiritual consciousness (mahä means
"great," and budha means "learned"); uväca—said; vidvän—very learned;
tat-niñöhäm—the path of God realization; kåpayä—being merciful;
prahasan—smiling; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja, who was truly the supreme learned person, then
addressed his class friends in very sweet language. Smiling, he began to teach
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
348
them about the uselessness of the materialistic way of life. Being very kind to
them, he instructed them as follows.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja's smiling is very significant. The other students were
very much advanced in enjoying materialistic life through religion, economic
development and sense gratification, but Prahläda Mahäräja laughed at them,
knowing that this was not actual happiness, for real happiness is advancement
in Kåñëa consciousness. The duty of those who follow in the footsteps of
Prahläda Mahäräja is to teach the entire world how to be Kåñëa conscious and
thus be really happy. Materialistic persons take to so-called religion to get some
blessings so that they can improve their economic position and enjoy the
material world through sense gratification. But devotees like Prahläda
Mahäräja laugh at how foolish they are to be busy in a temporary life without
knowledge of the soul's transmigration from one body to another. Materialistic
persons are engaged in striving for temporary benefits, whereas persons
advanced in spiritual knowledge, such as Prahläda Mahäräja, are not interested
in the materialistic way of life. Instead, they want to be elevated to an eternal
life of knowledge and bliss. Therefore, as Kåñëa is always compassionate to the
fallen souls, His servants, the devotees of Lord Kåñëa, are also interested in
educating the entire populace in Kåñëa consciousness. The mistake of
materialistic life is understood by devotees, and therefore they smile upon it,
considering it insignificant. Out of compassion, however, such devotees preach
the gospel of Bhagavad-gétä all over the world.
TEXTS 56-57
Tae Tau TaÓaErvaTSaveR TYa¢-§-I@aPairC^da" )
bal/a AdUizTaiDaYaae ÜNÜaraMaeirTaeihTaE" )) 56 ))
PaYauRPaaSaTa raJaeNd] TaNNYaSTaôdYae+a<aa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
349
TaaNaah k-å<aae MaE}aae Maha>aaGavTaae_Saur" )) 57 ))
te tu tad-gauravät sarve
tyakta-kréòä-paricchadäù
bälä adüñita-dhiyo
dvandvärämeritehitaiù
paryupäsata räjendra
tan-nyasta-hådayekñaëäù
tän äha karuëo maitro
mahä-bhägavato 'suraù
SYNONYMS
te—they; tu—indeed; tat-gauravät—from great respect for the words of
Prahläda Mahäräja (due to his being a devotee); sarve—all of them;
tyakta—having given up; kréòä-paricchadäù—toys for playing; bäläù—the
boys; adüñita-dhiyaù—whose intelligence was not as polluted (as that of their
fathers); dvandva—in duality; äräma—of those taking pleasure (the
instructors, namely Ñaëòa and Amarka); érita—by the instructions;
éhitaiù—and actions; paryupäsata—sat down around; räja-indra—O King
Yudhiñöhira; tat—unto him; nyasta—having given up; hådaya-ékñaëäù—their
hearts and eyes; tän—unto them; äha—spoke; karuëaù—very merciful;
maitraù—a real friend; mahä-bhägavataù—a most exalted devotee;
asuraù—Prahläda Mahäräja, although born of an asura father.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Yudhiñöhira, all the children were very much affectionate and
respectful to Prahläda Mahäräja, and because of their tender age they were not
so polluted by the instructions and actions of their teachers, who were attached
to condemned duality and bodily comfort. Thus the boys surrounded Prahläda
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
350
Mahäräja, giving up their playthings, and sat down to hear him. Their hearts
and eyes being fixed upon him, they looked at him with great earnestness.
Prahläda Mahäräja, although born in a demon family, was an exalted devotee,
and he desired their welfare. Thus he began instructing them about the futility
of materialistic life.
PURPORT
The words bälä adüñita-dhiyaù indicate that the children, being of a tender
age, were not as polluted by materialistic life as their fathers. Prahläda
Mahäräja, therefore, taking advantage of the innocence of his class friends,
began teaching them about the importance of spiritual life and the
insignificance of materialistic life. Although the teachers Ñaëòa and Amarka
were instructing all the boys in the materialistic life of religion, economic
development and sense gratification, the boys were not much polluted.
Therefore, with great attention they wanted to hear from Prahläda Mahäräja
about Kåñëa consciousness. In our Kåñëa consciousness movement, the
guru-kula plays an extremely important part in our activities because right
from childhood the boys at the guru-kula are instructed about Kåñëa
consciousness. Thus they become steady within the cores of their hearts, and
there is very little possibility that they will be conquered by the modes of
material nature when they are older.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Fifth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Prahläda Mahäräja, the Saintly Son of
Hiraëyakaçipu."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
351
6. Prahläda Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates
This chapter describes Prahläda Mahäräja's instructions to his class friends.
In speaking to his friends, who were all sons of demons, Prahläda Mahäräja
stressed that every living entity, especially in human society, must be
interested in spiritual realization from the very beginning of life. When human
beings are children, they should be taught that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the worshipable Deity for everyone. One should not be very much
interested in material enjoyment; instead, one should be satisfied with
whatever material profits are easily obtainable, and because the duration of
one's life is very short, one should utilize every moment for spiritual
advancement. One may wrongly think, "In the beginning of our lives let us
enjoy material facilities, and in old age we may become Kåñëa conscious." Such
materialistic thoughts are always useless because in old age one cannot be
trained in the spiritual way of life. Therefore, from the very beginning of life,
one should engage in devotional service (çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB
7.5.23]). This is the duty of all living entities. Material education is infected by
the three modes of nature, but spiritual education, for which there is a great
need in human society, is transcendental. Prahläda Mahäräja disclosed the
secret of how he had received instructions from Närada Muni. By accepting
the lotus feet of Prahläda Mahäräja, who is in the paramparä succession, one
will be able to understand the mode of spiritual life. In accepting this mode of
activity, there is no need for material qualifications.
After Prahläda Mahäräja's class friends had listened to Prahläda Mahäräja,
they inquired how he had become so learned and advanced. In this way the
chapter ends.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
352
TEXT 1
é[qPa[had ovac
k-aEMaar AacreTPa[ajae DaMaaRNa( >aaGavTaaiNah )
dulR/>a& MaaNauz& JaNMa TadPYaDa]uvMaQaRdMa( )) 1 ))
çré-prahräda uväca
kaumära äcaret präjïo
dharmän bhägavatän iha
durlabhaà mänuñaà janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam
SYNONYMS
çré-prahrädaù uväca—Prahläda Mahäräja said; kaumäraù—in the tender age of
childhood; äcaret—should practice; präjïaù—one who is intelligent;
dharmän—occupational duties; bhägavatän—which are devotional service to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; iha—in this life; durlabham—very rarely
obtained; mänuñam—human; janma—birth; tat—that; api—even;
adhruvam—impermanent, temporary; artha-dam—full of meaning.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja said: One who is sufficiently intelligent should use the
human form of body from the very beginning of life—in other words, from the
tender age of childhood—to practice the activities of devotional service, giving
up all other engagements. The human body is most rarely achieved, and
although temporary like other bodies, it is meaningful because in human life
one can perform devotional service. Even a slight amount of sincere devotional
service can give one complete perfection.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
353
PURPORT
The whole purpose of Vedic civilization and of reading the Vedas is to
attain the perfect stage of devotional service in the human form of life.
According to the Vedic system, therefore, from the very beginning of life the
brahmacarya system is introduced so that from one's very childhood—from the
age of five years—one can practice modifying one's human activities so as to
engage perfectly in devotional service. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (2.40),
svalpam apy asya dharmasya träyate mahato bhayät: "Even a little advancement
on this path can protect one from the most dangerous type of fear." Modern
civilization, not referring to the verdicts of Vedic literature, is so cruel to the
members of human society that instead of teaching children to become
brahmacärés, it teaches mothers to kill their children even in the womb, on the
plea of curbing the increase of population. And if by chance a child is saved,
he is educated only for sense gratification. Gradually, throughout the entire
world, human society is losing interest in the perfection of life. Indeed, men
are living like cats and dogs, spoiling the duration of their human lives by
actually preparing to transmigrate again to the degraded species among the
8,400,000 forms of life. The Kåñëa consciousness movement is anxious to serve
human society by teaching people to perform devotional service, which can
save a human being from being degraded again to animal life. As already stated
by Prahläda Mahäräja, bhägavata-dharma consists of çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù
smaraëaà päda-sevanam/ arcanaà vandanaà däsyaà sakhyam
ätma-nivedanam [SB 7.5.23]. In all the schools, colleges and universities, and at
home, all children and youths should be taught to hear about the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In other words, they should be taught to hear the
instructions of Bhagavad-gétä, to put them into practice in their lives, and thus
to become strong in devotional service, free from fear of being degraded to
animal life. Following bhägavata-dharma has been made extremely easy in this
age of Kali. The çästra says:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
354
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
One need only chant the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra. Everyone engaged in the
practice of chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra will be completely cleansed,
from the core of his heart, and be saved from the cycle of birth and death.
TEXT 2
YaQaa ih PauåzSYaeh ivZ<aae" PaadaePaSaPaR<aMa( )
Yadez SavR>aUTaaNaa& iPa[Ya AaTMaeìr" SauôTa( )) 2 ))
yathä hi puruñasyeha
viñëoù pädopasarpaëam
yad eña sarva-bhütänäà
priya ätmeçvaraù suhåt
SYNONYMS
yathä—in order that; hi—indeed; puruñasya—of a living entity; iha—here;
viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
päda-upasarpaëam—approaching the lotus feet; yat—because; eñaù—this;
sarva-bhütänäm—of all living entities; priyaù—the dear one;
ätma-éçvaraù—the master of the soul, the Supersoul; suhåt—the best
well-wisher and friend.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
355
The human form of life affords one a chance to return home, back to
Godhead. Therefore every living entity, especially in the human form of life,
must engage in devotional service to the lotus feet of Lord Viñëu. This
devotional service is natural because Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is the most beloved, the master of the soul, and the well-wisher of all
other living beings.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (5.29):
bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram
suhådaà sarva-bhütänäà
jïätvä mäà çäntim åcchati
"The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and austerities,
the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the benefactor and
well-wisher of all living entities, attains peace from the pangs of material
miseries." Simply by understanding these three facts—that the Supreme Lord,
Viñëu, is the proprietor of the entire creation, that He is the best well-wishing
friend of all living entities, and that He is the supreme enjoyer of
everything—one becomes peaceful and happy. For this transcendental
happiness, the living entity has wandered throughout the universe in different
forms of life and different planetary systems, but because he has forgotten his
intimate relationship with Viñëu, he has merely suffered, life after life.
Therefore, the educational system in the human form of life should be so
perfect that one will understand his intimate relationship with God, or Viñëu.
Every living entity has an intimate relationship with God. One should
therefore glorify the Lord in the adoration of çänta-rasa or revive his eternal
relationship with Viñëu as a servant in däsya-rasa, a friend in sakhya-rasa, a
parent in vätsalya-rasa or a conjugal lover in mädhurya-rasa. All these
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
356
relationships are on the platform of love. Viñëu is the center of love for
everyone, and therefore the duty of everyone is to engage in the loving service
of the Lord. As stated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead (SB 3.25.38),
yeñäm ahaà priya ätmä sutaç ca sakhä guruù suhådo daivam iñöam. In any form
of life, we are related with Viñëu, who is the most beloved, the Supersoul, son,
friend and guru. Our eternal relationship with God can be revived in the
human form of life, and that should be the goal of education. Indeed, that is
the perfection of life and the perfection of education.
TEXT 3
Sau%MaEiNd]Yak&- dETYaa dehYaaeGaeNa deihNaaMa( )
SavR}a l/>YaTae dEvaÛQaa du"%MaYaÒTa" )) 3 ))
sukham aindriyakaà daityä
deha-yogena dehinäm
sarvatra labhyate daiväd
yathä duùkham ayatnataù
SYNONYMS
sukham—happiness; aindriyakam—with reference to the material senses;
daityäù—O my dear friends born in demoniac families; deha-yogena—because
of possessing a particular type of material body; dehinäm—of all embodied
living entities; sarvatra—everywhere (in any form of life); labhyate—is
obtainable; daivät—by a superior arrangement; yathä—just as;
duùkham—unhappiness; ayatnataù—without endeavor.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja continued: My dear friends born of demoniac families,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
357
the happiness perceived with reference to the sense objects by contact with the
body can be obtained in any form of life, according to one's past fruitive
activities. Such happiness is automatically obtained without endeavor, just as
we obtain distress.
PURPORT
In the material world, in any form of life, there is some so-called happiness
and so-called distress. No one invites distress in order to suffer, but still it
comes. Similarly, even if we do not endeavor to obtain the advantages of
material happiness, we shall obtain them automatically. This happiness and
distress are obtainable in any form of life, without endeavor. Thus there is no
need to waste time and energy fighting against distress or working very hard
for happiness. Our only business in the human form of life should be to revive
our relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus become
qualified to return home, back to Godhead. Material happiness and distress
come as soon as we accept a material body, regardless of what form. We cannot
avoid such happiness and distress under any circumstances. The best use of
human life, therefore, lies in reviving our relationship with the Supreme Lord,
Viñëu.
TEXT 4
TaTPa[YaaSaae Na k-TaRVYaae YaTa AaYauVYaRYa" ParMa( )
Na TaQaa ivNdTae +aeMa& Mauku-Ndcr<aaMbuJaMa( )) 4 ))
tat-prayäso na kartavyo
yata äyur-vyayaù param
na tathä vindate kñemaà
mukunda-caraëämbujam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
358
SYNONYMS
tat—for that (sense gratification and economic development);
prayäsaù—endeavor; na—not; kartavyaù—to be done; yataù—from which;
äyuù-vyayaù—waste of the duration of life; param—only or ultimately;
na—nor; tathä—in that way; vindate—enjoys; kñemam—the ultimate goal of
life; mukunda—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can deliver one
from the material clutches; caraëa-ambujam—the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
Endeavors merely for sense gratification or material happiness through
economic development are not to be performed, for they result only in a loss of
time and energy, with no actual profit. If one's endeavors are directed toward
Kåñëa consciousness, one can surely attain the spiritual platform of
self-realization. There is no such benefit from engaging oneself in economic
development.
PURPORT
We see materialistic persons busily engaged in economic development all
day and all night, trying to increase their material opulence, but even if we
suppose that they get some benefit from such endeavors, that does not solve
the real problem of their lives. Nor do they know what the real problem of life
is. This is due to a lack of spiritual education. Especially in the present age,
every man is in darkness, in the bodily conception of life, not knowing
anything of the spirit soul and its needs. Misguided by the blind leaders of
society, people consider the body to be everything, and they are engaged in
trying to keep the body materially comfortable. Such a civilization is
condemned because it does not lead humanity toward knowing the real goal of
life. People are simply wasting time and the valuable gift of the human form
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
359
because a human being who does not cultivate spiritual life but dies like the
cats and dogs is degraded in his next life. From human life, such a person is put
into the cycle of continuous birth and death. Thus one loses the true benefit of
human life, which is to become Kåñëa conscious and solve life's problems.
TEXT 5
TaTaae YaTaeTa ku-Xal/" +aeMaaYa >avMaaié[Ta" )
Xarqr& PaaEåz& Yaavà ivPaÛeTa PauZk-l/Ma( )) 5 ))
tato yateta kuçalaù
kñemäya bhavam äçritaù
çaréraà pauruñaà yävan
na vipadyeta puñkalam
SYNONYMS
tataù—therefore; yateta—should endeavor; kuçalaù—an intelligent man
interested in the ultimate goal of life; kñemäya—for the real benefit of life, or
for liberation from material bondage; bhavam äçritaù—who is in material
existence; çaréram—the body; pauruñam—human; yävat—as long as; na—not;
vipadyeta—fails; puñkalam—stout and strong.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, while in material existence [bhavam äçritaù], a person fully
competent to distinguish wrong from right must endeavor to achieve the highest
goal of life as long as the body is stout and strong and is not embarrassed by
dwindling.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
360
As stated by Prahläda Mahäräja at the beginning of this chapter, kaumära
äcaret präjïaù. The word präjïa refers to one who is experienced and who can
distinguish right from wrong. Such a person should not waste his energy and
valuable human lifetime simply working like a cat or dog to develop his
economic condition.
For one word in this verse there are two readings—bhavam äçritaù and
bhayam äçritaù—but accepting the meaning of either of them will bring one to
the same conclusion. Bhayam äçritaù indicates that the materialistic way of life
is always fearful because at every step there is danger. Materialistic life is full
of anxieties and fear (bhayam). Similarly, accepting the reading bhavam
äçritaù, the word bhavam refers to unnecessary trouble and problems. For want
of Kåñëa consciousness, one is put into bhavam, being perpetually embarrassed
by birth, death, old age and disease. Thus one is surely full of anxieties.
Human society should be divided into a social system of brähmaëas,
kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras, but everyone can engage in devotional service. If
one wants to live without devotional service, his status as a brähmaëa, kñatriya,
vaiçya or çüdra certainly has no meaning. It is said, sthänäd bhrañöäù patanty
adhaù: whether one is in a higher or lower division, one certainly falls down
for want of Kåñëa consciousness. A sane man, therefore, is always fearful of
falling from his position. This is a regulative principle. One should not fall
from his exalted position. The highest goal of life can be achieved as long as
one's body is stout and strong. We should therefore live in such a way that we
keep ourselves always healthy and strong in mind and intelligence so that we
can distinguish the goal of life from a life full of problems. A thoughtful man
must act in this way, learning to distinguish right from wrong, and thus attain
the goal of life.
TEXT 6
Pau&Saae vzRXaTa& ùaYauSTadDa| caiJaTaaTMaNa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
361
iNaZf-l&/ YadSaaE ra}Yaa& XaeTae_NDa& Pa[aiPaTaSTaMa" )) 6 ))
puàso varña-çataà hy äyus
tad-ardhaà cäjitätmanaù
niñphalaà yad asau rätryäà
çete 'ndhaà präpitas tamaù
SYNONYMS
puàsaù—of every human being; varña-çatam—one hundred years; hi—indeed;
äyuù—duration of life; tat—of that; ardham—half; ca—and;
ajita-ätmanaù—of a person who is a servant of his senses; niñphalam—without
profit, without meaning; yat—because; asau—that person; rätryäm—at night;
çete—sleeps; andham—ignorance (forgetting his body and soul);
präpitaù—being completely possessed of; tamaù—darkness.
TRANSLATION
Every human being has a maximum duration of life of one hundred years,
but for one who cannot control his senses, half of those years are completely
lost because at night he sleeps twelve hours, being covered by ignorance.
Therefore such a person has a lifetime of only fifty years.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä, a human being and an ant all live for one hundred years, but
their lifetimes of one hundred years are different from one another. This world
is a relative world, and its relative moments of time are different. Thus the one
hundred years of Brahmä are not the same as the one hundred years of a
human being. From Bhagavad-gétä we understand that Brahma's daytime of
twelve hours equals 4,300,000 times 1,000 years (sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar
yad brahmaëo viduù [Bg. 8.17]). Thus the varña-çatam, or one hundred years,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
362
are relatively different according to time, person and circumstances. As far as
human beings are concerned, the calculation given here is right for the general
public. Although one has a maximum of one hundred years of life, by sleeping
one loses fifty years. Eating, sleeping, sex life and fear are the four bodily
necessities, but to utilize the full duration of life a person desiring to advance
in spiritual consciousness must reduce these activities. That will give him an
opportunity to fully use his lifetime.
TEXT 7
MauGDaSYa baLYae kE-Xaaere §-I@Taae YaaiTa iv&XaiTa" )
JarYaa Ga]STadehSYa YaaTYak-LPaSYa iv&XaiTa" )) 7 ))
mugdhasya bälye kaiçore
kréòato yäti viàçatiù
jarayä grasta-dehasya
yäty akalpasya viàçatiù
SYNONYMS
mugdhasya—of a person bewildered or not in perfect knowledge; bälye—in
childhood; kaiçore—in boyhood; kréòataù—playing; yäti—passes;
viàçatiù—twenty years; jarayä—by invalidity; grasta-dehasya—of a person
overcome; yäti—passes; akalpasya—without determination, being unable to
execute even material activities; viàçatiù—another twenty years.
TRANSLATION
In the tender age of childhood, when everyone is bewildered, one passes ten
years. Similarly, in boyhood, engaged in sporting and playing, one passes
another ten years. In this way, twenty years are wasted. Similarly, in old age,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
363
when one is an invalid, unable to perform even material activities, one passes
another twenty years wastefully.
PURPORT
Without Kåñëa consciousness, one wastes twenty years in childhood and
boyhood and another twenty years in old age, when one cannot perform any
material activities and is full of anxiety about what is to be done by his sons
and grandsons and how one's estate should be protected. Half of these years
are spent in sleep. Furthermore, one wastes another thirty years sleeping at
night during the rest of his life. Thus seventy out of one hundred years are
wasted by a person who does not know the aim of life and how to utilize this
human form.
TEXT 8
duraPaUre<a k-aMaeNa MaaeheNa c bl/IYaSaa )
Xaez& Ga*hezu Sa¢-SYa Pa[MataSYaaPaYaaiTa ih )) 8 ))
duräpüreëa kämena
mohena ca baléyasä
çeñaà gåheñu saktasya
pramattasyäpayäti hi
SYNONYMS
duräpüreëa—which is never fulfilled; kämena—by a strong aspiration to enjoy
the material world; mohena—by bewilderment; ca—also; baléyasä—which is
strong and formidable; çeñam—the remaining years of life; gåheñu—to family
life; saktasya—of one who is too attached; pramattasya—mad;
apayäti—wastefully pass; hi—indeed.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
364
TRANSLATION
One whose mind and senses are uncontrolled becomes increasingly attached
to family life because of insatiable lusty desires and very strong illusion. In such
a madman's life, the remaining years are also wasted because even during those
years he cannot engage himself in devotional service.
PURPORT
This is the account of one hundred years of life. Although in this age a
lifetime of one hundred years is generally not possible, even if one has one
hundred years, the calculation is that fifty years are wasted in sleeping, twenty
years in childhood and boyhood, and twenty years in invalidity (jarä-vyädhi).
This leaves only a few more years, but because of too much attachment to
household life, those years are also spent with no purpose, without God
consciousness. Therefore, one should be trained to be a perfect brahmacäré in
the beginning of life and then to be perfect in sense control, following the
regulative principles, if one becomes a householder. From household life one is
ordered to accept vänaprastha life and go to the forest and then accept
sannyäsa. That is the perfection of life. From the very beginning of life, those
who are ajitendriya, who cannot control their senses, are educated only for
sense gratification, as we have seen in the Western countries. Thus the entire
duration of a life of even one hundred years is wasted and misused, and at the
time of death one transmigrates to another body, which may not be human. At
the end of one hundred years, one who has not acted as a human being in a life
of tapasya (austerity and penance) must certainly be embodied again in a body
like those of cats, dogs and hogs. Therefore this life of lusty desires and sense
gratification is extremely risky.
TEXT 9
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
365
k-ae Ga*hezu PauMaaNSa¢-MaaTMaaNaMaiJaTaeiNd]Ya" )
òehPaaXaEd*R!EbRÖMauTSaheTa ivMaaeicTauMa( )) 9 ))
ko gåheñu pumän saktam
ätmänam ajitendriyaù
sneha-päçair dåòhair baddham
utsaheta vimocitum
SYNONYMS
kaù—what; gåheñu—to household life; pumän—man; saktam—very much
attached; ätmänam—his own self, the soul; ajita-indriyaù—who has not
conquered the senses; sneha-päçaiù—by the ropes of affection; dåòhaiù—very
strong; baddham—bound hand and foot; utsaheta—is able; vimocitum—to
liberate from material bondage.
TRANSLATION
What person too attached to household life due to being unable to control his
senses can liberate himself? An attached householder is bound very strongly by
ropes of affection for his family [wife, children and other relatives].
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja's first proposal was kaumära äcaret präjïo dharmän
bhägavatän iha: [SB 7.6.1] "One who is sufficiently intelligent should use the
human form of body from the very beginning of life—in other words, from the
tender age of childhood—to practice the activities of devotional service,
giving up all other engagements." Dharmän bhägavatän means the religious
principle of reviving our relationship with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. For this purpose Kåñëa personally advises, sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Give up all other duties and surrender
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
366
unto Me." While in the material world we manufacture so many duties in the
name of so many isms, but our actual duty is to free ourselves from the cycle of
birth, death, old age and disease. For this purpose, one must first be liberated
from material bondage, and especially from household life. Household life is
actually a kind of license for a materially attached person by which to enjoy
sense gratification under regulative principles. Otherwise there is no need of
entering household life.
Before entering household life, one should be trained as a brahmacäré, living
under the care of the guru, whose place is known as the guru-kula. Brahmacäré
guru-kule vasan dänto guror hitam (SB 7.12.1). From the very beginning, a
brahmacäré is trained to sacrifice everything for the benefit of the guru. A
brahmacäré is advised to go begging alms door to door, addressing all women as
mother, and whatever he collects goes to the benefit of the guru. In this way he
learns how to control his senses and sacrifice everything for the guru. When he
is fully trained, if he likes he is allowed to marry. Thus he is not an ordinary
gåhastha who has learned only how to satisfy his senses. A trained gåhastha can
gradually give up household life and go to the forest to become increasingly
enlightened in spiritual life and at last take sannyäsa. Prahläda Mahäräja
explained to his father that to be freed from all material anxieties one should
go to the forest. Hitvätma-pätaà gåham andha-küpam. One should give up his
household, which is a place for going further and further down into the
darkest regions of material existence. The first advice, therefore, is that one
must give up household life (gåham andha-küpam). However, if one prefers to
remain in the dark well of household life because of uncontrolled senses, he
becomes increasingly entangled by ropes of affection for his wife, children,
servants, house, money and so on. Such a person cannot attain liberation from
material bondage. Therefore children should be taught from the very
beginning of life to be first-class brahmacärés. Then it will be possible for them
to give up household life in the future.
To return home, back to Godhead, one must be completely free from
material attachment. Therefore, bhakti-yoga means vairägya-vidyä, the art that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
367
can help one develop a distaste for material enjoyment.
väsudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogaù prayojitaù
janayaty äçu vairägyaà
jïänaà ca yad ahaitukam
"By rendering devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa,
one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and detachment from the
world." (SB 1.2.7) If one engages in devotional service from the beginning of
life, he easily attains vairägya-vidyä, or asakti, detachment, and becomes
jitendriya, the controller of his senses. One who perfectly engages in
devotional service is therefore called gosvämé or svämé, master of the senses.
Unless one is master of the senses, he should not accept the renounced order
of life, sannyäsa. A strong inclination for sense enjoyment is the cause of the
material body. Without full knowledge one cannot be unattached to material
enjoyment, but as long as one is not in that position one is not fit to return
home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 10
k-ae NvQaRTa*Z<aa& ivSa*JaeTa( Pa[a<ae>Yaae_iPa Ya wRiPSaTa" )
Ya& §-I<aaTYaSaui>a" Pa[eïESTaSk-r" Saevk-ae vi<ak(- )) 10 ))
ko nv artha-tåñëäà visåjet
präëebhyo 'pi ya épsitaù
yaà kréëäty asubhiù preñöhais
taskaraù sevako vaëik
SYNONYMS
kaù—who; nu—indeed; artha-tåñëäm—a strong desire to acquire money;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
368
visåjet—can give up; präëebhyaù—than life; api—indeed; yaù—which;
épsitaù—more desired; yam—which; kréëäti—tries to acquire; asubhiù—with
his own life; preñöhaiù—very dear; taskaraù—a thief; sevakaù—a professional
servant; vaëik—a merchant.
TRANSLATION
Money is so dear that one conceives of money as being sweeter than honey.
Therefore, who can give up the desire to accumulate money, especially in
household life? Thieves, professional servants [soldiers] and merchants try to
acquire money even by risking their very dear lives.
PURPORT
How money can be dearer than life is indicated in this verse. Thieves may
enter the house of a rich man to steal money at the risk of their lives. Because
of trespassing, they may be killed by guns or attacked by watchdogs, but still
they try to commit burglary. Why do they risk their lives? Only to get some
money. Similarly, a professional soldier is recruited into the army, and he
accepts such service, with the risk of dying on the battlefield, only for the sake
of money. In the same way, merchants go from one country to another on
boats at the risk of their lives, or they dive into the water of the sea to collect
pearls and valuable gems. Thus it is practically proved—and everyone will
admit—that money is sweeter than honey. One may risk everything to acquire
money, and this is especially true of rich men who are too attached to
household life. Formerly, of course, the members of the higher castes—the
brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas (everyone but the çüdras)—were trained in
the guru-kula to adhere to a life of renunciation and sense control by
practicing brahmacarya and mystic yoga. Then they were allowed to enter
household life. There have consequently been many instances in which great
kings and emperors have given up household life. Although they were
extremely opulent and were the masters of kingdoms, they could give up all
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
369
their possessions because they were trained early as brahmacärés. Prahläda
Mahäräja's advice is therefore very appropriate:
kaumära äcaret präjïo
dharmän bhägavatän iha
durlabhaà mänuñaà janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam
[SB 7.6.1]
"One who is sufficiently intelligent should use the human form of body from
the very beginning of life—in other words, from the tender age of
childhood—to practice the activities of devotional service, giving up all other
engagements. The human body is most rarely achieved, and although
temporary like other bodies, it is meaningful because in human life one can
perform devotional service. Even a slight amount of sincere devotional service
can give one complete perfection." Human society should take advantage of
this instruction.
TEXTS 11-13
k-Qa& iPa[YaaYaa ANauk-iMPaTaaYaa"
Sa(r)& rhSYa& åicra&ê MaN}aaNa( )
SauôTSau TaTòehiSaTa" iXaéUNaa&
k-l/a+ara<aaMaNaur¢-icta" )) 11 ))
Pau}aaNSMar&STaa duihTa›ôRdYYaa
>a]aTa›Na( SvSa›vaR iPaTaraE c dqNaaE )
Ga*haNa( MaNaaejaeåPairC^da&ê
v*taqê ku-LYaa" Paéu>a*TYavGaaRNa( )) 12 ))
TYaJaeTa k-aeXaSk*-idvehMaaNa"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
370
k-MaaRi<a l/ae>aadivTa*ák-aMa" )
AaEPaSQYaJaEû& bhuMaNYaMaaNa"
k-Qa& ivrJYaeTa durNTaMaaeh" )) 13 ))
kathaà priyäyä anukampitäyäù
saìgaà rahasyaà ruciräàç ca manträn
suhåtsu tat-sneha-sitaù çiçünäà
kaläkñaräëäm anurakta-cittaù
puträn smaraàs tä duhitèr hådayyä
bhrätèn svasèr vä pitarau ca dénau
gåhän manojïoru-paricchadäàç ca
våttéç ca kulyäù paçu-bhåtya-vargän
tyajeta koças-kåd ivehamänaù
karmäëi lobhäd avitåpta-kämaù
aupasthya-jaihvaà bahu-manyamänaù
kathaà virajyeta duranta-mohaù
SYNONYMS
katham—how; priyäyäù—of the dearmost wife; anukampitäyäù—always
affectionate and compassionate; saìgam—the association; rahasyam—solitary;
rucirän—very pleasing and acceptable; ca—and; manträn—instructions;
suhåtsu—to the wife and children; tat-sneha-sitaù—being bound by their
affection; çiçünäm—to the small children; kala-akñaräëäm—speaking in
broken language; anurakta-cittaù—a person whose mind is attracted;
puträn—the sons; smaran—thinking of; täù—them; duhitèù—the daughters
(married and staying at the homes of their husbands); hådayyäù—always
situated in the core of the heart; bhrätèn—the brothers; svasèù vä—or the
sisters; pitarau—father and mother; ca—and; dénau—who in old age are
mostly invalids; gåhän—household affairs; manojïa—very attractive;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
371
uru—much; paricchadän—furniture; ca—and; våttéù—big sources of income
(industry, business); ca—and; kulyäù—connected with the family; paçu—of
animals (cows, elephants and other household animals); bhåtya—servants and
maidservants; vargän—groups; tyajeta—can give up; koçaù-kåt—the silkworm;
iva—like; éhamänaù—performing; karmäëi—different activities;
lobhät—because of insatiable desires; avitåpta-kämaù—whose increasing
desires are not satisfied; aupasthya—pleasure from the genitals; jaihvam—and
the tongue; bahu-manyamänaù—considering as very important; katham—how;
virajyeta—is able to give up; duranta-mohaù—being in great illusion.
TRANSLATION
How can a person who is most affectionate to his family, the core of his
heart being always filled with their pictures, give up their association?
Specifically, a wife is always very kind and sympathetic and always pleases her
husband in a solitary place. Who could give up the association of such a dear
and affectionate wife? Small children talk in broken language, very pleasing to
hear, and their affectionate father always thinks of their sweet words. How
could he give up their association? One's elderly parents and one's sons and
daughters are also very dear. A daughter is especially dear to her father, and
while living at her husband's house she is always in his mind. Who could give
up that association? Aside from this, in household affairs there are many
decorated items of household furniture, and there are also animals and servants.
Who could give up such comforts? The attached householder is like a silkworm,
which weaves a cocoon in which it becomes imprisoned, unable to get out.
Simply for the satisfaction of two important senses—the genitals and the
tongue—one is bound by material conditions. How can one escape?
PURPORT
In household affairs the first attraction is the beautiful and pleasing wife,
who increases household attraction more and more. One enjoys his wife with
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
372
two prominent sense organs, namely the tongue and the genitals. The wife
speaks very sweetly. This is certainly an attraction. Then she prepares very
palatable foods to satisfy the tongue, and when the tongue is satisfied one gains
strength in the other sense organs, especially the genitals. Thus the wife gives
pleasure in sexual intercourse. Household life means sex life (yan
maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukhaà hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]). This is encouraged by
the tongue. Then there are children. A baby gives pleasure by speaking sweet
words in broken language, and when the sons and daughters are grown up one
becomes involved in their education and marriage. Then there are one's own
father and mother to be taken care of, and one also becomes concerned with
the social atmosphere and with pleasing his brothers and sisters. A man
becomes increasingly entangled in household affairs, so much so that leaving
them becomes almost impossible. Thus the household becomes gåham
andha-küpam, a dark well into which the man has fallen. For such a man to get
out is extremely difficult unless he is helped by a strong person, the spiritual
master, who helps the fallen person with the strong rope of spiritual
instructions. A fallen person should take advantage of this rope, and then the
spiritual master, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, will take him
out of the dark well.
TEXT 14
ku-$u=MbPaaezaYa ivYaNa( iNaJaaYau‚
NaR buDYaTae_Qa| ivhTa& Pa[Mata" )
SavR}a TaaPa}aYadu"i%TaaTMaa
iNaivRÛTae Na Svku-$u=MbraMa" )) 14 ))
kuöumba-poñäya viyan nijäyur
na budhyate 'rthaà vihataà pramattaù
sarvatra täpa-traya-duùkhitätmä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
373
nirvidyate na sva-kuöumba-rämaù
SYNONYMS
kuöumba—of family members; poñäya—for the maintenance; viyat—declining;
nija-äyuù—his lifetime; na—not; budhyate—understands; artham—the
interest or purpose of life; vihatam—spoiled; pramattaù—being mad in
material conditions; sarvatra—everywhere; täpa-traya—by the threefold
miserable conditions (adhyätmika, adhidaivika and adhibhautika);
duùkhita—being distressed; ätmä—himself; nirvidyate—becomes remorseful;
na—not; sva-kuöumba-rämaù—enjoying simply by maintaining the members
of the family.
TRANSLATION
One who is too attached cannot understand that he is wasting his valuable
life for the maintenance of his family. He also fails to understand that the
purpose of human life, a life suitable for realization of the Absolute Truth, is
being imperceptibly spoiled. However, he is very cleverly attentive to seeing
that not a single farthing is lost by mismanagement. Thus although an attached
person in material existence always suffers from threefold miseries, he does not
develop a distaste for the way of material existence.
PURPORT
A foolish man does not understand the values of human life, nor does he
understand how he is wasting his valuable life simply for the maintenance of
his family members. He is expert in calculating the loss of pounds, shillings and
pence, but he is so foolish that he does not know how much money he is losing,
even according to material considerations. Cäëakya Paëòita gives the example
that a moment of life cannot be purchased in exchange for millions of dollars.
A foolish person, however, wastes such a valuable life without knowing how
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
374
much he is losing, even according to monetary calculations. Although a
materialistic person is expert in calculating costs and doing business, he does
not realize that he is misusing his costly life for want of knowledge. Even
though such a materialistic person is always suffering threefold miseries, he is
not intelligent enough to cease his materialistic way of life.
TEXT 15
ivtaezu iNaTYaai>aiNaivíceTaa
ivÜa&ê daez& ParivtahTauR" )
Pa[eTYaeh vaQaaPYaiJaTaeiNd]YaSTa‚
dXaaNTak-aMaae hrTae ku-$u=Mbq )) 15 ))
vitteñu nityäbhiniviñöa-cetä
vidväàç ca doñaà para-vitta-hartuù
pretyeha väthäpy ajitendriyas tad
açänta-kämo harate kuöumbé
SYNONYMS
vitteñu—in material wealth; nitya-abhiniviñöa-cetäù—whose mind is always
absorbed; vidvän—having learned; ca—also; doñam—the fault;
para-vitta-hartuù—of one who steals the money of others by cheating or by
transactions on the black market; pretya—after dying; iha—in this material
world; vä—or; athäpi—still; ajita-indriyaù—because of being unable to control
the senses; tat—that; açänta-kämaù—whose desires are unsatiated;
harate—steals; kuöumbé—too fond of his family.
TRANSLATION
If a person too attached to the duties of family maintenance is unable to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
375
control his senses, the core of his heart is immersed in how to accumulate
money. Although he knows that one who takes the wealth of others will be
punished by the law of the government, and by the laws of Yamaräja after
death, he continues cheating others to acquire money.
PURPORT
Especially in these days, people do not believe in a next life or in the court
of Yamaräja and the various punishments of the sinful. But at least one should
know that one who cheats others to acquire money will be punished by the
laws of the government. Nonetheless, people do not care about the laws of this
life or those governing the next. Despite whatever knowledge one has, one
cannot stop his sinful activities if he is unable to control his senses.
TEXT 16
ivÜaNaPaqTQa& dNauJaa" ku-$u=Mb&
PauZ<aNSvl/aek-aYa Na k-LPaTae vE )
Ya" SvqYaPaarKYaivi>aà>aav‚
STaMa" Pa[PaÛeTa YaQaa ivMaU!" )) 16 ))
vidvän apétthaà danujäù kuöumbaà
puñëan sva-lokäya na kalpate vai
yaù svéya-pärakya-vibhinna-bhävas
tamaù prapadyeta yathä vimüòhaù
SYNONYMS
vidvän—knowing (the inconvenience of material existence, especially in
household life); api—although; ittham—thus; danu-jäù—O sons of demons;
kuöumbam—the family members or extended family members (like one's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
376
community, society, nation or union of nations); puñëan—providing with all
the necessities of life; sva-lokäya—in understanding himself; na—not;
kalpate—capable; vai—indeed; yaù—he who; svéya—my own;
pärakya—belonging to others; vibhinna—separate; bhävaù—having a
conception of life; tamaù—nothing but darkness; prapadyeta—enters;
yathä—just as; vimüòhaù—a person without education, or one who is like an
animal.
TRANSLATION
O my friends, sons of demons! In this material world, even those who are
apparently advanced in education have the propensity to consider, "This is
mine, and that is for others." Thus they are always engaged in providing the
necessities of life to their families in a limited conception of family life, just like
uneducated cats and dogs. They are unable to take to spiritual knowledge;
instead, they are bewildered and overcome by ignorance.
PURPORT
In human society there are attempts to educate the human being, but for
animal society there is no such system, nor are animals able to be educated.
Therefore animals and unintelligent men are called vimüòha, or ignorant,
bewildered, whereas an educated person is called vidvän. The real vidvän is one
who tries to understand his own position within this material world. For
example, when Sanätana Gosvämé submitted to the lotus feet of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, his first question was 'ke ämi', 'kene ämäya järe täpa-traya'. In
other words, he wanted to know his constitutional position and why he was
suffering from the threefold miseries of material existence. This is the process
of education. If one does not ask, "Who am I? What is the goal of my life?" but
instead follows the same animal propensities as cats and dogs, what is the use
of his education? As discussed in the previous verse, a living being is entrapped
by his fruitive activities, exactly like a silkworm trapped in its own cocoon.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
377
Foolish persons are generally encaged by their fruitive actions (karma) because
of a strong desire to enjoy this material world. Such attracted persons become
involved in society, community and nation and waste their time, not having
profited from having obtained human forms. Especially in this age, Kali-yuga,
great leaders, politicians, philosophers and scientists are all engaged in foolish
activities, thinking, "This is mine, and this is yours." The scientists invent
nuclear weapons and collaborate with the big leaders to protect the interests of
their own nation or society. In this verse, however, it is clearly stated that
despite their so-called advanced knowledge, they actually have the same
mentality as cats and dogs. As cats, dogs and other animals, not knowing their
true interest in life, become increasingly involved in ignorance, the so-called
educated person who does not know his own self-interest or the true goal of
life becomes increasingly involved in materialism. Therefore Prahläda
Mahäräja advises everyone to follow the principles of varëäçrama-dharma.
Specifically, at a certain point one must give up family life and take to the
renounced order of life to cultivate spiritual knowledge and thus become
liberated. This is further discussed in the following verses.
TEXTS 17-18
YaTaae Na k-iêTa( Kv c ku-}aicd( va
dqNa" SvMaaTMaaNaMal&/ SaMaQaR" )
ivMaaeicTau& k-aMad*Xaa& ivhar‚
§-I@aMa*Gaae YaiàGa@ae ivSaGaR" )) 17 ))
TaTaae ivdUraTa( PairôTYa dETYaa
dETYaezu Sa(r)& ivzYaaTMake-zu )
oPaeTa NaaraYa<aMaaiddev&
Sa Mau¢-Sa(r)EirizTaae_PavGaR" )) 18 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
378
yato na kaçcit kva ca kutracid vä
dénaù svam ätmänam alaà samarthaù
vimocituà käma-dåçäà vihärakréòä-
mågo yan-nigaòo visargaù
tato vidürät parihåtya daityä
daityeñu saìgaà viñayätmakeñu
upeta näräyaëam ädi-devaà
sa mukta-saìgair iñito 'pavargaù
SYNONYMS
yataù—because; na—never; kaçcit—anyone; kva—in any place; ca—also;
kutracit—at any time; vä—or; dénaù—having a poor fund of knowledge;
svam—own; ätmänam—self; alam—exceedingly; samarthaù—able;
vimocitum—to liberate; käma-dåçäm—of lusty women; vihära—in the sexual
enjoyment; kréòä-mågaù—a playboy; yat—in whom; nigaòaù—which is the
shackle of material bondage; visargaù—the expansions of family relationships;
tataù—in such circumstances; vidürät—from far away; parihåtya—giving up;
daityäù—O my friends, sons of the demons; daityeñu—among the demons;
saìgam—association; viñaya-ätma-keñu—who are too addicted to sense
enjoyment; upeta—one should approach; näräyaëam—Lord Näräyaëa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; ädi-devam—the origin of all the demigods;
saù—He; mukta-saìgaiù—by the association of liberated persons;
iñitaù—desired; apavargaù—the path of liberation.
TRANSLATION
My dear friends, O sons of the demons, it is certain that no one bereft of
knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead has been able to liberate
himself from material bondage at any time or in any country. Rather, those
bereft of knowledge of the Lord are bound by the material laws. They are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
379
factually addicted to sense gratification, and their target is woman. Indeed, they
are actually playthings in the hands of attractive women. Victimized by such a
conception of life, they become surrounded by children, grandchildren and
great-grandchildren, and thus they are shackled to material bondage. Those who
are very much addicted to this conception of life are called demons. Therefore,
although you are sons of demons, keep aloof from such persons and take shelter
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, the origin of all the
demigods, because the ultimate goal for the devotees of Näräyaëa is liberation
from the bondage of material existence.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja has maintained the philosophical point of view that one
should give up the dark well of family life and go to the forest to take shelter of
the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (hitvätma-pätaà gåham
andha-küpaà vanaà gato yad dharim äçrayeta [SB 7.5.5]). In this verse also, he
stresses the same point. In the history of human society, no one, at any time or
any place, has been liberated because of too much affection and attachment
for his family. Even in those who are apparently very educated, the same
family attachment is there. They cannot give up the association of their
families, even in old age or invalidity, for they are attached to sense
enjoyment. As we have several times discussed, yan
maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukhaà hi tuccham: [SB 7.9.45] so-called householders
are simply attracted by sexual enjoyment. Thus they keep themselves shackled
in family life, and furthermore they want their children to be shackled in the
same way. Playing the parts of playboys in the hands of women, they glide
down to the darkest regions of material existence. Adänta-gobhir viçatäà
tamisraà punaù punaç carvita-carvaëänäm [SB 7.5.30]. Because they are unable
to control their senses, they continue a life of chewing the chewed and
therefore descend to the darkest material regions. One should give up the
association of such demons and adhere to the association of devotees. Thus
one will be able to be liberated from material bondage.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
380
TEXT 19
Na ùCYauTa& Pa[q<aYaTaae bûaYaaSaae_SauraTMaJaa" )
AaTMaTvaTa( SavR>aUTaaNaa& iSaÖTvaidh SavRTa" )) 19 ))
na hy acyutaà préëayato
bahv-äyäso 'surätmajäù
ätmatvät sarva-bhütänäà
siddhatväd iha sarvataù
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—indeed; acyutam—the infallible Supreme Personality of
Godhead; préëayataù—satisfying; bahu—much; äyäsaù—endeavor;
asura-ätma-jäù—O sons of demons; ätmatvät—because of being intimately
related as the Supersoul; sarva-bhütänäm—of all living entities;
siddhatvät—because of being established; iha—in this world; sarvataù—in all
directions, in all times and from all angles of vision.
TRANSLATION
My dear sons of demons, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, is
the original Supersoul, the father of all living entities. Consequently there are
no impediments to pleasing Him or worshiping Him under any conditions,
whether one be a child or an old man. The relationship between the living
entities and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is always a fact, and therefore
there is no difficulty in pleasing the Lord.
PURPORT
One may ask, "One is certainly very attached to family life, but if one gives
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
381
up family life to be attached to the service of the Lord, one must undergo the
same endeavor and trouble. Therefore, what is the benefit of taking the
trouble to engage in the service of the Lord?" This is not a valid objection. The
Lord asserts in Bhagavad-gétä (14.4):
sarva-yoniñu kaunteya
mürtayaù sambhavanti yäù
täsäà brahma mahad yonir
ahaà béja-pradaù pitä
"It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kunté, are made
possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-giving father."
The Supreme Lord, Näräyaëa, is the seed-giving father of all living entities
because the living entities are parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord
(mamaiväàço ...jéva-bhütaù [15.7]). As there is no difficulty in establishing the
intimate relationship between a father and son, there is no difficulty in
reestablishing the natural, intimate relationship between Näräyaëa and the
living entities. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya träyate mahato bhayät: if one
performs even very slight devotional service, Näräyaëa is always ready to save
one from the greatest danger. The definite example is Ajämila. Ajämila
separated himself from the Supreme Personality of Godhead by performing
many sinful activities and was condemned by Yamaräja to be very severely
punished, but because at the time of death he chanted the name of Näräyaëa,
although he was calling not for the Supreme Lord Näräyaëa but for his son
named Näräyaëa, he was saved from the hands of Yamaräja. Therefore,
pleasing Näräyaëa does not require as much endeavor as pleasing one's family,
community and nation. We have seen important political leaders killed for a
slight discrepancy in their behavior. Therefore pleasing one's society, family,
community and nation is extremely difficult. Pleasing Näräyaëa, however, is
not at all difficult; it is very easy.
One's duty is to revive one's relationship with Näräyaëa. A slight endeavor
in this direction will make the attempt successful, whereas one will never be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
382
successful in pleasing his so-called family, society and nation, even if one
endeavors to sacrifice his life. The simple endeavor involved in the devotional
service of çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23], hearing and chanting the holy
name of the Lord, can make one successful in pleasing the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has therefore bestowed His
blessings by saying, paraà vijayate çré-kåñëa-saìkértanam: "All glories to Çré
Kåñëa saìkértana!" If one wants to derive the actual benefit from this human
form, he must take to the chanting of the holy name of the Lord.
TEXTS 20-23
Paravrezu >aUTaezu b]øaNTaSQaavraidzu )
>aaEiTake-zu ivk-arezu >aUTaeZvQa MahTSau c )) 20 ))
Gau<aezu Gau<aSaaMYae c Gau<aVYaiTak-re TaQaa )
Wk- Wv Parae ùaTMaa >aGavaNaqìrae_VYaYa" )) 21 ))
Pa[TYaGaaTMaSvæPae<a d*XYaæPae<a c SvYaMa( )
VYaaPYaVYaaPak-iNadeRXYaae ùiNadeRXYaae_ivk-iLPaTa" )) 22 ))
ke-vl/aNau>avaNaNdSvæPa" ParMaeìr" )
MaaYaYaaNTaihRTaEìYaR wRYaTae Gau<aSaGaRYaa )) 23 ))
parävareñu bhüteñu
brahmänta-sthävarädiñu
bhautikeñu vikäreñu
bhüteñv atha mahatsu ca
guëeñu guëa-sämye ca
guëa-vyatikare tathä
eka eva paro hy ätmä
bhagavän éçvaro 'vyayaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
383
pratyag-ätma-svarüpeëa
dåçya-rüpeëa ca svayam
vyäpya-vyäpaka-nirdeçyo
hy anirdeçyo 'vikalpitaù
kevalänubhavänandasvarüpaù
parameçvaraù
mäyayäntarhitaiçvarya
éyate guëa-sargayä
SYNONYMS
para-avareñu—in exalted or hellish conditions of life; bhüteñu—in the living
beings; brahma-anta—ending with Lord Brahmä; sthävara-ädiñu—beginning
with the nonmoving forms of life, the trees and plants; bhautikeñu—of the
material elements; vikäreñu—in the transformations; bhüteñu—in the five
gross elements of material nature; atha—moreover; mahatsu—in the
mahat-tattva, the total material energy; ca—also; guëeñu—in the modes of
material nature; guëa-sämye—in an equilibrium of material qualities; ca—and;
guëa-vyatikare—in the uneven manifestation of the modes of material nature;
tathä—as well; ekaù—one; eva—only; paraù—transcendental; hi—indeed;
ätmä—the original source; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
éçvaraù—the controller; avyayaù—without deteriorating; pratyak—inner;
ätma-svarüpeëa—by His original constitutional position as the Supersoul;
dåçya-rüpeëa—by His visible forms; ca—also; svayam—personally;
vyäpya—pervaded; vyäpaka—all-pervading; nirdeçyaù—to be described;
hi—certainly; anirdeçyaù—not to be described (because of fine, subtle
existence); avikalpitaù—without differentiation; kevala—only;
anubhava-änanda-svarüpaù—whose form is blissful and full of knowledge;
parama-éçvaraù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme ruler;
mäyayä—by mäyä, the illusory energy; antarhita—covered; aiçvaryaù—whose
unlimited opulence; éyate—is mistaken as; guëa-sargayä—the interaction of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
384
the material modes of nature.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller, who is
infallible and indefatigable, is present in different forms of life, from the inert
living beings [sthävara], such as the plants, to Brahmä, the foremost created
living being. He is also present in the varieties of material creations and in the
material elements, the total material energy and the modes of material nature
[sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa], as well as the unmanifested material
nature and the false ego. Although He is one, He is present everywhere, and
He is also the transcendental Supersoul, the cause of all causes, who is present
as the observer in the cores of the hearts of all living entities. He is indicated as
that which is pervaded and as the all-pervading Supersoul, but actually He
cannot be indicated. He is changeless and undivided. He is simply perceived as
the supreme sac-cid-änanda [eternity, knowledge and bliss]. Being covered by
the curtain of the external energy, to the atheist He appears nonexistent.
PURPORT
Not only is the Supreme Personality of Godhead present as the Supersoul of
all living entities; at the same time, He pervades everything in the entire
creation. He exists in all circumstances and at all times. He exists in the heart
of Lord Brahmä and also in the cores of the hearts of the hogs, dogs, trees,
plants and so on. He is present everywhere. He is present not only in the heart
of the living entity, but also in material things, even in the atoms, protons and
electrons being explored by material scientists.
The Lord is present in three features—as Brahman, Paramätmä and
Bhagavän. Because He is present everywhere, He is described as sarvaà khalv
idaà brahma. Viñëu exists beyond Brahman. Bhagavad-gétä confirms that
Kåñëa, by His Brahman feature, is all-pervading (mayä tatam idaà sarvam [Bg.
9.4]), but Brahman depends upon Kåñëa (brahmaëo hi pratiñöhäham [Bg. 14.27]).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
385
Without Kåñëa, there could be no existence of Brahman or Paramätmä.
Therefore, Bhagavän, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the ultimate
realization of the Absolute Truth. Although He is present as the Paramätmä in
the core of everyone's heart, He is nonetheless one, either as an individual or
as the all-pervading Brahman.
The supreme cause is Kåñëa, and devotees who have surrendered to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead can realize Him and His presence within the
universe and within the atom (aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham [Bs.
5.35]). This realization is possible only for devotees who have fully surrendered
unto the lotus feet of the Lord; for others it is not possible. This is confirmed
by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14):
daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé
mama mäyä duratyayä
mäm eva ye prapadyante
mäyäm etäà taranti te
The process of surrender in a devotional attitude is accepted by a fortunate
living being. After wandering through many varieties of life on many
planetary systems, when one comes to the real understanding of the Absolute
Truth by the grace of a devotee, one surrenders to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (bahünäà janmanäm ante jïänavän
mäà prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]).
Prahläda Mahäräja's class friends, who were born of Daitya families,
thought that realizing the Absolute was extremely difficult. Indeed, we have
experience that many, many people say this very thing. Actually, however, this
is not so. The Absolute, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is most
intimately related to all living entities. Therefore if one understands the
Vaiñëava philosophy, which explains how He is present everywhere and how
He acts everywhere, to worship the Supreme Lord or to realize Him is not at all
difficult. Realization of the Lord, however, is possible only in the association of
devotees. Therefore Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, in His teachings to Rüpa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
386
Gosvämé said (Cc. Madhya 19.151):
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
The living entity in the material condition wanders through many varieties of
life and many varieties of circumstances, but if he comes in contact with a
pure devotee and is intelligent enough to take instructions from the pure
devotee regarding the process of devotional service, he can understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the origin of Brahman and Paramätmä,
without difficulty. In this regard, Çréla Madhväcärya says:
antaryämé pratyag-ätmä
vyäptaù kälo hariù småtaù
prakåtyä tamasävåtatvät
harer aiçvaryaà na jïäyate
The Lord is present as antaryämé in everyone's heart and is visible in the
individual soul covered by a body. Indeed, He is everywhere at every time and
every condition, but because He is covered by the curtain of material energy,
to an ordinary person there appears to be no God.
TEXT 24
TaSMaaTa( SaveRzu >aUTaezu dYaa& ku-åTa SaaEôdMa( )
>aavMaaSaurMauNMauCYa YaYaa TauZYaTYaDaae+aJa" )) 24 ))
tasmät sarveñu bhüteñu
dayäà kuruta sauhådam
bhävam äsuram unmucya
yayä tuñyaty adhokñajaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
387
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; sarveñu—to all; bhüteñu—living entities; dayäm—mercy;
kuruta—show; sauhådam—friendliness; bhävam—the attitude; äsuram—of the
demons (who separate friends and enemies); unmucya—giving up; yayä—by
which; tuñyati—is satisfied; adhokñajaù—the Supreme Lord, who is beyond the
perception of the senses.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, my dear young friends born of demons, please act in such a way
that the Supreme Lord, who is beyond the conception of material knowledge,
will be satisfied. Give up your demoniac nature and act without enmity or
duality. Show mercy to all living entities by enlightening them in devotional
service, thus becoming their well-wishers.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.55), bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç
cäsmi tattvataù: "One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by
devotional service." Prahläda Mahäräja ultimately instructed his class friends,
the sons of the demons, to accept the process of devotional service by
preaching the science of Kåñëa consciousness to everyone. Preaching is the
best service to the Lord. The Lord will immediately be extremely satisfied with
one who engages in this service of preaching Kåñëa consciousness. This is
confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (18.69). Na ca tasmän
manuñyeñu kaçcin me priya-kåttamaù: "There is no servant in this world more
dear to Me than he, nor will there ever be one more dear." If one sincerely tries
his best to spread Kåñëa consciousness by preaching the glories of the Lord and
His supremacy, even if he is imperfectly educated, he becomes the dearmost
servant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is bhakti. As one
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
388
performs this service for humanity, without discrimination between friends
and enemies, the Lord becomes satisfied, and the mission of one's life is
fulfilled. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore advised everyone to become a
guru-devotee and preach Kåñëa consciousness (yäre dekha, täre kaha
'kåñëa'-upadeça [Cc. Madhya 7.128]). That is the easiest way to realize the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. By such preaching, the preacher becomes
satisfied, and those to whom he preaches are also satisfied. This is the process
of bringing peace and tranquillity to the entire world.
bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram
suhådaà sarva-bhütänäà
jïätvä mäà çäntim åcchati
[Bg. 5.29]
One is expected to understand these three formulas of knowledge concerning
the Supreme Lord—that He is the supreme enjoyer, that He is the proprietor
of everything, and that He is the best well-wisher and friend of everyone. A
preacher should personally understand these truths and preach them to
everyone. Then there will be peace and tranquillity all over the world.
The word sauhådam ("friendliness") is very significant in this verse. People
are generally ignorant of Kåñëa consciousness, and therefore to become their
best well-wisher one should teach them about Kåñëa consciousness without
discrimination. Since the Supreme Lord, Viñëu, is situated in the core of
everyone's heart, every body is a temple of Viñëu. One should not misuse this
understanding as an excuse for such words as daridra-näräyaëa. If Näräyaëa
lives in the house of a daridra, a poor man, this does not mean that Näräyaëa
becomes poor. He lives everywhere—in the houses of the poor and those of the
rich—but in all circumstances He remains Näräyaëa; to think that He
becomes either poor or rich is a material calculation. He is always
ñaò-aiçvarya-pürëa, full in six opulences, in all circumstances.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
389
TEXT 25
Tauíe c Ta}a ik-Mal/>YaMaNaNTa AaÛe
ik&- TaEGauR<aVYaiTak-raidh Yae SviSaÖa" )
DaMaaRdYa" ik-MaGau<aeNa c k-ai¿TaeNa
Saar&Jauza& cr<aYaaeåPaGaaYaTaa& Na" )) 25 ))
tuñöe ca tatra kim alabhyam ananta ädye
kià tair guëa-vyatikaräd iha ye sva-siddhäù
dharmädayaù kim aguëena ca käìkñitena
säraà juñäà caraëayor upagäyatäà naù
SYNONYMS
tuñöe—when satisfied; ca—also; tatra—that; kim—what;
alabhyam—unobtainable; anante—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ädye—the original source of everything, the cause of all causes; kim—what
need; taiù—with them; guëa-vyatikarät—due to the actions of the modes of
material nature; iha—in this world; ye—which; sva-siddhäù—automatically
achieved; dharma-ädayaù—the three principles of material advancement,
namely religion, economic development and sense gratification; kim—what
need; aguëena—with liberation into the Supreme; ca—and;
käìkñitena—desired; säram—essence; juñäm—relishing; caraëayoù—of the
two lotus feet of the Lord; upagäyatäm—who glorify the qualities of the Lord;
naù—of us.
TRANSLATION
Nothing is unobtainable for devotees who have satisfied the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is the cause of all causes, the original source of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
390
everything. The Lord is the reservoir of unlimited spiritual qualities. For
devotees, therefore, who are transcendental to the modes of material nature,
what is the use of following the principles of religion, economic development,
sense gratification and liberation, which are all automatically obtainable under
the influence of the modes of nature? We devotees always glorify the lotus feet
of the Lord, and therefore we need not ask for anything in terms of dharma,
käma, artha and mokña.
PURPORT
In an advanced civilization, people are eager to be religious, to be
economically well situated, to satisfy their senses to the fullest extent, and at
last to attain liberation. However, these are not to be magnified as desirable.
Indeed, for a devotee these are all very easily available. Bilvamaìgala Öhäkura
said, muktiù svayaà mukulitäïjali sevate 'smän dharmärtha-käma-gatayaù
samaya-pratékñäù. Liberation always stands at the door of a devotee, ready to
carry out his orders. Material advancement in religion, economic development,
sense gratification and liberation simply wait to serve a devotee at the first
opportunity. A devotee is already in a transcendental position; he does not
need further qualifications to be liberated. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä
(14.26), sa guëän samatétyaitän brahma-bhüyäya kalpate: a devotee is
transcendental to the actions and reactions of the three modes of material
nature because he is situated on the Brahman platform.
Prahläda Mahäräja said, aguëena ca käìkñitena: if one is engaged in the
transcendental loving service of the lotus feet of the Lord, he does not need
anything in terms of dharma, artha, käma or mokña. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
therefore, in the beginning of the transcendental literature, it is said, dharmaù
projjhita-kaitavo 'tra [SB 1.1.2]. Dharma, artha, käma and mokña are
kaitava—false and unnecessary. Nirmatsaräëäm, persons who are completely
transcendental to the material activities of separateness, who make no
distinction between "mine" and "yours," but who simply engage in the
devotional service of the Lord, are actually fit to accept bhägavata-dharma
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
391
(dharmän bhagavatän iha). Because they are nirmatsara, not jealous of anyone,
they want to make others devotees, even their enemies. In this regard, Çréla
Madhväcärya remarks, käìkñate mokña-gam api sukhaà näkäìkñato yathä.
Devotees are not desirous of any material happiness, including the happiness
derived from liberation. This is called anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam [Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(10)]. Karmés desire
material happiness, and jïänés desire liberation, but a devotee does not desire
anything; he is simply satisfied by rendering transcendental loving service at
the lotus feet of the Lord and glorifying Him everywhere by preaching, which
is his life and soul.
TEXT 26
DaMaaRQaRk-aMa wiTa Yaae_i>aihTaiñvGaR
wR+aa }aYaq NaYadMaaE ivivDaa c vaTaaR )
MaNYae TadeTadi%l&/ iNaGaMaSYa SaTYa&
SvaTMaaPaR<a& SvSauôd" ParMaSYa Pau&Sa" )) 26 ))
dharmärtha-käma iti yo 'bhihitas tri-varga
ékñä trayé naya-damau vividhä ca värtä
manye tad etad akhilaà nigamasya satyaà
svätmärpaëaà sva-suhådaù paramasya puàsaù
SYNONYMS
dharma—religion; artha—economic development; kämaù—regulated sense
gratification; iti—thus; yaù—which; abhihitaù—prescribed; tri-vargaù—the
group of three; ékñä—self-realization; trayé—the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies;
naya—logic; damau—and the science of law and order; vividhä—varieties of;
ca—also; värtä—occupational duties, or one's livelihood; manye—I consider;
tat—them; etat—these; akhilam—all; nigamasya—of the Vedas;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
392
satyam—truth; sva-ätma-arpaëam—the full surrendering of one's self;
sva-suhådaù—unto the supreme friend; paramasya—the ultimate;
puàsaù—personality.
TRANSLATION
Religion, economic development and sense gratification—these are described
in the Vedas as tri-varga, or three ways to salvation. Within these three
categories are education and self-realization; ritualistic ceremonies performed
according to Vedic injunction; logic; the science of law and order; and the
various means of earning one's livelihood. These are the external subject
matters of study in the Vedas, and therefore I consider them material.
However, I consider surrender to the lotus feet of Lord Viñëu to be
transcendental.
PURPORT
These instructions of Prahläda Mahäräja stress the transcendental position
of devotional service. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (14.26):
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman." One who fully engages in the devotional service of
the Lord is immediately raised to the transcendental position, which is the
brahma-bhüta stage [SB 4.30.20]. Any education or activity not on the
brahma-bhüta platform, the platform of self-realization, is considered to be
material, and Prahläda Mahäräja says that anything material cannot be the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
393
Absolute Truth, for the Absolute Truth is on the spiritual platform. This is
also confirmed by Lord Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä (2.45), where He says,
traiguëya-viñayä vedä nistraiguëyo bhavärjuna: "The Vedas mainly deal with
the subject of the three modes of material nature. Rise above these modes, O
Arjuna. Be transcendental to all of them." To act on the material platform,
even if one's activities are sanctioned by the Vedas, is not the ultimate goal of
life. The ultimate goal of life is to stay on the spiritual platform, fully
surrendered to the parama-puruña, the supreme person. This is the object of
the human mission. In summary, the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies and
injunctions are not to be discounted; they are means of being promoted to the
spiritual platform. But if one does not come to the spiritual platform, the Vedic
ceremonies are simply a waste of time. This is confirmed in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.8):
dharmaù svanuñöhitaù puàsäà
viñvaksena-kathäsu yaù
notpädayed yadi ratià
çrama eva hi kevalam
"Duties [dharma] executed by men, regardless of occupation, are only so much
useless labor if they do not provoke attraction for the message of the Supreme
Lord." If one very strictly performs the various duties of religion but does not
ultimately come to the platform of surrendering to the Supreme Lord, his
methods of attaining salvation or elevation are simply a waste of time and
energy.
TEXT 27
jaNa& TadeTadMal&/ durvaPaMaah
NaaraYa<aae NarSa%" ik-l/ NaardaYa )
Wk-aiNTaNaa& >aGavTaSTadik-ÄNaaNaa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
394
PaadarivNdrJaSaaPl/uTadeihNaa& SYaaTa( )) 27 ))
jïänaà tad etad amalaà duraväpam äha
näräyaëo nara-sakhaù kila näradäya
ekäntinäà bhagavatas tad akiïcanänäà
pädäravinda-rajasäpluta-dehinäà syät
SYNONYMS
jïänam—knowledge; tat—that; etat—this; amalam—without material
contamination; duraväpam—very difficult to understand (without the mercy
of a devotee); äha—explained; näräyaëaù—Lord Näräyaëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; nara-sakhaù—the friend of all living entities
(especially human beings); kila—certainly; näradäya—unto the great sage
Närada; ekäntinäm—of those who have surrendered exclusively to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tat—that (knowledge); akiïcanänäm—who do not claim any
material possessions; päda-aravinda—of the lotus feet of the Lord; rajasä—by
the dust; äpluta—bathed; dehinäm—whose bodies; syät—is possible.
TRANSLATION
Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the well-wisher and friend
of all living entities, formerly explained this transcendental knowledge to the
great saint Närada. Such knowledge is extremely difficult to understand
without the mercy of a saintly person like Närada, but everyone who has taken
shelter of Närada's disciplic succession can understand this confidential
knowledge.
PURPORT
It is stated here that this confidential knowledge is extremely difficult to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
395
understand, yet it is very easy to understand if one takes shelter of a pure
devotee. This confidential knowledge is also mentioned at the end of
Bhagavad-gétä, where the Lord says, sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà
çaraëaà vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender
unto Me." This knowledge is an extremely confidential secret, but it can be
understood if one approaches the Supreme Personality of Godhead through
the bona fide agent, the spiritual master in the disciplic succession from
Närada. Prahläda Mahäräja wanted to impress upon the sons of the demons
that although such knowledge can be understood only by a saintly person like
Närada, they should not be disappointed, for if one takes shelter of Närada
instead of material teachers, this knowledge is possible to understand.
Understanding does not depend upon high parentage. The living entity is
certainly pure on the spiritual platform, and therefore anyone who attains the
spiritual platform by the grace of the spiritual master can also understand this
confidential knowledge.
TEXT 28
é[uTaMaeTaNMaYaa PaUv| jaNa& ivjaNaSa&YauTaMa( )
DaMa| >aaGavTa& éuÖ& Naardad( devdXaRNaaTa( )) 28 ))
çrutam etan mayä pürvaà
jïänaà vijïäna-saàyutam
dharmaà bhägavataà çuddhaà
näradäd deva-darçanät
SYNONYMS
çrutam—heard; etat—this; mayä—by me; pürvam—formerly;
jïänam—confidential knowledge; vijïäna-saàyutam—combined with its
practical application; dharmam—transcendental religion; bhägavatam—in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
396
relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead; çuddham—having
nothing to do with material activities; näradät—from the great saint Närada;
deva—the Supreme Lord; darçanät—who always sees.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja continued: I received this knowledge from the great saint
Närada Muni, who is always engaged in devotional service. This knowledge,
which is called bhägavata-dharma, is fully scientific. It is based on logic and
philosophy and is free from all material contamination.
TEXTS 29-30
é[qdETYaPau}aa Ocu"
Pa[had Tv& vYa& caiPa NaTaeR_NYa& ivÚhe GauåMa( )
WTaa>Yaa& GauåPau}aa>Yaa& bal/aNaaMaiPa hqìraE )) 29 ))
bal/SYaaNTa"PaurSQaSYa MahTSa(r)ae durNvYa" )
i^iNDa Na" Sa&XaYa& SaaEMYa SYaaÀeiÜóM>ak-ar<aMa( )) 30 ))
çré-daitya-puträ ücuù
prahräda tvaà vayaà cäpi
narte 'nyaà vidmahe gurum
etäbhyäà guru-puträbhyäà
bälänäm api héçvarau
bälasyäntaùpura-sthasya
mahat-saìgo duranvayaù
chindhi naù saàçayaà saumya
syäc ced visrambha-käraëam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
397
SYNONYMS
çré-daitya-puträù ücuù—the sons of the demons said; prahräda—O dear friend
Prahläda; tvam—you; vayam—we; ca—and; api—also; na—not; åte—except;
anyam—any other; vidmahe—know; gurum—Spiritual master;
etäbhyäm—these two; guru-puträbhyäm—the sons of Çukräcärya; bälänäm—of
little children; api—although; hi—indeed; éçvarau—the two controllers;
bälasya—of a child; antaùpura-sthasya—remaining inside the house or palace;
mahat-saìgaù—the association of a great person like Närada;
duranvayaù—very difficult; chindhi—please dispel; naù—our;
saàçayam—doubt; saumya—O gentle one; syät—there may be; cet—if;
visrambha-käraëam—cause of faith (in your words).
TRANSLATION
The sons of the demons replied: Dear Prahläda, neither you nor we know
any teacher or spiritual master other than Ñaëòa and Amarka, the sons of
Çukräcärya. After all, we are children and they our controllers. For you
especially, who always remain within the palace, it is very difficult to associate
with a great personality. Dear friend, most gentle one, would you kindly explain
how it was possible for you to hear Närada? Kindly dispel our doubts in this
regard.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled, "Prahläda Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates."
7. What Prahläda Learned in the Womb
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
398
In this chapter, to dissipate the doubts of his class friends, the sons of the
demons, Prahläda Mahäräja states how, within the womb of his mother, he had
heard from the mouth of Närada Muni, who had instructed him in
bhägavata-dharma.
When Hiraëyakaçipu left his kingdom and went to the mountain known as
Mandaräcala to execute severe austerities, all the demons scattered.
Hiraëyakaçipu's wife, Kayädhu, was pregnant at that time, and the demigods,
mistakenly thinking that she carried another demon in her womb, arrested
her. Their plan was that as soon as the child took birth they would kill him.
While they were taking Kayädhu to the heavenly planets, they met Närada
Muni, who stopped them from taking her away and took her to his äçrama
until Hiraëyakaçipu's return. In Närada Muni's äçrama, Kayädhu prayed for
the protection of the baby in her womb, and Närada Muni reassured her and
gave her instructions on spiritual knowledge. Taking advantage of those
instructions, Prahläda Mahäräja, although a small baby within the womb,
listened very carefully. The spirit soul is always apart from the material body.
There is no change in the spiritual form of the living entity. Any person above
the bodily conception of life is pure and can receive transcendental
knowledge. This transcendental knowledge is devotional service, and Prahläda
Mahäräja, while living in the womb of his mother, received instructions in
devotional service from Närada Muni. Any person engaged in the service of
the Lord through the instructions of a bona fide spiritual master is immediately
liberated, and being free from the clutches of mäyä, he is relieved of all
ignorance and material desires. The duty of everyone is to take shelter of the
Supreme Lord and thus become free from all material desires. Regardless of the
material condition in which one is situated, one can achieve this perfection.
Devotional service is not dependent on the material activities of austerity,
penance, mystic yoga or piety. Even without such assets, one can achieve
devotional service through the mercy of a pure devotee.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
399
TEXT 1
é[qNaard ovac
Wv& dETYaSauTaE" Pa*íae Maha>aaGavTaae_Saur" )
ovac TaaNSMaYaMaaNa" SMarNa( MadNau>aaizTaMa( )) 1 ))
çré-närada uväca
evaà daitya-sutaiù påñöo
mahä-bhägavato 'suraù
uväca tän smayamänaù
smaran mad-anubhäñitam
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—the great saint Närada Muni said; evam—thus;
daitya-sutaiù—by the sons of the demons; påñöaù—being questioned;
mahä-bhägavataù—the exalted devotee of the Lord; asuraù—born in a family
of demons; uväca—spoke; tän—unto them (the sons of the demons);
smayamänaù—smiling; smaran—remembering; mat-anubhäñitam—what was
spoken by me.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni said: Although Prahläda Mahäräja was born in a family of
asuras, he was the greatest of all devotees. Having thus been questioned by his
class friends, the sons of the asuras, he remembered the words spoken to him by
me and replied to his friends as follows.
PURPORT
When he was in the womb of his mother, Prahläda Mahäräja listened to the
words of Närada Muni. One cannot imagine how the baby in embryo could
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
400
hear Närada, but this is spiritual life; progress in spiritual life cannot be
obstructed by any material condition. This is called ahaituky apratihatä.
Reception of spiritual knowledge is never checked by any material condition.
Thus Prahläda Mahäräja, from his very childhood, spoke spiritual knowledge
to his class friends, and certainly it was effective, although all of them were
children.
TEXT 2
é[qPa[had ovac
iPaTair Pa[iSQaTae_SMaak&- TaPaSae MaNdracl/Ma( )
YauÖaeÛMa& Par& c§u-ivRbuDaa daNavaNPa[iTa )) 2 ))
çré-prahräda uväca
pitari prasthite 'smäkaà
tapase mandaräcalam
yuddhodyamaà paraà cakrur
vibudhä dänavän prati
SYNONYMS
çré-prahrädaù uväca—Prahläda Mahäräja said; pitari—when the demon father,
Hiraëyakaçipu; prasthite—left for; asmäkam—our; tapase—to execute
austerities; mandara-acalam—the hill known as Mandaräcala;
yuddha-udyamam—exertion of warfare; param—very great; cakruù—executed;
vibudhäù—the demigods, headed by King Indra; dänavän—the demons;
prati—toward.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja said: When our father, Hiraëyakaçipu, went to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
401
Mandaräcala Mountain to execute severe austerities, in his absence the
demigods, headed by King Indra, made a severe attempt to subdue all the
demons in warfare.
TEXT 3
iPaPaqil/kE-rihirv idíya l/aek-aePaTaaPaNa" )
PaaPaeNa PaaPaae_>a+aqiTa vdNTaae vaSavadYa" )) 3 ))
pipélikair ahir iva
diñöyä lokopatäpanaù
päpena päpo 'bhakñéti
vadanto väsavädayaù
SYNONYMS
pipélikaiù—by small ants; ahiù—a serpent; iva—like; diñöyä—thank heaven;
loka-upatäpanaù—always oppressing everyone; päpena—by his own sinful
activities; päpaù—the sinful Hiraëyakaçipu; abhakñi—has now been eaten;
iti—thus; vadantaù—saying; väsava-ädayaù—the demigods, headed by King
Indra.
TRANSLATION
"Alas, as a serpent is eaten by small ants, so the troublesome Hiraëyakaçipu,
who always inflicted miseries upon all types of people, has now been defeated by
the reactions of his own sinful activities." Saying this, the demigods, headed by
King Indra, arranged to fight the demons.
TEXTS 4-5
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
402
TaezaMaiTabl/aeÛaeGa& iNaXaMYaaSaurYaUQaPaa" )
vDYaMaaNaa" SaurE>asTaa dud]uvu" SavRTaaeidXaMa( )) 4 ))
k-l/}aPau}aivtaaáaNGa*haNPaéuPairC^daNa( )
Naave+YaMaa<aaSTvirTaa" SaveR Pa[a<aParqPSav" )) 5 ))
teñäm atibalodyogaà
niçamyäsura-yüthapäù
vadhyamänäù surair bhétä
dudruvuù sarvato diçam
kalatra-putra-vittäptän
gåhän paçu-paricchadän
nävekñyamäëäs tvaritäù
sarve präëa-parépsavaù
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of the demigods, headed by King Indra; atibala-udyogam—the great
exertion and strength; niçamya—hearing of; asura-yüthapäù—the great
leaders of the demons; vadhyamänäù—being killed one after another;
suraiù—by the demigods; bhétäù—afraid; dudruvuù—ran away; sarvataù—in
all; diçam—directions; kalatra—wives; putra-vitta—children and wealth;
äptän—relatives; gåhän—homes; paçu-paricchadän—animals and
paraphernalia of household life; na—not; avekñyamäëäù—seeing to;
tvaritäù—very hasty; sarve—all of them; präëa-parépsavaù—very much
desiring to live.
TRANSLATION
When the great leaders of the demons, who were being killed one after
another, saw the unprecedented exertion of the demigods in fighting, they
began to flee, scattering themselves in all directions. Simply to protect their
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
403
lives, they hastily fled from their homes, wives, children, animals and household
paraphernalia. Paying no heed to all these, the demons simply fled.
TEXT 6
VYalu/MPaNa( raJaiXaibrMaMara JaYak-ai¿<a" )
wNd]STau raJaMaihzq& MaaTar& MaMa caGa]hqTa( )) 6 ))
vyalumpan räja-çibiram
amarä jaya-käìkñiëaù
indras tu räja-mahiñéà
mätaraà mama cägrahét
SYNONYMS
vyalumpan—plundered; räja-çibiram—the palace of my father. Hiraëyakaçipu;
amaräù—the demigods; jaya-käìkñiëaù—eager to be victorious; indraù—the
head of the demigods, King Indra; tu—but; räja-mahiñém—the Queen;
mätaram—mother; mama—my; ca—also; agrahét—captured.
TRANSLATION
The victorious demigods plundered the palace of Hiraëyakaçipu, the King of
the demons, and destroyed everything within it. Then Indra, King of heaven,
arrested my mother, the Queen.
TEXT 7
NaqYaMaaNaa& >aYaaeiÜGana& ådTaq& ku-rrqiMav )
Yad*C^YaaGaTaSTa}a devizRdRd*Xae PaiQa )) 7 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
404
néyamänäà bhayodvignäà
rudatéà kurarém iva
yadåcchayägatas tatra
devarñir dadåçe pathi
SYNONYMS
néyamänäm—being taken away; bhaya-udvignäm—disturbed and full of fear;
rudatém—crying; kurarém iva—like a kuraré (osprey); yadåcchayä—by chance;
ägataù—arrived; tatra—on the spot; deva-åñiù—the great saint Närada;
dadåçe—he saw; pathi—on the road.
TRANSLATION
As she was being led away, crying in fear like a kuraré captured by a vulture,
the great sage Närada, who at that time had no engagement, appeared on the
scene and saw her in that condition.
TEXT 8
Pa[ah NaENaa& SaurPaTae NaeTauMahRSYaNaaGaSaMa( )
MauÄ MauÄ Maha>aaGa SaTaq& ParPairGa]hMa( )) 8 ))
präha nainäà sura-pate
netum arhasy anägasam
muïca muïca mahä-bhäga
satéà para-parigraham
SYNONYMS
präha—he said; na—not; enäm—this; sura-pate—O King of the demigods;
netum—to drag away; arhasi—you deserve; anägasam—not at all sinful; muïca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
405
muïca—release, release; mahä-bhäga—O greatly fortunate one; satém—chaste;
para-parigraham—the wife of another person.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni said: O Indra, King of the demigods, this woman is certainly
sinless. You should not drag her off in this merciless way. O greatly fortunate
one, this chaste woman is the wife of another. You must immediately release
her.
TEXT 9
é[qwNd] ovac
AaSTae_SYaa Ja#=re vqYaRMaivzù& SauriÜz" )
AaSYaTaa& YaavTPa[Sav& Maae+Yae_QaRPadvq& GaTa" )) 9 ))
çré-indra uväca
äste 'syä jaöhare véryam
aviñahyaà sura-dviñaù
äsyatäà yävat prasavaà
mokñye 'rtha-padavéà gataù
SYNONYMS
çré-indraù uväca—King Indra said; äste—there is; asyäù—of her;
jaöhare—within the abdomen; véryam—the seed; aviñahyam—intolerable;
sura-dviñaù—of the enemy of the demigods; äsyatäm—let her remain (in our
prison); yävat—until; prasavam—the delivery of the child; mokñye—I shall
release; artha-padavém—the path of my object; gataù—obtained.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
406
TRANSLATION
King Indra said: In the womb of this woman, the wife of the demon
Hiraëyakaçipu, is the seed of that great demon. Therefore, let her remain in our
custody until her child is delivered, and then we shall release her.
PURPORT
Indra, the King of heaven, decided to arrest Prahläda Mahäräja's mother
because he thought that another demon, another Hiraëyakaçipu, was within
her womb. The best course, he thought, was to kill the child when the child
was born, and then the woman could be released.
TEXT 10
é[qNaard ovac
AYa& iNaiZk-iLbz" Saa+aaNMaha>aaGavTaae MahaNa( )
TvYaa Na Pa[aPSYaTae Sa&SQaaMaNaNTaaNaucrae bl/I )) 10 ))
çré-närada uväca
ayaà niñkilbiñaù säkñän
mahä-bhägavato mahän
tvayä na präpsyate saàsthäm
anantänucaro balé
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—the great saint Närada Muni said; ayam—this (child
within the womb); niñkilbiñaù—completely sinless; säkñät—directly;
mahä-bhägavataù—a saintly devotee; mahän—very great; tvayä—by you;
na—not; präpsyate—will obtain; saàsthäm—his death; ananta—of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
407
Supreme Personality of Godhead; anucaraù—a servant; balé—extremely
powerful.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni replied: The child within this woman's womb is faultless and
sinless. Indeed, he is a great devotee, a powerful servant of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore you will not be able to kill him.
PURPORT
There have been many instances in which demons or nondevotees have
attempted to kill a devotee, but they have never been able to destroy a great
devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord promises in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.31), kaunteya pratijänéhi na me bhaktaù praëaçyati. This is a
declaration by the Supreme Personality of Godhead that His devotee cannot
be killed by demons. Prahläda Mahäräja is the vivid example of the truth of
this promise. Närada Muni told the King of heaven, "it would be impossible for
you to kill the child, even though you are demigods, and certainly it would be
impossible for others."
TEXT 11
wTYau¢-STaa& ivhaYaeNd]ae devzeRMaaRNaYaNvc" )
ANaNTaiPa[Ya>a¢-yENaa& Pair§-MYa idv& YaYaaE )) 11 ))
ity uktas täà vihäyendro
devarñer mänayan vacaù
ananta-priya-bhaktyainäà
parikramya divaà yayau
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
408
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; uktaù—addressed; täm—her; vihäya—releasing; indraù—the King of
heaven; deva-åñeù—of the saint Närada Muni; mänayan—honoring;
vacaù—the words; ananta-priya—for one who is very dear to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; bhaktyä—by devotion; enäm—this (woman);
parikramya—circumambulating; divam—to the heavenly planets;
yayau—returned.
TRANSLATION
When the great saint Närada Muni had thus spoken, King Indra, being
respectful to Närada's words, immediately released my mother. Because of my
being a devotee of the Lord, all the demigods circumambulated her. Then they
returned to their celestial kingdom.
PURPORT
Although King Indra and the other demigods are exalted personalities, they
were so obedient to Närada Muni that King Indra immediately accepted
Närada Muni's words concerning Prahläda Mahäräja. This is called
understanding by the paramparä system. Indra and the demigods did not know
that a great devotee was in the womb of Kayädhu, the wife of Hiraëyakaçipu,
but they accepted the authoritative statements of Närada Muni and
immediately offered their respects to the devotee by circumambulating the
woman in whose womb he was living. To understand God and the devotee by
the paramparä system is the process of knowledge. There is no need to
speculate about God and His devotee. One should accept the statements of a
bona fide devotee and thus try to understand.
TEXT 12
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
409
TaTaae Mae MaaTarMa*iz" SaMaaNaqYa iNaJaaé[Mae )
AaìaSYaehaeZYaTaa& vTSae YaavTa( Tae >aTauRraGaMa" )) 12 ))
tato me mätaram åñiù
samänéya nijäçrame
äçväsyehoñyatäà vatse
yävat te bhartur ägamaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; me—my; mätaram—mother; åñiù—the great saint Närada
Åñi; samänéya—bringing; nija-äçrame—to his own äçrama; äçväsya—giving
her assurance; iha—here; uñyatäm—stay; vatse—my dear child; yävat—until;
te—your; bhartuù—of the husband; ägamaù—the coming.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja continued: The great saint Närada Muni brought my
mother to his äçrama and assured her of all protection, saying, "My dear child,
please remain at my äçrama until the arrival of your husband."
TEXT 13
TaQaeTYavaTSaqd( devzeRriNTake- Saaku-Taae>aYaa )
Yaavd( dETYaPaiTagaaeRraTa( TaPaSaae Na NYavTaRTa )) 13 ))
tathety avätséd devarñer
antike säkuto-bhayä
yävad daitya-patir ghorät
tapaso na nyavartata
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
410
SYNONYMS
tathä—so be it; iti—thus; avätsét—lived; deva-åñeù—Devarñi Närada;
antike—near; sä—she (my mother); akuto-bhayä—without fear from any
direction; yävat—as long as; daitya-patiù—my father, Hiraëyakaçipu, the lord
of the demons; ghorät—from very severe; tapasaù—austerities; na—not;
nyavartata—ceased.
TRANSLATION
After accepting the instructions of Devarñi Närada, my mother stayed in his
care, without fear from any direction, as long as my father, the King of the
Daityas, had not become free from his severe austerities.
TEXT 14
‰iz& PaYaRcrTa( Ta}a >a¢-ya ParMaYaa SaTaq )
ANTavRÒq SvGa>aRSYa +aeMaaYaeC^aPa[SaUTaYae )) 14 ))
åñià paryacarat tatra
bhaktyä paramayä saté
antarvatné sva-garbhasya
kñemäyecchä-prasütaye
SYNONYMS
åñim—unto Närada Muni; paryacarat—rendered service; tatra—there (in the
äçrama of Närada Muni); bhaktyä—with devotion and faith; paramayä—great;
saté—the faithful woman; antarvatné—pregnant; sva-garbhasya—of her
embryo; kñemäya—for the welfare; icchä—according to desire; prasütaye—for
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
411
deliverance of the child.
TRANSLATION
My mother, being pregnant, desired the safety of her embryo and desired to
give birth after her husband's arrival. Thus she stayed at Närada Muni's
äçrama, where she rendered service unto Närada Muni with great devotion.
PURPORT
It is stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (9.19.17)
mäträ svasrä duhiträ vä
näviviktäsano bhavet
balavän indriya-grämo
vidväàsam api karñati
One should not remain in a secluded place with a woman, even one's mother,
sister, or daughter. Nonetheless, although one is strictly prohibited from
staying with a woman in a secluded place, Närada Muni gave shelter to
Prahläda Mahäräja's young mother, who rendered service to him with great
devotion and faith. Does this mean that Närada Muni transgressed the Vedic
injunctions? Certainly he did not. Such injunctions are intended for mundane
creatures, but Närada Muni is transcendental to mundane categories. Närada
Muni is a great saint and is transcendentally situated. Therefore, although he
was a young man, he could give shelter to a young woman and accept her
service. Haridäsa Öhäkura also spoke with a young woman, a prostitute, in the
dead of night, but the woman could not deviate his mind. Instead, she became
a Vaiñëavé, a pure devotee, by the benediction of Haridäsa Öhäkura. Ordinary
persons, however, should not imitate such highly elevated devotees. Ordinary
persons must strictly observe the rules and regulations by staying aloof from
the association of women. No one should imitate Närada Muni or Haridäsa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
412
Öhäkura. It is said, vaiñëavera kriyä-mudrä vijïe nä bujhaya. Even if a man is
very advanced in learning, he cannot understand the behavior of a Vaiñëava.
Anyone can take shelter of a pure Vaiñëava, without fear. Therefore in the
previous verse it has been distinctly said, devarñer antike säkuto-bhayä:
Kayädhu, the mother of Prahläda Mahäräja, stayed under the protection of
Närada Muni without fear from any direction. Similarly, Närada Muni, in his
transcendental position, stayed with the young woman without fear of
deviation. Närada Muni, Haridäsa Öhäkura and similar äcäryas especially
empowered to broadcast the glories of the Lord cannot be brought down to the
material platform. Therefore one is strictly forbidden to think that the äcärya
is an ordinary human being (guruñu nara-matiù).
TEXT 15
‰iz" k-aåi<ak-STaSYaa" Pa[adadu>aYaMaqìr" )
DaMaRSYa Tatv& jaNa& c MaaMaPYauiÕXYa iNaMaRl/Ma( )) 15 ))
åñiù käruëikas tasyäù
prädäd ubhayam éçvaraù
dharmasya tattvaà jïänaà ca
mäm apy uddiçya nirmalam
SYNONYMS
åñiù—the great sage Närada Muni; käruëikaù—naturally very affectionate or
merciful to the fallen souls; tasyäù—to her; prädät—gave instructions;
ubhayam—both; éçvaraù—a powerful controller who can do whatever he likes
(Närada Muni); dharmasya—of religion; tattvam—the truth;
jïänam—knowledge; ca—and; mäm—me; api—especially;
uddiçya—indicating; nirmalam—without material contamination.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
413
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni delivered his instructions both to me, who was within the
womb, and to my mother, who was engaged in rendering him service. Because
he is naturally extremely kind to the fallen souls, being in a transcendental
position, he gave instructions on religion and transcendental knowledge. These
instructions were free from all material contamination.
PURPORT
Here it is said, dharmasya tattvaà jïänaà ca. .. nirmalam. The word
nirmalam refers to spotless dharma, spotless religion—or, in other words,
bhägavata-dharma. Ordinary ritualistic activities constitute contaminated
religion, by which one benefits by developing material wealth and prosperity,
but uncontaminated, pure religion consists of understanding one's relationship
with God and acting accordingly, thus fulfilling the highest mission of life and
returning home, back to Godhead. Prahläda Mahäräja advised that one elevate
oneself to the standard of bhägavata-dharma from the very beginning of life
(kaumära äcaret präjïo dharmän bhägavatän iha [SB 7.6.1]). The Lord Himself
also speaks of pure, uncontaminated religion when He says, sarva-dharmän
parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja: "Abandon all varieties of religion and just
surrender unto Me." (Bg. 18.66) One must understand one's relationship with
God and then act accordingly. This is bhägavata-dharma. Bhägavata-dharma
means bhakti-yoga.
väsudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogaù prayojitaù
janayaty äçu vairägyaà
jïänaà ca yad ahaitukam
"By rendering devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa,
one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and detachment from the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
414
world." (SB 1.2.7) To be situated on the platform of pure religion, one should
perform bhakti-yoga in relationship with Kåñëa, Väsudeva.
TEXT 16
Tatau k-al/SYa dqgaRTvaTa( ñqTvaNMaaTauiSTaraedDae )
‰iz<aaNauGa*hqTa& Maa& NaaDauNaaPYaJahaTa( SMa*iTa" )) 16 ))
tat tu kälasya dérghatvät
strétvän mätus tirodadhe
åñiëänugåhétaà mäà
nädhunäpy ajahät småtiù
SYNONYMS
tat—that (instruction on religion and knowledge); tu—indeed; kälasya—of
time; dérghatvät—because of the longness; strétvät—because of being a woman;
mätuù—of my mother; tirodadhe—disappeared; åñiëä—by the sage;
anugåhétam—being blessed; mäm—me; na—not; adhunä—today; api—even;
ajahät—left; småtiù—the memory (of Närada Muni's instructions).
TRANSLATION
Because of the long duration of time that has passed and because of her being
a woman and therefore less intelligent, my mother has forgotten all those
instructions; but the great sage Närada blessed me, and therefore I could not
forget them.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (9.32) the Lord says:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
415
mäà hi pärtha vyapäçritya
ye 'pi syuù päpa-yonayaù
striyo vaiçyäs tathä çüdräs
te 'pi yänti paräà gatim
"O son of Påthä, those who take shelter in Me—though they be lowborn,
women, vaiçyas [merchants] or çüdras [workers]—can approach the supreme
destination." The word päpa-yoni refers to those who are less than çüdras, but
even though a woman may not be päpa-yoni, because of being less intelligent
she sometimes forgets devotional instructions. For those who are strong
enough, however, there is no question of forgetting. Women are generally
attached to material enjoyment, and because of this tendency they sometimes
forget devotional instructions. But if even a woman practices devotional
service strictly, according to the rules and regulations, the statement by the
Lord Himself that she can return to Godhead (te 'pi yänti paräà gatim) is not
at all astonishing. One must take shelter of the Lord and rigidly follow the
rules and regulations. Then, regardless of what one is, one will return home,
back to Godhead. Prahläda Mahäräja's mother was more concerned with
protecting the child in the womb and was very anxious to see her husband
return. Therefore she could not consider very seriously the sublime
instructions of Närada Muni.
TEXT 17
>avTaaMaiPa >aUYaaNMae Yaid é[ÕDaTae vc" )
vEXaardq Daq" é[ÖaTa" ñqbal/aNaa& c Mae YaQaa )) 17 ))
bhavatäm api bhüyän me
yadi çraddadhate vacaù
vaiçäradé dhéù çraddhätaù
stré-bälänäà ca me yathä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
416
SYNONYMS
bhavatäm—of yourselves; api—also; bhüyät—it may be; me—of me; yadi—if;
çraddadhate—you believe in; vacaù—the words; vaiçäradé—of the most expert,
or in relation with the Supreme Lord; dhéù—intelligence; çraddhätaù—because
of firm faith; stré—of women; bälänäm—of small boys; ca—also; me—of me;
yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja continued: My dear friends, if you can place your faith in
my words, simply by that faith you can also understand transcendental
knowledge, just like me, although you are small children. Similarly, a woman
can also understand transcendental knowledge and know what is spirit and what
is matter.
PURPORT
These words of Prahläda Mahäräja are very important in regard to
knowledge descending by the disciplic succession. Even when Prahläda
Mahäräja was a baby within the womb of his mother, he became fully
convinced of the existence of the supreme power because of hearing the
powerful instructions of Närada and understood how to attain perfection in
life by bhakti-yoga. These are the most important understandings in spiritual
knowledge.
yasya deve parä bhaktir
yathä deve tathä gurau
tasyaite kathitä hy arthäù
prakäçante mahätmanaù
[ÇU 6.23(11)]
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
417
"Unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the
spiritual master, all the imports of Vedic knowledge are automatically
revealed." (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.23)
ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi
na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù
sevonmukhe hi jihvädau
svayam eva sphuraty adaù
"No one can understand Kåñëa as He is by the blunt material senses. But He
reveals Himself to the devotees, being pleased with them for their
transcendental loving service unto Him." (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.234)
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä
viçate tad-anantaram
"One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional
service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by such
devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God." (Bg. 18.55)
These are Vedic instructions. One must have full faith in the words of the
spiritual master and similar faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Then the real knowledge of ätmä and Paramätmä and the distinction between
matter and spirit will be automatically revealed. This ätma-tattva, or spiritual
knowledge, will be revealed within the core of a devotee's heart because of his
having taken shelter of the lotus feet of a mahäjana such as Prahläda
Mahäräja.
In this verse the word bhüyät may be understood to mean "let there be."
Prahläda Mahäräja offers his blessings to his class friends, saying, "Also become
faithful like me. Become bona fide Vaiñëavas." A devotee of the Lord desires
for everyone to take to Kåñëa consciousness. Unfortunately, however, people
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
418
sometimes do not have staunch faith in the words of the spiritual master who
comes by the disciplic succession, and therefore they are unable to understand
transcendental knowledge. The spiritual master must be in the line of
authorized disciplic succession, like Prahläda Mahäräja, who received the
knowledge from Närada. If the class friends of Prahläda Mahäräja, the sons of
demons, were to accept the truth through Prahläda, they would certainly also
become fully aware of transcendental knowledge.
The words vaiçäradé dhéù refer to intelligence concerning the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is extremely expert. The Lord has created
wonderful universes by His expert knowledge. Unless one is extremely expert,
he cannot understand the expert management of the supreme expert. One can
understand, however, if one is fortunate enough to meet a bona fide spiritual
master coming in the disciplic succession from Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva,
Mother Lakñmé or the Kumäras. These four sampradäyas, or disciplic
successions of knowledge and transcendence, are called the
Brahma-sampradäya, Rudra-sampradäya, Çré-sampradäya, and
Kumära-sampradäya. Sampradäya-vihénä ye manträs te niñphalä matäù. The
knowledge of the Supreme received from such a sampradäya, or disciplic
succession, can give one enlightenment. If one does not take to the path of
disciplic succession, it is not possible for one to understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. If one understands the Supreme Lord through
devotional service with faith in the disciplic succession and then advances
further, he awakens his natural love for God, and then his success in life is
assured.
TEXT 18
JaNMaaÛa" zi@Mae >aava d*ía dehSYa NaaTMaNa" )
f-l/aNaaiMav v*+aSYa k-ale/NaeìrMaUiTaRNaa )) 18 ))
janmädyäù ñaò ime bhävä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
419
dåñöä dehasya nätmanaù
phalänäm iva våkñasya
käleneçvara-mürtinä
SYNONYMS
janma-ädyäù—beginning with birth; ñaö—the six (birth, existence, growth,
transformation, dwindling and at last death); ime—all these;
bhäväù—different conditions of the body; dåñöäù—seen; dehasya—of the body;
na—not; ätmanaù—of the soul; phalänäm—of the fruits; iva—like;
våkñasya—of a tree; kälena—in due course of time; éçvara-mürtinä—whose
form is the ability to transform or control the bodily activities.
TRANSLATION
Just as the fruits and flowers of a tree in due course of time undergo six
changes—birth, existence, growth, transformation, dwindling and then
death—the material body, which is obtained by the spirit soul under different
circumstances, undergoes similar changes. However, there are no such changes
for the spirit soul.
PURPORT
This is a very important verse in understanding the difference between the
spiritual soul and the material body. The soul is eternal, as stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (2.20):
na jäyate mriyate vä kadäcin
näyaà bhütvä bhavitä vä na bhüyaù
ajo nityaù çäçvato 'yaà puräëo
na hanyate hanyamäne çarére
"For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once been, does he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
420
ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undying and primeval.
He is not slain when the body is slain." The spirit soul is eternal, being freed
from waste and change, which take place because of the material body. The
example of a tree and its fruits and flowers is very simple and clear. A tree
stands for many, many years, but with the seasonal changes its fruits and
flowers undergo six transformations. The foolish theory of modern chemists
that life can be produced by chemical interactions cannot be accepted as truth.
The birth of a human being's material body takes place due to a mixture of the
ovum and semen, but the history of birth is that although the ovum and semen
mix together after sex, there is not always pregnancy. Unless the soul enters
the mixture, there is no possibility of pregnancy, but when the soul takes
shelter of the mixture the body takes birth, exists, grows, transforms and
dwindles, and ultimately it is vanquished. The fruits and flowers of a tree
seasonally come and go, but the tree continues to stand. Similarly, the
transmigrating soul accepts various bodies, which undergo six transformations,
but the soul remains permanently the same (ajo nityaù çäçvato 'yaà puräëo na
hanyate hanyamäne çarére [Bg. 2.20]). The soul is eternal and ever existing, but
the bodies accepted by the soul are changing.
There are two kinds of soul—the Supreme Soul (the Personality of
Godhead) and the individual soul (the living entity). As various bodily
changes take place in the individual soul, different millenniums of creation
take place in the Supreme Soul. In this regard, Madhväcärya says:
ñaò vikäräù çarérasya
na viñëos tad-gatasya
ca tad-adhénaà çaréraà ca
jïätvä tan mamatäà tyajet
Since the body is the external feature of the soul, the soul is not dependent on
the body; rather, the body is dependent on the soul. One who understands this
truth should not be very much anxious about the maintenance of his body.
There is no possibility of maintaining the body permanently or eternally.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
421
Antavanta ime dehä nityasyoktäù çarériëaù. This is the statement of
Bhagavad-gétä (2.18). The material body is antavat (perishable), but the soul
within the body is eternal (nityasyoktäù çarériëaù). Lord Viñëu and the
individual souls, who are part and parcel of Him, are both eternal. Nityo
nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm (Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13). Lord Viñëu is the chief
living being, whereas the individual living entities are parts of Lord Viñëu. All
the various grades of bodies—from the gigantic universal body to the small
body of an ant—are perishable, but the Supersoul and the soul, being equal in
quality, both exist eternally. This is further explained in the next verses.
TEXTS 19-20
AaTMaa iNaTYaae_VYaYa" éuÖ Wk-" +ae}aj Aaé[Ya" )
Aivi§-Ya" Svd*Ga( heTauVYaaRPak-ae_Sa&GYaNaav*Ta" )) 19 ))
WTaEÜaRdXai>aivRÜaNaaTMaNaae l/+a<aE" ParE" )
Ah& MaMaeTYaSaÙav& dehadaE MaaehJa& TYaJaeTa( )) 20 ))
ätmä nityo 'vyayaù çuddha
ekaù kñetra-jïa äçrayaù
avikriyaù sva-dåg hetur
vyäpako 'saìgy anävåtaù
etair dvädaçabhir vidvän
ätmano lakñaëaiù paraiù
ahaà mamety asad-bhävaà
dehädau mohajaà tyajet
SYNONYMS
ätmä—the spirit soul, the part of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
nityaù—without birth or death; avyayaù—with no possibility of dwindling;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
422
çuddhaù—without the material contamination of attachment and detachment;
ekaù—individual; kñetra-jïaù—who knows and is therefore different from the
material body; äçrayaù(12)-the original foundation; avikriyaù(13)-not
undergoing changes like the body; sva-dåk(14)-self-illuminated; hetuù—the
cause of all causes; vyäpakaù—spreading throughout the body in the form of
consciousness; asaìgé—not depending on the body (free to transmigrate from
one body to another); anävåtaù—not covered by material contamination;
etaiù—by all these; dvädaçabhiù—twelve; vidvän—a person who is not foolish
but fully aware of things as they are; ätmanaù—of the spirit soul;
lakñaëaiù—symptoms; paraiù—transcendental; aham—I ("I am this body");
mama—mine ("everything in relationship with this body is mine"); iti—thus;
asat-bhävam—a false conception of life; deha-ädau—identifying oneself with
the material body and then with one's wife, children, family, community,
nation and so on; moha-jam—produced from illusory knowledge; tyajet—must
give up.
TRANSLATION
"Ätmä" refers to the Supreme Lord or the living entities. Both of them are
spiritual, free from birth and death, free from deterioration and free from
material contamination. They are individual, they are the knowers of the
external body, and they are the foundation or shelter of everything. They are
free from material change, they are self-illuminated, they are the cause of all
causes, and they are all-pervading. They have nothing to do with the material
body, and therefore they are always uncovered. With these transcendental
qualities, one who is actually learned must give up the illusory conception of
life, in which one thinks, "I am this material body, and everything in
relationship with this body is mine."
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (15.7) Lord Kåñëa clearly says, mamaiväàço jéva-loke
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
423
jéva-bhütaù: "All the living entities are part of Me." Therefore the living
entities are qualitatively the same as the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is the leader, the Supreme among all the living entities. In the Vedas it is
said, nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm (Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13): the Lord is
the chief individual living entity, the leader of the subordinate living entities.
Because the living entities are parts or samples of God, their qualities are not
different from those of the Supreme Lord. The living entities have the same
qualities as the Lord, just as a drop of sea water is composed of the same
chemicals as the great sea itself. Thus there is oneness in quality but a
difference in quantity. One can understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead by understanding the sample, the living entity, because all the
qualities of God exist in a minute quantity in the living entities. There is
oneness, but God is great whereas the living entities are extremely small. Aëor
aëéyän mahato mahéyän (Kaöha Upaniñad 1.2.20). The living entities are
smaller than the atom, but God is greater than the greatest. Our conception of
greatness may be represented by the sky because we think of the sky as being
unlimitedly big, but God is bigger than the sky. Similarly, we have knowledge
that the living entities are smaller than atoms, being one ten-thousandth the
size of the tip of a hair, yet the quality of being the supreme cause of all causes
exists in the living entity as well as in the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Indeed, it is due to the presence of the living entity that the body exists and
bodily changes take place. Similarly, it is because the Supreme Lord is within
this universe that the changes dictated by the material laws occur.
The word ekaù, meaning "individual," is significant. As explained in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.4), mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni na cähaà teñv avasthitaù.
Everything, material and spiritual, including earth, water, air, fire, sky and the
living entities, exists on the platform of spirit soul. Although everything is an
emanation from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one should not think
that the Supreme Lord is dependent upon anything else.
Both God and the living entity are fully conscious. As living entities, we are
conscious of our bodily existence. Similarly, the Lord is conscious of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
424
gigantic cosmic manifestation. This is confirmed in the Vedas. Yasmin dyauù
påthivé cäntarékñam. Vijïätäram adhikena vijänéyät. Ekam evädvitéyam.
Ätma-jyotiù samräò ihoväca. Sa imän lokän asåjata. Satyaà jïänam anantam.
Asaìgo hy ayaà puruñaù. pürëasya pürëam ädäya pürëam evävaçiñyate [Éço
Invocation]. All these Vedic injunctions prove that both the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and the minute soul are individual. One is great, and
the other is small, but both of them are the cause of all causes—the corporally
limited and the universally unlimited.
We should always remember that although we are equal to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in quality, we are never equal to Him in quantity.
Persons with a small fund of intelligence, finding themselves equal in quality
with God, foolishly think that they are equal in quantity also. Their
intelligence is called aviçuddha-buddhayaù-unpolished or contaminated
intelligence. When such persons, after endeavoring hard for many, many lives
to understand the supreme cause, are finally in actual knowledge of Kåñëa,
Väsudeva, they surrender unto Him (väsudevaù sarvam iti sa mahätmä
sudurlabhaù [Bg. 7.19]). Thus they become great mahätmäs, perfect souls. If one
is fortunate enough to understand his relationship with God, knowing that
God is great (vibhu) whereas the living entity is small (aëu), he is perfect in
knowledge. The individual exists in darkness when he thinks that he is the
material body and that everything in relationship with the material body
belongs to him. This is called ahaà mama (janasya moho 'yam ahaà mameti
[SB 5.5.8]). This is illusion. One must give up his illusory conception and thus
become fully aware of everything.
TEXT 21
Sv<a| YaQaa Ga]avSau heMak-ar"
+ae}aezu YaaeGaESTadi>aj AaPanuYaaTa( )
+ae}aezu dehezu TaQaaTMaYaaeGaE‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
425
rDYaaTMaivd( b]øGaiTa& l/>aeTa )) 21 ))
svarëaà yathä grävasu hema-käraù
kñetreñu yogais tad-abhijïa äpnuyät
kñetreñu deheñu tathätma-yogair
adhyätma-vid brahma-gatià labheta
SYNONYMS
svarëam—gold; yathä—just as; grävasu—in the stones of gold ore;
hema-käraù—the expert who knows about gold; kñetreñu—in the gold mines;
yogaiù—by various processes; tat-abhijïaù—an expert who can understand
where gold is; äpnuyät—very easily obtains; kñetreñu—within the material
fields; deheñu—the human bodies and all the rest of the 8,400,000 different
bodily forms; tathä—similarly; ätma-yogaiù—by spiritual processes;
adhyätma-vit—one who is expert in understanding the distinction between
spirit and matter; brahma-gatim—perfection in spiritual life; labheta—may
obtain.
TRANSLATION
An expert geologist can understand where there is gold and by various
processes can extract it from the gold ore. Similarly, a spiritually advanced
person can understand how the spiritual particle exists within the body, and
thus by cultivating spiritual knowledge he can attain perfection in spiritual life.
However, as one who is not expert cannot understand where there is gold, a
foolish person who has not cultivated spiritual knowledge cannot understand
how the spirit exists within the body.
PURPORT
Here is a very good example concerning spiritual understanding. Foolish
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
426
rascals, including so-called jïänés, philosophers and scientists, cannot
understand the existence of the soul within the body because they are lacking
in spiritual knowledge. The Vedas enjoin, tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum
eväbhigacchet: [MU 1.2.12(15)] to understand spiritual knowledge, one must
approach a bona fide spiritual master. Unless one has been trained in geology,
one cannot detect gold in stone. Similarly, unless one has been trained by a
spiritual master, he cannot understand what is spirit and what is matter. Here
it is said, yogais tad-abhijïaù. This indicates that one who has connected
himself with spiritual knowledge can understand that there is a spiritual soul
within the body. However, one who is in an animalistic conception of life and
has no spiritual culture cannot understand. As an expert mineralogist or
geologist can understand where there is gold and can then invest his money to
dig there and chemically separate the gold from the ore, an expert spiritualist
can understand where the soul is within matter. One who has not been trained
cannot distinguish between gold and stone. Similarly, fools and rascals who
have not learned from an expert spiritual master what is soul and what is
matter cannot understand the existence of the soul within the body. To
understand such knowledge, one must be trained in the mystic yoga system, or,
finally, in the bhakti-yoga system. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (18.55), bhaktyä
mäm abhijänäti. Unless one takes shelter of the bhakti-yoga process, one
cannot understand the existence of the soul within the body. Therefore
Bhagavad-gétä begins by teaching:
dehino 'smin yathä dehe
kaumäraà yauvanaà jarä
tathä dehäntara-präptir
dhéras tatra na muhyati
"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth
to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." (Bg. 2.13) Thus the first
instruction is that one should understand that the soul is within the body and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
427
is transmigrating from one body to another. This is the beginning of spiritual
knowledge. Any person who is not expert in understanding this science or is
unwilling to understand it remains in the bodily conception of life, or the
animalistic conception of life, as confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(yasyätma-buddhiù kuëape tri-dhätuke. .. sa eva go-kharaù [SB 10.84.13]). Every
member of human society should clearly understand the instructions of
Bhagavad-gétä, for only in this way can one be spiritually elevated and
automatically give up the false, illusory knowledge by which one thinks, "I am
this body, and everything belonging to this body is mine [ahaà mameti SB
5.5.8]." This doggish conception should be rejected immediately. One should be
prepared to understand the spirit soul and the supreme spirit, God, who are
eternally related. Thus one may return home, back to Godhead, having solved
all the problems of life.
TEXT 22
AíaE Pa[k*-TaYa" Pa[ae¢-añYa Wv ih Tad(Gau<aa" )
ivk-ara" zae@XaacaYaOE" PauMaaNaek-" SaMaNvYaaTa( )) 22 ))
añöau prakåtayaù proktäs
traya eva hi tad-guëäù
vikäräù ñoòaçäcäryaiù
pumän ekaù samanvayät
SYNONYMS
añöau—eight; prakåtayaù—material energies; proktäù—it is said;
trayaù—three; eva—certainly; hi—indeed; tat-guëäù—the modes of material
energy; vikäräù—transformations; ñoòaça—sixteen; äcäryaiù—by the
authorities; pumän—the living entity; ekaù—one; samanvayät—from
conjunction.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
428
TRANSLATION
The Lord's eight separated material energies, the three modes of material
nature and the sixteen transformations [the eleven senses and the five gross
material elements like earth and water]—within all these, the one spiritual soul
exists as the observer. Therefore all the great äcäryas have concluded that the
individual soul is conditioned by these material elements.
PURPORT
As explained in the previous verse, kñetreñu deheñu tathätma-yogair
adhyätma-vid brahma-gatià labheta: "A spiritually advanced person can
understand how the spiritual particle exists within the body, and thus by
cultivating spiritual knowledge he can attain perfection in spiritual life." The
intelligent person who is expert in finding the self within the body must
understand the eight external energies, which are listed in Bhagavad-gétä (7.4):
bhümir äpo 'nalo väyuù
khaà mano buddhir eva ca
ahaìkära itéyaà me
bhinnä prakåtir añöadhä
"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all together
these eight comprise My separated material energies." Bhümi, earth, includes
all the objects of sense perception—rüpa (form), rasa (taste), gandha (smell),
çabda (sound) and sparça (touch). Within the earth are the fragrance of roses,
the taste of sweet fruit, and whatever else we want. As stated in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.10.4), sarva-käma-dughä mahé: the earth (mahé)
contains all our requirements. Thus the objects of sense perception are all
present in bhümi, or the earth. The gross material elements and subtle material
elements (mind, intelligence and ahaìkära, false ego) constitute the total
material energy.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
429
Within the total material energy are the three material modes or qualities.
These qualities—sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa—belong not to the
soul but to the material energy. It is because of the interaction of these three
material modes of nature that the five knowledge-gathering senses, the five
working senses and their controller, the mind, are manifested. Then, according
to these modes, the living entity gets the opportunity to perform different
types of karma with different types of knowledge, thinking, feeling and willing.
Thus the bodily machine begins to work.
This has all been properly analyzed in säìkhya-yoga by the great äcäryas,
especially by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, in His incarnation
as Devahüti-putra Kapila. This is indicated here by the word äcäryaiù. We
need not follow anyone who is not an authorized äcärya. Äcäryavän puruño
veda: one can understand the truth fully when he has taken shelter of an
expert äcärya.
The living entity is individual, but the body is a composition of many
material elements. This is proved by the fact that as soon as the living entity
quits this combination of material elements, it becomes a mere conglomeration
of matter. The matter is qualitatively one, and the spiritual soul is qualitatively
one with the Supreme. The Supreme is one, and the individual soul is one, but
the individual soul is understood to be the master of the individual
combination of material energy, whereas the Supreme Lord is the controller of
the total material energy. The living entity is the master of his particular body,
and according to his activities he is subjected to different types of pains and
pleasures. However, although the Supreme Person, the Paramätmä, is also one,
He is present as an individual in all the different bodies.
The material energy is in fact divided into twenty-four elements. The
individual soul, the owner of the individual body, is a twenty-fifth subject, and
above everything is Lord Viñëu as Paramätmä, the supreme controller, who is
the twenty-sixth subject. When one understands all of these twenty-six
subjects, he becomes adhyätma-vit, an expert in understanding the distinction
between matter and spirit. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (13.3),
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
430
kñetra-kñetrajïayor jïänam: understanding of the kñetra (the constitution of
the body) and of the individual soul and the Supersoul constitutes real jïäna,
or knowledge. Unless one ultimately understands that the Supreme Lord is
eternally related with the individual soul, one's knowledge is imperfect. This is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (7.19):
bahünäà janmanäm ante
jïänavän mäà prapadyate
väsudevaù sarvam iti
sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù
"After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders
unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great
soul is very rare." Everything, material and spiritual, consists of various
energies of Väsudeva, to whom the individual soul, the spiritual part of the
Supreme Lord, is subordinate. Upon understanding this perfect knowledge,
one surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead (väsudevaù sarvam iti
sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù [Bg. 7.19]).
TEXT 23
dehSTau SavRSaºaTaae JaGaTa( TaSQauiriTa iÜDaa )
A}aEv Ma*GYa" Pauåzae NaeiTa NaeTaqTYaTaTa( TYaJaNa( )) 23 ))
dehas tu sarva-saìghäto
jagat tasthur iti dvidhä
atraiva mågyaù puruño
neti netéty atat tyajan
SYNONYMS
dehaù—the body; tu—but; sarva-saìghätaù—the combination of all the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
431
twenty-four elements; jagat—seen to be moving; tasthuù—and standing in one
place; iti—thus; dvidhä—two kinds; atra eva—in this matter; mågyaù—to be
searched for; puruñaù—the living entity, the soul; na—not; iti—thus; na—not;
iti—thus; iti—in this way; atat—what is not spirit; tyajan—giving up.
TRANSLATION
There are two kinds of bodies for every individual soul—a gross body made
of five gross elements and a subtle body made of three subtle elements. Within
these bodies, however, is the spirit soul. One must find the soul by analysis,
saying, "This is not it. This is not it." Thus one must separate spirit from
matter.
PURPORT
As previously stated, svarëaà yathä grävasu hema-käraù kñetreñu yogais
tad-abhijïa äpnuyät. An expert in the study of soil can find out where gold is
and then dig there. He can then analyze the stone and test the gold with nitric
acid. Similarly, one must analyze the whole body to find within the body the
spirit soul. In studying one's own body, one must ask himself whether his head
is his soul, his fingers are his soul, his hand is his soul, and so on. In this way,
one must gradually reject all the material elements and the combinations of
material elements in the body. Then, if one is expert and follows the äcärya, he
can understand that he is the spiritual soul living within the body. The
greatest äcärya, Kåñëa, begins His teachings in Bhagavad-gétä by saying:
dehino 'smin yathä dehe
kaumäraà yauvanaà jarä
tathä dehäntara-präptir
dhéras tatra na muhyati
"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
432
to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." (Bg. 2.13) The spirit soul
possesses the body and is within the body. This is the real analysis. The soul
never mixes with the bodily elements. Although the soul is within the body, it
is separate and always pure. One must analyze and understand his self. This is
self-realization. Neti neti is the analytical process of rejecting matter. By
expertly conducting such an analysis, one can understand where the soul is.
One who is not expert, however, cannot distinguish gold from earth, nor the
soul from the body.
TEXT 24
ANvYaVYaiTareke-<a ivveke-NaaeXaTaaTMaNaa )
SvGaRSQaaNaSaMaaMNaaYaEivRMa*XaiÙrSaTvrE" )) 24 ))
anvaya-vyatirekeëa
vivekenoçatätmanä
svarga-sthäna-samämnäyair
vimåçadbhir asatvaraiù
SYNONYMS
anvaya—directly; vyatirekeëa—and indirectly; vivekena—by mature
discrimination; uçatä—purified; ätmanä—with the mind; svarga—creation;
sthäna—maintenance; samämnäyaiù—and with destruction; vimåçadbhiù—by
those making a serious analysis; asat-varaiù—very sober.
TRANSLATION
Sober and expert persons should search for the spirit soul with minds
purified through analytical study in terms of the soul's connection with and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
433
distinction from all things that undergo creation, maintenance and destruction.
PURPORT
A sober person can study himself and distinguish the soul from the body by
analytical study. For example, when one considers his body—his head, his
hands and so on-one can certainly understand the difference between the
spirit soul and the body. No one says, "I head." Everyone says, "My head." Thus
there are two entities—the head and "I." They are not identical, although they
appear to be one conglomeration.
One may argue, "When we analyze the body we find a head, hands, legs, a
belly, blood, bones, urine, stool and so on, but after everything is considered,
where is the existence of the soul?" A sober man, however, avails himself of
this Vedic instruction:
yato vä imäni bhütäni jäyante; yena jätäni jévanti; yat prayanty abhisaàviçanti;
tad vijijïäsasva; tad brahmeti.
(Taittiréya Upaniñad 3.1.1)
Thus he can understand that the head, hands, legs and indeed the entire body
have grown on the basis of the soul. If the soul is within, the body, head, hands
and legs grow, but otherwise they do not. A dead child does not grow up, for
the soul is not present. If by a careful analysis of the body one still cannot find
the existence of the soul, this is due to his ignorance. How can a gross man
fully engaged in materialistic activities understand the soul, which is a small
particle of spirit one ten-thousandth the size of the tip of a hair? Such a person
foolishly thinks that the material body has grown from a combination of
chemicals, although he cannot find them. The Vedas inform us, however, that
chemical combinations do not constitute the living force; the living force is
the ätmä and Paramätmä, and the body grows on the basis of that living force.
The fruit of a tree grows and undergoes six kinds of change because of the
presence of the tree. If there were no tree, there could be no question of the
growth and maturity of fruit. Therefore, beyond the existence of the body are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
434
the Paramätmä and ätmä within the body. This is the first understanding of
spiritual knowledge explained in Bhagavad-gétä. Dehino 'smin yathä dehe [Bg.
2.13]. The body exists because of the presence of the Supreme Lord and the
jéva, which is part of the Lord. This is further explained by the Lord Himself in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.4):
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings
are in Me, but I am not in them." The Supreme Soul exists everywhere. The
Vedas enjoin, sarvam khalv idaà brahma: everything is Brahman or an
expansion of Brahman's energies. Sütre maëi-gaëä iva: everything rests on the
Lord, just like pearls strung together on a thread. The thread is the principal
Brahman. He is the supreme cause, the Supreme Lord upon whom everything
rests (mattaù parataraà nänyat [Bg. 7.7]). Thus we must study the ätmä and
Paramätmä—the individual soul and the Supersoul—upon whom the entire
material cosmic manifestation rests. This is explained by the Vedic statement
yato vä imäni bhütäni jäya nte. yena jätäni jévanti.
TEXT 25
buÖeJaaRGar<a& SvPan" SauzuiáiriTa v*taYa" )
Taa YaeNaEvaNau>aUYaNTae Saae_DYa+a" Pauåz" Par" )) 25 ))
buddher jägaraëaà svapnaù
suñuptir iti våttayaù
tä yenaivänubhüyante
so 'dhyakñaù puruñaù paraù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
435
SYNONYMS
buddheù—of the intelligence; jägaraëam—the waking or active state of the
gross senses; svapnaù—dreaming (the activity of the senses without the gross
body); suñuptiù—deep sleep or cessation of all activities (although the living
entity is the seer); iti—thus; våttayaù—the various transactions; täù—they;
yena—by whom; eva—indeed; anubhüyante—are perceived; saù—that;
adhyakñaù—overseer (who is different from the activities); puruñaù—the
enjoyer; paraù—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
Intelligence can be perceived in three states of activity—wakefulness,
dreaming and deep sleep. The person who perceives these three is to be
considered the original master, the ruler, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Without intelligence one cannot understand the direct activities of the
senses, nor can he understand dreaming or the cessation of all gross and subtle
activities. The seer and controller is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Supreme Soul, by whose direction the individual soul can understand when he
is awake, when he is sleeping, and when he is completely in trance. In
Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) the Lord says, sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo mattaù
småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: "I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me
come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." The living entities are
completely absorbed in the three states of wakefulness, dreaming and deep
sleep through their intelligence. This intelligence is supplied by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who accompanies the individual soul as a friend. Çréla
Madhväcärya says that the living entity is sometimes described as sattva-buddhi
when his intelligence acts directly to perceive pains and pleasures above
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
436
activities. There is a dreaming state in which understanding comes from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca [Bg.
15.15]). The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul, is the supreme
controller, and under His direction the living entities are subcontrollers. One
must understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead with one's intelligence.
TEXT 26
Wi>aiñv<aOE" PaYaRSTaEbuRiÖ>aedE" i§-YaaeÙvE" )
SvæPaMaaTMaNaae buDYaed( GaNDaEvaRYauiMavaNvYaaTa( )) 26 ))
ebhis tri-varëaiù paryastair
buddhi-bhedaiù kriyodbhavaiù
svarüpam ätmano budhyed
gandhair väyum ivänvayät
SYNONYMS
ebhiù—by these; tri-varëaiù—composed of the three modes of nature;
paryastaiù—completely rejected (due to not touching the living force);
buddhi—of intelligence; bhedaiù—the differentiations;
kriyä-udbhavaiù—produced from different activities; svarüpam—the
constitutional position; ätmanaù—of the self; budhyet—one should
understand; gandhaiù—by the aromas; väyum—the air; iva—exactly like;
anvayät—from close connection.
TRANSLATION
As one can understand the presence of the air by the aromas it carries, so,
under the guidance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can understand
the living soul by these three divisions of intelligence. These three divisions,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
437
however, are not the soul; they are constituted of the three modes and are born
of activities.
PURPORT
As already explained, there are three states to our existence, namely
wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep. In all three states, we have different
experiences. Thus the soul is the observer of these three states. Actually, the
activities of the body are not the activities of the soul. The soul is different
from the body. Just as aromas are distinct from the material vehicle in which
they are carried, the soul is unattached to material activities. This analysis can
be considered by a person who is fully under the shelter of the lotus feet of the
Supreme Lord. This is confirmed by the Vedic injunction yasmin vijïäte
sarvam evaà vijïätaà bhavati (Muëòaka Upaniñad 1.3). If one can understand
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can automatically understand
everything else. Because of not taking shelter of the Lord's lotus feet, even
great scholars, scientists, philosophers and religionists are always bewildered.
This is confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.2.32):
ye 'nye 'ravindäkña vimukta-mäninas
tvayy asta-bhäväd aviçuddha-buddhayaù
Even though one may artificially think himself liberated from material
contamination, if he has not taken shelter of the Lord's lotus feet his
intelligence is polluted. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (3.42):
indriyäëi paräëy ähur
indriyebhyaù paraà manaù
manasas tu parä buddhir
yo buddheù paratas tu saù
Above the senses is the mind, above the mind is the intelligence, and above
the intelligence is the soul. Ultimately, when one's intelligence becomes clear
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
438
through devotional service, one is situated in buddhi-yoga. This also is
explained in Bhagavad-gétä (dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà yena mäm upayänti te).
When devotional service develops and one's intelligence becomes clear, one
can use his intelligence to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 27
WTad(Üarae ih Sa&Saarae Gau<ak-MaRiNabNDaNa" )
AjaNaMaUl/ae_PaaQaaeR_iPa Pau&Sa" SvPan wvaPYaRTae )) 27 ))
etad dväro hi saàsäro
guëa-karma-nibandhanaù
ajïäna-mülo 'pärtho 'pi
puàsaù svapna ivärpyate
SYNONYMS
etat—this; dväraù—whose door; hi—indeed; saàsäraù—material existence, in
which one suffers threefold miseries; guëa-karma-nibandhanaù—captivation
by the three modes of material nature; ajïäna-mülaù—whose root is
ignorance; apärthaù—without factual meaning; api—even; puàsaù—of the
living entity; svapnaù—a dream; iva—like; arpyate—is placed.
TRANSLATION
Through polluted intelligence one is subjected to the modes of nature, and
thus one is conditioned by material existence. Like a dreaming state in which
one falsely suffers, material existence, which is due to ignorance, must be
considered unwanted and temporary.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
439
The unwanted condition of temporary life is called ignorance. One can
very easily understand that the material body is temporary, for it is generated
at a certain date and ends at a certain date, after undergoing the six kinds of
change, namely birth, death, growth, maintenance, transformation and
dwindling. This condition of the eternal soul is due to his ignorance, and
although it is temporary, it is unwanted. Because of ignorance one is put into
temporary bodies one after another. The spirit soul, however, does not need to
enter such temporary bodies. He does so only due to his ignorance or his
forgetfulness of Kåñëa. Therefore in the human form of life, when one's
intelligence is developed, one should change his consciousness by trying to
understand Kåñëa. Then one can be liberated. This is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.9), where the Lord says:
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." Unless one understands Kåñëa and
comes to Kåñëa consciousness, one must continue in material bondage. To end
this conditional life, one must surrender to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Indeed, that is demanded by the Supreme Lord. Sarva-dharmän
parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66].
As advised by Mahäräja Åñabhadeva, na sädhu manye yata ätmano 'yam
asann api kleçada äsa dehaù [SB 5.5.4]. One must be intelligent enough to
understand that although one's body is temporary and will not endure for long,
as long as one has a body he must undergo the pangs of material existence.
Therefore, if by good association, by the instructions of a bona fide spiritual
master, one takes to Kåñëa consciousness, his conditional life of material
existence is vanquished, and his original consciousness, known as Kåñëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
440
consciousness, is revived. When one is Kåñëa conscious, he can realize that
material existence, whether one is awake or dreaming, is nothing but a dream
and has no factual value. This realization is possible by the grace of the
Supreme Lord. This grace is also present in the form of the instructions of
Bhagavad-gétä. Therefore Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu's mission is for everyone to
engage in welfare activities to awaken the foolish living entity, especially in
human society, so that he may come to the platform of Kåñëa consciousness
and benefit by liberation from conditional life.
In this connection, Çréla Madhväcärya cites the following verses:
duùkha-rüpo 'pi saàsäro
buddhi-pürvam aväpyate
yathä svapne çiraç chedaà
svayaà kåtvätmano vaçaù
tato duùkham aväpyeta
tathä jägarito 'pi tu
jänann apy ätmano duùkham
avaças tu pravartate
One must realize that the material condition of life is full of distresses. One
can realize this with purified intelligence. When one's intelligence is purified,
he can understand that unwanted, temporary, material life is just like a dream.
Just as one suffers pain when his head is cut off in a dream, in ignorance one
suffers not only while dreaming but also while awake. Without the mercy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one continues in ignorance and is thus
subjected to material distresses in various ways.
TEXT 28
TaSMaaÙviÙ" k-TaRVYa& k-MaR<aa& i}aGau<aaTMaNaaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
441
bqJaiNahRr<a& YaaeGa" Pa[vahaeParMaae iDaYa" )) 28 ))
tasmäd bhavadbhiù kartavyaà
karmaëäà tri-guëätmanäm
béja-nirharaëaà yogaù
pravähoparamo dhiyaù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; bhavadbhiù—by your good selves; kartavyam—to be done;
karmaëäm—of all material activities; tri-guëa-ätmanäm—conditioned by the
three modes of material nature; béja-nirharaëam—burning of the seed;
yogaù—the process by which one can be linked with the Supreme;
praväha—of the continuous current in the form of wakefulness, dreaming and
deep sleep; uparamaù—the cessation; dhiyaù—of the intelligence.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, my dear friends, O sons of the demons, your duty is to take to
Kåñëa consciousness, which can burn the seed of fruitive activities artificially
created by the modes of material nature and stop the flow of the intelligence in
wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep. In other words, when one takes to Kåñëa
consciousness, his ignorance is immediately dissipated.
PURPORT
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (14.26):
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
442
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman." By the practice of bhakti-yoga, one immediately
comes to the spiritual platform, transcendental to the actions and reactions of
the three modes of material nature. The root of ignorance is material
consciousness, which must be killed by spiritual consciousness, or Kåñëa
consciousness. The word béja-nirharaëam refers to burning the root cause of
material life to ashes. In the Mediné dictionary, yoga is explained by its result:
yoge 'pürvärtha-sampräptau saìgati-dhyäna-yuktiñu. When one is put into an
awkward position because of ignorance, the process by which one can be freed
from this entanglement is called yoga. This is also called liberation. Muktir
hitvänyathä-rüpaà svarüpeëa vyavasthitiù [SB 2.10.6]. Mukti means giving up
one's position in ignorance or illusion, by which one thinks in a way contrary
to his constitutional position. Returning to one's constitutional position is
called mukti, and the process by which one does this is called yoga. Thus yoga is
above karma, jïäna and säìkhya. Indeed, yoga is the ultimate goal of life. Kåñëa
therefore advised Arjuna to become a yogé (tasmäd yogé bhavärjuna). Lord
Kåñëa further advised in Bhagavad-gétä that the first-class yogé is he who has
come to the platform of devotional service.
yoginäm api sarveñäà
mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù
"Of all yogés, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is
the highest of all." (Bg. 6.47) Thus one who always thinks of Kåñëa within the
core of his heart is the best yogé. By practicing this best of all yoga systems, one
is liberated from the material condition.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
443
TEXT 29
Ta}aaePaaYaSahóa<aaMaYa& >aGavTaaeidTa" )
Yadqìre >aGaviTa YaQaa YaErÅSaa riTa" )) 29 ))
tatropäya-sahasräëäm
ayaà bhagavatoditaù
yad éçvare bhagavati
yathä yair aïjasä ratiù
SYNONYMS
tatra—in that connection (getting out of the entanglement of material
conditioning); upäya—of processes; sahasräëäm—of many thousands;
ayam—this; bhagavatä uditaù—given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
yat—which; éçvare—to the Lord; bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; yathä—as much as; yaiù—by which; aïjasä—quickly;
ratiù—attachment with love and affection.
TRANSLATION
Of the different processes recommended for disentanglement from material
life, the one personally explained and accepted by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead should be considered all-perfect. That process is the performance of
duties by which love for the Supreme Lord develops.
PURPORT
Among the linking processes that elevate one from bondage to material
contamination, the one recommended by the Supreme Personality of Godhead
should be accepted as the best. That process is clearly explained in
Bhagavad-gétä, where the Lord says, sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
444
çaraëaà vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender
unto Me." This process is the best because the Lord assures, ahaà tväà
sarva-päpebhyo mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù: "I shall deliver you from all sinful
reaction. Do not fear." There is no need to be worried, for the Lord Himself
assures that He will care for His devotee and save him from the reactions of
sinful activities. Material bondage is a result of sinful activity. Therefore, since
the Lord assures that He will dissipate the results of fruitive material activities,
there is no need to be worried. This process of understanding one's position as
a spirit soul and then engaging oneself in devotional service is therefore the
best. The entire Vedic program is based on this principle, and one can
understand it as recommended in the Vedas:
yasya deve parä bhaktir
yathä deve tathä gurau
tasyaite kathitä hy arthäù
prakäçante mahätmanaù
[ÇU 6.23(16)]
"Unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the
spiritual master, all the imports of Vedic knowledge are automatically
revealed." (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.23) One must accept the pure devotee, the
representative of God, as one's guru and then offer him all the respects one
would offer the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the secret of success.
For one who adopts this method, the perfect process is revealed. In this verse,
the words yair aïjasä ratiù indicate that by offering service and surrendering
to the spiritual master, one is elevated to devotional service, and by performing
devotional service one gradually becomes attached to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Because of this attachment to the Lord, one can understand the
Lord. In other words, one can understand what the Lord's position is, what our
position is and what our relationship is. All this can be understood very easily
by the simple method of bhakti-yoga. As soon as one is situated on the platform
of bhakti-yoga, the root cause of one's suffering and material bondage is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
445
destroyed. This is clearly explained in the next verse, which gives the secret of
success.
TEXTS 30-31
Gauåéué[UzYaa >a¢-ya SavRl/BDaaPaR<aeNa c )
Sa(r)eNa SaaDau>a¢-aNaaMaqìraraDaNaeNa c )) 30 ))
é[ÖYaa TaTk-QaaYaa& c k-ITaRNaEGauR<ak-MaR<aaMa( )
TaTPaadaMbuåhDYaaNaaTa( Taiç(r)e+aahR<aaidi>a" )) 31 ))
guru-çuçrüñayä bhaktyä
sarva-labdhärpaëena ca
saìgena sädhu-bhaktänäm
éçvarärädhanena ca
çraddhayä tat-kathäyäà ca
kértanair guëa-karmaëäm
tat-pädämburuha-dhyänät
tal-liìgekñärhaëädibhiù
SYNONYMS
guru-çuçrüñayä—by rendering service to the bona fide spiritual master;
bhaktyä—with faith and devotion; sarva—all; labdha—of material gains;
arpaëena—by offering (to the guru, or to Kåñëa through the spiritual master);
ca—and; saìgena—by the association; sädhu-bhaktänäm—of devotees and
saintly persons; éçvara—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ärädhanena—by the worship; ca—and; çraddhayä—with great faith;
tat-kathäyäm—in discourses about the Lord; ca—and; kértanaiù—by
glorifications; guëa-karmaëäm—of the transcendental qualities and activities
of the Lord; tat—His; päda-amburuha—on the lotus feet; dhyänät—by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
446
meditation; tat—His; liìga—forms (Deities); ékña—observing;
arhaëa-ädibhiù—and by worshiping.
TRANSLATION
One must accept the bona fide spiritual master and render service unto him
with great devotion and faith. Whatever one has in one's possession should be
offered to the spiritual master, and in the association of saintly persons and
devotees one should worship the Lord, hear the glories of the Lord with faith,
glorify the transcendental qualities and activities of the Lord, always meditate
on the Lord's lotus feet, and worship the Deity of the Lord strictly according to
the injunctions of the çästra and guru.
PURPORT
In the previous verse it has been said that the process which immediately
increases one's love and affection for the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the best of the many thousands of ways to become free from the entanglement
of material existence. It is also said, dharmasya tattvaà nihitaà guhäyäm:
actually the truth of religious principles is extremely confidential.
Nonetheless, it can be understood very easily if one actually adopts the
principles of religion. As it is said, dharmaà tu säkñäd bhagavat-praëétam: [SB
6.3.19] the process of religion is enunciated by the Supreme Lord because He is
the supreme authority. This is also indicated in the previous verse by the word
bhagavatoditaù. The injunctions or directions of the Lord are infallible, and
their benefits are fully assured. According to His directions, which are
explained in this verse, the perfect form of religion is bhakti-yoga.
To practice bhakti-yoga, one must first accept a bona fide spiritual master.
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, in his Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.2.74-75), advises:
guru-pädäçrayas tasmät
kåñëa-dékñädi-çikñaëam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
447
viçrambheëa guroù sevä
sädhu-vartmänuvartanam
sad-dharma-påcchä bhogädityägaù
kåñëasya hetave
One's first duty is to accept a bona fide spiritual master. The student or
disciple should be very inquisitive; he should be eager to know the complete
truth about eternal religion (sanätana-dharma). The words guru-çuçrüñayä
mean that one should personally serve the spiritual master by giving him
bodily comforts, helping him in bathing, dressing, sleeping, eating and so on.
This is called guru-çuçrüñaëam. A disciple should serve the spiritual master as a
menial servant, and whatever he has in his possession should be dedicated to
the spiritual master. präëair arthair dhiyä väcä. Everyone has his life, his
wealth, his intelligence and his words, and all of them should be offered to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead through the via medium of the spiritual
master. Everything should be offered to the spiritual master as a matter of
duty, but the offering should be made to the spiritual master with heart and
soul, not artificially to gain material prestige. This offering is called arpaëa.
Moreover, one should live among devotees, saintly persons, to learn the
etiquette and proper behavior of devotional service. Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks in this connection that whatever is offered to the
spiritual master should be offered with love and affection, not for material
adoration. Similarly, it is recommended that one associate with devotees, but
there must be some discrimination. Actually, a sädhu, a saintly person, must be
saintly in his behavior (sädhavaù sad-äcäräù). Unless one adheres to the
standard behavior, one's position as a sädhu, a saintly person, is not complete.
Therefore a Vaiñëava, a sädhu, must completely adhere to the standard of
behavior. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that a Vaiñëava, a person
initiated into the Vaiñëava cult, should be offered the respect befitting a
Vaiñëava, which means that he should be offered service and prayers.
However, one should not associate with him if he is not a fit person with
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
448
whom to associate.
TEXT 32
hir" SaveRzu >aUTaezu >aGavaNaaSTa wRìr" )
wiTa >aUTaaiNa MaNaSaa k-aMaESTaE" SaaDau MaaNaYaeTa( )) 32 ))
hariù sarveñu bhüteñu
bhagavän ästa éçvaraù
iti bhütäni manasä
kämais taiù sädhu mänayet
SYNONYMS
hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarveñu—in all; bhüteñu—living
entities; bhagavän—the supreme personality; äste—is situated; éçvaraù—the
supreme controller; iti—thus; bhütäni—all living entities; manasä—by such
understanding; kämaiù—by desires; taiù—those; sädhu mänayet—one should
highly esteem.
TRANSLATION
One should always remember the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His
localized representation as the Paramätmä, who is situated in the core of every
living entity's heart. Thus one should offer respect to every living entity
according to that living entity's position or manifestation.
PURPORT
Hariù sarveñu bhüteñu. This statement is sometimes misunderstood by
unscrupulous persons who wrongly conclude that because Hari, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is situated in every living entity, every living entity is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
449
therefore Hari. Such foolish persons do not distinguish between the ätmä and
the Paramätmä, who are situated in every body. The ätma is the living entity,
and the Paramätmä is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The individual
living entity, however, is different from the Paramätmä, the Supreme Lord.
Therefore hariù sarveñu bhüteñu means that Hari is situated as Paramätmä, not
as ätmä, although ätmä is a part of Paramätmä. Offering respect to every living
entity means offering respect to the Paramätmä situated in every living entity.
One should not misunderstand every living entity to be the Paramätmä.
Sometimes unscrupulous persons designate a living entity as daridra-näräyaëa,
svämé-näräyaëa, this Näräyaëa or that Näräyaëa. One should clearly
understand that although Näräyaëa is situated in the core of the heart of every
living entity, the living entity never becomes Näräyaëa.
TEXT 33
Wv& iNaiJaRTazÍGaOE" i§-YaTae >ai¢-rqìre )
vaSaudeve >aGaviTa YaYaa Sa&l/>YaTae riTa" )) 33 ))
evaà nirjita-ñaò-vargaiù
kriyate bhaktir éçvare
väsudeve bhagavati
yayä saàlabhyate ratiù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; nirjita—subdued; ñaö-vargaiù—by the six symptoms of the senses
(lusty desires, anger, greed, illusion, madness and jealousy); kriyate—is
rendered; bhaktiù—devotional service; éçvare—unto the supreme controller;
väsudeve—to Lord Väsudeva; bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; yayä—by which; saàlabhyate—is obtained; ratiù—attachment.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
450
TRANSLATION
By these activities [as mentioned above] one is able to cut down the
influence of the enemies, namely lust, anger, greed, illusion, madness and
jealousy, and when thus situated, one can render service to the Lord. In this
way one surely attains the platform of loving service to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
PURPORT
As mentioned in verses thirty and thirty-one, one's first duty is to approach
the spiritual master, the representative of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, to begin rendering service to him. Prahläda Mahäräja proposed that
from the very beginning of life (kaumära äcaret präjïaù) a small child should
be trained to serve the spiritual master while living at the guru-kula.
Brahmacäré guru-kule vasan dänto guror hitam (SB 7.12.1). This is the beginning
of spiritual life. Guru-pädäçrayaù, sädhu-vartmänuvartanam,
sad-dharma-påcchä. By following the instructions of the guru and the çästras,
the disciple attains the stage of devotional service and becomes unattached to
possessions. Whatever he possesses he offers to the spiritual master, the guru,
who engages him in çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23]. The disciple follows
strictly and in this way learns how to control his senses. Then, by using his
pure intelligence, he gradually becomes a lover of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, as confirmed by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé (ädau çraddhä tataù
sädhu-saìgaù). In this way one's life becomes perfect, and his attachment for
Kåñëa becomes positively manifested. In that stage, he is situated in ecstasy,
experiencing bhäva and anubhäva, as explained in the following verse.
TEXT 34
iNaXaMYa k-MaaRi<a Gau<aaNaTauLYaaNa(
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
451
vqYaaRi<a l/Il/aTaNaui>a" k*-TaaiNa )
YadaiTahzaeRTPaul/k-aé[uGaÓd&
Pa[aeTk-<#= oÓaYaiTa raEiTa Na*TYaiTa )) 34 ))
niçamya karmäëi guëän atulyän
véryäëi lélä-tanubhiù kåtäni
yadätiharñotpulakäçru-gadgadaà
protkaëöha udgäyati rauti nåtyati
SYNONYMS
niçamya—hearing; karmäëi—transcendental activities; guëän—spiritual
qualities; atulyän—uncommon (not generally visible in an ordinary person);
véryäëi—very powerful; lélä-tanubhiù—by different pastime forms;
kåtäni—performed; yadä—when; atiharña—because of great jubilation;
utpulaka—horripilation; açru—tears in the eyes; gadgadam—faltering voice;
protkaëöhaù—with an open voice; udgäyati—chants very loudly; rauti—cries;
nåtyati—dances.
TRANSLATION
One who is situated in devotional service is certainly the controller of his
senses, and thus he is a liberated person. When such a liberated person, the
pure devotee, hears of the transcendental qualities and activities of the Lord's
incarnations for the performance of various pastimes, his hair stands on end on
his body, tears fall from his eyes, and in his spiritual realization his voice falters.
Sometimes he very openly dances, sometimes he sings loudly, and sometimes he
cries. Thus he expresses his transcendental jubilation.
PURPORT
The Lord's activities are uncommon. For example, when He appeared as
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
452
Lord Rämacandra, He performed uncommon activities like bridging the ocean.
Similarly, when Lord Kåñëa appeared He raised the Govardhana Hill when He
was only seven years of age. These are uncommon activities. Fools and rascals,
who are not in the transcendental position, consider these uncommon
activities of the Lord to be mythological, but when the pure devotee, the
liberated person, hears about these uncommon activities of the Lord, he
immediately becomes ecstatic and exhibits the symptoms of chanting, dancing,
and crying very loudly and jubilantly. This is the difference between a devotee
and a nondevotee.
TEXT 35
Yada Ga]hGa]STa wv KvicÖSa‚
TYaa§-NdTae DYaaYaiTa vNdTae JaNaMa( )
Mauhu" ìSaNvi¢- hre JaGaTPaTae
NaaraYa<aeTYaaTMaMaiTaGaRTa}aPa" )) 35 ))
yadä graha-grasta iva kvacid dhasaty
äkrandate dhyäyati vandate janam
muhuù çvasan vakti hare jagat-pate
näräyaëety ätma-matir gata-trapaù
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; graha-grastaù—haunted by a ghost; iva—like;
kvacit—sometimes; hasati—laughs; äkrandate—cries loudly (remembering the
transcendental qualities of the Lord); dhyäyati—meditates; vandate—offers
respects; janam—to all living entities (thinking all of them to be engaged in
the service of the Lord); muhuù—constantly; çvasan—breathing heavily;
vakti—he speaks; hare—O my Lord; jagat-pate—O master of the whole world;
näräyaëa—O Lord Näräyaëa; iti—thus; ätma-matiù—fully absorbed in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
453
thoughts of the Supreme Lord; gata-trapaù—without shame.
TRANSLATION
When a devotee becomes like a person haunted by a ghost, he laughs and
very loudly chants about the qualities of the Lord. Sometimes he sits to perform
meditation, and he offers respects to every living entity, considering him a
devotee of the Lord. Constantly breathing very heavily, he becomes careless of
social etiquette and loudly chants like a madman, "Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa! O
my Lord, O master of the universe!"
PURPORT
When one chants the holy name of the Lord in ecstasy, not caring for
outward social conventions, it is to be understood that he is ätma-mati. In
other words, his consciousness is turned toward the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 36
Tada PauMaaNMau¢-SaMaSTabNDaNa‚
STaÙav>aavaNauk*-TaaXaYaak*-iTa" )
iNadRGDabqJaaNauXaYaae MahqYaSaa
>ai¢-Pa[YaaeGae<a SaMaeTYaDaae+aJaMa( )) 36 ))
tadä pumän mukta-samasta-bandhanas
tad-bhäva-bhävänukåtäçayäkåtiù
nirdagdha-béjänuçayo mahéyasä
bhakti-prayogeëa samety adhokñajam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
454
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; pumän—the living entity; mukta—liberated;
samasta-bandhanaù—from all material obstacles on the path of devotional
service; tat-bhäva—of the situation of the Supreme Lord's activities;
bhäva—by thinking; anukåta—made similar; äçaya-äkåtiù—whose mind and
body; nirdagdha—completely burned up; béja—the seed or original cause of
material existence; anuçayaù—desire; mahéyasä—very powerful; bhakti—of
devotional service; prayogeëa—by the application; sameti—achieves;
adhokñajam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond the reach of
the material mind and knowledge.
TRANSLATION
The devotee is then freed from all material contamination because he
constantly thinks of the Lord's pastimes and because his mind and body have
been converted to spiritual qualities. Because of his intense devotional service,
his ignorance, material consciousness and all kinds of material desires are
completely burnt to ashes. This is the stage at which one can achieve the shelter
of the Lord's lotus feet.
PURPORT
When a devotee is completely purified, he becomes anyäbhiläñitä-çünya. In
other words, all of his material desires become zero, being burnt to ashes, and
he exists either as the Lord's servant, friend, father, mother or conjugal lover.
Because one thinks constantly in this way, one's present material body and
mind are fully spiritualized, and the needs of one's material body completely
vanish from one's existence. An iron rod put into a fire becomes warmer and
warmer, and when it is red hot it is no longer an iron rod but fire. Similarly,
when a devotee constantly engages in devotional service and thinks of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
455
Lord in his original Kåñëa consciousness, he no longer has any material
activities, for his body is spiritualized. Advancement in Kåñëa consciousness is
very powerful, and therefore even during this life such a devotee has achieved
the shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. This transcendental ecstatic existence
of a devotee was completely exhibited by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. In this
regard, Çréla Madhväcärya writes as follows:
tad-bhäva-bhävaù tad yathä svarüpaà bhaktiù
kecid bhaktä vinåtyanti gäyanti ca yathepsitam
kecit tuñëéà japanty eva kecit çobhaya-käriëaù
The ecstatic condition of devotional service was completely exhibited by Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu, who sometimes danced, sometimes cried, sometimes
sang, sometimes remained silent, and sometimes chanted the holy name of the
Lord. That is perfect spiritual existence.
TEXT 37
ADaae+aJaal/M>aiMahaéu>aaTMaNa"
Xarqir<a" Sa&Sa*iTac§-XaaTaNaMa( )
Tad( b]øiNavaR<aSau%& ivdubuRDaa‚
STaTaae >aJaß& ôdYae ôdqìrMa( )) 37 ))
adhokñajälambham ihäçubhätmanaù
çarériëaù saàsåti-cakra-çätanam
tad brahma-nirväëa-sukhaà vidur budhäs
tato bhajadhvaà hådaye håd-éçvaram
SYNONYMS
adhokñaja—with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
456
reach of the materialistic mind or experimental knowledge; älambham—being
constantly in contact; iha—in this material world; açubha-ätmanaù—whose
mind is materially contaminated; çarériëaù—of a living entity who has
accepted a material body; saàsåti—of material existence; cakra—the cycle;
çätanam—completely stopping; tat—that; brahma-nirväëa—connected with
the Supreme Brahman, the Absolute Truth; sukham—transcendental
happiness; viduù—understand; budhäù—those who are spiritually advanced;
tataù—therefore; bhajadhvam—engage in devotional service; hådaye—within
the core of the heart; håt-éçvaram—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the Supersoul within the heart.
TRANSLATION
The real problem of life is the repetition of birth and death, which is like a
wheel rolling repeatedly up and down. This wheel, however, completely stops
when one is in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other
words, by the transcendental bliss realized from constant engagement in
devotional service, one is completely liberated from material existence. All
learned men know this. Therefore, my dear friends, O sons of the asuras,
immediately begin meditating upon and worshiping the Supersoul within
everyone's heart.
PURPORT
Generally it is understood that by merging into the existence of Brahman,
the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth, one becomes completely happy.
The words brahma-nirväëa refer to connecting with the Absolute Truth, who
is realized in three features: brahmeti paramätmeti bhagavän iti çabdyate [SB
1.2.11]. One feels brahma-sukha, spiritual happiness, by merging into the
impersonal Brahman because the brahmajyoti is the effulgence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Yasya prabhä prabhavato jagad-aëòa-koöi [Bs. 5.40].
Yasya prabhä, the impersonal Brahman, consists of the rays of Kåñëa's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
457
transcendental body. Therefore whatever transcendental bliss one feels from
merging in Brahman is due to contact with Kåñëa. Contact with Kåñëa is
perfect brahma-sukha. When the mind is in touch with the impersonal
Brahman one becomes satisfied, but one must advance further to render
service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for one's remaining merged in
the Brahman effulgence is not always assured. As it is said, äruhya kåcchreëa
paraà padaà tataù patanty adho 'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù: [SB 10.2.32] one
may merge in the Brahman feature of the Absolute Truth, but there is a
chance that one may fall because of not being acquainted with Adhokñaja, or
Väsudeva. Of course, such brahma-sukha undoubtedly eliminates material
happiness, but when one advances through impersonal Brahman and localized
Paramätmä to approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead in relationship
with Him as a servant, friend, parent or conjugal lover, one's happiness
becomes all-pervading. Then one automatically feels transcendental bliss, just
as one becomes happy seeing the shining of the moon. One acquires natural
happiness upon seeing the moon, but when one can see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, one's transcendental happiness increases hundreds
and thousands of times. As soon as one is very intimately connected with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, one surely becomes free from all material
contamination. Yä nirvåtis tanu-bhåtäm. This cessation of all material
happiness is called nirvåti or nirväëa. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé says in
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.1.38):
brahmänando bhaved eña
cet parärdha-guëé-kåtaù
naiti bhakti-sukhämbhodheù
paramäëu-tuläm api
"If brahmänanda, the bliss of merging in the Brahman effulgence, were
multiplied one hundred trillion times, it would still not equal even an atomic
fragment of the ocean of transcendental bliss felt in devotional service."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
458
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
"One who is transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman
and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is
equally disposed toward all living entities. In that state he attains pure
devotional service unto the Lord." (Bg. 18.54) If one advances further from the
brahma-nirväëa platform, one enters the stage of devotional service
(mad-bhaktià labhate paräm). The word adhokñajälambham refers to keeping
the mind always engaged in the Absolute Truth, who is beyond the mind and
material speculation. Sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]. This is
the result of Deity worship. By constantly engaging in the service of the Lord
and thinking of His lotus feet, one is automatically freed from all material
contamination. Thus the word brahma-nirväëa-sukham indicates that when
one is in touch with the Absolute Truth, material sense gratification is
completely nullified.
TEXT 38
k-ae_iTaPa[YaaSaae_Saurbal/k-a hre‚
åPaaSaNae Sve ôid i^d]vTa( SaTa" )
SvSYaaTMaNa" Sa:YaurXaezdeihNaa&
SaaMaaNYaTa" ik&- ivzYaaePaPaadNaE" )) 38 ))
ko 'ti-prayäso 'sura-bälakä harer
upäsane sve hådi chidravat sataù
svasyätmanaù sakhyur açeña-dehinäà
sämänyataù kià viñayopapädanaiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
459
SYNONYMS
kaù—what; ati-prayäsaù—difficult endeavor; asura-bälakäù—O sons of
demons; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; upäsane—in
discharging the devotional service; sve—in one's own; hådi—core of the heart;
chidra-vat—just like the space; sataù—who always exists; svasya—of one's self
or of the living entity; ätmanaù—of the Supersoul; sakhyuù—of the
well-wishing friend; açeña—unlimited; dehinäm—of the embodied souls;
sämänyataù—generally; kim—what is the need; viñaya-upapädanaiù—with
activities delivering the objects of the senses for sense enjoyment.
TRANSLATION
O my friends, sons of the asuras, the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His
Supersoul feature always exists within the cores of the hearts of all living
entities. Indeed, He is the well-wisher and friend of all living entities, and there
is no difficulty in worshiping the Lord. Why, then, should people not engage in
His devotional service? Why are they so addicted to unnecessarily producing
artificial paraphernalia for sense gratification?
PURPORT
Because the Personality of Godhead is supreme, no one is equal to Him, and
no one is greater than Him. Nonetheless, if one is a devotee of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the Lord is easily obtainable. The Lord is compared to
the sky because the sky is vast yet within the reach of all, not only of human
beings but even of the animals. The Supreme Lord, in His Paramätmä feature,
exists as the best well-wisher and friend. As confirmed in the Vedas, sayujau
sakhäyau. The Lord, in His Supersoul feature, always stays in the heart along
with the living entity. The Lord is so friendly to the living entity that He
remains within the heart so that one can always contact Him without
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
460
difficulty. One can do this simply by devotional service (çravaëaà kértanaà
viñëoù smaranaà. päda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23]). As soon as one hears of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (kåñëa-kértana), one immediately comes in
touch with the Lord. A devotee immediately comes in touch with the Lord by
any or all of the items of devotional service:
çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù
smaraëaà päda-sevanam
arcanaà vandanaà däsyaà
sakhyam ätma-nivedanam
[SB 7.5.23]
Therefore there is no difficulty in coming in contact with the Supreme Lord
(ko 'ti-prayäsaù). On the other hand, going to hell requires great endeavor. If
one wants to go to hell by illicit sex, meat-eating, gambling and intoxication,
he must acquire so many things. For illicit sex he must arrange for money for
brothels, for meat-eating he must arrange for many slaughterhouses, for
gambling he must arrange for casinos and hotels, and for intoxication he must
open many breweries. Clearly, therefore, if one wants to go to hell he must
endeavor very much, but if he wants to return home, back to Godhead, there is
no difficult endeavor. To go back to Godhead, one may live alone anywhere, in
any condition, and simply sit down, meditate upon the Supersoul and chant
and hear about the Lord. Thus there is no difficulty in approaching the Lord.
Adänta-gobhir viçatäà tamisram [SB 7.5.30]. Because of inability to control the
senses, one must go through great endeavor to go to hell, but if one is sensible
he can very easily obtain the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
because the Lord is always with him. By the simple method of çravaëaà
kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23], the Lord is satisfied. Indeed, the Lord says:
patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà
yo me bhaktyä prayacchati
tad ahaà bhakty-upahåtam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
461
açnämi prayatätmanaù
"If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will
accept it." (Bg. 9.26) One can meditate upon the Lord anywhere and
everywhere. Thus Prahläda Mahäräja advised his friends, the sons of the
demons, to take this path back home, back to Godhead, without difficulty.
TEXT 39
raYa" k-l/}a& PaXav" SauTaadYaae
Ga*ha Mahq ku-Årk-aeXa>aUTaYa" )
SaveR_QaRk-aMaa" +a<a>ax(GauraYauz"
ku-vRiNTa MaTYaRSYa ik-YaTa( iPa[Ya& cl/a" )) 39 ))
räyaù kalatraà paçavaù sutädayo
gåhä mahé kuïjara-koça-bhütayaù
sarve 'rtha-kämäù kñaëa-bhaìguräyuñaù
kurvanti martyasya kiyat priyaà caläù
SYNONYMS
räyaù—wealth; kalatram—one's wife and feminine friends; paçavaù—domestic
animals like cows, horses, asses, cats and dogs; suta-ädayaù—children and so
on; gåhäù—big buildings and residences; mahé—land; kuïjara—elephants;
koça—treasury house; bhütayaù—and other luxuries for sense gratification and
material enjoyment; sarve—all; artha—economic development; kämäù—and
sense gratification; kñaëa-bhaìgura—perishable in a moment; äyuñaù—of one
whose duration of life; kurvanti—effect or bring; martyasya—of one who is
destined to die; kiyat—how much; priyam—pleasure; caläù—flickering and
temporary.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
462
TRANSLATION
One's riches, beautiful wife and female friends, one's sons and daughters,
one's residence, one's domestic animals like cows, elephants and horses, one's
treasury, economic development and sense gratification—indeed, even the
lifetime in which one can enjoy all these material opulences—are certainly
temporary and flickering. Since the opportunity of human life is temporary,
what benefit can these material opulences give to a sensible man who has
understood himself to be eternal?
PURPORT
This verse describes how the advocates of economic development are
frustrated by the laws of nature. As the previous verse asks, kià
viñayopapädanaiù: what is the actual benefit of so-called economic
development? The history of the world has factually proved that attempts to
increase economic development for bodily comfort through the advancement
of material civilization have done nothing to remedy the inevitability of birth,
death, old age and disease. Everyone has knowledge of huge empires
throughout the history of the world—the Roman Empire, the Moghul Empire,
the British Empire and so on—but all the societies engaged in such economic
development (sarve 'rtha-kämäù) have been frustrated by the laws of nature
through periodic wars, pestilence, famine and so on. Thus all their attempts
have been flickering and temporary. In this verse, therefore, it is said, kurvanti
martyasya kiyat priyaà caläù: one may be very proud of possessing a vast
empire, but such empires are impermanent; after one hundred or two hundred
years, everything is finished. All such positions of economic development,
although created with great endeavor and hardship, are vanquished very soon.
Therefore they have been described as caläù. An intelligent man should
conclude that material economic development is not at all pleasing. The entire
world is described in Bhagavad-gétä as duùkhälayam açäçvatam [Bg.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
463
8.15]—miserable and temporary. Economic development may be pleasing for
some time, but it cannot endure. Thus many big businessmen are now very
morose because they are being harassed by various plundering governments. In
conclusion, why should one waste his time for so-called economic
development, which is neither permanent nor pleasing to the soul?
On the other hand, our relationship with Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, is eternal. Nitya-siddha kåñëa-prema. The pure souls are eternally
in love with Kåñëa, and this permanent love, either as a servant, a friend, a
parent or a conjugal lover, is not at all difficult to revive. Especially in this age,
the concession is that simply by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra (harer näma
harer näma harer nämaiva kevalam [Cc. Ädi 17.21]) one revives his original
relationship with God and thus becomes so happy that he does not want
anything material. As enunciated by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, na dhanaà na
janaà na sundaréà kavitäà vä jagad-éça kämaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4].
A very advanced devotee in Kåñëa consciousness does not want riches,
followers or possessions. Räyaù kalatraà paçavaù sutädayo gåhä mahé
kuïjara-koça-bhütayaù. The satisfaction of possessing material opulences,
although perhaps of a different standard, is available even in the lives of dogs
and hogs, who cannot revive their eternal relationship with Kåñëa. In human
life, however, our eternal, dormant relationship with Kåñëa is possible to
revive. Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja has described this life as arthadam.
Consequently, instead of wasting our time for economic development, which
cannot give us any happiness, if we simply try to revive our eternal
relationship with Kåñëa, we will properly utilize our lives.
TEXT 40
Wv& ih l/aek-a" §-Taui>a" k*-Taa AMaq
+aiYaZ<av" SaaiTaXaYaa Na iNaMaRl/a" )
TaSMaadd*íé[uTadUz<a& Par&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
464
>a¢-yae¢-YaeXa& >aJaTaaTMal/BDaYae )) 40 ))
evaà hi lokäù kratubhiù kåtä amé
kñayiñëavaù sätiçayä na nirmaläù
tasmäd adåñöa-çruta-düñaëaà paraà
bhaktyoktayeçaà bhajatätma-labdhaye
SYNONYMS
evam—similarly (as earthly wealth and possessions are impermanent);
hi—indeed; lokäù—higher planetary systems like heaven, the moon, the sun
and Brahmaloka; kratubhiù—by performing great sacrifices; kåtäù—achieved;
amé—all those; kñayiñëavaù—perishable, impermanent; sätiçayäù—although
more comfortable and pleasing; na—not; nirmaläù—pure (free from
disturbances); tasmät—therefore; adåñöa-çruta—never seen or heard;
düñaëam—whose fault; param—the Supreme; bhaktyä—with great devotional
love; uktayä—as described in the Vedic literature (not mixed with jïäna or
karma); éçam—the Supreme Lord; bhajata—worship; ätma-labdhaye—for
self-realization.
TRANSLATION
It is learned from Vedic literature that by performing great sacrifices one
may elevate himself to the heavenly planets. However, although life on the
heavenly planets is hundreds and thousands of times more comfortable than life
on earth, the heavenly planets are not pure [nirmalam], or free from the taint of
material existence. The heavenly planets are also temporary, and therefore they
are not the goal of life. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, however, has
never been seen or heard to possess inebriety. Consequently, for your own
benefit and self-realization, you must worship the Lord with great devotion, as
described in the revealed scriptures.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
465
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, kñéëe puëye martya-lokaà viçanti [Bg. 9.21]. Even
if one is promoted to the higher planetary systems by performing great
sacrifices, which are accompanied by the sinful act of sacrificing animals, the
standard of happiness in Svargaloka is also not free of disturbances. There is a
similar struggle for existence even for the King of heaven, Indra. Thus there is
no practical benefit in promoting oneself to the heavenly planets. Indeed, from
the heavenly planets one must return to this earth after one has exhausted the
results of his pious activities. In the Vedas it is said, tad yatheha karma jito
lokaù kñéyate evam evämutra puëya jito lokaù kñéyata. As the material positions
we acquire here by hard work are vanquished in due course of time, one's
residence in the heavenly planets is also eventually vanquished. According to
one's activities of piety in different degrees, one obtains different standards of
life, but none of them are permanent, and therefore they are all impure.
Consequently, one should not endeavor to be promoted to the higher
planetary systems, only to return to this earth or descend still lower to the
hellish planets. To stop this cycle of going up and coming down, one must take
to Kåñëa consciousness. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore said:
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
(Cc. Madhya 19.151)
The living entity is rotating in the cycle of birth and death, going sometimes to
the higher planets and sometimes to the lower planets, but that is not the
solution to the problems of life. But if by the grace of Kåñëa one is fortunate
enough to meet a guru, a representative of Kåñëa, one gets the clue to
returning home, back to Godhead, having achieved self-realization. This is
what is actually desirable. Bhajatätma-labdhaye: one must take to Kåñëa
consciousness for self-realization.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
466
TEXT 41
YadQaR wh k-MaaRi<a ivÜNMaaNYaSak*-àr" )
k-raeTYaTaae ivPaYaaRSaMaMaaega& ivNdTae f-l/Ma( )) 41 ))
yad-artha iha karmäëi
vidvan-mäny asakån naraù
karoty ato viparyäsam
amoghaà vindate phalam
SYNONYMS
yat—of which; arthe—for the purpose; iha—in this material world;
karmäëi—many activities (in factories, industries, speculation and so on);
vidvat—advanced in knowledge; mäné—thinking himself to be; asakåt—again
and again; naraù—a person; karoti—performs; ataù—from this;
viparyäsam—the opposite; amogham—unfailingly; vindate—achieves;
phalam—result.
TRANSLATION
A materialistic person, thinking himself very advanced in intelligence,
continually acts for economic development. But again and again, as enunciated
in the Vedas, he is frustrated by material activities, either in this life or in the
next. Indeed, the results one obtains are inevitably the opposite of those one
desires.
PURPORT
No one has ever achieved the results he desired from material activities. On
the contrary, everyone has been frustrated again and again. Therefore one
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
467
must not waste his time in such material activities for sensual pleasure, either
in this life or in the next. So many nationalists, economists and other
ambitious persons have tried for happiness, individually or collectively, but
history proves that they have all been frustrated. In recent history we have
seen many political leaders work hard for individual and collective economic
development, but they have all failed. This is the law of nature, as clearly
explained in the next verse.
TEXT 42
Sau%aYa du"%Maae+aaYa SaªLPa wh k-iMaR<a" )
SadaPanaeTaqhYaa du"%MaNaqhaYaa" Sau%av*Ta" )) 42 ))
sukhäya duùkha-mokñäya
saìkalpa iha karmiëaù
sadäpnotéhayä duùkham
anéhäyäù sukhävåtaù
SYNONYMS
sukhäya—for achieving happiness by a so-called higher standard of life;
duùkha-mokñäya—for becoming free from misery; saìkalpaù—the
determination; iha—in this world; karmiëaù—of the living entity trying for
economic development; sadä—always; äpnoti—achieves; éhayä—by activity or
ambition; duùkham—only unhappiness; anéhäyäù—and from not desiring
economic development; sukha—by happiness; ävåtaù—covered.
TRANSLATION
In this material world, every materialist desires to achieve happiness and
diminish his distress, and therefore he acts accordingly. Actually, however, one
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
468
is happy as long as one does not endeavor for happiness; as soon as one begins
his activities for happiness, his conditions of distress begin.
PURPORT
Every conditioned soul is bound by the laws of material nature, as described
in Bhagavad-gétä (prakåteù kriyamäëäni guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù [Bg. 3.27]).
Everyone has achieved a certain type of body given by material nature
according to the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of
the material energy." (Bg. 18.61) The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Supersoul, is present in everyone's heart, and as the living entity desires, the
Lord gives him facilities with which to work according to his ambitions in
different grades of bodies. The body is just like an instrument by which the
living entity moves according to false desires for happiness and thus suffers the
pangs of birth, death, old age and disease in different standards of life.
Everyone begins his activities with some plan and ambition, but actually, from
the beginning of one's plan to the end, one does not derive any happiness. On
the contrary, as soon as one begins acting according to his plan, his life of
distress immediately begins. Therefore, one should not be ambitious to
dissipate the unhappy conditions of life, for one cannot do anything about
them. Ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä kartäham iti manyate [Bg. 3.27]. Although one is
acting according to false ambitions, he thinks he can improve his material
conditions by his activities. The Vedas enjoin that one should not try to
increase happiness or decrease distress, for this is futile. Tasyaiva hetoù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
469
prayateta kovidaù. One should work for self-realization, not for economic
development, which is impossible to improve. Without endeavor, one can get
the amount of happiness and distress for which he is destined, and one cannot
change this. Therefore, it is better to use one's time for advancement in the
spiritual life of Kåñëa consciousness. One should not waste his valuable life as a
human being. It is better to utilize this life for developing Kåñëa consciousness,
without ambitions for so-called happiness.
TEXT 43
k-aMaaNk-aMaYaTae k-aMYaEYaRdQaRiMah PaUåz" )
Sa vE dehSTau PaarKYaae >ax(Gaurae YaaTYauPaEiTa c )) 43 ))
kämän kämayate kämyair
yad-artham iha püruñaù
sa vai dehas tu pärakyo
bhaìguro yäty upaiti ca
SYNONYMS
kämän—things for sense gratification; kämayate—one desires; kämyaiù—by
different desirable actions; yat—of which; artham—for the purpose; iha—in
this material world; püruñaù—the living entity; saù—that; vai—indeed;
dehaù—body; tu—but; pärakyaù—belongs to others (the dogs, vultures, etc.);
bhaìguraù—perishable; yäti—goes away; upaiti—embraces the spirit soul;
ca—and.
TRANSLATION
A living entity desires comfort for his body and makes many plans for this
purpose, but actually the body is the property of others. Indeed, the perishable
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
470
body embraces the living entity and then leaves him aside.
PURPORT
Everyone desires comfort for his body and tries to make a suitable situation
for this purpose, forgetting that the body is meant to be eaten by dogs, jackals
or moths and thus turned into useless stool, ashes or earth. The living entity
wastes his time in a futile attempt to gain material possessions for the comfort
of one body after another.
TEXT 44
ik-Mau VYavihTaaPaTYadaraGaarDaNaadYa" )
raJYak-aeXaGaJaaMaaTYa>a*TYaaáa MaMaTaaSPada" )) 44 ))
kim u vyavahitäpatyadärägära-
dhanädayaù
räjya-koça-gajämätyabhåtyäptä
mamatäspadäù
SYNONYMS
kim u—what to speak of; vyavahita—separated; apatya—children;
dära—wives; agära—residences; dhana—wealth; ädayaù—and so on;
räjya—kingdoms; koça—treasuries; gaja—big elephants and horses;
amätya—ministers; bhåtya—servants; äptäù—relatives;
mamatä-äspadäù—false seats or abodes of intimate relationship ("mineness").
TRANSLATION
Since the body itself is ultimately meant to become stool or earth, what is
the meaning of the paraphernalia related to the body, such as wives, residences,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
471
wealth, children, relatives, servants, friends, kingdoms, treasuries, animals and
ministers? They are also temporary. What more can be said about this?
TEXT 45
ik-MaeTaEraTMaNaSTauC^E" Sah deheNa NaìrE" )
ANaQaOErQaRSaªaXaEiNaRTYaaNaNdrSaaedDae" )) 45 ))
kim etair ätmanas tucchaiù
saha dehena naçvaraiù
anarthair artha-saìkäçair
nityänanda-rasodadheù
SYNONYMS
kim—what is the use; etaiù—with all these; ätmanaù—for the real self;
tucchaiù—which are most insignificant; saha—with; dehena—the body;
naçvaraiù—perishable; anarthaiù—unwanted; artha-saìkäçaiù—appearing as
if needed; nitya-änanda—of eternal happiness; rasa—of the nectar;
udadheù—for the ocean.
TRANSLATION
All this paraphernalia is very near and dear as long as the body exists, but as
soon as the body is destroyed, all things related to the body are also finished.
Therefore, actually one has nothing to do with them, but because of ignorance
one accepts them as valuable. Compared to the ocean of eternal happiness, they
are most insignificant. What is the use of such insignificant relationships for the
eternal living being?
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
472
Kåñëa consciousness, devotional service to Kåñëa, is the ocean of eternal
bliss. In comparison to this eternal bliss, the so-called happiness of society,
friendship and love is simply useless and insignificant. One should therefore
not be attached to temporary things. One should take to Kåñëa consciousness
and become eternally happy.
TEXT 46
iNaæPYaTaaiMah SvaQaR" ik-YaaNdeh>a*Taae_Saura" )
iNazek-aidZvvSQaaSau i(c)-XYaMaaNaSYa k-MaRi>a" )) 46 ))
nirüpyatäm iha svärthaù
kiyän deha-bhåto 'suräù
niñekädiñv avasthäsu
kliçyamänasya karmabhiù
SYNONYMS
nirüpyatäm—let it be ascertained; iha—in this world; sva-arthaù—personal
benefit; kiyän—how much; deha-bhåtaù—of a living entity who has a material
body; asuräù—O sons of demons; niñeka-ädiñu—beginning from the happiness
derived from sex life; avasthäsu—in temporary conditions; kliçyamänasya—of
one who is suffering in severe hardships; karmabhiù—by his previous material
activities.
TRANSLATION
My dear friends, O sons of the asuras, the living entity receives different
types of bodies according to his previous fruitive activities. Thus he is seen to
suffer with reference to his particular body in all conditions of life, beginning
with his infusion into the womb. Please tell me, therefore, after full
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
473
consideration, what is the living entity's actual interest in fruitive activities,
which result in hardship and misery?
PURPORT
Karmaëä daiva-netreëa jantur dehopapattaye [SB 3.31.1]. The living entity
receives a particular type of body according to his karma, or fruitive activities.
The material pleasure derived in the material world from one's particular body
is based on sexual pleasure: yan maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukhaà hi tuccham [SB
7.9.45]. The entire world is working so hard only for sexual pleasure. To enjoy
sexual pleasure and maintain the status quo of material life, one must work
very hard, and because of such activities, one prepares himself another
material body. Prahläda Mahäräja places this matter to his friends, the asuras,
for their consideration. Asuras generally cannot understand that the objects of
sexual pleasure, the so-called pleasure of materialistic life, depend on
extremely hard labor.
TEXT 47
k-MaaR<Yaar>aTae dehq deheNaaTMaaNauviTaRNaa )
k-MaRi>aSTaNauTae dehMau>aYa& Tvivvek-Ta" )) 47 ))
karmäëy ärabhate dehé
dehenätmänuvartinä
karmabhis tanute deham
ubhayaà tv avivekataù
SYNONYMS
karmäëi—material fruitive activities; ärabhate—begins; dehé—a living entity
who has accepted a particular type of body; dehena—with that body;
ätma-anuvartinä—which is received according to his desire and past activities;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
474
karmabhiù—by such material activities; tanute—he expands; deham—another
body; ubhayam—both of them; tu—indeed; avivekataù—due to ignorance.
TRANSLATION
The living entity, who has received his present body because of his past
fruitive activity, may end the results of his actions in this life, but this does not
mean that he is liberated from bondage to material bodies. The living entity
receives one type of body, and by performing actions with that body he creates
another. Thus he transmigrates from one body to another, through repeated
birth and death, because of his gross ignorance.
PURPORT
The living entity's evolution through different types of bodies is conducted
automatically by the laws of nature in bodies other than those of human
beings. In other words, by the laws of nature (prakåteù kriyamäëäni [Bg. 3.27])
the living entity evolves from lower grades of life to the human form. Because
of his developed consciousness, however, the human being must understand
the constitutional position of the living entity and understand why he must
accept a material body. This chance is given to him by nature, but if he
nonetheless acts like an animal, what is the benefit of his human life? In this
life one must select the goal of life and act accordingly. Having received
instructions from the spiritual master and the çästra, one must be sufficiently
intelligent. In the human form of life, one should not remain foolish and
ignorant, but must inquire about his constitutional position. This is called
athäto brahma jijïäsä. The human psychology gives rise to many questions,
which various philosophers have considered and answered with various types
of philosophy based upon mental concoction. This is not the way of liberation.
The Vedic instructions say, tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum eväbhigacchet: [MU
1.2.12(17)] to solve the problems of life, one must accept a spiritual master.
Tasmäd guruà prapadyeta jijïäsuù çreya uttamam: [SB 11.3.21] if one is actually
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
475
serious in inquiring about the solution to material existence, one must
approach a bona fide guru.
tad viddhi praëipätena
paripraçnena sevayä
upadekñyanti te jïänaà
jïäninas tattva-darçinaù
"Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him
submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart
knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth." (Bg. 4.34) One must
approach a bona fide spiritual master by surrendering himself (praëipätena)
and rendering service. An intelligent person must inquire from the spiritual
master about the goal of life. A bona fide spiritual master can answer all such
questions because he has seen the real truth. Even in ordinary activities, we
first consider gain and loss, and then we act. Similarly, an intelligent person
must consider the entire process of material existence and then act
intelligently, following the directions of the bona fide spiritual master.
TEXT 48
TaSMaadQaaRê k-aMaaê DaMaaRê YadPaaé[Yaa" )
>aJaTaaNaqhYaaTMaaNaMaNaqh& hirMaqìrMa( )) 48 ))
tasmäd arthäç ca kämäç ca
dharmäç ca yad-apäçrayäù
bhajatänéhayätmänam
anéhaà harim éçvaram
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; arthäù—ambitions for economic development; ca—and;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
476
kämäù—ambitions for satisfaction of the senses; ca—also; dharmäù—duties of
religion; ca—and; yat—upon whom; apäçrayäù—dependent;
bhajata—worship; anéhayä—without desire for them; ätmänam—the
Supersoul; anéham—indifferent; harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
éçvaram—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The four principles of advancement in spiritual life-dharma, artha, käma and
mokña—all depend on the disposition of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore, my dear friends, follow in the footsteps of devotees. Without desire,
fully depend upon the disposition of the Supreme Lord and worship Him, the
Supersoul, in devotional service.
PURPORT
These are words of intelligence. Everyone should know that in every stage
of life we are dependent upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore
the dharma, religion, which we accept should be that which is recommended
by Prahläda Mahäräja-bhägavata-dharma. This is the instruction of Kåñëa:
sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]. To take shelter
of the lotus feet of Kåñëa means to act according to the rules and regulations of
bhägavata-dharma, devotional service. As far as economic development is
concerned, we should discharge our occupational duties but fully depend on
the lotus feet of the Lord for the results. Karmaëy evädhikäras te mä phaleñu
kadäcana: "You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not
entitled to the fruits of action." According to one's position, one should
perform his duties, but for the results one should fully depend upon Kåñëa.
Narottama däsa Öhäkura sings that our only desire should be to perform the
duties of Kåñëa consciousness. We should not be misled by the karma-mémäàsä
philosophy, which concludes that if we work seriously the results will come
automatically. This is not a fact. The ultimate result depends upon the will of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
477
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In devotional service, therefore, the
devotee completely depends upon the Lord and honestly performs his
occupational duties. Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja advised his friends to
depend completely on Kåñëa and worship Him in devotional service.
TEXT 49
SaveRzaMaiPa >aUTaaNaa& hirraTMaeìr" iPa[Ya" )
>aUTaEMaRhiÙ" Svk*-TaE" k*-TaaNaa& JaqvSa&ijTa" )) 49 ))
sarveñäm api bhütänäà
harir ätmeçvaraù priyaù
bhütair mahadbhiù sva-kåtaiù
kåtänäà jéva-saàjïitaù
SYNONYMS
sarveñäm—of all; api—certainly; bhütänäm—living entities; hariù—the Lord,
who mitigates all the miseries of the living entity; ätmä—the original source of
life; éçvaraù—the complete controller; priyaù—the dear; bhütaiù—by the
separated energies, the five material elements; mahadbhiù—emanating from
the total material energy, the mahat-tattva; sva-kåtaiù—which are manifested
by Himself; kåtänäm—created; jéva-saàjïitaù—who is also known as the living
entity, since the living entities are expansions of His marginal energy.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is the soul and the Supersoul of
all living entities. Every living entity is a manifestation of His energy in terms
of the living soul and the material body. Therefore the Lord is the most dear,
and He is the supreme controller.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
478
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is manifested by His different
energies—the material energy, the spiritual energy and the marginal energy.
He is the original source of all living entities in the material world, and He is
situated in everyone's heart as the Supersoul. Although the living entity is the
cause of his various types of bodies, the body is given by material nature
according to the order of the Lord.
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of
the material energy." (Bg. 18.61) The body is just like a machine, a car, in
which the living entity is given a chance to sit and move according to his
desire. The Lord is the original cause of the material body and the soul, which
is expanded by His marginal energy. The Supreme Lord is the dearmost object
of all living entities. Prahläda Mahäräja therefore advised his class friends, the
sons of the demons, to take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
again.
TEXT 50
devae_Saurae MaNauZYaae va Ya+aae GaNDavR Wv va )
>aJaNa( Mauku-Ndcr<a& SviSTaMaaNa( SYaad( YaQaa vYaMa( )) 50 ))
devo 'suro manuñyo vä
yakño gandharva eva vä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
479
bhajan mukunda-caraëaà
svastimän syäd yathä vayam
SYNONYMS
devaù—a demigod; asuraù—a demon; manuñyaù—a human being; vä—or;
yakñaù—a Yakña (a member of a demoniac species); gandharvaù—a
Gandharva; eva—indeed; vä—or; bhajan—rendering service;
mukunda-caraëam—to the lotus feet of Mukunda, Lord Kåñëa, who can give
liberation; svasti-män—full of all auspiciousness; syät—becomes; yathä—just
as; vayam—we (Prahläda Mahäräja).
TRANSLATION
If a demigod, demon, human being, Yakña, Gandharva or anyone within this
universe renders service to the lotus feet of Mukunda, who can deliver
liberation, he is actually situated in the most auspicious condition of life,
exactly like us [the mahäjanas, headed by Prahläda Mahäräja].
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja, by his living example, requested his friends to engage in
devotional service. Whether in demigod society, asura society, human society
or Gandharva society, every living entity should take shelter of the lotus feet
of Mukunda and thus become perfect in good fortune.
TEXTS 51-52
Naal&/ iÜJaTv& devTvMa*izTv& vaSauraTMaJaa" )
Pa[q<aNaaYa Mauku-NdSYa Na v*ta& Na bhujTaa )) 51 ))
Na daNa& Na TaPaae NaeJYaa Na XaaEc& Na v]TaaiNa c )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
480
Pa[qYaTae_Mal/Yaa >a¢-ya hirrNYad( iv@MbNaMa( )) 52 ))
nälaà dvijatvaà devatvam
åñitvaà väsurätmajäù
préëanäya mukundasya
na våttaà na bahu-jïatä
na dänaà na tapo nejyä
na çaucaà na vratäni ca
préyate 'malayä bhaktyä
harir anyad viòambanam
SYNONYMS
na—not; alam—sufficient; dvijatvam—being a perfect, highly qualified
brähmaëa; devatvam—being a demigod; åñitvam—being a saintly person;
vä—or; asura-ätma-jäù—O descendants of asuras; préëanäya—for pleasing;
mukundasya—of Mukunda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na
våttam—not good conduct; na—not; bahu-jïatä—vast learning; na—neither;
dänam—charity; na tapaù—no austerity; na—nor; ijyä—worship; na—nor;
çaucam—cleanliness; na vratäni—nor execution of great vows; ca—also;
préyate—is satisfied; amalayä—by spotless; bhaktyä—devotional service;
hariù—the Supreme Lord; anyat—other things; viòambanam—only show.
TRANSLATION
My dear friends, O sons of the demons, you cannot please the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by becoming perfect brähmaëas, demigods or great
saints or by becoming perfectly good in etiquette or vast learning. None of these
qualifications can awaken the pleasure of the Lord. Nor by charity, austerity,
sacrifice, cleanliness or vows can one satisfy the Lord. The Lord is pleased only
if one has unflinching, unalloyed devotion to Him. Without sincere devotional
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
481
service, everything is simply a show.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja concludes that one can become perfect by serving the
Supreme Lord sincerely by all means. Material elevation to life as a brähmaëa,
demigod, åñi and so on are not causes for developing love of Godhead, but if
one sincerely engages in the service of the Lord, his Kåñëa consciousness is
complete. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.30):
api cet su-duräcäro
bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù
samyag vyavasito hi saù
"Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly
situated." To develop unalloyed love for Kåñëa is the perfection of life. Other
processes may be helpful, but if one does not develop his love for Kåñëa, these
other processes are simply a waste of time.
dharmaù svanuñöhitaù puàsäà
viñvaksena-kathäsu yaù
notpädayed yadi ratià
çrama eva hi kevalam
"Duties [dharma] executed by men, regardless of occupation, are only so much
useless labor if they do not provoke attraction for the message of the Supreme
Lord." (SB 1.2.8) The test of perfection is one's unalloyed devotion to the Lord.
TEXT 53
TaTaae hraE >aGaviTa >ai¢&- ku-åTa daNava" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
482
AaTMaaEPaMYaeNa SavR}a SavR>aUTaaTMaNaqìre )) 53 ))
tato harau bhagavati
bhaktià kuruta dänaväù
ätmaupamyena sarvatra
sarva-bhütätmanéçvare
SYNONYMS
tataù—therefore; harau—unto Lord Hari; bhagavati—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; bhaktim—devotional service; kuruta—execute;
dänaväù—O my dear friends, O sons of demons; ätma-aupamyena—just as
one's own self; sarvatra—everywhere; sarva-bhüta-ätmani—who is situated as
the soul and Supersoul of all living entities; éçvare—unto the Supreme Lord,
the controller.
TRANSLATION
My dear friends, O sons of the demons, in the same favorable way that one
sees himself and takes care of himself, take to devotional service to satisfy the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is present everywhere as the Supersoul
of all living entities.
PURPORT
The word ätmaupamyena refers to thinking others to be like oneself. One
can very intelligently conclude that without devotional service, without
becoming Kåñëa conscious, one cannot be happy. Therefore the duty of all
devotees is to preach Kåñëa consciousness everywhere all over the world,
because all living entities without Kåñëa consciousness are suffering the pangs
of material existence. To preach Kåñëa consciousness is the best welfare
activity. Indeed, it is described by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu as para-upakära,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
483
work for the true benefit of others. The activities of para-upakära have been
especially entrusted to those who have taken birth in India as human beings.
bhärata-bhümite haila manuñya-janma yära
janma särthaka kari' kara para-upakära
(Cc. Ädi 9.41)
The entire world is suffering for want of Kåñëa consciousness. Therefore Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu advised all human beings born in India to make their
lives perfect by Kåñëa consciousness and then preach the gospel of Kåñëa
consciousness all over the world so that others may become happy by executing
the principles of Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 54
dETaeYaa Ya+ar+aa&iSa iñYa" éUd]a v]JaaEk-Sa" )
%Gaa Ma*Gaa" PaaPaJaqva" SaiNTa ùCYauTaTaa& GaTaa" )) 54 ))
daiteyä yakña-rakñäàsi
striyaù çüdrä vrajaukasaù
khagä mågäù päpa-jéväù
santi hy acyutatäà gatäù
SYNONYMS
daiteyäù—O demons; yakña-rakñäàsi—the living entities known as the Yakñas
and Räkñasas; striyaù—women; çüdräù—the laborer class;
vraja-okasaù—village cowherd men; khagäù—birds; mågäù—animals;
päpa-jéväù—sinful living entities; santi—can become; hi—certainly;
acyutatäm—the qualities of Acyuta, the Supreme Lord; gatäù—obtained.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
484
TRANSLATION
O my friends, O sons of demons, everyone, including you (the Yakñas and
Räkñasas), the unintelligent women, çüdras and cowherd men, the birds, the
lower animals and the sinful living entities, can revive his original, eternal
spiritual life and exist forever simply by accepting the principles of bhakti-yoga.
PURPORT
The devotees are referred to as acyuta-gotra, or the dynasty of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The Lord is called Acyuta, as indicated in
Bhagavad-gétä (senayor ubhayor madhye rathaà sthäpaya me 'cyuta [Bg. 1.21]).
The Lord is infallible in the material world because He is the supreme spiritual
person. Similarly, the jévas, who are part and parcel of the Lord, can also
become infallible. Although Prahläda's mother was in the conditional state
and was the wife of a demon, even Yakñas, Räkñasas, women, çüdras and even
birds and other lower living entities can be elevated to the acyuta-gotra, the
family of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the highest perfection.
As Kåñëa never falls, when we revive our spiritual consciousness, Kåñëa
consciousness, we never fall again to material existence. One should
understand the position of the supreme Acyuta, Kåñëa, who says in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." One should understand Acyuta, the
supreme infallible, and how we are related with Him, and one should take to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
485
the service of the Lord. This is the perfection of life. Çréla Madhväcärya says,
acyutatäà cyuti-varjanam. The word acyutatäm refers to one who never falls to
this material world but always remains in the Vaikuëöha world, fully engaged
in the service of the Lord.
TEXT 55
WTaavaNaev l/aeke-_iSMaNPau&Sa" SvaQaR" Par" SMa*Ta" )
Wk-aNTa>ai¢-GaaeRivNde YaTa( SavR}a Tadq+a<aMa( )) 55 ))
etävän eva loke 'smin
puàsaù svärthaù paraù småtaù
ekänta-bhaktir govinde
yat sarvatra tad-ékñaëam
SYNONYMS
etävän—this much; eva—certainly; loke asmin—in this material world;
puàsaù—of the living entity; sva-arthaù—the real self-interest;
paraù—transcendental; småtaù—regarded; ekänta-bhaktiù—unalloyed
devotional service; govinde—to Govinda; yat—which; sarvatra—everywhere;
tat-ékñaëam—seeing the relationship with Govinda, Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
In this material world, to render service to the lotus feet of Govinda, the
cause of all causes, and to see Him everywhere, is the only goal of life. This
much alone is the ultimate goal of human life, as explained by all the revealed
scriptures.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
486
In this verse the words sarvatra tad-ékñaëam describe the highest perfection
of devotional service, in which one sees everything with reference to
Govinda's activities. The highly elevated devotee never sees anything
unrelated to Govinda.
sthävara-jaìgama dekhe, nä dekhe tära mürti
sarvatra haya nija iñöa-deva-sphürti
"The mahä-bhägavata, the advanced devotee, certainly sees everything mobile
and immobile, but he does not exactly see their forms. Rather, everywhere he
immediately sees manifest the form of the Supreme Lord." (Cc. Madhya 8.274)
Even in this material world, a devotee does not see materially manifested
things; instead he sees Govinda in everything. When he sees a tree or a human
being, a devotee sees them in relation to Govinda. Govindam ädi-puruñam:
Govinda is the original source of everything.
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
"Kåñëa, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal,
blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is
the prime cause of all causes." (Bs. 5.1) The test of a perfect devotee is that he
sees Govinda everywhere in this universe, even in every atomic particle
(aëòa-ntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham). This is the perfect vision of a
devotee. It is therefore said:
näräyaëam ayaà dhéräù
paçyanti paramärthinaù
jagad dhananmayaà lubdhäù
kämukäù käminémayam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
487
A devotee sees everyone and everything in relationship with Näräyaëa
(näräyaëam ayam). Everything is an expansion of Näräyaëa's energy. Just as
those who are greedy see everything as a source of money-making and those
who are lusty see everything as being conducive to sex, the most perfect
devotee, Prahläda Mahäräja, saw Näräyaëa even within a stone column. This
does not mean, however, that we must accept the words daridra-näräyaëa,
which have been manufactured by some unscrupulous person. One who
actually envisions Näräyaëa everywhere makes no distinction between the
poor and the rich. To single out the daridra-näräyaëas, or poor Näräyaëa, and
reject the dhani-näräyaëa, or rich Näräyaëa, is not the vision of a devotee.
Rather, that is the imperfect vision of materialistic persons.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Seventh Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "What Prahläda Learned in the Womb."
8. Lord Nåsiàhadeva Slays the King of the Demons
As described in this chapter, Hiraëyakaçipu was ready to kill his own son
Prahläda Mahäräja, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared in front
of the demon as Çré Nåkeçaré, half lion and half man, and killed him.
Following the instructions of Prahläda Mahäräja, all the sons of the demons
became attached to Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When
this attachment became pronounced, their teachers, Ñaëòa and Amarka, were
very much afraid that the boys would become more and more devoted to the
Lord. In a helpless condition, they approached Hiraëyakaçipu and described in
detail the effect of Prahläda's preaching. After hearing of this, Hiraëyakaçipu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
488
decided to kill his son Prahläda. Hiraëyakaçipu was so angry that Prahläda
Mahäräja fell down at his feet and said many things just to pacify him, but he
was unsuccessful in satisfying his demoniac father. Hiraëyakaçipu, as a typical
demon, began to advertise himself as being greater than the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but Prahläda Mahäräja challenged him, saying that
Hiraëyakaçipu was not God, and began to glorify the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, declaring that the Lord is all-pervading, that everything is under
Him, and that no one is equal to or greater than Him. Thus he requested his
father to be submissive to the omnipotent Supreme Lord.
The more Prahläda Mahäräja glorified the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the more angry and agitated the demon became. Hiraëyakaçipu
asked his Vaiñëava son whether his God existed within the columns of the
palace, and Prahläda Mahäräja immediately accepted that since the Lord is
present everywhere, He was also present within the columns. When
Hiraëyakaçipu heard this philosophy from his young son, he derided the boy's
statement as just the talk of a child and forcefully struck the pillar with his fist.
As soon as Hiraëyakaçipu struck the column, there issued forth a
tumultuous sound. At first Hiraëyakaçipu, the King of the demons, could not
see anything but the pillar, but to substantiate Prahläda's statements, the Lord
came out of the pillar in His wonderful incarnation as Narasiàha, half lion
and half man. Hiraëyakaçipu could immediately understand that the
extraordinarily wonderful form of the Lord was surely meant for his death, and
thus he prepared to fight with the form of half lion and half man. The Lord
performed His pastimes by fighting with the demon for some time, and in the
evening, on the border between day and night, the Lord captured the demon,
threw him on His lap, and killed him by piercing his abdomen with His nails.
The Lord not only killed Hiraëyakaçipu, the King of the demons, but also
killed many of his followers. When there was no one else to fight, the Lord,
roaring with anger, sat down on Hiraëyakaçipu's throne.
The entire universe was thus relieved of the rule of Hiraëyakaçipu, and
everyone was jubilant in transcendental bliss. Then all the demigods, headed
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
489
by Lord Brahmä, approached the Lord. These included the great saintly
persons, the Pitäs, the Siddhas, the Vidyädharas, the Nägas, the Manus, the
prajäpatis, the Gandharvas, the Cäraëas, the Yakñas, the Kimpuruñas, the
Vaitälikas, the Kinnaras and also many other varieties of beings in human
form. All of them stood not far from the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
began offering their prayers unto the Lord, whose spiritual effulgence was
brilliant as He sat on the throne.
TEXT 1
é[qNaard ovac
AQa dETYaSauTaa" SaveR é[uTva TadNauvi<aRTaMa( )
JaGa*huiNaRrvÛTvaàEv GauvRNauiXai+aTaMa( )) 1 ))
çré-närada uväca
atha daitya-sutäù sarve
çrutvä tad-anuvarëitam
jagåhur niravadyatvän
naiva gurv-anuçikñitam
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; atha—thereupon; daitya-sutäù—the
sons of the demons (the class friends of Prahläda Mahäräja); sarve—all;
çrutvä—hearing; tat—by him (Prahläda); anuvarëitam—the statements about
devotional life; jagåhuù—accepted; niravadyatvät—due to the supreme utility
of that instruction; na—not; eva—indeed; guru-anuçikñitam—that which was
taught by their teachers.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
490
Närada Muni continued: All the sons of the demons appreciated the
transcendental instructions of Prahläda Mahäräja and took them very seriously.
They rejected the materialistic instructions given by their teachers, Ñaëòa and
Amarka.
PURPORT
This is the effect of the preaching of a pure devotee like Prahläda
Mahäräja. If a devotee is qualified, sincere and serious about Kåñëa
consciousness and if he follows the instructions of a bona fide spiritual master,
as Prahläda Mahäräja did when preaching the instructions he had received
from Närada Muni, his preaching is effective. As it is said in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.25.25):
satäà prasaìgän mama vérya-saàvido
bhavanti håt-karëa-rasäyanäù kathäù
If one tries to understand the discourses given by the sat, or pure devotees,
those instructions will be very pleasing to the ear and appealing to the heart.
Thus if one is inspired to take to Kåñëa consciousness and if one practices the
process in his life, he is surely successful in returning home, back to Godhead.
By the grace of Prahläda Mahäräja, all his class friends, the sons of the demons,
became Vaiñëavas. They did not like hearing from their so-called teachers
Ñaëòa and Amarka, who were interested only in teaching them about
diplomacy, politics, economic development and similar topics meant
exclusively for sense gratification.
TEXT 2
AQaacaYaRSauTaSTaeza& buiÖMaek-aNTaSa&iSQaTaaMa( )
Aal/+Ya >aqTaSTvirTaae raj AavedYad( YaQaa )) 2 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
491
athäcärya-sutas teñäà
buddhim ekänta-saàsthitäm
älakñya bhétas tvarito
räjïa ävedayad yathä
SYNONYMS
atha—thereupon; äcärya-sutaù—the son of Çukräcärya; teñäm—of them (the
sons of the demons); buddhim—the intelligence; ekänta-saàsthitäm—fixed in
one subject matter, devotional service; älakñya—realizing or seeing practically;
bhétaù—being afraid; tvaritaù—as soon as possible; räjïe—unto the King
(Hiraëyakaçipu); ävedayat—submitted; yathä—fittingly.
TRANSLATION
When Ñaëòa and Amarka, the sons of Çukräcärya, observed that all the
students, the sons of the demons, were becoming advanced in Kåñëa
consciousness because of the association of Prahläda Mahäräja, they were afraid.
They approached the King of the demons and described the situation as it was.
PURPORT
The words buddhim ekänta-saàsthitäm indicate that as an effect of Prahläda
Mahäräja's preaching, the students who listened to him became fixed in the
conclusion that Kåñëa consciousness is the only object of human life. The fact
is that anyone who associates with a pure devotee and follows his instructions
becomes fixed in Kåñëa consciousness and is not disturbed by materialistic
consciousness. The teachers particularly observed this in their students, and
therefore they were afraid because the whole community of students was
gradually becoming Kåñëa conscious.
TEXTS 3-4
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
492
k-aePaaveXacl/Óa}a" Pau}a& hNTau& MaNaae dDae )
i+aPTva PaåzYaa vaca Pa[hadMaTadhR<aMa( )) 3 ))
Aahe+aMaa<a" PaaPaeNa iTarêqNaeNa c+auza )
Pa[é[YaavNaTa& daNTa& bÖaÅil/MaviSQaTaMa( )
SaPaR" PadahTa wv ìSaNPa[k*-iTadaå<a" )) 4 ))
kopäveça-calad-gätraù
putraà hantuà mano dadhe
kñiptvä paruñayä väcä
prahrädam atad-arhaëam
ähekñamäëaù päpena
tiraçcénena cakñuñä
praçrayävanataà däntaà
baddhäïjalim avasthitam
sarpaù padähata iva
çvasan prakåti-däruëaù
SYNONYMS
kopa-äveça—by a very angry mood; calat—trembling; gätraù—the whole body;
putram—his son; hantum—to kill; manaù—mind; dadhe—fixed;
kñiptvä—rebuking; paruñayä—with very harsh; väcä—words;
prahrädam—Prahläda Mahäräja; a-tat-arhaëam—not fit to be chastised (due
to his noble character and tender age); äha—said; ékñamäëaù—looking at him
in anger; päpena—because of his sinful activities; tiraçcénena—crooked;
cakñuñä—with eyes; praçraya-avanatam—very gentle and mild; däntam—very
restrained; baddha-aïjalim—having folded hands; avasthitam—situated;
sarpaù—a snake; pada-ähataù—being trampled by the foot; iva—like;
çvasan—hissing; prakåti—by nature; däruëaù—very evil.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
493
TRANSLATION
When Hiraëyakaçipu understood the entire situation, he was extremely
angry, so much so that his body trembled. Thus he finally decided to kill his son
Prahläda. Hiraëyakaçipu was by nature very cruel, and feeling insulted, he
began hissing like a snake trampled upon by someone's foot. His son Prahläda
was peaceful, mild and gentle, his senses were under control, and he stood
before Hiraëyakaçipu with folded hands. According to Prahläda's age and
behavior, he was not to be chastised. Yet with staring, crooked eyes,
Hiraëyakaçipu rebuked him with the following harsh words.
PURPORT
When one is impudent toward a highly authorized devotee, one is punished
by the laws of nature. The duration of his life is diminished, and he loses the
blessings of superior persons and the results of pious activities. Hiraëyakaçipu,
for example, had achieved such great power in the material world that he
could subdue practically all the planetary systems in the universe, including
the heavenly planets (Svargaloka). Yet now, because of his mistreatment of
such a Vaiñëava as Prahläda Mahäräja, all the results of his tapasya diminished.
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.4.46):
äyuù çriyaà yaço dharmaà
lokän äçiña eva ca
hanti çreyäàsi sarväëi
puàso mahad-atikramaù
"When one mistreats great souls, his life span, opulence, reputation, religion,
possessions and good fortune are all destroyed."
TEXT 5
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
494
é[qihr<Yak-iXaPauåvac
he duivRNaqTa MaNdaTMaNku-l/>aedk-raDaMa )
STaBDa& MaC^aSaNaaed(v*ta& NaeZYae TvaÛ YaMa+aYaMa( )) 5 ))
çré-hiraëyakaçipur uväca
he durvinéta mandätman
kula-bheda-karädhama
stabdhaà mac-chäsanodvåttaà
neñye tvädya yama-kñayam
SYNONYMS
çré-hiraëyakaçipuù uväca—the blessed Hiraëyakaçipu said; he—O;
durvinéta—most impudent; manda-ätman—O stupid fool;
kula-bheda-kara—who are bringing about a disruption in the family;
adhama—O lowest of mankind; stabdham—most obstinate; mat-çäsana—from
my ruling; udvåttam—going astray; neñye—I shall bring; tvä—you;
adya—today; yama-kñayam—to the place of Yamaräja, the superintendent of
death.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu said: O most impudent, most unintelligent disruptor of the
family, O lowest of mankind, you have violated my power to rule you, and
therefore you are an obstinate fool. Today I shall send you to the place of
Yamaräja.
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu condemned his Vaiñëava son Prahläda for being
durvinéta-ungentle, uncivilized, or impudent. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura, however, has derived a meaning from this word durvinéta by the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
495
mercy of the goddess of learning, Sarasvaté. He says that duù refers to this
material world. This is confirmed by Lord Kåñëa in His instruction in
Bhagavad-gétä that this material world is duùkhälayam, full of material
conditions. Vi means viçeña, "specifically," and néta means "brought in." By the
mercy of the Supreme Lord, Prahläda Mahäräja was especially brought to this
material world to teach people how to get out of the material condition. Lord
Kåñëa says, yadä yadä hi dharmasya glänir bhavati bhärata [Bg. 4.7]. When the
entire population, or part of it, becomes forgetful of its own duty, Kåñëa comes.
When Kåñëa is not present the devotee is present, but the mission is the same:
to free the poor conditioned souls from the clutches of the mäyä that chastises
them.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura further explains that the word
mandätman means manda—very bad or very slow in spiritual realization. As
stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.1.10), mandäù sumanda-matayo manda-bhägyä.
Prahläda Mahäräja is the guide of all the mandas, or bad living entities who are
under the influence of mäyä. He is the benefactor even of the slow and bad
living entities in this material world. Kula-bheda-karädhama: by his actions,
Prahläda Mahäräja made great personalities who established big, big families
seem insignificant. Everyone is interested in his own family and in making his
dynasty famous, but Prahläda Mahäräja was so liberal that he made no
distinction between one living entity and another. Therefore he was greater
than the great prajäpatis who established their dynasties. The word stabdham
means obstinate. A devotee does not care for the instructions of the asuras.
When they give instructions, he remains silent. A devotee cares about the
instructions of Kåñëa, not those of demons or nondevotees. He does not give
any respect to a demon, even though the demon be his father.
Mac-chäsanodvåttam: Prahläda Mahäräja was disobedient to the orders of his
demoniac father. Yama-kñayam: every conditioned soul is under the control of
Yamaräja, but Hiraëyakaçipu said that he considered Prahläda Mahäräja his
deliverer, for Prahläda would stop Hiraëyakaçipu's repetition of birth and
death. Because Prahläda Mahäräja, being a great devotee, was better than any
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
496
yogé, Hiraëyakaçipu was to be brought among the society of bhakti-yogés. Thus
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has explained these words in a very
interesting way as they can be interpreted from the side of Sarasvaté, the
mother of learning.
TEXT 6
§u-ÖSYa YaSYa k-MPaNTae }aYaae l/aek-a" Saheìra" )
TaSYa Mae_>aqTavNMaU! XaaSaNa& ik&- bl/ae_TYaGaa" )) 6 ))
kruddhasya yasya kampante
trayo lokäù saheçvaräù
tasya me 'bhétavan müòha
çäsanaà kià balo 'tyagäù
SYNONYMS
kruddhasya—when angered; yasya—he who; kampante—tremble; trayaù
lokäù—the three worlds; saha-éçvaräù—with their leaders; tasya—of that;
me—of me (Hiraëyakaçipu); abhéta-vat—without fear; müòha—rascal;
çäsanam—ruling order; kim—what; balaù—strength; atyagäù—have
overstepped.
TRANSLATION
My son Prahläda, you rascal, you know that when I am angry all the planets
of the three worlds tremble, along with their chief rulers. By whose power has a
rascal like you become so impudent that you appear fearless and overstep my
power to rule you?
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
497
The relationship between a pure devotee and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is extremely relishable. A devotee never claims to be very powerful
himself; instead, he fully surrenders to the lotus feet of Kåñëa, being confident
that in all dangerous conditions Kåñëa will protect His devotee. Kåñëa Himself
says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.31), kaunteya pratijänéhi na me bhaktaù praëaçyati: "O
son of Kunté, declare boldly that My devotee never perishes." The Lord
requested Arjuna to declare this instead of declaring it Himself because
sometimes Kåñëa changes His view and therefore people might not believe
Him. Thus Kåñëa asked Arjuna to declare that a devotee of the Lord is never
vanquished.
Hiraëyakaçipu was perplexed about how his five-year-old boy could be so
fearless that he did not care for the order of his very great and powerful father.
A devotee cannot execute the order of anyone except the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. This is the position of a devotee. Hiraëyakaçipu could understand
that this boy must have been very powerful, since the boy did not heed his
orders. Hiraëyakaçipu asked his son, kià balaù: "How have you overcome my
order? By whose strength have you done this?"
TEXT 7
é[qPa[had ovac
Na ke-vl&/ Mae >avTaê raJaNa(
Sa vE bl&/ bil/Naa& caParezaMa( )
Pare_vre_Maq iSQarJa(r)Maa Yae
b]øadYaae YaeNa vXa& Pa[<aqTaa" )) 7 ))
çré-prahräda uväca
na kevalaà me bhavataç ca räjan
sa vai balaà balinäà cäpareñäm
pare 'vare 'mé sthira-jaìgamä ye
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
498
brahmädayo yena vaçaà praëétäù
SYNONYMS
çré-prahrädaù uväca—Prahläda Mahäräja replied; na—not; kevalam—only;
me—of me; bhavataù—of yourself; ca—and; räjan—O great King; saù—he;
vai—indeed; balam—strength; balinäm—of the strong; ca—and;
apareñäm—of others; pare—exalted; avare—subordinate; amé—those;
sthira-jaìgamäù—moving or nonmoving living entities; ye—who;
brahma-ädayaù—beginning from Lord Brahmä; yena—by whom;
vaçam—under control; praëétäù—brought.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja said: My dear King, the source of my strength, of which
you are asking, is also the source of yours. Indeed, the original source of all
kinds of strength is one. He is not only your strength or mine, but the only
strength for everyone. Without Him, no one can get any strength. Whether
moving or not moving, superior or inferior, everyone, including Lord Brahmä,
is controlled by the strength of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (10.41):
yad yad vibhütimat sattvaà
çrémad ürjitam eva vä
tat tad evävagaccha tvaà
mama tejo-'àça-sambhavam
"Know that all beautiful, glorious and mighty creations spring from but a spark
of My splendor." This is confirmed by Prahläda Mahäräja. If one sees
extraordinary strength or power anywhere, it is derived from the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
499
Personality of Godhead. To give an example, there are different grades of fire,
but all of them derive heat and light from the sun. Similarly, all living entities,
big or small, are dependent on the mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. One's only duty is to surrender, for one is a servant and cannot
independently attain the position of master. One can attain the position of
master only by the mercy of the master, not independently. Unless one
understands this philosophy, he is still a müòha; in other words, he is not very
intelligent. The müòhas, the asses who do not have this intelligence, cannot
surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Understanding the subordinate position of the living entity takes millions
of births, but when one is actually wise he surrenders unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.19):
bahünäà janmanäm ante
jïänavän mäà prapadyate
väsudevaù sarvam iti
sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù
"After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders
unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great
soul is very rare." Prahläda Mahäräja was a great soul, a mahätmä, and
therefore he completely surrendered unto the lotus feet of the Lord. He was
confident that Kåñëa would give him protection under all circumstances.
TEXT 8
Sa wRìr" k-al/ oå§-Maae_Saa‚
vaeJa" Sah" Satvble/iNd]YaaTMaa )
Sa Wv ivì& ParMa" SvXai¢-i>a"
Sa*JaTYavTYaita Gau<a}aYaeXa" )) 8 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
500
sa éçvaraù käla urukramo 'säv
ojaù sahaù sattva-balendriyätmä
sa eva viçvaà paramaù sva-çaktibhiù
såjaty avaty atti guëa-trayeçaù
SYNONYMS
saù—He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); éçvaraù—the supreme
controller; kälaù—the time factor; urukramaù—the Lord, whose every action
is uncommon; asau—that one; ojaù—the strength of the senses; sahaù—the
strength of the mind; sattva—steadiness; bala—bodily strength; indriya—and
of the senses themselves; ätmä—the very self; saù—He; eva—indeed;
viçvam—the whole universe; paramaù—the supreme; sva-çaktibhiù—by His
multifarious transcendental potencies; såjati—creates; avati—maintains;
atti—winds up; guëa-traya-éçaù—the master of the material modes.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the supreme controller and
time factor, is the power of the senses, the power of the mind, the power of the
body, and the vital force of the senses. His influence is unlimited. He is the best
of all living entities, the controller of the three modes of material nature. By
His own power, He creates this cosmic manifestation, maintains it and
annihilates it also.
PURPORT
Since the material world is being moved by the three material modes and
since the Lord is their master, the Lord can create, maintain and destroy the
material world.
TEXT 9
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
501
JaùaSaur& >aaviMaMa& TvMaaTMaNa"
SaMa& MaNaae DaTSv Na SaiNTa iviÜz" )
‰Tae_iJaTaadaTMaNa oTPaQae iSQaTaaTa(
TaiÖ ùNaNTaSYa MahTa( SaMahR<aMa( )) 9 ))
jahy äsuraà bhävam imaà tvam ätmanaù
samaà mano dhatsva na santi vidviñaù
åte 'jitäd ätmana utpathe sthität
tad dhi hy anantasya mahat samarhaëam
SYNONYMS
jahi—just give up; äsuram—demoniac; bhävam—tendency; imam—this;
tvam—you (my dear father); ätmanaù—of yourself; samam—equal;
manaù—the mind; dhatsva—make; na—not; santi—are; vidviñaù—enemies;
åte—except; ajität—uncontrolled; ätmanaù—the mind; utpathe—on the
mistaken path of undesirable tendencies; sthität—being situated; tat hi—that
(mentality); hi—indeed; anantasya—of the unlimited Lord; mahat—the best;
samarhaëam—method of worship.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja continued: My dear father, please give up your demoniac
mentality. Do not discriminate in your heart between enemies and friends;
make your mind equipoised toward everyone. Except for the uncontrolled and
misguided mind, there is no enemy within this world. When one sees everyone
on the platform of equality, one then comes to the position of worshiping the
Lord perfectly.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
502
Unless one is able to fix the mind at the lotus feet of the Lord, the mind is
impossible to control. As Arjuna says in Bhagavad-gétä (6.34):
caïcalaà hi manaù kåñëa
pramäthi balavad dåòham
tasyähaà nigrahaà manye
väyor iva suduñkaram
"For the mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate and very strong, O Kåñëa, and to
subdue it, it seems to me, is more difficult than controlling the wind." The only
bona fide process for controlling the mind is to fix the mind by service to the
Lord. We create enemies and friends according to the dictation of the mind,
but actually there are no enemies and friends. paëòitäù sama-darçinaù [Bg.
5.18]. Samaù sarveñu bhüteñu mad-bhaktià labhate paräm [Bg. 18.54]. To
understand this is the preliminary condition for entering into the kingdom of
devotional service.
TEXT 10
dSYaUNPaura z<a( Na iviJaTYa lu/MPaTaae
MaNYaNTa Wke- SviJaTaa idXaae dXa )
iJaTaaTMaNaae jSYa SaMaSYa deihNaa&
SaaDaae" SvMaaehPa[>ava" ku-Ta" Pare )) 10 ))
dasyün purä ñaë na vijitya lumpato
manyanta eke sva-jitä diço daça
jitätmano jïasya samasya dehinäà
sädhoù sva-moha-prabhaväù kutaù pare
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
503
dasyün—plunderers; purä—in the beginning; ñaö—six; na—not;
vijitya—conquering; lumpataù—stealing all one's possessions;
manyante—consider; eke—some; sva-jitäù—conquered; diçaù daça—the ten
directions; jita-ätmanaù—one who has conquered the senses; jïasya—learned;
samasya—equipoised; dehinäm—to all living entities; sädhoù—of such a
saintly person; sva-moha-prabhaväù—created by one's own illusion;
kutaù—where; pare—enemies or opposing elements.
TRANSLATION
In former times there were many fools like you who did not conquer the six
enemies that steal away the wealth of the body. These fools were very proud,
thinking, "I have conquered all enemies in all the ten directions." But if a
person is victorious over the six enemies and is equipoised toward all living
entities, for him there are no enemies. Enemies are merely imagined by one in
ignorance.
PURPORT
In this material world, everyone thinks that he has conquered his enemies,
not understanding that his enemies are his uncontrolled mind and five senses
(manaù ñañöhänéndriyäëi prakåti-sthäni karñati [Bg. 15.7]). In this material
world, everyone has become a servant of the senses. Originally everyone is a
servant of Kåñëa, but in ignorance one forgets this, and thus one is engaged in
the service of mäyä through lusty desires, anger, greed, illusion, madness and
jealousy. Everyone is actually dependent on the reactions of material laws, but
still one thinks himself independent and thinks that he has conquered all
directions. In conclusion, one who thinks that he has many enemies is an
ignorant man, whereas one who is in Kåñëa consciousness knows that there are
no enemies but those within oneself—the uncontrolled mind and senses.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
504
TEXT 11
é[qihr<Yak-iXaPauåvac
VYa¢&- Tv& MaTauRk-aMaae_iSa Yaae_iTaMaa}a& ivk-TQaSae )
MauMaUzUR<aa& ih MaNdaTMaNa( NaNau SYauivR(c)-va iGar" )) 11 ))
çré-hiraëyakaçipur uväca
vyaktaà tvaà martu-kämo 'si
yo 'timätraà vikatthase
mumürñüëäà hi mandätman
nanu syur viklavä giraù
SYNONYMS
çré-hiraëyakaçipuù uväca—the blessed Hiraëyakaçipu said;
vyaktam—evidently; tvam—you; martu-kämaù—desirous of death; asi—are;
yaù—one who; atimätram—without limit; vikatthase—are boasting (as if you
had conquered your senses whereas your father could not do so);
mumürñüëäm—of persons who are about to meet immediate death;
hi—indeed; manda-ätman—O unintelligent rascal; nanu—certainly;
syuù—become; viklaväù—confused; giraù—the words.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu replied: You rascal, you are trying to minimize my value, as if
you were better than me at controlling the senses. This is over-intelligent. I can
therefore understand that you desire to die at my hands, for this kind of
nonsensical talk is indulged in by those about to die.
PURPORT
It is said in Hitopadeça, upadeço hi mürkhäëäà prakopäya na çäntaye. If good
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
505
instructions are given to a foolish person, he does not take advantage of them,
but becomes more and more angry. Prahläda Mahäräja's authorized
instructions to his father were not accepted by Hiraëyakaçipu as truth; instead
Hiraëyakaçipu became increasingly angry at his great son, who was a pure
devotee. This kind of difficulty always exists when a devotee preaches Kåñëa
consciousness to persons like Hiraëyakaçipu, who are interested in money and
women. (The word hiraëya means "gold," and kaçipu refers to cushions or good
bedding.) Moreover, a father does not like to be instructed by his son,
especially if the father is a demon. Prahläda Mahäräja's Vaiñëava preaching to
his demoniac father was indirectly effective, for because of Hiraëyakaçipu's
excessive jealousy of Kåñëa and His devotee, he was inviting Nåsiàhadeva to
kill him very quickly. Thus he was expediting his being killed by the Lord
Himself. Although Hiraëyakaçipu was a demon, he is described here by the
added word çré. Why? The answer is that fortunately he had such a great
devotee son as Prahläda Mahäräja. Thus although he was a demon, he would
attain salvation and return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 12
YaSTvYaa MaNd>aaGYaae¢-ae MadNYaae JaGadqìr" )
KvaSaaE Yaid Sa SavR}a k-SMaaTa( STaM>ae Na d*XYaTae )) 12 ))
yas tvayä manda-bhägyokto
mad-anyo jagad-éçvaraù
kväsau yadi sa sarvatra
kasmät stambhe na dåçyate
SYNONYMS
yaù—the one who; tvayä—by you; manda-bhägya—O unfortunate one;
uktaù—described; mat-anyaù—besides me; jagat-éçvaraù—the supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
506
controller of the universe; kva—where; asau—that one; yadi—if; saù—He;
sarvatra—everywhere (all-pervading); kasmät—why; stambhe—in the pillar
before me; na dåçyate—not seen.
TRANSLATION
O most unfortunate Prahläda, you have always described a supreme being
other than me, a supreme being who is above everything, who is the controller
of everyone, and who is all-pervading. But where is He? If He is everywhere,
then why is He not present before me in this pillar?
PURPORT
Demons sometimes declare to a devotee that they cannot accept the
existence of God because they cannot see Him. But what the demon does not
know is stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (7.25): nähaà prakäçaù
sarvasya yogamäyä-samävåtaù. "I am never manifest to the foolish and
unintelligent. For them I am covered by yogamäyä." The Lord is open to being
seen by devotees, but nondevotees cannot see Him. The qualification for
seeing God is stated in Brahma-saàhitä (5.38):
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti. A
devotee who has developed a genuine love for Kåñëa can always see Him
everywhere, whereas a demon, not having a clear understanding of the
Supreme Lord, cannot see Him. When Hiraëyakaçipu was threatening to kill
Prahläda Mahäräja, Prahläda certainly saw the column standing before him
and his father, and he saw that the Lord was present in the pillar to encourage
him not to fear his demoniac father's words. The Lord was present to protect
him. Hiraëyakaçipu marked Prahläda's observation and asked him, "Where is
your God?" Prahläda Mahäräja replied, "He is everywhere." Then
Hiraëyakaçipu asked, "Why is He not in this pillar before me?" Thus in all
circumstances the devotee can always see the Supreme Lord, whereas the
nondevotee cannot.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
507
Prahläda Mahäräja has here been addressed by his father as "the most
unfortunate." Hiraëyakaçipu thought himself extremely fortunate because he
possessed the property of the universe. Prahläda Mahäräja, his legitimate son,
was to have inherited this vast property, but because of his impudence, he was
going to die at his father's hands. Therefore the demoniac father considered
Prahläda the most unfortunate because Prahläda would not be able to inherit
his property. Hiraëyakaçipu did not know that Prahläda Mahäräja was the
most fortunate person within the three worlds because Prahläda was protected
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such are the misunderstandings of
demons. They do not know that a devotee is protected by the Lord in all
circumstances (kaunteya pratijänéhi na me bhaktaù praëaçyati [Bg. 9.31]).
TEXT 13
Saae_h& ivk-TQaMaaNaSYa iXar" k-aYaaÖraiMa Tae )
GaaePaaYaeTa hirSTvaÛ YaSTae Xar<aMaqiPSaTaMa( )) 13 ))
so 'haà vikatthamänasya
çiraù käyäd dharämi te
gopäyeta haris tvädya
yas te çaraëam épsitam
SYNONYMS
saù—he; aham—I; vikatthamänasya—who are speaking such nonsense;
çiraù—the head; käyät—from the body; harämi—I shall take away; te—of you;
gopäyeta—let Him protect; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tvä—you; adya—now; yaù—He who; te—your; çaraëam—protector;
épsitam—desired.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
508
TRANSLATION
Because you are speaking so much nonsense, I shall now sever your head
from your body. Now let me see your most worshipable God come to protect
you. I want to see it.
PURPORT
Demons always think that the God of the devotees is fictitious. They think
that there is no God and that the so-called religious feeling of devotion to God
is but an opiate, a kind of illusion, like the illusions derived from LSD and
opium. Hiraëyakaçipu did not believe Prahläda Mahäräja when Prahläda
asserted that his Lord is present everywhere. Because Hiraëyakaçipu, as a
typical demon, was convinced that there is no God and that no one could
protect Prahläda, he felt encouraged to kill his son. He challenged the idea
that the devotee is always protected by the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 14
Wv& duå¢E-MauRhurdRYaNåza
SauTa& Maha>aaGavTa& MahaSaur" )
%É& Pa[Ga*ùaeTPaiTaTaae vraSaNaaTa(
STaM>a& TaTaa@aiTabl/" SvMauiíNaa )) 14 ))
evaà duruktair muhur ardayan ruñä
sutaà mahä-bhägavataà mahäsuraù
khaògaà pragåhyotpatito varäsanät
stambhaà tatäòätibalaù sva-muñöinä
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
509
evam—thus; duruktaiù—by harsh words; muhuù—constantly;
ardayan—chastising; ruñä—with unnecessary anger; sutam—his son;
mahä-bhägavatam—who was a most exalted devotee;
mahä-asuraù—Hiraëyakaçipu, the great demon; khaògam—sword;
pragåhya—taking up; utpatitaù—having gotten up; vara-äsanät—from his
exalted throne; stambham—the column; tatäòa—struck; ati-balaù—very
strong; sva-muñöinä—by his fist.
TRANSLATION
Being obsessed with anger, Hiraëyakaçipu, who was very great in bodily
strength, thus chastised his exalted devotee-son Prahläda with harsh words.
Cursing him again and again, Hiraëyakaçipu took up his sword, got up from his
royal throne, and with great anger struck his fist against the column.
TEXT 15
TadEv TaiSMaNa( iNaNadae_iTa>aqz<aae
b>aUv YaeNaa<@k-$=ahMaSfu-$=Ta( )
Ya& vE SviDaZ<YaaePaGaTa& TvJaadYa"
é[uTva SvDaaMaaTYaYaMa(r) MaeiNare )) 15 ))
tadaiva tasmin ninado 'tibhéñaëo
babhüva yenäëòa-kaöäham asphuöat
yaà vai sva-dhiñëyopagataà tv ajädayaù
çrutvä sva-dhämätyayam aìga menire
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; eva—just; tasmin—within (the pillar); ninadaù—a sound;
ati-bhéñaëaù—very fearful; babhüva—there was; yena—by which;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
510
aëòa-kaöäham—the covering of the universe; asphuöat—appeared to crack;
yam—which; vai—indeed; sva-dhiñëya-upagatam—reaching their respective
abodes; tu—but; aja-ädayaù—the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä;
çrutvä—hearing; sva-dhäma-atyayam—the destruction of their abodes;
aìga—my dear Yudhiñöhira; menire—thought.
TRANSLATION
Then from within the pillar came a fearful sound, which appeared to crack
the covering of the universe. O my dear Yudhiñöhira, this sound reached even
the abodes of the demigods like Lord Brahmä, and when the demigods heard it,
they thought, "Oh, now our planets are being destroyed!"
PURPORT
As we sometimes become very much afraid at the sound of a thunderbolt,
perhaps thinking that our houses will be destroyed, the great demigods like
Lord Brahmä feared the thundering sound that came from the pillar in front of
Hiraëyakaçipu.
TEXT 16
Sa iv§-MaNa( Pau}avDaePSauraeJaSaa
iNaXaMYa iNahaRdMaPaUvRMad(>auTaMa( )
ANTa"Sa>aaYaa& Na ddXaR TaTPad&
ivTa}aSauYaeRNa SaurairYaUQaPaa" )) 16 ))
sa vikraman putra-vadhepsur ojasä
niçamya nirhrädam apürvam adbhutam
antaù-sabhäyäà na dadarça tat-padaà
vitatrasur yena suräri-yütha-päù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
511
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); vikraman—exhibiting his prowess;
putra-vadha-épsuù—desirous of killing his own son; ojasä—with great strength;
niçamya—hearing; nirhrädam—the fierce sound; apürvam—never heard
before; adbhutam—very wonderful; antaù-sabhäyäm—within the jurisdiction
of the great assembly; na—not; dadarça—saw; tat-padam—the source of that
tumultuous sound; vitatrasuù—became afraid; yena—by which sound;
sura-ari-yütha-päù—the other leaders of the demons (not only
Hiraëyakaçipu).
TRANSLATION
While showing his extraordinary prowess, Hiraëyakaçipu, who desired to
kill his own son, heard that wonderful, tumultuous sound, which had never
before been heard. Upon hearing the sound, the other leaders of the demons
were afraid. None of them could find the origin of that sound in the assembly.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (7.8), Kåñëa explains Himself by saying:
raso 'ham apsu kaunteya
prabhäsmi çaçi süryayoù
praëavaù sarva-vedeñu
çabdaù khe pauruñaà nåñu
"O son of Kunté [Arjuna], I am the taste of water, the light of the sun and the
moon, the syllable om in the Vedic mantras; I am the sound in ether and
ability in man." Here the Lord exhibited His presence everywhere by the
tumultuous sound in the sky (çabdaù khe). The tumultuous thundering sound
was proof of the Lord's presence. The demons like Hiraëyakaçipu could now
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
512
realize the supreme ruling power of the Lord, and thus Hiraëyakaçipu became
afraid. However powerful a man may be, he always fears the sound of a
thunderbolt. Similarly, Hiraëyakaçipu and all the demons who were his
associates were extremely afraid because of the presence of the Supreme Lord
in the form of sound, although they could not trace out the source of the
sound.
TEXT 17
SaTYa& ivDaaTau& iNaJa>a*TYa>aaizTa&
VYaaiá& c >aUTaeZvi%le/zu caTMaNa" )
Ad*XYaTaaTYad(>auTaæPaMauÜhNa(
STaM>ae Sa>aaYaa& Na Ma*Ga& Na MaaNauzMa( )) 17 ))
satyaà vidhätuà nija-bhåtya-bhäñitaà
vyäptià ca bhüteñv akhileñu cätmanaù
adåçyatätyadbhuta-rüpam udvahan
stambhe sabhäyäà na mågaà na mänuñam
SYNONYMS
satyam—true; vidhätum—to prove; nija-bhåtya-bhäñitam—the words of His
own servant (Prahläda Mahäräja, who had said that his Lord is present
everywhere); vyäptim—the pervasion; ca—and; bhüteñu—among the living
entities and elements; akhileñu—all; ca—also; ätmanaù—of Himself;
adåçyata—was seen; ati—very; adbhuta—wonderful; rüpam—form;
udvahan—taking; stambhe—in the pillar; sabhäyäm—within the assembly;
na—not; mågam—an animal; na—nor; mänuñam—a human being.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
513
To prove that the statement of His servant Prahläda Mahäräja was
substantial—in other words, to prove that the Supreme Lord is present
everywhere, even within the pillar of an assembly hall—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Hari, exhibited a wonderful form never before seen.
The form was neither that of a man nor that of a lion. Thus the Lord appeared
in His wonderful form in the assembly hall.
PURPORT
When Hiraëyakaçipu asked Prahläda Mahäräja, "Where is your Lord? Is He
present in this pillar?" Prahläda Mahäräja fearlessly replied, "Yes, my Lord is
present everywhere." Therefore, to convince Hiraëyakaçipu that the statement
of Prahläda Mahäräja was unmistakably true, the Lord appeared from the
pillar. The Lord appeared as half lion and half man so that Hiraëyakaçipu
could not understand whether the great giant was a lion or a human being. To
substantiate Prahläda's statement, the Lord proved that His devotee, as
declared in Bhagavad-gétä, is never vanquished (kaunteya pratijänéhi na me
bhaktaù praëaçyati [Bg. 9.31]). Prahläda Mahäräja's demoniac father had
repeatedly threatened to kill Prahläda, but Prahläda was confident that he
could not be killed, since he was protected by the Supreme Lord. By appearing
from the pillar, the Lord encouraged His devotee, saying in effect, "Don't
worry. I am present here." By manifesting His form as Nåsiàhadeva, the Lord
also preserved the truth of Lord Brahmä's promise that Hiraëyakaçipu was not
to be killed by any animal or any man. The Lord appeared in a form that could
not be said to be fully a man or a lion.
TEXT 18
Sa SatvMaeNa& PairTaae ivPaXYaNa(
STaM>aSYa MaDYaadNauiNaiJaRhaNaMa( )
NaaYa& Ma*Gaae NaaiPa Narae ivic}a‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
514
Mahae ik-MaeTaà*Ma*GaeNd]æPaMa( )) 18 ))
sa sattvam enaà parito vipaçyan
stambhasya madhyäd anunirjihänam
näyaà mågo näpi naro vicitram
aho kim etan nå-mågendra-rüpam
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu, the King of the Daityas); sattvam—living being;
enam—that; paritaù—all around; vipaçyan—looking; stambhasya—of the
pillar; madhyät—from the midst; anunirjihänam—having come out; na—not;
ayam—this; mågaù—animal; na—not; api—indeed; naraù—human being;
vicitram—very wonderful; aho—alas; kim—what; etat—this;
nå-måga-indra-rüpam—the form of both a man and the king of the beasts, the
lion.
TRANSLATION
While Hiraëyakaçipu looked all around to find the source of the sound, that
wonderful form of the Lord, which could not be ascertained to be either a man
or a lion, emerged from the pillar. In amazement, Hiraëyakaçipu wondered,
"What is this creature that is half man and half lion?"
PURPORT
A demon cannot calculate the unlimited potency of the Supreme Lord. As
stated in the Vedas, paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate sväbhäviké
jïäna-bala-kriyä ca: [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport] the different potencies of the
Lord are always working as an automatic exhibition of His knowledge. For a
demon it is certainly wonderful that the form of a lion and the form of a man
can be united, since a demon has no experience of the inconceivable power for
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
515
which the Supreme Lord is called "all-powerful." Demons cannot understand
the omnipotence of the Lord. They simply compare the Lord to one of them
(avajänanti mäà müòhä mänuñéà tanum äçritam [Bg. 9.11]). Müòhas, rascals,
think that Kåñëa is an ordinary human being who appears for the benefit of
other human beings. paraà bhävam ajänantaù: fools, rascals and demons
cannot realize the supreme potency of the Lord, but He can do anything and
everything; indeed, He can do whatever He likes. When Hiraëyakaçipu
received benedictions from Lord Brahmä, he thought that he was safe, since he
received the benediction that he would not be killed either by an animal or by
a human being. He never thought that an animal and human being would be
combined so that demons like him would be puzzled by such a form. This is the
meaning of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's omnipotence.
TEXTS 19-22
MaqMaa&SaMaaNaSYa SaMauiTQaTaae_Ga]Taae )
Na*iSa&hæPaSTadl&/ >aYaaNak-Ma( )) 19 ))
Pa[TaácaMaqk-rc<@l/aecNa&
Sfu-rTSa$=ake-XarJa*iM>aTaaNaNaMa( )
k-ral/d&í\& k-rval/cÄl/‚
+auraNTaiJaû& >a]uku-$=qMau%aeLb<aMa( )) 20 ))
STaBDaaeßRk-<a| iGairk-Ndrad(>auTa‚
VYaataaSYaNaaSa& hNau>aed>aqz<aMa( )
idivSPa*XaTk-aYaMadqgaRPaqvr‚
Ga]qvaeåv+a"SQal/MaLPaMaDYaMaMa( )) 21 ))
cNd]a&éuGaaErEX^uirTa& TaNaUåhE‚
ivRZvG>auJaaNaqk-XaTa& Na%aYauDaMa( )
duraSad& SavRiNaJaeTaraYauDa‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
516
Pa[vek-ivd]aivTadETYadaNavMa( )) 22 ))
mémäàsamänasya samutthito 'grato
nåsiàha-rüpas tad alaà bhayänakam
pratapta-cämékara-caëòa-locanaà
sphurat saöä-keçara-jåmbhitänanam
karäla-daàñöraà karaväla-caïcalakñuränta-
jihvaà bhrukuöé-mukholbaëam
stabdhordhva-karëaà giri-kandarädbhutavyättäsya-
näsaà hanu-bheda-bhéñaëam
divi-spåçat käyam adérgha-pévaragrévoru-
vakñaù-sthalam alpa-madhyamam
candräàçu-gauraiç churitaà tanüruhair
viñvag bhujänéka-çataà nakhäyudham
duräsadaà sarva-nijetaräyudhapraveka-
vidrävita-daitya-dänavam
SYNONYMS
mémäàsamänasya—of Hiraëyakaçipu, who was contemplating the wonderful
form of the Lord; samutthitaù—appeared; agrataù—in front;
nåsiàha-rüpaù—the form of Nåsiàhadeva (half lion and half man); tat—that;
alam—extraordinarily; bhayänakam—very fearful; pratapta—like molten;
cämékara—gold; caëòa-locanam—having fierce eyes; sphurat—flashing;
saöä-keçara—by His mane; jåmbhita-änanam—whose face was expanded;
karäla—deadly; daàñöram—with a set of teeth; karaväla-caïcala—waving like
a sharp sword; kñura-anta—and as sharp as a razor; jihvam—whose tongue;
bhrukuöé-mukha—due to His frowning face; ulbaëam—dreadful;
stabdha—motionless; ürdhva—extending upward; karëam—whose ears;
giri-kandara—like the caves of a mountain; adbhuta—very wonderful;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
517
vyättäsya—with a widely opened mouth; näsam—and nostrils;
hanu-bheda-bhéñaëam—causing fear due to the separation of the jaws;
divi-spåçat—touching the sky; käyam—whose body; adérgha—short;
pévara—fat; gréva—neck; uru—broad; vakñaù-sthalam—chest; alpa—small;
madhyamam—middle portion of the body; candra-aàçu—like the rays of the
moon; gauraiù—whitish; churitam—covered; tanüruhaiù—with hairs;
viñvak—in all directions; bhuja—of arms; anéka-çatam—with a hundred rows;
nakha—having nails; äyudham—as fatal weapons; duräsadam—very difficult
to conquer; sarva—all; nija—personal; itara—and other; äyudha—of weapons;
praveka—by use of the best; vidrävita—caused to run; daitya—by whom the
demons; dänavam—and the rogues (atheists).
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu studied the form of the Lord, trying to decide who the form
of Nåsiàhadeva standing before him was. The Lord's form was extremely
fearsome because of His angry eyes, which resembled molten gold; His shining
mane, which expanded the dimensions of His fearful face; His deadly teeth; and
His razor-sharp tongue, which moved about like a dueling sword. His ears were
erect and motionless, and His nostrils and gaping mouth appeared like caves of a
mountain. His jaws parted fearfully, and His entire body touched the sky. His
neck was very short and thick, His chest broad, His waist thin, and the hairs on
His body as white as the rays of the moon. His arms, which resembled flanks of
soldiers, spread in all directions as He killed the demons, rogues and atheists
with His conchshell, disc, club, lotus and other natural weapons.
TEXT 23
Pa[aYae<a Mae_Ya& hir<aaeåMaaiYaNaa
vDa" SMa*Taae_NaeNa SaMauÛTaeNa ik-Ma( )
Wv& b]uv&STv>YaPaTad( GadaYauDaae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
518
NadNa( Na*iSa&h& Pa[iTa dETYaku-År" )) 23 ))
präyeëa me 'yaà hariëorumäyinä
vadhaù småto 'nena samudyatena kim
evaà bruvaàs tv abhyapatad gadäyudho
nadan nåsiàhaà prati daitya-kuïjaraù
SYNONYMS
präyeëa—probably; me—of me; ayam—this; hariëä—by the Supreme Lord;
uru-mäyinä—who possesses the great mystic power; vadhaù—the death;
småtaù—planned; anena—with this; samudyatena—endeavor; kim—what use;
evam—in this way; bruvan—murmuring; tu—indeed; abhyapatat—attacked;
gadä-äyudhaù—armed with his weapon, the club; nadan—loudly roaring;
nå-siàham—the Lord, appearing in the form of half lion and half man;
prati—toward; daitya-kuïjaraù—Hiraëyakaçipu, who was like an elephant.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu murmured to himself, "Lord Viñëu, who possesses great
mystic power, has made this plan to kill me, but what is the use of such an
attempt? Who can fight with me?" Thinking like this and taking up his club,
Hiraëyakaçipu attacked the Lord like an elephant.
PURPORT
In the jungle there are sometimes fights between lions and elephants. Here
the Lord appeared like a lion, and Hiraëyakaçipu, unafraid of the Lord,
attacked Him like an elephant. Generally the elephant is defeated by the lion,
and therefore the comparison in this verse is appropriate.
TEXT 24
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
519
Al/i+aTaae_GanaE PaiTaTa" PaTa(r)Maae
YaQaa Na*iSa&haEJaiSa Saae_SaurSTada )
Na Tad( ivic}a& %lu/ SatvDaaMaiNa
SvTaeJaSaa Yaae Nau PauraiPabTa( TaMa" )) 24 ))
alakñito 'gnau patitaù pataìgamo
yathä nåsiàhaujasi so 'suras tadä
na tad vicitraà khalu sattva-dhämani
sva-tejasä yo nu puräpibat tamaù
SYNONYMS
alakñitaù—invisible; agnau—in the fire; patitaù—fallen; pataìgamaù—an
insect; yathä—just as; nåsiàha—of Lord Nåsiàhadeva; ojasi—in the
effulgence; saù—he; asuraù—Hiraëyakaçipu; tadä—at that time; na—not;
tat—that; vicitram—wonderful; khalu—indeed; sattva-dhämani—in the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in pure goodness;
sva-tejasä—by His own effulgence; yaù—He who (the Lord); nu—indeed;
purä—formerly; apibat—swallowed up; tamaù—the darkness within the
material creation.
TRANSLATION
Just as a small insect falls forcefully into a fire and the insignificant creature
becomes invisible, when Hiraëyakaçipu attacked the Lord, who was full of
effulgence, Hiraëyakaçipu became invisible. This is not at all astonishing, for
the Lord is always situated in pure goodness. Formerly, during creation, He
entered the dark universe and illuminated it by His spiritual effulgence.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
520
The Lord is situated transcendentally, in pure goodness. The material world
is generally controlled by tamo-guëa, the quality of ignorance, but the spiritual
world, because of the presence of the Lord and His effulgence, is free from all
contamination by darkness, passion or contaminated goodness. Although there
is a tinge of goodness in this material world in terms of the brahminical
qualifications, such qualifications sometimes become invisible because of the
strong prevalence of the modes of passion and ignorance. But because the Lord
is always transcendentally situated, the material modes of passion and
ignorance cannot touch Him. Whenever the Lord is present, there cannot be
any darkness from the mode of ignorance. It is stated in Caitanya-caritämåta
(Madhya 22.31):
kåñëa—sürya-sama, mäyä haya andhakära
yähäì kåñëa, tähäì nähi mäyära adhikära
"Godhead is light. Nescience is darkness. Where there is Godhead there is no
nescience." This material world is full of darkness and ignorance of spiritual
life, but by bhakti-yoga this ignorance is dissipated. The Lord appeared because
of the bhakti-yoga exhibited by Prahläda Mahäräja, and as soon as the Lord
appeared, the influence of Hiraëyakaçipu's passion and ignorance was
vanquished as the Lord's quality of pure goodness, or the Brahman effulgence,
became prominent. In that prominent effulgence, Hiraëyakaçipu became
invisible, or his influence became insignificant. An example illustrating how
the darkness of the material world is vanquished is given in the çästra. When
Brahmä was created from the lotus stem growing from the abdomen of
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, Lord Brahmä saw everything to be dark, but when he
received knowledge from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, everything
became clear, as everything becomes clear when one comes from night to
sunshine. The important point is that as long as we are in the material modes
of nature, we are always in darkness. This darkness cannot be dissipated
without the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, which is
invoked by the practice of bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga creates a transcendental
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
521
situation with no tinges of material contamination.
TEXT 25
TaTaae_i>aPaÛa>YahNaNMahaSaurae
åza Na*iSa&h& GadYaaeåveGaYaa )
Ta& iv§-MaNTa& SaGad& GadaDarae
MahaerGa& Taa+YaRSauTaae YaQaaGa]hqTa( )) 25 ))
tato 'bhipadyäbhyahanan mahäsuro
ruñä nåsiàhaà gadayoruvegayä
taà vikramantaà sagadaà gadädharo
mahoragaà tärkñya-suto yathägrahét
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; abhipadya—attacking; abhyahanat—struck;
mahä-asuraù—the great demon (Hiraëyakaçipu); ruñä—with anger;
nåsiàham—Lord Nåsiàhadeva; gadayä—by his club; uru-vegayä—moving
with great force; tam—him (Hiraëyakaçipu); vikramantam—showing his
prowess; sa-gadam—with his club; gadä-dharaù—Lord Nåsiàhadeva, who also
holds a club in His hand; mahä-uragam—a great snake;
tärkñya-sutaù—Garuòa, the son of Tärkñya; yathä—just as; agrahét—captured.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the great demon Hiraëyakaçipu, who was extremely angry,
swiftly attacked Nåsiàhadeva with his club and began to beat Him. Lord
Nåsiàhadeva, however, captured the great demon, along with his club, just as
Garuòa might capture a great snake.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
522
TEXT 26
Sa TaSYa hSTaaeTk-il/TaSTadaSaurae
iv§-I@Taae YaÜdihGaRåTMaTa" )
ASaaßMaNYaNTa ôTaaEk-Saae_Mara
gaNaC^da >aarTa SavRiDaZ<YaPaa" )) 26 ))
sa tasya hastotkalitas tadäsuro
vikréòato yadvad ahir garutmataù
asädhv amanyanta håtaukaso 'marä
ghana-cchadä bhärata sarva-dhiñëya-päù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); tasya—of Him (Lord Nåsiàhadeva); hasta—from
the hands; utkalitaù—slipped; tadä—at that time; asuraù—the King of the
demons, Hiraëyakaçipu; vikréòataù—playing; yadvat—exactly like; ahiù—a
snake; garutmataù—of Garuòa; asädhu—not very good;
amanyanta—considered; håta-okasaù—whose abodes were taken by
Hiraëyakaçipu; amaräù—the demigods; ghana-cchadäù—situated behind a
cover of clouds; bhärata—O great son of Bhärata; sarva-dhiñëya-päù—the
rulers of the heavenly planets.
TRANSLATION
O Yudhiñöhira, O great son of Bhärata, when Lord Nåsiàhadeva gave
Hiraëyakaçipu a chance to slip from His hand, just as Garuòa sometimes plays
with a snake and lets it slip from his mouth, the demigods, who had lost their
abodes and who were hiding behind the clouds for fear of the demon, did not
consider that incident very good. Indeed, they were perturbed.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
523
PURPORT
When Hiraëyakaçipu was in the process of being killed by Lord
Nåsiàhadeva, the Lord gave the demon a chance to slip from His clutches.
This incident was not very much appreciated by the demigods, for they were
greatly afraid of Hiraëyakaçipu. They knew that if somehow or other
Hiraëyakaçipu escaped from Nåsiàhadeva's hands and saw that the demigods
were looking forward to his death with great pleasure, he would take great
revenge upon them. Therefore they were very much afraid.
TEXT 27
Ta& MaNYaMaaNaae iNaJavqYaRXaiªTa&
YaÖSTaMau¢-ae Na*hir„& MahaSaur" )
PauNaSTaMaaSaÂTa %ÉcMaR<aq
Pa[Ga*ù veGaeNa GaTaé[Maae Ma*Dae )) 27 ))
taà manyamäno nija-vérya-çaìkitaà
yad dhasta-mukto nåharià mahäsuraù
punas tam äsajjata khaòga-carmaëé
pragåhya vegena gata-çramo mådhe
SYNONYMS
tam—Him (Lord Nåsiàhadeva); manyamänaù—thinking;
nija-vérya-çaìkitam—afraid of his prowess; yat—because; hasta-muktaù—freed
from the clutches of the Lord; nå-harim—Lord Nåsiàhadeva;
mahä-asuraù—the great demon; punaù—again; tam—Him;
äsajjata—attacked; khaòga-carmaëé—his sword and shield; pragåhya—taking
up; vegena—with great force; gata-çramaù—his fatigue having gone;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
524
mådhe—in the battle.
TRANSLATION
When Hiraëyakaçipu was freed from the hands of Nåsiàhadeva, he falsely
thought that the Lord was afraid of his prowess. Therefore, after taking a little
rest from the fight, he took up his sword and shield and again attacked the Lord
with great force.
PURPORT
When a sinful man enjoys material facilities, foolish people sometimes
think, "How is it that this sinful man is enjoying whereas a pious man is
suffering?" By the will of the Supreme, a sinful man is sometimes given the
chance to enjoy the material world as if he were not under the clutches of
material nature, just so that he may be fooled. A sinful man who acts against
the laws of nature must be punished, but sometimes he is given a chance to
play, exactly like Hiraëyakaçipu when he was released from the hands of
Nåsiàhadeva. Hiraëyakaçipu was destined to be ultimately killed by
Nåsiàhadeva, but just to see the fun, the Lord gave him a chance to slip from
His hands.
TEXT 28
Ta& XYaeNaveGa& XaTacNd]vTMaRi>a‚
êrNTaMaiC^d]MauPaYaRDaae hir" )
k*-TvaÆhaSa& %rMauTSvNaaeLb<a&
iNaMaqil/Taa+a& JaGa*he MahaJav" )) 28 ))
taà çyena-vegaà çata-candra-vartmabhiç
carantam acchidram upary-adho hariù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
525
kåtväööa-häsaà kharam utsvanolbaëaà
nimélitäkñaà jagåhe mahä-javaù
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Hiraëyakaçipu); çyena-vegam—possessing the speed of a hawk;
çata-candra-vartmabhiù—by the maneuvers of his sword and his shield, which
was marked with a hundred moonlike spots; carantam—moving;
acchidram—without any weak spot; upari-adhaù—up and down; hariù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; kåtvä—making; aööa-häsam—loud laughter;
kharam—extremely shrill; utsvana-ulbaëam—very fearful due to its great
sound; nimélita—closed; akñam—eyes; jagåhe—captured; mahä-javaù—the
greatly powerful Lord.
TRANSLATION
Making a loud, shrill sound of laughter, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Näräyaëa, who is extremely strong and powerful, captured
Hiraëyakaçipu, who was protecting himself with his sword and shield, leaving
no gaps open. With the speed of a hawk, Hiraëyakaçipu moved sometimes in
the sky and sometimes on the earth, his eyes closed because of fear of
Nåsiàhadeva's laughter.
TEXT 29
ivZvk(- Sfu-rNTa& Ga]h<aaTaur& hir‚
VYaaRl/ae YaQaa%u& ku-il/Xaa+aTaTvcMa( )
ÜaYaURåMaaPaTYa ddar l/Il/Yaa
Na%EYaRQaaih& Gaå@ae MahaivzMa( )) 29 ))
viñvak sphurantaà grahaëäturaà harir
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
526
vyälo yathäkhuà kuliçäkñata-tvacam
dväry ürum äpatya dadära lélayä
nakhair yathähià garuòo mahä-viñam
SYNONYMS
viñvak—all around; sphurantam—moving his limbs; grahaëa-äturam—afflicted
because of being captured; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Nåsiàhadeva; vyälaù—a snake; yathä—just as; äkhum—a mouse;
kuliça-akñata—not cut even by the thunderbolt thrown by Indra;
tvacam—whose skin; dväri—on the threshold of the door; ürum—on His
thigh; äpatya—placing; dadära—pierced; lélayä—very easily; nakhaiù—with
the nails; yathä—just as; ahim—a snake; garuòaù—Garuòa, the carrier of Lord
Viñëu; mahä-viñam—very venomous.
TRANSLATION
As a snake captures a mouse or Garuòa captures a very venomous snake,
Lord Nåsiàhadeva captured Hiraëyakaçipu, who could not be pierced even by
the thunderbolt of King Indra. As Hiraëyakaçipu moved his limbs here, there
and all around, very much afflicted at being captured, Lord Nåsiàhadeva placed
the demon on His lap, supporting him with His thighs, and in the doorway of
the assembly hall the Lord very easily tore the demon to pieces with the nails of
His hand.
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu had received from Lord Brahmä the benediction that he
would not die on the land or in the sky. Therefore, to keep the promise of Lord
Brahmä intact, Nåsiàhadeva placed Hiraëyakaçipu's body on His lap, which
was neither land nor sky. Hiraëyakaçipu had received the benediction that he
would not die either during the day or at night. Therefore, to keep this promise
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
527
of Brahmä, the Lord killed Hiraëyakaçipu in the evening, which is the end of
day and the beginning of night but is neither day nor night. Hiraëyakaçipu
had taken a benediction from Lord Brahmä that he would not die from any
weapon or be killed by any person, dead or alive. Therefore, just to keep the
word of Lord Brahmä, Lord Nåsiàhadeva pierced Hiraëyakaçipu's body with
His nails, which were not weapons and were neither living nor dead. Indeed,
the nails can be called dead, but at the same time they can be said to be alive.
To keep intact all of Lord Brahmä's benedictions, Lord Nåsiàhadeva
paradoxically but very easily killed the great demon Hiraëyakaçipu.
TEXT 30
Sa&rM>aduZPa[e+Yak-ral/l/aecNaae
VYaataaNaNaaNTa& ivil/hNSviJaûYaa )
ASa*Gl/va¢-aå<ake-XaraNaNaae
YaQaaN}aMaal/I iÜPahTYaYaa hir" )) 30 ))
saàrambha-duñprekñya-karäla-locano
vyättänanäntaà vilihan sva-jihvayä
asåg-laväktäruëa-keçaränano
yathäntra-mälé dvipa-hatyayä hariù
SYNONYMS
saàrambha—because of great anger; duñprekñya—very difficult to look at;
karäla—very fearful; locanaù—eyes; vyätta—expanded; änana-antam—the
edge of the mouth; vilihan—licking; sva-jihvayä—with His tongue;
asåk-lava—with spots of blood; äkta—smeared; aruëa—reddish;
keçara—mane; änanaù—and face; yathä—just as; antra-mälé—decorated with
a garland of intestines; dvipa-hatyayä—by the killing of an elephant;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
528
hariù—the lion.
TRANSLATION
Lord Nåsiàhadeva's mouth and mane were sprinkled with drops of blood,
and His fierce eyes, full of anger, were impossible to look at. Licking the edge of
His mouth with His tongue, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Nåsiàhadeva, decorated with a garland of intestines taken from
Hiraëyakaçipu's abdomen, resembled a lion that has just killed an elephant.
PURPORT
The hair on Lord Nåsiàhadeva's face, being sprinkled with drops of blood,
was reddish and looked very beautiful. Lord Nåsiàhadeva pierced
Hiraëyakaçipu's abdomen with His nails, pulled out the demon's intestines and
wore them as a garland, which enhanced His beauty. Thus the Lord became
very fearsome, like a lion engaged in fighting an elephant.
TEXT 31
Na%ax(ku-raeTPaai$=TaôTSaraeåh&
ivSa*JYa TaSYaaNaucraNaudaYauDaaNa( )
AhNa( SaMaSTaaà%XañPaai<ai>a‚
daeRdR<@YaUQaae_NauPaQaaNa( SahóXa" )) 31 ))
nakhäìkurotpäöita-håt-saroruhaà
visåjya tasyänucarän udäyudhän
ahan samastän nakha-çastra-päëibhir
dordaëòa-yütho 'nupathän sahasraçaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
529
SYNONYMS
nakha-aìkura—by the pointed nails; utpäöita—torn out;
håt-saroruham—whose heart, which was like a lotus flower; visåjya—leaving
aside; tasya—of him; anucarän—the followers (soldiers and bodyguards);
udäyudhän—having raised weapons; ahan—He killed; samastän—all;
nakha-çastra-päëibhiù—with His nails and other weapons in His hands;
dordaëòa-yüthaù—having unlimited arms; anupathän—the attendants of
Hiraëyakaçipu; sahasraçaù—by thousands.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had many, many arms, first
uprooted Hiraëyakaçipu's heart and then threw him aside and turned toward
the demon's soldiers. These soldiers had come in thousands to fight with Him
with raised weapons and were very faithful followers of Hiraëyakaçipu, but
Lord Nåsiàhadeva killed all of them merely with the ends of His nails.
PURPORT
Since the creation of the material world, there have been two kinds of
men—the devas and the asuras. The devas are always faithful to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whereas the asuras are always atheists who defy the
supremacy of the Lord. At the present moment, throughout the entire world,
the atheists are extremely numerous. They are trying to prove that there is no
God and that everything takes place due to combinations and permutations of
material elements. Thus the material world is becoming more and more
godless, and consequently everything is in a disturbed condition. If this
continues, the Supreme Personality of Godhead will certainly take action, as
He did in the case of Hiraëyakaçipu. Within a second, Hiraëyakaçipu and his
followers were destroyed, and similarly if this godless civilization continues, it
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
530
will be destroyed in a second, simply by the movement of one finger of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The demons should therefore be careful and
curtail their godless civilization. They should take advantage of the Kåñëa
consciousness movement and become faithful to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; otherwise they are doomed. As Hiraëyakaçipu was killed in a second,
the godless civilization can be destroyed at any moment.
TEXT 32
Sa$=avDaUTaa Jal/da" ParaPaTaNa(
Ga]haê Tad(d*iíivMauíraeicz" )
AM>aaeDaYa" ìaSahTaa ivcu+au>au‚
iNaRhaRd>aqTaa idiGa>aa ivcu§u-éu" )) 32 ))
saöävadhütä jaladäù paräpatan
grahäç ca tad-dåñöi-vimuñöa-rociñaù
ambhodhayaù çväsa-hatä vicukñubhur
nirhräda-bhétä digibhä vicukruçuù
SYNONYMS
saöä—by the hair on Lord Nåsiàhadeva's head; avadhütäù—shaken;
jaladäù—the clouds; paräpatan—scattered; grahäù—the luminous planets;
ca—and; tat-dåñöi—by His glaring glance; vimuñöa—taken away;
rociñaù—whose effulgence; ambhodhayaù—the water of the oceans and seas;
çväsa-hatäù—being struck by Lord Nåsiàhadeva's breathing;
vicukñubhuù—became turbulent; nirhräda-bhétäù—frightened by
Nåsiàhadeva's roaring; digibhäù—all the elephants guarding the quarters;
vicukruçuù—cried out.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
531
TRANSLATION
The hair on Nåsiàhadeva's head shook the clouds and scattered them here
and there, His glaring eyes stole the effulgence of the luminaries in the sky, and
His breathing agitated the seas and oceans. Because of His roaring, all the
elephants in the world began to cry in fear.
PURPORT
As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (10.41):
yad yad vibhütimat sattvaà
çrémad ürjitam eva vä
tat tad evävagaccha tvaà
mama tejo-'àça-sambhavam
"Know that all beautiful, glorious and mighty creations spring from but a spark
of My splendor." The illumination of the planets and stars in the sky is but a
partial manifestation of the Lord's effulgence. There are many wonderful
qualities of different living entities, but whatever extraordinary things exist
are but part of the Lord's tejas, His illumination or brilliance. The deep waves
of the seas and oceans and the many other wonders within the creation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead all become insignificant when the Lord, in
His special feature, incarnates within this material world. Everything is
insignificant in comparison to His personal, all-defeating transcendental
qualities.
TEXT 33
ÛaESTaTSa$=aeiT+aáivMaaNaSax(ku-l/a
Pa[aeTSaPaRTa +Maa c Padai>aPaqi@Taa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
532
XaEl/a" SaMauTPaeTaurMauZYa r&hSaa
TataeJaSaa %& k-ku->aae Na reiJare )) 33 ))
dyaus tat-saöotkñipta-vimäna-saìkulä
protsarpata kñmä ca padäbhipéòitä
çailäù samutpetur amuñya raàhasä
tat-tejasä khaà kakubho na rejire
SYNONYMS
dyauù—outer space; tat-saöä—by His hair; utkñipta—thrown up;
vimäna-saìkulä—filled with airplanes; protsarpata—slipped out of place;
kñmä—the planet earth; ca—also; pada-abhipéòitä—distressed due to the
heavy weight of the lotus feet of the Lord; çailäù—the hills and mountains;
samutpetuù—sprang up; amuñya—of that one (the Lord); raàhasä—due to the
intolerable force; tat-tejasä—by His effulgence; kham—the sky;
kakubhaù—the ten directions; na rejire—did not shine.
TRANSLATION
Airplanes were thrown into outer space and the upper planetary system by
the hair on Nåsiàhadeva's head. Because of the pressure of the Lord's lotus
feet, the earth appeared to slip from its position, and all the hills and mountains
sprang up due to His intolerable force. Because of the Lord's bodily effulgence,
both the sky and all directions diminished in their natural illumination.
PURPORT
That there were airplanes flying in the sky long, long ago can be understood
from this verse. Çrémad-Bhägavatam was spoken five thousand years ago, and
the statements of this verse prove that the symptoms of a very advanced
civilization then existed, even in the upper planetary systems, as well as in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
533
lower planetary systems. Modern scientists and philosophers foolishly explain
that there was no civilization prior to three thousand years ago, but the
statement of this verse nullifies such whimsical judgments. The Vedic
civilization existed millions and millions of years ago. It existed since the
creation of this universe, and it included arrangements all over the universe
with all the modern amenities and even more.
TEXT 34
TaTa" Sa>aaYaaMauPaivíMautaMae
Na*PaaSaNae Sa&>a*TaTaeJaSa& iv>auMa( )
Al/i+aTaÜErQaMaTYaMazR<a&
Pa[c<@v£&- Na b>aaJa k-êNa )) 34 ))
tataù sabhäyäm upaviñöam uttame
nåpäsane sambhåta-tejasaà vibhum
alakñita-dvairatham atyamarñaëaà
pracaëòa-vaktraà na babhäja kaçcana
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; sabhäyäm—in the assembly house; upaviñöam—seated;
uttame—on the best; nåpa-äsane—throne (upon which King Hiraëyakaçipu
used to sit); sambhåta-tejasam—in full effulgence; vibhum—the Supreme Lord;
alakñita-dvairatham—whose challenger or enemy was not seen; ati—very
much; amarñaëam—fearsome (due to His anger); pracaëòa—terrible;
vaktram—face; na—not; babhäja—worshiped; kaçcana—anyone.
TRANSLATION
Manifesting a full effulgence and a fearsome countenance, Lord Nåsiàha,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
534
being very angry and finding no contestant to face His power and opulence,
then sat down in the assembly hall on the excellent throne of the king. Because
of fear and obedience, no one could come forward to serve the Lord directly.
PURPORT
When the Lord sat on the throne of Hiraëyakaçipu, there was no one to
protest; no enemy came forward on behalf of Hiraëyakaçipu to fight with the
Lord. This means that His supremacy was immediately accepted by the
demons. Another point is that although Hiraëyakaçipu treated the Lord as his
bitterest enemy, he was the Lord's faithful servant in Vaikuëöha, and therefore
the Lord had no hesitation in sitting on the throne that Hiraëyakaçipu had so
laboriously created. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks in this
connection that sometimes, with great care and attention, great saintly
persons and åñis offer the Lord valuable seats dedicated with Vedic mantras
and tantras, but still the Lord does not sit upon those thrones. Hiraëyakaçipu,
however, had formerly been Jaya, the doorkeeper at the Vaikuëöha gate, and
although he had fallen because of the curse of the brähmaëas and had gotten
the nature of a demon, and although he had never offered anything to the
Lord as Hiraëyakaçipu, the Lord is so affectionate to His devotee and servant
that He nonetheless took pleasure in sitting on the throne that Hiraëyakaçipu
had created. In this regard it is to be understood that a devotee is fortunate in
any condition of his life.
TEXT 35
iNaXaaMYa l/aek-}aYaMaSTak-Jvr&
TaMaaiddETYa& hir<aa hTa& Ma*Dae )
Pa[hzRveGaaeTk-il/TaaNaNaa Mauhu"
Pa[SaUNavzOEvRv*zu" SauriñYa" )) 35 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
535
niçämya loka-traya-mastaka-jvaraà
tam ädi-daityaà hariëä hataà mådhe
praharña-vegotkalitänanä muhuù
prasüna-varñair vavåñuù sura-striyaù
SYNONYMS
niçämya—hearing; loka-traya—of the three worlds; mastaka-jvaram—the
headache; tam—him; ädi—the original; daityam—demon; hariëä—by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; hatam—killed; mådhe—in battle;
praharña-vega—by an outburst of ecstasy; utkalita-änanäù—whose faces
blossomed; muhuù—again and again; prasüna-varñaiù—with showers of
flowers; vavåñuù—rained; sura-striyaù—the wives of the demigods.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu had been exactly like a fever of meningitis in the head of the
three worlds. Thus when the wives of the demigods in the heavenly planets saw
that the great demon had been killed by the personal hands of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, their faces blossomed in great joy. The wives of the
demigods again and again showered flowers from heaven upon Lord
Nåsiàhadeva like rain.
TEXT 36
Tada ivMaaNaavil/i>aNaR>aSTal&/
idd*+aTaa& Sax(ku-l/MaaSa Naaik-NaaMa( )
SauraNak-a duNdu>aYaae_Qa Jaiganre
GaNDavRMau:Yaa NaNa*TauJaRGau" iñYa" )) 36 ))
tadä vimänävalibhir nabhastalaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
536
didåkñatäà saìkulam äsa näkinäm
suränakä dundubhayo 'tha jaghnire
gandharva-mukhyä nanåtur jaguù striyaù
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; vimäna-ävalibhiù—with different types of airplanes;
nabhastalam—the sky; didåkñatäm—desirous of seeing; saìkulam—crowded;
äsa—became; näkinäm—of the demigods; sura-änakäù—the drums of the
demigods; dundubhayaù—the kettledrums; atha—as well; jaghnire—were
sounded; gandharva-mukhyäù—the chiefs of Gandharvaloka; nanåtuù—began
to dance; jaguù—sang; striyaù—heavenly society women.
TRANSLATION
At that time, the airplanes of the demigods, who desired to see the activities
of the Supreme Lord, Näräyaëa, crowded the sky. The demigods began beating
drums and kettledrums, and upon hearing them the angelic women began to
dance, while the chiefs of the Gandharvas sang sweetly.
TEXTS 37-39
Ta}aaePav]JYa ivbuDaa b]øeNd]iGairXaadYa" )
‰zYa" iPaTar" iSaÖa ivÛaDarMahaerGaa" )) 37 ))
MaNav" Pa[JaaNaa& PaTaYaae GaNDavaRPSarcar<aa" )
Ya+aa" ik-MPauåzaSTaaTa veTaal/a" Sahik-àra" )) 38 ))
Tae ivZ<auPaazRda" SaveR SauNaNdku-MaudadYa"
MaUiDNaR bÖaÅil/Pau$=a AaSaqNa& Taqv]TaeJaSaMa( )
wRi@re NarXaaduRl&/ NaaiTadUrcra" Pa*Qak(- )) 39 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
537
tatropavrajya vibudhä
brahmendra-giriçädayaù
åñayaù pitaraù siddhä
vidyädhara-mahoragäù
manavaù prajänäà patayo
gandharväpsara-cäraëäù
yakñäù kimpuruñäs täta
vetäläù saha-kinnaräù
te viñëu-pärñadäù sarve
sunanda-kumudädayaù
mürdhni baddhäïjali-puöä
äsénaà tévra-tejasam
éòire nara-çärdulaà
nätidüracaräù påthak
SYNONYMS
tatra—there (in the sky); upavrajya—coming (in their respective airplanes);
vibudhäù—all the different demigods; brahma-indra-giriça-ädayaù—headed by
Lord Brahmä, King Indra and Lord Çiva; åñayaù—the great saintly sages;
pitaraù—the inhabitants of Pitåloka; siddhäù—the residents of Siddhaloka;
vidyädhara—the residents of Vidyädharaloka; mahä-uragäù—the residents of
the planets where great serpents reside; manavaù—the Manus; prajänäm—of
the living entities (on different planets); patayaù—the chiefs; gandharva—the
residents of Gandharvaloka; apsara—the residents of the angelic planet;
cäraëäù—the residents of Cäraëaloka; yakñäù—the Yakñas; kimpuruñäù—the
Kimpuruñas; täta—O dear one; vetäläù—the Vetälas; saha-kinnaräù—along
with the Kinnaras; te—they; viñëu-pärñadäù—the personal associates of Lord
Viñëu (in the Vaikuëöhalokas); sarve—all; sunanda-kumuda-ädayaù—headed
by Sunanda and Kumuda; mürdhni—on their heads;
baddha-aïjali-puöäù—with folded hands; äsénam—who was sitting on the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
538
throne; tévra-tejasam—exposing His great spiritual effulgence; éòire—offered
respectful worship; nara-çärdulam—unto the Lord, who had appeared as half
man and half lion; na ati-düracaräù—coming near; påthak—individually.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Yudhiñöhira, the demigods then approached the Lord. They
were headed by Lord Brahmä, King Indra and Lord Çiva and included great
saintly persons and the residents of Pitåloka, Siddhaloka, Vidyädhara-loka and
the planet of the snakes. The Manus approached, and so did the chiefs of
various other planets. The angelic dancers approached, as did the Gandharvas,
the Cäraëas, the Yakñas, the inhabitants of Kinnaraloka, the Vetälas, the
inhabitants of Kimpuruña-loka, and the personal servants of Viñëu like Sunanda
and Kumuda. All of them came near the Lord, who glowed with intense light.
They individually offered their obeisances and prayers, their hands folded at
their heads.
TEXT 40
é[qb]øaevac
NaTaae_SMYaNaNTaaYa durNTaXa¢-Yae
ivic}avqYaaRYa Paiv}ak-MaR<ae )
ivìSYa SaGaRiSQaiTaSa&YaMaaNa( Gau<aE"
Svl/Il/Yaa SaNdDaTae_VYaYaaTMaNae )) 40 ))
çré-brahmoväca
nato 'smy anantäya duranta-çaktaye
vicitra-véryäya pavitra-karmaëe
viçvasya sarga-sthiti-saàyamän guëaiù
sva-lélayä sandadhate 'vyayätmane
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
539
SYNONYMS
çré-brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; nataù—bowed down; asmi—I am;
anantäya—unto the unlimited Lord; duranta—very difficult to find an end to;
çaktaye—who possesses different potencies; vicitra-véryäya—having varieties
of prowess; pavitra-karmaëe—whose actions have no reaction (even though
doing contrary things, He remains without contamination by the material
modes); viçvasya—of the universe; sarga—creation; sthiti—maintenance;
saàyamän—and annihilation; guëaiù—by the material qualities;
sva-lélayä—very easily; sandadhate—performs; avyaya-ätmane—whose
personality never deteriorates.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä prayed: My Lord, You are unlimited, and You possess
unending potencies. No one can estimate or calculate Your prowess and
wonderful influence, for Your actions are never polluted by the material energy.
Through the material qualities, You very easily create the universe, maintain it
and again annihilate it, yet You remain the same, without deterioration. I
therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
The activities of the Lord are always wonderful. His personal servants Jaya
and Vijaya were confidential friends, yet they were cursed, and they accepted
bodies of demons. Again, in the family of one such demon, Prahläda Mahäräja
was caused to take birth to exhibit the behavior of an exalted devotee, and
then the Lord accepted the body of Nåsiàhadeva to kill that same demon, who
by the Lord's own will had taken birth in a demoniac family. Therefore, who
can understand the Lord's transcendental activities? Not to speak of
understanding the transcendental activities of the Lord, no one can
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
540
understand even the activities of His servants. In Caitanya-caritämåta
(Madhya 23.39) it is said, täìra väkya, kriyä, mudrä vijïeha nä bhujhaya: no one
can understand the activities of the Lord's servants. Therefore, what to speak
of the activities of the Lord? Who can understand how Kåñëa is benefiting the
entire world? The Lord is addressed as duranta-çakti because no one can
understand His potencies and how He acts.
TEXT 41
é[qåd] ovac
k-aePak-al/ae YauGaaNTaSTae hTaae_YaMaSaurae_LPak-" )
TaTSauTa& PaaùuPaSa*Ta& >a¢&- Tae >a¢-vTSal/ )) 41 ))
çré-rudra uväca
kopa-kälo yugäntas te
hato 'yam asuro 'lpakaù
tat-sutaà pähy upasåtaà
bhaktaà te bhakta-vatsala
SYNONYMS
çré-rudraù uväca—Lord Çiva offered his prayer; kopa-kälaù—the right time for
Your anger (for the purpose of annihilating the universe); yuga-antaù—the
end of the millennium; te—by You; hataù—killed; ayam—this; asuraù—great
demon; alpakaù—very insignificant; tat-sutam—his son (Prahläda Mahäräja);
pähi—just protect; upasåtam—who is surrendered and standing nearby;
bhaktam—devotee; te—of Your Lordship; bhakta-vatsala—O my Lord, who are
so affectionate to Your devotee.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
541
Lord Çiva said: The end of the millennium is the time for Your anger. Now
that this insignificant demon Hiraëyakaçipu has been killed, O my Lord, who
are naturally affectionate to Your devotee, kindly protect his son Prahläda
Mahäräja, who is standing nearby as Your fully surrendered devotee.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the creator of the material world.
There are three processes in creation-namely creation, maintenance and
finally annihilation. During the period of annihilation, at the end of each
millennium, the Lord becomes angry, and the part of anger is played by Lord
Çiva, who is therefore called Rudra. When the Lord appeared in great anger to
kill Hiraëyakaçipu, everyone was extremely afraid of the Lord's attitude, but
Lord Çiva, knowing very well that the Lord's anger is also His lélä, was not
afraid. Lord Çiva knew that he would have to play the part of anger for the
Lord. Käla means Lord Çiva (Bhairava), and kopa refers to the Lord's anger.
These words, combined together as kopa-käla, refer to the end of each
millennium. Actually the Lord is always affectionate toward His devotees,
even though He may appear very angry. Because He is avyayätmä-because He
never falls down—even when angry the Lord is affectionate toward His
devotees. Therefore Lord Çiva reminded the Lord to act like an affectionate
father toward Prahläda Mahäräja, who was standing by the Lord's side as an
exalted, fully surrendered devotee.
TEXT 42
é[qwNd] ovac
Pa[TYaaNaqTaa" ParMa >avTaa }aaYaTaa Na" Sv>aaGaa
dETYaa§-aNTa& ôdYak-Mal&/ Tad(Ga*h& Pa[TYabaeiDa )
k-al/Ga]STa& ik-YaiddMahae NaaQa éué[UzTaa& Tae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
542
Maui¢-STaeza& Na ih bhuMaTaa NaariSa&haParE" ik-Ma( )) 42 ))
çré-indra uväca
pratyänétäù parama bhavatä träyatä naù sva-bhägä
daityäkräntaà hådaya-kamalaà tad-gåhaà pratyabodhi
käla-grastaà kiyad idam aho nätha çuçrüñatäà te
muktis teñäà na hi bahumatä närasiàhäparaiù kim
SYNONYMS
çré-indraù uväca—Indra, the King of heaven, said; pratyänétäù—recovered;
parama—O Supreme; bhavatä—by Your Lordship; träyatä—who are
protecting; naù—us; sva-bhägäù—shares in the sacrifices;
daitya-äkräntam—afflicted by the demon; hådaya-kamalam—the lotuslike
cores of our hearts; tat-gåham—which is actually Your residence;
pratyabodhi—it has been illuminated; käla-grastam—devoured by time;
kiyat—insignificant; idam—this (world); aho—alas; nätha—O Lord;
çuçrüñatäm—for those who are always engaged in the service; te—of You;
muktiù—liberation from material bondage; teñäm—of them (the pure
devotees); na—not; hi—indeed; bahumatä—thought very important;
nära-siàha—O Lord Nåsiàhadeva, half lion and half human being; aparaiù
kim—then what is the use of other possessions.
TRANSLATION
King Indra said: O Supreme Lord, You are our deliverer and protector. Our
shares of sacrifices, which are actually Yours, have been recovered from the
demon by You. Because the demoniac king Hiraëyakaçipu was most fearsome,
our hearts, which are Your permanent abode, were all overtaken by him. Now,
by Your presence, the gloom and darkness in our hearts have been dissipated. O
Lord, for those who always engage in Your service, which is more exalted than
liberation, all material opulence is insignificant. They do not even care for
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
543
liberation, not to speak of the benefits of käma, artha and dharma.
PURPORT
In this material world there are two kinds of people—the devatäs
(demigods) and the asuras (demons). Although the demigods are attached to
material enjoyment, they are devotees of the Lord who act according to the
rules and regulations of the Vedic injunctions. During the reign of
Hiraëyakaçipu, everyone was disturbed in the routine duties of Vedic
civilization. When Hiraëyakaçipu was killed, all the demigods, who had always
been disturbed by Hiraëyakaçipu, felt relief in their general way of life.
Because the government in Kali-yuga is full of demons, the living
conditions of devotees are always disturbed. Devotees cannot perform yajïa,
and thus they cannot partake of the remnants of food offered in yajïa for the
worship of Lord Viñëu. The hearts of the demigods are always filled with fear
of the demons, and therefore they cannot think of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The engagement of the demigods is to think of the Lord always
within the cores of their hearts. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (6.47):
yoginäm api sarveñäà
mad gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù
"And of all yogés, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me
in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga
and is the highest of all." The demigods fully absorb themselves in meditation
upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead to become perfect yogés, but because
of the presence of demons, their hearts are filled with the activities of the
demons. Thus their hearts, which are meant to be the abode of the Supreme
Lord, are practically occupied by the demons. All the demigods felt relieved
when Hiraëyakaçipu was dead, for they could easily think of the Lord. They
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
544
could then receive the results of sacrifices and become happy even though in
the material world.
TEXT 43
é[q‰zYa Ocu"
Tv& NaSTaPa" ParMaMaaTQa YadaTMaTaeJaae
YaeNaedMaaidPauåzaTMaGaTa& SaSaKQaR )
Tad( ivPa[lu/áMaMauNaaÛ Xar<YaPaal/
r+aaGa*hqTavPauza PauNarNvMa&SQaa" )) 43 ))
çré-åñaya ücuù
tvaà nas tapaù paramam ättha yad ätma-tejo
yenedam ädi-puruñätma-gataà sasarktha
tad vipraluptam amunädya çaraëya-päla
rakñä-gåhéta-vapuñä punar anvamaàsthäù
SYNONYMS
çré-åñayaù ücuù—the great sages said; tvam—You; naù—our; tapaù—austerity;
paramam—topmost; ättha—instructed; yat—which; ätma-tejaù—Your
spiritual power; yena—by which; idam—this (material world); ädi-puruña—O
supreme original Personality of Godhead; ätma-gatam—merged within
Yourself; sasarktha—(You) created; tat—that process of austerity and
penance; vipraluptam—stolen; amunä—by that demon (Hiraëyakaçipu);
adya—now; çaraëya-päla—O supreme maintainer of those who need to be
sheltered; rakñä-gåhéta-vapuñä—by Your body, which You accept to give
protection; punaù—again; anvamaàsthäù—You have approved.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
545
All the saintly persons present offered their prayers in this way: O Lord, O
supreme maintainer of those sheltered at Your lotus feet, O original Personality
of Godhead, the process of austerity and penance, in which You instructed us
before, is the spiritual power of Your very self. It is by austerity that You create
the material world, which lies dormant within You. This austerity was almost
stopped by the activities of this demon, but now, by Yourself appearing in the
form of Nåsiàhadeva, which is meant just to give us protection, and by killing
this demon, You have again approved the process of austerity.
PURPORT
The living entities wandering within the jurisdiction of the 8,400,000
species of life get the opportunity for self-realization in the human form and
gradually in such other elevated forms as those of the demigods, Kinnaras and
Cäraëas, as will be described below. In the higher statuses of life, beginning
from human life, the main duty is tapasya, or austerity. As Åñabhadeva advised
His sons, tapo divyaà putrakä yena sattvaà çuddhyet [SB 5.5.1]. To rectify our
material existence, austerity (tapasya) is absolutely necessary. However, when
people in general come under the control of a demon or a demoniac ruling
power, they forget this process of tapasya and gradually also become demoniac.
All the saintly persons, who were generally engaged in austerity, felt relieved
when Hiraëyakaçipu was killed by the Lord in the form of Nåsiàhadeva. They
realized that the original instruction concerning human life—that it is meant
for tapasya for self-realization—was reaffirmed by the Lord when He killed
Hiraëyakaçipu.
TEXT 44
é[qiPaTar Ocu"
é[aÖaiNa Naae_iDabu>auJae Pa[Sa>a& TaNaUJaE‚
dRtaaiNa TaqQaRSaMaYae_PYaiPabTa( iTal/aMbu )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
546
TaSYaaedraà%ivdq<aRvPaad( Ya AaC^RTa(
TaSMaE NaMaae Na*hrYae_i%l/DaMaRGaaeP}ae )) 44 ))
çré-pitara ücuù
çräddhäni no 'dhibubhuje prasabhaà tanüjair
dattäni tértha-samaye 'py apibat tilämbu
tasyodarän nakha-vidérëa-vapäd ya ärcchat
tasmai namo nåharaye 'khila-dharma-goptre
SYNONYMS
çré-pitaraù ücuù—the inhabitants of Pitåloka said; çräddhäni—the
performances of the çräddha ceremony (offering of food grains to dead
forefathers by a particular process); naù—our; adhibubhuje—enjoyed;
prasabham—by force; tanüjaiù—by our sons and grandsons; dattäni—offered;
tértha-samaye—at the time of bathing in the holy places; api—even;
apibat—drank; tila-ambu—offerings of water with sesame seeds; tasya—of the
demon; udarät—from the abdomen; nakha-vidérëa—pierced by the nails of the
hand; vapät—the skin of the intestines of which; yaù—He who (the
Personality of Godhead); ärcchat—obtained; tasmai—unto Him (the Supreme
Personality of Godhead); namaù—respectful obeisances; nå-haraye—who has
appeared as half lion and half man (Nåhari); akhila—universal;
dharma—religious principles; goptre—who maintains.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Pitåloka prayed: Let us offer our respectful obeisances
unto Lord Nåsiàhadeva, the maintainer of the religious principles of the
universe. He has killed Hiraëyakaçipu, the demon who by force enjoyed all the
offerings of the çräddha ceremonies performed by our sons and grandsons on the
anniversaries of our death and who drank the water with sesame seeds offered
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
547
in holy places of pilgrimage. By killing this demon, O Lord, You have taken
back all this stolen property from his abdomen by piercing it with Your nails.
We therefore wish to offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
It is the duty of all householders to offer food grains to all their departed
forefathers, but during the time of Hiraëyakaçipu this process was stopped; no
one would offer çräddha oblations of food grains to the forefathers with great
respect. Thus when there is a demoniac rule, everything concerning the Vedic
principles is turned upside down, all the religious ceremonies of yajïa are
stopped, the resources meant to be spent for yajïa are taken away by the
demoniac government, everything becomes chaotic, and consequently the
entire world becomes hell itself. When the demons are killed by the presence
of Nåsiàhadeva, everyone feels comfortable, irrespective of the planet upon
which he lives.
TEXT 45
é[qiSaÖa Ocu"
Yaae Naae GaiTa& YaaeGaiSaÖaMaSaaDau‚
rhazsd( YaaeGaTaPaaeble/Na )
NaaNaadPa| Ta& Na%EivRddar
TaSMaE Tau>Ya& Pa[<aTaa" SMaae Na*iSa&h )) 45 ))
çré-siddhä ücuù
yo no gatià yoga-siddhäm asädhur
ahärñéd yoga-tapo-balena
nänä darpaà taà nakhair vidadära
tasmai tubhyaà praëatäù smo nåsiàha
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
548
SYNONYMS
çré-siddhäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Siddhaloka said; yaù—the person who;
naù—our; gatim—perfection; yoga-siddhäm—achieved by mystic yoga;
asädhuù—most uncivilized and dishonest; ahärñét—stole away; yoga—of
mysticism; tapaù—and austerities; balena—by the power; nänä
darpam—proud due to wealth, opulence and strength; tam—him; nakhaiù—by
the nails; vidadära—pierced; tasmai—unto him; tubhyam—unto You;
praëatäù—bowed down; smaù—we are; nåsiàha—O Lord Nåsiàhadeva.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Siddhaloka prayed: O Lord Nåsiàhadeva, because we
belong to Siddhaloka, we automatically achieve perfection in all eight kinds of
mystic power. Yet Hiraëyakaçipu was so dishonest that by the strength of his
power and austerity, he took away our powers. Thus he became very proud of
his mystic strength. Now, because this rogue has been killed by Your nails, we
offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
On earth there are many yogés who can exhibit some feeble mystic power by
manufacturing pieces of gold like magic, but the inhabitants of the planet
Siddhaloka are actually extremely powerful in mysticism. They can fly from
one planet to another without airplanes. This is called laghimä-siddhi. They
can actually become very light and fly in the sky. By a severe type of austerity,
however, Hiraëyakaçipu excelled all the inhabitants of Siddhaloka and created
disturbances for them. The residents of Siddhaloka were also beaten by the
powers of Hiraëyakaçipu. Now that Hiraëyakaçipu had been killed by the
Lord, the inhabitants of Siddhaloka also felt relieved.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
549
TEXT 46
é[qivÛaDara Ocu"
ivÛa& Pa*QaGDaar<aYaaNauraÖa&
NYazeDadjae bl/vqYaRd*á" )
Sa YaeNa Sa&:Yae PaéuvÖTaSTa&
MaaYaaNa*iSa&h& Pa[<aTaa" SMa iNaTYaMa( )) 46 ))
çré-vidyädharä ücuù
vidyäà påthag dhäraëayänuräddhäà
nyañedhad ajïo bala-vérya-dåptaù
sa yena saìkhye paçuvad dhatas taà
mäyä-nåsiàhaà praëatäù sma nityam
SYNONYMS
çré-vidyädharäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Vidyädhara-loka prayed;
vidyäm—mystic formulas (by which one can appear and disappear);
påthak—separately; dhäraëayä—by various meditations within the mind;
anuräddhäm—attained; nyañedhat—stopped; ajïaù—this fool;
bala-vérya-dåptaù—puffed up by bodily strength and his ability to conquer
anyone; saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); yena—by whom; saìkhye—in battle;
paçu-vat—exactly like an animal; hataù—killed; tam—unto Him;
mäyä-nåsiàham—appearing as Lord Nåsiàhadeva by the influence of His own
energy; praëatäù—fallen; sma—certainly; nityam—eternally.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Vidyädhara-loka prayed: Our acquired power to appear
and disappear in various ways according to varieties of meditation was banned
by that foolish Hiraëyakaçipu because of his pride in his superior bodily
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
550
strength and his ability to conquer others. Now the Supreme Personality of
Godhead has killed him just as if the demon were an animal. Unto that supreme
pastime form of Lord Nåsiàhadeva, we eternally offer our respectful obeisances.
TEXT 47
é[qNaaGaa Ocu"
YaeNa PaaPaeNa rÒaiNa ñqrÒaiNa ôTaaiNa Na" )
TaÜ+a"Paa$=NaeNaaSaa& dtaaNaNd NaMaae_STau Tae )) 47 ))
çré-nägä ücuù
yena päpena ratnäni
stré-ratnäni håtäni naù
tad-vakñaù-päöanenäsäà
dattänanda namo 'stu te
SYNONYMS
çré-nägäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Nägaloka, who look like serpents, said;
yena—by which person; päpena—the most sinful (Hiraëyakaçipu);
ratnäni—the jewels on our heads; stré-ratnäni—beautiful wives; håtäni—taken
away; naù—our; tat—his; vakñaù-päöanena—by the piercing of the chest;
äsäm—of all the women (who were kidnapped); datta-änanda—O Lord, You
are the source of the pleasure; namaù—our respectful obeisances; astu—let
there be; te—unto You.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Nägaloka said: The most sinful Hiraëyakaçipu took away
all the jewels on our hoods and all our beautiful wives. Now, since his chest has
been pierced by Your nails, You are the source of all pleasure to our wives.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
551
Thus we together offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
No one is peaceful if his wealth and wife are forcibly taken away. All the
inhabitants of Nägaloka, which is situated below the earthly planetary system,
were in great anxiety because their wealth had been stolen and their wives
kidnapped by Hiraëyakaçipu. Now, Hiraëyakaçipu having been killed, their
wealth and wives were returned, and their wives felt satisfied. The inhabitants
of various lokas, or planets, offered their respectful obeisances unto the Lord
because they were relieved by the death of Hiraëyakaçipu. Disturbances
similar to those created by Hiraëyakaçipu are now taking place all over the
world because of demoniac governments. As stated in the Twelfth Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the men of the governments of Kali-yuga will be no better
than rogues and plunderers. Thus the populace will be harassed on one side by
scarcity of food and on another by heavy taxation by the government. In other
words, the people in most parts of the world in this age are harassed by the
ruling principles of Hiraëyakaçipu.
TEXT 48
é[qMaNav Ocu"
MaNavae vYa& Tav iNadeXak-air<aae
idiTaJaeNa dev Pair>aUTaSaeTav" )
>avTaa %l/" Sa oPaSa&ôTa" Pa[>aae
k-rvaMa Tae ik-MaNauXaaiDa ik-ªraNa( )) 48 ))
çré-manava ücuù
manavo vayaà tava nideça-käriëo
ditijena deva paribhüta-setavaù
bhavatä khalaù sa upasaàhåtaù prabho
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
552
karaväma te kim anuçädhi kiìkarän
SYNONYMS
çré-manavaù ücuù—all the Manus offered their respectful obeisances by saying;
manavaù—the leaders of the universal affairs (especially in connection with
giving knowledge to humanity about how to live lawfully under the protection
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead); vayam—we; tava—of Your Lordship;
nideça-käriëaù—the carriers of the orders; diti-jena—by Hiraëyakaçipu, the
son of Diti; deva—O Lord; paribhüta—disregarded; setavaù—whose laws of
morality concerning the varëäçrama system in human society; bhavatä—by
Your Lordship; khalaù—the most envious rascal; saù—he;
upasaàhåtaù—killed; prabho—O Lord; karaväma—shall we do; te—Your;
kim—what; anuçädhi—please direct; kiìkarän—Your eternal servants.
TRANSLATION
All the Manus offered their prayers as follows: As Your order carriers, O
Lord, we, the Manus, are the law-givers for human society, but because of the
temporary supremacy of this great demon, Hiraëyakaçipu, our laws for
maintaining varëäçrama-dharma were destroyed. O Lord, now that You have
killed this great demon, we are in our normal condition. Kindly order us, Your
eternal servants, what to do now.
PURPORT
In many places in Bhagavad-gétä, the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, refers to the
varëäçrama-dharma of four varëas and four äçramas. He teaches people about
this varëäçrama-dharma so that all of human society can live peacefully by
observing the principles for the four social divisions and four spiritual divisions
(varëa and äçrama) and thus make advancement in spiritual knowledge. The
Manus compiled the Manu-saàhitä. The word saàhitä means Vedic
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
553
knowledge, and manu indicates that this knowledge is given by Manu. The
Manus are sometimes incarnations of the Supreme Lord and sometimes
empowered living entities. Formerly, many long years ago, Lord Kåñëa
instructed the sun-god. The Manus are generally sons of the sun-god.
Therefore, while speaking to Arjuna about the importance of Bhagavad-gétä,
Kåñëa said, imaà vivasvate yogaà proktavän aham avyayam vivasvän manave
präha: [Bg. 4.1] "This instruction was given to Vivasvän, the sun-god, who in
turn instructed his son Manu." Manu gave the law known as Manu-saàhitä,
which is full of directions based on varëa and äçrama concerning how to live
as a human being. These are very scientific ways of life, but under the rule of
demons like Hiraëyakaçipu, human society breaks all these systems of law and
order and gradually becomes lower and lower. Thus there is no peace in the
world. The conclusion is that if we want real peace and order in the human
society, we must follow the principles laid down by the Manu-saàhitä and
confirmed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa.
TEXT 49
é[qPa[JaaPaTaYa Ocu"
Pa[JaeXaa vYa& Tae PareXaai>aSa*ía
Na YaeNa Pa[Jaa vE Sa*JaaMaae iNaizÖa" )
Sa Wz TvYaa i>aàv+aa Nau XaeTae
JaGaNMa(r)l&/ SatvMaUTaeR_vTaar" )) 49 ))
çré-prajäpataya ücuù
prajeçä vayaà te pareçäbhisåñöä
na yena prajä vai såjämo niñiddhäù
sa eña tvayä bhinna-vakñä nu çete
jagan-maìgalaà sattva-mürte 'vatäraù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
554
SYNONYMS
çré-prajäpatayaù ücuù—the great personalities who created the various living
beings offered their prayers by saying; prajä-éçäù—the prajäpatis created by
Lord Brahmä, who have created generations of living entities; vayam—we;
te—of You; para-éça—O Supreme Lord; abhisåñöäù—born; na—not; yena—by
whom (Hiraëyakaçipu); prajäù—living entities; vai—indeed; såjämaù—we
create; niñiddhäù—being forbidden; saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); eñaù—this;
tvayä—by You; bhinna-vakñäù—whose chest has been split; nu—indeed;
çete—lies down; jagat-maìgalam—for the auspiciousness of the whole world;
sattva-mürte—in this transcendental form of pure goodness; avatäraù—this
incarnation.
TRANSLATION
The prajäpatis offered their prayers as follows: O Supreme Lord, Lord of
even Brahmä and Çiva, we, the prajäpatis, were created by You to execute Your
orders, but we were forbidden by Hiraëyakaçipu to create any more good
progeny. Now the demon is lying dead before us, his chest pierced by You. Let
us therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto You, whose incarnation in this
form of pure goodness is meant for the welfare of the entire universe.
TEXT 50
é[qGaNDavaR Ocu"
vYa& iv>aae Tae Na$=Naa$yGaaYak-a
YaeNaaTMaSaad( vqYaRbl/aEJaSaa k*-Taa" )
Sa Wz NaqTaae >avTaa dXaaiMaMaa&
ik-MauTPaQaSQa" ku-Xal/aYa k-LPaTae )) 50 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
555
çré-gandharvä ücuù
vayaà vibho te naöa-näöya-gäyakä
yenätmasäd vérya-balaujasä kåtäù
sa eña néto bhavatä daçäm imäà
kim utpathasthaù kuçaläya kalpate
SYNONYMS
çré-gandharväù ücuù—the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka (who are usually
engaged as musicians of the heavenly planets) said; vayam—we; vibho—O
Lord; te—Your; naöa-näöya-gäyakäù—dancers and singers in dramatic
performances; yena—by whom; ätmasät—under subjection; vérya—of his
valor; bala—and bodily strength; ojasä—by the influence; kåtäù—made
(brought); saù—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); eñaù—this; nétaù—brought; bhavatä—by
Your Lordship; daçäm imäm—to this condition; kim—whether;
utpathasthaù—anyone who is an upstart; kuçaläya—for auspiciousness;
kalpate—is capable.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Gandharvaloka prayed: Your Lordship, we ever engage in
Your service by dancing and singing in dramatic performances, but this
Hiraëyakaçipu, by the influence of his bodily strength and valor, brought us
under his subjugation. Now he has been brought to this low condition by Your
Lordship. What benefit can result from the activities of such an upstart as
Hiraëyakaçipu?
PURPORT
By being a very obedient servant of the Supreme Lord, one becomes
extremely powerful in bodily strength, influence and effulgence, whereas the
fate of demoniac upstarts is ultimately to fall down like Hiraëyakaçipu.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
556
Hiraëyakaçipu and persons like him may be very powerful for some time, but
the obedient servants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead like the
demigods remain powerful always. They are victorious over the influence of
Hiraëyakaçipu by the grace of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 51
é[qcar<aa Ocu"
hre Tavax(iga]PaªJa& >avaPavGaRMaaié[Taa" )
Yadez SaaDauôC^YaSTvYaaSaur" SaMaaiPaTa" )) 51 ))
çré-cäraëä ücuù
hare taväìghri-paìkajaà
bhaväpavargam äçritäù
yad eña sädhu-håc-chayas
tvayäsuraù samäpitaù
SYNONYMS
çré-cäraëäù ücuù—the inhabitants of the Cäraëa planet said; hare—O Lord;
tava—Your; aìghri-paìkajam—lotus feet; bhava-apavargam—the only shelter
for becoming free from the contamination of material existence;
äçritäù—sheltered at; yat—because; eñaù—this; sädhu-håt-çayaù—stake in the
hearts of all honest persons; tvayä—by Your Lordship; asuraù—the demon
(Hiraëyakaçipu); samäpitaù—finished.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of the Cäraëa planet said: O Lord, because You have
destroyed the demon Hiraëyakaçipu, who was always a stake in the hearts of all
honest men, we are now relieved, and we eternally take shelter of Your lotus
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
557
feet, which award the conditioned soul liberation from materialistic
contamination.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead in His transcendental form of
Narahari, Nåsiàhadeva, is always ready to kill the demons, who always create
disturbances in the minds of honest devotees. To spread the Kåñëa
consciousness movement, devotees have to face many dangers and
impediments all over the world, but a faithful servant who preaches with great
devotion to the Lord must know that Lord Nåsiàhadeva is always his
protector.
TEXT 52
é[qYa+aa Ocu"
vYaMaNaucrMau:Yaa" k-MaRi>aSTae MaNaaejE‚
STa wh idiTaSauTaeNa Pa[aiPaTaa vahk-TvMa( )
Sa Tau JaNaPairTaaPa& TaTk*-Ta& JaaNaTaa Tae
Narhr oPaNaqTa" PaÄTaa& PaÄiv&Xa )) 52 ))
çré-yakñä ücuù
vayam anucara-mukhyäù karmabhis te mano-jïais
ta iha diti-sutena präpitä vähakatvam
sa tu jana-paritäpaà tat-kåtaà jänatä te
narahara upanétaù païcatäà païca-viàça
SYNONYMS
çré-yakñäù ücuù—the inhabitants of the Yakña planet prayed; vayam—we;
anucara-mukhyäù—the chief among Your many servants; karmabhiù—by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
558
services; te—unto You; mano-jïaiù—very pleasing; te—they; iha—at the
present moment; diti-sutena—by Hiraëyakaçipu, the son of Diti;
präpitäù—forced to engage as; vähakatvam—the palanquin carriers; saù—he;
tu—but; jana-paritäpam—the miserable condition of everyone;
tat-kåtam—caused by him; jänatä—knowing; te—by You; nara-hara—O Lord
in the form of Nåsiàha; upanétaù—is put to; païcatäm—death;
païca-viàça—O twenty-fifth principle (the controller of the other
twenty-four elements).
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Yakñaloka prayed: O controller of the twenty-four
elements, we are considered the best servants of Your Lordship because of
rendering services pleasing to You, yet we engaged as palanquin carriers by the
order of Hiraëyakaçipu, the son of Diti. O Lord in the form of Nåsiàhadeva,
You know how this demon gave trouble to everyone, but now You have killed
him, and his body is mixing with the five material elements.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is the controller of the ten senses, the five material
elements, the five sense objects, the mind, the intelligence, the false ego and
the soul. Therefore He is addressed as païca-viàça, the twenty-fifth element.
The inhabitants of the Yakña planet are supposed to be the best of all servants,
but Hiraëyakaçipu engaged them as palanquin carriers. The entire universe
was in trouble because of Hiraëyakaçipu, but now that Hiraëyakaçipu's body
was mixing with the five material elements—earth, water, fire, air and
sky—everyone felt relief. Upon Hiraëyakaçipu's death, the Yakñas were
reinstated in their original service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Thus they felt obliged to the Lord and offered their prayers.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
559
TEXT 53
é[qik-MPauåza Ocu"
vYa& ik-MPauåzaSTv& Tau MahaPauåz wRìr" )
AYa& ku-Pauåzae Naíae iDak(-k*-Ta" SaaDaui>aYaRda )) 53 ))
çré-kimpuruñä ücuù
vayaà kimpuruñäs tvaà tu
mahä-puruña éçvaraù
ayaà kupuruño nañöo
dhik-kåtaù sädhubhir yadä
SYNONYMS
çré-kimpuruñäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Kimpuruña-loka said; vayam—we;
kimpuruñäù—the inhabitants of Kimpuruña-loka, or insignificant living
entities; tvam—Your Lordship; tu—however; mahä-puruñaù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; éçvaraù—the supreme controller; ayam—this;
ku-puruñaù—most sinful person, Hiraëyakaçipu; nañöaù—slain;
dhik-kåtaù—being condemned; sädhubhiù—by the saintly persons;
yadä—when.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Kimpuruña-loka said: We are insignificant living entities,
and You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller.
Therefore how can we offer suitable prayers unto You? When this demon was
condemned by devotees because they were disgusted with him, he was then
killed by You.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
560
The cause of the Supreme Lord's appearance upon this earth is stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.7-8) by the Lord Himself:
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
[Bg. 4.7]
pariträëäya sädhünäà
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm
dharma-saàsthäpanärthäya
sambhavämi yuge yuge
[Bg. 4.8]
"Whenever and wherever there is a decrease in religious principles and a
predominant rise in irreligion, at that time I descend Myself. To deliver the
pious and annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of
religion, I advent Myself, millennium after millennium." The Lord appears in
order to execute two kinds of activities—to kill the demons and to protect the
devotees. When the devotees are too disturbed by the demons, the Lord
certainly appears in different incarnations to give the devotees protection.
The devotees following in the footsteps of Prahläda Mahäräja should not be
disturbed by the demoniac activities of the nondevotees. Rather, they should
stick to their principles as sincere servants of the Lord and rest assured that
the demoniac activities directed against them will not be able to stop their
devotional service.
TEXT 54
é[qvETaail/k-a Ocu"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
561
Sa>aaSau Sa}aezu TavaMal&/ YaXaae
GaqTva SaPaYaa| MahTaq& l/>aaMahe )
YaSTaaMaNaEzqd( vXaMaez duJaRNaae
iÜíya hTaSTae >aGavNYaQaaMaYa" )) 54 ))
çré-vaitälikä ücuù
sabhäsu satreñu tavämalaà yaço
gétvä saparyäà mahatéà labhämahe
yas täm anaiñéd vaçam eña durjano
dviñöyä hatas te bhagavan yathämayaù
SYNONYMS
çré-vaitälikäù ücuù—the inhabitants of Vaitälika-loka said; sabhäsu—in great
assemblies; satreñu—in the arenas of sacrifice; tava—Your; amalam—without
any spot of material contamination; yaçaù—reputation; gétvä—singing;
saparyäm—respectful position; mahatém—great; labhämahe—we achieved;
yaù—he who; täm—that (respectful position); anaiñét—brought under;
vaçam—his control; eñaù—this; durjanaù—crooked person; dviñöyä—by great
fortune; hataù—killed; te—by You; bhagavan—O Lord; yathä—exactly like;
ämayaù—a disease.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Vaitälika-loka said: Dear Lord, because of chanting Your
spotless glories in great assemblies and arenas of sacrifice, we were accustomed
to great respect from everyone. This demon, however, usurped that position.
Now, to our great fortune, You have killed this great demon, exactly as one
cures a chronic disease.
TEXT 55
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
562
é[qik-àra Ocu"
vYaMaqXa ik-àrGa<aaSTavaNauGaa
idiTaJaeNa iviíMaMauNaaNauk-airTaa" )
>avTaa hre Sa v*iJaNaae_vSaaidTaae
NariSa&h NaaQa iv>avaYa Naae >av )) 55 ))
çré-kinnarä ücuù
vayam éça kinnara-gaëäs tavänugä
ditijena viñöim amunänukäritäù
bhavatä hare sa våjino 'vasädito
narasiàha nätha vibhaväya no bhava
SYNONYMS
çré-kinnaräù ücuù—the inhabitants of the Kinnara planet said; vayam—we;
éça—O Lord; kinnara-gaëäù—the inhabitants of the Kinnara planet;
tava—Your; anugäù—faithful servants; diti-jena—by the son of Diti;
viñöim—service without remuneration; amunä—by that; anukäritäù—caused
to perform; bhavatä—by You; hare—O Lord; saù—he; våjinaù—most sinful;
avasäditaù—destroyed; narasiàha—O Lord Nåsiàhadeva; nätha—O master;
vibhaväya—for the happiness and opulence; naù—of us; bhava—You please be.
TRANSLATION
The Kinnaras said: O supreme controller, we are ever-existing servants of
Your Lordship, but instead of rendering service to You, we were engaged by
this demon in his service, constantly and without remuneration. This sinful
man has now been killed by You. Therefore, O Lord Nåsiàhadeva, our master,
we offer our respectful obeisances unto You. Please continue to be our patron.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
563
TEXT 56
é[qivZ<auPaazRda Ocu"
AÛETaÖirNaræPaMad(>auTa& Tae
d*í& Na" Xar<ad SavRl/aek-XaMaR )
Saae_Ya& Tae iviDak-r wRXa ivPa[Xaá‚
STaSYaed& iNaDaNaMaNauGa]haYa ivÚ" )) 56 ))
çré-viñëu-pärñadä ücuù
adyaitad dhari-nara-rüpam adbhutaà te
dåñöaà naù çaraëada sarva-loka-çarma
so 'yaà te vidhikara éça vipra-çaptas
tasyedaà nidhanam anugrahäya vidmaù
SYNONYMS
çré-viñëu-pärñadäù ücuù—the associates of Lord Viñëu in Vaikuëöhaloka said;
adya—today; etat—this; hari-nara—of half lion and half human being;
rüpam—form; adbhutam—very wonderful; te—Your; dåñöam—seen; naù—of
us; çaraëa-da—the everlasting bestower of shelter; sarva-loka-çarma—which
brings good fortune to all the various planets; saù—he; ayam—this; te—of
Your Lordship; vidhikaraù—order carrier (servant); éça—O Lord;
vipra-çaptaù—being cursed by the brähmaëas; tasya—of him; idam—this;
nidhanam—killing; anugrahäya—for the special favor; vidmaù—we
understand.
TRANSLATION
The associates of Lord Viñëu in Vaikuëöha offered this prayer: O Lord, our
supreme giver of shelter, today we have seen Your wonderful form as Lord
Nåsiàhadeva, meant for the good fortune of all the world. O Lord, we can
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
564
understand that Hiraëyakaçipu was the same Jaya who engaged in Your service
but was cursed by brähmaëas and who thus received the body of a demon. We
understand that his having now been killed is Your special mercy upon him.
PURPORT
Hiraëyakaçipu's coming to this earth and acting as the Lord's enemy was
prearranged. Jaya and Vijaya were cursed by the brähmaëas Sanaka,
Sanat-kumära, Sanandana and Sanätana because Jaya and Vijaya checked
these four Kumäras. The Lord accepted this cursing of His servants and agreed
that they would have to go to the material world and would then return to
Vaikuëöha after serving the term of the curse. Jaya and Vijaya were very much
perturbed, but the Lord advised them to act as enemies, for then they would
return after three births; otherwise, ordinarily, they would have to take seven
births. With this authority, Jaya and Vijaya acted as the Lord's enemies, and
now that these two were dead, all the Viñëudütas understood that the Lord's
killing of Hiraëyakaçipu was special mercy bestowed upon them.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Eighth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Nåsiàhadeva Slays the King of the Demons."
9. Prahläda Pacifies Lord Nåsiàhadeva with Prayers
As related in this chapter, Prahläda Mahäräja, following the order of Lord
Brahmä, pacified the Lord when the Lord was extremely angry after having
killed Hiraëyakaçipu.
After Hiraëyakaçipu was killed, the Lord continued to be very angry, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
565
the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä, could not pacify Him. Even mother
Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune, the constant companion of Näräyaëa, could
not dare come before Lord Nåsiàhadeva. Then Lord Brahmä asked Prahläda
Mahäräja to go forward and pacify the Lord's anger. Prahläda Mahäräja, being
confident of the affection of his master, Lord Nåsiàhadeva, was not afraid at
all. He very gravely appeared before the Lord's lotus feet and offered Him
respectful obeisances. Lord Nåsiàhadeva, being very much affectionate toward
Prahläda Mahäräja, put His hand on Prahläda's head, and because of being
personally touched by the Lord, Prahläda Mahäräja immediately achieved
brahma-jïäna, spiritual knowledge. Thus he offered his prayers to the Lord in
full spiritual knowledge and full devotional ecstasy. The instructions given by
Prahläda Mahäräja in the form of his prayers are as follows.
Prahläda said, "I am not proud of being able to offer prayers to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. I simply take shelter of the mercy of the Lord, for
without devotion one cannot appease Him. One cannot please the Supreme
Personality of Godhead simply by dint of high parentage or great opulence,
learning, austerity, penance or mystic power. Indeed, these are never pleasing
to the Supreme Lord, for nothing can please Him but pure devotional service.
Even if a nondevotee is a brähmaëa qualified with the twelve brahminical
symptoms, he cannot be very dear to the Lord, whereas if a person born in a
family of dog-eaters is a devotee, the Lord can accept his prayers. The Lord
does not need anyone's prayers, but if a devotee offers his prayers to the Lord,
the devotee benefits greatly. Ignorant persons born in low families, therefore,
can sincerely offer heartfelt prayers to the Lord, and the Lord will accept
them. As soon as one offers his prayers to the Lord, he is immediately situated
on the Brahman platform.
Lord Nåsiàhadeva appeared for the benefit of all human society, not only
for Prahläda's personal benefit. The fierce form of Lord Nåsiàhadeva may
appear most awful to a nondevotee, but to the devotee the Lord is always
affectionate as He is in other forms. Conditioned life in the material world is
actually extremely fearful; indeed, a devotee is not afraid of anything else. Fear
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
566
of material existence is due to false ego. Therefore the ultimate goal of life for
every living entity is to attain the position of being servant of the servant of
the Lord [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. The miserable condition of the living entities in
the material world can be remedied only by the mercy of the Lord. Although
there are so-called material protectors like Lord Brahmä and the other
demigods, or even one's own father, they are unable to do anything if one is
neglected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. However, one who has fully
taken shelter of the Lord's lotus feet can be saved from the onslaught of
material nature. Therefore every living entity should be unattracted by
material so-called happiness and should take shelter of the Lord by all means.
That is the mission of human life. To be attracted by sense gratification is
simply foolish. Whether one is a devotee of the Lord or is a nondevotee does
not depend upon one's birth in a high or low family. Even Lord Brahmä and
the goddess of fortune cannot achieve the full favor of the Lord, whereas a
devotee can very easily attain such devotional service. The Lord's mercy is
bestowed equally upon everyone, regardless of whether one is high or low.
Because Prahläda Mahäräja was blessed by Närada Muni, Prahläda became a
great devotee. The Lord always saves the devotee from impersonalists and
voidists. The Lord is present in everyone's heart as the Supersoul to give the
living being protection and all benefits. Thus the Lord acts sometimes as the
killer and sometimes as the protector. One should not accuse the Lord for any
discrepancies. It is His plan that we see varieties of life within this material
world. All of them are ultimately His mercy.
Although the entire cosmic manifestation is nondifferent, the material
world is nonetheless different from the spiritual world. Only by the mercy of
the Supreme Lord can one understand how the wonderful material nature
acts. For example, although Lord Brahmä appeared from the lotus seat that had
grown from the abdomen of Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, he could not understand
what to do after his appearance. He was attacked by two demons, Madhu and
Kaiöabha, who took away Vedic knowledge, but the Lord killed them and
entrusted to Lord Brahmä the Vedic knowledge. Thus the Lord appears in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
567
every millennium in the societies of demigods, human beings, animals, saints
and aquatics. All such incarnations are meant to protect the devotees and kill
the demons, but this killing and protecting does not reflect any sense of
partiality on the part of the Supreme Lord. The conditioned soul is always
attracted by the external energy. Therefore he is subjected to lust and greed,
and he suffers under the conditions of material nature. The Lord's causeless
mercy toward His devotee is the only means by which to get out of material
existence. Anyone engaged in glorifying the Lord's activities is always unafraid
of this material world, whereas one who cannot glorify the Lord in that way is
subjected to all lamentation.
Those interested in silently worshiping the Lord in solitary places may be
eligible for liberation themselves, but a pure devotee is always aggrieved to see
others suffering. Therefore, not caring for his own liberation, he always
engages in preaching by glorifying the Lord. Prahläda Mahäräja, therefore, had
tried to deliver his class friends by preaching and had never remained silent.
Although being silent, observing austerities and penances, learning the Vedic
literature, undergoing ritualistic ceremonies, living in a solitary place and
performing japa and transcendental meditation are approved means of
liberation, they are meant for nondevotees or for cheaters who want to live at
the expense of others. A pure devotee, however, being freed from all such
deceptive activities, is able to see the Lord face to face.
The atomic theory of the composition of the cosmic manifestation is not
factual. The Lord is the cause of everything, and therefore He is the cause of
this creation. One should therefore always engage in devotional service by
offering respectful obeisances to the Lord, offering prayers, working for the
Lord, worshiping the Lord in the temple, always remembering the Lord and
always hearing about His transcendental activities. Without these six kinds of
activity, one cannot attain to devotional service.
Prahläda Mahäräja thus offered his prayers to the Supreme Lord, begging
His mercy at every step. Lord Nåsiàhadeva was pacified by Prahläda
Mahäräja's prayers and wanted to give him benedictions by which Prahläda
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
568
could procure all kinds of material facilities. Prahläda Mahäräja, however, was
not misled by material facilities. Rather, he wanted to remain always a servant
of the servant of the Lord [Cc. Madhya 13.80].
TEXT 1
é[qNaard ovac
Wv& SauradYa" SaveR b]øåd]Paur" Sara" )
NaaePaETauMaXak-NMaNYauSa&rM>a& SauduraSadMa( )) 1 ))
çré-närada uväca
evaà surädayaù sarve
brahma-rudra-puraù saräù
nopaitum açakan manyusaàrambhaà
suduräsadam
SYNONYMS
çré-närada uväca—the great saintly sage Närada Muni said; evam—thus;
sura-ädayaù—the groups of demigods; sarve—all; brahma-rudra-puraù
saräù—represented by Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva; na—not; upaitum—to go
before the Lord; açakan—able; manyu-saàrambham—in a completely angry
mood; su-duräsadam—very difficult to approach (Lord Nåsiàhadeva).
TRANSLATION
The great saint Närada Muni continued: The demigods, headed by Lord
Brahmä, Lord Çiva and other great demigods, dared not come forward before the
Lord, who at that time was extremely angry.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
569
PURPORT
Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura has sung in his prema-bhakti-candrikä,
'krodha' bhakta-dveñi jane: anger should be used to punish a demon who is
envious of devotees. Käma, krodha, lobha, moha, mada and mätsarya—lust,
anger, greed, illusion, pride and envy—all have their proper use for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotee. A devotee of the Lord
cannot tolerate blasphemy of the Lord or His other devotees, and the Lord also
cannot tolerate blasphemy of a devotee. Thus Lord Nåsiàhadeva was so very
angry that the great demigods like Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva and even the
goddess of fortune, who is the Lord's constant companion, could not pacify
Him, even after offering prayers of glorification and praise. No one was able to
pacify the Lord in His anger, but because the Lord was willing to exhibit His
affection for Prahläda Mahäräja, all the demigods and the others present
before the Lord pushed Prahläda Mahäräja forward to pacify Him.
TEXT 2
Saa+aaTa( é[q" Pa[eizTaa devEd*Rîa Ta& Mahdd(>auTaMa( )
Ad*íaé[uTaPaUvRTvaTa( Saa NaaePaeYaaYa XaiªTaa )) 2 ))
säkñät çréù preñitä devair
dåñövä taà mahad adbhutam
adåñöäçruta-pürvatvät
sä nopeyäya çaìkitä
SYNONYMS
säkñät—directly; çréù—the goddess of fortune; preñitä—being requested to go
forward before the Lord; devaiù—by all the demigods (headed by Lord Brahmä
and Lord Çiva); dåñövä—after seeing; tam—Him (Lord Nåsiàhadeva);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
570
mahat—very big; adbhutam—wonderful; adåñöa—never seen; açruta—never
heard of; pürvatvät—due to being previously; sä—the goddess of fortune,
Lakñmé; na—not; upeyäya—went before the Lord; çaìkitä—being very much
afraid.
TRANSLATION
The goddess of fortune, Lakñméjé, was requested to go before the Lord by all
the demigods present, who because of fear could not do so. But even she had
never seen such a wonderful and extraordinary form of the Lord, and thus she
could not approach Him.
PURPORT
The Lord has unlimited forms and bodily features (advaitam acyutam
anädim ananta-rüpam [Bs. 5.33]). These are all situated in Vaikuëöha, yet
Lakñmédevé, the goddess of fortune, being inspired by lélä-çakti, could not
appreciate this unprecedented form of the Lord. In this regard, Çréla
Madhväcärya recites the following verses from the Brahmäëòa Puräëa:
adåñöäçruta-pürvatväd
anyaiù sädhäraëair janaiù
nåsiàhaà çaìkiteva çrér
loka-mohäyano yayau
prahräde caiva vätsalyadarçanäya
harer api
jïätvä manas tathä brahmä
prahrädaà preñayat tadä
ekatraikasya vätsalyaà
viçeñäd darçayed dhariù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
571
avarasyäpi mohäya
krameëaiväpi vatsalaù
In other words, for the common men the form of the Lord as Nåsiàhadeva is
certainly unseen and wonderful, but for a devotee like Prahläda Mahäräja such
a fearsome form of the Lord is not at all extraordinary. By the grace of the
Lord, a devotee can very easily understand how the Lord can appear in any
form He likes. Therefore the devotee is never afraid of such a form. Because of
special favor bestowed upon Prahläda Mahäräja, he remained silent and
unafraid, even though all the demigods, including even Lakñmédevé, were
afraid of Lord Nåsiàhadeva. Näräyaëa-paräù sarve na kutaçcana bibhyati (SB
6.17.28). Not only is a pure devotee of Näräyaëa like Prahläda Mahäräja
unafraid of any dangerous condition of material life, but also if the Lord
appears to mitigate the fear of a devotee, the devotee maintains his status of
fearlessness in all circumstances.
TEXT 3
Pa[had& Pa[ezYaaMaaSa b]øaviSQaTaMaiNTake- )
TaaTa Pa[XaMaYaaePaeih SviPa}ae ku-iPaTa& Pa[>auMa( )) 3 ))
prahrädaà preñayäm äsa
brahmävasthitam antike
täta praçamayopehi
sva-pitre kupitaà prabhum
SYNONYMS
prahrädam—Prahläda Mahäräja; preñayäm äsa—requested; brahmä—Lord
Brahmä; avasthitam—being situated; antike—very near; täta—my dear son;
praçamaya—just try to appease; upehi—go near; sva-pitre—because of your
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
572
father's demoniac activities; kupitam—greatly angered; prabhum—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter Lord Brahmä requested Prahläda Mahäräja, who was standing
very near him: My dear son, Lord Nåsiàhadeva is extremely angry at your
demoniac father. Please go forward and appease the Lord.
TEXT 4
TaQaeiTa XaNakE- raJaNMaha>aaGavTaae_>aRk-" )
oPaeTYa >auiv k-aYaeNa NaNaaMa ivDa*TaaÅil/" )) 4 ))
tatheti çanakai räjan
mahä-bhägavato 'rbhakaù
upetya bhuvi käyena
nanäma vidhåtäïjaliù
SYNONYMS
tathä—so be it; iti—thus accepting the words of Lord Brahmä; çanakaiù—very
slowly; räjan—O King (Yudhiñöhira); mahä-bhägavataù—the great, exalted
devotee (Prahläda Mahäräja); arbhakaù—although only a small boy;
upetya—gradually going near; bhuvi—on the ground; käyena—by his body;
nanäma—offered respectful obeisances; vidhåta-aïjaliù—folding his hands.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: O King, although the exalted devotee Prahläda
Mahäräja was only a little boy, he accepted Lord Brahmä's words. He gradually
proceeded toward Lord Nåsiàhadeva and fell down to offer his respectful
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
573
obeisances with folded hands.
TEXT 5
SvPaadMaUle/ PaiTaTa& TaMa>aRk&- )
ivl/aeKYa dev" k*-PaYaa PairPl/uTa"
oTQaaPYa TaC^qZ<YaRdDaaTa( k-raMbuJa& )) 5 ))
k-al/aihiv}aSTaiDaYaa& k*-Taa>aYaMa(
sva-päda-müle patitaà tam arbhakaà
vilokya devaù kåpayä pariplutaù
utthäpya tac-chérñëy adadhät karämbujaà
kälähi-vitrasta-dhiyäà kåtäbhayam
SYNONYMS
sva-päda-müle—at His lotus feet; patitam—fallen; tam—him (Prahläda
Mahäräja); arbhakam—only a little boy; vilokya—seeing; devaù—Lord
Nåsiàhadeva; kåpayä—out of His causeless mercy; pariplutaù—very much
afflicted (in ecstasy); utthäpya—raising; tat-çérñëi—on his head;
adadhät—placed; kara-ambujam—His lotus hand; käla-ahi—of the deadly
snake of time, (which can cause immediate death); vitrasta—afraid;
dhiyäm—to all of those whose minds; kåta-abhayam—which causes
fearlessness.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Nåsiàhadeva saw the small boy Prahläda Mahäräja prostrated at
the soles of His lotus feet, He became most ecstatic in affection toward His
devotee. Raising Prahläda, the Lord placed His lotus hand upon the boy's head
because His hand is always ready to create fearlessness in all of His devotees.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
574
PURPORT
The necessities of the material world are four-ähära, nidrä, bhaya and
maithuna (eating, sleeping, defending and mating). In this material world,
everyone is in fearful consciousness (sadä samudvigna-dhiyäm), and the only
means to make everyone fearless is Kåñëa consciousness. When Lord
Nåsiàhadeva appeared, all the devotees became fearless. The devotee's hope of
becoming fearless is to chant the holy name of Lord Nåsiàhadeva. Yato yato
yämi tato nåsiàhaù: wherever we go, we must always think of Lord
Nåsiàhadeva. Thus there will be no fear for the devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 6
Sa TaTk-rSPaXaRDauTaai%l/aéu>a"
SaPaÛi>aVYa¢-ParaTMadXaRNa" )
TaTPaadPaÚ& ôid iNav*RTaae dDaaE
ôZYataNau" i(c)-àôdé[ul/aecNa" )) 6 ))
sa tat-kara-sparça-dhutäkhiläçubhaù
sapady abhivyakta-parätma-darçanaù
tat-päda-padmaà hådi nirvåto dadhau
håñyat-tanuù klinna-håd-açru-locanaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Prahläda Mahäräja); tat-kara-sparça—because of being touched on
the head by the lotus hand of Nåsiàhadeva; dhuta—being cleansed;
akhila—all; açubhaù—inauspiciousness or material desires;
sapadi—immediately; abhivyakta—manifested;
para-ätma-darçanaù—realization of the Supreme Soul (spiritual knowledge);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
575
tat-päda-padmam—Lord Nåsiàhadeva's lotus feet; hådi—within the core of
the heart; nirvåtaù—full of transcendental bliss; dadhau—captured;
håñyat-tanuù—having transcendental ecstatic bliss manifested in the body;
klinna-håt—whose heart was softened due to transcendental ecstasy;
açru-locanaù—with tears in his eyes.
TRANSLATION
By the touch of Lord Nåsiàhadeva's hand on Prahläda Mahäräja's head,
Prahläda was completely freed of all material contaminations and desires, as if
he had been thoroughly cleansed. Therefore he at once became transcendentally
situated, and all the symptoms of ecstasy became manifest in his body. His heart
filled with love, and his eyes with tears, and thus he was able to completely
capture the lotus feet of the Lord within the core of his heart.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (14.26):
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman." Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gétä (9.32) the Lord says:
mäà hi pärtha vyapäçritya
ye 'pi syuù päpa-yonayaù
striyo vaiçyäs tathä çüdräs
te 'pi yänti paräà gatim
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
576
"O son of Påthä, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth—women, vaiçyas [merchants], as well as çüdras [workers]—can approach
the supreme destination."
On the strength of these verses from Bhagavad-gétä, it is evident that
although Prahläda Mahäräja was born in a demoniac family and although
virtually demoniac blood flowed within his body, he was cleansed of all
material bodily contamination because of his exalted position as a devotee. In
other words, such impediments on the spiritual path could not stop him from
progressing, for he was directly in touch with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Those who are physically and mentally contaminated by atheism
cannot be situated on the transcendental platform, but as soon as one is freed
from material contamination he is immediately fit to be situated in devotional
service.
TEXT 7
ASTaaEzqÖirMaek-aGa]MaNaSaa SauSaMaaihTa" )
Pa[eMaGaÓdYaa vaca TaNNYaSTaôdYae+a<a" )) 7 ))
astauñéd dharim ekägramanasä
susamähitaù
prema-gadgadayä väcä
tan-nyasta-hådayekñaëaù
SYNONYMS
astauñét—he began to offer prayers; harim—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; ekägra-manasä—the mind being completely fixed upon the lotus
feet of the Lord; su-samähitaù—very attentive (without diversion to any other
subject); prema-gadgadayä—faltering because of feeling transcendental bliss;
väcä—with a voice; tat-nyasta—being fully dedicated to Him (Lord
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
577
Nåsiàhadeva); hådaya-ékñaëaù—with heart and sight.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja fixed his mind and sight upon Lord Nåsiàhadeva with
full attention in complete trance. With a fixed mind, he began to offer prayers
in love with a faltering voice.
PURPORT
The word susamähitaù means "very attentive" or "fully fixed." The ability to
fix the mind in this way is a result of yoga-siddhi, mystic perfection. As it is
stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (12.13.1), dhyänävasthita-tad-gatena manasä
paçyanti yaà yoginaù. One attains yogic perfection when he is freed from all
material diversions and his mind is fixed upon the lotus feet of the Lord. This
is called samädhi or trance. Prahläda Mahäräja attained that stage beyond the
senses. Because he was engaged in service, he felt transcendentally situated,
and naturally his mind and attention became saturated in transcendence. In
that condition, he began to offer his prayers as follows.
TEXT 8
é[qPa[had ovac
b]øadYa" SaurGa<aa MauNaYaae_Qa iSaÖa"
SatvEk-TaaNaGaTaYaae vcSaa& Pa[vahE" )
NaaraiDaTau& PauåGau<aErDauNaaiPa iPaPa[u"
ik&- TaaeíuMahRiTa Sa Mae hiråGa]JaaTae" )) 8 ))
çré-prahräda uväca
brahmädayaù sura-gaëä munayo 'tha siddhäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
578
sattvaikatäna-gatayo vacasäà pravähaiù
närädhituà puru-guëair adhunäpi pipruù
kià toñöum arhati sa me harir ugra-jäteù
SYNONYMS
çré-prahrädaù uväca—Prahläda Mahäräja prayed; brahma-ädayaù—headed by
Lord Brahmä; sura-gaëäù—the inhabitants of the upper planetary systems;
munayaù—the great saintly persons; atha—as well (like the four Kumäras and
others); siddhäù—who have attained perfection or full knowledge; sattva—to
spiritual existence; ekatäna-gatayaù—who have taken without diversion to any
material activities; vacasäm—of descriptions or words; pravähaiù—by streams;
na—not; ärädhitum—to satisfy; puru-guëaiù—although fully qualified;
adhunä—until now; api—even; pipruù—were able; kim—whether; toñöum—to
become pleased; arhati—is able; saù—He (the Lord); me—my; hariù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; ugra-jäteù—who am born in an asuric
family.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja prayed: How is it possible for me, who have been born in
a family of asuras, to offer suitable prayers to satisfy the Supreme Personality of
Godhead? Even until now, all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä, and all
the saintly persons could not satisfy the Lord by streams of excellent words,
although such persons are very qualified, being in the mode of goodness. Then
what is to be said of me? I am not at all qualified.
PURPORT
A Vaiñëava who is fully qualified to serve the Lord still thinks himself
extremely low while offering prayers to the Lord. For example, Kåñëadäsa
Kaviräja Gosvämé, the author of Caitanya-caritämåta, says:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
579
jagäi mädhäi haite muïi se päpiñöha
puréñera kéöa haite muïi se laghiñöha
(Cc. Ädi 5.205)
Thus he considers himself unqualified, lower than the worms in stool, and
more sinful than Jagäi and Mädhäi. A pure Vaiñëava actually thinks of himself
in this way. Similarly, although Prahläda Mahäräja was a pure, exalted
Vaiñëava, he thought himself most unqualified to offer prayers to the Supreme
Lord. Mahäjano yena gataù sa panthäù [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. Every pure
Vaiñëava should think like this. One should not be falsely proud of his
Vaiñëava qualifications. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has therefore instructed us:
tåëäd api sunécena
taror iva sahiñëunä
amäninä mänadena
kértanéyaù sadä hariù
[Cc. Ädi 17.31]
"One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind,
thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more
tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and should be ready to
offer all respect to others. In such a state of mind one can chant the holy name
of the Lord constantly." Unless one is meek and humble, to make progress in
spiritual life is very difficult.
TEXT 9
MaNYae DaNaai>aJaNaæPaTaPa"é[uTaaEJa‚
STaeJa"Pa[>aavbl/PaaEåzbuiÖYaaeGaa" )
NaaraDaNaaYa ih >aviNTa ParSYa Pau&Saae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
580
>a¢-ya TauTaaez >aGavaNGaJaYaUQaPaaYa )) 9 ))
manye dhanäbhijana-rüpa-tapaù-çrutaujastejaù-
prabhäva-bala-pauruña-buddhi-yogäù
närädhanäya hi bhavanti parasya puàso
bhaktyä tutoña bhagavän gaja-yütha-päya
SYNONYMS
manye—I consider; dhana—riches; abhijana—aristocratic family;
rüpa—personal beauty; tapaù—austerity; çruta—knowledge from studying the
Vedas; ojaù—sensory prowess; tejaù—bodily effulgence; prabhäva—influence;
bala—bodily strength; pauruña—diligence; buddhi—intelligence;
yogäù—mystic power; na—not; ärädhanäya—for satisfying; hi—indeed;
bhavanti—are; parasya—of the transcendent; puàsaù—Supreme Personality
of Godhead; bhaktyä—simply by devotional service; tutoña—was satisfied;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; gaja-yütha-päya—unto the
King of elephants (Gajendra).
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja continued: One may possess wealth, an aristocratic
family, beauty, austerity, education, sensory expertise, luster, influence,
physical strength, diligence, intelligence and mystic yogic power, but I think
that even by all these qualifications one cannot satisfy the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. However, one can satisfy the Lord simply by devotional service.
Gajendra did this, and thus the Lord was satisfied with him.
PURPORT
No kind of material qualification is the means for satisfying the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, only by devotional service
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
581
can the Lord be known (bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti [Bg. 18.55]). Unless the Lord is
pleased by the service of a devotee, the Lord does not reveal Himself (nähaà
prakäçaù sarvasya yoga-mäyä-samävåtaù [Bg. 7.25]). This is the verdict of all
çästras. Neither by speculation nor by material qualifications can one
understand or approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 10
ivPa[ad( iÜz@(Gau<aYauTaadrivNdNaa>a‚
PaadarivNdivMau%aTa( ìPac& virïMa( )
MaNYae TadiPaRTaMaNaaevcNaeihTaaQaR‚
Pa[a<a& PauNaaiTa Sa ku-l&/ Na Tau >aUirMaaNa" )) 10 ))
vipräd dvi-ñaò-guëa-yutäd aravinda-näbhapädäravinda-
vimukhät çvapacaà variñöham
manye tad-arpita-mano-vacanehitärthapräëaà
punäti sa kulaà na tu bhürimänaù
SYNONYMS
viprät—than a brähmaëa; dvi-ñaö-guëa-yutät(18)-qualified with twelve
brahminical qualities; aravinda-näbha—Lord Viñëu, who has a lotus growing
from His navel; päda-aravinda—to the lotus feet of the Lord; vimukhät—not
interested in devotional service; çva-pacam—one born in a low family, or a
dog-eater; variñöham—more glorious; manye—I consider;
tat-arpita—surrendered unto the lotus feet of the Lord; manaù—his mind;
vacana—words; éhita—every endeavor; artha—wealth; präëam—and life;
punäti—purifies; saù—he (the devotee); kulam—his family; na—not; tu—but;
bhürimänaù—one who falsely thinks himself to be in a prestigious position.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
582
TRANSLATION
If a brähmaëa has all twelve of the brahminical qualifications [as they are
stated in the book called Sanat-sujäta] but is not a devotee and is averse to the
lotus feet of the Lord, he is certainly lower than a devotee who is a dog-eater
but who has dedicated everything—mind, words, activities, wealth and life—to
the Supreme Lord. Such a devotee is better than such a brähmaëa because the
devotee can purify his whole family, whereas the so-called brähmaëa in a
position of false prestige cannot purify even himself.
PURPORT
Here is a statement by Prahläda Mahäräja, one of the twelve authorities,
regarding the distinction between a devotee and a brähmaëa expert in
karma-käëòa, or Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. There are four varëas and four
äçramas, which divide human society, but the central principle is to become a
first-class pure devotee. It is said in the Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya:
bhagavad-bhakti-hénasya
jätiù çästraà japas tapaù
apräëasyaiva dehasya
maëòanaà loka-raïjanam
"If one is born in a high family like that of a brähmaëa, kñatriya or vaiçya but is
not a devotee of the Lord, all his good qualifications as a brähmaëa, kñatriya or
vaiçya are null and void. Indeed, they are considered decorations of a dead
body."
In this verse Prahläda Mahäräja speaks of the vipras, the learned brähmaëas.
The learned brähmaëa is considered best among the divisions of brähmaëa,
kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra, but a devotee born in a low caëòäla family is better
than such brähmaëas, not to speak of the kñatriyas, vaiçyas and others. A
devotee is better than anyone, for he is in the transcendental position on the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
583
Brahman platform.
mäà ca yo vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman." (Bg. 14.26) The twelve qualities of a first-class
brähmaëa, as stated in the book called Sanat-sujäta, are as follows:
jïänaà ca satyaà ca damaù çrutaà ca
hy amätsaryaà hrés titikñänasüyä
yajïaç ca dänaà ca dhåtiù çamaç ca
mahä-vratä dvädaça brähmaëasya
The European and American devotees in the Kåñëa consciousness movement
are sometimes accepted as brähmaëas, but the so-called caste brähmaëas are
very much envious of them. In answer to such envy, Prahläda Mahäräja says
that one who has been born in a brähmaëa family but is falsely proud of his
prestigious position cannot even purify himself, not to speak of his family,
whereas if a caëòäla, a lowborn person, is a devotee and has fully surrendered
unto the lotus feet of the Lord, he can purify his entire family. We have had
actual experience of how Americans and Europeans, because of their full
Kåñëa consciousness, have purified their whole families, so much so that a
mother of a devotee, at the time of her death, inquired about Kåñëa with her
last breath. Therefore it is theoretically true and has been practically proven
that a devotee can give the best service to his family, his community, his
society and his nation. The foolish accuse a devotee of following the principle
of escapism, but actually the fact is that a devotee is the right person to elevate
his family. A devotee engages everything in the service of the Lord, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
584
therefore he is always exalted.
TEXT 11
NaEvaTMaNa" Pa[>aurYa& iNaJal/a>aPaU<aaeR
MaaNa& JaNaadivduz" k-å<aae v*<aqTae )
Yad( YaÂNaae >aGavTae ivdDaqTa MaaNa&
TaÀaTMaNae Pa[iTaMau%SYa YaQaa Mau%é[q" )) 11 ))
naivätmanaù prabhur ayaà nija-läbha-pürëo
mänaà janäd aviduñaù karuëo våëéte
yad yaj jano bhagavate vidadhéta mänaà
tac cätmane prati-mukhasya yathä mukha-çréù
SYNONYMS
na—nor; eva—certainly; ätmanaù—for His personal benefit; prabhuù—Lord;
ayam—this; nija-läbha-pürëaù—is always satisfied in Himself (He does not
need to be satisfied by the service of others); mänam—respect; janät—from a
person; aviduñaù—who does not know that the aim of life is to please the
Supreme Lord; karuëaù—(the Supreme Personality of Godhead), who is so
kind to this foolish, ignorant person; våëéte—accepts; yat yat—whatever;
janaù—a person; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vidadhéta—may offer; mänam—worship; tat—that; ca—indeed; ätmane—for
his own benefit; prati-mukhasya—of the reflection of the face in the mirror;
yathä—just as; mukha-çréù—the decoration of the face.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is always fully
satisfied in Himself. Therefore when something is offered to Him, the offering,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
585
by the Lord's mercy, is for the benefit of the devotee, for the Lord does not
need service from anyone. To give an example, if one's face is decorated, the
reflection of one's face in a mirror is also seen to be decorated.
PURPORT
In bhakti-yoga it is recommended that a devotee follow nine principles;
çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù smaraëaà päda-sevanam/ arcanam. vandanaà
däsyaà sakhyam ätma-nivedanam [SB 7.5.23]. This service of glorifying the
Lord by hearing, chanting and so on is not, of course, meant for the benefit of
the Lord; this devotional service is recommended for the benefit of the
devotee. The Lord is always glorious, whether the devotee glorifies Him or not,
but if the devotee engages in glorifying the Lord, the devotee himself
automatically becomes glorious. Ceto-darpaëa-märjanaà
bhava-mahä-dävägni-nirväpaëam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. By glorifying the Lord
constantly, the living entity becomes purified in the core of his heart, and thus
he can understand that he does not belong to the material world but is a spirit
soul whose actual activity is to advance in Kåñëa consciousness so that he may
become free from the material clutches. Thus the blazing fire of material
existence is immediately extinguished (bhava-mahä-dävägni-nirväpaëam). A
foolish person is amazed that Kåñëa orders, sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm
ekaà çaraëaà vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Abandon all varieties of religious activities
and just surrender unto Me." Some foolish scholars even say that this is too
much to demand. But this demand is not for the benefit of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; rather, it is for the benefit of human society. If human
beings individually and collectively surrender everything to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in full Kåñëa consciousness, all of human society will
benefit. One who does not dedicate everything to the Supreme Lord is
described in this verse as aviduña, a rascal. In Bhagavad-gétä (7.15), the Lord
Himself speaks in the same way:
na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
586
prapadyante narädhamäù
mäyayäpahåta-jïänä
äsuraà bhävamäçritäù
"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose
knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of
demons, do not surrender unto Me." Because of ignorance and misfortune, the
atheists and the narädhamas, the lowest of men, do not surrender unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore although the Supreme Lord,
Kåñëa, is full in Himself, He appears in different yugas to demand the
surrender of the conditioned souls so that they will benefit by becoming free
from the material clutches. In conclusion, the more we engage in Kåñëa
consciousness and render service unto the Lord, the more we benefit. Kåñëa
does not need service from any of us.
TEXT 12
TaSMaadh& ivGaTaiv(c)-v wRìrSYa
SavaRTMaNaa Maih Ga*<aaiMa YaQaaMaNaqzMa( )
Naqcae_JaYaa Gau<aivSaGaRMaNauPa[iví"
PaUYaeTa YaeNa ih PauMaaNaNauvi<aRTaeNa )) 12 ))
tasmäd ahaà vigata-viklava éçvarasya
sarvätmanä mahi gåëämi yathä manéñam
néco 'jayä guëa-visargam anupraviñöaù
püyeta yena hi pumän anuvarëitena
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; aham—I; vigata-viklavaù—having given up contemplation
of being unfit; éçvarasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
587
sarva-ätmanä—in full surrender; mahi—glory; gåëämi—I shall chant or
describe; yathä manéñam—according to my intelligence; nécaù—although
lowborn (my father being a great demon, devoid of all good qualities);
ajayä—because of ignorance; guëa-visargam—the material world (wherein the
living entity takes birth according to the contamination of the modes of
nature); anupraviñöaù—entered into; püyeta—may be purified; yena—by
which (the glory of the Lord); hi—indeed; pumän—a person;
anuvarëitena—being chanted or recited.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, although I was born in a demoniac family, I may without a doubt
offer prayers to the Lord with full endeavor, as far as my intelligence allows.
Anyone who has been forced by ignorance to enter the material world may be
purified of material life if he offers prayers to the Lord and hears the Lord's
glories.
PURPORT
It is clearly understood that a devotee does not need to be born in a very
high family, to be rich, to be aristocratic or to be very beautiful. None of these
qualifications will engage one in devotional service. With devotion one should
feel, "God is great, and I am very small. Therefore my duty is to offer my
prayers to the Lord." Only on this basis can one understand and render service
to the Lord. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.55):
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä
viçate tad-anantaram
"One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
588
service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by such
devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God." Thus Prahläda Mahäräja
decided to offer his best prayers to the Lord, without consideration of his
material position.
TEXT 13
SaveR ùMaq iviDak-raSTav SatvDaaMNaae
b]øadYaae vYaiMaveXa Na caeiÜJaNTa" )
+aeMaaYa >aUTaYa oTaaTMaSau%aYa caSYa
iv§-Ii@Ta& >aGavTaae åicravTaarE" )) 13 ))
sarve hy amé vidhi-karäs tava sattva-dhämno
brahmädayo vayam iveça na codvijantaù
kñemäya bhütaya utätma-sukhäya cäsya
vikréòitaà bhagavato rucirävatäraiù
SYNONYMS
sarve—all; hi—certainly; amé—these; vidhi-karäù—executors of orders;
tava—Your; sattva-dhämnaù—being always situated in the transcendental
world; brahma-ädayaù—the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä; vayam—we;
iva—like; éça—O my Lord; na—not; ca—and; udvijantaù—who are afraid (of
Your fearful appearance); kñemäya—for the protection; bhütaye—for the
increase; uta—it is said; ätma-sukhäya—for personal satisfaction by such
pastimes; ca—also; asya—of this (material world); vikréòitam—manifested;
bhagavataù—of Your Lordship; rucira—very pleasing; avatäraiù—by Your
incarnations.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
589
O my Lord, all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä, are sincere servants of
Your Lordship, who are situated in a transcendental position. Therefore they
are not like us [Prahläda and his father, the demon Hiraëyakaçipu]. Your
appearance in this fearsome form is Your pastime for Your own pleasure. Such
an incarnation is always meant for the protection and improvement of the
universe.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja wanted to assert that his father and the other members
of his family were all unfortunate because they were demoniac, whereas the
devotees of the Lord are always fortunate because they are always ready to
follow the orders of the Lord. When the Supreme Lord appears in this material
world in His various incarnations, He performs two functions—saving the
devotee and vanquishing the demon (pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca
duñkåtäm [Bg. 4.8]). Lord Nåsiàhadeva, for example, appeared for the
protection of His devotee. Such pastimes as those of Nåsiàhadeva are certainly
not meant to create a fearful situation for the devotees, but nonetheless the
devotees, being very simple and faithful, were afraid of the fierce incarnation
of the Lord. Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja, in the following prayer, requests
the Lord to give up His anger.
TEXT 14
Tad( YaC^ MaNYauMaSaurê hTaSTvYaaÛ
MaaedeTa SaaDauriPa v*iêk-SaPaRhTYaa )
l/aek-aê iNav*RiTaiMaTaa" Pa[iTaYaiNTa SaveR
æPa& Na*iSa&h iv>aYaaYa JaNaa" SMariNTa )) 14 ))
tad yaccha manyum asuraç ca hatas tvayädya
modeta sädhur api våçcika-sarpa-hatyä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
590
lokäç ca nirvåtim itäù pratiyanti sarve
rüpaà nåsiàha vibhayäya janäù smaranti
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; yaccha—kindly give up; manyum—Your anger; asuraù—my
father, Hiraëyakaçipu, the great demon; ca—also; hataù—killed; tvayä—by
You; adya—today; modeta—take pleasure; sädhuù api—even a saintly person;
våçcika-sarpa-hatyä—by killing a snake or a scorpion; lokäù—all the planets;
ca—indeed; nirvåtim—pleasure; itäù—have achieved; pratiyanti—are waiting
(for pacification of Your anger); sarve—all of them; rüpam—this form;
nåsiàha—O Lord Nåsiàhadeva; vibhayäya—for mitigating their fear;
janäù—all the people of the universe; smaranti—will remember.
TRANSLATION
My Lord Nåsiàhadeva, please, therefore, cease Your anger now that my
father, the great demon Hiraëyakaçipu, has been killed. Since even saintly
persons take pleasure in the killing of a scorpion or a snake, all the worlds have
achieved great satisfaction because of the death of this demon. Now they are
confident of their happiness, and they will always remember Your auspicious
incarnation in order to be free from fear.
PURPORT
The most important point in this verse is that although saintly persons
never desire the killing of any living entity, they take pleasure in the killing of
envious living entities like snakes and scorpions. Hiraëyakaçipu was killed
because he was worse than a snake or a scorpion, and therefore everyone was
happy. Now there was no need for the Lord to be angry. The devotees can
always remember the form of Nåsiàhadeva when they are in danger, and
therefore the appearance of Nåsiàhadeva was not at all inauspicious. The
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
591
Lord's appearance is always worshipable and auspicious for all sane persons and
devotees.
TEXT 15
Naah& ib>aeMYaiJaTa Tae_iTa>aYaaNak-aSYa‚
iJaûakR-Nae}a>a]uku-$=qr>aSaaeGa]d&í\aTa( )
AaN}aóJa" +aTaJake-XarXax(ku-k-<aaR‚
iàhaRd>aqTaidiGa>aadiri>aà%aGa]aTa( )) 15 ))
nähaà bibhemy ajita te 'tibhayänakäsyajihvärka-
netra-bhrukuöé-rabhasogra-daàñörät
äntra-srajaù-kñataja-keçara-çaìku-karëän
nirhräda-bhéta-digibhäd ari-bhin-nakhägrät
SYNONYMS
na—not; aham—I; bibhemi—am afraid; ajita—O supreme victorious person,
who are never conquered by anyone; te—Your; ati—very much;
bhayänaka—fearful; äsya—mouth; jihvä—tongue; arka-netra—eyes shining
like the sun; bhrukuöé—frowning brows; rabhasa—strong;
ugra-daàñörät—ferocious teeth; äntra-srajaù—garlanded by intestines;
kñataja—bloody; keçara—manes; çaìku-karëät—wedgelike ears; nirhräda—by
a roaring sound (caused by You); bhéta—frightened; digibhät—from which
even the great elephants; ari-bhit—piercing the enemy; nakha-agrät—the tips
of whose nails.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, who are never conquered by anyone, I am certainly not afraid of
Your ferocious mouth and tongue, Your eyes bright like the sun or Your
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
592
frowning eyebrows. I do not fear Your sharp, pinching teeth, Your garland of
intestines, Your mane soaked with blood, or Your high, wedgelike ears. Nor do
I fear Your tumultuous roaring, which makes elephants flee to distant places, or
Your nails, which are meant to kill Your enemies.
PURPORT
Lord Nåsiàhadeva's fierce appearance was certainly most dangerous for the
nondevotees, but for Prahläda Mahäräja such a fearful appearance was not at
all disturbing. The lion is very fearsome for other animals, but its cubs are not
at all afraid of the lion. The water of the sea is certainly dreadful for all living
entities on the land, but within the sea even the small fish is unafraid. Why?
Because the small fish has taken shelter of the big ocean. It is said that
although great elephants are taken away by the flooding waters of the river,
the small fish swim opposite the current. Therefore although the Lord
sometimes assumes a fierce appearance to kill the duñkåtés, the devotees
worship Him. Keçava dhåta-nara-hari-rüpa jaya jagadéça hare. The devotee
always takes pleasure in worshiping the Lord and glorifying the Lord in any
form, either pleasing or fierce.
TEXT 16
}aSTaae_SMYah& k*-Pa<avTSal/ du"SahaeGa]‚
Sa&Saarc§-k-dNaad( Ga]SaTaa& Pa[<aqTa" )
bÖ" Svk-MaRi>aåXataMa Tae_x(iga]MaUl&/
Pa[qTaae_PavGaRXar<a& ûYaSae k-da Nau )) 16 ))
trasto 'smy ahaà kåpaëa-vatsala duùsahograsaàsära-
cakra-kadanäd grasatäà praëétaù
baddhaù sva-karmabhir uçattama te 'ìghri-mülaà
préto 'pavarga-çaraëaà hvayase kadä nu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
593
SYNONYMS
trastaù—frightened; asmi—am; aham—I; kåpaëa-vatsala—O my Lord, who
are so kind to the fallen souls (who have no spiritual knowledge);
duùsaha—intolerable; ugra—ferocious; saàsära-cakra—of the cycle of birth
and death; kadanät—from such a miserable condition; grasatäm—among other
conditioned souls, who devour one another; praëétaù—being thrown;
baddhaù—bound; sva-karmabhiù—the course by the reactions of my own
activities; uçattama—O great insurmountable; te—Your; aìghri-mülam—to
the soles of the lotus feet; prétaù—being pleased (with me);
apavarga-çaraëam—which are the shelter meant for liberation from this
horrible condition of material existence; hvayase—You will call (me);
kadä—when; nu—indeed.
TRANSLATION
O most powerful, insurmountable Lord, who are kind to the fallen souls, I
have been put into the association of demons as a result of my activities, and
therefore I am very much afraid of my condition of life within this material
world. When will that moment come when You will call me to the shelter of
Your lotus feet, which are the ultimate goal for liberation from conditional life?
PURPORT
Being in the material world is certainly miserable, but certainly when one is
put into the association of asuras, or atheistic men, it is intolerably so. One
may ask why the living entity is put into the material world. Indeed, sometimes
foolish people deride the Lord for having put them here. Actually, everyone is
put into conditional life according to his karma. Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja,
representing all the other conditioned souls, admits that he was put into life
among the asuras because of the results of his karma. The Lord is known as
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
594
kåpaëa-vatsala because He is extremely kind to the conditioned souls. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä, therefore, the Lord appears whenever there are
discrepancies in the execution of religious principles (yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata. .. tadätmänaà såjämy aham [Bg. 4.7]). The Lord is
extremely anxious to deliver the conditioned souls, and therefore He instructs
all of us to return home, back to Godhead (sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm
ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]). Thus Prahläda Mahäräja expected that the
Lord, by His kindness, would call him again to the shelter of His lotus feet. In
other words, everyone should be eager to return home, back to Godhead,
taking shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord and thus being fully trained in
Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 17
YaSMaaTa( iPa[YaaiPa[YaivYaaeGaSa&YaaeGaJaNMa‚
Xaaek-aiGanNaa Sak-l/YaaeiNazu dùMaaNa" )
du"%aEzDa& TadiPa du"%MaTaiÖYaah&
>aUMaN>a]MaaiMa vd Mae Tav daSYaYaaeGaMa( )) 17 ))
yasmät priyäpriya-viyoga-saàyoga-janmaçokägninä
sakala-yoniñu dahyamänaù
duùkhauñadhaà tad api duùkham atad-dhiyähaà
bhüman bhramämi vada me tava däsya-yogam
SYNONYMS
yasmät—because of which (because of existing in the material world);
priya—pleasing; apriya—not pleasing; viyoga—by separation; saàyoga—and
combination; janma—whose birth; çoka-agninä—by the fire of lamentation;
sakala-yoniñu—in any type of body; dahyamänaù—being burned;
duùkha-auñadham—remedial measures for miserable life; tat—that; api—also;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
595
duùkham—suffering; a-tat-dhiyä—by accepting the body as the self; aham—I;
bhüman—O great one; bhramämi—am wandering (within the cycle of birth
and death); vada—kindly instruct; me—unto me; tava—Your;
däsya-yogam—activities of service.
TRANSLATION
O great one, O Supreme Lord, because of combination with pleasing and
displeasing circumstances and because of separation from them, one is placed in
a most regrettable position, within heavenly or hellish planets, as if burning in a
fire of lamentation. Although there are many remedies by which to get out of
miserable life, any such remedies in the material world are more miserable than
the miseries themselves. Therefore I think that the only remedy is to engage in
Your service. Kindly instruct me in such service.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja aspired to engage in the service of the lotus feet of the
Lord. After the death of his father, who was materially very opulent, Prahläda
would have inherited his father's property, which extended throughout the
world, but Prahläda Mahäräja was not inclined to accept such material
opulence, for whether one is in the heavenly or hellish planets or is a rich or a
poor man's son, material conditions are everywhere. Therefore no condition of
life is at all pleasing. If one wants the uncontaminated pleasure of blissful life,
he must engage himself in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
Material opulence may be somewhat pleasing for the time being, but to come
to that temporary pleasing condition one must work extremely hard. When a
poor man is rich he may be better situated, but to come to that position he had
to accept many miseries. The fact is that in material life, whether one is
miserable or happy, both conditions are miserable. If one actually wants happy,
blissful life, one must become Kåñëa conscious and constantly engage in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. That is the real remedy. The entire
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
596
world is under the illusion that people will be happy by advancing in
materialistic measures to counteract the miseries of conditional life, but this
attempt will never be successful. Humanity must be trained to engage in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. That is the purpose of the Kåñëa
consciousness movement. There can be no happiness in changing one's
material conditions, for everywhere there is trouble and misery.
TEXT 18
Saae_h& iPa[YaSYa Sauôd" PardevTaaYaa
l/Il/ak-QaaSTav Na*iSa&h ivirÄGaqTaa" )
AÅiSTaTaMYaRNauGa*<aNGau<aivPa[Mau¢-ae
duGaaRi<a Tae PadYauGaal/Yah&SaSa(r)" )) 18 ))
so 'haà priyasya suhådaù paradevatäyä
lélä-kathäs tava nåsiàha viriïca-gétäù
aïjas titarmy anugåëan guëa-vipramukto
durgäëi te pada-yugälaya-haàsa-saìgaù
SYNONYMS
saù—that; aham—I (Prahläda Mahäräja); priyasya—of the dearmost;
suhådaù—well-wisher; paradevatäyäù—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; lélä-kathäù—narrations of the pastimes; tava—Your; nåsiàha—O
my Lord Nåsiàhadeva; viriïca-gétäù—given by Lord Brahmä by the disciplic
succession; aïjaù—easily; titarmi—I shall cross; anugåëan—constantly
describing; guëa—by the modes of material nature; vipramuktaù—specifically
being uncontaminated; durgäëi—all miserable conditions of life; te—of You;
pada-yuga-älaya—fully absorbed in meditation on the lotus feet;
haàsa-saìgaù—having the association of the haàsas, or liberated persons
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
597
(who have no connection with material activities).
TRANSLATION
O my Lord Nåsiàhadeva, by engaging in Your transcendental loving service
in the association of devotees who are liberated souls [haàsas], I shall become
completely uncontaminated by the association of the three modes of material
nature and be able to chant the glories of Your Lordship, who are so dear to me.
I shall chant Your glories, following exactly in the footsteps of Lord Brahmä
and his disciplic succession. In this way I shall undoubtedly be able to cross the
ocean of nescience.
PURPORT
A devotee's life and duty are very well explained herein. As soon as a
devotee can chant the holy name and glories of the Supreme Lord, he
certainly comes to the liberated position. Attachment for glorifying the Lord
by hearing and chanting the holy name and activities of the Lord (çravaëaà
kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23]) certainly brings one to the position where material
contamination is absent. One should chant the bona fide songs received from
the disciplic succession. In Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the chanting is
powerful when one follows the disciplic succession (evaà paramparä-präptam
imaà räjarñayo viduù [Bg. 4.2]). Manufacturing many ways of chanting will
never be effective. However, chanting the song or the narration left by the
previous äcäryas (mahäjano yena gataù sa panthäù [Cc. Madhya 17.186]) is
extremely effective, and this process is very easy. Therefore in this verse
Prahläda Mahäräja uses the word aïjaù ("easily"). Accepting the thoughts of
exalted authorities through disciplic succession is certainly much easier than
the method of mental speculation, by which one tries to invent some means to
understand the Absolute Truth. The best process is to accept the instructions
of the previous äcäryas and follow them. Then God realization and
self-realization become extremely easy. By following this easy method, one is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
598
liberated from the contamination of the material modes of nature, and thus
one can certainly cross the ocean of nescience, in which there are many
miserable conditions. By following in the footsteps of the great äcäryas, one
associates with the haàsas or paramahaàsas, those who are completely freed
from material contamination. Indeed, by following the instructions of the
äcäryas one is always freed from all material contamination, and thus one's life
becomes successful, for one reaches the goal of life. This material world is
miserable, regardless of one's standard of life. Of this there is no doubt.
Attempts to mitigate the miseries of material existence by material methods
will never be successful. One must take to Kåñëa consciousness to become
really happy; otherwise happiness is impossible. One might say that becoming
advanced in spiritual life also involves tapasya, voluntary acceptance of some
inconvenience. However, such inconvenience is not as dangerous as material
attempts to mitigate all miseries.
TEXT 19
bal/SYa Naeh Xar<a& iPaTaraE Na*iSa&h
NaaTaRSYa caGadMaudNviTa MaÂTaae NaaE" )
TaáSYa TaTPa[iTaiviDaYaR whaÅSaeí‚
STaavd( iv>aae TaNau>a*Taa& TvduPaei+aTaaNaaMa( )) 19 ))
bälasya neha çaraëaà pitarau nåsiàha
närtasya cägadam udanvati majjato nauù
taptasya tat-pratividhir ya ihäïjaseñöas
tävad vibho tanu-bhåtäà tvad-upekñitänäm
SYNONYMS
bälasya—of a little child; na—not; iha—in this world; çaraëam—shelter
(protection); pitarau—the father and mother; nåsiàha—O my Lord
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
599
Nåsiàhadeva; na—neither; ärtasya—of a person suffering from some disease;
ca—also; agadam—medicine; udanvati—in the water of the ocean;
majjataù—of a person who is drowning; nauù—the boat; taptasya—of a person
suffering from a condition of material misery; tat-pratividhiù—the
counteraction (invented for stopping the suffering of material existence);
yaù—that which; iha—in this material world; aïjasä—very easily;
iñöaù—accepted (as a remedy); tävat—similarly; vibho—O my Lord, O
Supreme; tanu-bhåtäm—of the living entities who have accepted material
bodies; tvat-upekñitänäm—who are neglected by You and not accepted by You.
TRANSLATION
My Lord Nåsiàhadeva, O Supreme, because of a bodily conception of life,
embodied souls neglected and not cared for by You cannot do anything for their
betterment. Whatever remedies they accept, although perhaps temporarily
beneficial, are certainly impermanent. For example, a father and mother cannot
protect their child, a physician and medicine cannot relieve a suffering patient,
and a boat on the ocean cannot protect a drowning man.
PURPORT
Through parental care, through remedies for different kinds of disease, and
through means of protection on the water, in the air and on land, there is
always an endeavor for relief from various kinds of suffering in the material
world, but none of them are guaranteed measures for protection. They may be
beneficial temporarily, but they afford no permanent benefit. Despite the
presence of a father and mother, a child cannot be protected from accidental
death, disease and various other miseries. No one can help, including the
parents. Ultimately the shelter is the Lord, and one who takes shelter of the
Lord is protected. This is guaranteed. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.31),
kaunteya pratijänéhi na me bhaktaù praëaçyati: "O son of Kunté, declare it
boldly that My devotee never perishes." Therefore, unless one is protected by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
600
the mercy of the Lord, no remedial measure can act effectively. One should
consequently depend fully on the causeless mercy of the Lord. Although as a
matter of routine duty one must of course accept other remedial measures, no
one can protect one who is neglected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
In this material world, everyone is trying to counteract the onslaught of
material nature, but everyone is ultimately fully controlled by material nature.
Therefore even though so-called philosophers and scientists try to surmount
the onslaught of material nature, they have not been able to do so. Kåñëa says
in Bhagavad-gétä (13.9) that the real sufferings of the material world are
four—janma-måtyu jarä-vyädhi (birth, death, old age and disease). In the
history of the world, no one has been successful in conquering these miseries
imposed by material nature. prakåteù kriyamäëäni guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù [Bg.
3.27]. Nature (prakåti) is so strong that no one can overcome her stringent
laws. So-called scientists, philosophers, religionists and politicians should
therefore conclude that they cannot offer facilities to the people in general.
They should make vigorous propaganda to awaken the populace and raise them
to the platform of Kåñëa consciousness. Our humble attempt to propagate the
Kåñëa consciousness movement all over the world is the only remedy that can
bring about a peaceful and happy life. We can never be happy without the
mercy of the Supreme Lord (tvad-upekñitänäm). If we keep displeasing our
supreme father, we shall never be happy within this material world, in either
the upper or lower planetary systems.
TEXT 20
YaiSMaNYaTaae YaihR YaeNa c YaSYa YaSMaad(
YaSMaE YaQaa YaduTa YaSTvPar" Parae va )
>aav" k-raeiTa ivk-raeiTa Pa*QaKSv>aav"
SaÄaeidTaSTadi%l&/ >avTa" SvæPaMa( )) 20 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
601
yasmin yato yarhi yena ca yasya yasmäd
yasmai yathä yad uta yas tv aparaù paro vä
bhävaù karoti vikaroti påthak svabhävaù
saïcoditas tad akhilaà bhavataù svarüpam
SYNONYMS
yasmin—in any condition of life; yataù—because of anything; yarhi—at any
time (past, present or future); yena—by something; ca—also; yasya—in
relationship with anyone; yasmät—from any causal representative;
yasmai—unto anyone (without discrimination in regard to place, person or
time); yathä—in any manner; yat—whatever it may be; uta—certainly;
yaù—anyone who; tu—but; aparaù—the other; paraù—the supreme; vä—or;
bhävaù—being; karoti—does; vikaroti—changes; påthak—separate;
svabhävaù—nature (under the influence of different modes of material
nature); saïcoditaù—being influenced; tat—that; akhilam—all; bhavataù—of
Your Lordship; svarüpam—emanated from Your different energies.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, everyone in this material world is under the modes of
material nature, being influenced by goodness, passion and ignorance.
Everyone—from the greatest personality, Lord Brahmä, down to the small
ant—works under the influence of these modes. Therefore everyone in this
material world is influenced by Your energy. The cause for which they work,
the place where they work, the time when they work, the matter due to which
they work, the goal of life they have considered final, and the process for
obtaining this goal—all are nothing but manifestations of Your energy. Indeed,
since the energy and energetic are identical, all of them are but manifestations
of You.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
602
PURPORT
Whether one thinks himself protected by his parents, by the government,
by some place or by some other cause, everything is due to the various
potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everything that is done,
whether in the higher, middle or lower planetary systems, is due to the
supervision or control of the Supreme Lord. It is therefore said,
karmaëä-daiva-netreëa jantur dehopapattaye [SB 3.31.1]. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul within the core of everyone's heart,
gives inspirations for action according to one's mentality. All of these
mentalities are merely facilities given by Kåñëa to the person acting.
Bhagavad-gétä therefore says, mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: [Bg. 15.15]
everyone works according to the inspiration given by the Supersoul. Because
everyone has a different goal of life, everyone acts differently, as guided by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The words yasmin yato yarhi yena ca yasya yasmät indicate that all
activities, whatever they may be, are but different features of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. All of them are created by the living entity and
fulfilled by the mercy of the Lord. Although all such activities are
nondifferent from the Lord, the Lord nonetheless directs, sarva-dharmän
parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Give up all other duties and
surrender unto Me." When we accept this direction from the Lord, we can
actually become happy. As long as we work according to our material senses we
are in material life, but as soon as we act according to the real, transcendental
direction of the Lord, our position is spiritual. The activities of bhakti,
devotional service, are directly under the control of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. The Närada-païcarätra states:
sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà
tat-paratvena nirmalam
håñékeëa håñékeçacopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
603
sevanaà bhaktir ucyate
[Cc. Madhya 19.170]
When one gives up materially designated positions and works directly under
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one's spiritual life is revived. This is
described as svarüpena avasthiti, being situated in one's original constitutional
position. This is the real description of mukti, or liberation from material
bondage.
TEXT 21
MaaYaa MaNa" Sa*JaiTa k-MaRMaYa& bl/IYa"
k-ale/Na caeidTaGau<aaNauMaTaeNa Pau&Sa" )
^NdaeMaYa& YadJaYaaiPaRTazae@Xaar&
Sa&Saarc§-MaJa k-ae_iTaTareTa( TvdNYa" )) 21 ))
mäyä manaù såjati karmamayaà baléyaù
kälena codita-guëänumatena puàsaù
chandomayaà yad ajayärpita-ñoòaçäraà
saàsära-cakram aja ko 'titaret tvad-anyaù
SYNONYMS
mäyä—the external energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
manaù(19)—the mind; såjati—creates; karma-mayam—producing hundreds
and thousands of desires and acting accordingly; baléyaù—extremely powerful,
insurmountable; kälena—by time; codita-guëa—whose three modes of material
nature are agitated; anumatena—permitted by the mercy of the glance (time);
puàsaù—of the plenary portion, Lord Viñëu, the expansion of Lord Kåñëa;
chandaù-mayam—chiefly influenced by the directions in the Vedas;
yat—which; ajayä—because of dark ignorance; arpita—offered;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
604
ñoòaça—sixteen; aram—the spokes; saàsära-cakram—the wheel of repeated
birth and death in different species of life; aja—O unborn Lord; kaù—who (is
there); atitaret—able to get out; tvat-anyaù—without taking shelter at Your
lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, O supreme eternal, by expanding Your plenary portion You have
created the subtle bodies of the living entities through the agency of Your
external energy, which is agitated by time. Thus the mind entraps the living
entity in unlimited varieties of desires to be fulfilled by the Vedic directions of
karma-käëòa [fruitive activity] and the sixteen elements. Who can get free from
this entanglement unless he takes shelter at Your lotus feet?
PURPORT
If the hand of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is present in
everything, where is the question of being liberated from material encagement
to spiritual, blissful life? Indeed, it is a fact that Kåñëa is the source of
everything, as we understand from Kåñëa Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (ahaà
sarvasya prabhavaù [Bg. 10.8]). All the activities in both the spiritual and
material world are certainly conducted by the orders of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead through the agency of either the material or spiritual
nature. As further confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10), mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sacaräcaram: without the direction of the Supreme Lord, material
nature cannot do anything; it cannot act independently. Therefore, in the
beginning the living entity wanted to enjoy the material energy, and to give
the living entity all facility, Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
created this material world and gave the living entity the facility to concoct
different ideas and plans through the mind. These facilities offered by the
Lord to the living entity constitute the sixteen kinds of perverted support in
terms of the knowledge-gathering senses, the working senses, the mind and the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
605
five material elements. The wheel of repeated birth and death is created by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but to direct the bewildered living entity in
progress toward liberation according to varied stages of advancement, different
directions are given in the Vedas (chandomayam). If one wants to be elevated
to the higher planetary systems, he may follow the Vedic directions. As the
Lord states in Bhagavad-gétä (9.25):
yänti deva-vratä devän
pitèn yänti pitå-vratäù
bhütäni yänti bhütejyä
yänti mad-yäjino 'pi mäm
"Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those
who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; those who
worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship Me will live with
Me." The real purpose of the Vedas is to direct one back home, back to
Godhead, but the living entity, not knowing the real goal of his life, wants to
go sometimes here and sometimes there and do sometimes this and sometimes
that. In this way he wanders throughout the entire universe, imprisoned in
various species and thus engaging in various activities for which he must suffer
the reactions. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore says:
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
(Cc. Madhya 19.151)
The fallen, conditioned living entity, trapped by the external energy, loiters in
the material world, but if by good fortune he meets a bona fide representative
of the Lord who gives him the seed of devotional service, and if he takes
advantage of such a guru, or representative of God, he receives the
bhakti-latä-béja, the seed of devotional service. If he properly cultivates Kåñëa
consciousness, he is then gradually elevated to the spiritual world. The
ultimate conclusion is that one must surrender to the principles of bhakti-yoga,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
606
for then one will gradually attain liberation. No other method of liberation
from the material struggle is at all possible.
TEXT 22
Sa Tv& ih iNaTYaiviJaTaaTMaGau<a" SvDaaMNaa
k-al/ae vXaqk*-TaivSa*JYaivSaGaRXai¢-" )
c§e- ivSa*íMaJaYaeìr zae@Xaare
iNaZPaq@yMaaNaMauPak-zR iv>aae Pa[PaàMa( )) 22 ))
sa tvaà hi nitya-vijitätma-guëaù sva-dhämnä
kälo vaçé-kåta-visåjya-visarga-çaktiù
cakre visåñöam ajayeçvara ñoòaçäre
niñpéòyamänam upakarña vibho prapannam
SYNONYMS
saù—that one (the supreme independent person who, through His external
energy, has created the material mind, which is the cause of all suffering in
this material world); tvam—You (are); hi—indeed; nitya—eternally;
vijita-ätma—conquered; guëaù—whose property of the intelligence;
sva-dhämnä—by Your personal spiritual energy; kälaù—the time element
(which creates and annihilates); vaçé-kåta—brought under Your control;
visåjya—by which all effects; visarga—and causes; çaktiù—the energy;
cakre—in the wheel of time (the repetition of birth and death);
visåñöam—being thrown; ajayä—by Your external energy, the mode of
ignorance; éçvara—O supreme controller; ñoòaça-are—with sixteen spokes
(the five material elements, the ten senses, and the leader of the senses,
namely the mind); niñpéòyamänam—being crushed (under that wheel);
upakarña—kindly take me (to the shelter of Your lotus feet); vibho—O
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
607
supreme great; prapannam—who am fully surrendered unto You.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, O supreme great, You have created this material world of
sixteen constituents, but You are transcendental to their material qualities. In
other words, these material qualities are under Your full control, and You are
never conquered by them. Therefore the time element is Your representation.
My Lord, O Supreme, no one can conquer You. As for me, however, I am being
crushed by the wheel of time, and therefore I surrender fully unto You. Now
kindly take me under the protection of Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
The wheel of material miseries is also a creation of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, but He is not under the control of the material energy. Rather,
He is the controller of the material energy, whereas we, the living entities, are
under its control. When we give up our constitutional position (jévera 'svarüpa'
haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa' [Cc. Madhya 20.108]), the Supreme Personality of
Godhead creates this material energy and her influence over the conditioned
soul. Therefore He is the Supreme, and only He can deliver the conditioned
soul from the onslaught of material nature (mäm eva ye prapadyante mäyäm
etäà taranti te [Bg. 7.14]). Mäyä, the external energy, continuously imposes
upon the conditioned souls the suffering of the threefold miseries of this
material world. Therefore, in the previous verse, Prahläda Mahäräja prayed to
the Lord, "But for Your Lordship, no one can save me." Prahläda Mahäräja has
also explained that a child's protectors, his parents, cannot save the child from
the onslaught of birth and death, nor can medicine and a physician save one
from death, nor can a boat or similar means of protection save a person
drowning in the water, for everything is controlled by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Therefore suffering humanity must surrender to Kåñëa, as Kåñëa
Himself demands in the last instruction of Bhagavad-gétä (18.66):
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
608
sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù
"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver
you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." All of human society must take
advantage of this offer and thus be saved by Kåñëa from the danger of being
crushed by the wheel of time, the wheel of past, present and future.
The word niñpéòyamänam ("being crushed") is very significant. Every living
entity in the material condition is actually being crushed again and again, and
to be saved from this position one must take shelter of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Then one will be happy. The word prapannam is also
very significant, for unless one fully surrenders to the Supreme Lord one
cannot be saved from being crushed. A criminal is put in prison and punished
by the government, but the same government, if it likes, can release the
criminal from imprisoned life. Similarly, we must know conclusively that our
material condition of suffering has been allotted to us by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and if we want to be saved from this suffering, we
must appeal to the same controller. Thus one can be saved from this material
condition.
TEXT 23
d*ía MaYaa idiv iv>aae_i%l/iDaZ<YaPaaNaa‚
MaaYau" ié[Yaae iv>av wC^iTa YaaÅNaae_YaMa( )
Yae_SMaiTPaTau" ku-iPaTahaSaivJa*iM>aTa>a]U‚
ivSfU-iJaRTaeNa lu/il/Taa" Sa Tau Tae iNarSTa" )) 23 ))
dåñöä mayä divi vibho 'khila-dhiñëya-pänäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
609
äyuù çriyo vibhava icchati yäï jano 'yam
ye 'smat pituù kupita-häsa-vijåmbhita-bhrüvisphürjitena
lulitäù sa tu te nirastaù
SYNONYMS
dåñöäù—have been seen practically; mayä—by me; divi—in the higher
planetary systems; vibho—O my Lord; akhila—all; dhiñëya-pänäm—of the
chiefs of different states or planets; äyuù—the duration of life; çriyaù—the
opulences; vibhavaù—glories, influence; icchati—desire; yän—all of which;
janaù ayam—these people in general; ye—all of which (duration of life,
opulence, etc.); asmat pituù—of our father, Hiraëyakaçipu; kupita-häsa—by his
critical laughing when angry; vijåmbhita—being expanded; bhrü—of the
eyebrows; visphürjitena—simply by the feature; lulitäù—pulled down or
finished; saù—he (my father); tu—but; te—by You; nirastaù—completely
vanquished.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, people in general want to be elevated to the higher planetary
systems for a long duration of life, opulence and enjoyment, but I have seen all
of these through the activities of my father. When my father was angry and he
laughed sarcastically at the demigods, they were immediately vanquished simply
by seeing the movements of his eyebrows. Yet my father, who was so powerful,
has now been vanquished by You within a moment.
PURPORT
Within this material world, one should understand by practical experience
the value of material opulence, longevity and influence. We have actual
experience that even on this planet there have been many great politicians
and military commanders like Napoleon, Hitler, Shubhash Chandra Bose and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
610
Gandhi, but as soon as their lives were finished, their popularity, influence and
everything else were finished also. Prahläda Mahäräja formerly gathered the
same experience by seeing the activities of Hiraëyakaçipu, his great father.
Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja did not give any importance to anything in this
material world. No one can maintain his body or material achievements
forever. A Vaiñëava can understand that nothing within this material world,
not even that which is powerful, opulent or influential, can endure. At any
time such things may be vanquished. And who can vanquish them? The
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore one should conclusively
understand that no one is greater than the Supreme Great. Since the Supreme
Great demands, sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66],
every intelligent man must agree to this proposal. One must surrender unto
the Lord to be saved from the wheel of repeated birth, death, old age and
disease.
TEXT 24
TaSMaadMaUSTaNau>a*TaaMahMaaiXazae_j
AaYau" ié[Ya& iv>avMaEiNd]YaMaaivirHCYaaTa( )
NaeC^aiMa Tae ivlu/il/TaaNauåiv§-Mae<a
k-al/aTMaNaaePaNaYa Maa& iNaJa>a*TYaPaaìRMa( )) 24 ))
tasmäd amüs tanu-bhåtäm aham äçiño 'jïa
äyuù çriyaà vibhavam aindriyam äviriïcyät
necchämi te vilulitän uruvikrameëa
kälätmanopanaya mäà nija-bhåtya-pärçvam
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; amüù—all those (opulences); tanu-bhåtäm—with reference
to living entities possessing material bodies; aham—I; äçiñaù ajïaù—knowing
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
611
well the results of such benedictions; äyuù—a long duration of life;
çriyam—material opulences; vibhavam—influence and glories; aindriyam—all
meant for sense gratification; äviriïcyät—beginning from Lord Brahmä (down
to the small ant); na—not; icchämi—I want; te—by You; vilulitän—subject to
be finished; uru-vikrameëa—who are extremely powerful; käla-ätmanä—as the
master of the time factor; upanaya—kindly take to; mäm—me;
nija-bhåtya-pärçvam—the association of Your faithful servant, Your devotee.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, now I have complete experience concerning the worldly
opulence, mystic power, longevity and other material pleasures enjoyed by all
living entities, from Lord Brahmä down to the ant. As powerful time, You
destroy them all. Therefore, because of my experience, I do not wish to possess
them. My dear Lord, I request You to place me in touch with Your pure
devotee and let me serve him as a sincere servant.
PURPORT
By studying Çrémad-Bhägavatam, every intelligent man can get experience
like that of Prahläda Mahäräja through the historical incidents mentioned in
this great literature of spiritual knowledge. By following in the footsteps of
Prahläda Mahäräja, one should gain thorough experience that all material
opulence is perishable at every moment. Even this body, for which we try to
acquire so many sensual pleasures, may perish at any time. The soul, however,
is eternal. Na hanyate hanyamäne çarére: [Bg. 2.20] the soul is never
vanquished, even when the body is destroyed. An intelligent man, therefore,
should care for the happiness of the spirit soul, not of the body. Even if one
receives a body with a long duration of life, like those of Lord Brahmä and the
other great demigods, it will also be destroyed, and therefore an intelligent
man should be concerned with the imperishable spirit soul.
To save oneself, one must take shelter of a pure devotee. Narottama däsa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
612
Öhäkura therefore says, chäòiyä vaiñëava-sevä nistära päyeche kebä. If one
wants to save himself from material nature's onslaughts, which arise because of
the material body, one must become Kåñëa conscious and try to fully
understand Kåñëa. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9), janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù. One should understand Kåñëa in truth, and this one
can do only by serving a pure devotee. Thus Prahläda Mahäräja prays that
Lord Nåsiàhadeva place him in touch with a pure devotee and servant instead
of awarding him material opulence. Every intelligent man within this material
world must follow Prahläda Mahäräja. Mahäjano yena gataù sa panthäù [Cc.
Madhya 17.186]. Prahläda Mahäräja did not want to enjoy the estate left by his
father; rather, he wanted to become a servant of the servant of the Lord [Cc.
Madhya 13.80]. The illusory human civilization that perpetually endeavors for
happiness through material advancement is rejected by Prahläda Mahäräja and
those who strictly follow in his footsteps.
There are different types of material opulence, known technically as bhukti,
mukti and siddhi. Bhukti refers to being situated in a very good position, like a
position with the demigods in the higher planetary systems, where one can
enjoy material sense gratification to the greatest extent. Mukti refers to being
disgusted with material advancement and thus desiring to become one with
the Supreme. Siddhi refers to executing a severe type of meditation, like that of
the yogés, to attain eight kinds of perfection (aëimä, laghimä, mahimä, etc.). All
who desire some material advancement through bhukti, mukti or siddhi are
punishable in due course of time, and they return to material activities.
Prahläda Mahäräja rejected them all; he simply wanted to engage as an
apprentice under the guidance of a pure devotee.
TEXT 25
ku-}aaiXaz" é[uiTaSau%a Ma*GaTa*iZ<aæPaa"
Kved& k-le/vrMaXaezåJaa& ivraeh" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
613
iNaivRÛTae Na Tau JaNaae YadPaqiTa ivÜaNa(
k-aMaaNal&/ MaDaul/vE" XaMaYaNduraPaE" )) 25 ))
kuträçiñaù çruti-sukhä mågatåñëi-rüpäù
kvedaà kalevaram açeña-rujäà virohaù
nirvidyate na tu jano yad apéti vidvän
kämänalaà madhu-lavaiù çamayan duräpaiù
SYNONYMS
kutra—where; äçiñaù—benedictions; çruti-sukhäù—simply pleasing to hear of;
mågatåñëi-rüpäù—exactly like a mirage in the desert; kva—where; idam—this;
kalevaram—body; açeña—unlimited; rujäm—of diseases; virohaù—the place
for generating; nirvidyate—become satiated; na—not; tu—but; janaù—people
in general; yat api—although; iti—thus; vidvän—so-called learned
philosophers, scientists and politicians; käma-analam—the blazing fire of lusty
desires; madhu-lavaiù—with drops of honey (happiness);
çamayan—controlling; duräpaiù—very difficult to obtain.
TRANSLATION
In this material world, every living entity desires some future happiness,
which is exactly like a mirage in the desert. Where is water in the desert, or, in
other words, where is happiness in this material world? As for this body, what
is its value? It is merely a source of various diseases. The so-called philosophers,
scientists and politicians know this very well, but nonetheless they aspire for
temporary happiness. Happiness is very difficult to obtain, but because they are
unable to control their senses, they run after the so-called happiness of the
material world and never come to the right conclusion.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
614
There is a song in the Bengali language which states, "I constructed this
home for happiness, but unfortunately there was a fire, and everything has
now been burnt to ashes." This illustrates the nature of material happiness.
Everyone knows it, but nonetheless one plans to hear or think something very
pleasing. Unfortunately, all of one's plans are annihilated in due course of
time. There were many politicians who planned empires, supremacy and
control of the world, but in due time all their plans and empires—and even
the politicians themselves—were vanquished. Everyone should take lessons
from Prahläda Mahäräja about how we are engaged in so-called temporary
happiness through bodily exercises for sense enjoyment. All of us repeatedly
make plans, which are all repeatedly frustrated. Therefore one should stop
such planmaking.
As one cannot stop a blazing fire by constantly pouring ghee upon it, one
cannot satisfy oneself by increasing plans for sense enjoyment. The blazing fire
is bhava-mahä-dävägni, the forest fire of material existence. This forest fire
occurs automatically, without endeavor. We want to be happy in the material
world, but this will never be possible; we shall simply increase the blazing fire
of desires. Our desires cannot be satisfied by illusory thoughts and plans;
rather, we have to follow the instructions of Lord Kåñëa: sarva-dharmän
parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Then we shall be happy.
Otherwise, in the name of happiness, we shall continue to suffer miserable
conditions.
TEXT 26
Kvah& rJa"Pa[>av wRXa TaMaae_iDake-_iSMaNa(
JaaTa" SaureTarku-le/ Kv TavaNauk-MPaa )
Na b]ø<aae Na Tau >avSYa Na vE rMaaYaa
YaNMae_iPaRTa" iXariSa PaÚk-r" Pa[Saad" )) 26 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
615
kvähaà rajaù-prabhava éça tamo 'dhike 'smin
jätaù suretara-kule kva tavänukampä
na brahmaëo na tu bhavasya na vai ramäyä
yan me 'rpitaù çirasi padma-karaù prasädaù
SYNONYMS
kva—where; aham—I (am); rajaù-prabhavaù—being born in a body full of
passion; éça—O my Lord; tamaù—the mode of ignorance; adhike—surpassing
in; asmin—in this; jätaù—born; sura-itara-kule—in a family of atheists or
demons (who are subordinate to the devotees); kva—where; tava—Your;
anukampä—causeless mercy; na—not; brahmaëaù—of Lord Brahmä; na—not;
tu—but; bhavasya—of Lord Çiva; na—nor; vai—even; ramäyäù—of the
goddess of fortune; yat—which; me—of me; arpitaù—offered; çirasi—on the
head; padma-karaù—lotus hand; prasädaù—the symbol of mercy.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, O Supreme, because I was born in a family full of the hellish
material qualities of passion and ignorance, what is my position? And what is to
be said of Your causeless mercy, which was never offered even to Lord Brahmä,
Lord Çiva or the goddess of fortune, Lakñmé? You never put Your lotus hand
upon their heads, but You have put it upon mine.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja was surprised at the causeless mercy of the Supreme
Lord, the Personality of Godhead, for although Prahläda was born in a
demoniac family and although the Lord had never before placed His lotus
hand on the head of Brahmä, Çiva or the goddess of fortune, His constant
companion, Lord Nåsiàhadeva kindly placed His hand on the head of
Prahläda. This is the meaning of causeless mercy. The causeless mercy of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
616
Supreme Personality of Godhead may be bestowed upon anyone, regardless of
his position in this material world. Everyone is eligible to worship the Supreme
Lord, irrespective of his material position. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä
(14.26):
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman." Anyone who engages in continuous devotional
service to the Lord is situated in the spiritual world and has nothing to do with
the material qualities (sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa).
Because Prahläda Mahäräja was situated on the spiritual platform, he had
nothing to do with his body, which had been born of the modes of passion and
ignorance. The symptoms of passion and ignorance are described in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.19) as lust and hankering (tadä rajas tamo-bhäväù
käma-lobhädayaç ca ye). Prahläda Mahäräja, being a great devotee, thought the
body born of his father to be born of passion and ignorance, but because
Prahläda was fully engaged in the service of the Lord, his body did not belong
to the material world. The pure Vaiñëava's body is spiritualized even in this
life. For example, when iron is put into a fire it becomes red-hot and is no
longer iron but fire. Similarly, the so-called material bodies of devotees who
fully engage in the devotional service of the Lord, being constantly in the fire
of spiritual life, have nothing to do with matter, but are spiritualized.
Çréla Madhväcärya remarks that the goddess of fortune, the mother of the
universe, could not get mercy similar to that which was offered to Prahläda
Mahäräja, for although the goddess of fortune is always a constant companion
of the Supreme Lord, the Lord is more inclined to His devotees. In other
words, devotional service is so great that when it is offered even by those born
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
617
in low families, the Lord accepts it as being more valuable than the service
offered by the goddess of fortune. Lord Brahmä, King Indra and the other
demigods living in the upper planetary systems are situated in a different spirit
of consciousness, and therefore they are sometimes troubled by demons, but a
devotee, even if situated in the lower planets, enjoys life in Kåñëa
consciousness under any circumstances. parataù svataù karmataù: as he acts
himself, as he is instructed by others or as he performs his material activities,
he enjoys life in every respect. In this regard, Madhväcärya quotes the
following verses, which are mentioned in the Brahma-tarka:
çré-brahma-brähmévéndräditri-
katat stré-puru-ñöutäù
tad anye ca kramädeva
sadä muktau småtäv api
hari-bhaktau ca taj-jïäne
sukhe ca niyamena tu
parataù svataù karmato vä
na kathaïcit tad anyathä
TEXT 27
NaEza ParavrMaiTa>aRvTaae NaNau SYaa‚
ÂNTaaeYaRQaaTMaSauôdae JaGaTaSTaQaaiPa )
Sa&SaevYaa SaurTaraeirv Tae Pa[Saad"
SaevaNauæPaMaudYaae Na ParavrTvMa( )) 27 ))
naiñä parävara-matir bhavato nanu syäj
jantor yathätma-suhådo jagatas tathäpi
saàsevayä surataror iva te prasädaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
618
sevänurüpam udayo na parävaratvam
SYNONYMS
na—not; eñä—this; para-avara—of higher or lower; matiù—such
discrimination; bhavataù—of Your Lordship; nanu—indeed; syät—there can
be; jantoù—of ordinary living entities; yathä—as; ätma-suhådaù—of one who
is the friend; jagataù—of the whole material world; tathäpi—but still (there is
such a demonstration of intimacy or difference); saàsevayä—according to the
degree of service rendered by the devotee; surataroù iva—like that of the
desire tree in Vaikuëöhaloka (which offers fruits according to the desire of the
devotee); te—Your; prasädaù—benediction or blessing;
sevä-anurüpam—according to the category of service one renders to the Lord;
udayaù—manifestation; na—not; para-avaratvam—discrimination due to
higher or lower levels.
TRANSLATION
Unlike an ordinary living entity, my Lord, You do not discriminate between
friends and enemies, the favorable and the unfavorable, because for You there is
no conception of higher and lower. Nonetheless, You offer Your benedictions
according to the level of one's service, exactly as a desire tree delivers fruits
according to one's desires and makes no distinction between the lower and the
higher.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (4.11) the Lord clearly says, ye yathä mäà prapadyante täàs
tathaiva bhajämy aham: "As one surrenders to Me, I reward him accordingly."
As stated by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, jévera 'svarüpa' haya-kåñëera
'nitya-däsa': [Cc. Madhya 20.108] every living being is an eternal servant of
Kåñëa. According to the service the living entity renders, he automatically
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
619
receives benedictions from Kåñëa, who does not make distinctions, thinking,
"Here is a person in an intimate relationship with Me, and here is a person I
dislike." Kåñëa advises everyone to surrender to Him (sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]). One's relationship with the Supreme
Lord is in proportion to that surrender and the service one renders unto the
Lord. Thus throughout the entire world the higher or lower positions of the
living entities are selected by the living entities themselves. If one is inclined
to dictate that the Lord grant something, one receives benedictions according
to his desires. If one wants to be elevated to the higher planetary systems, the
heavenly planets, he can be promoted to the place he desires, and if one wants
to remain a hog or a pig on earth, the Lord fulfills that desire also. Therefore,
one's position is determined by one's desires; the Lord is not responsible for the
higher or lower grades of our existence. This is further explained quite
definitely in Bhagavad-gétä (9.25) by the Lord Himself:
yänti deva-vratä devän
pitèn yänti pitå-vratäù
bhütäni yänti bhütejyä
yänti mad-yäjino 'pi mäm
Some people want to be promoted to the heavenly planets, some want to be
promoted to Pitåloka, and some want to remain on earth, but if one is
interested in returning home, back to Godhead, he can be promoted there also.
According to the demands of a particular devotee, he receives a result by the
grace of the Lord. The Lord does not discriminate, thinking, "Here is a person
favorable to Me, and here is a person who is not favorable." Rather, He fulfills
the desires of everyone. Therefore the çästras enjoin:
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
620
"Whether one is without desire [the condition of the devotees], or is desirous of
all fruitive results, or is after liberation, one should with all efforts try to
worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead for complete perfection,
culminating in Kåñëa consciousness." (SB 2.3.10) According to one's position,
whether as a devotee, a karmé or a jïäné, whatever one wants one can get if one
fully engages in the service of the Lord.
TEXT 28
Wv& JaNa& iNaPaiTaTa& Pa[>avaihkU-Pae
k-aMaai>ak-aMaMaNau Ya" Pa[PaTaNPa[Sa(r)aTa( )
k*-TvaTMaSaaTa( SaurizR<aa >aGavNa( Ga*hqTa"
Saae_h& k-Qa& Nau ivSa*Jae Tav >a*TYaSaevaMa( )) 28 ))
evaà janaà nipatitaà prabhavähi-küpe
kämäbhikämam anu yaù prapatan prasaìgät
kåtvätmasät surarñiëä bhagavan gåhétaù
so 'haà kathaà nu visåje tava bhåtya-seväm
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; janam—people in general; nipatitam—fallen; prabhava—of
material existence; ahi-küpe—in a blind well full of snakes;
käma-abhikämam—desiring the sense objects; anu—following; yaù—the
person who; prapatan—falling down (in this condition); prasaìgät—because
of bad association or increased association with material desires; kåtvä
ätmasät—causing me (to acquire spiritual qualities like himself, Çré Närada);
sura-åñiëä—by the great saintly person (Närada); bhagavan—O my Lord;
gåhétaù—accepted; saù—that person; aham—I; katham—how; nu—indeed;
visåje—can give up; tava—Your; bhåtya-seväm—the service of Your pure
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
621
devotee.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, because of my association
with material desires, one after another, I was gradually falling into a blind well
full of snakes, following the general populace. But Your servant Närada Muni
kindly accepted me as his disciple and instructed me how to achieve this
transcendental position. Therefore, my first duty is to serve him. How could I
leave his service?
PURPORT
As will be seen in later verses, even though Prahläda Mahäräja was directly
offered all the benedictions he might have desired, he refused to accept such
offerings from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. On the contrary, he asked
the Lord to engage him in the service of His servant Närada Muni. This is the
symptom of a pure devotee. One should serve the spiritual master first. It is not
that one should bypass the spiritual master and desire to serve the Supreme
Lord. This is not the principle for a Vaiñëava. Narottama däsa Öhäkura says:
täìdera caraëa sevi bhakta-sane väsa
janame janame haya, ei abhiläña
One should not be anxious to offer direct service to the Lord. Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu advised that one become a servant of the servant of the servant
of the Lord (gopé-bhartuù pada-kamalayor däsa-däsänudäsaù [Cc. Madhya
13.80]). This is the process for approaching the Supreme Lord. The first service
should be rendered to the spiritual master so that by his mercy one can
approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead to render service. While
teaching Rüpa Gosvämé, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu said, guru-kåñëa-prasäde
päya bhakti-latä-béja: [Cc. Madhya 19.151] one can achieve the seed of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
622
devotional service by the mercy of the guru, the spiritual master, and then by
the mercy of Kåñëa. This is the secret of success. First one should try to please
the spiritual master, and then one should attempt to please the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura also says, yasya
prasädäd bhagavat-prasädo **(20). One should not attempt to please the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by concoction. One must first be prepared to
serve the spiritual master, and when one is qualified he is automatically offered
the platform of direct service to the Lord. Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja
proposed that he engage in the service of Närada Muni. He never proposed
that he engage directly in the service of the Lord. This is the right conclusion.
Therefore he said, so 'haà kathaà nu visåje tava bhåtya-seväm: "How can I give
up the service of my spiritual master, who has favored me in such a way that I
am now able to see You face to face?" Prahläda Mahäräja prayed to the Lord
that he might continue to engage in the service of his spiritual master, Närada
Muni.
TEXT 29
MaTPa[a<ar+a<aMaNaNTa iPaTauvRDaê
MaNYae Sv>a*TYa‰izvaKYaMa*Ta& ivDaaTauMa( )
%É& Pa[Ga*ù YadvaecdSaiÜiDaTSau‚
STvaMaqìrae MadParae_vTau k&- hraiMa )) 29 ))
mat-präëa-rakñaëam ananta pitur vadhaç ca
manye sva-bhåtya-åñi-väkyam åtaà vidhätum
khaògaà pragåhya yad avocad asad-vidhitsus
tväm éçvaro mad-aparo 'vatu kaà harämi
SYNONYMS
mat-präëa-rakñaëam—saving my life; ananta—O unlimited one, reservoir of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
623
unlimited transcendental qualities; pituù—of my father; vadhaù ca—and
killing; manye—I consider; sva-bhåtya—of Your unalloyed servants;
åñi-väkyam—and the words of the great saint Närada; åtam—true;
vidhätum—to prove; khaògam—sword; pragåhya—taking in hand; yat—since;
avocat—my father said; asat-vidhitsuù—desiring to act very impiously;
tväm—You; éçvaraù—any supreme controller; mat-aparaù—other than me;
avatu—let him save; kam—your head; harämi—I shall now separate.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, O unlimited reservoir of transcendental qualities, You have killed
my father, Hiraëyakaçipu, and saved me from his sword. He had said very
angrily, "If there is any supreme controller other than me, let Him save you. I
shall now sever your head from your body." Therefore I think that both in
saving me and in killing him, You have acted just to prove true the words of
Your devotee. There is no other cause.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (9.29) the Lord says:
samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu
na me dveñyo 'sti na priyaù
ye bhajanti tu mäà bhaktyä
mayi te teñu cäpy aham
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is undoubtedly equal to everyone. He
has no friend and no enemy, but as one desires benefits from the Lord, the
Lord is very pleased to award them. The lower and higher positions of different
living entities are due to their desires, for the Lord, being equal to all, fulfills
everyone's desires. The killing of Hiraëyakaçipu and saving of Prahläda
Mahäräja also strictly followed this law of the supreme controller's activities.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
624
When Prahläda's mother, Hiraëyakaçipu's wife, Kayädhu, was under the
protection of Närada, she prayed for the protection of her son from the enemy,
and Närada Muni gave assurance that Prahläda Mahäräja would always be
saved from the enemy's hands. Thus when Hiraëyakaçipu was going to kill
Prahläda Mahäräja, the Lord saved Prahläda to fulfill His promise in
Bhagavad-gétä (kaunteya pratijänéhi na me bhaktaù praëaçyati [Bg. 9.31]) and to
prove true the words of Närada. The Lord can fulfill many purposes through
one action. Thus the killing of Hiraëyakaçipu and the saving of Prahläda were
enacted simultaneously to prove the truthfulness of the Lord's devotee and the
fidelity of the Lord Himself to His own purpose. The Lord acts only to satisfy
the desires of His devotees; otherwise He has nothing to do. As confirmed in
the Vedic language, na tasya käryaà karaëaà ca vidyate: the Lord has nothing
to do personally, for everything is done through His different potencies
(paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]). The Lord has
multifarious energies, through which everything is done. Thus when He
personally does something, it is only to satisfy His devotee. The Lord is known
as bhakta-vatsala because He very much favors His devoted servant.
TEXT 30
Wk-STvMaev JaGadeTaMaMauZYa YaTa( Tv‚
MaaÛNTaYaae" Pa*QaGavSYaiSa MaDYaTaê )
Sa*îa Gau<aVYaiTak-r& iNaJaMaaYaYaed&
NaaNaev TaErviSaTaSTadNauPa[iví" )) 30 ))
ekas tvam eva jagad etam amuñya yat tvam
ädy-antayoù påthag avasyasi madhyataç ca
såñövä guëa-vyatikaraà nija-mäyayedaà
näneva tair avasitas tad anupraviñöaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
625
SYNONYMS
ekaù—one; tvam—You; eva—only; jagat—the cosmic manifestation;
etam—this; amuñya—of that (the whole universe); yat—since; tvam—You;
ädi—in the beginning; antayoù—at the end; påthak—separately;
avasyasi—exist (as the cause); madhyataù ca—also in the middle (the duration
between the beginning and end); såñövä—creating; guëa-vyatikaram—the
transformation of the three modes of material nature; nija-mäyayä—by Your
own external energy; idam—this; nänä iva—like many varieties; taiù—by
them (the modes); avasitaù—experienced; tat—that; anupraviñöaù—entering
into.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You alone manifest Yourself as the entire cosmic
manifestation, for You existed before the creation, You exist after the
annihilation, and You are the maintainer between the beginning and the end.
All this is done by Your external energy through actions and reactions of the
three modes of material nature. Therefore whatever exists—externally and
internally—is You alone.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.35):
eko 'py asau racayituà jagad-aëòa-koöià
yac-chaktir asti jagad-aëòa-cayä yad-antaù
aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-sthaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who, by one of His plenary
portions, enters the existence of every universe and every atomic particle and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
626
thus unlimitedly manifests His infinite energy all over the material creation."
To create this cosmic manifestation, Govinda, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, expands His external energy and thus enters everything in the
universe, including the atomic particles. In this way He exists in the entire
cosmic manifestation. Therefore the activities of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in maintaining His devotees are transcendental, not material. He
exists in everything as the cause and effect, yet He is separate, existing beyond
this cosmic manifestation. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.4):
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
The entire cosmic manifestation is but an expansion of the Lord's energy;
everything rests in Him, yet He exists separately, beyond creation,
maintenance and annihilation. The varieties of creation are performed by His
external energy. Because the energy and energetic are one, everything is one
(sarvaà khalv idaà brahma). Therefore without Kåñëa, the Parabrahman,
nothing can exist. The difference between the material and spiritual worlds is
that His external energy is manifested in the material world, whereas His
spiritual energy exists in the spiritual world. Both energies, however, belong to
the Supreme Lord, and therefore in a higher sense there is no exhibition of
material energy because everything is spiritual energy. The energy in which
the Lord's all-pervasiveness is not realized is called material. Otherwise,
everything is spiritual. Therefore Prahläda prays, ekas tvam eva jagad etam:
"You are everything.
TEXT 31
Tv& va wd& SadSadqXa >ava&STaTaae_NYaae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
627
MaaYaa YadaTMaParbuiÖirYa& ùPaaQaaR )
Yad( YaSYa JaNMa iNaDaNa& iSQaiTarq+a<a& c
Tad( vETadev vSauk-al/vdiíTavaeR" )) 31 ))
tvaà vä idaà sad-asad éça bhaväàs tato 'nyo
mäyä yad ätma-para-buddhir iyaà hy apärthä
yad yasya janma nidhanaà sthitir ékñaëaà ca
tad vaitad eva vasukälavad añöi-tarvoù
SYNONYMS
tvam—You; vä—either; idam—the whole universe; sat-asat—consisting of
cause and effect (You are the cause, and Your energy is the effect); éça—O my
Lord, the supreme controller; bhavän—Yourself; tataù—from the universe;
anyaù—separately situated (the creation is made by the Lord, yet He remains
separate from the creation); mäyä—the energy that appears as a separate
creation; yat—of which; ätma-para-buddhiù—the conception of one's own and
another's; iyam—this; hi—indeed; apärthä—has no meaning (everything is
Your Lordship, and therefore there is no hope for understanding "my" and
"your"); yat—the substance from which; yasya—of which; janma—creation;
nidhanam—annihilation; sthitiù—maintenance; ékñaëam—manifestation;
ca—and; tat—that; vä—or; etat—this; eva—certainly; vasukäla-vat—like the
quality of being the earth and, beyond that, the subtle element of the earth
(smell); añöi-tarvoù—the seed (the cause) and the tree (the effect of the cause).
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, the entire cosmic
creation is caused by You, and the cosmic manifestation is an effect of Your
energy. Although the entire cosmos is but You alone, You keep Yourself aloof
from it. The conception of "mine and yours," is certainly a type of illusion
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
628
[mäyä] because everything is an emanation from You and is therefore not
different from You. Indeed, the cosmic manifestation is nondifferent from You,
and the annihilation is also caused by You. This relationship between Your
Lordship and the cosmos is illustrated by the example of the seed and the tree,
or the subtle cause and the gross manifestation.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (7.10) the Lord says:
béjaà mäà sarva-bhütänäà
viddhi pärtha sanätanam
"O son of Påthä, know that I am the original seed of all existences." In the
Vedic literature it is said, éçäväsyam idaà sarvam [Éço mantra 1], yato vä imäni
bhütäni jäyante and sarvaà khalv idaà brahma. All this Vedic information
indicates that there is only one God and that there is nothing else but Him.
The Mäyävädé philosophers explain this in their own way, but the Supreme
Personality of Godhead asserts the truth that He is everything and yet is
separate from everything. This is the philosophy of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu,
which is called acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(21). Everything is one, the Supreme
Lord, yet everything is separate from the Lord. This is the understanding of
oneness and difference.
The example given in this regard—vasukälavad añöi-tarvoù—is very easy to
understand. Everything exists in time, yet there are different phases of the
time factor—present, past and future. Present, past and future are one. Every
day we can experience the time factor as morning, noon and evening, and
although morning is different from noon, which is different from evening, all
of them taken together are one. The time factor is the energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but the Lord is separate from the time factor.
Everything is created, maintained and annihilated by time, but the Supreme
Lord, the Personality of Godhead, has no beginning and no end. He is nityaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
629
çäçvataù—eternal, permanent. Everything passes through time's phases of
present, past and future, yet the Lord is always the same. Thus there is
undoubtedly a difference between the Lord and the cosmic manifestation, but
actually they are not different. Accepting them to be different is called avidyä,
ignorance.
True oneness, however, is not equivalent to the conception of the
Mäyävädés. The true understanding is that the differences are manifested by
the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The seed is manifested as a
tree, which displays varieties in its trunk, branches, leaves, flowers and fruits.
Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has therefore sung, keçava tuyä jagata vicitra: "My
dear Lord, Your creation is full of varieties." The varieties are one and at the
same time different. This is the philosophy of acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(22).
The conclusion given in Brahma-saàhitä [Bs. 5.1] is this:
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
"Kåñëa, known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal,
blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is
the prime cause of all causes." Because the Lord is the supreme cause,
everything is one with Him, but when we consider varieties, we find that one
thing is different from another.
We may conclude, therefore, that there is no difference between one thing
and another, yet in varieties there are differences. In this regard, Madhväcärya
gives an example concerning a tree and a tree in fire. Both trees are the same,
but they look different because of the time factor. The time factor is under the
control of the Supreme Lord, and therefore the Supreme Lord is different from
time. An advanced devotee consequently does not distinguish between
happiness and distress. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.14.8):
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
630
tat te 'nukampäà susamékñamäëo
bhuïjäna evätma-kåtaà vipäkam
When a devotee is in a condition of so-called distress, he considers it a gift or
blessing from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When a devotee is always
thus situated in Kåñëa consciousness in any condition of life, he is described as
mukti-pade sa däya-bhäk, a perfect candidate for returning home, back to
Godhead. The word däya-bhäk means "inheritance." A son inherits the
property of his father. Similarly, when the devotee is fully Kåñëa conscious,
undisturbed by dualities, he is sure that he will return home, back to Godhead,
just as one inherits his father's property.
TEXT 32
NYaSYaedMaaTMaiNa JaGad( ivl/YaaMbuMaDYae
XaezeTMaNaa iNaJaSau%aNau>avae iNarqh" )
YaaeGaeNa Maqil/Tad*GaaTMaiNaPaqTaiNad]‚
STauYaeR iSQaTaae Na Tau TaMaae Na Gau<aa&ê Yau¿e )) 32 ))
nyasyedam ätmani jagad vilayämbu-madhye
çeñetmanä nija-sukhänubhavo niréhaù
yogena mélita-dåg-ätma-nipéta-nidras
turye sthito na tu tamo na guëäàç ca yuìkñe
SYNONYMS
nyasya—throwing; idam—this; ätmani—in Your own self; jagat—cosmic
manifestation created by You; vilaya-ambu-madhye—in the Causal Ocean, in
which everything is preserved in a state of reserved energy; çeñe—You act as if
sleeping; ätmanä—by Yourself; nija—Your own personal;
sukha-anubhavaù—experiencing the state of spiritual bliss; niréhaù—appearing
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
631
to be doing nothing; yogena—by the mystic power; mélita-dåk—the eyes
appearing closed; ätma—by a manifestation of Yourself; nipéta—prevented;
nidraù—whose sleeping; turye—in the transcendental stage; sthitaù—keeping
(Yourself); na—not; tu—but; tamaù—the material condition of sleeping;
na—nor; guëän—the material modes; ca—and; yuìkñe—do You engage
Yourself in.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, after the annihilation the
creative energy is kept in You, who appear to sleep with half-closed eyes.
Actually, however, You do not sleep like an ordinary human being, for You are
always in a transcendental stage, beyond the creation of the material world, and
You always feel transcendental bliss. As Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, You thus
remain in Your transcendental status, not touching material objects. Although
You appear to sleep, this sleeping is distinct from sleeping in ignorance.
PURPORT
As explained very clearly in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.47):
yaù käraëärëava-jale bhajati sma yoganidräm
ananta-jagad-aëòa-sa-roma-küpaù
ädhära-çaktim avalambya paräà sva-mürtià
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the primeval Lord Govinda, who lies down in the Causal Ocean in
His plenary portion as Mahä-Viñëu, with all the universes generating from the
pores of hair on His transcendental body, and who accepts the mystic slumber
of eternity." The ädi-puruña, the original Supreme Personality of
Godhead—Kåñëa, Govinda—expands Himself as Mahä-Viñëu. After the
annihilation of this cosmic manifestation, He keeps Himself in transcendental
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
632
bliss. The word yoga-nidräm is used in reference to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. One should understand that this nidrä, or sleep, is not like our nidrä
in the mode of ignorance. The Lord is always situated in transcendence. He is
sac-cid-änanda [Bs. 5.1]—eternally in bliss—and thus He is not disturbed by
sleep like ordinary human beings. It should be understood that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is in transcendental bliss in all stages. Çréla
Madhväcärya concisely states that the Lord is turya-sthitaù, always situated in
transcendence. In transcendence there is no such thing as
jägaraëa-nidrä-susupti—wakefulness, sleep and deep sleep.
The practice of yoga is similar to the yoga-nidrä of Mahä-Viñëu. Yogés are
advised to keep their eyes half closed, but this state is not at all one of sleep,
although imitation yogés, especially in the modern age, manifest their so-called
yoga by sleeping. In the çästra, yoga is described as dhyänävasthita, a state of
full meditation, but this is meditation upon the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Dhyänävasthita-tad-gatena manasä: the mind should always be
situated at the lotus feet of the Lord. Yoga practice does not mean sleeping.
The mind should always be actively fixed at the lotus feet of the Lord. Then
one's practice of yoga will be successful.
TEXT 33
TaSYaEv Tae vPauird& iNaJak-al/Xa¢-ya
SaÄaeidTaPa[k*-iTaDaMaR<a AaTMaGaU!Ma( )
AM>aSYaNaNTaXaYaNaad( ivrMaTSaMaaDae‚
NaaR>aer>aUTa( Svk-i<ak-av$=vNMahaBJaMa( )) 33 ))
tasyaiva te vapur idaà nija-käla-çaktyä
saïcodita-prakåti-dharmaëa ätma-güòham
ambhasy ananta-çayanäd viramat-samädher
näbher abhüt sva-kaëikä-vaöavan-mahäbjam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
633
SYNONYMS
tasya—of that Supreme Personality of Godhead; eva—certainly; te—of You;
vapuù—the cosmic body; idam—this (universe); nija-käla-çaktyä—by the
potent time factor; saïcodita—agitated; prakåti-dharmaëaù—of Him, by whom
the three guëas, or qualities of material nature; ätma-güòham—dormant in
Yourself; ambhasi—in the water known as the Causal Ocean;
ananta-çayanät—from the bed known as Ananta (another feature of
Yourself); viramat-samädheù—having awakened from the samädhi (yogic
trance); näbheù—from the navel; abhüt—appeared; sva-kaëikä—from the
seed; vaöa-vat—like the great banyan tree; mahä-abjam—the great lotus of the
worlds (has similarly grown).
TRANSLATION
This cosmic manifestation, the material world, is also Your body. This total
lump of matter is agitated by Your potent energy known as käla-çakti, and thus
the three modes of material nature are manifested. You awaken from the bed of
Çeña, Ananta, and from Your navel a small transcendental seed is generated. It
is from this seed that the lotus flower of the gigantic universe is manifested,
exactly as a banyan tree grows from a small seed.
PURPORT
The three different forms of Mahä-Viñëu-namely Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu,
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, who are the origin of creation
and maintenance—are gradually being described. From Mahä-Viñëu,
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu is generated, and from Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu,
Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu gradually expands. Thus Mahä-Viñëu is the original cause
of Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, and from Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu comes the lotus
flower from which Lord Brahmä is manifested. Thus the original cause of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
634
everything is Viñëu, and consequently the cosmic manifestation is not
different from Viñëu. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (10.8), wherein Kåñëa
says, ahaà sarvasya prabhavo mattaù sarvaà pravartate: "I am the source of all
spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from Me." Garbhodakaçäyé
Viñëu is an expansion of Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, who is an expansion of
Saìkarñaëa. In this way, Kåñëa is ultimately the cause of all causes
(sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1]). The conclusion is that both the material
world and spiritual world are considered to be the body of the Supreme Lord.
We can understand that the material body is caused by the spiritual body and
is therefore an expansion of the spiritual body. Thus when one takes up
spiritual activities, one's entire material body is spiritualized. Similarly, in this
material world, when the Kåñëa consciousness movement expands, the entire
material world becomes spiritualized. As long as we do not realize this, we live
in the material world, but when we are fully Kåñëa conscious we live not in the
material world but in the spiritual world.
TEXT 34
TaTSaM>av" k-ivrTaae_NYadPaXYaMaaNa‚
STva& bqJaMaaTMaiNa TaTa& Sa bihivRicNTYa )
NaaivNddBdXaTaMaPSau iNaMaÂMaaNaae
JaaTae_x(ku-re k-QaMauhaePal/>aeTa bqJaMa( )) 34 ))
tat-sambhavaù kavir ato 'nyad apaçyamänas
tväà béjam ätmani tataà sa bahir vicintya
nävindad abda-çatam apsu nimajjamäno
jäte 'ìkure katham uhopalabheta béjam
SYNONYMS
tat-sambhavaù—who was generated from that lotus flower; kaviù—he who can
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
635
understand the subtle cause of creation (Lord Brahmä); ataù—from that
(lotus); anyat—anything else; apaçyamänaù—not able to see; tväm—Your
Lordship; béjam—the cause of the lotus; ätmani—in himself;
tatam—expanded; saù—he (Lord Brahmä); bahiù vicintya—considering to be
external; na—not; avindat—understood (You); abda-çatam—for a hundred
years according to the demigods*(23); apsu—in the water;
nimajjamänaù—diving; jäte aìkure—when the seed fructifies and is
manifested as a creeper; katham—how; uha—O my Lord; upalabheta—one can
perceive; béjam—the seed that has already fructified.
TRANSLATION
From that great lotus flower, Brahmä was generated, but Brahmä certainly
could see nothing but the lotus. Therefore, thinking You to be outside, Lord
Brahmä dove into the water and attempted to find the source of the lotus for
one hundred years. He could find no trace of You, however, for when a seed
fructifies, the original seed cannot be seen.
PURPORT
This is the description of the cosmic manifestation. The development of the
cosmic manifestation is like the fructification of a seed. When cotton is
transformed into thread, the cotton is no longer visible, and when the thread
is woven into cloth, the thread is no longer visible. Similarly, it is perfectly
correct that when the seed that had generated from the navel of
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu became manifested as the cosmic creation, one could
no longer understand where the cause of the cosmic manifestation is. Modern
scientists have tried to explain the origin of creation by a chunk theory, but no
one can explain how such a chunk might have burst. The Vedic literature,
however, explains clearly that the total material energy was agitated by the
three modes of material nature because of the glance of the Supreme Lord. In
other words, in terms of the chunk theory, the bursting of the chunk was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
636
caused by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus one must accept the
supreme cause, Lord Viñëu, as the cause of all causes.
TEXT 35
Sa TvaTMaYaaeiNariTaiviSMaTa Aaié[Taae_BJa&
k-ale/Na Taqv]TaPaSaa PairéuÖ>aav" )
TvaMaaTMaNaqXa >auiv GaNDaiMavaiTaSaU+Ma&
>aUTaeiNd]YaaXaYaMaYae ivTaTa& ddXaR )) 35 ))
sa tv ätma-yonir ativismita äçrito 'bjaà
kälena tévra-tapasä pariçuddha-bhävaù
tväm ätmanéça bhuvi gandham ivätisükñmaà
bhütendriyäçayamaye vitataà dadarça
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Lord Brahmä); tu—but; ätma-yoniù—who is born without a mother
(directly begotten by the father, Lord Viñëu); ati-vismitaù—very much
surprised (not finding the source of his birth); äçritaù—situated on;
abjam—the lotus; kälena—in due course of time; tévra-tapasä—by severe
austerities; pariçuddha-bhävaù—being completely purified; tväm—You;
ätmani—in his body and existence; éça—O my Lord; bhuvi—within the earth;
gandham—aroma; iva—like; ati-sükñmam—very subtle;
bhüta-indriya—composed of elements and senses; äçaya-maye—and that filled
with desires (the mind); vitatam—spread out; dadarça—found.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, who is celebrated as ätma-yoni, having been born without a
mother, was struck with wonder. Thus he took shelter of the lotus flower, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
637
when he had been purified after undergoing severe austerities for many
hundreds of years, he could see that the cause of all causes, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, was spread throughout his own body and senses, just as
aroma, although very subtle, is perceived in the earth.
PURPORT
Here the statement of self-realization ahaà brahmäsmi(24), which is
interpreted by the Mäyäväda philosophy to mean "I am the Supreme Lord," is
explained. The Supreme Lord is the original seed of everything (janmädy asya
yataù [SB 1.1.1]. ahaà sarvasya prabhavo mattaù sarvaà pravartate [Bg. 10.8]).
Thus the Supreme Lord extends everywhere, even throughout our bodies,
because our bodies are made of material energy, which is the Lord's separated
energy. One should realize that since the Supreme Lord spreads throughout
one's body and since the individual soul is a part of the Supreme Lord,
everything is Brahman (sarvaà khalv idaà brahma). This realization was
achieved by Lord Brahmä after he was purified, and it is possible for everyone.
When one is completely in knowledge of ahaà brahmäsmi(25), he thinks, "I am
part of the Supreme Lord, my body is made of His material energy, and
therefore I have no separate existence. Yet although the Supreme Lord is
spread everywhere, He is different from me." This is the philosophy of
acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(26). An example given in this regard is that of the
aroma within the earth. In the earth there are aromas and colors, but one
cannot see them. Actually we find that when flowers grow from the earth,
they appear with different colors and aromas, which they have certainly
gathered from the earth, although in the earth we cannot see them. Similarly,
the Supreme Lord, by His different energies, spreads throughout one's body
and soul, although we cannot see Him. An intelligent man, however, can see
the Supreme Lord existing everywhere.
Aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham: [Bs. 5.35] the Lord is within the
universe and within the atom by His different energies. This is the real vision
of the Supreme Lord for the intelligent man. Brahmä, the first created being,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
638
became the most intelligent person by his tapasya, austerity, and thus he came
to this realization. We must therefore take all knowledge from Brahmä, who
became perfect by his tapasya.
TEXT 36
Wv& SahóvdNaax(iga]iXar"k-raeå‚
NaaSaaÛk-<aRNaYaNaa>ar<aaYauDaa!yMa( )
MaaYaaMaYa& SaduPal/i+aTaSaiàveXa&
d*îa MahaPauåzMaaPa Maud& ivirÄ" )) 36 ))
evaà sahasra-vadanäìghri-çiraù-karorunäsädya-
karëa-nayanäbharaëäyudhäòhyam
mäyämayaà sad-upalakñita-sanniveçaà
dåñövä mahä-puruñam äpa mudaà viriïcaù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; sahasra—thousands and thousands; vadana—faces;
aìghri—feet; çiraù—heads; kara—hands; uru—thighs; näsa-ädya—noses, etc.;
karëa—ears; nayana—eyes; äbharaëa—varieties of ornaments;
äyudha—varieties of weapons; äòhyam—endowed with; mäyä-mayam—all
demonstrated by unlimited potency; sat-upalakñita—appearing in different
symptoms; sanniveçam—combined together; dåñövä—seeing;
mahä-puruñam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; äpa—achieved;
mudam—transcendental bliss; viriïcaù—Lord Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä could then see You possessing thousands and thousands of
faces, feet, heads, hands, thighs, noses, ears and eyes. You were very nicely
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
639
dressed, being decorated and bedecked with varieties of ornaments and weapons.
Seeing You in the form of Lord Viñëu, Your symptoms and form being
transcendental, Your legs extending from the lower planets, Lord Brahmä
achieved transcendental bliss.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä, being completely pure, could see the original form of the
Lord as Viñëu, having many thousands of faces and forms. This process is
called self-realization. Genuine self-realization consists not of perceiving the
impersonal effulgence of the Lord, but seeing face to face the transcendental
form of the Lord. As distinctly mentioned here, Lord Brahmä saw the Supreme
Lord as mahä-puruña, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Arjuna also saw
Kåñëa in this same way. Therefore he told the Lord, paraà brahma paraà
dhäma pavitraà paramaà bhavän puruñaà çäçvataà divyam: [Bg. 10.12] "You
are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode and purifier, the
Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person." The Lord is parama-puruña, the
supreme form. Puruñaà çäçvatam: He is everlastingly the supreme enjoyer. It is
not that the impersonal Brahman assumes a form; on the contrary, the
impersonal Brahman effulgence is an emanation from the supreme form of the
Lord. Upon being purified, Brahmä could see the supreme form of the Lord.
The impersonal Brahman cannot have heads, noses, ears, hands and legs. This
is not possible, for these are attributes of the Lord's form.
The word mäyämayam means "spiritual knowledge." This is explained by
Madhväcärya. Mäyämayaà jïäna-svarüpam. The word mäyämayam, describing
the Lord's form, should not be taken to mean illusion. Rather, the Lord's form
is factual, and seeing this form is the result of perfect knowledge. This is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä: bahünäà janmanäm ante jïänavän mäà
prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. The word jïänavän refers to one who is perfectly in
knowledge. Such a person can see the Personality of Godhead, and therefore
he surrenders unto the Lord. The Lord's being symptomized by a face, nose,
ears and so on is eternal. Without such a form, no one can be blissful. The
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
640
Lord, however, is sac-cid-änanda-vigraha, as stated in the çästra (éçvaraù
paramaù kåñëaù sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù [Bs. 5.1]). When one is in perfect
transcendental bliss, he can see the Lord's supreme form (vigraha). In this
regard, Çréla Madhväcärya says:
gandhäkhyä devatä yadvat
påthivéà vyäpya tiñöhati
evaà vyäptaà jagad viñëuà
brahmätma-sthaà dadarça ha
Lord Brahmä saw that as aromas and colors spread throughout the earth, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead pervades the cosmic manifestation in a subtle
form.
TEXT 37
TaSMaE >avaNhYaiXarSTaNauv& ih ib>a]d(
vedd]uhaviTabl/aE MaDaukE-$=>aa:YaaE )
hTvaNaYaC^]uiTaGa<aa&ê rJaSTaMaê
Satv& Tav iPa[YaTaMaa& TaNauMaaMaNaiNTa )) 37 ))
tasmai bhavän haya-çiras tanuvaà hi bibhrad
veda-druhäv atibalau madhu-kaiöabhäkhyau
hatvänayac chruti-gaëäàç ca rajas tamaç ca
sattvaà tava priyatamäà tanum ämananti
SYNONYMS
tasmai—unto Lord Brahmä; bhavän—Your Lordship; haya-çiraù—having the
head and neck of a horse; tanuvam—the incarnation; hi—indeed;
bibhrat—accepting; veda-druhau—two demons who were against the Vedic
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
641
principles; ati-balau—extremely powerful; madhu-kaiöabha-äkhyau—known as
Madhu and Kaiöabha; hatvä—killing; anayat—delivered; çruti-gaëän—all the
different Vedas (Säma, Yajur, Åg and Atharva); ca—and; rajaù tamaù ca—by
representing the modes of passion and ignorance; sattvam—pure
transcendental goodness; tava—Your; priya-tamäm—most dear; tanum—form
(as Hayagréva); ämananti—they honor.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, when You appeared as Hayagréva, with the head of a horse,
You killed two demons known as Madhu and Kaiöabha, who were full of the
modes of passion and ignorance. Then You delivered the Vedic knowledge to
Lord Brahmä. For this reason, all the great saints accept Your forms as
transcendental, untinged by material qualities.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead in His transcendental form is always
ready to give protection to His devotees. As mentioned herein, the Lord in the
form of Hayagréva killed two demons named Madhu and Kaiöabha when they
attacked Lord Brahmä. Modern demons think that there was no life in the
beginning of creation, but from Çrémad-Bhägavatam we understand that the
first living creature created by the Supreme Personality of Godhead was Lord
Brahmä, who is full of Vedic understanding. Unfortunately, those entrusted
with distributing Vedic knowledge, such as the devotees engaged in spreading
Kåñëa consciousness, may sometimes be attacked by demons, but they must rest
assured that demoniac attacks will not be able to harm them, for the Lord is
always prepared to give them protection. The Vedas provide the knowledge by
which we can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead (vedaiç ca
sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15]). The devotees of the Lord are always ready
to spread knowledge by which one may understand the Lord through Kåñëa
consciousness, but the demons, being unable to understand the Supreme Lord,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
642
are full of ignorance and passion. Thus the Lord, whose form is transcendental,
is always ready to kill the demons. By culturing the mode of goodness, one can
understand the position of the transcendental Lord and how the Lord is always
prepared to remove all obstacles on the path of understanding Him.
In summary, whenever the Lord incarnates, He appears in His original
transcendental form. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.7):
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bhärata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend
Myself." It is simply foolish to think of the Lord as being originally impersonal
but accepting a material body when He appears as a personal incarnation.
Whenever the Lord appears, He appears in His original transcendental form,
which is spiritual and blissful. But unintelligent men, such as the Mäyävädés,
cannot understand the transcendental form of the Lord, and therefore the
Lord chastises them by saying, avajänanti mäà müòhä mänuñéà tanum äçritam:
[Bg. 9.11] "Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form." Whenever the
Lord appears, whether as a fish, a tortoise, a hog or any other form, one should
understand that He maintains His transcendental position and that His only
business, as stated here, is hatvä—to kill the demons. The Lord appears in
order to protect the devotees and kill the demons (pariträëäya sädhünäà
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm [Bg. 4.8]). Since the demons are always ready to oppose
Vedic civilization, they are sure to be killed by the transcendental form of the
Lord.
TEXT 38
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
643
wTQa& Na*iTaYaRGa*izdev‡zavTaarE‚
l/aeRk-aNa( iv>aavYaiSa h&iSa JaGaTPa[TaqPaaNa( )
DaMa| MahaPauåz PaaiSa YauGaaNauv*ta&
^à" k-l/aE Yad>aviñYauGaae_Qa Sa TvMa( )) 38 ))
itthaà nå-tiryag-åñi-deva-jhañävatärair
lokän vibhävayasi haàsi jagat pratépän
dharmaà mahä-puruña päsi yugänuvåttaà
channaù kalau yad abhavas tri-yugo 'tha sa tvam
SYNONYMS
ittham—in this way; nå—like a human being (such as Lord Kåñëa and Lord
Rämacandra); tiryak—like animals (such as the boar); åñi—as a great saint
(Paraçuräma); deva—as demigods; jhaña—as an aquatic (such as the fish and
tortoise); avatäraiù—by such different incarnations; lokän—all the different
planetary systems; vibhävayasi—You protect; haàsi—You (sometimes) kill;
jagat pratépän—persons who have simply created trouble in this world;
dharmam—the principles of religion; mahä-puruña—O great personality;
päsi—You protect; yuga-anuvåttam—according to the different millenniums;
channaù—covered; kalau—in the age of Kali; yat—since; abhavaù—have been
(and will be in the future); tri-yugaù—named Triyuga; atha—therefore;
saù—the same personality; tvam—You.
TRANSLATION
In this way, my Lord, You appear in various incarnations as a human being,
an animal, a great saint, a demigod, a fish or a tortoise, thus maintaining the
entire creation in different planetary systems and killing the demoniac
principles. According to the age, O my Lord, You protect the principles of
religion. In the age of Kali, however, You do not assert Yourself as the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
644
Personality of Godhead, and therefore You are known as Triyuga, or the Lord
who appears in three yugas.
PURPORT
As the Lord appeared just to maintain Lord Brahmä from the attack of
Madhu and Kaiöabha, He also appeared to protect the great devotee Prahläda
Mahäräja. Similarly, Lord Caitanya appeared in order to protect the fallen
souls of Kali-yuga. There are four yugas, or millenniums—Satya, Tretä,
Dväpara and Kali. In all the yugas but Kali-yuga, the Lord appears in various
incarnations and asserts Himself as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but
although Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, who appears in Kali-yuga, is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, He never asserted Himself as such. On the
contrary, whenever Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu was addressed as being as good
as Kåñëa, He blocked His ears with His hands, denying His identity with
Kåñëa, because He was playing the part of a devotee. Lord Caitanya knew that
in Kali-yuga there would be many bogus incarnations pretending to be God,
and therefore He avoided asserting Himself as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu is accepted as the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, however, in many Vedic literatures, especially in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.5.32):
kåñëa-varëaà tviñäkåñëaà
säìgopäìgästra-pärñadam
yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair
yajanti hi sumedhasaù
In Kali-yuga, intelligent men worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
the form of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, who is always accompanied by His
associates such as Nityänanda, Advaita, Gadädhara and Çréväsa. The entire
Kåñëa consciousness movement is based on the principles of the saìkértana
movement inaugurated by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Therefore one who tries
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
645
to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead through the medium of
the saìkértana movement knows everything perfectly. He is sumedhas, a person
with substantial intelligence.
TEXT 39
NaETaNMaNaSTav k-QaaSau ivku-<#=NaaQa
SaMPa[qYaTae duirTaduíMaSaaDau Taqv]Ma( )
k-aMaaTaur& hzRXaaek->aYaEz<aaTa|
TaiSMaNk-Qa& Tav GaiTa& ivMa*XaaiMa dqNa" )) 39 ))
naitan manas tava kathäsu vikuëöha-nätha
sampréyate durita-duñöam asädhu tévram
kämäturaà harña-çoka-bhayaiñaëärtaà
tasmin kathaà tava gatià vimåçämi dénaù
SYNONYMS
na—certainly not; etat—this; manaù—mind; tava—Your; kathäsu—in
transcendental topics; vikuëöha-nätha—O Lord of Vaikuëöha, where there is
no anxiety; sampréyate—is pacified or interested in; durita—by sinful
activities; duñöam—polluted; asädhu—dishonest; tévram—very difficult to
control; käma-äturam—always full of different desires and lusty propensities;
harña-çoka—sometimes by jubilation and sometimes by distress; bhaya—and
sometimes by fear; eñaëä—and by desiring; ärtam—distressed; tasmin—in that
mental status; katham—how; tava—Your; gatim—transcendental activities;
vimåçämi—I shall consider and try to understand; dénaù—who am most fallen
and poor.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
646
My dear Lord of the Vaikuëöha planets, where there is no anxiety, my mind
is extremely sinful and lusty, being sometimes so-called happy and sometimes
so-called distressed. My mind is full of lamentation and fear, and it always seeks
more and more money. Thus it has become most polluted and is never satisfied
in topics concerning You. I am therefore most fallen and poor. In such a status
of life, how shall I be able to discuss Your activities?
PURPORT
Here Prahläda Mahäräja represents himself as a common man, although he
actually has nothing to do with this material world. Prahläda is always situated
in the Vaikuëöha planets of the spiritual world, but on behalf of the fallen
souls he asks how, when his mind is always disturbed by material things, he can
discuss the transcendental position of the Lord. The mind becomes sinful
because we are always engaged in sinful activities. Anything not connected
with Kåñëa consciousness should be understood to be sinful. Indeed, Kåñëa
demands in Bhagavad-gétä (18.66):
sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù
"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver
you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." As soon as one surrenders unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, Kåñëa immediately relieves one of
the reactions of sinful activities. Therefore one who is not surrendered to the
lotus feet of the Lord should be understood to be sinful, foolish, degraded
among men and bereft of all real knowledge because of atheistic propensities.
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (7.15):
na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù
prapadyante narädhamäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
647
mäyayäpahåta-jïänä
äsuraà bhävam äçritäù
Therefore, especially in this age of Kali, the mind must be cleansed, and this is
possible only by the chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra.
Ceto-darpaëa-märjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. In this age, the process of chanting
the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra is the only method by which to cleanse the sinful
mind. When the mind is completely cleansed of all sinful reactions, one can
then understand his duty in the human form of life. The Kåñëa consciousness
movement is meant to educate sinful men so that they may become pious
simply by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra.
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
To cleanse the heart so that one may become sober and wise in this age of Kali,
there is no value to any method other than the chanting of the Hare Kåñëa
mahä-mantra. Prahläda Mahäräja has confirmed this process in previous
verses. Tvad-vérya-gäyana-mahämåta-magna-cittaù [SB 7.9.43]. Prahläda
further confirms that if one's mind is always absorbed in thought of Kåñëa, that
very qualification will purify one and keep one purified always. To understand
the Lord and His activities, one must free his mind from all contamination of
the material world, and this one can achieve by simply chanting the Lord's
holy name. Thus one becomes free from all material bondage.
TEXT 40
iJaûEk-Taae_CYauTa ivk-zRiTa MaaivTa*áa
iXaénae_NYaTaSTvGaudr& é[v<a& ku-TaiêTa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
648
ga]a<aae_NYaTaêPal/d*k(- Kv c k-MaRXai¢-‚
bRûy" SaPaTNYa wv GaehPaiTa& lu/NaiNTa )) 40 ))
jihvaikato 'cyuta vikarñati mävitåptä
çiçno 'nyatas tvag-udaraà çravaëaà kutaçcit
ghräëo 'nyataç capala-dåk kva ca karma-çaktir
bahvyaù sapatnya iva geha-patià lunanti
SYNONYMS
jihvä—the tongue; ekataù—to one side; acyuta—O my infallible Lord;
vikarñati—attracts; mä—me; avitåptä—not being satisfied; çiçnaù—the
genitals; anyataù—to another side; tvak—the skin (for touching a soft thing);
udaram—the belly (for various types of food); çravaëam—the ear (for hearing
some sweet music); kutaçcit—to some other side; ghräëaù—the nose (for
smelling); anyataù—to still another side; capala-dåk—the restless eyesight; kva
ca—somewhere; karma-çaktiù—the active senses; bahvyaù—many;
sa-patnyaù—co-wives; iva—like; geha-patim—a householder;
lunanti—annihilate.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, O infallible one, my position is like that of a person who has
many wives, all trying to attract him in their own way. For example, the tongue
is attracted to palatable dishes, the genitals to sex with an attractive woman, and
the sense of touch to contact with soft things. The belly, although filled, still
wants to eat more, and the ear, not attempting to hear about You, is generally
attracted to cinema songs. The sense of smell is attracted to yet another side,
the restless eyes are attracted to scenes of sense gratification, and the active
senses are attracted elsewhere. In this way I am certainly embarrassed.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
649
PURPORT
The human form of life is meant for God realization, but this process, which
begins with çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23]—hearing and chanting of
the holy name of the Lord—is disturbed as long as our senses are materially
attracted. Therefore devotional service means purifying the senses. In the
conditioned state our senses are covered by material sense gratification, and as
long as one is not trained in purifying the senses, one cannot become a
devotee. In our Kåñëa consciousness movement, therefore, we advise from the
very beginning that one restrict the activities of the senses, especially the
tongue, which is described by Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura as most greedy and
unconquerable. To stop this attraction of the tongue, one is authoritatively
advised not to accept meat or similar uneatable things nor to allow the tongue
to hanker to drink or smoke. Even the drinking of tea and coffee is not
permitted. Similarly, the genitals must be restricted from illicit sex. Without
such restraint of the senses, one cannot make advancement in Kåñëa
consciousness. The only method of controlling the senses is to chant and hear
the holy name of the Lord; otherwise, one will always be disturbed, as a
householder with more than one wife would be disturbed by them for sense
gratification.
TEXT 41
Wv& Svk-MaRPaiTaTa& >avvETar<Yaa‚
MaNYaaeNYaJaNMaMar<aaXaNa>aqTa>aqTaMa( )
PaXYaÅNa& SvParivGa]hvErMaE}a&
hNTaeiTa Paarcr PaqPa*ih MaU!MaÛ )) 41 ))
evaà sva-karma-patitaà bhava-vaitaraëyäm
anyonya-janma-maraëäçana-bhéta-bhétam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
650
paçyaï janaà sva-para-vigraha-vaira-maitraà
hanteti päracara pépåhi müòham adya
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; sva-karma-patitam—fallen because of the reactions of one's
own material activities; bhava—compared to the world of nescience (birth,
death, old age and disease); vaitaraëyäm—in the river known as Vaitaraëé
(which lies in front of the doorway of Yamaräja, the superintendent of death);
anyaù anya—one after another; janma—birth; maraëa—death;
äçana—different types of eating; bhéta-bhétam—being exceedingly afraid;
paçyan—seeing; janam—the living entity; sva—one's own; para—of others;
vigraha—in the body; vaira-maitram—considering friendship and enmity;
hanta—alas; iti—in this way; päracara—O You, who are on the other side of
the river of death; pépåhi—kindly save us all (from this dangerous condition);
müòham—we are all foolish, bereft of spiritual knowledge; adya—today
(because You are personally present here).
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You are always transcendentally situated on the other side of
the river of death, but because of the reactions of our own activities, we are
suffering on this side. Indeed, we have fallen into this river and are repeatedly
suffering the pains of birth and death and eating horrible things. Now kindly
look upon us—not only upon me but also upon all others who are
suffering—and by Your causeless mercy and compassion, deliver us and
maintain us.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja, a pure Vaiñëava, prays to the Lord not only for himself
but for all other suffering living entities. There are two classes of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
651
Vaiñëavas—the bhajanänandés and goñöhy-änandés. The bhajanänandés worship
the Lord only for their own personal benefit, but the goñöhy-änandés try to
elevate all others to Kåñëa consciousness so that they may be saved. Fools who
cannot perceive repeated birth and death and the other miseries of
materialistic life cannot be sure of what will happen to them in their next
birth. Indeed, these foolish, materially contaminated rascals have
manufactured an irresponsible way of life that does not consider the next life.
They do not know that according to one's own activities, one receives a body
selected from 8,400,000 species. These rascals have been described in
Bhagavad-gétä as duñkåtino müòhäù. Nondevotees, those who are not Kåñëa
conscious, must engage in sinful activities, and therefore they are
müòhas—fools and rascals. They are such fools that they do not know what
will happen to them in their next life. Although they see varieties of living
creatures eating abominable things—pigs eating stool, crocodiles eating all
kinds of flesh, and so on—they do not realize that they themselves, because of
their practice of eating all kinds of nonsense in this life, will be destined to eat
the most abominable things in their next life. A Vaiñëava is always afraid of
such an abominable life, and to free himself from such horrible conditions, he
engages himself in the devotional service of the Lord. The Lord is
compassionate to them, and therefore He appears for their benefit.
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bhärata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend
Myself." (Bg. 4.7) The Lord is always ready to help the fallen souls, but because
they are fools and rascals, they do not take to Kåñëa consciousness and abide
by the instructions of Kåñëa. Therefore although Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is
personally the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, He comes as a devotee to preach the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
652
Kåñëa consciousness movement. Yäre dekha, täre kaha 'kåñëa'-upadeça. One
must therefore become a sincere servant of Kåñëa. Ämära äjïäya guru haïä
tära' ei deça (Cc. Madhya 7.128). One should become a guru and spread Kåñëa
consciousness all over the world, simply by preaching the teachings of
Bhagavad-gétä.
TEXT 42
k-ae Nv}a Tae_i%l/Gaurae >aGavNPa[YaaSa
otaar<ae_SYa >avSaM>avl/aePaheTaae" )
MaU!ezu vE MahdNauGa]h AaTaRbNDaae
ik&- TaeNa Tae iPa[YaJaNaaNaNauSaevTaa& Na" )) 42 ))
ko nv atra te 'khila-guro bhagavan prayäsa
uttäraëe 'sya bhava-sambhava-lopa-hetoù
müòheñu vai mahad-anugraha ärta-bandho
kià tena te priya-janän anusevatäà naù
SYNONYMS
kaù—what is that; nu—indeed; atra—in this matter; te—of Your Lordship;
akhila-guro—O supreme spiritual master of the entire creation; bhagavan—O
Supreme Lord, O Personality of Godhead; prayäsaù—endeavor; uttäraëe—for
the deliverance of these fallen souls; asya—of this; bhava-sambhava—of
creation and maintenance; lopa—and of annihilation; hetoù—of the cause;
müòheñu—unto the foolish persons rotting in this material world; vai—indeed;
mahat-anugrahaù—compassion by the Supreme; ärta-bandho—O friend of the
suffering living entities; kim—what is the difficulty; tena—with that; te—of
Your Lordship; priya-janän—the dear persons (devotees); anusevatäm—of
those always engaged in serving; naù—like us (who are so engaged).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
653
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, original spiritual master of
the entire world, what is the difficulty for You, who manage the affairs of the
universe, in delivering the fallen souls engaged in Your devotional service? You
are the friend of all suffering humanity, and for great personalities it is
necessary to show mercy to the foolish. Therefore I think that You will show
Your causeless mercy to persons like us, who engage in Your service.
PURPORT
Here the words priya janän anusevatäà naù indicate that the Supreme Lord,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is very favorable to devotees who act
according to the instructions of His own pure devotee. In other words, one
must become the servant of the servant of the servant of the Lord. If one
wants to become the servant of the Lord directly, this is not as fruitful as
engaging in the service of the Lord's servant. This is the direction of Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu, who shows us the way to become gopé-bhartuù
pada-kamalayor däsa-däsänudäsaù [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. One should not be
proud of becoming directly the servant of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Rather, one must seek a pure devotee, a servant of the Lord, and
engage oneself in the service of such a servant. The more one becomes the
servant of the servant, the more one becomes perfect in devotional service.
This is also the injunction of Bhagavad-gétä: evaà paramparä-präptam imaà
räjarñayo viduù [Bg. 4.2]. One can understand the science of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead simply by the paramparä system. In this regard, Çréla
Narottama däsa Öhäkura says, täìdera caraëa sevi bhakta-sane väsa: "Let me
serve the lotus feet of the devotees of the Lord, and let me live with devotees."
Janame janame haya, ei abhiläña. Following Narottama däsa Öhäkura, one
should aspire to be a servant of the Lord's servant, life after life. Çréla
Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura also sings, tumi ta' öhäkura, tomära kukura, baliyä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
654
jänaha more: "O my Lord, O Vaiñëava, please consider me your dog." One must
become the dog of a Vaiñëava, a pure devotee, for a pure devotee can deliver
Kåñëa without difficulty. Kåñëa se tomära, kåñëa dite pära. Kåñëa is the property
of His pure devotee, and if we take shelter of a pure devotee, he can deliver
Kåñëa very easily. Prahläda wants to engage in the service of a devotee, and
therefore he prays to Kåñëa, "My dear Lord, kindly give me the shelter of Your
very dear devotee so that I may engage in his service and You may then be
pleased." Mad-bhakta-püjäbhyadhikä (SB 11.19.21). The Lord says, "Engaging in
the service of My devotee is better than trying to engage in My devotional
service."
Another significant point in this verse is that by devotional service
Prahläda Mahäräja does not want to benefit alone. Rather, he prays to the
Lord that all of us fallen souls in this material world may, by the grace of the
Lord, engage in the service of His servant and thus be delivered. The grace of
the Lord is not at all difficult for the Lord to bestow, and thus Prahläda
Mahäräja wants to save the whole world by spreading Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 43
NaEvaeiÜJae Par durTYaYavETar<Yaa‚
STvÜqYaRGaaYaNaMahaMa*TaMaGanicta" )
Xaaece TaTaae ivMau%ceTaSa wiNd]YaaQaR‚
MaaYaaSau%aYa >arMauÜhTaae ivMaU!aNa( )) 43 ))
naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraëyäs
tvad-vérya-gäyana-mahämåta-magna-cittaù
çoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyärthamäyä-
sukhäya bharam udvahato vimüòhän
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
655
na—not; eva—certainly; udvije—I am disturbed or afraid; para—O Supreme;
duratyaya—insurmountable or very difficult to cross; vaitaraëyäù—of the
Vaitaraëé, the river of the material world; tvat-vérya—of Your Lordship's
glories and activities; gäyana—from chanting or distributing; mahä-amåta—in
the great ocean of nectarean spiritual bliss; magna-cittaù—whose
consciousness is absorbed; çoce—I am simply lamenting; tataù—from that;
vimukha-cetasaù—the fools and rascals who are bereft of Kåñëa consciousness;
indriya-artha—in sense gratification; mäyä-sukhäya—for temporary, illusory
happiness; bharam—the false burden or responsibility (of maintaining one's
family, society and nation and elaborate arrangements for that purpose);
udvahataù—who are lifting (by making grand plans for this arrangement);
vimüòhän—although all of them are nothing but fools and rascals (I am
thinking of them also).
TRANSLATION
O best of the great personalities, I am not at all afraid of material existence,
for wherever I stay I am fully absorbed in thoughts of Your glories and
activities. My concern is only for the fools and rascals who are making elaborate
plans for material happiness and maintaining their families, societies and
countries. I am simply concerned with love for them.
PURPORT
Throughout the entire world, everyone is making big, big plans to adjust the
miseries of the material world, and this is true at present, in the past and in the
future. Nonetheless, although they make elaborate political, social and cultural
plans, they have all been described herein as vimüòha—fools. The material
world has been described in Bhagavad-gétä as duùkhälayam açäçvatam [Bg.
8.15]—temporary and miserable—but these fools are trying to turn the
material world into sukhälayam, a place of happiness, not knowing how
everything acts by the arrangement of material nature, which works in her
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
656
own way.
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities that are in actuality carried
out by nature." (Bg. 3.27)
There is a plan for material nature, personally known as Durgä, to punish
the demons. Although the asuras, the godless demons, struggle for existence,
they are directly attacked by the goddess Durgä, who is well equipped with ten
hands with different types of weapons to punish them. She is carried by her
lion carrier, or the modes of passion and ignorance. Everyone struggles very
hard to fight through the modes of passion and ignorance and conquer
material nature, but at the end everyone is vanquished by nature's laws.
There is a river known as Vaitaraëé between the material and spiritual
worlds, and one must cross this river to reach the other side, or the spiritual
world. This is an extremely difficult task. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä
(7.14), daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé mama mäyä duratyayä: "This divine energy of
Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to
overcome." The same word duratyaya, meaning "very difficult," is used here.
Therefore one cannot surpass the stringent laws of material nature except by
the mercy of the Supreme Lord. Nonetheless, although all materialists are
baffled in their plans, they try again and again to become happy in this
material world. Therefore they have been described as vimüòha—first-class
fools. As for Prahläda Mahäräja, he was not at all unhappy, for although he
was in the material world, he was full of Kåñëa consciousness. Those who are
Kåñëa conscious, trying to serve the Lord, are not unhappy, whereas one who
has no assets in Kåñëa consciousness and is struggling for existence is not only
foolish but extremely unhappy also. Prahläda Mahäräja was happy and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
657
unhappy simultaneously. He felt happiness and transcendental bliss because of
his being Kåñëa conscious, yet he felt great unhappiness for the fools and
rascals who make elaborate plans to be happy in this material world.
TEXT 44
Pa[aYae<a dev MauNaYa" SvivMaui¢-k-aMaa
MaaENa& criNTa ivJaNae Na ParaQaRiNaïa" )
NaETaaiNvhaYa k*-Pa<aaiNvMauMau+a Wk-ae
NaaNYa& TvdSYa Xar<a& >a]MaTaae_NauPaXYae )) 44 ))
präyeëa deva munayaù sva-vimukti-kämä
maunaà caranti vijane na parärtha-niñöhäù
naitän vihäya kåpaëän vimumukña eko
nänyaà tvad asya çaraëaà bhramato 'nupaçye
SYNONYMS
präyeëa—generally, in almost all cases; deva—O my Lord; munayaù—the great
saintly persons; sva—personal, own; vimukti-kämäù—ambitious for liberation
from this material world; maunam—silently; caranti—they wander (in places
like the Himalayan forests, where they have no touch with the activities of the
materialists); vijane—in solitary places; na—not;
para-artha-niñöhäù—interested in working for others by giving them the
benefit of the Kåñëa consciousness movement, by enlightening them with
Kåñëa consciousness; na—not; etän—these; vihäya—leaving aside;
kåpaëän—fools and rascals (engaged in materialistic activity who do not know
the benefit of the human form of life); vimumukñe—I desire to be liberated and
to return home, back to Godhead; ekaù—alone; na—not; anyam—other;
tvat—but for You; asya—of this; çaraëam—shelter; bhramataù—of the living
entity rotating and wandering throughout the material universes;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
658
anupaçye—do I see.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord Nåsiàhadeva, I see that there are many saintly persons
indeed, but they are interested only in their own deliverance. Not caring for the
big cities and towns, they go to the Himalayas or the forest to meditate with
vows of silence [mauna-vrata]. They are not interested in delivering others. As
for me, however, I do not wish to be liberated alone, leaving aside all these poor
fools and rascals. I know that without Kåñëa consciousness, without taking
shelter of Your lotus feet, one cannot be happy. Therefore I wish to bring them
back to shelter at Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
This is the decision of the Vaiñëava, the pure devotee of the Lord. For
himself he has no problems, even if he has to stay in this material world,
because his only business is to remain in Kåñëa consciousness. The Kåñëa
conscious person can go even to hell and still be happy. Therefore Prahläda
Mahäräja said, naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraëyäù: "O best of the great
personalities, I am not at all afraid of material existence." The pure devotee is
never unhappy in any condition of life. This is confirmed in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.17.28):
näräyaëa-paräù sarve
na kutaçcana bibhyati
svargäpavarga-narakeñv
api tulyärtha-darçinaù
"Devotees solely engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Näräyaëa, never fear any condition of life. For them the heavenly
planets, liberation and the hellish planets are all the same, for such devotees
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
659
are interested only in the service of the Lord."
For a devotee, being situated in the heavenly planets and being in the
hellish planets are equal, for a devotee lives neither in heaven nor in hell but
with Kåñëa in the spiritual world. The secret of success for the devotee is not
understood by the karmés and jïänés. Karmés therefore try to be happy by
material adjustment, and jïänés want to be happy by becoming one with the
Supreme. The devotee has no such interest. He is not interested in so-called
meditation in the Himalayas or the forest. Rather, his interest is in the busiest
part of the world, where he teaches people Kåñëa consciousness. The Kåñëa
consciousness movement was started for this purpose. We do not teach one to
meditate in a secluded place just so that one may show that he has become very
much advanced and may be proud of his so-called transcendental meditation,
although he engages in all sorts of foolish materialistic activity. A Vaiñëava
like Prahläda Mahäräja is not interested in such a bluff of spiritual
advancement. Rather, he is interested in enlightening people in Kåñëa
consciousness because that is the only way for them to become happy. Prahläda
Mahäräja says clearly, nänyaà tvad asya çaraëaà bhramato 'nupaçye: "I know
that without Kåñëa consciousness, without taking shelter of Your lotus feet,
one cannot be happy." One wanders within the universe, life after life, but by
the grace of a devotee, a servant of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, one can get the
clue to Kåñëa consciousness and then not only become happy in this world but
also return home, back to Godhead. That is the real target in life. The
members of the Kåñëa consciousness movement are not at all interested in
so-called meditation in the Himalayas or the forest, where one will only make
a show of meditation, nor are they interested in opening many schools for yoga
and meditation in the cities. Rather, every member of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement is interested in going door to door to try to convince people about
the teachings of Bhagavad-gétä As It Is, the teachings of Lord Caitanya. That is
the purpose of the Hare Kåñëa movement. The members of the Kåñëa
consciousness movement must be fully convinced that without Kåñëa one
cannot be happy. Thus the Kåñëa conscious person avoids all kinds of pseudo
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
660
spiritualists, transcendentalists, meditators, monists, philosophers and
philanthropists.
TEXT 45
YaNMaEQauNaaid Ga*hMaeiDaSau%& ih TauC^&
k-<@UYaNaeNa k-rYaaeirv du"%du"%Ma( )
Ta*PYaiNTa Naeh k*-Pa<aa bhudu"%>aaJa"
k-<@UiTavNMaNaiSaJa& ivzheTa Daqr" )) 45 ))
yan maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukhaà hi tucchaà
kaëòüyanena karayor iva duùkha-duùkham
tåpyanti neha kåpaëä bahu-duùkha-bhäjaù
kaëòütivan manasijaà viñaheta dhéraù
SYNONYMS
yat—that which (is meant for material sense gratification);
maithuna-ädi—represented by talking of sex, reading sexual literature or
enjoying sex life (at home or outside, as in a club); gåhamedhi-sukham—all
types of material happiness based on attachment to family, society, friendship,
etc.; hi—indeed; tuccham—insignificant; kaëòüyanena—with the itching;
karayoù—of the two hands (to relieve the itching); iva—like;
duùkha-duùkham—different types of unhappiness (into which one is put after
such itching sense gratification); tåpyanti—become satisfied; na—never;
iha—in material sense gratification; kåpaëäù—the foolish persons;
bahu-duùkha-bhäjaù—subjected to various types of material unhappiness;
kaëòüti-vat—if one can learn from such itching; manasi-jam—which is simply
a mental concoction (actually there is no happiness); viñaheta—and tolerates
(such itching); dhéraù—(he can become) a most perfect, sober person.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
661
TRANSLATION
Sex life is compared to the rubbing of two hands to relieve an itch.
Gåhamedhis, so-called gåhasthas who have no spiritual knowledge, think that
this itching is the greatest platform of happiness, although actually it is a source
of distress. The kåpaëas, the fools who are just the opposite of brähmaëas, are
not satisfied by repeated sensuous enjoyment. Those who are dhéra, however,
who are sober and who tolerate this itching, are not subjected to the sufferings
of fools and rascals.
PURPORT
Materialists think that sexual indulgence is the greatest happiness in this
material world, and therefore they make elaborate plans to satisfy their senses,
especially the genitals. This is generally found everywhere, and specifically
found in the Western world, where there are regular arrangements to satisfy
sex life in different ways. Actually, however, this has not made anyone happy.
Even the hippies, who have given up all the materialistic comforts of their
fathers and grandfathers, cannot give up the sensational happiness of sex life.
Such persons are described here as kåpaëas, misers. The human form of life is a
great asset, for in this life one can fulfill the goal of existence. Unfortunately,
however, because of a lack of education and culture, people are victimized by
the false happiness of sex life. Prahläda Mahäräja therefore advises one not to
be misled by this civilization of sense gratification, and especially not by sex
life. Rather, one should be sober, avoid sense gratification and be Kåñëa
conscious. The lusty person, who is compared to a foolish miser, never gets
happiness by sense gratification. The influence of material nature is very
difficult to surpass, but as stated by Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14), mäm eva ye
prapadyante, mäyäm etäà taranti te: if one voluntarily submits to the lotus feet
of Kåñëa, he can be saved very easily.
In reference to the low-grade happiness of sex life, Yämunäcärya says in this
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
662
connection:
yad-avadhi mama cetaù kåñëa-pädäravinde
nava-nava-rasa-dhämany udyataà rantum äsét
tad-avadhi bata näré-saìgame smaryamäne
bhavati mukha-vikäraù suñöhu niñöhévanaà ca
"Since I have been engaged in the transcendental loving service of Kåñëa,
realizing ever-new pleasure in Him, whenever I think of sex pleasure, I spit at
the thought, and my lips curl with distaste." Yämunäcärya had formerly been a
great king who enjoyed sexual happiness in various ways, but since he later
engaged himself in the service of the Lord, he enjoyed spiritual bliss and hated
to think of sex life. If sexual thoughts came to him, he would spit with disgust.
TEXT 46
MaaENav]Taé[uTaTaPaae_DYaYaNaSvDaMaR‚
VYaa:YaarhaeJaPaSaMaaDaYa AaPavGYaaR" )
Pa[aYa" Par& Pauåz Tae TviJaTaeiNd]Yaa<aa&
vaTaaR >avNTYauTa Na va}a Tau daiM>ak-aNaaMa( )) 46 ))
mauna-vrata-çruta-tapo-'dhyayana-sva-dharmavyäkhyä-
raho-japa-samädhaya äpavargyäù
präyaù paraà puruña te tv ajitendriyäëäà
värtä bhavanty uta na vätra tu dämbhikänäm
SYNONYMS
mauna—silence; vrata—vows; çruta—Vedic knowledge; tapaù—austerity;
adhyayana—study of scripture; sva-dharma—executing varëäçrama-dharma;
vyäkhyä—explaining the çästras; rahaù—living in a solitary place;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
663
japa—chanting or reciting mantras; samädhayaù—remaining in trance;
äpavargyäù—these are ten types of activities for advancing on the path of
liberation; präyaù—generally; param—the only means; puruña—O my Lord;
te—all of them; tu—but; ajita-indriyäëäm—of persons who cannot control the
senses; värtäù—means of living; bhavanti—are; uta—so it is said; na—not;
vä—or; atra—in this connection; tu—but; dämbhikänäm—of persons who are
falsely proud.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, there are ten prescribed methods on the
path to liberation—to remain silent, not to speak to anyone, to observe vows, to
amass all kinds of Vedic knowledge, to undergo austerities, to study the Vedas
and other Vedic literatures, to execute the duties of varëäçrama-dharma, to
explain the çästras, to stay in a solitary place, to chant mantras silently, and to
be absorbed in trance. These different methods for liberation are generally only
a professional practice and means of livelihood for those who have not
conquered their senses. Because such persons are falsely proud, these
procedures may not be successful.
PURPORT
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.1.15):
kecit kevalayä bhaktyä
väsudeva-paräyaëäù
aghaà dhunvanti kärtsnyena
néhäram iva bhäskaraù
"Only a rare person who has adopted complete, unalloyed devotional service to
Kåñëa can uproot the weeds of sinful actions with no possibility that they will
revive. He can do this simply by discharging devotional service, just as the sun
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
664
can immediately dissipate fog by its rays." The real purpose of human life is to
attain liberation from material entanglement. Such liberation may be achieved
by many methods (tapasä brahmacaryeëa çamena ca damena ca [SB 6.1.13]), but
all of them more or less depend on tapasya, austerity, which begins with
celibacy. Çukadeva Gosvämé says that those who are väsudeva-paräyaëa, who
have fully surrendered to the lotus feet of Lord Väsudeva, Kåñëa, automatically
achieve the results of mauna (silence), vrata (vows) and other such methods
simply by discharging devotional service. In other words, these methods are
not so powerful. If one takes to devotional service, all of them are very easily
performed.
Mauna, for example, does not mean that one should just stop speaking. The
tongue is meant for speaking, although sometimes, to make a big show, a
person remains silent. There are many who observe silence some day in a
week. Vaiñëavas, however, do not observe such silence. Silence means not
speaking foolishly. Speakers at assemblies, conferences and meetings generally
speak foolishly like toads. This is described by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé as väco
vegam. One who wants to say something can show himself to be a big orator,
but rather than go on speaking nonsense, better to remain silent. This method
of silence, therefore, is recommended for persons very attached to speaking
nonsense. One who is not a devotee must speak nonsensically because he does
not have the power to speak about the glories of Kåñëa. Thus whatever he says
is influenced by the illusory energy and is compared to the croaking of a frog.
One who speaks about the glories of the Lord, however, has no need to be
silent. Caitanya Mahäprabhu recommends, kértanéyaù sadä hariù: [Cc. Ädi
17.31] one should go on chanting the glories of the Lord twenty-four hours a
day. There is no question of becoming mauna, or silent.
The ten processes for liberation or improvement on the path of liberation
are not meant for the devotees. Kevalayä bhaktyä: if one simply engages in
devotional service to the Lord, all ten methods of liberation are automatically
observed. Prahläda Mahäräja's proposal is that such processes may be
recommended for the ajitendriya, those who cannot conquer their senses.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
665
Devotees, however, have already conquered their senses.
Sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà tat-paratvena nirmalam: [Cc. Madhya 19.170] a devotee
is already freed from material contamination. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté
Öhäkura therefore said:
duñöa mana! tumi kisera vaiñëava?
pratiñöhära tare, nirjanera ghare,
tava hari-näma kevala kaitava
There are many who like to chant the Hare Kåñëa mantra in a silent, solitary
place, but if one is not interested in preaching, talking constantly to the
nondevotees, the influence of the modes of nature is very difficult to surpass.
Therefore unless one is extremely advanced in Kåñëa consciousness, one
should not imitate Haridäsa Öhäkura, who had no other business than
chanting the holy name always, twenty-four hours a day. Prahläda Mahäräja
does not condemn such a process; he accepts it, but without active service to
the Lord, simply by such methods one generally cannot attain liberation. One
cannot attain liberation simply by false pride.
TEXT 47
æPae wMae SadSaTaq Tav vedSa*íe
bqJaax(ku-raivv Na caNYadæPak-SYa )
Yau¢-a" SaMa+aMau>aYa}a ivc+aNTae Tva&
YaaeGaeNa viöiMav daåzu NaaNYaTa" SYaaTa( )) 47 ))
rüpe ime sad-asaté tava veda-såñöe
béjäìkuräv iva na cänyad arüpakasya
yuktäù samakñam ubhayatra vicakñante tväà
yogena vahnim iva däruñu nänyataù syät
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
666
SYNONYMS
rüpe—in the forms; ime—these two; sat-asaté—the cause and the effect;
tava—Your; veda-såñöe—explained in the Vedas; béja-aìkurau—the seed and
the sprout; iva—like; na—never; ca—also; anyat—any other; arüpakasya—of
You, who possess no material form; yuktäù—those engaged in Your devotional
service; samakñam—before the very eyes; ubhayatra—in both ways (spiritually
and materially); vicakñante—can actually see; tväm—You; yogena—simply by
the method of devotional service; vahnim—fire; iva—like; däruñu—in wood;
na—not; anyataù—from any other means; syät—it is possible.
TRANSLATION
By authorized Vedic knowledge one can see that the forms of cause and
effect in the cosmic manifestation belong to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, for the cosmic manifestation is His energy. Both cause and effect are
nothing but energies of the Lord. Therefore, O my Lord, just as a wise man, by
considering cause and effect, can see how fire pervades wood, those engaged in
devotional service understand how You are both the cause and effect.
PURPORT
As described in previous verses, many so-called students of spiritual
understanding follow the ten different methods known as
mauna-vrata-çruta-tapo-'dhyayana-sva-dharma-vyäkhyä-raho japa-samädhayaù
[SB 7.9.46]. These may be very attractive, but by following such methods, one
cannot actually understand the real cause and effect and the original cause of
everything (janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1]). The original source of everything is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself (sarva-käraëa-käraëam). This
original source of everything is Kåñëa, the supreme ruler. Éçvaraù paramaù
kåñëaù sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù [Bs. 5.1]. He has His eternal spiritual form.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
667
Indeed, He is the root of everything (béjaà mäà sarva-bhütänäm [Bg. 7.10]).
Whatever manifestations exist, their cause is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This cannot be understood by so-called silence or by any other
hodgepodge method. The supreme cause can be understood only by devotional
service, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti [Bg. 18.55]).
Elsewhere in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.14.21), the Supreme Godhead personally
says, bhaktyäham ekayä grähyaù: one can understand the original cause of all
causes, the Supreme Person, only by devotional service, not by show-bottle
exhibitionism.
TEXT 48
Tv& vaYauriGanrviNaivRYadMbuMaa}aa"
Pa[a<aeiNd]Yaai<a ôdYa& icdNauGa]hê )
Sav| TvMaev SaGau<aae ivGau<aê >aUMaNa(
NaaNYaTa( TvdSTYaiPa MaNaaevcSaa iNaå¢-Ma( )) 48 ))
tvaà väyur agnir avanir viyad ambu mäträù
präëendriyäëi hådayaà cid anugrahaç ca
sarvaà tvam eva saguëo viguëaç ca bhüman
nänyat tvad asty api mano-vacasä niruktam
SYNONYMS
tvam—You (are); väyuù—air; agniù—fire; avaniù—earth; viyat—sky;
ambu—water; mäträù—the sense objects; präëa—the life airs; indriyäëi—the
senses; hådayam—the mind; cit—consciousness; anugrahaù ca—and false ego
or the demigods; sarvam—everything; tvam—You; eva—only;
sa-guëaù—material nature with its three modes; viguëaù—the spiritual spark
and Supersoul, which are beyond material nature; ca—and; bhüman—O my
great Lord; na—not; anyat—other; tvat—than You; asti—is; api—although;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
668
manaù-vacasä—by mind and words; niruktam—everything manifested.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Lord, You are actually the air, the earth, fire, sky and water.
You are the objects of sense perception, the life airs, the five senses, the mind,
consciousness and false ego. Indeed, You are everything, subtle and gross. The
material elements and anything expressed, either by the words or by the mind,
are nothing but You.
PURPORT
This is the all-pervasive conception of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, which explains how He spreads everywhere and anywhere. Sarvaà
khalv idaà brahma: everything is Brahman—the Supreme Brahman, Kåñëa.
Nothing exists without Him. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.4):
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
"I exist everywhere, and everything exists in Me, yet I am not visible
everywhere." The Lord can be visible only through devotional service. Tatra
tiñöhämi närada yatra gäyanti mad-bhaktäù: the Supreme Lord stays only where
His devotees chant His glories.
TEXT 49
NaETae Gau<aa Na Gaui<aNaae MahdadYaae Yae
SaveR MaNa" Pa[>a*TaYa" SahdevMaTYaaR" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
669
AaÛNTavNTa oåGaaYa ivdiNTa ih Tva‚
Maev& ivMa*XYa SauiDaYaae ivrMaiNTa XaBdaTa( )) 49 ))
naite guëä na guëino mahad-ädayo ye
sarve manaù prabhåtayaù sahadeva-martyäù
ädy-antavanta urugäya vidanti hi tväm
evaà vimåçya sudhiyo viramanti çabdät
SYNONYMS
na—neither; ete—all these; guëäù—three qualities of material nature;
na—nor; guëinaù—the predominating deities of the three modes of material
nature (namely Lord Brahmä, the predominating deity of passion, and Lord
Çiva, the predominating deity of ignorance); mahat-ädayaù—the five
elements, the senses and the sense objects; ye—those which; sarve—all;
manaù—the mind; prabhåtayaù—and so on; saha-deva-martyäù—with the
demigods and the mortal human beings; ädi-anta-vantaù—who all have a
beginning and end; urugäya—O Supreme Lord, who are glorified by all saintly
persons; vidanti—understand; hi—indeed; tväm—Your Lordship; evam—thus;
vimåçya—considering; sudhiyaù—all wise men; viramanti—cease;
çabdät—from studying or understanding the Vedas.
TRANSLATION
Neither the three modes of material nature [sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and
tamo-guëa], nor the predominating deities controlling these three modes, nor
the five gross elements, nor the mind, nor the demigods nor the human beings
can understand Your Lordship, for they are all subjected to birth and
annihilation. Considering this, the spiritually advanced have taken to devotional
service. Such wise men hardly bother with Vedic study. Instead, they engage
themselves in practical devotional service.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
670
PURPORT
As stated in several places, bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti: [Bg. 18.55] only by
devotional service can the Supreme Lord be understood. The intelligent
person, the devotee, does not bother much about the practices mentioned in
text 46 (mauna-vrata-çruta-tapo-'dhyayana-sva-dharma [SB 7.9.46]). After
understanding the Supreme Lord through devotional service, such devotees
are no longer interested in studies of the Vedas. Indeed, this is confirmed in
the Vedas also. The Vedas say, kim arthä vayam adhyeñyämahe kim arthä vayam
vakñyämahe. What is the use of studying so many Vedic literatures? What is
the use of explaining them in different ways? Vayam vakñyämahe. No one
needs to study any more Vedic literatures, nor does anyone need to describe
them by philosophical speculation. Bhagavad-gétä (2.52) also says:
yadä te moha-kalilaà
buddhir vyatitariñyati
tadä gantäsi nirvedaà
çrotavyasya çrutasya ca
When one understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead by executing
devotional service, one ceases the practice of studying the Vedic literature.
Elsewhere it is said, ärädhito yadi haris tapasä tataù kim [Närada-païcarätra]. If
one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engage in His
service, there is no more need of severe austerities, penances and so on.
However, if after performing severe austerities and penances one does not
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, such practices are useless.
TEXT 50
TaTa( Tae_hRtaMa NaMa" STauiTak-MaRPaUJaa"
k-MaR SMa*iTaêr<aYaae" é[v<a& k-QaaYaaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
671
Sa&SaevYaa TviYa ivNaeiTa z@(r)Yaa ik&-
>ai¢&- JaNa" ParMah&SaGaTaaE l/>aeTa )) 50 ))
tat te 'rhattama namaù stuti-karma-püjäù
karma småtiç caraëayoù çravaëaà kathäyäm
saàsevayä tvayi vineti ñaò-aìgayä kià
bhaktià janaù paramahaàsa-gatau labheta
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; te—unto You; arhat-tama—O supreme of all worshipable
persons; namaù—respectful obeisances; stuti-karma-püjäù—worshiping Your
Lordship by offering prayers and other devotional activities; karma—activities
being dedicated to You; småtiù—constant remembrance; caraëayoù—of Your
lotus feet; çravaëam—always hearing; kathäyäm—in topics (about You);
saàsevayä—such devotional service; tvayi—unto You; vinä—without;
iti—thus; ñaö-aìgayä—having six different parts; kim—how;
bhaktim—devotional service; janaù—a person;
paramahaàsa-gatau—obtainable by the paramahaàsa; labheta—may attain.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, the best of all persons to
whom prayers are offered, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You because
without rendering six kinds of devotional service unto You—offering prayers,
dedicating all the results of activities, worshiping You, working on Your behalf,
always remembering Your lotus feet and hearing about Your glories—who can
achieve that which is meant for the paramahaàsas?
PURPORT
The Vedas enjoin: näyam ätmä pravacanena labhyo na medhayä na bahunä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
672
çrutena. One cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead simply
by studying the Vedas and offering prayers. Only by the grace of the Supreme
Lord can one understand Him. The process of understanding the Lord,
therefore, is bhakti. Without bhakti, simply following the Vedic injunctions to
understand the Absolute Truth will not be helpful at all. The process of bhakti
is understood by the paramahaàsa, one who has accepted the essence of
everything. The results of bhakti are reserved for such a paramahaàsa, and this
stage cannot be obtained by any Vedic process other than devotional service.
Other processes, such as jïäna and yoga, can be successful only when mixed
with bhakti. When we speak of jïäna-yoga, karma-yoga and dhyäna-yoga the
word yoga indicates bhakti. Bhakti-yoga, or buddhi-yoga, executed with
intelligence and full knowledge, is the only successful method for going back
home, back to Godhead. If one wants to be liberated from the pangs of
material existence, he should take to devotional service for quick attainment
of this goal.
TEXT 51
é[qNaard ovac
WTaavÜi<aRTaGau<aae >a¢-ya >a¢e-Na iNaGauR<a" )
Pa[had& Pa[<aTa& Pa[qTaae YaTaMaNYaur>aazTa )) 51 ))
çré-närada uväca
etävad varëita-guëo
bhaktyä bhaktena nirguëaù
prahrädaà praëataà préto
yata-manyur abhäñata
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; etävat—up to this;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
673
varëita—described; guëaù—transcendental qualities; bhaktyä—with devotion;
bhaktena—by the devotee (Prahläda Mahäräja); nirguëaù—the transcendental
Lord; prahrädam—unto Prahläda Mahäräja; praëatam—who was surrendered
at the lotus feet of the Lord; prétaù—being pleased; yata-manyuù—controlling
the anger; abhäñata—began to speak (as follows).
TRANSLATION
The great saint Närada said: Thus Lord Nåsiàhadeva was pacified by the
devotee Prahläda Mahäräja with prayers offered from the transcendental
platform. The Lord gave up His anger, and being very kind to Prahläda, who
was offering prostrated obeisances, He spoke as follows.
PURPORT
The word nirguëa is important. The Mäyävädé philosophers accept the
Absolute Truth as nirguëa or niräkära. The word nirguëa refers to one who
possesses no material qualities. The Lord, being full of spiritual qualities, gave
up all His anger and spoke to Prahläda.
TEXT 52
é[q>aGavaNauvac
Pa[had >ad] >ad]& Tae Pa[qTaae_h& Tae_SauraetaMa )
vr& v*<aqZvai>aMaTa& k-aMaPaUrae_SMYah& Na*<aaMa( )) 52 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
prahräda bhadra bhadraà te
préto 'haà te 'surottama
varaà våëéñväbhimataà
käma-püro 'smy ahaà nåëäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
674
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prahräda—O
My dear Prahläda; bhadra—you are so gentle; bhadram—all good fortune;
te—unto you; prétaù—pleased; aham—I (am); te—unto You; asura-uttama—O
best devotee in the family of asuras (atheists); varam—benediction;
våëéñva—just ask (from Me); abhimatam—desired; käma-püraù—who fulfills
everyone's desire; asmi—am; aham—I; nåëäm—of all men.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Prahläda, most gentle
one, best of the family of the asuras, all good fortune unto you. I am very much
pleased with you. It is My pastime to fulfill the desires of all living beings, and
therefore you may ask from Me any benediction that you desire to be fulfilled.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is known as bhakta-vatsala, the
Supreme Personality who is very much affectionate to His devotees. It is not
very extraordinary that the Lord offered His devotee all benedictions. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead said in effect, "I fulfill the desires of
everyone. Since you are My devotee, whatever you want for yourself will
naturally be given, but if you pray for anyone else, that prayer also will be
fulfilled." Thus if we approach the Supreme Lord or His devotee, or if we are
blessed by a devotee, naturally we will automatically achieve the benedictions
of the Supreme Lord. Yasya prasädäd bhagavat-prasädaù **(27). Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that if one pleases the Vaiñëava spiritual
master, all of one's desires will be fulfilled.
TEXT 53
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
675
MaaMaPa[q<aTa AaYauZMaNdXaRNa& dulR/>a& ih Mae )
d*îa Maa& Na PauNaJaRNTauraTMaaNa& TaáuMahRiTa )) 53 ))
mäm apréëata äyuñman
darçanaà durlabhaà hi me
dåñövä mäà na punar jantur
ätmänaà taptum arhati
SYNONYMS
mäm—Me; apréëataù—not pleasing; äyuñman—O long-living Prahläda;
darçanam—seeing; durlabham—very rare; hi—indeed; me—of Me;
dåñövä—after seeing; mäm—Me; na—not; punaù—again; jantuù—the living
entity; ätmänam—for himself; taptum—to lament; arhati—deserves.
TRANSLATION
My dear Prahläda, may you live a long time. One cannot appreciate or
understand Me without pleasing Me, but one who has seen or pleased Me has
nothing more for which to lament for his own satisfaction.
PURPORT
One cannot be happy under any circumstances unless one pleases the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but one who has learned how to please the
Supreme Lord need no longer lament for his material condition.
TEXT 54
Pa[q<aiNTa ùQa Maa& Daqra" SavR>aaveNa SaaDav" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
676
é[eYaSk-aMaa Maha>aaGa SavaRSaaMaaiXaza& PaiTaMa( )) 54 ))
préëanti hy atha mäà dhéräù
sarva-bhävena sädhavaù
çreyas-kämä mahä-bhäga
sarväsäm äçiñäà patim
SYNONYMS
préëanti—try to please; hi—indeed; atha—because of this; mäm—Me;
dhéräù—those who are sober and most intelligent; sarva-bhävena—in all
respects, in different modes of devotional service; sädhavaù—persons who are
very well behaved (perfect in all respects); çreyas-kämäù—desiring the best
benefit in life; mahä-bhäga—O you who are so fortunate; sarväsäm—of all;
äçiñäm—kinds of benedictions; patim—the master (Me).
TRANSLATION
My dear Prahläda, you are very fortunate. Please know from Me that those
who are very wise and highly elevated try to please Me in all different modes of
mellows, for I am the only person who can fulfill all the desires of everyone.
PURPORT
The words dhéräù sarva-bhävena do not mean "in whichever way you like."
Bhäva is the preliminary condition of love of Godhead.
athäsaktis tato bhävas
tataù premäbhyudaïcati
sädhakänäm ayaà premëaù
prädurbhäve bhavet kramaù
(Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.4.16)
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
677
The bhäva stage is the final division before one reaches love of Godhead. The
word sarva-bhäva means that one can love the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in different transcendental modes of mellows, beginning with däsya,
sakhya, vätsalya and mädhurya. In the çänta stage, one is on the border of
loving service to the Lord. Pure love of Godhead begins from däsya and
develops to sakhya, vätsalya and then mädhurya. Still, in any of these five
mellows one can render loving service to the Supreme Lord. Since our main
business is to love the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can render service
from any of the above-mentioned platforms of love.
TEXT 55
é[qNaard ovac
Wv& Pa[l/ae>YaMaaNaae_iPa vrEl/aeRk-Pa[l/ae>aNaE" )
Wk-aiNTaTvad( >aGaviTa NaEC^Ta( TaaNaSauraetaMa" )) 55 ))
çré-närada uväca
evaà pralobhyamäno 'pi
varair loka-pralobhanaiù
ekäntitväd bhagavati
naicchat tän asurottamaù
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—the great saint Närada said; evam—thus;
pralobhyamänaù—being allured or induced; api—although; varaiù—by
benedictions; loka—of the world; pralobhanaiù—by different kinds of
allurements; ekäntitvät—because of being solely surrendered; bhagavati—unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na aicchat—did not want; tän—those
benedictions; asura-uttamaù—Prahläda Mahäräja, the best of the family of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
678
asuras.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni said: Prahläda Mahäräja was the best person in the family of
asuras, who always aspire for material happiness. Nonetheless, although allured
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who offered him all benedictions for
material happiness, because of his unalloyed Kåñëa consciousness he did not
want to take any material benefit for sense gratification.
PURPORT
Pure devotees like Prahläda Mahäräja and Dhruva Mahäräja do not aspire
for any material benefit at any stage of devotional service. When the Lord was
present before Dhruva Mahäräja, Dhruva did not want to take any material
benefit from the Lord: svämin kåtärtho 'smi varaà na yäce [Cc. Madhya 22.42].
As a pure devotee, he could not ask the Lord for any material benefit. In this
regard, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu instructed us:
na dhanaà na janaà na sundaréà
kavitäà vä jagad-éça kämaye
mama janmani janmanéçvare
bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi
[Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4]
"O my Lord, Jagadéça, I do not pray for benedictions by which to achieve
material wealth, popularity or beauty. My only desire is to serve You. Kindly
engage me in the service of the servant of Your servant."
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Ninth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Prahläda Pacifies Lord Nåsiàhadeva with
Prayers."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
679
10. Prahläda, the Best Among Exalted Devotees
This chapter describes how the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Nåsiàhadeva disappeared, after pleasing Prahläda Mahäräja. It also describes a
benediction given by Lord Çiva.
Lord Nåsiàhadeva wanted to bestow benedictions upon Prahläda Mahäräja,
one after another, but Prahläda Mahäräja, thinking them impediments on the
path of spiritual progress, did not accept any of them. Instead, he fully
surrendered at the Lord's lotus feet. He said: "If anyone engaged in the
devotional service of the Lord prays for personal sense gratification, he cannot
be called a pure devotee or even a devotee. He may be called only a merchant
engaged in the business of give and take. Similarly, a master who wants to
please his servant after taking service from him is also not a real master."
Prahläda Mahäräja, therefore, did not ask anything from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Rather, he said that if the Lord wanted to give him a
benediction, he wanted the Lord to assure him that he would never be induced
to take any benedictions for the sake of material desires. Exchanges of
devotional service for lusty desires are always very prominent. As soon as lusty
desires awaken, one's senses, mind, life, soul, religious principles, patience,
intelligence, shyness, beauty, strength, memory and truthfulness are all
vanquished. One can render unalloyed devotional service only when there are
no material desires in one's mind.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead was greatly pleased with Prahläda
Mahäräja for his unalloyed devotion, yet the Lord provided him one material
benediction-that he would be perfectly happy in this world and live his next
life in Vaikuëöha. The Lord gave him the benediction that he would be the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
680
king of this material world until the end of the manvantara millennium and
that although in this material world, he would have the facility to hear the
glories of the Lord and depend fully on the Lord, performing service to Him in
uncontaminated bhakti-yoga. The Lord advised Prahläda to perform sacrifices
through bhakti-yoga, for this is the duty of a king.
Prahläda Mahäräja accepted whatever the Lord had offered him, and he
prayed for the Lord to deliver his father. In response to this prayer, the Lord
assured him that in the family of such a pure devotee as he, not only the
devotee's father but his forefathers for twenty-one generations are liberated.
The Lord also asked Prahläda to perform the ritualistic ceremonies appropriate
after his father's death.
Then Lord Brahmä, who was also present, offered many prayers to the Lord,
expressing his obligation to the Lord for having offered benedictions to
Prahläda Mahäräja. The Lord advised Lord Brahmä not to offer benedictions
to asuras as he had to Hiraëyakaçipu, for such benedictions indulge them.
Then Lord Nåsiàhadeva disappeared. On that day, Prahläda Mahäräja was
installed on the throne of the world by Lord Brahmä and Çukräcärya.
Thus Närada Muni described the character of Prahläda Mahäräja for
Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja, and he further described the killing of Rävaëa by Lord
Rämacandra and the killing of Çiçupäla and Dantavakra in Dväpara-yuga.
Çiçupäla, of course, had merged into the existence of the Lord and thus
achieved säyujya-mukti. Närada Muni praised Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja because
the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, was the greatest well-wisher and friend of the
Päëòavas and almost always stayed in their house. Thus the fortune of the
Päëòavas was greater than that of Prahläda Mahäräja.
Later, Närada Muni described how the demon Maya Dänava constructed
Tripura for the demons, who became very powerful and defeated the demigods.
Because of this defeat, Lord Rudra, Çiva, dismantled Tripura; thus he became
famous as Tripuräri. For this, Rudra is very much appreciated and worshiped
by the demigods. This narration occurs at the end of the chapter.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
681
TEXT 1
é[qNaard ovac
>ai¢-YaaeGaSYa TaTa( SavRMaNTaraYaTaYaa>aRk-" )
MaNYaMaaNaae ôzqke-Xa& SMaYaMaaNa ovac h )) 1 ))
çré-närada uväca
bhakti-yogasya tat sarvam
antaräyatayärbhakaù
manyamäno håñékeçaà
smayamäna uväca ha
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; bhakti-yogasya—of the principles of
devotional service; tat—those (blessings or benedictions offered by Lord
Nåsiàhadeva); sarvam—each and every one of them; antaräyatayä—because
of being impediments (on the path of bhakti-yoga); arbhakaù—Prahläda
Mahäräja, although only a boy; manyamänaù—considering; håñékeçam—unto
Lord Nåsiàhadeva; smayamänaù—smiling; uväca—said; ha—in the past.
TRANSLATION
The saint Närada Muni continued: Although Prahläda Mahäräja was only a
boy, when he heard the benedictions offered by Lord Nåsiàhadeva he
considered them impediments on the path of devotional service. Thus he smiled
very mildly and spoke as follows.
PURPORT
Material achievements are not the ultimate goal of devotional service. The
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
682
ultimate goal of devotional service is love of Godhead. Therefore although
Prahläda Mahäräja, Dhruva Mahäräja, Ambaréña Mahäräja, Yudhiñöhira
Mahäräja and many devotee kings were materially very opulent, they accepted
their material opulence in the service of the Lord, not for their personal sense
gratification. Of course, possessing material opulence is always fearful because
under the influence of material opulence one may be misdirected from
devotional service. Nonetheless, a pure devotee (anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam
[Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(28)]) is never misdirected by material opulence.
On the contrary, whatever he possesses he engages one hundred percent in the
service of the Lord. When one is allured by material possessions, they are
considered to be given by mäyä, but when one uses material possessions fully
for service, they are considered God's gifts, or facilities offered by Kåñëa for
enhancing one's devotional service.
TEXT 2
é[qPa[had ovac
Maa Maa& Pa[l/ae>aYaaeTPatYaa Sa¢&- k-aMaezu TaEvR„rE" )
TaTSa(r)>aqTaae iNaivR<<aae MauMau+auSTvaMauPaaié[Ta" )) 2 ))
çré-prahräda uväca
mä mäà pralobhayotpattyä
saktaàkämeñu tair varaiù
tat-saìga-bhéto nirviëëo
mumukñus tväm upäçritaù
SYNONYMS
çré-prahrädaù uväca—Prahläda Mahäräja said (to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead); mä—please do not; mäm—me; pralobhaya—allure;
utpattyä—because of my birth (in a demoniac family); saktam—(I am already)
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
683
attached; kämeñu—to material enjoyment; taiù—by all those;
varaiù—benedictions of material possessions; tat-saìga-bhétaù—being afraid of
such material association; nirviëëaù—completely detached from material
desires; mumukñuù—desiring to be liberated from material conditions of life;
tväm—unto Your lotus feet; upäçritaù—I have taken shelter.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja said: My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead,
because I was born in an atheistic family I am naturally attached to material
enjoyment. Therefore, kindly do not tempt me with these illusions. I am very
much afraid of material conditions, and I desire to be liberated from
materialistic life. It is for this reason that I have taken shelter of Your lotus
feet.
PURPORT
Materialistic life means attachment to the body and everything in
relationship to the body. This attachment is based on lusty desires for sense
gratification, specifically sexual enjoyment. Kämais tais tair håta-jïänäù: [Bg.
7.20] when one is too attached to material enjoyment, he is bereft of all
knowledge (håta jïänäù). As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, those who are attached to
material enjoyment are mostly inclined to worship the demigods to procure
various material opulences. They are especially attached to worship of the
goddess Durgä and Lord Çiva because this transcendental couple can offer
their devotees all material opulence. Prahläda Mahäräja, however, was
detached from all material enjoyment. He therefore took shelter of the lotus
feet of Lord Nåsiàhadeva, and not the feet of any demigod. It is to be
understood that if one really wants release from this material world, from the
threefold miseries and from janma-måtyu jarä-vyädhi [Bg. 13.9] (birth, death,
old age and disease), one must take shelter of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, for without the Supreme Personality of Godhead one cannot get
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
684
release from materialistic life. Atheistic men are very much attached to
material enjoyment. Therefore if they get some opportunity to achieve more
and more material enjoyment, they take it. Prahläda Mahäräja, however, was
very careful in this regard. Although born of a materialistic father, because he
was a devotee he had no material desires (anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam
[Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(29)]).
TEXT 3
>a*TYal/+a<aiJajaSau>aR¢&- k-aMaeZvcaedYaTa( )
>avaNa( Sa&SaarbqJaezu ôdYaGa]iNQazu Pa[>aae )) 3 ))
bhåtya-lakñaëa-jijïäsur
bhaktaà kämeñv acodayat
bhavän saàsära-béjeñu
hådaya-granthiñu prabho
SYNONYMS
bhåtya-lakñaëa-jijïäsuù—desiring to exhibit the symptoms of a pure devotee;
bhaktam—the devotee; kämeñu—in the material world, where lusty desires
predominate; acodayat—has sent; bhavän—Your Lordship;
saàsära-béjeñu—the root cause of being present in this material world;
hådaya-granthiñu—which (desire for material enjoyment) is in the cores of the
hearts of all conditioned souls; prabho—O my worshipable Lord.
TRANSLATION
O my worshipable Lord, because the seed of lusty desires, which is the root
cause of material existence, is within the core of everyone's heart, You have
sent me to this material world to exhibit the symptoms of a pure devotee.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
685
PURPORT
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu has given considerable discussion about nitya-siddha
and sädhana-siddha devotees. Nitya-siddha devotees come from Vaikuëöha to
this material world to teach, by their personal example, how to become a
devotee. The living entities in this material world can take lessons from such
nitya-siddha devotees and thus become inclined to return home, back to
Godhead. A nitya-siddha devotee comes from Vaikuëöha upon the order of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and shows by his example how to become a
pure devotee (anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam [Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(30)]). In
spite of coming to this material world, the nitya-siddha devotee is never
attracted by the allurements of material enjoyment. A perfect example is
Prahläda Mahäräja, who was a nitya-siddha, a mahä-bhägavata devotee.
Although Prahläda was born in the family of Hiraëyakaçipu, an atheist, he was
never attached to any kind of materialistic enjoyment. Desiring to exhibit the
symptoms of a pure devotee, the Lord tried to induce Prahläda Mahäräja to
take material benedictions, but Prahläda Mahäräja did not accept them. On
the contrary, by his personal example he showed the symptoms of a pure
devotee. In other words, the Lord Himself has no desire to send His pure
devotee to this material world, nor does a devotee have any material purpose
in coming. When the Lord Himself appears as an incarnation within this
material world, He is not allured by the material atmosphere, and He has
nothing to do with material activity, yet by His example He teaches the
common man how to become a devotee. Similarly, a devotee who comes here
in accordance with the order of the Supreme Lord shows by his personal
behavior how to become a pure devotee. A pure devotee, therefore, is a
practical example for all living entities, including Lord Brahmä.
TEXT 4
NaaNYaQaa Tae_i%l/Gaurae ga$e=Ta k-å<aaTMaNa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
686
YaSTa AaiXaz AaXaaSTae Na Sa >a*TYa" Sa vE vi<ak(- )) 4 ))
nänyathä te 'khila-guro
ghaöeta karuëätmanaù
yas ta äçiña äçäste
na sa bhåtyaù sa vai vaëik
SYNONYMS
na—not; anyathä—otherwise; te—of You; akhila-guro—O supreme instructor
of the entire creation; ghaöeta—such a thing can happen;
karuëä-ätmanaù—the Supreme Person, who is extremely kind to His devotees;
yaù—any person who; te—from You; äçiñaù—material benefits;
äçäste—desires (in exchange for serving You); na—not; saù—such a person;
bhåtyaù—a servitor; saù—such a person; vai—indeed; vaëik—a merchant
(who wants to get material profit from his business).
TRANSLATION
Otherwise, O my Lord, O supreme instructor of the entire world, You are so
kind to Your devotee that You could not induce him to do something
unbeneficial for him. On the other hand, one who desires some material benefit
in exchange for devotional service cannot be Your pure devotee. Indeed, he is
no better than a merchant who wants profit in exchange for service.
PURPORT
It is sometimes found that one comes to a devotee or a temple of the Lord
just to get some material benefit. Such a person is described here as a
mercantile man. Bhagavad-gétä speaks of ärto jijïäsur arthärthé. The word ärta
refers to one who is physically distressed, and arthärthé refers to one in need of
money. Such persons are forced to approach the Supreme Personality of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
687
Godhead for mitigation of their distress or to get some money by the
benediction of the Lord. They have been described as sukåté, pious, because in
their distress or need for money they have approached the Supreme Lord.
Unless one is pious, one cannot approach the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. However, although a pious man may receive some material benefit,
one who is concerned with material benefits cannot be a pure devotee. When
a pure devotee receives material opulences, this is not because of his pious
activity but for the service of the Lord. When one engages in devotional
service, one is automatically pious. Therefore, a pure devotee is
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam [Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(31)]. He has no desire for
material profit, nor does the Lord induce him to try to profit materially. When
a devotee needs something, the Supreme Personality of Godhead supplies it
(yoga-kñemaà vahämy aham [Bg. 9.22]).
Sometimes materialists go to a temple to offer flowers and fruit to the Lord
because they have learned from Bhagavad-gétä that if a devotee offers some
flowers and fruits, the Lord accepts them. In Bhagavad-gétä (9.26) the Lord
says:
patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà
yo me bhaktyä prayacchati
tad ahaà bhakty-upahåtam
açnämi prayatätmanaù
"If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will
accept it." Thus a man with a mercantile mentality thinks that if he can get
some material benefit, like a large amount of money, simply by offering a little
fruit and flower, this is good business. Such persons are not accepted as pure
devotees. Because their desires are not purified, they are still mercantile men,
even though they go to temples to make a show of being devotees.
Sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà tat-paratvena nirmalam: [Cc. Madhya 19.170] only
when one is fully freed from material desires can one be purified, and only in
that purified state can one serve the Lord. Håñékeëa håñékeça-sevanaà bhaktir
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
688
ucyate. This is the pure devotional platform.
TEXT 5
AaXaaSaaNaae Na vE >a*TYa" SvaiMaNYaaiXaz AaTMaNa" )
Na SvaMaq >a*TYaTa" SvaMYaiMaC^Na( Yaae raiTa caiXaz" )) 5 ))
äçäsäno na vai bhåtyaù
sväminy äçiña ätmanaù
na svämé bhåtyataù svämyam
icchan yo räti cäçiñaù
SYNONYMS
äçäsänaù—a person who desires (in exchange for service); na—not;
vai—indeed; bhåtyaù—a qualified servant or pure devotee of the Lord;
svämini—from the master; äçiñaù—material benefit; ätmanaù—for personal
sense gratification; na—nor; svämé—the master; bhåtyataù—from the servant;
svämyam—the prestigious position of being the master; icchan—desiring;
yaù—any such master who; räti—bestows; ca—also; äçiñaù—material profit.
TRANSLATION
A servant who desires material profits from his master is certainly not a
qualified servant or pure devotee. Similarly, a master who bestows benedictions
upon his servant because of a desire to maintain a prestigious position as master
is also not a pure master.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.20), kämais tais tair håta jïänäù prapadyante
'nya-devatäù. "Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
689
unto demigods." A demigod cannot become master, for the real master is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The demigods, to keep their prestigious
positions, bestow upon their worshipers whatever benedictions the worshipers
want. For example, once it was found that an asura took a benediction from
Lord Çiva by which the asura would be able to kill someone simply by placing
his hands on that person's head. Such benedictions are possible to receive from
the demigods. If one worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead, however,
the Lord will never offer him such condemned benedictions. On the contrary,
it is said in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.88.8), yasyäham anugåhnämi hariñye
tad-dhanaà çanaiù. If one is too materialistic but at the same time wants to be
a servant of the Supreme Lord, the Lord, because of His supreme compassion
for the devotee, takes away all his material opulences and obliges him to be a
pure devotee of the Lord. Prahläda Mahäräja distinguishes between the pure
devotee and the pure master. The Lord is the pure master, the supreme master,
whereas an unalloyed devotee with no material motives is the pure servant.
One who has materialistic motivations cannot become a servant, and one who
unnecessarily bestows benedictions upon his servant to keep his own
prestigious position is not a real master.
TEXT 6
Ah& Tvk-aMaSTvÙ¢-STv& c SvaMYaNaPaaé[Ya" )
NaaNYaQaehavYaaerQaaeR raJaSaevk-Yaaeirv )) 6 ))
ahaà tv akämas tvad-bhaktas
tvaà ca svämy anapäçrayaù
nänyathehävayor artho
räja-sevakayor iva
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
690
aham—as far as I am concerned; tu—indeed; akämaù—without material
desire; tvat-bhaktaù—fully attached to You without motivation; tvam
ca—Your Lordship also; svämé—the real master; anapäçrayaù—without
motivation (You do not become the master with motivation); na—not;
anyathä—without being in such a relationship as master and servant;
iha—here; ävayoù—our; arthaù—any motivation (the Lord is the pure master,
and Prahläda Mahäräja is the pure devotee with no materialistic motivation);
räja—of a king; sevakayoù—and the servitor; iva—like (just as a king exacts
taxes for the benefit of the servant or the citizens pay taxes for the benefit of
the king).
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, I am Your unmotivated servant, and You are my eternal master.
There is no need of our being anything other than master and servant. You are
naturally my master, and I am naturally Your servant. We have no other
relationship.
PURPORT
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu said, jévera 'svarüpa' haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa':
[Cc. Madhya 20.108] every living being is eternally a servant of the Supreme
Lord, Kåñëa. Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (5.29), bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram: "I am the proprietor of all planets, and I am the
supreme enjoyer." This is the natural position of the Lord, and the natural
position of the living being is to surrender unto Him (sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]). If this relationship continues, then real
happiness exists eternally between the master and servant. Unfortunately,
when this eternal relationship is disturbed, the living entity wants to become
separately happy and thinks that the master is his order supplier. In this way
there cannot be happiness. Nor should the master cater to the desires of the
servant. If he does, he is not the real master. The real master commands, "You
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
691
must do this," and the real servant immediately obeys the order. Unless this
relationship between the Supreme Lord and the subordinate living entity is
established, there can be no real happiness. The living entity is äçraya, always
subordinate, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is viñaya, the supreme
objective, the goal of life. Unfortunate persons trapped in this material world
do not know this. Na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum: [SB 7.5.31] illusioned by
the material energy, everyone in this material world is unaware that the only
aim of life is to approach Lord Viñëu.
ärädhanänäà sarveñäà
viñëor ärädhanaà param
tasmät parataraà devi
tadéyänäà samarcanam
In the Padma Puräëa Lord Çiva explains to his wife, Parvaté, the goddess
Durgä, that the highest goal of life is to satisfy Lord Viñëu, who can be satisfied
only when His servant is satisfied. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore
teaches, gopé-bhartuù pada-kamalayor däsa-däsänudäsaù [Cc. Madhya 13.80].
One must become a servant of the servant. Prahläda Mahäräja also prayed to
Lord Nåsiàhadeva that he might be engaged as the servant of the Lord's
servant. This is the prescribed method of devotional service. As soon as a
devotee wants the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be his order supplier,
the Lord immediately refuses to become the master of such a motivated
devotee. In Bhagavad-gétä (4.11) the Lord says, ye yathä mäà prapadyante täàs
tathaiva bhajämy aham. "As one surrenders unto Me, I reward him accordingly."
Materialistic persons are generally inclined to material profits. As long as one
continues in such an adulterated position, he does not receive the benefit of
returning home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 7
Yaid daSYaiSa Mae k-aMaaNa( vra&STv& vrdzR>a )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
692
k-aMaaNaa& ôÛSa&raeh& >avTaSTau v*<ae vrMa( )) 7 ))
yadi däsyasi me kämän
varäàs tvaà varadarñabha
kämänäà hådy asaàrohaà
bhavatas tu våëe varam
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; däsyasi—want to give; me—me; kämän—anything desirable;
varän—as Your benediction; tvam—You; varada-åñabha—O Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who can give any benediction; kämänäm—of all
desires for material happiness; hådi—within the core of my heart;
asaàroham—no growth; bhava taù—from You; tu—then; våëe—I pray for;
varam—such a benediction.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, best of the givers of benediction, if You at all want to bestow a
desirable benediction upon me, then I pray from Your Lordship that within the
core of my heart there be no material desires.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu taught us how to pray for benedictions from
the Lord. He said:
na dhanaà na janaà na sundaréà
kavitäà vä jagad-éça kämaye
mama janmani janmanéçvare
bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi
[Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4]
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
693
"O my Lord, I do not want from You any amount of wealth, nor many
followers, nor a beautiful wife, for these are all materialistic desires. But if I
have to ask You for any benediction, I pray that in whatever forms of life I may
take my birth, under any circumstances, I will not be bereft of Your
transcendental devotional service." Devotees are always on the positive
platform, in contrast to the Mäyävädés, who want to make everything
impersonal or void. One cannot remain void (çünyavädé); rather, one must
possess something. Therefore, the devotee, on the positive side, wants to
possess something, and this possession is very nicely described by Prahläda
Mahäräja, who says, "If I must take some benediction from You, I pray that
within the core of my heart there may be no material desires." The desire to
serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not at all material.
TEXT 8
wiNd]Yaai<a MaNa" Pa[a<a AaTMaa DaMaaeR Da*iTaMaRiTa" )
hq" é[qSTaeJa" SMa*iTa" SaTYa& YaSYa NaXYaiNTa JaNMaNaa )) 8 ))
indriyäëi manaù präëa
ätmä dharmo dhåtir matiù
hréù çrés tejaù småtiù satyaà
yasya naçyanti janmanä
SYNONYMS
indriyäëi—the senses; manaù—the mind; präëaù—the life air; ätmä—the
body; dharmaù—religion; dhåtiù—patience; matiù—intelligence;
hréù—shyness; çréù—opulence; tejaù—strength; småtiù—memory;
satyam—truthfulness; yasya—of which lusty desires; naçyanti—are
vanquished; janmanä—from the very beginning of birth.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
694
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, because of lusty desires from the very beginning of one's birth,
the functions of one's senses, mind, life, body, religion, patience, intelligence,
shyness, opulence, strength, memory and truthfulness are vanquished.
PURPORT
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, kämaà håd-rogam. Materialistic life means
that one is afflicted by a formidable disease called lusty desire. Liberation
means freedom from lusty desires because it is only due to such desires that one
must accept repeated birth and death. As long as one's lusty desires are
unfulfilled, one must take birth after birth to fulfill them. Because of material
desires, therefore, one performs various types of activities and receives various
types of bodies with which to try to fulfill desires that are never satisfied. The
only remedy is to take to devotional service, which begins when one is free
from all material desires. Anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam [Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu
1.1.11(32)]. Anya-abhiläñitä means "material desire," and çünyam means "free
from." The spiritual soul has spiritual activities and spiritual desires, as
described by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu: mama janmani janmanéçvare bhavatäd
bhaktir ahaituké tvayi [Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4]. Unalloyed devotion to
the service of the Lord is the only spiritual desire. To fulfill this spiritual
desire, however, one must be free from all material desires. Desirelessness
means freedom from material desires. This is described by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé
as Anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam [Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(33)]. As soon as one has
material desires, one loses his spiritual identity. Then all the paraphernalia of
one's life, including one's senses, body, religion, patience and intelligence, are
deviated from one's original Kåñëa consciousness. As soon as one has material
desires, one cannot properly use his senses, intelligence, mind and so on for
the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Mäyävädé
philosophers want to become impersonal, senseless and mindless, but that is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
695
not possible. The living entity must be living, always existing with desires,
ambitions and so on. These should be purified, however, so that one can desire
spiritually and be spiritually ambitious, without material contamination. In
every living entity these propensities exist because he is a living entity. When
materially contaminated, however, one is put into the hands of material misery
(janma-måtyu jarä-vyädhi [Bg. 13.9]). If one wants to stop repeated birth and
death, one must take to the devotional service of the Lord.
sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà
tat-paratvena nirmalam
håñékeëa håñékeçasevanaà
bhaktir ucyate
[Cc. Madhya 19.170]
"Bhakti, or devotional service, means engaging all our senses in the service of
the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all the senses.
When the spirit soul renders service unto the Supreme, there are two side
effects. One is freed from all material designations, and, simply by being
employed in the service of the Lord, one's senses are purified."
TEXT 9
ivMauÄiTa Yada k-aMaaNMaaNavae MaNaiSa iSQaTaaNa( )
TaùeRv Pau<@rqk-a+a >aGavtvaYa k-LPaTae )) 9 ))
vimuïcati yadä kämän
mänavo manasi sthitän
tarhy eva puëòarékäkña
bhagavattväya kalpate
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
696
vimuïcati—gives up; yadä—whenever; kämän—all material desires;
mänavaù—human society; manasi—within the mind; sthitän—situated;
tarhi—at that time only; eva—indeed; puëòaréka-akña—O lotus-eyed Lord;
bhagavattväya—to be equally as opulent as the Lord; kalpate—becomes
eligible.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, when a human being is able to give up all the material desires in
his mind, he becomes eligible to possess wealth and opulence like Yours.
PURPORT
Atheistic men sometimes criticize a devotee by saying, "If you do not want
to take any benediction from the Lord and if the servant of the Lord is as
opulent as the Lord Himself, why do you ask for the benediction of being
engaged as the Lord's servant?" Çrédhara Svämé comments, bhagavattväya
bhagavat-samän aiçvaryäya. Bhagavattva, becoming as good as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, does not mean becoming one with Him or equal to
Him, although in the spiritual world the servant is equally as opulent as the
master. The servant of the Lord is engaged in the service of the Lord as a
servant, friend, father, mother or conjugal lover, all of whom are equally as
opulent as the Lord. This is acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(34). The master and
servant are different yet equal in opulence. This is the meaning of
simultaneous difference from the Supreme Lord and oneness with Him.
TEXT 10
p NaMaae >aGavTae Tau>Ya& PauåzaYa MahaTMaNae )
hrYae_d(>auTaiSa&haYa b]ø<ae ParMaaTMaNae )) 10 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
697
oà namo bhagavate tubhyaà
puruñäya mahätmane
haraye 'dbhuta-siàhäya
brahmaëe paramätmane
SYNONYMS
oà—O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaù—I offer my
respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Person; tubhyam—unto
You; puruñäya—unto the Supreme Person; mahä-ätmane—unto the Supreme
Soul, or the Supersoul; haraye—unto the Lord, who vanquishes all the miseries
of devotees; adbhuta-siàhäya—unto Your wonderful lionlike form as
Nåsiàhadeva; brahmaëe—unto the Supreme Brahman; parama-ätmane—unto
the Supreme Soul.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, full of six opulences, O Supreme Person! O Supreme Soul, killer
of all miseries! O Supreme Person in the form of a wonderful lion and man, let
me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
In the previous verse Prahläda Mahäräja has explained that a devotee can
achieve the platform of bhagavattva, being as good as the Supreme Person, but
this does not mean that the devotee loses his position as a servant. A pure
servant of the Lord, although as opulent as the Lord, is still meant to offer
respectful obeisances to the Lord in service. Prahläda Mahäräja was engaged in
pacifying the Lord, and therefore he did not consider himself equal to the
Lord. He defined his position as a servant and offered respectful obeisances
unto the Lord.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
698
TEXT 11
é[q>aGavaNauvac
NaEk-aiNTaNaae Mae MaiYa JaaiTvhaiXaz
AaXaaSaTae_Mau}a c Yae >aviÜDaa" )
TaQaaiPa MaNvNTarMaeTad}a
dETYaeìra<aaMaNau>au&+v >aaeGaaNa( )) 11 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
naikäntino me mayi jätv ihäçiña
äçäsate 'mutra ca ye bhavad-vidhäù
tathäpi manvantaram etad atra
daityeçvaräëäm anubhuìkñva bhogän
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; na—not;
ekäntinaù—unalloyed, without desires except for the one desire for devotional
service; me—from Me; mayi—unto Me; jätu—any time; iha—within this
material world; äçiñaù—benedictions; äçäsate—intent desire; amutra—in the
next life; ca—and; ye—all such devotees who; bhavat-vidhäù—like you;
tathäpi—still; manvantaram—the duration of time until the end of the life of
one Manu; etat—this; atra—within this material world; daitya-éçvaräëäm—of
the opulences of materialistic persons; anubhuìkñva—you can enjoy;
bhogän—all material opulences.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Prahläda, a devotee like
you never desires any kind of material opulences, either in this life or in the
next. Nonetheless, I order you to enjoy the opulences of the demons in this
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
699
material world, acting as their king until the end of the duration of time
occupied by Manu.
PURPORT
One Manu lives for a duration of time calculated to be an aggregate of
seventy-one yuga cycles, each of which equals 4,300,000 years. Although
atheistic men like to enjoy material opulences and they endeavor with great
energy to build big residences, roads, cities and factories, unfortunately they
cannot live more than eighty, ninety or at the utmost one hundred years.
Although the materialist exerts so much energy to create a kingdom of
hallucinations, he is unable to enjoy it for more than a few years. However,
because Prahläda Mahäräja was a devotee, the Lord allowed him to enjoy
material opulence as the king of the materialists. Prahläda Mahäräja had taken
birth in the family of Hiraëyakaçipu, who was the topmost materialist, and
since Prahläda was the bona fide heir of his father, the Supreme Lord allowed
him to enjoy the kingdom created by his father for so many years that no
materialist could calculate them. A devotee does not have to desire material
opulence, but if he is a pure devotee, there is ample opportunity for him to
enjoy material happiness also, without personal endeavor. Therefore, everyone
is advised to take to devotional service under all circumstances. If one desires
material opulence, he can also become a pure devotee, and his desires will be
fulfilled. It is stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.3.10):
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"Whether one desires everything or nothing, or whether he desires to merge
into the existence of the Lord, he is intelligent only if he worships Lord Kåñëa,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by rendering transcendental loving
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
700
service."
TEXT 12
k-Qaa MadqYaa JauzMaa<a" iPa[YaaSTv‚
MaaveXYa MaaMaaTMaiNa SaNTaMaek-Ma( )
SaveRzu >aUTaeZviDaYajMaqXa&
YaJaSv YaaeGaeNa c k-MaR ihNvNa( )) 12 ))
kathä madéyä juñamäëaù priyäs tvam
äveçya mäm ätmani santam ekam
sarveñu bhüteñv adhiyajïam éçaà
yajasva yogena ca karma hinvan
SYNONYMS
kathäù—messages or instructions; madéyäù—given by Me; juñamäëaù—always
hearing or contemplating; priyäù—extremely pleasing; tvam—yourself;
äveçya—being fully absorbed in; mäm—Me; ätmani—within the core of your
heart; santam—existing; ekam—one (the same Supreme Soul); sarveñu—in all;
bhüteñu—living entities; adhiyajïam—the enjoyer of all ritualistic ceremonies;
éçam—the Supreme Lord; yajasva—worship; yogena—by bhakti-yoga,
devotional service; ca—also; karma—fruitive activities; hinvan—giving up.
TRANSLATION
It does not matter that you are in the material world. You should always,
continuously, hear the instructions and messages given by Me and always be
absorbed in thought of Me, for I am the Supersoul existing in the core of
everyone's heart. Therefore, give up fruitive activities and worship Me.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
701
PURPORT
When a devotee becomes materially very opulent, one should not think
that he is enjoying the results of his fruitive activities. A devotee in this
material world uses all material opulences for the service of the Lord because
he is planning how to serve the Lord with these opulences, as advised by the
Lord Himself. Whatever material opulence is within his possession he engages
to expand the glories and service of the Lord. A devotee never performs any
fruitive or ritualistic ceremony to enjoy the results of such karma. Rather, a
devotee knows that karma-käëòa is meant for the less intelligent man.
Narottama däsa Öhäkura says in his prema-bhakti-candrikä, karma-käëòa,
jïäna-käëòa, kevala viñera bhäëòa: both karma-käëòa and jïäna-käëòa-fruitive
activities and speculation about the Supreme Lord—are like pots of poison.
One who is attracted to karma-käëòa and jïäna-käëòa spoils his existence as a
human being. Therefore a devotee is never interested in karma-käëòa or
jïäna-käëòa, but is simply interested in favorable service to the Lord
(änukülyena kåñëänuçélanam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]), or cultivation of spiritual
activities in devotional service.
TEXT 13
>aaeGaeNa Pau<Ya& ku-Xale/Na PaaPa&
k-le/vr& k-al/JaveNa ihTva )
k-IiTa| ivéuÖa& Saurl/aek-GaqTaa&
ivTaaYa MaaMaeZYaiSa Mau¢-bNDa" )) 13 ))
bhogena puëyaà kuçalena päpaà
kalevaraà käla-javena hitvä
kértià viçuddhäà sura-loka-gétäà
vitäya mäm eñyasi mukta-bandhaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
702
SYNONYMS
bhogena—by feelings of material happiness; puëyam—pious activities or their
results; kuçalena—by acting piously (devotional service is the best of all pious
activities); päpam—all kinds of reactions to impious activities; kalevaram—the
material body; käla-javena—by the most powerful time factor; hitvä—giving
up; kértim—reputation; viçuddhäm—transcendental or fully purified;
sura-loka-gétäm—praised even in the heavenly planets; vitäya—spreading all
through the universe; mäm—unto Me; eñyasi—you will come back;
mukta-bandhaù—being liberated from all bondage.
TRANSLATION
My dear Prahläda, while you are in this material world you will exhaust all
the reactions of pious activity by feeling happiness, and by acting piously you
will neutralize impious activity. Because of the powerful time factor, you will
give up your body, but the glories of your activities will be sung in the upper
planetary systems, and being fully freed from all bondage, you will return home,
back to Godhead.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says: evaà prahlädasyäàçena
sädhana-siddhatvaà nitya-siddhatvaà ca näradädivaj jïeyam. There are two
classes of devotees—the sädhana-siddha and the nitya-siddha. Prahläda
Mahäräja is a mixed siddha; that is, he is perfect partly because of executing
devotional service and partly because of eternal perfection. Thus he is
compared to such devotees as Närada. Formerly, Närada Muni was the son of a
maidservant, and therefore in his next birth he attained perfection
(sädhana-siddhi) because of having executed devotional service. Yet he is also a
nitya-siddha because he never forgets the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
703
The word kuçalena is very important. One should live in the material world
very expertly. The material world is known as the world of duality because one
sometimes has to act impiously and sometimes has to act piously. Although one
does not want to act impiously, the world is so fashioned that there is always
danger (padaà padaà yad vipadäm [SB 10.14.58]). Thus even when performing
devotional service a devotee has to create many enemies. Prahläda Mahäräja
himself had experience of this, for even his father became his enemy. A
devotee should expertly manage to think always of the Supreme Lord so that
the reactions of suffering cannot touch him. This is the expert management of
päpa-puëya-pious and impious activities. An exalted devotee like Prahläda
Mahäräja is jévan-mukta; he is liberated even in this very life in the material
body.
TEXT 14
Ya WTaTa( k-ITaRYaeNMaù& TvYaa GaqTaiMad& Nar" )
Tva& c Maa& c SMarNk-ale/ k-MaRbNDaaTa( Pa[MauCYaTae )) 14 ))
ya etat kértayen mahyaà
tvayä gétam idaà naraù
tväà ca mäà ca smaran käle
karma-bandhät pramucyate
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; etat—this activity; kértayet—chants; mahyam—unto Me;
tvayä—by you; gétam—prayers offered; idam—this; naraù—human being;
tväm—you; ca—as well as; mäm ca—Me also; smaran—remembering; käle—in
due course of time; karma-bandhät—from the bondage of material activities;
pramucyate—becomes free.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
704
TRANSLATION
One who always remembers your activities and My activities also, and who
chants the prayers you have offered, becomes free, in due course of time, from
the reactions of material activities.
PURPORT
Here it is stated that anyone who chants and hears about the activities of
Prahläda Mahäräja and, in relationship with Prahläda's activities, the activities
of Nåsiàhadeva, gradually becomes free from all the bondage of fruitive
activities. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.15, 2.56):
yaà hi na vyathayanty ete
puruñaà puruñarñabha
sama-duùkha-sukhaà dhéraà
so 'måtatväya kalpate
"O best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happiness and
distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for liberation."
duùkheñv anudvigna-manäù
sukheñu vigata-spåhaù
véta-räga-bhaya-krodhaù
sthita-dhér munir ucyate
[Bg. 2.56]
"One who is not disturbed in spite of the threefold miseries, who is not elated
when there is happiness, and who is free from attachment, fear and anger, is
called a sage of steady mind." A devotee should not be aggrieved in an
awkward position, nor should he feel extraordinarily happy in material
opulence. This is the way of expert management of material life. Because a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
705
devotee knows how to manage expertly, he is called jévan-mukta. As Rüpa
Gosvämé explains in Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu:
éhä yasya harer däsye
karmaëä manasä girä
nikhiläsv apy avasthäsu
jévan-muktaù sa ucyate
"A person acting in Kåñëa consciousness (or, in other words, in the service of
Kåñëa) with his body, mind, intelligence and words is a liberated person even
within this material world, although he may be engaged in many so-called
material activities." Because of constantly engaging in devotional service, in
any condition of life, a devotee is free from all material bondage.
bhaktiù punäti man-niñöhä
çva-päkän api sambhavät
"Even one born in a family of meat-eaters is purified if he engages in
devotional service." (SB 11.14.21) Çréla Jéva Gosvämé cites this verse in logically
supporting that anyone who chants about the pure life and activities of
Prahläda Mahäräja is freed from the reactions of material activities.
TEXTS 15-17
é[qPa[had ovac
vr& vrYa WTaTa( Tae vrdeXaaNMaheìr )
YadiNaNdTa( iPaTaa Mae TvaMaivÜa&STaeJa WeìrMa( )) 15 ))
ivÖaMazaRXaYa" Saa+aaTa( SavRl/aek-Gauå& Pa[>auMa( )
>a]aTa*heiTa Ma*zad*iíSTvÙ¢e- MaiYa cagavaNa( )) 16 ))
TaSMaaTa( iPaTaa Mae PaUYaeTa durNTaad( duSTaradgaaTa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
706
PaUTaSTae_Paa(r)Sa&d*íSTada k*-Pa<avTSal/ )) 17 ))
çré-prahräda uväca
varaà varaya etat te
varadeçän maheçvara
yad anindat pitä me
tväm avidväàs teja aiçvaram
viddhämarñäçayaù säkñät
sarva-loka-guruà prabhum
bhrätå-heti måñä-dåñöis
tvad-bhakte mayi cäghavän
tasmät pitä me püyeta
durantäd dustaräd aghät
pütas te 'päìga-saàdåñöas
tadä kåpaëa-vatsala
SYNONYMS
çré-prahrädaù uväca—Prahläda Mahäräja said; varam—benediction; varaye—I
pray; etat—this; te—from You; varada-éçät—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who offers benedictions even to such exalted demigods as Brahmä
and Çiva; mahä-éçvara—O my Supreme Lord; yat—that; anindat—vilified;
pitä—father; me—my; tväm—You; avidvän—without knowledge of;
tejaù—strength; aiçvaram—supremacy; viddha—being polluted; amarña—with
anger; äçayaù—within the heart; säkñät—directly; sarva-loka-gurum—unto
the supreme spiritual master of all living beings; prabhum—unto the supreme
master; bhrätå-hä—the killer of his brother; iti—thus; måñä-dåñöiù—falsely
envious because of a false conception; tvat-bhakte—unto Your devotee;
mayi—unto me; ca—and; agha-vän—who committed heavily sinful activities;
tasmät—from that; pitä—father; me—my; püyeta—may be purified;
durantät—very great; dustarät—difficult to pass over; aghät—from all sinful
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
707
activities; pütaù—(although he was) purified; te—of You; apäìga—by the
glance over him; saàdåñöaù—being looked at; tadä—at that time;
kåpaëa-vatsala—O You who are merciful to the materialistic.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja said: O Supreme Lord, because You are so merciful to the
fallen souls, I ask You for only one benediction. I know that my father, at the
time of his death, had already been purified by Your glance upon him, but
because of his ignorance of Your beautiful power and supremacy, he was
unnecessarily angry at You, falsely thinking that You were the killer of his
brother. Thus he directly blasphemed Your Lordship, the spiritual master of all
living beings, and committed heavily sinful activities directed against me, Your
devotee. I wish that he be excused for these sinful activities.
PURPORT
Although Hiraëyakaçipu was purified as soon as he came in contact with
the Lord's lap and the Lord saw him, Prahläda Mahäräja still wanted to hear
from the Lord's own mouth that his father had been purified by the Lord's
causeless mercy. Prahläda Mahäräja offered this prayer to the Lord for the sake
of his father. As a Vaiñëava son, despite all the inconveniences imposed upon
him by his father, he could not forget his father's affection.
TEXT 18
é[q>aGavaNauvac
i}a"Saái>a" iPaTaa PaUTa" iPaTa*i>a" Sah Tae_Naga )
YaTa( SaaDaae_SYa ku-le/ JaaTaae >avaNvE ku-l/PaavNa" )) 18 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
708
triù-saptabhiù pitä pütaù
pitåbhiù saha te 'nagha
yat sädho 'sya kule jäto
bhavän vai kula-pävanaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
triù-saptabhiù—seven multiplied by three (that is to say, twenty-one);
pitä—father; pütaù—purified; pitåbhiù—with your forefathers; saha—all
together; te—your; anagha—O most sinless personality (Prahläda Mahäräja);
yat—because; sädho—O great saintly person; asya—of this person; kule—in
the dynasty; jätaù—took birth; bhavän—you; vai—indeed; kula-pävanaù—the
purifier of the whole dynasty.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Prahläda, O most pure,
O great saintly person, your father has been purified, along with twenty-one
forefathers in your family. Because you were born in this family, the entire
dynasty has been purified.
PURPORT
The word triù-saptabhiù means seven multiplied by three. In one's family
one can count back four or five generations—to one's great-grandfather or
even one's great-grandfather's father—but since the Lord mentions
twenty-one forefathers, this indicates that the benediction expands to other
families also. Before the present family in which one has taken birth, one must
have been born in other families. Thus when a Vaiñëava takes birth in a
family, by the grace of the Lord he purifies not only that family but also the
families of his previous births.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
709
TEXT 19
Ya}a Ya}a c MaÙ¢-a" Pa[XaaNTaa" SaMadiXaRNa" )
SaaDav" SaMaudacaraSTae PaUYaNTae_iPa k-Ik-$=a" )) 19 ))
yatra yatra ca mad-bhaktäù
praçäntäù sama-darçinaù
sädhavaù samudäcäräs
te püyante 'pi kékaöäù
SYNONYMS
yatra yatra—wherever and whenever; ca—also; mat-bhaktäù—My devotees;
praçäntäù—extremely peaceful; sama-darçinaù—equipoised;
sädhavaù—decorated with all good qualities; samudäcäräù—equally
magnanimous; te—all of them; püyante—are purified; api—even; kékaöäù—a
degraded country or the inhabitants of such a place.
TRANSLATION
Whenever and wherever there are peaceful, equipoised devotees who are
well behaved and decorated with all good qualities, that place and the dynasties
there, even if condemned, are purified.
PURPORT
Wherever exalted devotees stay, not only they and their dynasties but the
entire country is purified.
TEXT 20
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
710
SavaRTMaNaa Na ih&SaiNTa >aUTaGa]aMaezu ik-ÄNa )
oÀavcezu dETYaeNd] MaÙavivGaTaSPa*ha" )) 20 ))
sarvätmanä na hiàsanti
bhüta-grämeñu kiïcana
uccävaceñu daityendra
mad-bhäva-vigata-spåhäù
SYNONYMS
sarva-ätmanä—in all respects, even in the modes of anger and jealousy;
na—never; hiàsanti—they are envious; bhüta-grämeñu—among all species of
life; kiïcana—toward any one of them; ucca-avaceñu—the lower and higher
living entities; daitya-indra—O my dear Prahläda, King of the Daityas;
mat-bhäva—because of devotional service unto Me; vigata—given up;
spåhäù—all material modes of anger and greed.
TRANSLATION
My dear Prahläda, King of the Daityas, because of being attached to
devotional service to Me, My devotee does not distinguish between lower and
higher living entities. In all respects, he is never jealous of anyone.
TEXT 21
>aviNTa Pauåza l/aeke- MaÙ¢-aSTvaMaNauv]Taa" )
>avaNMae %lu/ >a¢-aNaa& SaveRza& Pa[iTaæPaDa*k(- )) 21 ))
bhavanti puruñä loke
mad-bhaktäs tväm anuvratäù
bhavän me khalu bhaktänäà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
711
sarveñäà pratirüpa-dhåk
SYNONYMS
bhavanti—become; puruñäù—persons; loke—in this world; mat-bhaktäù—My
pure devotees; tväm—you; anuvratäù—following in your footsteps;
bhavän—you; me—My; khalu—indeed; bhaktänäm—of all devotees;
sarveñäm—in different mellows; pratirüpa-dhåk—tangible example.
TRANSLATION
Those who follow your example will naturally become My pure devotees.
You are the best example of My devotee, and others should follow in your
footsteps.
PURPORT
In this connection, Çréla Madhväcärya quotes a verse from the Skanda
Puräëa:
åte tu tättvikän devän
näradädéàs tathaiva ca
prahrädäd uttamaù ko nu
viñëu-bhaktau jagat-traye
There are many, many devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
they have been enumerated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.3.20) as follows:
svayambhür näradaù çambhuù
kumäraù kapilo manuù
prahlädo janako bhéñmo
balir vaiyäsakir vayam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
712
Of the twelve authorized devotees—Lord Brahmä, Närada, Lord Çiva, Kapila,
Manu and so on—Prahläda Mahäräja is understood to be the best example.
TEXT 22
ku-å Tv& Pa[eTak*-TYaaiNa iPaTau" PaUTaSYa SavRXa" )
Mad(r)SPaXaRNaeNaa(r) l/aek-aNYaaSYaiTa SauPa[Jaa" )) 22 ))
kuru tvaà preta-kåtyäni
pituù pütasya sarvaçaù
mad-aìga-sparçanenäìga
lokän yäsyati suprajäù
SYNONYMS
kuru—perform; tvam—you; preta-kåtyäni—the ritualistic ceremony performed
after death; pituù—of your father; pütasya—already purified; sarvaçaù—in all
respects; mat-aìga—My body; sparçanena—by touching; aìga—My dear child;
lokän—to planets; yäsyati—he will be elevated; su-prajäù—to become a
devotee-citizen.
TRANSLATION
My dear child, your father has already been purified just by the touch of My
body at the time of his death. Nonetheless, the duty of a son is to perform the
çräddha ritualistic ceremony after his father's death so that his father may be
promoted to a planetary system where he may become a good citizen and
devotee.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
713
In this regard, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that although
Hiraëyakaçipu was already purified, he had to take birth on a higher planetary
system to become a devotee again. Prahläda Mahäräja was advised to perform
the ritualistic ceremony as a matter of etiquette, for the Supreme Personality
of Godhead under no circumstances wants to stop the regulative principles.
Madhva Muni also instructs:
madhu-kaiöabhau bhakty-abhävä
dürau bhagavato måtau
tama eva kramäd äptau
bhaktyä ced yo harià yayau
When the demons Madhu and Kaiöabha were killed by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, their kinsmen also observed the ritualistic ceremonies
so that these demons could return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 23
iPa}Ya& c SQaaNaMaaiTaï YaQaae¢&- b]øvaidi>a" )
MaYYaaveXYa MaNaSTaaTa ku-å k-MaaRi<a MaTPar" )) 23 ))
pitryaà ca sthänam ätiñöha
yathoktaà brahmavädibhiù
mayy äveçya manas täta
kuru karmäëi mat-paraù
SYNONYMS
pitryam—paternal; ca—also; sthänam—place, throne; ätiñöha—sit upon;
yathä-uktam—as described; brahmavädibhiù—by the followers of Vedic
civilization; mayi—unto Me; äveçya—being fully absorbed; manaù—the mind;
täta—My dear boy; kuru—just execute; karmäëi—the regulative duties;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
714
mat-paraù—just for the sake of My work.
TRANSLATION
After performing the ritualistic ceremonies, take charge of your father's
kingdom. Sit upon the throne and do not be disturbed by materialistic activities.
Please keep your mind fixed upon Me. Without transgressing the injunctions of
the Vedas, as a matter of formality you may perform your particular duties.
PURPORT
When one becomes a devotee, he no longer has any duty to the Vedic
regulative principles. One has many duties to perform, but if one becomes fully
devoted to the Lord, he no longer has any such obligations. As stated in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.5.41):
devarñi-bhütäpta-nåëäà pitèëäà
na kiìkaro näyam åëé ca räjan
sarvätmanä yaù çaraëaà çaraëyaà
gato mukundaà parihåtya kartam
One who has fully surrendered to the lotus feet of the Lord is no longer a
debtor to his forefathers, the great sages, human society, the common man or
any living entity.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead nonetheless advised Prahläda
Mahäräja to follow the regulative principles, for since he was going to be the
king, others would follow his example. Thus Lord Nåsiàhadeva advised
Prahläda Mahäräja to engage in his political duties so that people would
become the Lord's devotees.
yad yad äcarati çreñöhas
tad tad evetaro janaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
715
sa yat pramäëaà kurute
lokas tad anuvartate
"Whatever action a great man performs, common men follow. And whatever
standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the world pursues." (Bg. 3.21) One
should not be attached to any materialistic activities, but a devotee may
perform such activities as an example to show the common man that one
should not deviate from the Vedic injunctions.
TEXT 24
é[qNaard ovac
Pa[hadae_iPa TaQaa c§e- iPaTauYaRTSaaMParaiYak-Ma( )
YaQaah >aGavaNa( raJaài>aiz¢-ae iÜJaaiTai>a" )) 24 ))
çré-närada uväca
prahrädo 'pi tathä cakre
pitur yat sämparäyikam
yathäha bhagavän räjann
abhiñikto dvijätibhiù
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; prahrädaù—Prahläda Mahäräja;
api—also; tathä—in that way; cakre—executed; pituù—of his father;
yat—whatever; sämparäyikam—ritualistic ceremonies performed after death;
yathä—even as; äha—order; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
räjan—O King Yudhiñöhira; abhiñiktaù—he was enthroned in the kingdom;
dvi-jätibhiù—by the brähmaëas present.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
716
TRANSLATION
Çré Närada Muni continued: Thus, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead
ordered, Prahläda Mahäräja performed the ritualistic ceremonies for his father.
O King Yudhiñöhira, he was then enthroned in the kingdom of Hiraëyakaçipu,
as directed by the brähmaëas.
PURPORT
It is essential that society be divided into four groups of men-brähmaëas,
kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras. Here we see that although Prahläda was perfect in
every respect, he nonetheless followed the instructions of the brähmaëas who
performed the Vedic rituals. Therefore in society there must be a very
intelligent class of leaders who are well versed in the Vedic knowledge so that
they can guide the entire populace to follow the Vedic principles and thus
gradually become most perfect and eligible to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 25
Pa[SaadSauMau%& d*îa b]øa Narhir„& hirMa( )
STauTva vaiG>a" Paiv}aai>a" Pa[ah devaidi>av*RTa" )) 25 ))
prasäda-sumukhaà dåñövä
brahmä naraharià harim
stutvä vägbhiù paviträbhiù
präha devädibhir våtaù
SYNONYMS
prasäda-sumukham—whose face was bright because the Supreme Lord was
pleased; dåñövä—seeing this situation; brahmä—Lord Brahmä;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
717
nara-harim—unto Lord Nåsiàhadeva; harim—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; stutvä—offering prayers; vägbhiù—by transcendental words;
paviträbhiù—without any material contamination; präha—addressed (the
Lord); deva-ädibhiù—by other demigods; våtaù—surrounded.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, surrounded by the other demigods, was bright-faced because
the Lord was pleased. Thus he offered prayers to the Lord with transcendental
words.
TEXT 26
é[qb]øaevac
devdevai%l/aDYa+a >aUTa>aavNa PaUvRJa )
idíya Tae iNahTa" PaaPaae l/aek-SaNTaaPaNaae_Saur" )) 26 ))
çré-brahmoväca
deva-deväkhilädhyakña
bhüta-bhävana pürvaja
diñöyä te nihataù päpo
loka-santäpano 'suraù
SYNONYMS
çré-brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; deva-deva—O my Lord, Lord of all the
demigods; akhila-adhyakña—owner of the whole universe; bhüta-bhävana—O
cause of all living entities; pürva-ja—O original Personality of Godhead;
diñöyä—by Your example or because of our good fortune; te—by You;
nihataù—killed; päpaù—most sinful; loka-santäpanaù—giving trouble to the
entire universe; asuraù—the demon Hiraëyakaçipu.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
718
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: O Supreme Lord of all lords, proprietor of the entire
universe, O benedictor of all living entities, O original person [Cc. Ädi-puruña],
because of our good fortune You have now killed this sinful demon, who was
giving trouble to the entire universe.
PURPORT
The word pürvaja is described in Bhagavad-gétä (10.8): ahaà sarvasya
prabhavo mattaù sarvaà pravartate. All the demigods, including Lord Brahmä,
are manifested from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the
original person, the cause of all causes, is Govinda, the ädi-puruñam.
TEXT 27
Yaae_SaaE l/BDavrae Mataae Na vDYaae MaMa Sa*iíi>a" )
TaPaaeYaaeGabl/aeàÖ" SaMaSTaiNaGaMaaNahNa( )) 27 ))
yo 'sau labdha-varo matto
na vadhyo mama såñöibhiù
tapo-yoga-balonnaddhaù
samasta-nigamän ahan
SYNONYMS
yaù—the person who; asau—he (Hiraëyakaçipu); labdha-varaù—being given
the extraordinary benediction; mattaù—from me; na vadhyaù—not to be
killed; mama såñöibhiù—by any living being created by me;
tapaù-yoga-bala—by austerity, mystic power and strength; unnaddhaù—thus
being very proud; samasta—all; nigamän—Vedic injunctions;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
719
ahan—disregarded, transgressed.
TRANSLATION
This demon, Hiraëyakaçipu, received from me the benediction that he would
not be killed by any living being within my creation. With this assurance and
with strength derived from austerities and mystic power, he became excessively
proud and transgressed all the Vedic injunctions.
TEXT 28
idíya TataNaYa" SaaDauMaRha>aaGavTaae_>aRk-" )
TvYaa ivMaaeicTaae Ma*TYaaeidRíya Tva& SaiMaTaae_DauNaa )) 28 ))
diñöyä tat-tanayaù sädhur
mahä-bhägavato 'rbhakaù
tvayä vimocito måtyor
diñöyä tväà samito 'dhunä
SYNONYMS
diñöyä—by fortune; tat-tanayaù—his son; sädhuù—who is a great saintly
person; mahä-bhägavataù—a great and exalted devotee; arbhakaù—although a
child; tvayä—by Your Lordship; vimocitaù—released; måtyoù—from the
clutches of death; diñöyä—also by great fortune; tväm samitaù—perfectly under
Your shelter; adhunä—now.
TRANSLATION
By great fortune, Hiraëyakaçipu's son Prahläda Mahäräja has now been
released from death, for although he is a child, he is an exalted devotee. Now he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
720
is fully under the protection of Your lotus feet.
TEXT 29
WTad( vPauSTae >aGavNDYaaYaTa" ParMaaTMaNa" )
SavRTaae Gaaeá* SaN}aaSaaNMa*TYaaeriPa iJagaa&SaTa" )) 29 ))
etad vapus te bhagavan
dhyäyataù paramätmanaù
sarvato goptå santräsän
måtyor api jighäàsataù
SYNONYMS
etat—this; vapuù—body; te—Your; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of
Godhead; dhyäyataù—those who meditate upon; parama-ätmanaù—of the
Supreme Person; sarvataù—from everywhere; goptå—the protector;
santräsät—from all kinds of fear; måtyoù api—even from fear of death;
jighäàsataù—if one is envied by an enemy.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, You are the Supreme
Soul. If one meditates upon Your transcendental body, You naturally protect
him from all sources of fear, even the imminent danger of death.
PURPORT
Everyone is sure to die, for no one is excused from the hands of death,
which is but a feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (måtyuù
sarva-haraç cäham [Bg. 10.34]). When one becomes a devotee, however, he is
not destined to die according to a limited duration of life. Everyone has a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
721
limited duration of life, but a devotee's lifetime can be extended by the mercy
of the Supreme Lord, who is able to nullify the results of one's karma. Karmäëi
nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhäjäà [Bs. 5.54]. This is the statement of
Brahma-saàhitä (5.54). A devotee is not under the laws of karma. Therefore
even a devotee's scheduled death can be avoided by the causeless mercy of the
Supreme Lord. God protects the devotee even from the extreme danger of
death.
TEXT 30
é[q>aGavaNauvac
MaEv& iv>aae_Saura<aa& Tae Pa[deYa" PaÚSaM>av )
vr" §U-riNaSaGaaR<aaMahqNaaMaMa*Ta& YaQaa )) 30 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
maivaà vibho 'suräëäà te
pradeyaù padma-sambhava
varaù krüra-nisargäëäm
ahénäm amåtaà yathä
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead replied (to
Brahmä); mä—do not; evam—thus; vibho—O great person; asuräëäm—unto
the demons; te—by you; pradeyaù—bestow benedictions; padma-sambhava—O
Lord Brahmä, born from the lotus flower; varaù—benediction;
krüra-nisargäëäm—persons who are by nature very cruel and jealous;
ahénäm—to snakes; amåtam—nectar or milk; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
722
The Personality of Godhead replied: My dear Lord Brahmä, O great lord
born from the lotus flower, just as it is dangerous to feed milk to a snake, so it
is dangerous to give benedictions to demons, who are by nature ferocious and
jealous. I warn you not to give such benedictions to any demon again.
TEXT 31
é[qNaard ovac
wTYau¤-a >aGavaNraJa&STaTaêaNTadRDae hir" )
Ad*XYa" SavR>aUTaaNaa& PaUiJaTa" ParMaeiïNaa )) 31 ))
çré-närada uväca
ity uktvä bhagavän räjaàs
tataç cäntardadhe hariù
adåçyaù sarva-bhütänäà
püjitaù parameñöhinä
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; iti uktvä—saying this; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; räjan—O King Yudhiñöhira; tataù—from
that place; ca—also; antardadhe—disappeared; hariù—the Lord;
adåçyaù—without being visible; sarva-bhütänäm—by all kinds of living
entities; püjitaù—being worshiped; parameñöhinä—by Lord Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: O King Yudhiñöhira, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is not visible to an ordinary human being, spoke in this way,
instructing Lord Brahmä. Then, being worshiped by Brahmä, the Lord
disappeared from that place.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
723
TEXT 32
TaTa" SaMPaUJYa iXarSaa vvNde ParMaeiïNaMa( )
>av& Pa[JaaPaTaqNdevaNPa[hadae >aGavTk-l/a" )) 32 ))
tataù sampüjya çirasä
vavande parameñöhinam
bhavaà prajäpatén devän
prahrädo bhagavat-kaläù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; sampüjya—worshiping; çirasä—by bowing the head;
vavande—offered prayers; parameñöhinam—to Lord Brahmä; bhavam—to Lord
Çiva; prajäpatén—to the great demigods entrusted with increasing the
population; devän—to all the great demigods; prahrädaù—Prahläda Mahäräja;
bhagavat-kaläù—influential parts of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja then worshiped and offered prayers to all the demigods,
such as Brahmä, Çiva and the Prajäpatis, who are all parts of the Lord.
TEXT 33
TaTa" k-aVYaaidi>a" SaaDa| MauiNai>a" k-Mal/aSaNa" )
dETYaaNaa& daNavaNaa& c Pa[hadMak-raeTa( PaiTaMa( )) 33 ))
tataù kävyädibhiù särdhaà
munibhiù kamaläsanaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
724
daityänäà dänavänäà ca
prahrädam akarot patim
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; kävya-ädibhiù—with Çukräcärya and others; särdham—and
with; munibhiù—great saintly persons; kamala-äsanaù—Lord Brahmä;
daityänäm—of all the demons; dänavänäm—of all the giants; ca—and;
prahrädam—Prahläda Mahäräja; akarot—created; patim—the master or king.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, along with Çukräcärya and other great saints, Lord Brahmä,
whose seat is on the lotus flower, made Prahläda the king of all the demons and
giants in the universe.
PURPORT
By the grace of Lord Nåsiàhadeva, Prahläda Mahäräja became a greater
king than his father, Hiraëyakaçipu. Prahläda's inauguration was performed by
Lord Brahmä in the presence of other saintly persons and demigods.
TEXT 34
Pa[iTaNaNÛ TaTaae deva" Pa[YauJYa ParMaaiXaz" )
SvDaaMaaiNa YaYaU raJaNb]øaÛa" Pa[iTaPaUiJaTaa" )) 34 ))
pratinandya tato deväù
prayujya paramäçiñaù
sva-dhämäni yayü räjan
brahmädyäù pratipüjitäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
725
SYNONYMS
pratinandya—congratulating; tataù—thereafter; deväù—all the demigods;
prayujya—having offered; parama-äçiñaù—exalted benedictions;
sva-dhämäni—to their respective abodes; yayuù—returned; räjan—O King
Yudhiñöhira; brahma-ädyäù—all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä;
pratipüjitäù—being thoroughly worshiped (by Prahläda Mahäräja).
TRANSLATION
O King Yudhiñöhira, after all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä, were
properly worshiped by Prahläda Mahäräja, they offered Prahläda their utmost
benedictions and then returned to their respective abodes.
TEXT 35
Wv& c PaazRdaE ivZ<aae" Pau}aTv& Pa[aiPaTaaE idTae" )
ôid iSQaTaeNa hir<aa vEr>aaveNa TaaE hTaaE )) 35 ))
evaà ca pärñadau viñëoù
putratvaà präpitau diteù
hådi sthitena hariëä
vaira-bhävena tau hatau
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; ca—also; pärñadau—the two personal associates;
viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; putratvam—becoming the sons; präpitau—having
gotten; diteù—of Diti; hådi—within the core of the heart; sthitena—being
situated; hariëä—by the Supreme Lord; vaira-bhävena—by conceiving as an
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
726
enemy; tau—both of them; hatau—were killed.
TRANSLATION
Thus the two associates of Lord Viñëu who had become Hiraëyäkña and
Hiraëyakaçipu, the sons of Diti, were both killed. By illusion they had thought
that the Supreme Lord, who is situated in everyone's heart, was their enemy.
PURPORT
The discourse concerning Lord Nåsiàhadeva and Prahläda Mahäräja began
when Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira asked Närada how Çiçupäla had merged into the
body of Kåñëa. Çiçupäla and Dantavakra were the same Hiraëyäkña and
Hiraëyakaçipu. Here Närada Muni is relating how in three different births the
associates of Lord Viñëu were killed by Lord Viñëu Himself. First they were the
demons Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu.
TEXT 36
PauNaê ivPa[XaaPaeNa ra+aSaaE TaaE b>aUvTau" )
ku-M>ak-<aRdXaGa]qvaE hTaaE TaaE raMaiv§-MaE" )) 36 ))
punaç ca vipra-çäpena
räkñasau tau babhüvatuù
kumbhakarëa-daça-grévau
hatau tau räma-vikramaiù
SYNONYMS
punaù—again; ca—also; vipra-çäpena—being cursed by the brähmaëas;
räkñasau—the two Räkñasas; tau—both of them; babhüvatuù—incarnated as;
kumbhakarëa-daça-grévau—known as Kumbhakarëa and the ten-headed
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
727
Rävaëa (in their next birth); hatau—they also were killed; tau—both of them;
räma-vikramaiù—by the extraordinary strength of Lord Rämacandra.
TRANSLATION
Being cursed by the brähmaëas, the same two associates took birth again as
Kumbhakarëa and the ten-headed Rävaëa. These two Räkñasas were killed by
Lord Rämacandra's extraordinary power.
TEXT 37
XaYaaNaaE YauiDa iNai>aRàôdYaaE raMaXaaYakE-" )
TaiÀtaaE JahTaudeRh& YaQaa Pa[a¢-NaJaNMaiNa )) 37 ))
çayänau yudhi nirbhinnahådayau
räma-çäyakaiù
tac-cittau jahatur dehaà
yathä präktana-janmani
SYNONYMS
çayänau—being laid down; yudhi—on the battlefield; nirbhinna—being
pierced; hådayau—in the core of the heart; räma-çäyakaiù—by the arrows of
Lord Rämacandra; tat-cittau—thinking or being conscious of Lord
Rämacandra; jahatuù—gave up; deham—body; yathä—even as;
präktana-janmani—in their previous births.
TRANSLATION
Pierced by the arrows of Lord Rämacandra, both Kumbhakarëa and Rävaëa
lay on the ground and left their bodies, fully absorbed in thought of the Lord,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
728
just as they had in their previous births as Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu.
TEXT 38
TaaivhaQa PauNaJaaRTaaE iXaéuPaal/k-æzJaaE )
hraE vEraNaubNDaeNa PaXYaTaSTae SaMaqYaTau" )) 38 ))
täv ihätha punar jätau
çiçupäla-karüña-jau
harau vairänubandhena
paçyatas te saméyatuù
SYNONYMS
tau—both of them; iha—in this human society; atha—in this way;
punaù—again; jätau—took their births; çiçupäla—Çiçupäla;
karüña-jau—Dantavakra; harau—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vaira-anubandhena—by the bondage of considering the Lord an enemy;
paçyataù—were looking on; te—while you; saméyatuù—merged or went into
the lotus feet of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
They both took birth again in human society as Çiçupäla and Dantavakra and
continued in the same enmity toward the Lord. It is they who merged into the
body of the Lord in your presence.
PURPORT
Vairänubandhena. Acting like the Lord's enemy is also beneficial for the
living entity. Kämäd dveñäd bhayät snehäd. Whether in lusty desire, anger, fear
or envy of the Lord, somehow or other, as recommended by Çréla Rüpa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
729
Gosvämé (tasmät kenäpy upäyena [SB 7.1.32]), one should become attached to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and ultimately achieve the goal of
returning home, back to Godhead. What, then, is to be said of one who is
related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead as a servant, friend, father,
mother or conjugal lover?
TEXT 39
WNa" PaUvRk*-Ta& YaTa( Tad( raJaaNa" k*-Z<avEir<a" )
JahuSTae_NTae TadaTMaaNa" k-I$=" PaeXaSk*-Taae YaQaa )) 39 ))
enaù pürva-kåtaà yat tad
räjänaù kåñëa-vairiëaù
jahus te 'nte tad-ätmänaù
kéöaù peçaskåto yathä
SYNONYMS
enaù—this sinful activity (of blaspheming the Supreme Lord);
pürva-kåtam—executed in previous births; yat—which; tat—that;
räjänaù—kings; kåñëa-vairiëaù—always acting as enemies of Kåñëa;
jahuù—gave up; te—all of them; ante—at the time of death;
tat-ätmänaù—attaining the same spiritual body and form; kéöaù—a worm;
peçaskåtaù—(captured by) a black drone; yathä—just like.
TRANSLATION
Not only Çiçupäla and Dantavakra but also many, many other kings who
acted as enemies of Kåñëa attained salvation at the time of death. Because they
thought of the Lord, they received spiritual bodies and forms the same as His,
just as worms captured by a black drone obtain the same type of body as the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
730
drone.
PURPORT
The mystery of yogic meditation is explained here. Real yogés always
meditate on the form of Viñëu within their hearts. Consequently, at the time
of death they give up their bodies while thinking of the form of Viñëu and thus
attain Viñëuloka, Vaikuëöhaloka, where they receive bodily features the same
as those of the Lord. From the Sixth Canto we have already learned that when
the Viñëudütas came from Vaikuëöha to deliver Ajämila, they looked exactly
like Viñëu, with four hands and the same features as Viñëu. Therefore, we may
conclude that if one practices thinking of Viñëu and is fully absorbed in
thinking of Him at the time of death, one returns home, back to Godhead.
Even enemies of Kåñëa who thought of Kåñëa in fear (bhaya), such as King
Kaàsa, received bodies in a spiritual identity similar to that of the Lord.
TEXT 40
YaQaa YaQaa >aGavTaae >a¢-ya ParMaYaai>ada )
Na*PaaêEÛadYa" SaaTMYa& hreSTaiÀNTaYaa YaYau" )) 40 ))
yathä yathä bhagavato
bhaktyä paramayäbhidä
nåpäç caidyädayaù sätmyaà
hares tac-cintayä yayuù
SYNONYMS
yathä yathä—just as; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
bhaktyä—by devotional service; paramayä—supreme; abhidä—incessantly
thinking of such activities; nåpäù—kings; caidya-ädayaù—Çiçupäla,
Dantavakra and others; sätmyam—the same form; hareù—of the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
731
Personality of Godhead; tat-cintayä—by constantly thinking of Him;
yayuù—returned home, back to Godhead.
TRANSLATION
By devotional service, pure devotees who incessantly think of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead receive bodies similar to His. This is known as
särüpya-mukti. Although Çiçupäla, Dantavakra and other kings thought of
Kåñëa as an enemy, they also achieved the same result.
PURPORT
In Caitanya-caritämåta, in connection with Lord Caitanya's instructions to
Sanätana Gosvämé, it is explained that a devotee should externally execute his
routine devotional service in a regular way but should always inwardly think of
the particular mellow in which he is attracted to the service of the Lord. This
constant thought of the Lord makes the devotee eligible to return home, back
to Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9), tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti
mäm eti: after giving up his body, a devotee does not again receive a material
body, but goes back to Godhead and receives a spiritual body resembling those
of the Lord's eternal associates whose activities he followed. However the
devotee likes to serve the Lord, he may constantly think of the Lord's
associates—the cowherd boys, the gopés, the Lord's father and mother, His
servants and the trees, land, animals, plants and water in the Lord's abode.
Because of constantly thinking of these features, one acquires a transcendental
position. Kings like Çiçupäla, Dantavakra, Kaàsa, Pauëòraka, Narakäsura and
Sälva were all similarly delivered. This is confirmed by Madhväcärya:
pauëòrake narake caiva
çälve kaàse ca rukmiëi
äviñöäs tu harer bhaktäs
tad-bhaktyä harim äpire
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
732
Pauëòraka, Narakäsura, Sälva and Kaàsa were all inimical toward the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but because all these kings constantly
thought of Him, they achieved the same liberation—särüpya-mukti. The
jïäna-bhakta, the devotee who follows the path of jïäna, also attains the same
destination. If even the enemies of the Lord achieve salvation by constantly
thinking about the Lord, what is to be said of pure devotees who always engage
in the Lord's service and who think of nothing but the Lord in every activity?
TEXT 41
Aa:YaaTa& SavRMaeTaTa( Tae YaNMaa& Tv& PairPa*ívaNa( )
dMagaaezSauTaadqNaa& hre" SaaTMYaMaiPa iÜzaMa( )) 41 ))
äkhyätaà sarvam etat te
yan mäà tvaà paripåñöavän
damaghoña-sutädénäà
hareù sätmyam api dviñäm
SYNONYMS
äkhyätam—described; sarvam—everything; etat—this; te—unto you;
yat—whatever; mäm—unto me; tvam—you; paripåñöavän—inquired;
damaghoña-suta-ädénäm—of the son of Damaghoña (Çiçupäla) and others;
hareù—of the Lord; sätmyam—equal bodily features; api—even;
dviñäm—although they were inimical.
TRANSLATION
Everything you asked me about how Çiçupäla and others attained salvation
although they were inimical has now been explained to you by me.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
733
TEXT 42
Wza b]ø<YadevSYa k*-Z<aSYa c MahaTMaNa" )
AvTaark-Qaa Pau<Yaa vDaae Ya}aaiddETYaYaae" )) 42 ))
eñä brahmaëya-devasya
kåñëasya ca mahätmanaù
avatära-kathä puëyä
vadho yaträdi-daityayoù
SYNONYMS
eñä—all this; brahmaëya-devasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is worshiped by all brähmaëas; kåñëasya—of Kåñëa, the original Supreme
Personality of Godhead; ca—also; mahä-ätmanaù—the Supersoul;
avatära-kathä—narrations about His incarnations; puëyä—pious, purifying;
vadhaù—killing; yatra—wherein; ädi—in the beginning of the millennium;
daityayoù—of the demons (Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu).
TRANSLATION
In this narration about Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, various
expansions or incarnations of the Lord have been described, and the killing of
the two demons Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu has also been described.
PURPORT
Avatäras, or incarnations, are expansions of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead—Kåñëa, Govinda.
advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam
ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà nava-yauvanaà ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
734
vedeñu durlabham adurlabham ätma-bhaktau
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who is the original
person-nondual, infallible, and without beginning. Although He expands into
unlimited forms, He is still the original, and although He is the oldest person,
He always appears as a fresh youth. Such eternal, blissful and all-knowing
forms of the Lord cannot be understood by the academic wisdom of the Vedas,
but they are always manifest to pure, unalloyed devotees." (Bs. 5.33) The
Brahma-saàhitä describes the avatäras. Indeed, all the avatäras are described
in the authentic scriptures. No one can become an avatära, or incarnation,
although this has become fashionable in the age of Kali. The avatäras are
described in the authentic scriptures (çästras), and therefore before one risks
accepting a pretender as an avatära, one should refer to the çästras. The çästras
say everywhere that Kåñëa is the original Personality of Godhead and that He
has innumerable avatäras, or incarnations. Elsewhere in the Brahma-saàhitä it
is said, rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena tiñöhan: [Bs. 5.39] Räma, Nåsiàha,
Varäha and many others are consecutive expansions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. After Kåñëa comes Balaräma, after Balaräma is
Saìkarñaëa, then Aniruddha, Pradyumna, Näräyaëa and then the
puruña-avatäras—Mahä-Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and Kñérodakaçäyé
Viñëu. All of them are avatäras.
One must hear about the avatäras. Narrations about such avatäras are
called avatära-kathä, the narrations of Kåñëa's expansions. Hearing and
chanting these narrations is completely pious. Såëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù
puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù [SB 1.2.17]. One who hears and chants can become
puëya, purified of material contamination.
Whenever there are references to the avatäras, religious principles are
established, and demons who are against Kåñëa are killed. The Kåñëa
consciousness movement is spreading all over the world with two aims—to
establish Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and to kill all the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
735
pretenders who falsely present themselves as avatäras. The preachers of the
Kåñëa consciousness movement must carry this conviction very carefully
within their hearts and kill the demons who in many tactful ways vilify the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. If we take shelter of Nåsiàhadeva
and Prahläda Mahäräja, it will be easier to kill the demons who are against
Kåñëa and to thus reestablish Kåñëa's supremacy. Kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam:
[SB 1.3.28] Kåñëa is the Supreme Lord, the original Lord. Prahläda Mahäräja is
our guru, and Kåñëa is our worshipable God. As advised by Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. If
we can be successful in getting the mercy of Prahläda Mahäräja and also that
of Nåsiàhadeva, then our Kåñëa consciousness movement will be extremely
successful.
The demon Hiraëyakaçipu had so many ways to try to become God himself,
but although Prahläda Mahäräja was chastised and threatened in many ways,
he rigidly refused to accept his powerful demoniac father as God. Following in
the footsteps of Prahläda Mahäräja, we should reject all the rascals who
pretend to be God. We must accept Kåñëa and His incarnations, and no one
else.
TEXTS 43-44
Pa[hadSYaaNaucirTa& Maha>aaGavTaSYa c )
>ai¢-jaRNa& ivri¢-ê YaaQaaQYa| caSYa vE hre" )) 43 ))
SaGaRiSQaTYaPYaYaeXaSYa Gau<ak-MaaRNauv<aRNaMa( )
Paravreza& SQaaNaaNaa& k-ale/Na VYaTYaYaae MahaNa( )) 44 ))
prahrädasyänucaritaà
mahä-bhägavatasya ca
bhaktir jïänaà viraktiç ca
yäthärthyaà cäsya vai hareù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
736
sarga-sthity-apyayeçasya
guëa-karmänuvarëanam
parävareñäà sthänänäà
kälena vyatyayo mahän
SYNONYMS
prahrädasya—of Prahläda Mahäräja; anucaritam—characteristics (understood
by reading or describing his activities); mahä-bhägavatasya—of the great and
exalted devotee; ca—also; bhaktiù—devotional service unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; jïänam—complete knowledge of the Transcendence
(Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän); viraktiù—renunciation of material
existence; ca—also; yäthärthyam—just to understand each of them perfectly;
ca—and; asya—of this; vai—indeed; hareù—always in reference to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarga—of creation; sthiti—maintenance;
apyaya—and annihilation; éçasya—of the master (the Supreme Personality of
Godhead); guëa—of the transcendental qualities and opulences; karma—and
activities; anu(35)varëanam-description within the disciplic succession;
para-avareñäm—of different types of living entities known as demigods and
demons; sthänänäm—of the various planets or places to live; kälena—in due
course of time; vyatyayaù—the annihilation of everything; mahän—although
very great.
TRANSLATION
This narration describes the characteristics of the great and exalted devotee
Prahläda Mahäräja, his staunch devotional service, his perfect knowledge, and
his perfect detachment from material contamination. It also describes the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as the cause of creation, maintenance and
annihilation. Prahläda Mahäräja, in his prayers, has described the
transcendental qualities of the Lord and has also described how the various
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
737
abodes of the demigods and demons, regardless of how materially opulent, are
destroyed by the mere direction of the Lord.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is filled with descriptions of the characteristics of
various devotees, with reference to the service of the Lord. This Vedic
literature is called Bhägavatam because it deals with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and His devotee. By studying Çrémad-Bhägavatam under the
direction of the bona fide spiritual master, one can perfectly understand the
science of Kåñëa, the nature of the material and spiritual worlds, and the aim
of life. Çrémad-Bhägavatam amalaà puräëam. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the
spotless Vedic literature, as we have discussed in the beginning of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Therefore, simply by understanding Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
one can understand the science of the activities of the devotees, the activities
of the demons, the permanent abode and the temporary abode. Through
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, everything is perfectly known.
TEXT 45
DaMaaeR >aaGavTaaNaa& c >aGavaNYaeNa GaMYaTae )
Aa:YaaNae_iSMaNSaMaaManaTaMaaDYaaiTMak-MaXaezTa" )) 45 ))
dharmo bhägavatänäà ca
bhagavän yena gamyate
äkhyäne 'smin samämnätam
ädhyätmikam açeñataù
SYNONYMS
dharmaù—religious principles; bhägavatänäm—of the devotees; ca—and;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yena—by which;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
738
gamyate—one can understand; äkhyäne—in the narration; asmin—this;
samämnätam—is perfectly described; ädhyätmikam—transcendence;
açeñataù—without reservations.
TRANSLATION
The principles of religion by which one can actually understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are called bhägavata-dharma. In this narration,
therefore, which deals with these principles, actual transcendence is properly
described.
PURPORT
Through the principles of religion, one can understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Brahman (the impersonal feature of the Supreme
Lord) and Paramätmä (the localized aspect of the Lord). When one is well
conversant with all these principles, he becomes a devotee and performs
bhägavata-dharma. Prahläda Mahäräja, the spiritual master in the line of
disciplic succession, advised that this bhägavata-dharma be instructed to
students from the very beginning of their education (kaumära äcaret präjïo
dharmän bhägavatän iha [SB 7.6.1]). To understand the science of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the real purpose of education. Çravaëaà kértanaà
viñëoù [SB 7.5.23]. One must simply hear about and describe Lord Viñëu and
His various incarnations. This narration concerning Prahläda Mahäräja and
Lord Nåsiàhadeva, therefore, has properly described spiritual, transcendental
subjects.
TEXT 46
Ya WTaTa( Pau<YaMaa:YaaNa& ivZ<aaevsYaaeRPab*&ihTaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
739
k-ITaRYaeC^\ÖYaa é[uTva k-MaRPaaXaEivRMauCYaTae )) 46 ))
ya etat puëyam äkhyänaà
viñëor véryopabåàhitam
kértayec chraddhayä çrutvä
karma-päçair vimucyate
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; etat—this; puëyam—pious; äkhyänam—narration;
viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; vérya—the supreme power; upabåàhitam—in which is
described; kértayet—chants or repeats; çraddhayä—with great faith;
çrutvä—after properly hearing (from the right source); karma-päçaiù—from
the bondage of fruitive activities; vimucyate—becomes liberated.
TRANSLATION
One who hears and chants this narration about the omnipotence of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, is certainly liberated from material
bondage without fail.
TEXT 47
WTad( Ya AaidPauåzSYa Ma*GaeNd]l/Il/a&
dETYaeNd]YaUQaPavDa& Pa[YaTa" Pa#e=Ta )
dETYaaTMaJaSYa c SaTaa& Pa[vrSYa Pau<Ya&
é[uTvaNau>aavMaku-Taae>aYaMaeiTa l/aek-Ma( )) 47 ))
etad ya ädi-puruñasya mågendra-léläà
daityendra-yütha-pa-vadhaà prayataù paöheta
daityätmajasya ca satäà pravarasya puëyaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
740
çrutvänubhävam akuto-bhayam eti lokam
SYNONYMS
etat—this narration; yaù—anyone who; ädi-puruñasya—of the original
Personality of Godhead; måga-indra-léläm—pastimes as a lion and human
being combined; daitya-indra—of the King of the demons; yütha-pa—as strong
as an elephant; vadham—the killing; prayataù—with great attention;
paöheta—reads; daitya-ätma-jasya—of Prahläda Mahäräja, the son of the
demon; ca—also; satäm—among elevated devotees; pravarasya—the best;
puëyam—pious; çrutvä—hearing; anubhävam—the activities;
akutaù-bhayam—where there is no fear anywhere or at any time; eti—reaches;
lokam—the spiritual world.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja was the best among exalted devotees. Anyone who with
great attention hears this narration concerning the activities of Prahläda
Mahäräja, the killing of Hiraëyakaçipu, and the activities of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Nåsiàhadeva, surely reaches the spiritual world, where
there is no anxiety.
TEXT 48
YaUYa& Na*l/aeke- bTa >aUir>aaGaa
l/aek&- PauNaaNaa MauNaYaae_i>aYaiNTa )
Yaeza& Ga*haNaavSaTaqiTa Saa+aad(
GaU!& Par& b]ø MaNauZYail/(r)Ma( )) 48 ))
yüyaà nå-loke bata bhüri-bhägä
lokaà punänä munayo 'bhiyanti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
741
yeñäà gåhän ävasatéti säkñäd
güòhaà paraà brahma manuñya-liìgam
SYNONYMS
yüyam—all of you (the Päëòavas); nå-loke—within this material world;
bata—however; bhüri-bhägäù—extremely fortunate; lokam—all the planets;
punänäù—who can purify; munayaù—great saintly persons; abhiyanti—almost
always come to visit; yeñäm—of whom; gåhän—the house; ävasati—resides in;
iti—thus; säkñät—directly; güòham—very confidential; param brahma—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; manuñya-liìgam—appearing just like a
human being.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: My dear Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, all of you [the
Päëòavas] are extremely fortunate, for the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa, lives in your palace just like a human being. Great saintly persons know
this very well, and therefore they constantly visit this house.
PURPORT
After hearing about the activities of Prahläda Mahäräja, a pure devotee
should be very anxious to follow in his footsteps, but such a devotee might be
disappointed, thinking that not every devotee can come to the standard of
Prahläda Mahäräja. This is the nature of a pure devotee; he always thinks
himself to be the lowest, to be incompetent and unqualified. Thus after
hearing the narration of Prahläda Mahäräja's activities, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira,
who was on the same standard of devotional service as Prahläda, might have
been thinking of his own humble position. Närada Muni, however, could
understand Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira's mind, and therefore he immediately
encouraged him by saying that the Päëòavas were not less fortunate; they were
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
742
as good as Prahläda Mahäräja because although Lord Nåsiàhadeva appeared
for Prahläda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His original form as
Kåñëa was always living with the Päëòavas. Although the Päëòavas, because of
the influence of Kåñëa's yogamäyä, could not think of their fortunate position,
every saintly person, including the great sage Närada, could understand it, and
therefore they constantly visited Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira.
Any pure devotee who is constantly conscious of Kåñëa is naturally very
fortunate. The word nå-loke, meaning "within the material world," indicates
that before the Päëòavas there had been many, many devotees, such as the
descendants of the Yadu dynasty and Vasiñöha, Maréci, Kaçyapa, Lord Brahmä
and Lord Çiva, who were all extremely fortunate. The Päëòavas, however,
were better than all of them because Kåñëa Himself lived with them
constantly. Närada Muni therefore specifically mentioned that within this
material world (nå-loke) the Päëòavas were the most fortunate.
TEXT 49
Sa va AYa& b]ø MahiÜMa*GYa‚
kE-vLYaiNavaR<aSau%aNau>aUiTa" )
iPa[Ya" Sauôd( v" %lu/ MaaTaule/Ya
AaTMaahR<aqYaae iviDak*-d( Gauåê )) 49 ))
sa vä ayaà brahma mahad-vimågyakaivalya-
nirväëa-sukhänubhütiù
priyaù suhåd vaù khalu mätuleya
ätmärhaëéyo vidhi-kåd guruç ca
SYNONYMS
saù—that (Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa); vä—also; ayam—this;
brahma—the impersonal Brahman (which is an emanation from Kåñëa);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
743
mahat—by great personalities; vimågya—searched for; kaivalya—oneness;
nirväëa-sukha—of transcendental happiness; anubhütiù—the source of
practical experience; priyaù—very, very dear; suhåt—well-wisher; vaù—of you;
khalu—indeed; mätuleyaù—the son of a maternal uncle; ätmä—exactly like
body and soul together; arhaëéyaù—worshipable (because He is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead); vidhi-kåt—(yet He serves you as) an order carrier;
guruù—your supreme advisor; ca—as well.
TRANSLATION
The impersonal Brahman is Kåñëa Himself because Kåñëa is the source of
the impersonal Brahman. He is the origin of the transcendental bliss sought by
great saintly persons, yet He, the Supreme Person, is your most dear friend and
constant well-wisher and is intimately related to you as the son of your
maternal uncle. Indeed, He is always like your body and soul. He is
worshipable, yet He acts as your servant and sometimes as your spiritual
master.
PURPORT
There is always a difference of opinion about the Absolute Truth. One class
of transcendentalists concludes that the Absolute Truth is impersonal, and
another class concludes that the Absolute Truth is a person. In Bhagavad-gétä,
the Absolute Truth is accepted as the Supreme Person. Indeed, that Supreme
Person Himself, Lord Kåñëa, instructs in Bhagavad-gétä, brahmaëo hi
pratiñöhäham [Bg. 14.27], mattaù parataraà nänyat [Bg. 7.7]. "The impersonal
Brahman is My partial manifestation, and there is no truth superior to Me."
That same Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, acted as the supreme
friend and relative of the Päëòavas, and sometimes He even acted as their
servant by carrying a letter from the Päëòavas to Dhåtaräñöra and
Duryodhana. Because Kåñëa was the well-wisher of the Päëòavas, He also
acted as guru by becoming the spiritual master of Arjuna. Arjuna accepted
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
744
Kåñëa as his spiritual master (çiñyas te 'haà çädhi mäà tväà prapannam [Bg.
2.7]), and Kåñëa sometimes chastised him. For example, the Lord said, açocyän
anvaçocas tvaà prajïä-vädäàç ca bhäñase: [Bg. 2.11] "while speaking learned
words, you are mourning for what is not worthy of grief." The Lord also said,
kutas tvä kaçmalam idaà viñame samupasthitam: "My dear Arjuna, how have
these impurities come upon you?" Such was the intimate relationship between
the Päëòavas and Kåñëa. In the same way, a pure devotee of the Lord is always
with Kåñëa through thick and thin; his way of life is Kåñëa. This is the
statement of the authority Çré Närada Muni.
TEXT 50
Na YaSYa Saa+aad( >avPaÚJaaid>aq
æPa& iDaYaa vSTauTaYaaePavi<aRTaMa( )
MaaENaeNa >a¢-yaePaXaMaeNa PaUiJaTa"
Pa[SaqdTaaMaez Sa SaaTvTaa& PaiTa" )) 50 ))
na yasya säkñäd bhava-padmajädibhé
rüpaà dhiyä vastutayopavarëitam
maunena bhaktyopaçamena püjitaù
prasédatäm eña sa sätvatäà patiù
SYNONYMS
na—not; yasya—of whom; säkñät—directly; bhava—Lord Çiva;
padma-ja—Lord Brahmä (born from the lotus); ädibhiù—by them and others
also; rüpam—the form; dhiyä—even by meditation; vastutayä—fundamentally;
upavarëitam—described and perceived; maunena—by samädhi, deep
meditation; bhaktyä—by devotional service; upaçamena—by renunciation;
püjitaù—worshiped; prasédatäm—may He be pleased; eñaù—this; saù—He;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
745
sätvatäm—of the great devotees; patiù—the master.
TRANSLATION
Exalted persons like Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä could not properly describe
the truth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. May the Lord, who is
always worshiped as the protector of all devotees by great saints who observe
vows of silence, meditation, devotional service and renunciation, be pleased
with us.
PURPORT
The Absolute Truth is sought by different persons in different ways, yet He
remains inconceivable. Nonetheless, devotees like the Päëòavas, the gopés, the
cowherd boys, Mother Yaçodä, Nanda Mahäräja and all the inhabitants of
Våndävana do not need to practice conventional processes of meditation to
attain the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for He remains with them
through thick and thin. Therefore a saint like Närada, understanding the
difference between transcendentalists and pure devotees, always prays that the
Lord will be pleased with him.
TEXT 51
Sa Wz >aGavaNraJaNVYaTaNaaed( ivhTa& YaXa" )
Paura åd]SYa devSYa MaYaeNaaNaNTaMaaiYaNaa )) 51 ))
sa eña bhagavän räjan
vyatanod vihataà yaçaù
purä rudrasya devasya
mayenänanta-mäyinä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
746
SYNONYMS
saù eñaù bhagavän—the same Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, who is
Parabrahman; räjan—my dear King; vyatanot—expanded; vihatam—lost;
yaçaù—reputation; purä—formerly in history; rudrasya—of Lord Çiva (the
most powerful among the demigods); devasya—the demigod; mayena—by a
demon named Maya; ananta—unlimited; mäyinä—possessing technical
knowledge.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Yudhiñöhira, long, long ago in history, a demon known as
Maya Dänava, who was very expert in technical knowledge, reduced the
reputation of Lord Çiva. In that situation, Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, saved Lord Çiva.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva is known as Mahädeva, the most exalted demigod. Thus
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that although Lord Brahmä did not know
the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Çiva could have
known them. This historical incident proves that Lord Çiva derives power
from Lord Kåñëa, the Parabrahman.
TEXT 52
raJaaevac
k-iSMaNa( k-MaRi<a devSYa MaYaae_hÅGadqiXaTau" )
YaQaa caePaicTaa k-IiTaR" k*-Z<aeNaaNaeNa k-QYaTaaMa( )) 52 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
747
räjoväca
kasmin karmaëi devasya
mayo 'haï jagad-éçituù
yathä copacitä kértiù
kåñëenänena kathyatäm
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—King Yudhiñöhira inquired; kasmin—for what reason;
karmaëi—by which activities; devasya—of Lord Mahädeva (Çiva);
mayaù—the great demon Maya Dänava; ahan—vanquished; jagat-éçituù—of
Lord Çiva, who controls the power of the material energy and is the husband of
Durgädevé; yathä—just as; ca—and; upacitä—again expanded;
kértiù—reputation; kåñëena—by Lord Kåñëa; anena—this; kathyatäm—please
describe.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira said: For what reason did the demon Maya Dänava
vanquish Lord Çiva's reputation? How did Lord Kåñëa save Lord Çiva and
expand his reputation again? Kindly describe these incidents.
TEXT 53
é[qNaard ovac
iNaiJaRTaa ASaura devEYauRDYaNaeNaaePab*&ihTaE" )
MaaiYaNaa& ParMaacaYa| MaYa& Xar<aMaaYaYau" )) 53 ))
çré-närada uväca
nirjitä asurä devair
yudhy anenopabåàhitaiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
748
mäyinäà paramäcäryaà
mayaà çaraëam äyayuù
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; nirjitäù—being defeated;
asuräù—all the demons; devaiù—by the demigods; yudhi—in battle;
anena—by Lord Kåñëa; upabåàhitaiù—increased in power; mäyinäm—of all
the demons; parama-äcäryam—the best and largest; mayam—unto Maya
Dänava; çaraëam—shelter; äyayuù—took.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni said: When the demigods, who are always powerful by the
mercy of Lord Kåñëa, fought with the asuras, the asuras were defeated, and
therefore they took shelter of Maya Dänava, the greatest of the demons.
TEXTS 54-55
Sa iNaMaaRYa PauriSTaóae hEMaqraEPYaaYaSaqivR>au" )
dulR/+YaaPaaYaSa&YaaeGaa duivRTaKYaRPairC^da" )) 54 ))
Taai>aSTae_SaurSaeNaaNYaae l/aek-a&ñqNa( SaeìraNa( Na*Pa )
SMarNTaae NaaXaYaa& c§u-" PaUvRvErMal/i+aTaa" )) 55 ))
sa nirmäya puras tisro
haimé-raupyäyasér vibhuù
durlakñyäpäya-saàyogä
durvitarkya-paricchadäù
täbhis te 'sura-senänyo
lokäàs trén seçvarän nåpa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
749
smaranto näçayäà cakruù
pürva-vairam alakñitäù
SYNONYMS
saù—that (great demon Maya Dänava); nirmäya—constructing; puraù—big
residences; tisraù—three; haimé—made of gold; raupyä—made of silver;
äyaséù—made of iron; vibhuù—very great, powerful; durlakñya—immeasurable;
apäya-saàyogäù—whose movements in coming and going;
durvitarkya—uncommon; paricchadäù—possessing paraphernalia; täbhiù—by
all of them (the three residences, which resembled airplanes); te—they;
asura-senä-anyaù—the commanders of the asuras; lokän trén—the three
worlds; sa-éçvarän—with their chief rulers; nåpa—my dear King Yudhiñöhira;
smarantaù—remembering; näçayäm cakruù—began to annihilate;
pürva—former; vairam—enmity; alakñitäù—unseen by anyone else.
TRANSLATION
Maya Dänava, the great leader of the demons, prepared three invisible
residences and gave them to the demons. These dwellings resembled airplanes
made of gold, silver and iron, and they contained uncommon paraphernalia. My
dear King Yudhiñöhira, because of these three dwellings the commanders of the
demons remained invisible to the demigods. Taking advantage of this
opportunity, the demons, remembering their former enmity, began to vanquish
the three worlds—the upper, middle and lower planetary systems.
TEXT 56
TaTaSTae Saeìra l/aek-a oPaaSaaÛeìr& NaTaa" )
}aaih NaSTaavk-aNdev ivNaía&iñPaural/YaE" )) 56 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
750
tatas te seçvarä lokä
upäsädyeçvaraà natäù
trähi nas tävakän deva
vinañöäàs tripurälayaiù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; te—they (the demigods); sa-éçvaräù—with their rulers;
lokäù—the planets; upäsädya—approaching; éçvaram—Lord Çiva; natäù—fell
down in surrender; trähi—please save; naù—us; tävakän—near and dear to
you and very frightened; deva—O Lord; vinañöän—almost finished;
tripura-älayaiù—by the demons dwelling in those three planes.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, when the demons had begun to destroy the higher planetary
systems, the rulers of those planets went to Lord Çiva, fully surrendered unto
him and said: Dear Lord, we demigods living in the three worlds are about to be
vanquished. We are your followers. Kindly save us.
TEXT 57
AQaaNauGa*ù >aGavaNMaa >aEíeiTa SauraiNv>au" )
Xar& DaNauiz SaNDaaYa PaureZvñ& VYaMauÄTa )) 57 ))
athänugåhya bhagavän
mä bhaiñöeti surän vibhuù
çaraà dhanuñi sandhäya
pureñv astraà vyamuïcata
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
751
atha—thereafter; anugåhya—just to show them favor; bhagavän—the most
powerful; mä—do not; bhaiñöa—be afraid; iti—thus; surän—unto the
demigods; vibhuù—Lord Çiva; çaram—arrows; dhanuñi—on the bow;
sandhäya—fixing; pureñu—at those three residences occupied by the demons;
astram—weapons; vyamuïcata—released.
TRANSLATION
The most powerful and able Lord Çiva reassured them and said, "Do not be
afraid." He then fixed his arrows to his bow and released them toward the three
residences occupied by the demons.
TEXT 58
TaTaae_iGanv<aaR wzv oTPaeTau" SaUYaRMa<@l/aTa( )
YaQaa MaYaU%SaNdaeha Naad*XYaNTa Paurae YaTa" )) 58 ))
tato 'gni-varëä iñava
utpetuù sürya-maëòalät
yathä mayükha-sandohä
nädåçyanta puro yataù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; agni-varëäù—as brilliant as fire; iñavaù—arrows;
utpetuù—released; sürya-maëòalät—from the sun globe; yathä—just as;
mayükha-sandohäù—beams of light; na adåçyanta—could not be seen;
puraù—the three residences; yataù—because of this (being covered by the
arrows of Lord Çiva).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
752
TRANSLATION
The arrows released by Lord Çiva appeared like fiery beams emanating from
the sun globe and covered the three residential airplanes, which could then no
longer be seen.
TEXT 59
TaE" SPa*ía VYaSav" SaveR iNaPaeTau" SMa PauraEk-Sa" )
TaaNaaNaqYa MahaYaaeGaq MaYa" kU-ParSae_i+aPaTa( )) 59 ))
taiù spåñöä vyasavaù sarve
nipetuù sma puraukasaù
tän änéya mahä-yogé
mayaù küpa-rase 'kñipat
SYNONYMS
taiù—by those (fiery arrows); spåñöäù—being attacked or being touched;
vyasavaù—without life; sarve—all the demons; nipetuù—fell down;
sma—formerly; pura-okasaù—being the inhabitants of the above-mentioned
three residential airplanes; tän—all of them; änéya—bringing; mahä-yogé—the
great mystic; mayaù—Maya Dänava; küpa-rase—in the well of nectar (created
by the great mystic Maya); akñipat—put.
TRANSLATION
Attacked by Lord Çiva's golden arrows, all the demoniac inhabitants of those
three dwellings lost their lives and fell down. Then the great mystic Maya
Dänava dropped the demons into a nectarean well that he had created.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
753
PURPORT
The asuras are generally extremely powerful because of their mystic yogic
power. However, as Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (6.47):
yoginäm api sarveñäà
mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù
"Of all yogés, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is
the highest of all." The actual purpose of mystic yoga is to concentrate one's
attention fully on the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, and always think of Him
(mad-gatenäntarätmanä). To attain such perfection, one must undergo a
certain process—haöha-yoga—and through this yoga system the practitioner
achieves some uncommon mystic power. The asuras, however, instead of
becoming devotees of Kåñëa, utilize this mystic power for their personal sense
gratification. Maya Dänava, for example, is mentioned here as mahä-yogé, a
great mystic, but his business was to help the asuras. Nowadays we are actually
seeing that there are some yogés who cater to the senses of materialists, and
there are imposters who advertise themselves as God. Maya Dänava was such a
person, a god among the demons, and he could perform some wonderful feats,
one of which is described here: he made a well filled with nectar and dipped
the asuras into that nectarean well. This nectar was known as
måta-sanjévayitari, for it could bring a dead body to life. Måta-sanjévayitari is
also an Äyur-vedic preparation. It is a kind of liquor that invigorates even a
person on the verge of death.
TEXT 60
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
754
iSaÖaMa*TarSaSPa*ía vJa]Saara MahaEJaSa" )
otaSQauMaeRgadl/Naa vEÛuTaa wv vöYa" )) 60 ))
siddhämåta-rasa-spåñöä
vajra-särä mahaujasaù
uttasthur megha-dalanä
vaidyutä iva vahnayaù
SYNONYMS
siddha-amåta-rasa-spåñöäù—the demons, thus being touched by the powerful
mystic nectarean liquid; vajra-säräù—their bodies becoming invincible to
thunderbolts; mahä-ojasaù—being extremely strong; uttasthuù—again got up;
megha-dalanäù—that which goes through the clouds; vaidyutäù—lightning
(which penetrates the clouds); iva—like; vahnayaù—fiery.
TRANSLATION
When the dead bodies of the demons came in touch with the nectar, their
bodies became invincible to thunderbolts. Endowed with great strength, they
got up like lightning penetrating clouds.
TEXT 61
ivl/aeKYa >aGanSaªLPa& ivMaNaSk&- v*zßJaMa( )
TadaYa& >aGavaiNvZ<auSTa}aaePaaYaMak-LPaYaTa( )) 61 ))
vilokya bhagna-saìkalpaà
vimanaskaà våña-dhvajam
tadäyaà bhagavän viñëus
tatropäyam akalpayat
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
755
SYNONYMS
vilokya—seeing; bhagna-saìkalpam—disappointed; vimanaskam—extremely
unhappy; våña-dhvajam—Lord Çiva; tadä—at that time; ayam—this;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viñëuù—Lord Viñëu;
tatra—about the well of nectar; upäyam—means (how to stop it);
akalpayat—considered.
TRANSLATION
Seeing Lord Çiva very much aggrieved and disappointed, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu, considered how to stop this nuisance
created by Maya Dänava.
TEXT 62
vTSaêaSaqtada b]øa SvYa& ivZ<aurYa& ih GaaE" )
Pa[ivXYa i}aPaur& k-ale/ rSakU-PaaMa*Ta& PaPaaE )) 62 ))
vatsaç cäsét tadä brahmä
svayaà viñëur ayaà hi gauù
praviçya tripuraà käle
rasa-küpämåtaà papau
SYNONYMS
vatsaù—a calf; ca—also; äsét—became; tadä—at that time; brahmä—Lord
Brahmä; svayam—personally; viñëuù—Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; ayam—this; hi—indeed; gauù—a cow; praviçya—entering;
tri-puram—the three residences; käle—at noon; rasa-küpa-amåtam—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
756
nectar contained in that well; papau—drank.
TRANSLATION
Then Lord Brahmä became a calf and Lord Viñëu a cow, and at noon they
entered the residences and drank all the nectar in the well.
TEXT 63
Tae_Saura ùiPa PaXYaNTaae Na NYazeDaiNvMaaeihTaa" )
Tad( ivjaYa MahaYaaeGaq rSaPaal/aiNad& JaGaaE )
SMaYaNa( ivXaaek-" Xaaek-aTaaRNSMarNdEvGaiTa& c TaaMa( )) 63 ))
te 'surä hy api paçyanto
na nyañedhan vimohitäù
tad vijïäya mahä-yogé
rasa-pälän idaà jagau
smayan viçokaù çokärtän
smaran daiva-gatià ca täm
SYNONYMS
te—those; asuräù—demons; hi—indeed; api—although; paçyantaù—seeing
(the calf and cow drinking the nectar); na—not; nyañedhan—forbade them;
vimohitäù—being bewildered by illusion; tat vijïäya—knowing this fully;
mahä-yogé—the great mystic Maya Dänava; rasa-pälän—unto the demons who
guarded the nectar; idam—this; jagau—said; smayan—being bewildered;
viçokaù—not being very unhappy; çoka-ärtän—greatly lamenting;
smaran—remembering; daiva-gatim—spiritual power; ca—also; täm—that.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
757
TRANSLATION
The demons could see the calf and cow, but because of the illusion created
by the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the demons could not
forbid them. The great mystic Maya Dänava became aware that the calf and
cow were drinking the nectar, and he could understand this to be the unseen
power of providence. Thus he spoke to the demons, who were grievously
lamenting.
TEXT 64
devae_Saurae Narae_NYaae va Naeìrae_STaqh k-êNa )
AaTMaNaae_NYaSYa va idí& dEveNaaPaaeihTau& ÜYaae" )) 64 ))
devo 'suro naro 'nyo vä
neçvaro 'stéha kaçcana
ätmano 'nyasya vä diñöaà
daivenäpohituà dvayoù
SYNONYMS
devaù—the demigods; asuraù—the demons; naraù—humans; anyaù—or
anyone else; vä—either; na—not; éçvaraù—the supreme controller; asti—is;
iha—in this world; kaçcana—anyone; ätmanaù—one's own;
anyasya—another's; vä—either; diñöam—destiny; daivena—which is given by
the Supreme Lord; apohitum—to undo; dvayoù—of both of them.
TRANSLATION
Maya Dänava said: What has been destined by the Supreme Lord for oneself,
for others, or for both oneself and others cannot be undone anywhere or by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
758
anyone, whether one be a demigod, a demon, a human being or anyone else.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is one—Kåñëa, the viñëu-tattva. Kåñëa expands Himself
into viñëu-tattva personal expansions (sväàça), who control everything. Maya
Dänava said, "However I plan, you plan or both of us plan, the Lord has
planned what is to happen. No one's plan will be successful without His
sanction." We may make our own various plans, but unless they are sanctioned
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, they will never be successful.
Hundreds and millions of plans are made by all kinds of living entities, but
without the sanction of the Supreme Lord they are futile.
TEXTS 65-66
AQaaSaaE Xai¢-i>a" Svai>a" XaM>aae" Pa[aDaaiNak&- VYaDaaTa( )
DaMaRjaNaivr¢-y*iÖTaPaaeivÛai§-Yaaidi>a" )) 65 ))
rQa& SaUTa& ßJa& vahaNDaNauvRMaRXaraid YaTa( )
SaàÖae rQaMaaSQaaYa Xar& DaNauåPaadde )) 66 ))
athäsau çaktibhiù sväbhiù
çambhoù prädhänikaà vyadhät
dharma-jïäna-virakty-åddhitapo-
vidyä-kriyädibhiù
rathaà sütaà dhvajaà vähän
dhanur varma-çarädi yat
sannaddho ratham ästhäya
çaraà dhanur upädade
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
759
atha—thereafter; asau—He (Lord Kåñëa); çaktibhiù—by His potencies;
sväbhiù—personal; çambhoù—of Lord Çiva; prädhänikam—ingredients;
vyadhät—created; dharma—religion; jïäna—knowledge;
virakti—renunciation; åddhi—opulence; tapaù—austerity; vidyä—education;
kriyä—activities; ädibhiù—by all these and other transcendental opulences;
ratham—chariot; sütam—charioteer; dhvajam—flag; vähän—horses and
elephants; dhanuù—bow; varma—shield; çara-ädi—arrows and so on;
yat—everything that was required; sannaddhaù—equipped; ratham—on the
chariot; ästhäya—seated; çaram—arrow; dhanuù—unto the bow;
upädade—joined.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: Thereafter, Lord Kåñëa, by His own personal
potency, consisting of religion, knowledge, renunciation, opulence, austerity,
education and activities, equipped Lord Çiva with all the necessary
paraphernalia, such as a chariot, a charioteer, a flag, horses, elephants, a bow, a
shield and arrows. When Lord Çiva was fully equipped in this way, he sat down
on the chariot with his arrows and bow to fight with the demons.
PURPORT
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (12.13.16): vaiñëavänäà yathä çambhuù:
Lord Çiva is the best of the Vaiñëavas, the devotees of Lord Kåñëa. Indeed, he
is one of the mahäjanas, the twelve authorities on Vaiñëava philosophy
(svayambhür näradaù çambhuù kumäraù kapilo manuù, etc. [SB 6.3.20]). Lord
Kåñëa is always prepared to help all the mahäjanas and devotees in every
respect (kaunteya pratijänéhi na me bhaktaù praëaçyati [Bg. 9.31]). Although
Lord Çiva is very powerful, he lost a battle to the asuras, and therefore he was
morose and disappointed. However, because he is one of the chief devotees of
the Lord, the Lord personally equipped him with all the paraphernalia for war.
The devotee, therefore, must serve the Lord sincerely, and Kåñëa is always in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
760
the background to protect him and, if need be, to equip him fully to fight with
his enemy. For devotees there is no scarcity of knowledge or material requisites
for spreading the Kåñëa consciousness movement.
TEXT 67
Xar& DaNauiz SaNDaaYa MauhUTaeR_i>aiJaTaqìr" )
ddah TaeNa du>aeRÛa hrae_Qa i}aPaurae Na*Pa )) 67 ))
çaraà dhanuñi sandhäya
muhürte 'bhijitéçvaraù
dadäha tena durbhedyä
haro 'tha tripuro nåpa
SYNONYMS
çaram—the arrows; dhanuñi—on the bow; sandhäya—joining together;
muhürte abhijiti—at noon; éçvaraù—Lord Çiva; dadäha—set afire; tena—by
them (the arrows); durbhedyäù—very difficult to pierce; haraù—Lord Çiva;
atha—in this way; tri-puraù—the three residences of the demons; nåpa—O
King Yudhiñöhira.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Yudhiñöhira, the most powerful Lord Çiva joined the arrows to
his bow, and at noon he set fire to all three residences of the demons and thus
destroyed them.
TEXT 68
idiv duNdu>aYaae NaeduivRMaaNaXaTaSax(ku-l/a" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
761
devizRiPaTa*iSaÖeXaa JaYaeiTa ku-SauMaaeTk-rE" )
Avaik-rÅGauôRía NaNa*TauêaPSaraeGa<aa" )) 68 ))
divi dundubhayo nedur
vimäna-çata-saìkuläù
devarñi-pitå-siddheçä
jayeti kusumotkaraiù
aväkiraï jagur håñöä
nanåtuç cäpsaro-gaëäù
SYNONYMS
divi—in the sky; dundubhayaù—kettledrums; neduù—vibrated; vimäna—of
airplanes; çata—hundreds and thousands; saìkuläù—endowed; deva-åñi—all
the demigods and saints; pitå—the residents of Pitåloka; siddha—the residents
of Siddhaloka; éçäù—all the great personalities; jaya iti—vibrated the chant
"let there be victory"; kusuma-utkaraiù—various kinds of flowers;
aväkiran—showered on the head of Lord Çiva; jaguù—chanted; håñöäù—in
great pleasure; nanåtuù—danced; ca—and; apsaraù-gaëäù—the beautiful
women of the heavenly planets.
TRANSLATION
Seated in their airplanes in the sky, the inhabitants of the higher planetary
systems beat many kettledrums. The demigods, saints, Pitäs, Siddhas and
various great personalities showered flowers on the head of Lord Çiva, wishing
him all victory, and the Apsaräs began to chant and dance with great pleasure.
TEXT 69
Wv& dGßa PauriSTaóae >aGavaNPaurha Na*Pa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
762
b]øaidi>a" STaUYaMaaNa" Sv&DaaMa Pa[TYaPaÛTa )) 69 ))
evaà dagdhvä puras tisro
bhagavän pura-hä nåpa
brahmädibhiù stüyamänaù
svaà dhäma pratyapadyata
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; dagdhvä—burning to ashes; puraù tisraù—the three residences of
the demons; bhagavän—the supreme powerful; pura-hä—who annihilated the
residences of the asuras; nåpa—O King Yudhiñöhira; brahma-ädibhiù—by Lord
Brahmä and other demigods; stüyamänaù—being worshiped; svam—to his
own; dhäma—abode; pratyapadyata—returned.
TRANSLATION
O King Yudhiñöhira, thus Lord Çiva is known as Tripuräri, the annihilator
of the three dwellings of the demons, because he burnt these dwellings to ashes.
Being worshiped by the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva returned
to his own abode.
TEXT 70
Wv& ivDaaNYaSYa hre" SvMaaYaYaa
iv@MbMaaNaSYa Na*l/aek-MaaTMaNa" )
vqYaaRi<a GaqTaaNYa*izi>aJaRGad(Gaurae‚
l/aeRk&- PauNaaNaaNYaPar& vdaiMa ik-Ma( )) 70 ))
evaà vidhäny asya hareù sva-mäyayä
viòambamänasya nå-lokam ätmanaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
763
véryäëi gétäny åñibhir jagad-guror
lokaà punänäny aparaà vadämi kim
SYNONYMS
evam vidhäni—in this way; asya—of Kåñëa; hareù—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; sva-mäyayä—by His transcendental potencies;
viòambamänasya—acting like an ordinary human being; nå-lokam—within
human society; ätmanaù—of Him; véryäëi—transcendental activities;
gétäni—narrations; åñibhiù—by great saintly persons; jagat-guroù—of the
supreme master; lokam—all the planetary systems; punänäni—purifying;
aparam—what else; vadämi kim—can I say.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, Çré Kåñëa, appeared as a human being, yet He performed many
uncommon and wonderful pastimes by His own potency. How can I say more
about His activities than what has already been said by great saintly persons?
Everyone can be purified by His activities, simply by hearing about them from
the right source.
PURPORT
Bhagavad-gétä and all the Vedic literatures fully explain that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, appears in human society as an ordinary
human being but acts very uncommonly for the well-being of the entire world.
One should not be influenced by the illusory energy and think Lord Kåñëa to
be an ordinary human being. Those who really seek the Absolute Truth come
to the understanding that Kåñëa is everything (väsudevaù samam iti). Such
great souls are very rare. Nonetheless, if one studies the entire Bhagavad-gétä as
it is, Kåñëa is very easy to understand. The Kåñëa consciousness movement is
just trying to make Kåñëa known all over the world as the Supreme Personality
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
764
of Godhead (kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam [SB 1.3.28]). If people take this
movement seriously, their lives as human beings will be successful.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Tenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Prahläda, the Best Among Exalted Devotees."
11. The Perfect Society: Four Social Classes
This chapter describes the general principles by following which a human
being, and specifically one who is interested in advancing in spiritual life, can
become perfect.
By hearing about the characteristics of Prahläda Mahäräja, Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira became extremely pleased. Now he inquired from Närada Muni
about the actual religion of a human being and about special characteristics of
varëäçrama-dharma, which marks the highest status of human civilization.
When Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira asked Närada Muni about these matters, Närada
Muni stopped giving his own statements and quoted statements by Lord
Näräyaëa, for He is the supreme authority for giving religious codes (dharmaà
tu säkñäd bhagavat-praëétam [SB 6.3.19]). Every human being is expected to
acquire thirty qualities, such as truthfulness, mercy and austerity. The process
of following the priniples of religion is known as sanätana-dharma, the eternal
religious system.
The varëäçrama system delineates the divisions of brähmaëa, kñatriya,
vaiçya and çüdra. It also sets forth the system of saàskäras. The garbhädhäna
saàskära, the ceremony for begetting a child, must be observed by the higher
section of people, namely the dvijas. One who follows the garbhädhäna
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
765
saàskära system is actually twice-born, but those who do not, who deviate
from the principles of varëäçrama-dharma, are called dvija-bandhus. The
principal occupations for a brähmaëa are worshiping the Deity, teaching
others how to worship the Deity, studying the Vedic literatures, teaching the
Vedic literatures, accepting charity from others and again giving charity to
others. A brähmaëa should make his livelihood from these six occupational
duties. The duty of a kñatriya is to give protection to the citizens and levy taxes
upon them, but he is forbidden to tax the brähmaëas. The members of the
Kåñëa consciousness movement should therefore be exempt from government
taxation. Kñatriyas may tax everyone but the brähmaëas. Vaiçyas should
cultivate the land, produce food grains and protect the cows, whereas the
çüdras, who by quality never become brähmaëas, kñatriyas or vaiçyas, should
serve the three higher classes and be satisfied. Other means of livelihood are
also prescribed for the brähmaëas, and these are four-çäléna, yäyävara, çila, and
uïchana. Each of these occupational duties is successively better.
One who is in a lower grade of social life cannot accept the profession of a
higher class unless necessary. In times of emergency, all the classes but the
kñatriyas may accept professional duties of others. The means of livelihood
known as åta (çiloïchana), amåta (ayäcita), måta (yäcïä), pramåta (karñaëa),
and satyänåta (väëijya) may be accepted by everyone but the kñatriyas. For a
brähmaëa or a kñatriya, engaging in the service of the vaiçyas or çüdras is
considered the profession of dogs.
Närada Muni also described that the symptom of a brähmaëa is controlled
senses, the symptoms of a kñatriya are power and fame, the symptom of a vaiçya
is service to the brähmaëas and kñatriyas, and the symptom of a çüdra is service
to the three higher classes. The qualification for a woman is to be a very
faithful and chaste wife. In this way, Närada Muni described the
characteristics of higher and lower grades of people and recommended that
one follow the principles of his caste or his hereditary occupation. One cannot
suddenly give up a profession to which he is accustomed, and therefore it is
recommended that one gradually be awakened. The symptoms of brähmaëas,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
766
kñatriyas, vaiçyas, and çüdras are very important, and therefore one should be
designated only by these symptoms, and not by birth. Designation by birth is
strictly forbidden by Närada Muni and all great personalities.
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
é[uTveihTa& SaaDauSa>aaSa>aaiJaTa&
MahtaMaaGa]<Ya oå§-MaaTMaNa" )
YauiDaiïrae dETYaPaTaeMauRdaiNvTa"
PaPa[C^ >aUYaSTaNaYa& SvYaM>auv" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
çrutvehitaà sädhu sabhä-sabhäjitaà
mahattamägraëya urukramätmanaù
yudhiñöhiro daitya-pater mudänvitaù
papraccha bhüyas tanayaà svayambhuvaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; çrutvä—hearing; éhitam—the
narration; sädhu sabhä-sabhäjitam—which is discussed in assemblies of great
devotees like Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva; mahat-tama-agraëyaù—the best of
the saintly persons (Yudhiñöhira); urukrama-ätmanaù—of he (Prahläda
Mahäräja) whose mind is always engaged upon the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who always acts uncommonly; yudhiñöhiraù—King Yudhiñöhira;
daitya-pateù—of the master of the demons; mudä-anvitaù—in a pleasing mood;
papraccha—inquired; bhüyaù—again; tanayam—unto the son;
svayambhuvaù—of Lord Brahmä.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
767
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After hearing about the activities and
character of Prahläda Mahäräja, which are adored and discussed among great
personalities like Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja, the most
respectful king among exalted personalities, again inquired from the great saint
Närada Muni in a mood of great pleasure.
TEXT 2
é[qYauiDaiïr ovac
>aGavNa( é[aeTauiMaC^aiMa Na*<aa& DaMa| SaNaaTaNaMa( )
v<aaRé[MaacarYauTa& YaTa( PauMaaiNvNdTae ParMa( )) 2 ))
çré-yudhiñöhira uväca
bhagavan çrotum icchämi
nåëäà dharmaà sanätanam
varëäçramäcära-yutaà
yat pumän vindate param
SYNONYMS
çré-yudhiñöhiraù uväca—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira inquired; bhagavan—O my lord;
çrotum—to hear; icchämi—I wish; nåëäm—of human society; dharmam—the
occupational duties; sanätanam—common and eternal (for everyone);
varëa-äçrama-äcära-yutam—based on the principles of the four divisions of
society and the four divisions of spiritual advancement; yat—from which;
pumän—the people in general; vindate—can enjoy very peacefully;
param—the supreme knowledge (by which one can attain devotional service).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
768
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira said: My dear lord, I wish to hear from you about the
principles of religion by which one can attain the ultimate goal of
life—devotional service. I wish to hear about the general occupational duties of
human society and the system of social and spiritual advancement known as
varëäçrama-dharma.
PURPORT
Sanätana-dharma means devotional service. The word sanätana refers to
that which is eternal, which does not change but continues in all
circumstances. We have several times explained what the eternal occupational
duty of the living being is. Indeed, it has been explained by Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu. Jévera 'svarüpa' haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa': [Cc. Madhya 20.108]
the real occupational duty of the living entity is to serve the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Even if one prefers to deviate from this principle he
remains a servant because that is his eternal position; but one serves mäyä, the
illusory, material energy. The Kåñëa consciousness movement, therefore, is an
attempt to guide human society to serving the Personality of Godhead instead
of serving the material world with no real profit. Our actual experience is that
every man, animal, bird and beast—indeed, every living entity—is engaged in
rendering service. Even though one's body or one's superficial religion may
change, every living entity is always engaged in the service of someone.
Therefore, the mentality of service is called the eternal occupational duty.
This eternal occupational duty can be organized through the institution of
varëäçrama, in which there are four varëas (brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and
çüdra) and four äçramas (brahmacarya, gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa).
Thus, Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja inquired from Närada Muni about the principles
of sanätana-dharma for the benefit of human society.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
769
TEXT 3
>avaNPa[JaaPaTae" Saa+aadaTMaJa" ParMaeiïNa" )
SauTaaNaa& SaMMaTaae b]ø&STaPaaeYaaeGaSaMaaiDai>a" )) 3 ))
bhavän prajäpateù säkñäd
ätmajaù parameñöhinaù
sutänäà sammato brahmaàs
tapo-yoga-samädhibhiù
SYNONYMS
bhavän—Your Lordship; prajäpateù—of Prajäpati (Lord Brahmä);
säkñät—directly; ätma-jaù—the son; parameñöhinaù—of the supreme person
within this universe (Lord Brahmä); sutänäm—of all the sons;
sammataù—agreed upon as the best; brahman—O best of the brähmaëas;
tapaù—by austerity; yoga—by mystic practice; samädhibhiù—and by trance or
meditation (in all respects, you are the best).
TRANSLATION
O best of the brähmaëas, you are directly the son of Prajäpati [Lord
Brahmä]. Because of your austerities, mystic yoga and trance, you are
considered the best of all of Lord Brahmä's sons.
TEXT 4
NaaraYa<aPara ivPa[a DaMa| Gauù& Par& ivdu" )
k-å<aa" SaaDav" XaaNTaaSTviÜDaa Na TaQaaPare )) 4 ))
näräyaëa-parä viprä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
770
dharmaà guhyaà paraà viduù
karuëäù sädhavaù çäntäs
tvad-vidhä na tathäpare
SYNONYMS
näräyaëa-paräù—those who are always devoted to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Näräyaëa; vipräù—the best of the brähmaëas; dharmam—religious
principle; guhyam—the most confidential; param—supreme; viduù—know;
karuëäù—such persons are very merciful (being devotees); sädhavaù—whose
behavior is very exalted; çäntäù—peaceful; tvat-vidhäù—like Your Honor;
na—not; tathä—so; apare—others (followers of methods other than
devotional service).
TRANSLATION
No one is superior to you in peaceful life and mercy, and no one knows
better than you how to execute devotional service or how to become the best of
the brähmaëas. Therefore, you know all the principles of confidential religious
life, and no one knows them better than you.
PURPORT
Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja knew that Närada Muni is the supreme spiritual
master of human society who can teach the path of spiritual liberation leading
to the understanding of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Actually, it is
for this purpose that Närada Muni compiled his Bhakti-sütra and gave
directions in the Närada-païcarätra. To learn about religious principles and
the perfection of life, one must take instruction from the disciplic succession
of Närada Muni. Our Kåñëa consciousness movement is directly in the line of
the Brahma-sampradäya. Närada Muni received instructions from Lord
Brahmä and in turn transmitted the instructions to Vyäsadeva. Vyäsadeva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
771
instructed his son Çukadeva Gosvämé, who spoke Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The
Kåñëa consciousness movement is based on Çrémad-Bhägavatam and
Bhagavad-gétä. Because Çrémad-Bhägavatam was spoken by Çukadeva Gosvämé
and Bhagavad-gétä was spoken by Kåñëa, there is no difference between them.
If we strictly follow the principle of disciplic succession, we are certainly on
the right path of spiritual liberation, or eternal engagement in devotional
service.
TEXT 5
é[qNaard ovac
NaTva >aGavTae_JaaYa l/aek-aNaa& DaMaRSaeTave )
v+Yae SaNaaTaNa& DaMa| NaaraYa<aMau%aC^]uTaMa( )) 5 ))
çré-närada uväca
natvä bhagavate 'jäya
lokänäà dharma-setave
vakñye sanätanaà dharmaà
näräyaëa-mukhäc chrutam
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; natvä—offering my obeisances;
bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ajäya—ever existing,
never born; lokänäm—throughout the entire universe; dharma-setave—who
protects religious principles; vakñye—I shall explain; sanätanam—eternal;
dharmam—occupational duty; näräyaëa-mukhät—from the mouth of
Näräyaëa; çrutam—which I have heard.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
772
Çré Närada Muni said: After first offering my obeisances unto Lord Kåñëa,
the protector of the religious principles of all living entities, let me explain the
principles of the eternal religious system, of which I have heard from the mouth
of Näräyaëa.
PURPORT
The word aja refers to Kåñëa, who explains in Bhagavad-gétä (4.6), ajo 'pi
sann avyayätmä: "I am ever existing, and thus I never take birth. There is no
change in My existence."
TEXT 6
Yaae_vTaqYaaRTMaNaae_&XaeNa da+aaYa<Yaa& Tau DaMaRTa" )
l/aek-aNaa& SvSTaYae_DYaaSTae TaPaae bdirk-aé[Mae )) 6 ))
yo 'vatéryätmano 'àçena
däkñäyaëyäà tu dharmataù
lokänäà svastaye 'dhyäste
tapo badarikäçrame
SYNONYMS
yaù—He who (Lord Näräyaëa); avatérya—adventing; ätmanaù—of Himself;
aàçena—with a part (Nara); däkñäyaëyäm—in the womb of Däkñäyaëé, the
daughter of Mahäräja Dakña; tu—indeed; dharmataù—from Dharma
Mahäräja; lokänäm—of all people; svastaye—for the benefit of;
adhyäste—executes; tapaù—austerity; badarikäçrame—in the place known as
Badarikäçrama.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
773
Lord Näräyaëa, along with His partial manifestation Nara, appeared in this
world through the daughter of Dakña Mahäräja known as Mürti. He was
begotten by Dharma Mahäräja for the benefit of all living entities. Even now,
He is still engaged in executing great austerities near the place known as
Badarikäçrama.
TEXT 7
DaMaRMaUl&/ ih >aGavaNSavRvedMaYaae hir" )
SMa*Ta& c TaiÜda& raJaNYaeNa caTMaa Pa[SaqdiTa )) 7 ))
dharma-mülaà hi bhagavän
sarva-vedamayo hariù
småtaà ca tad-vidäà räjan
yena cätmä prasédati
SYNONYMS
dharma-mülam—the root of religious principles; hi—indeed; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-veda-mayaù—the essence of all Vedic
knowledge; hariù—the Supreme Being; småtam ca—and the scriptures;
tat-vidäm—of those who know the Supreme Lord; räjan—O King; yena—by
which (religious principle); ca—also; ätmä—the soul, mind, body and
everything; prasédati—become fully satisfied.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Being, the Personality of Godhead, is the essence of all Vedic
knowledge, the root of all religious principles, and the memory of great
authorities. O King Yudhiñöhira, this principle of religion is to be understood as
evidence. On the basis of this religious principle, everything is satisfied,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
774
including one's mind, soul and even one's body.
PURPORT
As stated by Yamaräja, dharmaà tu säkñäd bhagavat-praëétam [SB 6.3.19].
Yamaräja, the representative of the Lord who takes care of the living beings
after their death, gives his verdict as to how and when the living being will
change his body. He is the authority, and he says that the religious principles
consist of the codes and laws given by God. No one can manufacture religion,
and therefore manufactured religious systems are rejected by the followers of
the Vedic principles. In Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) it is said, vedaiç ca sarvair aham
eva vedyaù: Vedic knowledge means to understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa. Therefore, whether one speaks of the Vedas, scriptures,
religion or the principles of everyone's occupational duty, all of them must aim
at understanding Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.6) therefore concludes:
sa vai puàsäà paro dharmo
yato bhaktir adhokñaje
ahaituky apratihatä
yayätmä suprasédati
In other words, religious principles aim at learning how to render
transcendental loving service to the Lord. That service must be unmotivated
and unchecked by material conditions. Then human society will be happy in
all respects.
The småti, the scriptures following the principles of Vedic knowledge, are
considered the evidence of Vedic principles. There are twenty different types
of scripture for following religious principles, and among them the scriptures
of Manu and Yäjïavalkya are considered to be all-pervading authorities. In the
Yäjïavalkya-småti it is said:
çruti-småti-sadäcäraù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
775
svasya ca priyam ätmanaù
samyak saìkalpajaù kämo
dharma-mülam idaà småtam
One should learn human behavior from çruti, the Vedas, and from småti, the
scriptures following the Vedic principles. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé in his
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu says:
çruti-småti-puräëädipaïcarätra-
vidhià vinä
aikäntiké harer bhaktir
utpätäyaiva kalpate
[Brs. 1.2.101(36)]
The purport is that to become a devotee one must follow the principles laid
down in çruti and småti. One must follow the codes of the puräëas and the
päïcarätriké-vidhi. One cannot be a pure devotee without following the çruti
and småti, and the çruti and småti without devotional service cannot lead one
to the perfection of life.
Therefore, from all the evidence the conclusion is that without bhakti,
devotional service, there is no question of religious principles. God is the
central figure in the performance of religious principles. Almost everything
going on in this world as religion is devoid of any idea of devotional service
and is therefore condemned by the verdict of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Without
devotional service, so-called religious principles are only cheating.
TEXTS 8-12
SaTYa& dYaa TaPa" XaaEc& iTaiTa+ae+aa XaMaae dMa" )
Aih&Saa b]øcYa| c TYaaGa" SvaDYaaYa AaJaRvMa( )) 8 ))
SaNTaaez" SaMad*k(- Saeva Ga]aMYaehaeParMa" XaNaE" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
776
Na*<aa& ivPaYaRYaehe+aa MaaENaMaaTMaivMaXaRNaMa( )) 9 ))
AàaÛade" Sa&iv>aaGaae >aUTae>Yaê YaQaahRTa" )
TaeZvaTMadevTaabuiÖ" SauTara& Na*zu Paa<@v )) 10 ))
é[v<a& k-ITaRNa& caSYa SMar<a& MahTaa& GaTae" )
SaeveJYaavNaiTadaRSYa& Sa:YaMaaTMaSaMaPaR<aMa( )) 11 ))
Na*<aaMaYa& Parae DaMaR" SaveRza& SaMaudaôTa" )
i}a&Xaç+a<avaNraJaNSavaRTMaa YaeNa TauZYaiTa )) 12 ))
satyaà dayä tapaù çaucaà
titikñekñä çamo damaù
ahiàsä brahmacaryaà ca
tyägaù svädhyäya ärjavam
santoñaù samadåk-sevä
grämyehoparamaù çanaiù
nåëäà viparyayehekñä
maunam ätma-vimarçanam
annädyädeù saàvibhägo
bhütebhyaç ca yathärhataù
teñv ätma-devatä-buddhiù
sutaräà nåñu päëòava
çravaëaà kértanaà cäsya
smaraëaà mahatäà gateù
sevejyävanatir däsyaà
sakhyam ätma-samarpaëam
nåëäm ayaà paro dharmaù
sarveñäà samudähåtaù
triàçal-lakñaëavän räjan
sarvätmä yena tuñyati
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
777
SYNONYMS
satyam—speaking the truth without distortion or deviation; dayä—sympathy
to everyone suffering; tapaù—austerities (such as observing fasts at least twice
in a month on the day of Ekädaçé); çaucam—cleanliness (bathing regularly at
least twice a day, morning and evening, and remembering to chant the holy
name of God); titikñä—toleration (being unagitated by seasonal changes or
inconvenient circumstances); ékñä—distinguishing between good and bad;
çamaù—control of the mind (not allowing the mind to act whimsically);
damaù—control of the senses (not allowing the senses to act without control);
ahiàsä—nonviolence (not subjecting any living entity to the threefold
miseries); brahmacaryam—continence or abstaining from misuse of one's
semen (not indulging in sex with women other than one's own wife and not
having sex with one's own wife when sex is forbidden, like during the period of
menstruation); ca—and; tyägaù—giving in charity at least fifty percent of
one's income; svädhyäyaù—reading of transcendental literatures like
Bhagavad-gétä, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Rämäyaëa and Mahäbhärata (or, for those
not in Vedic culture, reading of the Bible or Koran); ärjavam—simplicity
(freedom from mental duplicity); santoñaù—being satisfied with that which is
available without severe endeavor; samadåk-sevä—rendering service to saintly
persons who make no distinctions between one living being and another and
who see every living being as a spirit soul (paëòitäù sama-darçinaù [Bg. 5.18]);
grämya-éha-uparamaù—not taking part in so-called philanthropic activities;
çanaiù—gradually; nåëäm—in human society; viparyaya-éhä—the unnecessary
activities; ékñä—discussing; maunam—being grave and silent; ätma—into the
self; vimarçanam—research (as to whether one is the body or the soul);
anna-ädya-ädeù—of food and drink, etc.; saàvibhägaù—equal distribution;
bhütebhyaù—to different living entities; ca—also; yathä-arhataù—as befitting;
teñu—all living entities; ätma-devatä-buddhiù—accepting as the self or the
demigods; sutaräm—preliminarily; nåñu—among all human beings;
päëòava—O Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira; çravaëam—hearing; kértanam—chanting;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
778
ca—also; asya—of Him (the Lord); smaraëam—remembering (His words and
activities); mahatäm—of great saintly persons; gateù—who is the shelter;
sevä—service; ijyä—worship; avanatiù—offering obeisances;
däsyam—accepting the service; sakhyam—to consider as a friend;
ätma-samarpaëam—surrendering one's whole self; nåëäm—of all human
beings; ayam—this; paraù—the supermost; dharmaù—religious principle;
sarveñäm—of all; samudähåtaù—described fully;
triàçat-lakñaëa-vän—possessing thirty characteristics; räjan—O King;
sarva-ätmä—the Supreme Lord, the Supersoul of all; yena—by which;
tuñyati—is satisfied.
TRANSLATION
These are the general principles to be followed by all human beings:
truthfulness, mercy, austerity (observing fasts on certain days of the month),
bathing twice a day, tolerance, discrimination between right and wrong, control
of the mind, control of the senses, nonviolence, celibacy, charity, reading of
scripture, simplicity, satisfaction, rendering service to saintly persons, gradually
taking leave of unnecessary engagements, observing the futility of the
unnecessary activities of human society, remaining silent and grave and
avoiding unnecessary talk, considering whether one is the body or the soul,
distributing food equally to all living entities (both men and animals), seeing
every soul (especially in the human form) as a part of the Supreme Lord,
hearing about the activities and instructions given by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead (who is the shelter of the saintly persons), chanting about these
activities and instructions, always remembering these activities and
instructions, trying to render service, performing worship, offering obeisances,
becoming a servant, becoming a friend, and surrendering one's whole self. O
King Yudhiñöhira, these thirty qualifications must be acquired in the human
form of life. Simply by acquiring these qualifications, one can satisfy the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
779
PURPORT
In order that human beings be distinct from the animals, the great saint
Närada recommends that every human being be educated in terms of the
above-mentioned thirty qualifications. Nowadays there is propaganda
everywhere, all over the world, for a secular state, a state interested only in
mundane activities. But if the citizens of the state are not educated in the
above-mentioned good qualities, how can there be happiness? For example, if
the total populace is untruthful, how can the state be happy? Therefore,
without consideration of one's belonging to a sectarian religion, whether
Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Buddhist or any other sect, everyone should be
taught to become truthful. Similarly, everyone should be taught to be merciful,
and everyone should observe fasting on certain days of the month. Everyone
should bathe twice a day, cleanse his teeth and body externally, and cleanse his
mind internally by remembering the holy name of the Lord. The Lord is one,
whether one is Hindu, Muslim or Christian. Therefore, one should chant the
holy name of the Lord, regardless of differences in linguistic pronunciation.
Also, everyone should be taught to be very careful not to discharge semen
unnecessarily. This is very important for all human beings. If semen is not
discharged unnecessarily, one becomes extremely strong in memory,
determination, activity and the vitality of one's bodily energy. Everyone
should also be taught to be simple in thought and feeling and satisfied in body
and mind. These are the general qualifications of a human being. There is no
question of a secular state or an ecclesiastical state. Unless one is educated in
the above-mentioned thirty qualities, there cannot be any peace. Ultimately it
is recommended:
çravaëaà kértanaà cäsya
smaraëaà mahatäà gateù
sevejyävanatir däsyaà
sakhyam ätma-samarpaëam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
780
Everyone should become a devotee of the Lord, because by becoming a devotee
of the Lord one automatically acquires the other qualities.
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
haräv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëä
manorathenäsati dhävato bahiù
"In one who has unflinching devotional service to Kåñëa, all the good qualities
of Kåñëa and the demigods are consistently manifest. However, he who has no
devotion to the Supreme Personality of Godhead has no good qualifications
because he is engaged by mental concoction in material existence, which is the
external feature of the Lord." (SB 5.18.12) Our Kåñëa consciousness movement,
therefore, is all-embracing. Human civilization should take it very seriously
and practice its principles for the peace of the world.
TEXT 13
Sa&Sk-ara Ya}aaiviC^àa" Sa iÜJaae_Jaae JaGaad YaMa( )
wJYaaDYaYaNadaNaaiNa ivihTaaiNa iÜJaNMaNaaMa( )
JaNMak-MaaRvdaTaaNaa& i§-Yaaêaé[MacaeidTaa" )) 13 ))
saàskärä yaträvicchinnäù
sa dvijo 'jo jagäda yam
ijyädhyayana-dänäni
vihitäni dvijanmanäm
janma-karmävadätänäà
kriyäç cäçrama-coditäù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
781
saàskäräù—reformatory processes; yatra—wherein; avicchinnäù—without
interruption; saù—such a person; dvi-jaù—twice-born; ajaù—Lord Brahmä;
jagäda—sanctioned; yam—who; ijyä—worshiping; adhyayana—studies of the
Vedas; dänäni—and charity; vihitäni—prescribed; dvi-janmanäm—of persons
who are called twice-born; janma—by birth; karma—and activities;
avadätänäm—who are purified; kriyäù—activities; ca—also;
äçrama-coditäù—recommended for the four äçramas.
TRANSLATION
Those who have been reformed by the garbhädhäna ceremony and other
prescribed reformatory methods, performed with Vedic mantras and without
interruption, and who have been approved by Lord Brahmä, are dvijas, or
twice-born. Such brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas, purified by their family
traditions and by their behavior, should worship the Lord, study the Vedas and
give charity. In this system, they should follow the principles of the four
äçramas [brahmacarya, gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa].
PURPORT
After giving a general list of thirty qualifications for one's behavior, Närada
Muni now describes the principles of the four varëas and four äçramas. A
human being must be trained in the above-mentioned thirty qualities;
otherwise, he is not even a human being. Then, among such qualified persons,
the varëäçrama process should be introduced. In the varëäçrama system, the
first ceremony for purification is garbhädhäna, which is performed with
mantras at the time of sex for propagating a good child. One who uses sex life
not for sensual pleasures but only to beget children according to the
reformatory method is also accepted as a brahmacäré. One should not waste
semen on sensual pleasure, violating the principles of Vedic life. Restraint in
sex is possible, however, only when the populace is trained in the
above-mentioned thirty qualities; otherwise, it is not possible. Even if one is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
782
born in a family of dvijas, or twice-born, if they have not followed the
reformatory process he is called a dvija-bandhu—not one of the twice-born,
but a friend of the twice-born. The whole purpose of this system is to create
good population. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, when women are polluted the
populace is varëa-saìkara, and when the varëa-saìkara population increases,
the situation of the entire world becomes hellish. Therefore, all the Vedic
literatures strongly warn against creating varëa-saìkara population. When
there is varëa-saìkara population, the people cannot be properly controlled
for peace and prosperity, regardless of great legislative assemblies, parliaments
and similar bodies.
TEXT 14
ivPa[SYaaDYaYaNaadqiNa z@NYaSYaaPa[iTaGa]h" )
rajae v*ita" Pa[JaaGaaeáurivPa[ad( va k-raidi>a" )) 14 ))
viprasyädhyayanädéni
ñaò-anyasyäpratigrahaù
räjïo våttiù prajä-goptur
avipräd vä karädibhiù
SYNONYMS
viprasya—of the brähmaëa; adhyayana-ädéni—reading the Vedas, etc; ñaö—six
(to study the Vedas, to teach the Vedas, to worship the Deity, to teach others
how to worship, to accept charity and to give charity); anyasya—of those other
than the brähmaëas (the kñatriyas); apratigrahaù—without accepting charity
from others (the kñatriyas may execute the five other occupational duties
prescribed for the brähmaëas); räjïaù—of the kñatriya; våttiù—the means of
livelihood; prajä-goptuù—who maintain the subjects; aviprät—from those who
are not brähmaëas; vä—or; kara-ädibhiù—by levying revenue taxes, customs
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
783
duties, fines for punishment, etc.
TRANSLATION
For a brähmaëa there are six occupational duties. A kñatriya should not
accept charity, but he may perform the other five of these duties. A king or
kñatriya is not allowed to levy taxes on brähmaëas, but he may make his
livelihood by levying minimal taxes, customs duties, and penalty fines upon his
other subjects.
PURPORT
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains the position of brähmaëas and
kñatriyas as follows. Brähmaëas have six occupational duties, of which three
are compulsory—namely, studying the Vedas, worshiping the Deity and giving
charity. By teaching, by inducing others to worship the Deity, and by
accepting gifts, the brähmaëas receive the necessities of life. This is also
confirmed in the Manu-saàhitä:
ñaëëäà tu karmaëäm asya
tréëi karmäëi jévikä
yajanädhyäpane caiva
viçuddhäc ca pratigrahaù
Of the six occupational duties of the brähmaëas, three are
compulsory—namely, worship of the Deity, study of the Vedas and the giving
of charity. In exchange, a brähmaëa should receive charity, and this should be
his means of livelihood. A brähmaëa cannot take up any professional
occupational duty for his livelihood. The çästras especially stress that if one
claims to be a brähmaëa, he cannot engage in the service of anyone else;
otherwise he at once falls from his position and becomes a çüdra. Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé and Sanätana Gosvämé belonged to a very respectful family, but
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
784
because they engaged in the service of Nawab Hussain Shah—not even as
ordinary clerks, but as ministers—they were ostracized from brahminical
society. Indeed, they became like Mohammedans and even changed their
names. Unless a brähmaëa is very pure, he cannot accept charity from others.
Charity should be given to those who are pure. Even if one is born in a family
of brähmaëas, if one acts as a çüdra one cannot accept charity, for this is
strictly prohibited. Although the kñatriyas are almost as qualified as the
brähmaëas, even they cannot accept charity. This is strictly prohibited in this
verse by the word apratigraha. What to speak of the lower social orders, even
the kñatriyas must not accept charity. The king or government may levy taxes
upon the citizens in various ways—by revenue duties, customs duties,
realization of fines, and so on—provided the king is able to give full protection
to his subjects to assure the security of their life and property. Unless he is able
to give protection, he cannot levy taxes. However, a king must not levy any tax
upon the brähmaëas and the Vaiñëavas fully engaged in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 15
vEXYaSTau vaTaaRv*ita" SYaaNa( iNaTYa& b]øku-l/aNauGa" )
éUd]SYa iÜJaéué[Uza v*itaê SvaiMaNaae >aveTa( )) 15 ))
vaiçyas tu värtä-våttiù syän
nityaà brahma-kulänugaù
çüdrasya dvija-çuçrüñä
våttiç ca svämino bhavet
SYNONYMS
vaiçyaù—the mercantile community; tu—indeed; värtä-våttiù—engaged in
agriculture, cow protection, and trade; syät—must be; nityam—always;
brahma-kula-anugaù—following the directions of the brähmaëas;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
785
çüdrasya—of the fourth-grade persons, the workers; dvija-çuçrüñä—the service
of the three higher sections (the brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas);
våttiù—means of livelihood; ca—and; sväminaù—of the master; bhavet—he
must be.
TRANSLATION
The mercantile community should always follow the directions of the
brähmaëas and engage in such occupational duties as agriculture, trade, and
protection of cows. For the çüdras the only duty is to accept a master from a
higher social order and engage in his service.
TEXT 16
vaTaaR ivic}aa Xaal/INaYaaYaavriXal/aeH^NaMa( )
ivPa[v*itaêTauDaeRYa& é[eYaSaq caetaraetara )) 16 ))
värtä viciträ çälénayäyävara-
çiloïchanam
vipra-våttiç caturdheyaà
çreyasé cottarottarä
SYNONYMS
värtä—the occupational means of livelihood for the vaiçya (agriculture, cow
protection, and trade); viciträ—various types; çäléna—livelihood achieved
without effort; yäyävara—going to the field to beg for some paddy;
çila—picking up the grains left in the field by the proprietor;
uïchanam—picking up the grains that have fallen from bags in shops;
vipra-våttiù—the means of livelihood for the brähmaëas; caturdhä—four
different kinds; iyam—this; çreyasé—better; ca—also; uttara-uttarä—the latter
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
786
compared to the former.
TRANSLATION
As an alternative, a brähmaëa may also take to the vaiçya's occupational
duty of agriculture, cow protection, or trade. He may depend on that which he
has received without begging, he may beg in the paddy field every day, he may
collect paddy left in a field by its proprietor, or he may collect food grains left
here and there in the shops of grain dealers. These are four means of livelihood
that may also be adopted by brähmaëas. Among these four, each of them in
succession is better than the one preceding it.
PURPORT
A brähmaëa is sometimes offered land and cows in charity, and thus for his
livelihood he may act in the same way as a vaiçya, by cultivating land, giving
protection to cows and trading off his surpluses. A better process, however, is
to pick up grains from a field or from a dealer's shop without begging.
TEXT 17
JagaNYaae NaaetaMaa& v*itaMaNaaPaid >aJaeàr" )
‰Tae raJaNYaMaaPaTSau SaveRzaMaiPa SavRXa" )) 17 ))
jaghanyo nottamäà våttim
anäpadi bhajen naraù
åte räjanyam äpatsu
sarveñäm api sarvaçaù
SYNONYMS
jaghanyaù—low (person); na—not; uttamäm—high; våttim—means of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
787
livelihood; anäpadi—when there is no social upheaval; bhajet—may accept;
naraù—a man; åte—except; räjanyam—the profession of the kñatriyas;
äpatsu—at times of emergency; sarveñäm—of everyone in every status of life;
api—certainly; sarvaçaù—all professions or occupational duties.
TRANSLATION
Except in a time of emergency, lower persons should not accept the
occupational duties of those who are higher. When there is such an emergency,
of course, everyone but the kñatriya may accept the means of livelihood of
others.
PURPORT
The occupational duty of a brähmaëa should not be accepted by persons in
lower social orders, especially vaiçyas and çüdras. For example, an occupational
duty of the brähmaëa is to teach Vedic knowledge, but unless there is an
emergency, this professional duty should not be accepted by the kñatriyas,
vaiçyas or çüdras. Even a kñatriya cannot accept the duties of a brähmaëa
unless there is an emergency, and then even if he does so he should not accept
charity from anyone else. Sometimes brähmaëas protest against our Kåñëa
consciousness movement for creating brähmaëas from Europeans, or, in other
words, from mlecchas and yavanas. This movement, however, is here supported
in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. At the present moment, society is in a chaotic
condition, and everyone has given up the cultivation of spiritual life, which is
especially meant for the brähmaëas. Because spiritual culture has been stopped
all over the world, there is now an emergency, and therefore it is now time to
train those who are considered lower and condemned, so that they may
become brähmaëas and take up the work of spiritual progress. The spiritual
progress of human society has been stopped, and this should be considered an
emergency. Here is solid support from Närada Muni of the movement known
as Kåñëa consciousness.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
788
TEXTS 18-20
‰TaaMa*Taa>Yaa& JaqveTa Ma*TaeNa Pa[Ma*TaeNa va )
SaTYaaNa*Taa>YaaMaiPa va Na ìv*tYaa k-dacNa )) 18 ))
‰TaMauH^iXal&/ Pa[ae¢-MaMa*Ta& YadYaaicTaMa( )
Ma*Ta& Tau iNaTYaYaaÁa SYaaTa( Pa[Ma*Ta& k-zR<a& SMa*TaMa( )) 19 ))
SaTYaaNa*Ta& c vai<aJYa& ìv*itaNascSaevNaMa(
vJaRYaeTa( Taa& Sada ivPa[ae raJaNYaê JauGauiPSaTaaMa( )
SavRvedMaYaae ivPa[" SavRdevMaYaae Na*Pa" )) 20 ))
åtämåtäbhyäà jéveta
måtena pramåtena vä
satyänåtäbhyäm api vä
na çva-våttyä kadäcana
åtam uïchaçilaà proktam
amåtaà yad ayäcitam
måtaà tu nitya-yäcïä syät
pramåtaà karñaëaà småtam
satyänåtaà ca väëijyaà
çva-våttir néca-sevanam
varjayet täà sadä vipro
räjanyaç ca jugupsitäm
sarva-vedamayo vipraù
sarva-devamayo nåpaù
SYNONYMS
åta-amåtäbhyäm—of the means of livelihood known as åta and amåta;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
789
jéveta—one may live; måtena—by the profession of måta; pramåtena vä—or by
the profession of pramåta; satyänåtäbhyäm api—even by the profession of
satyänåta; vä—or; na—never; çva-våttyä—by the profession of the dogs;
kadäcana—at any time; åtam—åta; uïchaçilam—the livelihood of collecting
grains left in the field or marketplace; proktam—it is said; amåtam—the
profession of amåta; yat—which; ayäcitam—obtained without begging from
anyone else; måtam—the profession of måta; tu—but; nitya-yäcïä—begging
grains every day from the farmers; syät—should be; pramåtam—the pramåta
means of livelihood; karñaëam—tilling the field; småtam—it is so remembered;
satyänåtam—the occupation of satyänåta; ca—and; väëijyam—trade;
çva-våttiù—the occupation of the dogs; néca-sevanam—the service of low
persons (the vaiçyas and çüdras); varjayet—should give up; täm—that (the
profession of the dogs); sadä—always; vipraù—the brähmaëa; räjanyaù
ca—and the kñatriya; jugupsitäm—very abominable;
sarva-veda-mayaù—learned in all the Vedic understandings; vipraù—the
brähmaëa; sarva-deva-mayaù—the embodiment of all the demigods;
nåpaù—the kñatriya or king.
TRANSLATION
In time of emergency, one may accept any of the various types of professions
known as åta, amåta, måta, pramåta and satyänåta, but one should not at any
time accept the profession of a dog. The profession of uïchaçila, collecting
grains from the field, is called åta. Collecting without begging is called amåta,
begging grains is called måta, tilling the ground is called pramåta, and trade is
called satyänåta. Engaging in the service of low-grade persons, however, is called
çva-våtti, the profession of the dogs. Specifically, brähmaëas and kñatriyas
should not engage in the low and abominable service of çüdras. Brähmaëas
should be well acquainted with all the Vedic knowledge, and kñatriyas should be
well acquainted with the worship of demigods.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
790
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.13), cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà
guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù: the four divisions of human society were created by
the Supreme Lord according to the three modes of material nature and the
work ascribed to them. Formerly, the principle of dividing human society into
four sections—brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra—was strictly followed, but
because of gradual neglect of the varëäçrama principles, varëa-saìkara
population developed, and the entire institution has now been lost. In this age
of Kali, practically everyone is a çüdra (kalau çüdra-sambhaväù), and finding
anyone who is a brähmaëa, kñatriya or vaiçya is very difficult. Although the
Kåñëa consciousness movement is a movement of brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas, it
is trying to reestablish the divine varëäçrama institution, for without this
division of society there cannot be peace and prosperity anywhere.
TEXT 21
XaMaae dMaSTaPa" XaaEc& SaNTaaez" +aaiNTaraJaRvMa( )
jaNa& dYaaCYauTaaTMaTv& SaTYa& c b]øl/+a<aMa( )) 21 ))
çamo damas tapaù çaucaà
santoñaù kñäntir ärjavam
jïänaà dayäcyutätmatvaà
satyaà ca brahma-lakñaëam
SYNONYMS
çamaù—control of the mind; damaù—control of the senses; tapaù—austerity
and penance; çaucam—cleanliness; santoñaù—satisfaction;
kñäntiù—forgiveness (being unagitated by anger); ärjavam—simplicity;
jïänam—knowledge; dayä—mercy; acyuta-ätmatvam—accepting oneself as an
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
791
eternal servant of the Lord; satyam—truthfulness; ca—also;
brahma-lakñaëam—the symptoms of a brähmaëa.
TRANSLATION
The symptoms of a brähmaëa are control of the mind, control of the senses,
austerity and penance, cleanliness, satisfaction, forgiveness, simplicity,
knowledge, mercy, truthfulness, and complete surrender to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
In the institution of varëäçrama-dharma, the symptoms of a brähmaëa,
kñatriya, vaiçya, çüdra, brahmacäré, gåhastha, vänaprastha, and sannyäsé are all
described. The ultimate aim is acyutätmatvam—to think always of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, or Viñëu. To make advancement in
Kåñëa consciousness, one has to become a brähmaëa, with the
above-mentioned symptoms.
TEXT 22
XaaEYa| vqYa| Da*iTaSTaeJaSTYaaGaêaTMaJaYa" +aMaa )
b]ø<YaTaa Pa[Saadê SaTYa& c +a}al/+a<aMa( )) 22 ))
çauryaà véryaà dhåtis tejas
tyägaç cätmajayaù kñamä
brahmaëyatä prasädaç ca
satyaà ca kñatra-lakñaëam
SYNONYMS
çauryam—power in battle; véryam—being unconquerable; dhåtiù—patience
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
792
(even in reverses, a kñatriya is very grave); tejaù—ability to defeat others;
tyägaù—giving charity; ca—and; ätma-jayaù—not being overwhelmed by
bodily necessities; kñamä—forgiveness; brahmaëyatä—faithfulness to the
brahminical principles; prasädaù—jolliness in any condition of life; ca—and;
satyam ca—and truthfulness; kñatra-lakñaëam—these are the symptoms of a
kñatriya.
TRANSLATION
To be influential in battle, unconquerable, patient, challenging and
charitable, to control the bodily necessities, to be forgiving, to be attached to the
brahminical nature and to be always jolly and truthful—these are the symptoms
of the kñatriya.
TEXT 23
devGauvRCYauTae >ai¢-iñvGaRPairPaaez<aMa( )
AaiSTaKYaMauÛMaae iNaTYa& NaEPau<Ya& vEXYal/+a<aMa( )) 23 ))
deva-gurv-acyute bhaktis
tri-varga-paripoñaëam
ästikyam udyamo nityaà
naipuëyaà vaiçya-lakñaëam
SYNONYMS
deva-guru-acyute—unto the demigods, the spiritual master and Lord Viñëu;
bhaktiù—engagement in devotional service; tri-varga—of the three principles
of pious life (religion, economic development and sense gratification);
paripoñaëam—execution; ästikyam—faith in the scriptures, the spiritual
master and the Supreme Lord; udyamaù—active; nityam—without cessation,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
793
continuously; naipuëyam—expertise; vaiçya-lakñaëam—the symptoms of a
vaiçya.
TRANSLATION
Being always devoted to the demigods, the spiritual master and the Supreme
Lord, Viñëu; endeavoring for advancement in religious principles, economic
development and sense gratification [dharma, artha and käma]; believing in the
words of the spiritual master and scripture; and always endeavoring with
expertise in earning money—these are the symptoms of the vaiçya.
TEXT 24
éUd]SYa SaàiTa" XaaEc& Saeva SvaiMaNYaMaaYaYaa )
AMaN}aYajae ùSTaeYa& SaTYa& GaaeivPa[r+a<aMa( )) 24 ))
çüdrasya sannatiù çaucaà
sevä sväminy amäyayä
amantra-yajïo hy asteyaà
satyaà go-vipra-rakñaëam
SYNONYMS
çüdrasya—of the çüdra (the fourth grade of man in society, the worker);
sannatiù—obedience to the higher classes (the brähmaëas, kñatriyas and
vaiçyas); çaucam—cleanliness; sevä—service; svämini—to the master who
maintains him; amäyayä—without duplicity; amantra-yajïaù—performance of
sacrifices simply by offering obeisances (without mantras); hi—certainly;
asteyam—practicing not to steal; satyam—truthfulness; go—cows;
vipra—brahmaëas; rakñaëam—protecting.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
794
TRANSLATION
Offering obeisances to the higher sections of society [the brähmaëas,
kñatriyas and vaiçyas], being always very clean, being free from duplicity,
serving one's master, performing sacrifices without uttering mantras, not
stealing, always speaking the truth and giving all protection to the cows and
brähmaëas—these are the symptoms of the çüdra.
PURPORT
It is everyone's experience that workers or servants are generally
accustomed to stealing. A first-class servant is one who does not steal. Here it
is recommended that a first-class çüdra must remain very clean, must not steal
or speak lies, and must always render service to his master. A çüdra may attend
sacrifices and Vedic ritualistic ceremonies along with his master, but he should
not utter the mantras, for these may be uttered only by the members of the
higher sections of society. Unless one is completely pure and has been raised to
the standard of a brähmaëa, kñatriya or vaiçya—in other words, unless one is
dvija, twice-born—the chanting of mantras will not be fruitful.
TEXT 25
ñq<aa& c PaiTadevaNaa& TaC^ué[UzaNaukU-l/Taa )
TaØNDauZvNauv*itaê iNaTYa& Tad(v]TaDaar<aMa( )) 25 ))
stréëäà ca pati-devänäà
tac-chuçrüñänukülatä
tad-bandhuñv anuvåttiç ca
nityaà tad-vrata-dhäraëam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
795
SYNONYMS
stréëäm—of women; ca—also; pati-devänäm—who have accepted their
husbands as worshipable; tat-çuçrüñä—readiness to render service to her
husband; anukülatä—being favorably disposed towards her husband;
tat-bandhuñu—unto the friends and relatives of the husband; anuvåttiù—being
similarly disposed (to treat them well for the satisfaction of the husband);
ca—and; nityam—regularly; tat-vrata-dhäraëam—accepting the vows of the
husband or acting exactly as the husband acts.
TRANSLATION
To render service to the husband, to be always favorably disposed toward the
husband, to be equally well disposed toward the husband's relatives and friends,
and to follow the vows of the husband—these are the four principles to be
followed by women described as chaste.
PURPORT
It is very important for peaceful householder life that a woman follow the
vow of her husband. Any disagreement with the husband's vow will disrupt
family life. In this regard, Cäëakya Paëòita gives a very valuable instruction:
dampatyoù kalaho nästi tatra çréù svayam ägatäù. When there are no fights
between husband and wife, the goddess of fortune automatically comes to the
home. A woman's education should be conducted along the lines indicated in
this verse. The basic principle for a chaste woman is to be always favorably
disposed toward her husband. In Bhagavad-gétä (1.40) it is said, stréñu duñöäsu
värñëeya jäyate varëa-saìkaraù: if the women are polluted, there will be
varëa-saìkara population. In modern terms, the varëa-saìkara are the hippies,
who do not follow any regulative injunctions. Another explanation is that
when the population is varëa-saìkara, no one can know who is on what
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
796
platform. The varëäçrama system scientifically divides society into four varëas
and four äçramas, but in varëa-saìkara society there are no such distinctions,
and no one can know who is who. In such a society, no one can distinguish
between a brähmaëa, a kñatriya, a vaiçya and a çüdra. For peace and happiness
in the material world, the varëäçrama institution must be introduced. The
symptoms of one's activities must be defined, and one must be educated
accordingly. Then spiritual advancement will automatically be possible.
TEXTS 26-27
SaMMaaJaRNaaePale/Paa>Yaa& Ga*hMa<@NavTaRNaE" )
SvYa& c Mai<@Taa iNaTYa& PairMa*íPairC^da )) 26 ))
k-aMaEåÀavcE" Saaßq Pa[é[Yae<a dMaeNa c )
vaKYaE" SaTYaE" iPa[YaE" Pa[eM<aa k-ale/ k-ale/ >aJaeTa( PaiTaMa( )) 27 ))
sammärjanopalepäbhyäà
gåha-maëòana-vartanaiù
svayaà ca maëòitä nityaà
parimåñöa-paricchadä
kämair uccävacaiù sädhvé
praçrayeëa damena ca
väkyaiù satyaiù priyaiù premëä
käle käle bhajet patim
SYNONYMS
sammärjana—by cleaning; upalepäbhyäm—by smearing with water or other
cleansing liquids; gåha—the household; maëòana—decorating;
vartanaiù—remaining at home and engaged in such duties;
svayam—personally; ca—also; maëòitä—finely dressed; nityam—always;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
797
parimåñöa—cleansed; paricchadä—garments and household utensils;
kämaiù—according to the desires of the husband; ucca-avacaiù—both great
and small; sädhvé—a chaste woman; praçrayeëa—with modesty; damena—by
controlling the senses; ca—also; väkyaiù—by speech; satyaiù—truthful;
priyaiù—very pleasing; premëä—with love; käle käle—at appropriate times;
bhajet—should worship; patim—her husband.
TRANSLATION
A chaste woman must dress nicely and decorate herself with golden
ornaments for the pleasure of her husband. Always wearing clean and attractive
garments, she should sweep and clean the household with water and other
liquids so that the entire house is always pure and clean. She should collect the
household paraphernalia and keep the house always aromatic with incense and
flowers and must be ready to execute the desires of her husband. Being modest
and truthful, controlling her senses, and speaking in sweet words, a chaste
woman should engage in the service of her husband with love, according to time
and circumstances.
TEXT 28
SaNTauíal/aelu/Paa d+aa DaMaRja iPa[YaSaTYavak(- )
APa[Mataa éuic" iòGDaa PaiTa& TvPaiTaTa& >aJaeTa( )) 28 ))
santuñöälolupä dakñä
dharma-jïä priya-satya-väk
apramattä çuciù snigdhä
patià tv apatitaà bhajet
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
798
santuñöä—always satisfied; alolupä—without being greedy; dakñä—very expert
in serving; dharma-jïä—fully conversant with religious principles;
priya—pleasing; satya—truthful; väk—in speaking; apramattä—attentive in
service to her husband; çuciù—always clean and pure; snigdhä—affectionate;
patim—the husband; tu—but; apatitam—who is not fallen; bhajet—should
worship.
TRANSLATION
A chaste woman should not be greedy, but satisfied in all circumstances. She
must be very expert in handling household affairs and should be fully
conversant with religious principles. She should speak pleasingly and truthfully
and should be very careful and always clean and pure. Thus a chaste woman
should engage with affection in the service of a husband who is not fallen.
PURPORT
According to the injunction of Yäjïavalkya, an authority on religious
principles, äçuddheù sampratikñyo hi mahäpätaka-düñitaù. One is considered
contaminated by the reactions of great sinful activities when one has not been
purified according to the methods of the daça-vidhä-saàskära. In
Bhagavad-gétä, however, the Lord says, na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù prapadyante
narädhamäù: [Bg. 7.15] "Those miscreants who do not surrender unto Me are
the lowest of mankind." The word narädhama means "nondevotee." Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu also said, yei bhaje sei baòa, abhakta-héna [Cc. Antya
4.67], chära. Anyone who is a devotee is sinless. One who is not a devotee,
however, is the most fallen and condemned. It is recommended, therefore, that
a chaste wife not associate with a fallen husband. A fallen husband is one who
is addicted to the four principles of sinful activity—namely illicit sex,
meat-eating, gambling and intoxication. Specifically, if one is not a soul
surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is understood to be
contaminated. Thus a chaste woman is advised not to agree to serve such a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
799
husband. It is not that a chaste woman should be like a slave while her
husband is narädhama, the lowest of men. Although the duties of a woman are
different from those of a man, a chaste woman is not meant to serve a fallen
husband. If her husband is fallen, it is recommended that she give up his
association. Giving up the association of her husband does not mean, however,
that a woman should marry again and thus indulge in prostitution. If a chaste
woman unfortunately marries a husband who is fallen, she should live
separately from him. Similarly, a husband can separate himself from a woman
who is not chaste according to the description of the çästra. The conclusion is
that a husband should be a pure Vaiñëava and that a woman should be a chaste
wife with all the symptoms described in this regard. Then both of them will be
happy and make spiritual progress in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 29
Yaa PaiTa& hir>aaveNa >aJaeTa( é[qirv TaTPara )
hYaaRTMaNaa hrel/aeRke- PaTYaa é[qirv MaaedTae )) 29 ))
yä patià hari-bhävena
bhajet çrér iva tat-parä
hary-ätmanä harer loke
patyä çrér iva modate
SYNONYMS
yä—any woman who; patim—her husband; hari-bhävena—mentally accepting
him as equal to Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhajet—worships
or renders service to; çréù iva—exactly like the goddess of fortune;
tat-parä—being devoted; hari-ätmanä—completely absorbed in thoughts of
Hari; hareù loke—in the spiritual world, the Vaikuëöha planets; patyä—with
her husband; çréù iva—exactly like the goddess of fortune; modate—enjoys
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
800
spiritual, eternal life.
TRANSLATION
The woman who engages in the service of her husband, following strictly in
the footsteps of the goddess of fortune, surely returns home, back to Godhead,
with her devotee husband, and lives very happily in the Vaikuëöha planets.
PURPORT
The faithfulness of the goddess of fortune is the ideal for a chaste woman.
The Brahma-saàhitä (5.29) says, lakñmé-sahasra-çata-sambhrama-sevyamänam.
In the Vaikuëöha planets, Lord Viñëu is worshiped by many, many thousands
of goddesses of fortune, and in Goloka Våndävana, Lord Kåñëa is worshiped by
many, many thousands of gopés, all of whom are goddesses of fortune. A woman
should serve her husband as faithfully as the goddess of fortune. A man should
be an ideal servant of the Lord, and a woman should be an ideal wife like the
goddess of fortune. Then both husband and wife will be so faithful and strong
that by acting together they will return home, back to Godhead, without a
doubt. In this regard, Çréla Madhväcärya gives this opinion:
harir asmin sthita iti
stréëäà bhartari bhävanä
çiñyäëäà ca gurau nityaà
çüdräëäà brähmaëädiñu
bhåtyänäà svämini tathä
hari-bhäva udéritaù
A woman should think of her husband as the Supreme Lord. Similarly, a
disciple should think of the spiritual master as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, a çüdra should think of a brähmaëa as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and a servant should think of his master as the Supreme Personality
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
801
of Godhead. In this way, all of them will automatically become devotees of the
Lord. In other words, by thinking this way, all of them will become Kåñëa
conscious.
TEXT 30
v*ita" SaªrJaaTaqNaa& TataTku-l/k*-Taa >aveTa( )
AcaEra<aaMaPaaPaaNaaMaNTYaJaaNTaevSaaiYaNaaMa( )) 30 ))
våttiù saìkara-jäténäà
tat-tat-kula-kåtä bhavet
acauräëäm apäpänäm
antyajäntevasäyinäm
SYNONYMS
våttiù—occupational duty; saìkara-jäténäm—of the mixed classes of men
(those other than the four divisions); tat-tat—according to their respective;
kula-kåtä—family tradition; bhavet—should be; acauräëäm—not thieves by
profession; apäpänäm—not sinful; antyaja—lower classes;
antevasäyinäm—known as antevasäyé or caëòäla.
TRANSLATION
Among the mixed classes known as saìkara, those who are not thieves are
known as antevasäyé or caëòälas [dog-eaters], and they also have their
hereditary customs.
PURPORT
The four principal divisions of society—brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and
çüdra—have been defined, and now there is a description of the antyaja, the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
802
mixed classes. Among the mixed classes, there are two divisions—pratilomaja
and anulomaja. If a woman of a high caste marries a man of a lower caste, their
union is called pratiloma. If a woman of a low caste, however, marries a man of
a higher caste, their union is called anuloma. The members of such dynasties
have their traditional duties as barbers, washermen and so on. Among the
antyajas, those who are still somewhat pure in that they do not steal and are
not addicted to meat-eating, drinking, illicit sex and gambling are called
antevasäyé. Among people of the lower classes, intermarriage and the drinking
of wine are allowed, for these people do not recognize such conduct as sinful
among themselves.
TEXT 31
Pa[aYa" Sv>aavivihTaae Na*<aa& DaMaaeR YauGae YauGae )
vedd*iG>a" SMa*Taae raJaNPa[eTYa ceh c XaMaRk*-Ta( )) 31 ))
präyaù sva-bhäva-vihito
nåëäà dharmo yuge yuge
veda-dågbhiù småto räjan
pretya ceha ca çarma-kåt
SYNONYMS
präyaù—generally; sva-bhäva-vihitaù—prescribed, according to one's material
modes of nature; nåëäm—of human society; dharmaù—the occupational duty;
yuge yuge—in every age; veda-dågbhiù—by brähmaëas well conversant in the
Vedic knowledge; småtaù—recognized; räjan—O King; pretya—after death;
ca—and; iha—here (in this body); ca—also; çarma-kåt—auspicious.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
803
My dear King, brähmaëas well conversant in Vedic knowledge have given
their verdict that in every age [yuga] the conduct of different sections of people
according to their material modes of nature is auspicious both in this life and
after death.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (3.35) it is said, çreyän sva-dharmo viguëaù para-dharmät
svanuñöhität: "It is far better to discharge one's prescribed duties, even though
they may be faulty, than another's duties." The antyajas, the men of the lower
classes, are accustomed to stealing, drinking and illicit sex, but that is not
considered sinful. For example, if a tiger kills a man, this is not sinful but if a
man kills another man, this is considered sinful, and the killer is hanged. What
is a daily affair among the animals is a sinful act in human society. Thus
according to the symptoms of higher and lower sections of society, there are
different varieties of occupational duties. According to the experts in Vedic
knowledge, these duties are prescribed in terms of the age concerned.
TEXT 32
v*tYaa Sv>aavk*-TaYaa vTaRMaaNa" Svk-MaRk*-Ta( )
ihTva Sv>aavJa& k-MaR XaNaEiNaRGauR<aTaaiMaYaaTa( )) 32 ))
våttyä sva-bhäva-kåtayä
vartamänaù sva-karma-kåt
hitvä sva-bhäva-jaà karma
çanair nirguëatäm iyät
SYNONYMS
våttyä—with the profession; sva-bhäva-kåtayä—performed according to one's
modes of material nature; vartamänaù—existing; sva-karma-kåt—executing his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
804
own work; hitvä—giving up; sva-bhäva-jam—born from one's own modes of
nature; karma—activities; çanaiù—gradually; nirguëatäm—transcendental
position; iyät—may attain.
TRANSLATION
If one acts in his profession according to his position in the modes of nature
and gradually gives up these activities, he attains the niñkäma stage.
PURPORT
If one gradually gives up his hereditary customs and duties and tries to serve
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in his natural position, he is gradually
able to become free from these activities, and he attains the stage of niñkäma,
freedom from material desires.
TEXTS 33-34
oPYaMaaNa& Mauhu" +ae}a& SvYa& iNavsYaRTaaiMaYaaTa( )
Na k-LPaTae PauNa" SaUTYaE oá& bqJa& c NaXYaiTa )) 33 ))
Wv& k-aMaaXaYa& icta& k-aMaaNaaMaiTaSaevYaa )
ivrJYaeTa YaQaa raJaàiGanvTa( k-aMaibNdui>a" )) 34 ))
upyamänaà muhuù kñetraà
svayaà nirvéryatäm iyät
na kalpate punaù sütyai
uptaà béjaà ca naçyati
evaà kämäçayaà cittaà
kämänäm atisevayä
virajyeta yathä räjann
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
805
agnivat käma-bindubhiù
SYNONYMS
upyamänam—being cultivated; muhuù—again and again; kñetram—a field;
svayam—itself; nirvéryatäm—barrenness; iyät—may obtain; na kalpate—is not
suitable; punaù—again; sütyai—for growing further harvests; uptam—sown;
béjam—the seed; ca—and; naçyati—is spoiled; evam—in this way;
käma-äçayam—full of lusty desires; cittam—the core of the heart;
kämänäm—of the desirable objects; ati-sevayä—by enjoyment over and over
again; virajyeta—may become detached; yathä—just as; räjan—O King;
agni-vat—a fire; käma-bindubhiù—by small drops of clarified butter.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, if an agricultural field is cultivated again and again, the power
of its production decreases, and whatever seeds are sown there are lost. Just as
drops of ghee on a fire never extinguish the fire but a flood of ghee will,
similarly, overindulgence in lusty desires mitigates such desires entirely.
PURPORT
If one continuously sprinkles drops of ghee on a fire, the fire will not be
extinguished, but if one suddenly puts a lump of ghee on a fire, the fire may
possibly be extinguished entirely. Similarly, those who are too sinful and have
thus been born in the lower classes are allowed to enjoy sinful activities fully,
for thus there is a chance that these activities will become detestful to them,
and they will get the opportunity to be purified.
TEXT 35
YaSYa Yaç+a<a& Pa[ae¢&- Pau&Saae v<aaRi>aVYaÅk-Ma( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
806
YadNYa}aaiPa d*XYaeTa TaTa( TaeNaEv iviNaidRXaeTa( )) 35 ))
yasya yal lakñaëaà proktaà
puàso varëäbhivyaïjakam
yad anyaträpi dåçyeta
tat tenaiva vinirdiçet
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; yat—which; lakñaëam—symptom; proktam—described
(above); puàsaù—of a person; varëa-abhivyaïjakam—indicating the
classification (brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya, çüdra, etc.); yat—if;
anyatra—elsewhere; api—also; dåçyeta—is seen; tat—that; tena—by that
symptom; eva—certainly; vinirdiçet—one should designate.
TRANSLATION
If one shows the symptoms of being a brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya or çüdra, as
described above, even if he has appeared in a different class, he should be
accepted according to those symptoms of classification.
PURPORT
Herein it is clearly stated by Närada Muni that one should not be accepted
as a brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya or çüdra according to birth, for although this is
going on now, it is not accepted by the çästras. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(4.13), cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù. Thus the four
divisions of society—brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra—are to be
ascertained according to qualities and activities. If one was born in a brähmaëa
family and has acquired the brahminical qualifications, he is to be accepted as
a brähmaëa; otherwise, he should be considered a brahma-bandhu. Similarly, if
a çüdra acquires the qualities of a brähmaëa, although he was born in a çüdra
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
807
family, he is not a çüdra; because he has developed the qualities of a brähmaëa,
he should be accepted as a brähmaëa. The Kåñëa consciousness movement is
meant to develop these brahminical qualities. Regardless of the community in
which one was born, if one develops the qualities of a brähmaëa he should be
accepted as a brähmaëa, and he then may be offered the order of sannyäsa.
Unless one is qualified in terms of the brahminical symptoms, one cannot take
sannyäsa. In designating a person a brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya or çüdra, birth is
not the essential symptom. This understanding is very important. Herein
Närada Muni distinctly says that one may be accepted according to the caste of
his birth if he has the corresponding qualifications, but otherwise he should
not. One who has attained the qualifications of a brähmaëa, regardless of
where he was born, should be accepted as a brähmaëa. Similarly, if one has
developed the qualities of a çüdra or a caëòäla, regardless of where he was
born, he should be accepted in terms of those symptoms.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Eleventh Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Perfect Society: Four Social Classes."
12. The Perfect Society: Four Spiritual Classes
This chapter particularly describes the brahmacäré and the person in the
vänaprastha stage, and it also gives a general description of the four
äçramas-brahmacarya, gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa. In the previous
chapter, the great saint Närada Muni has described the varëa institution of
society, and now, in this chapter, he will describe the stages of spiritual
advancement in the four äçramas, which are known as brahmacarya, gåhastha,
vänaprastha and sannyäsa.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
808
The brahmacäri should live under the care of the true spiritual master,
giving him sincere respect and obeisances, acting as his menial servant, and
always carrying out his order. The brahmacäré should engage himself in
spiritual activities and study the Vedic literature under the direction of the
spiritual master. According to the brahmacarya system, he should dress with a
belt, deerskin, and matted hair and should bear a daëòa, waterpot and sacred
thread. He should collect alms daily in the morning, and in the evening
whatever alms he has collected he should offer to the spiritual master. A
brahmacäré should accept prasäda upon the order of the spiritual master, and if
the spiritual master sometimes forgets to order the disciple to eat, the disciple
should not take prasäda on his own initiative; rather, he should fast. The
brahmacäré should be trained to be satisfied with eating what is absolutely
necessary, he should be very expert in executing responsibilities, he should be
faithful, and he should control his senses and try to avoid the association of
women as far as possible. A brahmacäré should very strictly abstain from living
with women and should not meet with gåhasthas and those too addicted to
women. Nor should a brahmacäré speak in a lonely place with a woman.
After completing one's education as a brahmacäré in this way, one should
give dakñiëä, an offering of gratitude, to one's guru, and then one may leave for
home and accept the next äçrama-the gåhastha-äçrama-or else one may
continue in the brahmacarya-äçrama without adulteration. The duties for the
gåhastha-äçrama and brahmacarya-äçrama, as well as the duties for sannyäsés,
are prescribed in the çästras. A gåhastha is not meant to enjoy sex life without
restriction. Indeed, the whole purpose of Vedic life is to become free from
sexual indulgence. All the äçramas are recognized for spiritual progress, and
therefore although the gåhastha-äçrama gives a kind of license for sex life for a
certain time, it does not allow unrestricted sex life. Therefore, in gåhastha life
also, there is no illicit sex. A gåhastha should not accept a woman for sexual
enjoyment. Wasting semen is also illicit sex.
After the gåhastha-äçrama is another äçrama, known as vänaprastha, which
is midway between gåhastha and sannyäsa. A person in the vänaprastha order is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
809
restricted in eating food grains and forbidden to eat fruits that have not
ripened on the tree. Nor should he cook food with fire, although he is allowed
to eat caru, grains that have been offered in a sacrificial fire. He may also eat
fruits and grains that have grown naturally. Living in a thatched cottage, the
vänaprastha should endure all kinds of heat and cold. He should not cut his
nails or hair, and he should give up cleaning his body and teeth. He should
wear tree bark, accept a daëòa, and practice life in the forest, taking a vow to
live there for twelve years, eight years, four years, two years or at least one
year. At last, when because of old age he can no longer perform the activities
of a vänaprastha, he should gradually stop everything and in this way give up
his body.
TEXT 1
é[qNaard ovac
b]øcarq Gauåku-le/ vSaNdaNTaae GauraeihRTaMa( )
AacrNdaSavàqcae GauraE Saud*!SaaEôd" )) 1 ))
çré-närada uväca
brahmacäré guru-kule
vasan dänto guror hitam
äcaran däsavan néco
gurau sudåòha-sauhådaù
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; brahmacäré—a brahmacäré, a
student living at the residence of the guru; guru-kule—at the residence of the
guru; vasan—by living; däntaù—continuously practicing control of the senses;
guroù hitam—only for the benefit of the guru (not for one's personal benefit);
äcaran—practicing; däsa-vat—very humbly, like a slave; nécaù—submissive,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
810
obedient; gurau—unto the spiritual master; su-dåòha—firmly; sauhådaù—in
friendship or good will.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni said: A student should practice completely controlling his
senses. He should be submissive and should have an attitude of firm friendship
for the spiritual master. With a great vow, the brahmacäré should live at the
guru-kula, only for the benefit of the guru.
TEXT 2
SaaYa& Pa[aTaåPaaSaqTa GauvRGNYakR-SauraetaMaaNa( )
SaNDYae o>ae c YaTavaGa( JaPaNb]ø SaMaaihTa" )) 2 ))
säyaà prätar upäséta
gurv-agny-arka-surottamän
sandhye ubhe ca yata-väg
japan brahma samähitaù
SYNONYMS
säyam—in the evening; prätaù—in the morning; upäséta—he should worship;
guru—the spiritual master; agni—the fire (by a fire sacrifice); arka—the sun;
sura-uttamän—and Lord Viñëu, Puruñottama, the best of personalities;
sandhye—morning and evening; ubhe—both; ca—also; yata-väk—without
talking, being silent; japan—murmuring; brahma—the Gäyatré mantra;
samähitaù—being fully absorbed.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
811
At both junctions of day and night, namely, in the early morning and in the
evening, he should be fully absorbed in thoughts of the spiritual master, fire,
the sun-god and Lord Viñëu and by chanting the Gäyatré mantra he should
worship them.
TEXT 3
^Nda&SYaDaqYaqTa GauraerahUTaêeTa( SauYaiN}aTa" )
oPa§-Mae_vSaaNae c cr<aaE iXarSaa NaMaeTa( )) 3 ))
chandäàsy adhéyéta guror
ähütaç cet suyantritaù
upakrame 'vasäne ca
caraëau çirasä namet
SYNONYMS
chandäàsi—mantras in the Vedas, like the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra and the
Gäyatré mantra; adhéyéta—one should chant or read regularly; guroù—from
the spiritual master; ähütaù—being addressed or called (by him); cet—if;
su-yantritaù—faithful, well behaved; upakrame—in the beginning;
avasäne—at the end (of reading Vedic mantras); ca—also; caraëau—at the
lotus feet; çirasä—by the head; namet—one should offer obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Being called by the spiritual master, the student should study the Vedic
mantras regularly. Every day, before beginning his studies and at the end of his
studies, the disciple should respectfully offer obeisances unto the spiritual
master.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
812
TEXT 4
Mae%l/aiJaNavaSaa&iSa Ja$=ad<@k-Ma<@lU/Na( )
ib>a*YaaduPavqTa& c d>aRPaai<aYaRQaaeidTaMa( )) 4 ))
mekhaläjina-väsäàsi
jaöä-daëòa-kamaëòalün
bibhåyäd upavétaà ca
darbha-päëir yathoditam
SYNONYMS
mekhalä—a belt made of straw; ajina-väsäàsi—garments made of deerskin;
jaöä—matted hair; daëòa—a rod; kamaëòalün—and a waterpot known as a
kamaëòalu; bibhåyät—he (the brahmacäré) should regularly carry or wear;
upavétam ca—and a sacred thread; darbha-päëiù—taking purified kuça in his
hand; yathä uditam—as recommended in the çästras.
TRANSLATION
Carrying pure kuça grass in his hand, the brahmacäré should dress regularly
with a belt of straw and with deerskin garments. He should wear matted hair,
carry a rod and waterpot and be decorated with a sacred thread, as
recommended in the çästras.
TEXT 5
SaaYa& Pa[aTaêreÙE+Ya& Gaurve TaiàvedYaeTa( )
>auÅqTa YaÛNaujaTaae Naae ceduPavSaeTa( KvicTa( )) 5 ))
säyaà prätaç cared bhaikñyaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
813
gurave tan nivedayet
bhuïjéta yady anujïäto
no ced upavaset kvacit
SYNONYMS
säyam—in the evening; prätaù—in the morning; caret—should go out;
bhaikñyam—to collect alms; gurave—unto the spiritual master; tat—all that he
collects; nivedayet—should offer; bhuïjéta—he should eat; yadi—if;
anujïätaù—ordered (by the spiritual master); no—otherwise; cet—if;
upavaset—should observe fasting; kvacit—sometimes.
TRANSLATION
The brahmacäré should go out morning and evening to collect alms, and he
should offer all that he collects to the spiritual master. He should eat only if
ordered to take food by the spiritual master; otherwise, if the spiritual master
does not give this order, he may sometimes have to fast.
TEXT 6
SauXaql/ae iMaTa>auGa( d+a" é[ÕDaaNaae iJaTaeiNd]Ya" )
YaavdQa| VYavhreTa( ñqzu ñqiNaiJaRTaezu c )) 6 ))
suçélo mita-bhug dakñaù
çraddadhäno jitendriyaù
yävad-arthaà vyavaharet
stréñu stré-nirjiteñu ca
SYNONYMS
su-çélaù—very polite and well behaved; mita-bhuk—eating only exactly what
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
814
he needs, neither more nor less; dakñaù—expert or without laziness, always
busy; çraddadhänaù—possessing full faith in the instructions of the çästra and
the spiritual master; jita-indriyaù—having full control over the senses;
yävat-artham—as much as necessary; vyavaharet—should behave externally;
stréñu—unto women; stré-nirjiteñu—men who are henpecked, controlled by
women; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
A brahmacäré should be quite well behaved and gentle and should not eat or
collect more than necessary. He must always be active and expert, fully
believing in the instructions of the spiritual master and the çästra. Fully
controlling his senses, he should associate only as much as necessary with
women or those controlled by women.
PURPORT
A brahmacäré should be very careful not to mix with women or with men
addicted to women. Although when he goes out to beg alms it is necessary to
talk with women and with men very much attached to women, this association
should be very short, and he should talk with them only about begging alms,
and not more. A brahmacäré should be very careful in associating with men
who are attached to women.
TEXT 7
vJaRYaeTa( Pa[MadaGaaQaaMaGa*hSQaae b*hd(v]Ta" )
wiNd]Yaai<a Pa[MaaQaqiNa hrNTYaiPa YaTaeMaRNa" )) 7 ))
varjayet pramadä-gäthäm
agåhastho båhad-vrataù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
815
indriyäëi pramäthéni
haranty api yater manaù
SYNONYMS
varjayet—must give up; pramadä-gäthäm—talking with women; agåhasthaù—a
person who has not accepted the gåhastha-äçrama (a brahmacäré or sannyäsé);
båhat-vrataù—invariably observing the vow of celibacy; indriyäëi—the senses;
pramäthéni—almost always unconquerable; haranti—take away; api—even;
yateù—of the sannyäsé; manaù—the mind.
TRANSLATION
A brahmacäré, or one who has not accepted the gåhastha-äçrama [family life],
must rigidly avoid talking with women or about women, for the senses are so
powerful that they may agitate even the mind of a sannyäsé, a member of the
renounced order of life.
PURPORT
Brahmacarya essentially means the vow not to marry but to observe strict
celibacy (båhad-vrata). A brahmacäré or sannyäsé should avoid talking with
women or reading literature concerning talks between man and woman. The
injunction restricting association with women is the basic principle of spiritual
life. Associating or talking with women is never advised in any of the Vedic
literatures. The entire Vedic system teaches one to avoid sex life so that one
may gradually progress from brahmacarya to gåhastha, from gåhastha to
vänaprastha, and from vänaprastha to sannyäsa and thus give up material
enjoyment, which is the original cause of bondage to this material world. The
word båhad-vrata refers to one who has decided not to marry, or in other
words, not to indulge in sex life throughout his entire life.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
816
TEXT 8
ke-XaPa[SaaDaNaaeNMadRòPaNaa>YaÅNaaidk-Ma( )
Gauåñqi>aYauRviTai>a" k-arYaeàaTMaNaae Yauva )) 8 ))
keça-prasädhanonmardasnapanäbhyaïjanädikam
guru-strébhir yuvatibhiù
kärayen nätmano yuvä
SYNONYMS
keça-prasädhana—brushing the hair; unmarda—massaging the body;
snapana—bathing; abhyaïjana-ädikam—massaging the body with oil and so
on; guru-strébhiù—by the wife of the spiritual master; yuvatibhiù—very young;
kärayet—should allow to do; na—never; ätmanaù—for personal service;
yuvä—if the student is a young man.
TRANSLATION
If the wife of the spiritual master is young, a young brahmacäré should not
allow her to care for his hair, massage his body with oil, or bathe him with
affection like a mother.
PURPORT
The relationship between the student or disciple and the wife of the
spiritual master or teacher is like that between son and mother. A mother
sometimes cares for her son by combing his hair, massaging his body with oil,
or bathing him. Similarly, the wife of the teacher is also a mother (guru-patné),
and therefore she may also care for the disciple in a motherly way. If the wife
of the teacher is a young woman, however, a young brahmacäré should not
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
817
allow such a mother to touch him. This is strictly prohibited. There are seven
kinds of mothers:
ätma-mätä guroù patné
brähmaëé räja-patnikä
dhenur dhätré tathä påthvé
saptaitä mätaraù småtäù
These mothers are the original mother, the wife of the teacher or spiritual
master, the wife of a brähmaëa, the king's wife, the cow, the nurse and the
earth. Unnecessary association with women, even with one's mother, sister or
daughter, is strictly prohibited. This is human civilization. A civilization that
allows men to mix unrestrictedly with women is an animal civilization. In
Kali-yuga, people are extremely liberal, but mixing with women and talking
with them as equals actually constitutes an uncivilized way of life.
TEXT 9
NaNviGan" Pa[Mada NaaMa ga*Taku-M>aSaMa" PauMaaNa( )
SauTaaMaiPa rhae JaùadNYada YaavdQaRk*-Ta( )) 9 ))
nanv agniù pramadä näma
ghåta-kumbha-samaù pumän
sutäm api raho jahyäd
anyadä yävad-artha-kåt
SYNONYMS
nanu—certainly; agniù—the fire; pramadä—the woman (one who bewilders
the mind of man); näma—the very name; ghåta-kumbha—a pot of butter;
samaù—like; pumän—a man; sutäm api—even one's daughter; rahaù—in a
secluded place; jahyät—one must not associate with; anyadä—with other
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
818
women also; yävat—as much as; artha-kåt—required.
TRANSLATION
Woman is compared to fire, and man is compared to a butter pot. Therefore
a man should avoid associating even with his own daughter in a secluded place.
Similarly, he should also avoid association with other women. One should
associate with women only for important business and not otherwise.
PURPORT
If a butter pot and fire are kept together, the butter within the pot will
certainly melt. Woman is compared to fire, and man is compared to a butter
pot. However advanced one may be in restraining the senses, it is almost
impossible for a man to keep himself controlled in the presence of a woman,
even if she is his own daughter, mother or sister. Indeed, his mind is agitated
even if one is in the renounced order of life. Therefore, Vedic civilization
carefully restricts mingling between men and women. If one cannot
understand the basic principle of restraining association between man and
woman, he is to be considered an animal. That is the purport of this verse.
TEXT 10
k-LPaiYaTvaTMaNaa Yaavda>aaSaiMadMaqìr" )
ÜETa& Taavà ivrMaeTa( TaTaae ùSYa ivPaYaRYa" )) 10 ))
kalpayitvätmanä yävad
äbhäsam idam éçvaraù
dvaitaà tävan na viramet
tato hy asya viparyayaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
819
SYNONYMS
kalpayitvä—ascertaining positively; ätmanä—by self-realization; yävat—as
long as; äbhäsam—reflection (of the original body and senses); idam—this
(the body and senses); éçvaraù—completely independent of illusion;
dvaitam—duality; tävat—for that long; na—does not; viramet—see; tataù—by
such duality; hi—indeed; asya—of the person; viparyayaù—counteraction.
TRANSLATION
As long as a living entity is not completely self-realized—as long as he is not
independent of the misconception of identifying with his body, which is nothing
but a reflection of the original body and senses—he cannot be relieved of the
conception of duality, which is epitomized by the duality between man and
woman. Thus there is every chance that he will fall down because his
intelligence is bewildered.
PURPORT
Here is another important warning that a man must save himself from
attraction to woman. Until one is self-realized, fully independent of the
illusory conception of the material body, the duality of man and woman must
undoubtedly continue, but when one is actually self-realized this distinction
ceases.
vidyä-vinaya-sampanne
brähmaëe gavi hastini
çuni caiva çvapäke ca
paëòitäù sama-darçinaù
"The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a learned
and gentle brähmaëa, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater [outcaste]."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
820
(Bg. 5.18) On the spiritual platform, the learned person not only gives up the
duality of man and woman, but also gives up the duality of man and animal.
This is the test of self-realization. One must realize perfectly that the living
being is spirit soul but is tasting various types of material bodies. One may
theoretically understand this, but when one has practical realization, then he
actually becomes a paëòita, one who knows. Until that time, the duality
continues, and the conception of man and woman also continues. In this stage,
one should be extremely careful about mixing with women. No one should
think himself perfect and forget the çästric instruction that one should be very
careful about associating even with his daughter, mother or sister, not to speak
of other women. Çréla Madhväcärya cites the following çlokas in this regard:
bahutvenaiva vastünäà
yathärtha-jïänam ucyate
advaita-jïänam ity etad
dvaita-jïänaà tad-anyathä
yathä jïänaà tathä vastu
yathä vastus tathä matiù
naiva jïänärthayor bhedas
tata ekatva-vedanam
Unity in variety is real knowledge, and therefore giving up variety artificially
does not reflect perfect knowledge of monism. According to the
acintya-bhedäbheda philosophy of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, there are
varieties, but all of them constitute one unit. Such knowledge is knowledge of
perfect oneness.
TEXT 11
WTaTa( Sav| Ga*hSQaSYa SaMaaMNaaTa& YaTaeriPa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
821
Gauåv*itaivRk-LPaeNa Ga*hSQaSYaTauRGaaiMaNa" )) 11 ))
etat sarvaà gåhasthasya
samämnätaà yater api
guru-våttir vikalpena
gåhasthasyartu-gäminaù
SYNONYMS
etat—this; sarvam—all; gåhasthasya—of a householder;
samämnätam—described; yateù api—even of the person in the renounced
order; guru-våttiù vikalpena—to follow the orders of the spiritual master;
gåhasthasya—of the householder; åtu-gäminaù—accepting sex only during the
period favorable for procreation.
TRANSLATION
All the rules and regulations apply equally to the householder and the
sannyäsé, the member of the renounced order of life. The gåhastha, however, is
given permission by the spiritual master to indulge in sex during the period
favorable for procreation.
PURPORT
It is sometimes misunderstood that a gåhastha, a householder, is permitted to
indulge in sex at any time. This is a wrong conception of gåhastha life. In
spiritual life, whether one is a gåhastha, vänaprastha, sannyäsé or brahmacäré,
everyone is under the control of the spiritual master. For brahmacärés and
sannyäsés there are strong restrictions on sexual indulgence. Similarly, there
are strong restrictions for gåhasthas. Gåhasthas should indulge in sex life only
in accordance with the order of the guru. Therefore it is mentioned here that
one must follow the orders of the spiritual master (guru-våttir vikalpena). When
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
822
the spiritual master orders, the gåhastha may accept sex life. This is confirmed
in Bhagavad-gétä (7.11). Dharmäviruddho bhüteñu kämo 'smi: indulgence in sex
life without disobedience to the religious rules and regulations constitutes a
religious principle. The gåhastha is allowed to indulge in sex life during the
period favorable for procreation and in accordance with the spiritual master's
order. If the spiritual master's orders allow a gåhastha to engage in sex life at a
particular time, then the gåhastha may do so; otherwise, if the spiritual master
orders against it, the gåhastha should abstain. The gåhastha must obtain
permission from the spiritual master to observe the ritualistic ceremony of
garbhädhäna-saàskära. Then he may approach his wife to beget children,
otherwise not. A brähmaëa generally remains a brahmacäré throughout his
entire life, but although some brähmaëas become gåhasthas and indulge in sex
life, they do so under the complete control of the spiritual master. The kñatriya
is allowed to marry more than one wife, but this also must be in accordance
with the instructions of the spiritual master. It is not that because one is a
gåhastha he may marry as many times as he likes and indulge in sex life as he
likes. This is not spiritual life. In spiritual life, one must conduct one's whole
life under the guidance of the guru. Only one who executes his spiritual life
under the direction of the spiritual master can achieve the mercy of Kåñëa.
Yasya prasädäd bhagavat-prasädaù **(37). If one desires to advance in spiritual
life but he acts whimsically, not following the orders of the spiritual master, he
has no shelter. Yasyäprasädän na gatiù kuto 'pi. Without the spiritual master's
order, even the gåhastha should not indulge in sex life.
TEXT 12
AÅNaa>YaÅNaaeNMadRS}Yavle/%aiMaz& MaDau )
óGGaNDale/Paal/ªara&STYaJaeYauYaeR b*hd(v]Taa" )) 12 ))
aïjanäbhyaïjanonmardastry-
avalekhämiñaà madhu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
823
srag-gandha-lepälaìkäräàs
tyajeyur ye båhad-vratäù
SYNONYMS
aïjana—ointment or powder for decorating the eyes; abhyaïjana—massaging
the head; unmarda—massaging the body; stré-avalekha—to glance over a
woman or to paint a woman's picture; ämiñam—meat-eating; madhu—drinking
liquor or honey; srak—decorating the body with garlands of flowers;
gandha-lepa—smearing the body with scented ointment;
alaìkärän—decorating the body with ornaments; tyajeyuù—must give up;
ye—those who; båhat-vratäù—have taken the vow of celibacy.
TRANSLATION
Brahmacärés or gåhasthas who have taken the vow of celibacy as described
above should not indulge in the following: applying powder or ointment to the
eyes, massaging the head with oil, massaging the body with the hands, seeing a
woman or painting a woman's picture, eating meat, drinking wine, decorating
the body with flower garlands, smearing scented ointment on the body, or
decorating the body with ornaments. These they should give up.
TEXTS 13-14
oizTvEv& Gauåku-le/ iÜJaae_DaqTYaavbuDYa c )
}aYaq& Saa(r)aePaiNazd& YaavdQa| YaQaabl/Ma( )) 13 ))
dtva vrMaNaujaTaae Gaurae" k-aMa& Yadqìr" )
Ga*h& vNa& va Pa[ivXaeTa( Pa[v]JaeTa( Ta}a va vSaeTa( )) 14 ))
uñitvaivaà guru-kule
dvijo 'dhétyävabudhya ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
824
trayéà säìgopaniñadaà
yävad-arthaà yathä-balam
dattvä varam anujïäto
guroù kämaà yadéçvaraù
gåhaà vanaà vä praviçet
pravrajet tatra vä vaset
SYNONYMS
uñitvä—residing; evam—in this way; guru-kule—under the care of the spiritual
master; dvi-jaù—the twice-born, namely the brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas;
adhétya—studying Vedic literature; avabudhya—understanding it properly;
ca—and; trayém—the Vedic literatures; sa-aìga—along with supplementary
parts; upaniñadam—as well as the Upaniñads; yävat-artham—as far as possible;
yathä-balam—as far as one can, according to one's ability; dattvä—giving;
varam—remuneration; anujïätaù—being asked; guroù—of the spiritual
master; kämam—desires; yadi—if; éçvaraù—capable; gåham—household life;
vanam—retired life; vä—either; praviçet—one should enter; pravrajet—or get
out of; tatra—there; vä—either; vaset—should reside.
TRANSLATION
According to the rules and regulations mentioned above, one who is
twice-born, namely a brähmaëa, kñatriya or vaiçya, should reside in the
guru-kula under the care of the spiritual master. There he should study and
learn all the Vedic literatures along with their supplements and the Upaniñads,
according to his ability and power to study. If possible, the student or disciple
should reward the spiritual master with the remuneration the spiritual master
requests, and then, following the master's order, the disciple should leave and
accept one of the other äçramas, namely the gåhastha-äçrama,
vänaprastha-äçrama or sannyäsa-äçrama, as he desires.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
825
PURPORT
To study the Vedas and understand them, of course, requires some special
intelligence, but the members of the three higher sections of society—namely
the brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas—must learn the Vedic literatures
according to their capability and power to understand. In other words,
studying the Vedic literatures is compulsory for everyone but the çüdras and
antyajas. The Vedic literature gives the knowledge that can lead one to
understand the Absolute Truth—Brahman, Paramätmä or Bhagavän.
Guru-kula, or the reformatory educational institution, should be used only to
understand Vedic knowledge. At the present time there are many educational
institutions for training and technology, but such knowledge has nothing to do
with understanding of the Absolute Truth. Technology, therefore, is meant for
the çüdras, whereas the Vedas are meant for the dvijas. Consequently this verse
states, dvijo 'dhétyävabudhya ca trayéà säìgopaniñadam. At the present time, in
the age of Kali, practically everyone is a çüdra, and no one is a dvija. Therefore
the condition of society has very much deteriorated.
Another point to be observed from this verse is that from the
brahmacäré-äçrama one may accept the sannyäsa-äçrama, vänaprastha-äçrama
or gåhastha-äçrama. It is not compulsory for a brahmacäré to become a gåhastha.
Because the ultimate aim is to understand the Absolute Truth, there is no
necessity of going through all the different äçramas. Thus one may proceed to
the sannyäsa-äçrama directly from the brahmacäré-äçrama. Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura accepted the sannyäsa-äçrama directly
from the brahmacäré-äçrama. In other words, His Divine Grace
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura did not think it compulsory to accept the
gåhastha-äçrama or vänaprastha-äçrama.
TEXT 15
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
826
AGanaE GauravaTMaiNa c SavR>aUTaeZvDaae+aJaMa( )
>aUTaE" SvDaaMai>a" PaXYaedPa[iví& Pa[ivívTa( )) 15 ))
agnau guräv ätmani ca
sarva-bhüteñv adhokñajam
bhütaiù sva-dhämabhiù paçyed
apraviñöaà praviñöavat
SYNONYMS
agnau—in the fire; gurau—in the spiritual master; ätmani—in one's self;
ca—also; sarva-bhüteñu—in every living entity; adhokñajam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who cannot be seen or perceived with the material
eyes or other material senses; bhütaiù—with all living entities;
sva-dhämabhiù—along with His Lordship's paraphernalia; paçyet—one should
see; apraviñöam—not entered; praviñöa-vat—also entered.
TRANSLATION
One should realize that in the fire, in the spiritual master, in one's self and
in all living entities—in all circumstances and conditions—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, has simultaneously entered and not entered. He
is situated externally and internally as the full controller of everything.
PURPORT
Realization of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's omnipresence is the
perfect realization of the Absolute Truth to be attained through the study of
the Vedic literatures. As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.35),
aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham: the Lord is situated within the
universe, within the heart of every living entity and also within the atom. We
should understand that whenever the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
827
present, He is present with all His paraphernalia, including His name, form,
associates and servants. The living entity is part and parcel of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and thus one should understand that since the
Supreme Lord has entered the atom, the living entities are also there. One
must accept the inconceivable quality of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
for no one can understand from the material point of view how the Lord is
all-pervasive and yet is situated in His own abode, Goloka Våndävana. This
realization is possible if one strictly follows the regulative principles of äçrama
(brahmacäré, gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa). Çréla Madhväcärya says in
this regard:
apraviñöaù sarva-gataù
praviñöas tv anurüpavän
evaà dvi-rüpo bhagavän
harir eko janärdanaù
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His original form, has not entered
everything (apraviñöaù), but in His impersonal form He has entered (praviñöaù).
Thus He has entered and not entered simultaneously. This is also explained in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.4), wherein the Lord says:
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings
are in Me, but I am not in them." The Lord can defy Himself. Thus there is
variety in unity (ekatvaà bahutvam).
TEXT 16
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
828
Wv& ivDaae b]øcarq vaNaPa[SQaae YaiTaGa*Rhq )
criNvidTaivjaNa" Par& b]øaiDaGaC^iTa )) 16 ))
evaà vidho brahmacäré
vänaprastho yatir gåhé
caran vidita-vijïänaù
paraà brahmädhigacchati
SYNONYMS
evam vidhaù—in this way; brahmacäré—whether one is a brahmacäré;
vänaprasthaù—or one is in the vänaprastha-äçrama; yatiù—or in the
sannyäsa-äçrama; gåhé—or in the gåhastha-äçrama; caran—by practice of
self-realization and understanding of the Absolute Truth;
vidita-vijïänaù—fully conversant with the science of the Absolute Truth;
param—the Supreme; brahma—the Absolute Truth; adhigacchati—one can
understand.
TRANSLATION
By practicing in this way, whether one be in the brahmacäré-äçrama,
gåhastha-äçrama, vänaprastha-äçrama or sannyäsa-äçrama, one must always
realize the all-pervading presence of the Supreme Lord, for in this way it is
possible to understand the Absolute Truth.
PURPORT
This is the beginning of self-realization. One must first understand how
Brahman is present everywhere and how He is acting. This education is called
brahma jijïäsä and is the real concern of human life. Without such knowledge,
one cannot claim to be a human being; rather, he remains in the animal
kingdom. As it is said, sa eva go-kharaù: [SB 10.84.13] without such knowledge,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
829
one is no better than a cow or an ass.
TEXT 17
vaNaPa[SQaSYa v+YaaiMa iNaYaMaaNMauiNaSaMMaTaaNa( )
YaaNaaSQaaYa MauiNaGaRC^ed*izl/aek-MauhaÅSaa )) 17 ))
vänaprasthasya vakñyämi
niyamän muni-sammatän
yän ästhäya munir gacched
åñi-lokam uhäïjasä
SYNONYMS
vänaprasthasya—of a person in the vänaprastha-äçrama (retired life);
vakñyämi—I shall now explain; niyamän—the rules and regulations;
muni-sammatän—which are recognized by great munis, philosophers and
saintly persons; yän—which; ästhäya—being situated in, or practicing;
muniù—a saintly person; gacchet—is promoted; åñi-lokam—to the planetary
system where the seers and munis go (Maharloka); uha—O King;
aïjasä—without difficulty.
TRANSLATION
O King, I shall now describe the qualifications for a vänaprastha, one who
has retired from family life. By rigidly following the rules and regulations for
the vänaprastha, one can easily be elevated to the upper planetary system
known as Maharloka.
TEXT 18
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
830
Na k*-íPaCYaMaénqYaadk*-í& caPYak-al/Ta" )
AiGanPaKvMaQaaMa& va AkR-PaKvMauTaahreTa( )) 18 ))
na kåñöa-pacyam açnéyäd
akåñöaà cäpy akälataù
agni-pakvam athämaà vä
arka-pakvam utäharet
SYNONYMS
na—not; kåñöa-pacyam—grains grown by tilling of the field; açnéyät—one
should eat; akåñöam—grains that have grown without tilling of the field;
ca—and; api—also; akälataù—ripened untimely; agni-pakvam—grains
prepared by being cooked in fire; atha—as well as; ämam—mango; vä—either;
arka-pakvam—food ripened naturally by the sunshine; uta—it is so enjoined;
äharet—the vänaprastha should eat.
TRANSLATION
A person in vänaprastha life should not eat grains grown by tilling of the
fields. He should also not eat grains that have grown without tilling of the field
but are not fully ripe. Nor should a vänaprastha eat grains cooked in fire.
Indeed, he should eat only fruit ripened by the sunshine.
TEXT 19
vNYaEêåPaurae@aXaaNa( iNavR„PaeTa( k-al/caeidTaaNa( )
l/BDae Nave Nave_àaÛe Paura<a& c PairTYaJaeTa( )) 19 ))
vanyaiç caru-puroòäçän
nirvapet käla-coditän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
831
labdhe nave nave 'nnädye
puräëaà ca parityajet
SYNONYMS
vanyaiù—by fruits and grains produced in the forest without cultivation;
caru—grains to be offered in a fire sacrifice; puroòäçän—the cakes prepared
from caru; nirvapet—one should execute; käla-coditän—that which has grown
naturally; labdhe—on obtaining; nave—new; nave anna-ädye—newly
produced food grains; puräëam—the stock of old grains; ca—and;
parityajet—one should give up.
TRANSLATION
A vänaprastha should prepare cakes to be offered in sacrifice from fruits and
grains grown naturally in the forest. When he obtains some new grains, he
should give up his old stock of grains.
TEXT 20
AGNYaQaRMaev Xar<aMau$=Ja& vaid]k-NdrMa( )
é[YaeTa ihMavaYviGanvzaRk-aRTaPaza$( SvYaMa( )) 20 ))
agny-artham eva çaraëam
uöajaà vädri-kandaram
çrayeta hima-väyv-agnivarñärkätapa-
ñäö svayam
SYNONYMS
agni—the fire; artham—to keep; eva—only; çaraëam—a cottage;
uöa-jam—made of grass; vä—or; adri-kandaram—a cave in a mountain;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
832
çrayeta—the vänaprastha should take shelter of; hima—snow; väyu—wind;
agni—fire; varña—rain; arka—of the sun; ätapa—shining; ñäö—enduring;
svayam—personally.
TRANSLATION
A vänaprastha should prepare a thatched cottage or take shelter of a cave in
a mountain only to keep the sacred fire, but he should personally practice
enduring snowfall, wind, fire, rain and the shining of the sun.
TEXT 21
ke-XaraeMaNa%XMaé[uMal/aiNa Jai$=l/ae dDaTa( )
k-Ma<@LviJaNae d<@vLk-l/aiGanPairC^daNa( )) 21 ))
keça-roma-nakha-çmaçrumaläni
jaöilo dadhat
kamaëòalv-ajine daëòavalkalägni-
paricchadän
SYNONYMS
keça—hair on the head; roma—hair on the body; nakha—nails;
çmaçru—moustache; maläni—and dirt on the body; jaöilaù—with matted locks
of hair; dadhat—one should keep; kamaëòalu—a waterpot; ajine—and a
deerskin; daëòa—rod; valkala—the bark of a tree; agni—fire;
paricchadän—garments.
TRANSLATION
The vänaprastha should wear matted locks of hair on his head and let his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
833
body hair, nails and moustache grow. He should not cleanse his body of dirt. He
should keep a waterpot, deerskin and rod, wear the bark of a tree as a covering,
and use garments colored like fire.
TEXT 22
cred( vNae ÜadXaaBdaNaíaE va cTaurae MauiNa" )
Üavek&- va YaQaa buiÖNaR ivPaÛeTa k*-C^\Ta" )) 22 ))
cared vane dvädaçäbdän
añöau vä caturo muniù
dväv ekaà vä yathä buddhir
na vipadyeta kåcchrataù
SYNONYMS
caret—should remain; vane—in the forest; dvädaça-abdän—twelve years;
añöau—for eight years; vä—either; caturaù—four years; muniù—a saintly,
thoughtful man; dvau—two; ekam—one; vä—either; yathä—as well as;
buddhiù—intelligence; na—not; vipadyeta—bewildered; kåcchrataù—because
of hard austerities.
TRANSLATION
Being very thoughtful, a vänaprastha should remain in the forest for twelve
years, eight years, four years, two years or at least one year. He should behave
in such a way that he will not be disturbed or troubled by too much austerity.
TEXT 23
Yadak-LPa" Svi§-YaaYaa& VYaaiDai>aJaRrYaaQava )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
834
AaNvqi+aKYaa& va ivÛaYaa& ku-YaaRdNaXaNaaidk-Ma( )) 23 ))
yadäkalpaù sva-kriyäyäà
vyädhibhir jarayäthavä
änvékñikyäà vä vidyäyäà
kuryäd anaçanädikam
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; akalpaù—unable to act; sva-kriyäyäm—in one's own prescribed
duties; vyädhibhiù—because of disease; jarayä—or because of old age;
athavä—either; änvékñikyäm—in spiritual advancement; vä—or; vidyäyäm—in
the advancement of knowledge; kuryät—one must do; anaçana-ädikam—not
take sufficient food.
TRANSLATION
When because of disease or old age one is unable to perform his prescribed
duties for advancement in spiritual consciousness or study of the Vedas, he
should practice fasting, not taking any food.
TEXT 24
AaTMaNYaGanqNa( SaMaaraePYa Sa&NYaSYaah&MaMaaTMaTaaMa( )
k-ar<aezu NYaSaeTa( SaMYak(- SaºaTa& Tau YaQaahRTa" )) 24 ))
ätmany agnén samäropya
sannyasyähaà mamätmatäm
käraëeñu nyaset samyak
saìghätaà tu yathärhataù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
835
SYNONYMS
ätmani—in one's self; agnén—the fire elements within the body;
samäropya—properly placing; sannyasya—giving up; aham—false identity;
mama—false conception; ätmatäm—of the body's being one's self or one's own;
käraëeñu—in the five elements that cause the material body; nyaset—one
should merge; samyak—completely; saìghätam—combination; tu—but;
yathä-arhataù—as it befits.
TRANSLATION
He should properly place the fire element in his own self and in this way
give up bodily affinity, by which one thinks the body to be one's self or one's
own. One should gradually merge the material body into the five elements
[earth, water, fire, air and sky].
PURPORT
The body is an effect of a cause, namely the five material elements (earth,
water, fire, air and sky). In other words, one should know perfectly well that
the material body is nothing but a combination of the five elements. This
knowledge constitutes merging of the material body and the five material
elements. Merging into Brahman in perfect knowledge means understanding
perfectly that one is not the body but a spiritual soul.
TEXT 25
%e %aiNa vaYaaE iNaìaSaa&STaeJa"SaUZMaa<aMaaTMavaNa( )
APSvSa*k(- ëeZMaPaUYaaiNa i+aTaaE Xaez& YaQaaeÙvMa( )) 25 ))
khe khäni väyau niçväsäàs
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
836
tejaùsüñmäëam ätmavän
apsv asåk-çleñma-püyäni
kñitau çeñaà yathodbhavam
SYNONYMS
khe—in the sky; khäni—all the holes of the body; väyau—in the air;
niçväsän—all the different airs moving within the body (präëa, apäna, etc.);
tejaùsu—in fire; uñmäëam—the heat of the body; ätma-vän—a person who
knows the self; apsu—in water; asåk—blood; çleñma—mucus; püyäni—and
urine; kñitau—in the earth; çeñam—the remaining (namely skin, bones and
the other hard things in the body); yathä-udbhavam—wherefrom all of them
grew.
TRANSLATION
A sober, self-realized person who has full knowledge should merge the
various parts of the body in their original sources. The holes in the body are
caused by the sky, the process of breathing is caused by the air, the heat of the
body is caused by fire, and semen, blood and mucus are caused by water. The
hard substances, like skin, muscle and bone, are caused by earth. In this way all
the constituents of the body are caused by various elements, and they should be
merged again into those elements.
PURPORT
To be self-realized, one must understand the original sources of the various
elements of the body. The body is a combination of skin, bone, muscle, blood,
semen, urine, stool, heat, breath and so on, which all come from earth, water,
fire, air and sky. One must be well conversant with the sources of all the bodily
constituents. Then one becomes a self-realized person, or ätmavän, one who
knows the self.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
837
TEXTS 26-28
vacMaGanaE Sav¢-VYaaiMaNd]e iXaLPa& k-raviPa )
PadaiNa GaTYaa vYaiSa rTYaaePaSQa& Pa[JaaPaTaaE )) 26 ))
Ma*TYaaE PaaYau& ivSaGa| c YaQaaSQaaNa& iviNaidRXaeTa( )
id+au é[ae}a& SaNaadeNa SPaXaeRNaaDYaaTMaiNa TvcMa( )) 27 ))
æPaai<a c+auza raJaNa( JYaaeiTaZYai>aiNaveXaYaeTa( )
APSau Pa[ceTaSaa iJaûa& ga]eYaEga]aR<a& i+aTaaE NYaSaeTa( )) 28 ))
väcam agnau savaktavyäm
indre çilpaà karäv api
padäni gatyä vayasi
ratyopasthaà prajäpatau
måtyau päyuà visargaà ca
yathä-sthänaà vinirdiçet
dikñu çrotraà sa-nädena
sparçenädhyätmani tvacam
rüpäëi cakñuñä räjan
jyotiñy abhiniveçayet
apsu pracetasä jihväà
ghreyair ghräëaà kñitau nyaset
SYNONYMS
väcam—speech; agnau—in the fire-god (the personified god controlling fire);
sa-vaktavyäm—with the subject matter of speaking; indre—unto King Indra;
çilpam—craftsmanship or the capacity to work with the hands; karau—as well
as the hands; api—indeed; padäni—the legs; gatyä—with the power to move;
vayasi—unto Lord Viñëu; ratyä—sexual desire; upastham—with the genitals;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
838
prajäpatau—unto Prajäpati; måtyau—unto the demigod known as Måtyu;
päyum—the rectum; visargam—with its activity, evacuation; ca—also;
yathä-sthänam—in the proper place; vinirdiçet—one should indicate;
dikñu—unto different directions; çrotram—the aural sense; sa-nädena—with
sound vibration; sparçena—with touch; adhyätmani—unto the wind-god;
tvacam—the sense of touch; rüpäëi—form; cakñuñä—with eyesight; räjan—O
King; jyotiñi—in the sun; abhiniveçayet—one should endow; apsu—unto water;
pracetasä—with the demigod known as Varuëa; jihväm—the tongue;
ghreyaiù—with the object of smell; ghräëam—the power to smell; kñitau—in
the earth; nyaset—one should give.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the object of speech, along with the sense of speech [the tongue],
should be bestowed upon fire. Craftsmanship and the two hands should be given
to the demigod Indra. The power of movement and the legs should be given to
Lord Viñëu. Sensual pleasure, along with the genitals, should be bestowed upon
Prajäpati. The rectum, with the power of evacuation, should be bestowed, in its
proper place, unto Måtyu. The aural instrument, along with sound vibration,
should be given to the deities presiding over the directions. The instrument of
touch, along with the sense objects of touch, should be given to Väyu. Form,
with the power of sight, should be bestowed upon the sun. The tongue, along
with the demigod Varuëa, should be bestowed upon water, and the power of
smell, along with the two Açviné-kumära demigods, should be bestowed upon
the earth.
TEXTS 29-30
MaNaae MaNaaerQaEêNd]e buiÖ& baeDYaE" k-vaE Pare )
k-MaaR<YaDYaaTMaNaa åd]e Yadh&MaMaTaai§-Yaa )
SatveNa icta& +ae}aje Gau<aEvOEk-airk&- Pare )) 29 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
839
APSau i+aiTaMaPaae JYaaeiTaZYadae vaYaaE Na>aSYaMauMa( )
kU-$=SQae TaÀ MahiTa TadVYa¢e-_+are c TaTa( )) 30 ))
mano manorathaiç candre
buddhià bodhyaiù kavau pare
karmäëy adhyätmanä rudre
yad-ahaà mamatä-kriyä
sattvena cittaà kñetra-jïe
guëair vaikärikaà pare
apsu kñitim apo jyotiñy
ado väyau nabhasy amum
küöasthe tac ca mahati
tad avyakte 'kñare ca tat
SYNONYMS
manaù—the mind; manorathaiù—along with material desires; candre—unto
Candra, the mood demigod; buddhim—intelligence; bodhyaiù—with the
subject matter of intelligence; kavau pare—unto the supreme learned person,
Lord Brahmä; karmäëi—material activities; adhyätmanä—with false ego;
rudre—unto Lord Çiva (Rudra); yat—wherein; aham—I am the material body;
mamatä—everything belonging to the material body is mine; kriyä—such
activities; sattvena—along with the existential conception;
cittam—consciousness; kñetra-jïe—unto the individual soul; guëaiù—along
with the material activities conducted by the material qualities;
vaikärikam—the living entities under the influence of the material modes;
pare—in the Supreme Being; apsu—in the water; kñitim—the earth;
apaù—the water; jyotiñi—in the luminaries, specifically in the sun;
adaù—brightness; väyau—in the air; nabhasi—in the sky; amum—that;
küöasthe—in the materialistic conception of life; tat—that; ca—also;
mahati—in the mahat-tattva, the total material energy; tat—that; avyakte—in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
840
the nonmanifested; akñare—in the Supersoul; ca—also; tat—that.
TRANSLATION
The mind, along with all material desires, should be merged in the moon
demigod. All the subject matters of intelligence, along with the intelligence
itself, should be placed in Lord Brahmä. False ego, which is under the influence
of the material modes of nature and which induces one to think, "I am this
body, and everything connected with this body is mine," should be merged,
along with material activities, in Rudra, the predominating deity of false ego.
Material consciousness, along with the goal of thought, should be merged in the
individual living being, and the demigods acting under the modes of material
nature should be merged, along with the perverted living being, into the
Supreme Being. The earth should be merged in water, water in the brightness
of the sun, this brightness into the air, the air into the sky, the sky into the
false ego, the false ego into the total material energy, the total material energy
into the unmanifested ingredients [the pradhäna feature of the material energy],
and at last the ingredient feature of material manifestation into the Supersoul.
TEXT 31
wTYa+arTaYaaTMaaNa& icNMaa}aMavXaeizTaMa( )
jaTvaÜYaae_Qa ivrMaed( dGDaYaaeiNairvaNal/" )) 31 ))
ity akñaratayätmänaà
cin-mätram avaçeñitam
jïätvädvayo 'tha viramed
dagdha-yonir ivänalaù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
841
iti—thus; akñaratayä—because of being spiritual; ätmänam—oneself (the
individual soul); cit-mätram—completely spiritual; avaçeñitam—the remaining
balance (after the material elements are merged, one after another, into the
original Supersoul); jïätvä—understanding; advayaù—without differentiation,
or of the same quality as the Paramätmä; atha—thus; viramet—one should
cease from material existence; dagdha-yoniù—whose source (the wood) has
burnt up; iva—like; analaù—flames.
TRANSLATION
When all the material designations have thus merged into their respective
material elements, the living beings, who are all ultimately completely spiritual,
being one in quality with the Supreme Being, should cease from material
existence, as flames cease when the wood in which they are burning is
consumed. When the material body is returned to its various material elements,
only the spiritual being remains. This spiritual being is Brahman and is equal in
quality with Parabrahman.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Twelfth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Perfect Society: Four Spiritual Classes."
13. The Behavior of a Perfect Person
This Thirteenth Chapter describes the regulative principles for sannyäsés
and also describes the history of an avadhüta. It concludes with a description of
perfection for the student in spiritual advancement.
Çré Närada Muni has been describing the symptoms of various äçramas and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
842
varëas. Now, in this chapter, he specifically describes the regulative principles
to be followed by sannyäsés. After retiring from family life, one should accept
the status of vänaprastha, in which he must formally accept the body as his
means of existence but gradually forget the bodily necessities of life. After
vänaprastha life, having left home, one should travel to different places as a
sannyäsé. Without bodily comforts and free from dependence on anyone with
respect to bodily necessities, one should travel everywhere, wearing almost
nothing or actually walking naked. Without association with ordinary human
society, one should beg alms and always be satisfied in himself. One should be a
friend to every living entity and be very peaceful in Kåñëa consciousness. A
sannyäsé should travel alone in this way, not caring for life or death, waiting
for the time when he will leave his material body. He should not indulge in
unnecessary books or adopt professions like astrology, nor should he try to
become a great orator. He should also give up the path of unnecessary
argument and should not depend on anyone under any circumstances. He
should not try to allure people into becoming his disciples just so that the
number of his disciples may increase. He should give up the habit of reading
many books as a means of livelihood, and he should not attempt to increase the
number of temples and maöhas, or monasteries. When a sannyäsé thus becomes
completely independent, peaceful and equipoised, he can select the
destination he desires after death and follow the principles by which to reach
that destination. Although fully learned, he should always remain silent, like a
dumb person, and travel like a restless child.
In this regard, Närada Muni described a meeting between Prahläda and a
saintly person who had adopted the mode of life of a python. In this way he
described the symptoms of a paramahaàsa. A person who has attained the
paramahaàsa stage knows very well the distinction between matter and spirit.
He is not at all interested in gratifying the material senses, for he is always
deriving pleasure from devotional service to the Lord. He is not very anxious
to protect his material body. Being satisfied with whatever he attains by the
grace of the Lord, he is completely independent of material happiness and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
843
distress, and thus he is transcendental to all regulative principles. Sometimes
he accepts severe austerities, and sometimes he accepts material opulence. His
only concern is to satisfy Kåñëa, and for that purpose he can do anything and
everything, without reference to the regulative principles. He is never to be
equated with materialistic men, nor is he subject to the judgments of such
men.
TEXT 1
é[qNaard ovac
k-LPaSTvev& Pairv]JYa dehMaa}aavXaeizTa" )
Ga]aMaEk-ra}aiviDaNaa iNarPae+aêreNMahqMa( )) 1 ))
çré-närada uväca
kalpas tv evaà parivrajya
deha-mäträvaçeñitaù
grämaika-rätra-vidhinä
nirapekñaç caren mahém
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; kalpaù—a person who is competent
to undergo the austerities of sannyäsa, the renounced order of life, or to
prosecute studies in transcendental knowledge; tu—but; evam—in this way (as
described previously); parivrajya—fully understanding his spiritual identity
and thus traveling from one place to another; deha-mätra—keeping only the
body; avaçeñitaù—at last; gräma—in a village; eka—one only; rätra—of
passing a night; vidhinä—in the process; nirapekñaù—without dependence on
any material thing; caret—should move from one place to another;
mahém—on the earth.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
844
TRANSLATION
Çré Närada Muni said: A person able to cultivate spiritual knowledge should
renounce all material connections, and merely keeping the body inhabitable, he
should travel from one place to another, passing only one night in each village.
In this way, without dependence in regard to the needs of the body, the
sannyäsé should travel all over the world.
TEXT 2
ib>a*Yaad( YaÛSaaE vaSa" k-aEPaqNaaC^adNa& ParMa( )
TYa¢&- Na il/(r)ad( d<@aderNYaTa( ik-iÄdNaaPaid )) 2 ))
bibhåyäd yady asau väsaù
kaupénäcchädanaà param
tyaktaà na liìgäd daëòäder
anyat kiïcid anäpadi
SYNONYMS
bibhåyät—one should use; yadi—if; asau—a person in the renounced order;
väsaù—a garment or covering; kaupéna—a loincloth (just to cover the private
parts); äcchädanam—for covering; param—that much only; tyaktam—given
up; na—not; liìgät—than the distinguishing marks of a sannyäsé;
daëòa-ädeù—like the rod (tridaëòa); anyat—other; kiïcit—anything;
anäpadi—in ordinary undisturbed times.
TRANSLATION
A person in the renounced order of life may try to avoid even a dress to
cover himself. If he wears anything at all, it should be only a loincloth, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
845
when there is no necessity, a sannyäsé should not even accept a daëòa. A
sannyäsé should avoid carrying anything but a daëòa and kamaëòalu.
TEXT 3
Wk- Wv cred( i>a+auraTMaaraMaae_NaPaaé[Ya" )
SavR>aUTaSauôC^aNTaae NaaraYa<aParaYa<a" )) 3 ))
eka eva cared bhikñur
ätmärämo 'napäçrayaù
sarva-bhüta-suhåc-chänto
näräyaëa-paräyaëaù
SYNONYMS
ekaù—alone; eva—only; caret—can move; bhikñuù—a sannyäsé taking alms;
ätma-ärämaù—fully satisfied in the self; anapäçrayaù—without depending on
anything; sarva-bhüta-suhåt—becoming a well-wisher of all living entities;
çäntaù—completely peaceful; näräyaëa-paräyaëaù—becoming absolutely
dependent on Näräyaëa and becoming His devotee.
TRANSLATION
The sannyäsé, completely satisfied in the self, should live on alms begged
from door to door. Not being dependent on any person or any place, he should
always be a friendly well-wisher to all living beings and be a peaceful, unalloyed
devotee of Näräyaëa. In this way he should move from one place to another.
TEXT 4
PaXYaedaTMaNYadae ivì& Pare SadSaTaae_VYaYae )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
846
AaTMaaNa& c Par& b]ø SavR}a SadSaNMaYae )) 4 ))
paçyed ätmany ado viçvaà
pare sad-asato 'vyaye
ätmänaà ca paraà brahma
sarvatra sad-asan-maye
SYNONYMS
paçyet—one should see; ätmani—in the Supreme Soul; adaù—this;
viçvam—universe; pare—beyond; sat-asataù—the creation or cause of
creation; avyaye—in the Absolute, which is free from deterioration;
ätmänam—himself; ca—also; param—the supreme; brahma—absolute;
sarvatra—everywhere; sat-asat—in the cause and in the effect;
maye—all-pervading.
TRANSLATION
The sannyäsé should always try to see the Supreme pervading everything and
see everything, including this universe, resting on the Supreme.
TEXT 5
SauiáPa[baeDaYaae" SaNDaavaTMaNaae GaiTaMaaTMad*k(- )
PaXYaNbNDa& c Maae+a& c MaaYaaMaa}a& Na vSTauTa" )) 5 ))
supti-prabodhayoù sandhäv
ätmano gatim ätma-dåk
paçyan bandhaà ca mokñaà ca
mäyä-mätraà na vastutaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
847
SYNONYMS
supti—in the state of unconsciousness; prabodhayoù—and in the state of
consciousness; sandhau—in the state of marginal existence; ätmanaù—of
oneself; gatim—the movement; ätma-dåk—one who can actually see the self;
paçyan—always trying to see or understand; bandham—the conditional state
of life; ca—and; mokñam—the liberated state of life; ca—also;
mäyä-mätram—only illusion; na—not; vastutaù—in fact.
TRANSLATION
During unconsciousness and consciousness, and between the two, he should
try to understand the self and be fully situated in the self. In this way, he
should realize that the conditional and liberated stages of life are only illusory
and not actually factual. With such a higher understanding, he should see only
the Absolute Truth pervading everything.
PURPORT
The unconscious state is nothing but ignorance, darkness or material
existence, and in the conscious state one is awake. The marginal state,
between consciousness and unconsciousness, has no permanent existence.
Therefore one who is advanced in understanding the self should understand
that unconsciousness and consciousness are but illusions, for they
fundamentally do not exist. Only the Supreme Absolute Truth exists. As
confirmed by the Lord in Bhagavad-gétä (9.4):
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
848
"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings
are in Me, but I am not in them." Everything exists on the basis of Kåñëa's
impersonal feature; nothing can exist without Kåñëa. Therefore the advanced
devotee of Kåñëa can see the Lord everywhere, without illusion.
TEXT 6
Naai>aNaNded( Da]uv& Ma*TYauMaDa]uv& vaSYa JaqivTaMa( )
k-al&/ Par& Pa[Taq+aeTa >aUTaaNaa& Pa[>avaPYaYaMa( )) 6 ))
näbhinanded dhruvaà måtyum
adhruvaà väsya jévitam
kälaà paraà pratékñeta
bhütänäà prabhaväpyayam
SYNONYMS
na—not; abhinandet—one should praise; dhruvam—sure; måtyum—death;
adhruvam—not sure; vä—either; asya—of this body; jévitam—the duration of
life; kälam—eternal time; param—supreme; pratékñeta—one must observe;
bhütänäm—of the living entities; prabhava—manifestation;
apyayam—disappearance.
TRANSLATION
Since the material body is sure to be vanquished and the duration of one's
life is not fixed, neither death nor life is to be praised. Rather, one should
observe the eternal time factor, in which the living entity manifests himself and
disappears.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
849
PURPORT
The living entities in the material world, not only at the present but also in
the past, have been involved in trying to solve the problem of birth and death.
Some stress death and point to the illusory existence of everything material,
whereas others stress life, trying to preserve it perpetually and enjoy it to the
best of their ability. Both of them are fools and rascals. It is advised that one
observe the eternal time factor, which is the cause of the material body's
appearance and disappearance, and that one observe the living entity's
entanglement in this time factor. Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura therefore sings
in his Gétävalé:
anädi karama-phale, paòi' bhavärëava-jale,
taribäre nä dekhi upäya
One should observe the activities of eternal time, which is the cause of birth
and death. Before the creation of the present millennium, the living entities
were under the influence of the time factor, and within the time factor the
material world comes into existence and is again annihilated. Bhütvä bhütvä
praléyate [Bg. 8.19]. Being under the control of the time factor, the living
entities appear and die, life after life. This time factor is the impersonal
representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who gives the living
entities conditioned by material nature a chance to emerge from this nature by
surrendering to Him.
TEXT 7
NaaSaC^añezu SaÂeTa NaaePaJaqveTa Jaqivk-aMa( )
vadvada&STYaJaeTa( Tak-aRNPa+a& k&- c Na Sa&é[YaeTa( )) 7 ))
näsac-chästreñu sajjeta
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
850
nopajéveta jévikäm
väda-vädäàs tyajet tarkän
pakñaà kaàca na saàçrayet
SYNONYMS
na—not; asat-çästreñu—literature like newspapers, novels, dramas and fiction;
sajjeta—one should be attached or should indulge in reading; na—nor;
upajéveta—one should try to live; jévikäm—upon some professional literary
career; väda-vädän—unnecessary arguments on different aspects of
philosophy; tyajet—one should give up; tarkän—arguments and
counterarguments; pakñam—faction; kaàca—any; na—not;
saàçrayet—should take shelter of.
TRANSLATION
Literature that is a useless waste of time—in other words, literature without
spiritual benefit—should be rejected. One should not become a professional
teacher as a means of earning one's livelihood, nor should one indulge in
arguments and counter-arguments. Nor should one take shelter of any cause or
faction.
PURPORT
A person desiring to advance in spiritual understanding should be
extremely careful to avoid reading ordinary literature. The world is full of
ordinary literature that creates unnecessary agitation in the mind. Such
literature, including newspapers, dramas, novels and magazines, is factually not
meant for advancement in spiritual knowledge. Indeed, it has been described
as a place of enjoyment for crows (tad väyasaà tértham). Anyone advancing in
spiritual knowledge must reject such literature. Furthermore, one should not
concern oneself with the conclusions of various logicians or philosophers. Of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
851
course, those who preach sometimes need to argue with the contentions of
opponents, but as much as possible one should avoid an argumentative
attitude. In this connection, Çréla Madhväcärya says:
aprayojana-pakñaà na saàçrayet
näprayojana-pakñé syän
na våthä çiñya-bandha-kåt
na codäsénaù çästräëi
na viruddhäni cäbhyaset
na vyäkhyayopajéveta
na niñiddhän samäcaret
evam-bhüto yatir yäti
tad-eka-çaraëo harim
"There is no need to take shelter of unnecessary literature or concern oneself
with many so-called philosophers and thinkers who are useless for spiritual
advancement. Nor should one accept a disciple for the sake of fashion or
popularity. One should be callous to these so-called çästras, neither opposing
nor favoring them, and one should not earn one's livelihood by taking money
for explaining çästra. A sannyäsé must always be neutral and seek the means to
advance in spiritual life, taking full shelter under the lotus feet of the Lord."
TEXT 8
Na iXaZYaaNaNaubDNaqTa Ga]NQaaàEva>YaSaed( bhUNa( )
Na VYaa:YaaMauPaYauÅqTa NaarM>aaNaar>aeTa( KvicTa( )) 8 ))
na çiñyän anubadhnéta
granthän naiväbhyased bahün
na vyäkhyäm upayuïjéta
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
852
närambhän ärabhet kvacit
SYNONYMS
na—not; çiñyän—disciples; anubadhnéta—one should induce for material
benefit; granthän—unnecessary literatures; na—not; eva—certainly;
abhyaset—should try to understand or cultivate; bahün—many; na—nor;
vyäkhyäm—discourses; upayuïjéta—should make as a means of livelihood;
na—nor; ärambhän—unnecessary opulences; ärabhet—should attempt to
increase; kvacit—at any time.
TRANSLATION
A sannyäsé must not present allurements of material benefits to gather many
disciples, nor should he unnecessarily read many books or give discourses as a
means of livelihood. He must never attempt to increase material opulences
unnecessarily.
PURPORT
So-called svämés and yogés generally make disciples by alluring them with
material benefits. There are many so-called gurus who attract disciples by
promising to cure their diseases or increase their material opulence by
manufacturing gold. These are lucrative allurements for unintelligent men. A
sannyäsé is prohibited from making disciples through such material
allurements. Sannyäsés sometimes indulge in material opulence by
unnecessarily constructing many temples and monasteries, but actually such
endeavors should be avoided. Temples and monasteries should be constructed
for the preaching of spiritual consciousness or Kåñëa consciousness, not to
provide free hotels for persons who are useful for neither material nor spiritual
purposes. Temples and monasteries should be strictly off limits to worthless
clubs of crazy men. In the Kåñëa consciousness movement we welcome
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
853
everyone who agrees at least to follow the movement's regulative
principles—no illicit sex, no intoxication, no meat-eating and no gambling. In
the temples and monasteries, gatherings of unnecessary, rejected, lazy fellows
should be strictly disallowed. The temples and monasteries should be used
exclusively by devotees who are serious about spiritual advancement in Kåñëa
consciousness. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains the word
ärambhän as meaning maöhädi-vyäpärän, which means "attempts to construct
temples and monasteries." The first business of the sannyäsé is to preach Kåñëa
consciousness, but if, by the grace of Kåñëa, facilities are available, then he
may construct temples and monasteries to give shelter to the serious students
of Kåñëa consciousness. Otherwise such temples and monasteries are not
needed.
TEXT 9
Na YaTaeraé[Ma" Pa[aYaae DaMaRheTauMaRhaTMaNa" )
XaaNTaSYa SaMaictaSYa ib>a*YaaduTa va TYaJaeTa( )) 9 ))
na yater äçramaù präyo
dharma-hetur mahätmanaù
çäntasya sama-cittasya
bibhåyäd uta vä tyajet
SYNONYMS
na—not; yateù—of the sannyäsé; äçramaù—the symbolic dress (with daëòa
and kamaëòalu); präyaù—almost always; dharma-hetuù—the cause of
advancement in spiritual life; mahä-ätmanaù—who is factually exalted and
advanced; çäntasya—who is peaceful; sama-cittasya—who has attained the
stage of being equipoised; bibhåyät—one may accept (such symbolic signs);
uta—indeed; vä—or; tyajet—one may give up.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
854
TRANSLATION
A peaceful, equipoised person who is factually advanced in spiritual
consciousness does not need to accept the symbols of a sannyäsé, such as the
tridaëòa and kamaëòalu. According to necessity, he may sometimes accept those
symbols and sometimes reject them.
PURPORT
There are four stages of the renounced order of life—kuöécaka, bahüdaka,
parivräjakäcärya and paramahaàsa. Herein, Çrémad-Bhägavatam considers the
paramahaàsas among the sannyäsés. The Mäyävädé impersonalist sannyäsés
cannot attain the paramahaàsa stage. This is because of their impersonal
conception of the Absolute Truth. Brahmeti paramätmeti bhagavän iti çabdyate
[SB 1.2.11]. The Absolute Truth is perceived in three stages, of which bhagavän,
or realization of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is meant for the
paramahaàsas. Indeed, Çrémad-Bhägavatam itself is meant for the
paramahaàsas (paramo nirmatsaräëäà satäm [SB 1.1.2]). Unless one is in the
paramahaàsa stage, he is not eligible to understand the Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
For paramahaàsas, or sannyäsés in the Vaiñëava order, preaching is the first
duty. To preach, such sannyäsés may accept the symbols of sannyäsa, such as
the daëòa and kamaëòalu, or sometimes they may not. Generally the Vaiñëava
sannyäsés, being paramahaàsas, are automatically called bäbäjés, and they do
not carry a kamaëòalu or daëòa. Such a sannyäsé is free to accept or reject the
marks of sannyäsa. His only thought is "Where is there an opportunity to
spread Kåñëa consciousness?" Sometimes the Kåñëa consciousness movement
sends its representative sannyäsés to foreign countries where the daëòa and
kamaëòalu are not very much appreciated. We send our preachers in ordinary
dress to introduce our books and philosophy. Our only concern is to attract
people to Kåñëa consciousness. We may do this in the dress of sannyäsés or in
the regular dress of gentlemen. Our only concern is to spread interest in Kåñëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
855
consciousness.
TEXT 10
AVYa¢-il/(r)ae VYa¢-aQaaeR MaNaqZYauNMatabal/vTa( )
k-ivMaURk-vdaTMaaNa& Sa d*íya dXaRYaeà*<aaMa( )) 10 ))
avyakta-liìgo vyaktärtho
manéñy unmatta-bälavat
kavir mükavad ätmänaà
sa dåñöyä darçayen nåëäm
SYNONYMS
avyakta-liìgaù—whose symptoms of sannyäsa are unmanifested;
vyakta-arthaù—whose purpose is manifested; manéñé—such a great saintly
person; unmatta—restless; bäla-vat—like a boy; kaviù—a great poet or orator;
müka-vat—like a dumb man; ätmänam—himself; saù—he; dåñöyä—by
example; darçayet—should present; nåëäm—to human society.
TRANSLATION
Although a saintly person may not expose himself to the vision of human
society, by his behavior his purpose is disclosed. To human society he should
present himself like a restless child, and although he is the greatest thoughtful
orator, he should present himself like a dumb man.
PURPORT
A great personality very much advanced in Kåñëa consciousness may not
expose himself by the signs of a sannyäsé. To cover himself, he may live like a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
856
restless child or a dumb person, although he is the greatest orator or poet.
TEXT 11
A}aaPYaudahrNTaqMaiMaiTahaSa& PauraTaNaMa( )
Pa[hadSYa c Sa&vad& MauNaeraJaGarSYa c )) 11 ))
aträpy udäharantémam
itihäsaà purätanam
prahrädasya ca saàvädaà
muner äjagarasya ca
SYNONYMS
atra—herein; api—although not exposed to common eyes; udäharanti—the
learned sages recite as an example; imam—this; itihäsam—historical incident;
purätanam—very, very old; prahrädasya—of Prahläda Mahäräja; ca—also;
saàvädam—conversation; muneù—of the great saintly person;
äjagarasya—who took the profession of a python; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
As a historical example of this, learned sages recite the story of an ancient
discussion between Prahläda Mahäräja and a great saintly person who was
feeding himself like a python.
PURPORT
The saintly person met by Prahläda Mahäräja was undergoing äjagara-våtti,
the living conditions of a python, which does not go anywhere but sits in one
place for years and eats whatever is automatically available. Prahläda
Mahäräja, along with his associates, met this great saint and spoke to him as
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
857
follows.
TEXTS 12-13
Ta& XaYaaNa& DaraePaSQae k-aveYaa| SaùSaaNauiNa )
rJaSvlE/STaNaUdeXaEiNaRGaU!aMal/TaeJaSaMa( )) 12 ))
ddXaR l/aek-aiNvcrNa( l/aek-TatvivivTSaYaa )
v*Taae_MaaTYaE" k-iTaPaYaE" Pa[hadae >aGaviTPa[Ya" )) 13 ))
taà çayänaà dharopasthe
käveryäà sahya-sänuni
rajas-valais tanü-deçair
nigüòhämala-tejasam
dadarça lokän vicaran
loka-tattva-vivitsayä
våto 'mätyaiù katipayaiù
prahrädo bhagavat-priyaù
SYNONYMS
tam—that (saintly person); çayänam—lying down; dharä-upasthe—on the
ground; käveryäm—on the bank of the River Käveré; sahya-sänuni—on a ridge
of the mountain known as Sahya; rajaù-valaiù—covered with dust and dirt;
tanü-deçaiù—with all the parts of the body; nigüòha—very grave and deep;
amala—spotless; tejasam—whose spiritual power; dadarça—he saw; lokän—to
all the different planets; vicaran—traveling; loka-tattva—the nature of the
living beings (especially those who are trying to advance in Kåñëa
consciousness); vivitsayä—to try to understand; våtaù—surrounded;
amätyaiù—by royal associates; katipayaiù—a few; prahrädaù—Mahäräja
Prahläda; bhagavat-priyaù—who is always very, very dear to the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
858
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja, the most dear servitor of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, once went out touring the universe with some of his confidential
associates just to study the nature of saintly persons. Thus he arrived at the
bank of the Käveré, where there was a mountain known as Sahya. There he
found a great saintly person who was lying on the ground, covered with dirt and
dust, but who was deeply spiritually advanced.
TEXT 14
k-MaR<aak*-iTai>avaRca il/(r)EvR<aaRé[Maaidi>a" )
Na ivdiNTa JaNaa Ya& vE Saae_SaaiviTa Na veiTa c )) 14 ))
karmaëäkåtibhir väcä
liìgair varëäçramädibhiù
na vidanti janä yaà vai
so 'säv iti na veti ca
SYNONYMS
karmaëä—by activities; äkåtibhiù—by bodily features; väcä—by words;
liìgaiù—by symptoms; varëa-äçrama—pertaining to the particular material
and spiritual divisions of varëa and äçrama; ädibhiù—and by other symptoms;
na vidanti—could not understand; janäù—people in general; yam—whom;
vai—indeed; saù—whether that person; asau—was the same person; iti—thus;
na—not; vä—or; iti—thus; ca—also.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
859
TRANSLATION
Neither by that saintly person's activities, by his bodily features, by his
words nor by the symptoms of his varëäçrama status could people understand
whether he was the same person they had known.
PURPORT
The inhabitants of that particular place on the bank of the Käveré in the
valley of the mountain known as Sahya were unable to understand whether
that saint was the same man they had known. It is therefore said, vaiñëavera
kriyä mudrä vijïe nä bhujhaya. A highly advanced Vaiñëava lives in such a way
that no one can understand what he is or what he was. Nor should attempts be
made to understand the past of a Vaiñëava. Without asking the saintly person
about his previous life, Prahläda Mahäräja immediately offered him respectful
obeisances.
TEXT 15
Ta& NaTva>YaCYaR iviDavTa( PaadYaae" iXarSaa SPa*XaNa( )
ivivTSauirdMaPa[a+aqNMaha>aaGavTaae_Saur" )) 15 ))
taà natväbhyarcya vidhivat
pädayoù çirasä spåçan
vivitsur idam apräkñén
mahä-bhägavato 'suraù
SYNONYMS
tam—him (the saintly person); natvä—after offering obeisances unto;
abhyarcya—and worshiping; vidhi-vat—in terms of the rules and regulations of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
860
etiquette; pädayoù—the lotus feet of the saintly person; çirasä—with the head;
spåçan—touching; vivitsuù—desiring to know about him (the saintly person);
idam—the following words; apräkñét—inquired; mahä-bhägavataù—the very
advanced devotee of the Lord; asuraù—although born in an asura family.
TRANSLATION
The advanced devotee Prahläda Mahäräja duly worshiped and offered
obeisances to the saintly person who had adopted a python's means of
livelihood. After thus worshiping the saintly person and touching his own head
to the saint's lotus feet, Prahläda Mahäräja, in order to understand him,
inquired very submissively as follows.
TEXTS 16-17
ib>aizR k-aYa& PaqvaNa& SaaeÛMaae >aaeGavaNYaQaa )) 16 ))
ivta& cEvaeÛMavTaa& >aaeGaae ivtavTaaiMah )
>aaeiGaNaa& %lu/ dehae_Ya& Paqva >aviTa NaaNYaQaa )) 17 ))
bibharñi käyaà pévänaà
sodyamo bhogavän yathä
vittaà caivodyamavatäà
bhogo vittavatäm iha
bhoginäà khalu deho 'yaà
pévä bhavati nänyathä
SYNONYMS
bibharñi—you are maintaining; käyam—a body; pévänam—fat;
sa-udyamaù—one who endeavors; bhogavän—one who enjoys; yathä—as;
vittam—money; ca—also; eva—certainly; udyama-vatäm—of persons always
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
861
engaged in economic development; bhogaù—sense gratification;
vitta-vatäm—for persons who possess considerable wealth; iha—in this world;
bhoginäm—of the enjoyers, karmés; khalu—indeed; dehaù—body; ayam—this;
pévä—very fat; bhavati—becomes; na—not; anyathä—otherwise.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the saintly person to be quite fat, Prahläda Mahäräja said: My dear
sir, you undergo no endeavor to earn your livelihood, but you have a stout
body, exactly like that of a materialistic enjoyer. I know that if one is very rich
and has nothing to do, he becomes extremely fat by eating and sleeping and
performing no work.
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura did not like his disciples to
become very fat in the course of time. He would become very anxious upon
seeing his fat disciples becoming bhogés, or enjoyers of the senses. This attitude
is herewith confirmed by Prahläda Mahäräja, who was surprised to see a saintly
person adopting äjagara-våtti and becoming very fat. In the material world also,
we generally see that when a man who is poor and skinny gradually endeavors
to earn money through business or some other means and he then gets the
money, he enjoys the senses to his satisfaction. By enjoying the senses one
becomes fat. Therefore in spiritual advancement becoming fat is not at all
satisfactory.
TEXT 18
Na Tae XaYaaNaSYa iNaåÛMaSYa
b]øNa( Nau haQaaeR YaTa Wv >aaeGa" )
A>aaeiGaNaae_Ya& Tav ivPa[ deh"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
862
Paqva YaTaSTaÜd Na" +aMa& ceTa( )) 18 ))
na te çayänasya nirudyamasya
brahman nu härtho yata eva bhogaù
abhogino 'yaà tava vipra dehaù
pévä yatas tad vada naù kñamaà cet
SYNONYMS
na—not; te—of you; çayänasya—lying down; nirudyamasya—without
activities; brahman—O saintly person; nu—indeed; ha—it is evident;
arthaù—money; yataù—from which; eva—indeed; bhogaù—sense enjoyment;
abhoginaù—of one who is not engaged in sense enjoyment; ayam—this;
tava—your; vipra—O learned brähmaëa; dehaù—body; pévä—fat; yataù—how
is it; tat—that fact; vada—kindly tell; naù—us; kñamam—excuse; cet—if I
have asked an impudent question.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëa, fully in knowledge of transcendence, you have nothing to do,
and therefore you are lying down. It is also understood that you have no money
for sense enjoyment. How then has your body become so fat? Under the
circumstances, if you do not consider my question impudent, kindly explain
how this has happened.
PURPORT
Generally those engaged in spiritual advancement take food only once,
either in the afternoon or in the evening. If one takes food only once,
naturally he does not become fat. The learned sage, however, was quite fat, and
therefore Prahläda Mahäräja was very much surprised. Because of being
experienced in self-realization, a transcendentalist certainly becomes
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
863
bright-faced. And one who is advanced in self-realization must be considered
to possess the body of a brähmaëa. Because the bright-faced saintly person was
lying down and not working and yet was quite fat, Prahläda Mahäräja was
puzzled and wanted to question him about this.
TEXT 19
k-iv" k-LPaae iNaPau<ad*k(- ic}aiPa[Yak-Qa" SaMa" )
l/aek-SYa ku-vRTa" k-MaR Xaeze TaÜqi+aTaaiPa va )) 19 ))
kaviù kalpo nipuëa-dåk
citra-priya-kathaù samaù
lokasya kurvataù karma
çeñe tad-vékñitäpi vä
SYNONYMS
kaviù—very learned; kalpaù—expert; nipuëa-dåk—intelligent;
citra-priya-kathaù—able to speak palatable words that are pleasing to the
heart; samaù—equipoised; lokasya—of the people in general;
kurvataù—engaged in; karma—fruitive work; çeñe—you lie down;
tat-vékñitä—seeing them all; api—although; vä—either.
TRANSLATION
Your Honor appears learned, expert and intelligent in every way. You can
speak very well, saying things that are pleasing to the heart. You see that people
in general are engaged in fruitive activities, yet you are lying here inactive.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja studied the bodily features of the saintly person, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
864
through the saint's physiognomy Prahläda Mahäräja could understand that he
was intelligent and expert, although he was lying down and not doing
anything. Prahläda was naturally inquisitive about why he was lying there
inactive.
TEXT 20
é[qNaard ovac
Sa wTQa& dETYaPaiTaNaa PairPa*íae MahaMauiNa" )
SMaYaMaaNaSTaMa>Yaah TaÜaGaMa*TaYaiN}aTa" )) 20 ))
çré-närada uväca
sa itthaà daitya-patinä
paripåñöo mahä-muniù
smayamänas tam abhyäha
tad-väg-amåta-yantritaù
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—the great saint Närada Muni said; saù—that saintly person
(lying down); ittham—in this way; daitya-patinä—by the King of the Daityas
(Prahläda Mahäräja); paripåñöaù—being sufficiently questioned;
mahä-muniù—the great saintly person; smayamänaù—smiling; tam—unto him
(Prahläda Mahäräja); abhyäha—prepared to give answers; tat-väk—of his
words; amåta-yantritaù—being captivated by the nectar.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: When the saintly person was thus questioned by
Prahläda Mahäräja, the King of the Daityas, he was captivated by this shower of
nectarean words, and he replied to the inquisitiveness of Prahläda Mahäräja
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
865
with a smiling face.
TEXT 21
é[qb]aø<a ovac
vededMaSauré[eï >avaNa( NaNvaYaRSaMMaTa" )
wRhaeParMaYaaeNa›R<aa& PadaNYaDYaaTMac+auza )) 21 ))
çré-brähmaëa uväca
vededam asura-çreñöha
bhavän nanv ärya-sammataù
éhoparamayor nèëäà
padäny adhyätma-cakñuñä
SYNONYMS
çré-brähmaëaù uväca—the brähmaëa replied; veda—know very well; idam—all
these things; asura-çreñöha—O best of the asuras; bhavän—you;
nanu—indeed; ärya-sammataù—whose activities are approved by civilized
men; éhä—of inclination; uparamayoù—of decreasing; nèëäm—of the people
in general; padäni—different stages; adhyätma-cakñuñä—by transcendental
eyes.
TRANSLATION
The saintly brähmaëa said: O best of the asuras, Prahläda Mahäräja, who are
recognized by advanced and civilized men, you are aware of the different stages
of life because of your inherent transcendental eyes, with which you can see a
man's character and thus know clearly the results of acceptance and rejection of
things as they are.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
866
PURPORT
A pure devotee like Prahläda Mahäräja can understand the minds of others
because of his pure vision in devotional service. A devotee like Prahläda
Mahäräja can study another man's character without difficulty.
TEXT 22
YaSYa NaaraYa<aae devae >aGavaNôÓTa" Sada )
>a¢-ya ke-vl/YaajaNa& DauNaaeiTa ßaNTaMakR-vTa( )) 22 ))
yasya näräyaëo devo
bhagavän håd-gataù sadä
bhaktyä kevalayäjïänaà
dhunoti dhväntam arkavat
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; näräyaëaù devaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Näräyaëa; bhagavän—the Lord; håt-gataù—in the core of the heart;
sadä—always; bhaktyä—by devotional service; kevalayä—alone;
ajïänam—ignorance; dhunoti—cleans; dhväntam—darkness; arka-vat—as the
sun.
TRANSLATION
Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is full of all opulences,
is predominant within the core of your heart because of your being a pure
devotee. He always drives away all the darkness of ignorance, as the sun drives
away the darkness of the universe.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
867
PURPORT
The words bhaktyä kevalayä indicate that simply by executing devotional
service one can become full of all knowledge. Kåñëa is the master of all
knowledge (aiçvaryasya samagrasya véryasya yaçasaù çriyaù (Viñëu Puräëa
6.5.47)). The Lord is situated in everyone's heart (éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati [Bg. 18.61]), and when the Lord is pleased with a devotee,
the Lord instructs him. Only to the devotees, however, does the Lord give
instructions by which to advance further and further in devotional service. To
others, the nondevotees, the Lord gives instructions according to the manner
of their surrender. The pure devotee is described by the words bhaktyä
kevalayä. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that bhaktyä kevalayä
means jïäna-karmädy-amiçrayä, "unmixed with fruitive activities or
speculative knowledge." Simply surrendering at the lotus feet is the cause of all
a devotee's enlightenment and awareness.
TEXT 23
TaQaaiPa b]UMahe Pa[éna&STav raJaNYaQaaé[uTaMa( )
SaM>aaz<aqYaae ih >avaNaaTMaNa" éuiÖiMaC^Taa )) 23 ))
tathäpi brümahe praçnäàs
tava räjan yathä-çrutam
sambhäñaëéyo hi bhavän
ätmanaù çuddhim icchatä
SYNONYMS
tathäpi—still; brümahe—I shall answer; praçnän—all the questions;
tava—your; räjan—O King; yathä-çrutam—as I have learned by hearing from
the authorities; sambhäñaëéyaù—fit for being addressed; hi—indeed;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
868
bhavän—you; ätmanaù—of the self; çuddhim—purification; icchatä—by one
who desires.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, although you know everything, you have posed some
questions, which I shall try to answer according to what I have learned by
hearing from authorities. I cannot remain silent in this regard, for a personality
like you is just fit to be spoken to by one who desires self-purification.
PURPORT
A saintly person doesn't wish to speak to anyone and everyone, and he is
therefore grave and silent. Generally a common man does not need to be
advised. Unless one is prepared to take instructions, it is said that a saintly
person should not address him, although sometimes, because of great kindness,
a saintly person speaks to ordinary men. As for Prahläda Mahäräja, however,
since he was not a common, ordinary man, whatever questions he posed would
have to be answered, even by a great and exalted personality. Therefore the
saintly brähmaëa did not remain silent, but began to answer. These answers,
however, were not concocted by him. This is indicated by the words
yathä-çrutam, meaning "as I have heard from the authorities." In the paramparä
system, when the questions are bona fide the answers are bona fide. No one
should attempt to create or manufacture answers. One must refer to the çästras
and give answers according to Vedic understanding. The words yathä-çrutam
refer to Vedic knowledge. The Vedas are known as çruti because this
knowledge is received from authorities. The statements of the Vedas are
known as çruti-pramäëa. One should quote evidence from the çruti—the Vedas
or Vedic literature—and then one's statements will be correct. Otherwise
one's words will proceed from mental concoction.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
869
TEXT 24
Ta*Z<aYaa >avvaihNYaa YaaeGYaE" k-aMaErPaUYaRYaa )
k-MaaRi<a k-aYaRMaa<aae_h& NaaNaaYaaeiNazu YaaeiJaTa" )) 24 ))
tåñëayä bhava-vähinyä
yogyaiù kämair apüryayä
karmäëi käryamäëo 'haà
nänä-yoniñu yojitaù
SYNONYMS
tåñëayä—because of material desires; bhava-vähinyä—under the sway of the
material laws of nature; yogyaiù—as it is befitting; kämaiù—by material
desires; apüryayä—without end, one after another; karmäëi—activities;
käryamäëaù—constantly being compelled to perform; aham—I;
nänä-yoniñu—in various forms of life; yojitaù—engaged in the struggle for
existence.
TRANSLATION
Because of insatiable material desires, I was being carried away by the waves
of material nature's laws, and thus I was engaging in different activities,
struggling for existence in various forms of life.
PURPORT
As long as a living entity wants to fulfill various types of material desire, he
must continuously change from one body to accept another. Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that as a small piece of grass falls in a river and is
tossed about with different types of wood and tree branches, the living entity
floats in the ocean of material existence and is dashed and tossed amidst
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
870
material conditions. This is called the struggle for existence. One kind of
fruitive activity causes the living being to take one form of body, and because
of actions performed in that body, another body is created. One must therefore
stop these material activities, and the chance to do so is given in the human
form of life. Specifically, our energy to act should be engaged in the service of
the Lord, for then materialistic activities will automatically stop. One must
fulfill one's desires by surrendering unto the Supreme Lord, for He knows how
to fulfill them. Even though one may have material desires, one should
therefore engage in the devotional service of the Lord. That will purify one's
struggle for existence.
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"A person who has broader intelligence, whether he be full of all material
desire, without any material desire, or desiring liberation, must by all means
worship the supreme whole, the Personality of Godhead." (SB 2.3.10)
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanaà
bhaktir uttamä
[Cc. Madhya 19.167]
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kåñëa
favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive
activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."
(Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11)
TEXT 25
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
871
Yad*C^Yaa l/aek-iMaMa& Pa[aiPaTa" k-MaRi>a>a]RMaNa( )
SvGaaRPavGaRYaaeÜaRr& iTarêa& PauNarSYa c )) 25 ))
yadåcchayä lokam imaà
präpitaù karmabhir bhraman
svargäpavargayor dväraà
tiraçcäà punar asya ca
SYNONYMS
yadåcchayä—carried by the waves of material nature; lokam—human form;
imam—this; präpitaù—achieved; karmabhiù—by the influence of different
fruitive activities; bhraman—wandering from one form of life to another;
svarga—to the heavenly planets; apavargayoù—to liberation; dväram—the
gate; tiraçcäm—lower species of life; punaù—again; asya—of the human
beings; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
In the course of the evolutionary process, which is caused by fruitive
activities due to undesirable material sense gratification, I have received this
human form of life, which can lead to the heavenly planets, to liberation, to the
lower species, or to rebirth among human beings.
PURPORT
All living entities within this material world are undergoing the cycle of
birth and death according to the laws of nature. This struggle of birth and
death in different species may be called the evolutionary process, but in the
Western world it has been wrongly explained. Darwin's theory of evolution
from animal to man is incomplete because the theory does not present the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
872
reverse condition, namely evolution from man to animal. In this verse,
however, evolution has been very well explained on the strength of Vedic
authority. Human life, which is obtained in the course of the evolutionary
process, is a chance for elevation (svargäpavarga) or for degradation (tiraçcäm
punar asya ca). If one uses this human form of life properly, he can elevate
himself to the higher planetary systems, where material happiness is many
thousands of times better than on this planet, or one may cultivate knowledge
by which to become free from the evolutionary process and be reinstated in
one's original spiritual life. This is called apavarga, or liberation.
Material life is called pavarga because here we are subject to five different
states of suffering, represented by the letters pa, pha, ba, bha and ma. Pa means
pariçrama, very hard labor. Pha means phena, or foam from the mouth. For
example, sometimes we see a horse foaming at the mouth with heavy labor. Ba
means byarthatä, disappointment. In spite of so much hard labor, at the end we
find disappointment. Bha means bhaya, or fear. In material life, one is always
in the blazing fire of fear, since no one knows what will happen next. Finally,
ma means måtyu, or death. When one attempts to nullify these five different
statuses of life—pa, pha, ba, bha and ma—one achieves apavarga, or liberation
from the punishment of material existence.
The word tiraçcäm refers to degraded life. Human life, of course, provides
an opportunity for the best living conditions. As Western people think, from
the monkeys come the human beings, who are more comfortably situated.
However, if one does not utilize his human life for svarga or apavarga, he falls
again to the degraded life of animals like dogs and hogs. Therefore a sane
human being must consider whether he will elevate himself to the higher
planets, prepare to free himself from the evolutionary process, or travel again
through the evolutionary process in higher and lower grades of life. If one
works piously one may be elevated to the higher planetary systems or achieve
liberation and return home, back to Godhead, but otherwise one may be
degraded to a life as a dog, a hog and so on. As explained in Bhagavad-gétä
(9.25), yänti deva-vratä devän. Those interested in being elevated to the higher
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
873
planetary systems (Devaloka or Svargaloka) must prepare to do so. Similarly, if
one wants liberation and wants to return home, back to Godhead, he should
prepare himself for that purpose.
Our Kåñëa consciousness movement is therefore the highest movement for
the benediction of human society because this movement is teaching people
how to go back home, back to Godhead. In Bhagavad-gétä (13.22) it is clearly
stated that different forms of life are obtained by association with the three
modes of material nature (käraëaà guëa-saìgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni janmasu).
According to one's association with the material qualities of goodness, passion
and ignorance in this life, in one's next life one receives an appropriate body.
Modern civilization does not know that because of varied association in
material nature, the living entity, although eternal, is placed in different
diseased conditions known as the many species of life. Modern civilization is
unaware of the laws of nature.
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself the performer of activities that are in actuality carried
out by nature." (Bg. 3.27) Every living entity is under the full control of the
stringent laws of material nature, but rascals think themselves independent.
Actually, however, they cannot be independent. This is foolishness. A foolish
civilization is extremely risky, and therefore the Kåñëa consciousness
movement is trying to make people aware of their fully dependent condition
under the stringent laws of nature and is trying to save them from being
victimized by strong mäyä, which is Kåñëa's external energy. Behind the
material laws is the supreme controller, Kåñëa (mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate
sacaräcaram [Bg. 9.10]). Therefore if one surrenders unto Kåñëa (mäm eva ye
prapadyante mäyäm etäà taranti te [Bg. 7.14]), one may immediately be freed
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
874
from the control of external nature (sa guëän samatétyaitän brahma-bhüyäya
kalpate [Bg. 14.26]). This should be the aim of life.
TEXT 26
Ta}aaiPa dMPaTaqNaa& c Sau%aYaaNYaaPaNautaYae )
k-MaaRi<a ku-vRTaa& d*îa iNav*taae_iSMa ivPaYaRYaMa( )) 26 ))
taträpi dam-paténäà ca
sukhäyänyäpanuttaye
karmäëi kurvatäà dåñövä
nivåtto 'smi viparyayam
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; api—also; dam-paténäm—of men and women united by marriage;
ca—and; sukhäya—for the sake of pleasure, specifically the pleasure of sex life;
anya-apanuttaye—for avoiding misery; karmäëi—fruitive activities;
kurvatäm—always engaged in; dåñövä—by observing; nivåttaù asmi—I have
now ceased (from such activities); viparyayam—the opposite.
TRANSLATION
In this human form of life, men and women unite for the sensual pleasure of
sex, but by actual experience we have observed that none of them are happy.
Therefore, seeing the contrary results, I have stopped taking part in
materialistic activities.
PURPORT
As stated by Prahläda Mahäräja, yan maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukhaà hi
tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. Man and woman both seek sexual enjoyment, and when
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
875
they are united by the ritualistic ceremony of marriage, they are happy for
some time, but finally there is dissension, and thus there are so many cases of
separation and divorce. Although every man and woman is actually eager to
enjoy life through sexual unity, the result is disunity and distress. Marriage is
recommended to give men and women a concession for restricted sex life,
which is also recommended in Bhagavad-gétä by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Dharmäviruddho bhüteñu kämo 'smi: sex life not against the
principles of religion is Kåñëa. Every living entity is always eager to enjoy sex
life because materialistic life consists of eating, sleeping, sex and fear. In
animal life, eating, sleeping, sexual enjoyment and fear cannot be regulated,
but for human society the plan is that although men, like animals, must be
allowed to eat, sleep, enjoy sex and take protection from fear, they must be
regulated. The Vedic plan for eating recommends that one take yajïa-çiñöa, or
prasäda, food offered to Kåñëa. Yajïa-çiñöäçinaù santo mucyante sarva-kilbiñaiù:
"The devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because they eat
food that is offered first for sacrifice." (Bg. 3.13) In material life, one commits
sinful activities, especially in eating, and because of sinful activities one is
condemned by nature's laws to accept another body, which is imposed as
punishment. Sex and eating are essential, and therefore they are offered to
human society under Vedic restrictions so that according to the Vedic
injunctions people may eat, sleep, enjoy sex, be protected from fearful life and
gradually be elevated and liberated from the punishment of material existence.
Thus the Vedic injunctions for marriage offer a concession to human society,
the idea being that a man and woman united in a ritualistic marriage
ceremony should help one another advance in spiritual life. Unfortunately,
especially in this age, men and women unite for unrestricted sexual enjoyment.
Thus they are victimized, being obliged to take rebirth in the forms of animals
to fulfill their animalistic propensities. The Vedic injunctions therefore warn,
näyaà deho deha-bhäjäà nåloke kañöän kämän arhate vid-bhujäà ye [SB 5.5.1].
One should not enjoy sex life like hogs, and eat everything, even to the limit
of stool. A human being should eat prasäda offered to the Deity and should
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
876
enjoy sex life according to the Vedic injunctions. He should engage himself in
the business of Kåñëa consciousness, he should save himself from the fearful
condition of material existence, and he should sleep only to recover from
fatigue due to working hard.
The learned brähmaëa said that since everything is misused by fruitive
workers, he had retired from all fruitive activities.
TEXT 27
Sau%MaSYaaTMaNaae æPa& SaveRhaePariTaSTaNau" )
MaNa"Sa&SPaXaRJaaNa( d*îa >aaeGaaNSvPSYaaiMa Sa&ivXaNa( )) 27 ))
sukham asyätmano rüpaà
sarvehoparatis tanuù
manaù-saàsparçajän dåñövä
bhogän svapsyämi saàviçan
SYNONYMS
sukham—happiness; asya—of him; ätmanaù—of the living entity; rüpam—the
natural position; sarva—all; éha—material activities; uparatiù—completely
stopping; tanuù—the medium of its manifestation;
manaù-saàsparça-jän—produced from demands for sense gratification;
dåñövä—after seeing; bhogän—sense enjoyment; svapsyämi—I am sitting
silently, thinking deeply about these material activities; saàviçan—entering
into such activities.
TRANSLATION
The actual form of life for the living entities is one of spiritual happiness,
which is real happiness. This happiness can be achieved only when one stops all
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
877
materialistic activities. Material sense enjoyment is simply imagination.
Therefore, considering this subject matter, I have ceased from all material
activities and am lying down here.
PURPORT
The difference between the philosophy of the Mäyävädés and that of the
Vaiñëavas is explained herein. Both the Mäyävädés and Vaiñëavas know that
in materialistic activities there is no happiness. The Mäyävädé philosophers,
therefore, adhering to the slogan brahma satyaà jagan mithyä, want to refrain
from false, materialistic activities. They want to stop all activities and merge in
the Supreme Brahman. According to the Vaiñëava philosophy, however, if one
simply ceases from materialistic activity one cannot remain inactive for very
long, and therefore everyone should engage himself in spiritual activities,
which will solve the problem of suffering in this material world. It is said,
therefore, that although the Mäyävädé philosophers strive to refrain from
materialistic activities and merge in Brahman, and although they may actually
merge in the Brahman existence, for want of activity they fall down again into
materialistic activity (äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù patanty adhaù [SB
10.2.32]). Thus the so-called renouncer, unable to remain in meditation upon
Brahman, returns to materialistic activities by opening hospitals and schools
and so on. Therefore, simply cultivating knowledge that materialistic activities
cannot give one happiness, and that one should consequently cease from such
activities, is insufficient. One should cease from materialistic activities and
take up spiritual activities. Then the solution to the problem will be achieved.
Spiritual activities are activities performed according to the order of Kåñëa
(änukülyena kåñëänuçélanam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]). If one does whatever Kåñëa
says, his activities are not material. For example, when Arjuna fought in
response to the order of Kåñëa, his activities were not material. Fighting for
sense gratification is a materialistic activity, but fighting by the order of Kåñëa
is spiritual. By spiritual activities one becomes eligible to go back home, back to
Godhead, and then enjoy blissful life eternally. Here, in the material world,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
878
everything is but a mental concoction that will never give us real happiness.
The practical solution, therefore, is to cease from materialistic activities and
engage in spiritual activities. Yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra loko 'yaà
karma-bandhanaù [Bg. 3.9]). If one works for the sake of pleasing the Supreme
Lord—Yajïa, or Viñëu—one is in liberated life. If one fails to do so, however,
he remains in a life of bondage.
TEXT 28
wTYaeTadaTMaNa" SvaQa| SaNTa& ivSMa*TYa vE PauMaaNa( )
ivic}aaMaSaiTa ÜETae gaaeraMaaPanaeiTa Sa&Sa*iTaMa( )) 28 ))
ity etad ätmanaù svärthaà
santaà vismåtya vai pumän
viciträm asati dvaite
ghoräm äpnoti saàsåtim
SYNONYMS
iti—in this way; etat—a person materially conditioned; ätmanaù—of his self;
sva-artham—own interest; santam—existing within oneself;
vismåtya—forgetting; vai—indeed; pumän—the living entity;
viciträm—attractive false varieties; asati—in the material world; dvaite—other
than the self; ghoräm—very fearful (due to continuous acceptance of birth and
death); äpnoti—one becomes entangled; saàsåtim—in material existence.
TRANSLATION
In this way the conditioned soul living within the body forgets his
self-interest because he identifies himself with the body. Because the body is
material, his natural tendency is to be attracted by the varieties of the material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
879
world. Thus the living entity suffers the miseries of material existence.
PURPORT
Everyone is trying to be happy because, as explained in the previous verse,
sukham asyätmano rüpaà sarvehoparatis tanuù: when the living entity is in his
original spiritual form, he is happy by nature. There is no question of miseries
for the spiritual being. As Kåñëa is always happy, the living entities, who are
His parts and parcels, are also happy by nature, but because of being put within
this material world and forgetting their eternal relationship with Kåñëa, they
have forgotten their real nature. Because every one of us is a part of Kåñëa, we
have a very affectionate relationship with Him, but because we have forgotten
our identities and are considering the body to be the self, we are afflicted by all
the troubles of birth, death, old age and disease. This misconception in
materialistic life continues unless and until one comes to understand his
relationship with Kåñëa. The happiness sought by the conditioned soul is
certainly only illusion, as explained in the next verse.
TEXT 29
Jal&/ TaduÙvEX^à& ihTvajae Jal/k-aMYaYaa )
Ma*GaTa*Z<aaMauPaaDaaveTa( TaQaaNYa}aaQaRd*k(- SvTa" )) 29 ))
jalaà tad-udbhavaiç channaà
hitväjïo jala-kämyayä
mågatåñëäm upädhävet
tathänyaträrtha-dåk svataù
SYNONYMS
jalam—water; tat-udbhavaiù—by grass grown from that water;
channam—covered; hitvä—giving up; ajïaù—a foolish animal;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
880
jala-kämyayä—desiring to drink water; mågatåñëäm—a mirage;
upädhävet—runs after; tathä—similarly; anyatra—somewhere else;
artha-dåk—self-interested; svataù—in himself.
TRANSLATION
Just as a deer, because of ignorance, cannot see the water within a well
covered by grass, but runs after water elsewhere, the living entity covered by
the material body does not see the happiness within himself, but runs after
happiness in the material world.
PURPORT
This is an accurate example depicting how the living entity, because of lack
of knowledge, runs after happiness outside his own self. When one
understands his real identity as a spiritual being, he can understand the
supreme spiritual being, Kåñëa, and the real happiness exchanged between
Kåñëa and one's self. It is very interesting to note how this verse points to the
body's growth from the spirit soul. The modern materialistic scientist thinks
that life grows from matter, but actually the fact is that matter grows from life.
The life, or the spiritual soul, is compared herein to water, from which clumps
of matter grow in the form of grass. One who is ignorant of scientific
knowledge of the spirit soul does not look inside the body to find happiness in
the soul; instead, he goes outside to search for happiness, just as a deer without
knowledge of the water beneath the grass goes out to the desert to find water.
The Kåñëa consciousness movement is trying to remove the ignorance of
misled human beings who are trying to find water outside the jurisdiction of
life. Raso vai saù. Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya [Bg. 7.8]. The taste of water is Kåñëa.
To quench one's thirst, one must taste water by association with Kåñëa. This is
the Vedic injunction.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
881
TEXT 30
dehaidi>adOEvTaN}aEraTMaNa" Sau%MaqhTa" )
du"%aTYaYa& caNaqXaSYa i§-Yaa Maaegaa" k*-Taa" k*-Taa" )) 30 ))
dehädibhir daiva-tantrair
ätmanaù sukham éhataù
duùkhätyayaà cänéçasya
kriyä moghäù kåtäù kåtäù
SYNONYMS
deha-ädibhiù—with the body, mind, ego and intelligence;
daiva-tantraiù—under the control of superior power; ätmanaù—of the self;
sukham—happiness; éhataù—searching after; duùkha-atyayam—diminution of
miserable conditions; ca—also; anéçasya—of the living entity fully under the
control of material nature; kriyäù—plans and activities; moghäù kåtäù
kåtäù—become baffled again and again.
TRANSLATION
The living entity tries to achieve happiness and rid himself of the causes of
distress, but because the various bodies of the living entities are under the full
control of material nature, all his plans in different bodies, one after another,
are ultimately baffled.
PURPORT
Because the materialist is in gross ignorance of how the laws of material
nature act upon him as a result of his fruitive activity, he mistakenly plans to
enjoy bodily comfort in the human form of life through so-called economic
development, through pious activities for elevation to the higher planetary
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
882
systems, and in many other ways, but factually he becomes a victim of the
reactions of his fruitive activities. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is
situated as the Supersoul within the cores of the hearts of all living entities. As
the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15):
sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo
mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca
"I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge
and forgetfulness." The desires and activities of the living being are observed
by the Supersoul, who is the upadrañöä, the overseer, and who orders material
nature to fulfill the various desires of the living being. As clearly stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (18.61):
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
The Lord is situated in everyone's heart, and as one desires, the Lord gives one
various types of bodies, which are like machines. Riding on such a machine,
the living entity wanders throughout the universe, under the control of
material nature and its modes. Thus the living being is not at all free to act,
but is fully under the control of material nature, which is fully under the
control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
As soon as a living entity is victimized by material desires to lord it over
material nature, he is subjected to the control of material nature, which is
supervised by the Supreme Soul. The result is that one again and again makes
plans and is baffled, but as foolish as he is he cannot see the cause of his
bafflement. This cause is distinctly stated in Bhagavad-gétä: because one has
not surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he must work under
the control of material nature and its stringent laws (daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
883
mama mäyä duratyayä [Bg. 7.14]). The only means of becoming free from this
entanglement is to surrender to the Supreme Lord. In the human form of life,
the living entity must accept this instruction from the Supreme Person, Kåñëa:
sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]. "Do not plan to
achieve happiness and drive away distress. You will never be successful. Simply
surrender unto Me." Unfortunately, however, the living entity does not accept
the Supreme Lord's clearly stated instructions from Bhagavad-gétä, and thus he
becomes a perpetual captive of the laws of material nature.
Yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra loko 'yaà karma-bandhanaù: [Bg. 3.9]) if one
does not act for the satisfaction of Kåñëa, who is known as Viñëu or Yajïa, he
must be entangled in the reactions of fruitive activities. These reactions are
called päpa and puëya—sinful and pious. By pious activities one is elevated to
the higher planetary systems, and by impious activities one is degraded to
lower species of life, in which he is punished by the laws of nature. In the
lower species of life there is an evolutionary process, and when the term of the
living entity's imprisonment or punishment in the lower species is finished, he
is again offered a human form and given a chance to decide for himself which
way he should plan. If he again misses the opportunity, he is again put into the
cycle of birth and death, going sometimes higher and sometimes lower, turning
on the saàsära-cakra, the wheel of material existence. As a wheel sometimes
goes up and sometimes comes down, the stringent laws of material nature make
the living entity in material existence sometimes happy and sometimes
distressed. How he suffers in the cycle of happiness and distress is described in
the next verse.
TEXT 31
AaDYaaiTMak-aidi>aduR"%ErivMau¢-SYa k-ihRicTa( )
MaTYaRSYa k*-C^\aePaNaTaErQaOE" k-aMaE" i§-YaeTa ik-Ma( )) 31 ))
ädhyätmikädibhir duùkhair
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
884
avimuktasya karhicit
martyasya kåcchropanatair
arthaiù kämaiù kriyeta kim
SYNONYMS
ädhyätmika-ädibhiù—adhyätmika, adhidaivika and adhibhautika; duùkhaiù—by
the threefold miseries of material life; avimuktasya—of one who is not freed
from such miserable conditions (or one who is subjected to birth, death, old
age and disease); karhicit—sometimes; martyasya—of the living entity
subjected to death; kåcchra-upanataiù—things obtained because of severe
miseries; arthaiù—even if some benefit is derived; kämaiù—which can fulfill
one's material desires; kriyeta—what do they do; kim—and what is the value of
such happiness.
TRANSLATION
Materialistic activities are always mixed with three kinds of miserable
conditions—adhyätmika, adhidaivika and adhibautika. Therefore, even if one
achieves some success by performing such activities, what is the benefit of this
success? One is still subjected to birth, death, old age, disease and the reactions
of his fruitive activities.
PURPORT
According to the materialistic way of life, if a poor man, after laboring very,
very hard, gets some material profit at the end of his life, he is considered a
success, even though he again dies while suffering the threefold
miseries—adhyätmika, adhidaivika and adhibhautika. No one can escape the
threefold miseries of materialistic life, namely miseries pertaining to the body
and mind, miseries pertaining to the difficulties imposed by society,
community, nation and other living entities, and miseries inflicted upon us by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
885
natural disturbances from earthquakes, famines, droughts, floods, epidemics,
and so on. If one works very hard, suffering the threefold miseries, and then is
successful in getting some small benefit, what is the value of this benefit?
Besides that, even if a karmé is successful in accumulating some material
wealth, he still cannot enjoy it, for he must die in bereavement. I have even
seen a dying man begging a medical attendant to increase his life by four years
so that he could complete his material plans. Of course, the medical man was
unsuccessful in expanding the life of the man, who therefore died in great
bereavement. Everyone must die in this way, and after one's mental condition
is taken into account by the laws of material nature, he is given another
chance to fulfill his desires in a different body. Material plans for material
happiness have no value, but under the spell of the illusory energy we consider
them extremely valuable. There were many politicians, social reformers and
philosophers who died very miserably, without deriving any practical value
from their material plans. Therefore, a sane and sensible man never desires to
work hard under the conditions of threefold miseries, only to die in
disappointment.
TEXT 32
PaXYaaiMa DaiNaNaa& (c)e-Xa& lu/BDaaNaaMaiJaTaaTMaNaaMa( )
>aYaadl/BDaiNad]a<aa& SavRTaae_i>aivXaiªNaaMa( )) 32 ))
paçyämi dhaninäà kleçaà
lubdhänäm ajitätmanäm
bhayäd alabdha-nidräëäà
sarvato 'bhiviçaìkinäm
SYNONYMS
paçyämi—I can practically see; dhaninäm—of persons who are very rich;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
886
kleçam—the miseries; lubdhänäm—who are extremely greedy;
ajita-ätmanäm—who are victims of their senses; bhayät—because of fear;
alabdha-nidräëäm—who are suffering from insomnia; sarvataù—from all sides;
abhiviçaìkinäm—being particularly afraid.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëa continued: I am actually seeing how a rich man, who is a
victim of his senses, is very greedy to accumulate wealth, and therefore suffers
from insomnia due to fear from all sides, despite his wealth and opulence.
PURPORT
Greedy capitalists accumulate wealth under so many miserable conditions,
the result being that because they collect money by questionable means, their
minds are always agitated. Thus they are unable to sleep at night, and they
have to take pills for mental tranquillity to invite sleep. And sometimes even
the pills are a failure. Consequently the result of having accumulated money
by so much labor is certainly not happiness, but only distress. What is the
value of acquiring a comfortable position if one's mind is always disturbed?
Narottama däsa Öhäkura has therefore sung:
saàsära-biñänale, dibäniçi hiyä jvale,
juòäite nä kainu upäya
"I am suffering from the poisonous effect of material enjoyment. Thus my
heart is always burning and is almost on the verge of failure." The result of the
greedy capitalist's unnecessary accumulation of wealth is that he must suffer
from a blazing fire of anxiety and always be concerned with how to save his
money and invest it properly to get more and more. Such a life is certainly not
very happy, but because of the spell of the illusory energy, materialistic persons
engage in such activities.
As far as our Kåñëa consciousness movement is concerned, we are getting
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
887
money naturally, by the grace of God, by selling our literature. This literature
is not sold for our sense gratification; to spread the Kåñëa consciousness
movement we need so many things, and Kåñëa is therefore supplying us the
requisite money to advance this mission. The mission of Kåñëa is to spread
Kåñëa consciousness all over the world, and for this purpose we naturally must
have sufficient money. Therefore, according to the advice of Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé Prabhupäda, we should not give up attachment to money that can
spread the Kåñëa consciousness movement. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé says in his
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.2.256):
präpaïcikatayä buddhyä
hari-sambandhi-vastunaù
mumukñubhiù parityägo
vairägyaà phalgu kathyate
"When persons eager to achieve liberation renounce things which are related
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, though they are material, this is called
incomplete renunciation." Money that can help in spreading the Kåñëa
consciousness movement is not a part of the material world, and we should not
give it up, thinking that it is material. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé advises:
anäsaktasya viñayän
yathärham upayuïjataù
nirbandhaù kåñëa-sambandhe
yuktaà vairägyam ucyate
"When one is not attached to anything, but at the same time accepts
everything in relation to Kåñëa, one is rightly situated above possessiveness."
(Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.255) Money is undoubtedly coming in great
quantities, but we should not be attached to this money for sense gratification;
every cent should be spent for spreading the Kåñëa consciousness movement,
not for sense gratification. There is danger for a preacher when he receives
great quantities of money, for as soon as he spends even a single cent of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
888
collection for his personal sense gratification, he becomes a fallen victim. The
preachers of the Kåñëa consciousness movement should be extremely careful
not to misuse the immense quantities of money needed to spread this
movement. Let us not make this money the cause of our distress; it should be
used for Kåñëa, and that will cause our eternal happiness. Money is Lakñmé, or
the goddess of fortune, the companion of Näräyaëa. Lakñméjé must always
remain with Näräyaëa, and then there need be no fear of degradation.
TEXT 33
raJaTaêaErTa" Xa}aae" SvJaNaaTPaéuPai+aTa" )
AiQaR>Ya" k-al/Ta" SvSMaaiàTYa& Pa[a<aaQaRvÙYaMa( )) 33 ))
räjataç caurataù çatroù
sva-janät paçu-pakñitaù
arthibhyaù kälataù svasmän
nityaà präëärthavad bhayam
SYNONYMS
räjataù—from the government; caurataù—from thieves and rogues;
çatroù—from enemies; sva-janät—from relatives; paçu-pakñitaù—from animals
and birds; arthibhyaù—from beggars and persons seeking charity;
kälataù—from the time factor; svasmät—as well as from one's self;
nityam—always; präëa-artha-vat—for one who has life or money;
bhayam—fear.
TRANSLATION
Those who are considered materially powerful and rich are always full of
anxieties because of governmental laws, thieves and rogues, enemies, family
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
889
members, animals, birds, persons seeking charity, the inevitable time factor and
even their own selves. Thus they are invariably afraid.
PURPORT
The word svasmät means "from one's self." Because of attachment for
money, the richest person is even afraid of himself. He fears that he may have
locked his money in an unsafe manner or might have committed some mistake.
Aside from the government and its income tax and aside from thieves, even a
rich man's own relatives are always thinking of how to take advantage of him
and take away his money. Sometimes these relatives are described as sva
janaka-dasyu, which means "rogues and thieves in the guise of relatives."
Therefore, there is no need to accumulate wealth or unnecessarily endeavor
for more and more money. The real business of life is to ask "Who am I?" and to
understand one's self. One should understand the position of the living entity
in this material world and understand how to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 34
Xaaek-Maaeh>aYa§-aeDaraGa(c)E-BYaé[MaadYa" )
YaNMaUl/a" SYauNa*R<aa& JaùaTa( SPa*ha& Pa[a<aaQaRYaaebuRDa" )) 34 ))
çoka-moha-bhaya-krodharäga-
klaibya-çramädayaù
yan-müläù syur nåëäà jahyät
spåhäà präëärthayor budhaù
SYNONYMS
çoka—lamentation; moha—illusion; bhaya—fear; krodha—anger;
räga—attachment; klaibya—poverty; çrama—unnecessary labor; ädayaù—and
so on; yat-müläù—the original cause of all these; syuù—become; nåëäm—of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
890
human beings; jahyät—should give up; spåhäm—the desire; präëa—for bodily
strength or prestige; arthayoù—and accumulating money; budhaù—an
intelligent person.
TRANSLATION
Those in human society who are intelligent should give up the original cause
of lamentation, illusion, fear, anger, attachment, poverty and unnecessary labor.
The original cause of all of these is the desire for unnecessary prestige and
money.
PURPORT
Here is the difference between Vedic civilization and the modern demoniac
civilization. Vedic civilization concerned itself with how to achieve
self-realization, and for this purpose one was recommended to have a small
income to maintain body and soul together. The society was divided into
brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras, and the members of this society would
limit their endeavors to meeting their minimum demands. The brähmaëas, in
particular, would have no material desires. Because the kñatriyas had to rule
the people, it was necessary for them to have money and prestige. But the
vaiçyas were satisfied with agricultural produce and milk from the cow, and if
by chance there were excess, trade was allowed. The çüdras were also happy,
for they would get food and shelter from the three higher classes. In the
demoniac civilization of the present day, however, there is no question of
brähmaëas or kñatriyas; there are only so-called workers and a flourishing
mercantile class who have no goal in life.
According to Vedic civilization, the ultimate perfection of life is to take
sannyäsa, but at the present moment people do not know why sannyäsa is
accepted. Because of misunderstanding, they think that one accepts sannyäsa
to escape social responsibilities. But one does not accept sannyäsa to escape
from responsibility to society. Generally one accepts sannyäsa at the fourth
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
891
stage of spiritual life. One begins as a brahmacäré then becomes a gåhastha, a
vänaprastha and finally a sannyäsé to take advantage of the duration of one's
life by engaging oneself fully in self-realization. Sannyäsa does not mean
begging from door to door to accumulate money for sense gratification.
However, because in Kali-yuga people are more or less prone to sense
gratification, immature sannyäsa is not recommended. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé
writes in his Nectar of Instruction:
atyähäraù prayäsaç ca
prajalpo niyamägrahaù
jana-saìgaç ca laulyaà ca
ñaòbhir bhaktir vinaçyati
[NoI 2]
"One's devotional service is spoiled when he becomes too entangled in the
following six activities: (1) eating more than necessary or collecting more
funds than required; (2) overendeavoring for mundane things that are very
difficult to obtain; (3) talking unnecessarily about mundane subject matters;
(4) practicing the scriptural rules and regulations only for the sake of following
them and not for the sake of spiritual advancement, or rejecting the rules and
regulations of the scriptures and working independently or whimsically; (5)
associating with worldly-minded persons who are not interested in Kåñëa
consciousness; and (6) being greedy for mundane achievements." A sannyäsé
should have an institution meant to preach Kåñëa consciousness; he need not
accumulate money for himself. We recommend that as soon as money
accumulates in our Kåñëa consciousness movement, fifty per cent of it should
be invested in printing books, and fifty per cent for expenditures, especially in
establishing centers all over the world. The managers of the Kåñëa
consciousness movement should be extremely cautious in regard to this point.
Otherwise money will be the cause of lamentation, illusion, fear, anger,
material attachment, material poverty, and unnecessary hard work. When I
was alone in Våndävana, I never attempted to construct maöhäs or temples;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
892
rather, I was fully satisfied with the small amount of money I could gather by
selling Back to Godhead, and thus I would provide for myself and also print the
literature. When I went to foreign countries, I lived according to the same
principle, but when Europeans and Americans began to give money profusely,
I started temples and Deity worship. The same principle should still be
followed. Whatever money is collected should be spent for Kåñëa, and not a
farthing for sense gratification. This is the Bhägavata principle.
TEXT 35
MaDauk-arMahaSaPaaOE l/aeke-_iSMaàae GauætaMaaE )
vEraGYa& PairTaaez& c Pa[aáa YaiC^+aYaa vYaMa( )) 35 ))
madhukära-mahä-sarpau
loke 'smin no gurüttamau
vairägyaà paritoñaà ca
präptä yac-chikñayä vayam
SYNONYMS
madhukära—bees that go from flower to flower to collect honey;
mahä-sarpau—the big snake (the python, which does not move from one place
to another); loke—in the world; asmin—this; naù—our; guru—spiritual
masters; uttamau—first-class; vairägyam—renunciation; paritoñam ca—and
satisfaction; präptäù—obtained; yat-çikñayä—by whose instruction;
vayam—we.
TRANSLATION
The bee and the python are two excellent spiritual masters who give us
exemplary instructions regarding how to be satisfied by collecting only a little
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
893
and how to stay in one place and not move.
TEXT 36
ivraGa" SavRk-aMae>Ya" iXai+aTaae Mae MaDauv]TaaTa( )
k*-C^\aá& MaDauvd( ivta& hTvaPYaNYaae hreTPaiTaMa( )) 36 ))
virägaù sarva-kämebhyaù
çikñito me madhu-vratät
kåcchräptaà madhuvad vittaà
hatväpy anyo haret patim
SYNONYMS
virägaù—detachment; sarva-kämebhyaù—from all material desires;
çikñitaù—has been taught; me—unto me; madhu-vratät—from the bumblebee;
kåcchra—with great difficulties; äptam—acquired; madhu-vat—as good as
honey ("money is honey"); vittam—money; hatvä—killing; api—even;
anyaù—another; haret—takes away; patim—the owner.
TRANSLATION
From the bumblebee I have learned to be unattached to accumulating money,
for although money is as good as honey, anyone can kill its owner and take it
away.
PURPORT
The honey gathered in the comb is taken away by force. Therefore one who
accumulates money should realize that he may be harassed by the government
or by thieves or even killed by enemies. Especially in this age of Kali-yuga, it is
said that instead of protecting the money of the citizens, the government itself
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
894
will take away the money with the force of law. The learned brähmaëa had
therefore decided that he should not accumulate any money. One should own
as much as he immediately needs. There is no need to keep a big balance at
hand, along with the fear that it may be plundered by the government or by
thieves.
TEXT 37
ANaqh" PairTauíaTMaa Yad*C^aePaNaTaadhMa( )
Naae ceC^Yae bûhaiNa Mahaihirv SatvvaNa( )) 37 ))
anéhaù parituñöätmä
yadåcchopanatäd aham
no cec chaye bahv-ahäni
mahähir iva sattvavän
SYNONYMS
anéhaù—with no desire to possess more; parituñöa—very satisfied; ätmä—self;
yadåcchä—in its own way, without endeavor; upanatät—by things brought in
by possession; aham—I; no—not; cet—if so; çaye—I lie down; bahu—many;
ahäni—days; mahä-ahiù—a python; iva—like; sattva-vän—enduring.
TRANSLATION
I do not endeavor to get anything, but am satisfied with whatever is achieved
in its own way. If I do not get anything, I am patient and unagitated like a
python and lie down in this way for many days.
PURPORT
One should learn detachment from the bumblebees, for they collect drops
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
895
of honey here and there and keep it in their honeycomb, but then someone
comes and by force takes all the honey away, leaving the bumblebees with
nothing. Therefore one should learn from the bumblebee not to keep more
money than one needs. Similarly, one should learn from the python to stay in
one place for many, many days without food and then eat only if something
comes in its own way. Thus the learned brähmaëa gave instructions gained
from two creatures, namely the bumblebee and the python.
TEXT 38
KvicdLPa& Kvicd( >aUir >auÅe_à& SvaÜSvadu va )
Kvicd( >aUirGau<aaePaeTa& Gau<ahqNaMauTa KvicTa( )
é[ÖYaaePaôTa& KvaiPa k-daicNMaaNaviJaRTaMa( )
>auÅe >au¤-aQa k-iSMa&iêd( idvaNa¢&- Yad*C^Yaa )) 38 ))
kvacid alpaà kvacid bhüri
bhuïje 'nnaà svädv asvädu vä
kvacid bhüri guëopetaà
guëa-hénam uta kvacit
çraddhayopahåtaà kväpi
kadäcin mäna-varjitam
bhuïje bhuktvätha kasmiàç cid
divä naktaà yadåcchayä
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; alpam—very little; kvacit—sometimes; bhüri—a great
quantity; bhuïje—I eat; annam—food; svädu—palatable; asvädu—stale;
vä—either; kvacit—sometimes; bhüri—great; guëa-upetam—a nice flavor;
guëa-hénam—without flavor; uta—whether; kvacit—sometimes;
çraddhayä—respectfully; upahåtam—brought by someone; kväpi—sometimes;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
896
kadäcit—sometimes; mäna-varjitam—offered without respect; bhuïje—I eat;
bhuktvä—after eating; atha—as such; kasmin cit—sometimes, in some place;
divä—during the daytime; naktam—or at night; yadåcchayä—as it is available.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes I eat a very small quantity and sometimes a great quantity.
Sometimes the food is very palatable, and sometimes it is stale. Sometimes
prasäda is offered with great respect, and sometimes food is given neglectfully.
Sometimes I eat during the day and sometimes at night. Thus I eat what is
easily available.
TEXT 39
+aaEMa& dukU-l/MaiJaNa& cqr& vLk-l/Maev va )
vSae_NYadiPa SaMPa[aá& idí>auk(- TauíDaqrhMa( )) 39 ))
kñaumaà dukülam ajinaà
céraà valkalam eva vä
vase 'nyad api sampräptaà
diñöa-bhuk tuñöa-dhér aham
SYNONYMS
kñaumam—clothing made of linen; dukülam—silk or cotton;
ajinam—deerskin; céram—loincloth; valkalam—bark; eva—as it is; vä—either;
vase—I put on; anyat—something else; api—although; sampräptam—as
available; diñöa-bhuk—because of destiny; tuñöa—satisfied; dhéù—mind;
aham—I am.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
897
TRANSLATION
To cover my body I use whatever is available, whether it be linen, silk,
cotton, bark or deerskin, according to my destiny, and I am fully satisfied and
unagitated.
TEXT 40
KvicC^Yae DaraePaSQae Ta*<aPa<aaRXMa>aSMaSau )
KvicTa( Pa[aSaadPaYaRªe k-iXaPaaE va PareC^Yaa )) 40 ))
kvacic chaye dharopasthe
tåëa-parëäçma-bhasmasu
kvacit präsäda-paryaìke
kaçipau vä parecchayä
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; çaye—I lie down; dhara-upasthe—on the surface of the
earth; tåëa—on grass; parëa—leaves; açma—stone; bhasmasu—or a pile of
ashes; kvacit—sometimes; präsäda—in palaces; paryaìke—on a first-class
bedstead; kaçipau—on a pillow; vä—either; para—of another; icchayä—by the
wish.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes I lie on the surface of the earth, sometimes on leaves, grass or
stone, sometimes on a pile of ashes, or sometimes, by the will of others, in a
palace on a first-class bed with pillows.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
898
PURPORT
The learned brähmaëa's description indicates different types of births, for
one lies down according to one's body. Sometimes one takes birth as an animal
and sometimes as a king. When he takes birth as an animal he must lie down
on the ground, and when he takes birth as a king or a very rich man he is
allowed to lie in first-class rooms in huge palaces decorated with beds and
other furniture. Such facilities are not available, however, at the sweet will of
the living entity; rather, they are available by the supreme will (parecchayä), or
by the arrangement of mäyä. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (18.61):
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of
the material energy." The living entity, according to his material desires,
receives different types of bodies, which are nothing but machines offered by
material nature according to the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
By the will of the Supreme, one must take different bodies with different
means for lying down.
TEXT 41
KvicTa( òaTaae_Nauil/áa(r)" SauvaSaa" óGVYal/x(k*-Ta" )
rQae>aaìEêre KvaiPa idGvaSaa Ga]hvd( iv>aae )) 41 ))
kvacit snäto 'nuliptäìgaù
suväsäù sragvy alaìkåtaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
899
rathebhäçvaiç care kväpi
dig-väsä grahavad vibho
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; snätaù—bathing very nicely; anulipta-aìgaù—with
sandalwood pulp smeared all over the body; su-väsäù—dressing with very nice
garments; sragvé—decorated with garlands of flowers; alaìkåtaù—bedecked
with various types of ornaments; ratha—on a chariot; ibha—on an elephant;
açvaiù—or on the back of a horse; care—I wander; kväpi—sometimes;
dik-väsäù—completely naked; graha-vat—as if haunted by a ghost; vibho—O
lord.
TRANSLATION
O my lord, sometimes I bathe myself very nicely, smear sandalwood pulp all
over my body, put on a flower garland, and dress in fine garments and
ornaments. Then I travel like a king on the back of an elephant or on a chariot
or horse. Sometimes, however, I travel naked, like a person haunted by a ghost.
TEXT 42
Naah& iNaNde Na c STaaEiMa Sv>aavivzMa& JaNaMa( )
WTaeza& é[eYa AaXaaSae oTaEk-aTMYa& MahaTMaiNa )) 42 ))
nähaà ninde na ca staumi
sva-bhäva-viñamaà janam
eteñäà çreya äçäse
utaikätmyaà mahätmani
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
900
na—not; aham—I; ninde—blaspheme; na—nor; ca—also; staumi—praise;
sva-bhäva—whose nature; viñamam—contradictory; janam—a living entity or
human being; eteñäm—of all of them; çreyaù—the ultimate benefit; äçäse—I
pray for; uta—indeed; aikätmyam—oneness; mahä-ätmani—in the Supersoul,
the Parabrahman (Kåñëa).
TRANSLATION
Different people are of different mentalities. Therefore it is not my business
either to praise them or to blaspheme them. I only desire their welfare, hoping
that they will agree to become one with the Supersoul, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Kåñëa.
PURPORT
As soon as one comes to the platform of bhakti-yoga, one understands fully
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, is the goal of life (väsudevaù
samam iti sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù). This is the instruction of all the Vedic
literature (vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15], sarva dharmän
parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]). There is no use in praising
someone for material qualifications or blaspheming him for material
disqualifications. In the material world, good and bad have no meaning
because if one is good he may be elevated to a higher planetary system and if
one is bad he may be degraded to the lower planetary systems. People of
different mentalities are sometimes elevated and sometimes degraded, but this
is not the goal of life. Rather, the goal of life is to become free from elevation
and degradation and take to Kåñëa consciousness. Therefore a saintly person
does not discriminate between that which is supposedly good and supposedly
bad; rather, he desires for everyone to be happy in Kåñëa consciousness, which
is the ultimate goal of life.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
901
TEXT 43
ivk-LPa& JauhuYaaiÀtaaE Taa& MaNaSYaQaRiv>a]Mae )
MaNaae vEk-airke- huTva Ta& MaaYaaYaa& JauhaeTYaNau )) 43 ))
vikalpaà juhuyäc cittau
täà manasy artha-vibhrame
mano vaikärike hutvä
taà mäyäyäà juhoty anu
SYNONYMS
vikalpam—discrimination (between good and bad, one person and another,
one nation and another, and all similar discrimination); juhuyät—one should
offer as oblations; cittau—in the fire of consciousness; täm—that
consciousness; manasi—in the mind; artha-vibhrame—the root of all
acceptance and rejection; manaù—that mind; vaikärike—in false ego,
identification of oneself with matter; hutvä—offering as oblations; tam—this
false ego; mäyäyäm—in the total material energy; juhoti—offers as oblations;
anu—following this principle.
TRANSLATION
The mental concoction of discrimination between good and bad should be
accepted as one unit and then invested in the mind, which should then be
invested in the false ego. The false ego should be invested in the total material
energy. This is the process of fighting false discrimination.
PURPORT
This verse describes how a yogé can become free from material affection.
Because of material attraction, a karmé cannot see himself. Jïänés can
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
902
discriminate between matter and spirit, but the yogés, the best of whom are the
bhakti-yogés, want to return home, back to Godhead. The karmés are
completely in illusion, the jïänés are neither in illusion nor in positive
knowledge, but the yogés, especially the bhakti-yogés, are completely on the
spiritual platform. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (14.26):
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down under any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman." Thus a devotee's position is secure. A devotee is at
once elevated to the spiritual platform. Others, such as jïänés and haöha-yogés,
can only gradually ascend to the spiritual platform by nullifying their material
discrimination on the platform of psychology and nullifying the false ego, by
which one thinks, "I am this body, a product of matter." One must merge the
false ego into the total material energy and merge the total material energy
into the supreme energetic. This is the process of becoming free from material
attraction.
TEXT 44
AaTMaaNau>aUTaaE Taa& MaaYaa& JauhuYaaTa( SaTYad*x( MauiNa" )
TaTaae iNarqhae ivrMaeTa( SvaNau>aUTYaaTMaiNa iSQaTa" )) 44 ))
ätmänubhütau täà mäyäà
juhuyät satya-dåì muniù
tato nirého viramet
svänubhüty-ätmani sthitaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
903
SYNONYMS
ätma-anubhütau—unto self-realization; täm—that; mäyäm—the false ego of
material existence; juhuyät—should offer as an oblation; satya-dåk—one who
has actually realized the ultimate truth; muniù—such a thoughtful person;
tataù—because of this self-realization; niréhaù—without material desires;
viramet—one must completely retire from material activities;
sva-anubhüti-ätmani—in self-realization; sthitaù—thus being situated.
TRANSLATION
A learned, thoughtful person must realize that material existence is illusion.
This is possible only by self-realization. A self-realized person, who has actually
seen the truth, should retire from all material activities, being situated in
self-realization.
PURPORT
By an analytical study of the entire constitution of the body, one can surely
come to the conclusion that the soul is different from all the body's material
constituents, such as earth, water, fire and air. Thus the difference between
the body and soul can be realized by a person who is thoughtful (manéñé or
muni), and after this realization of the individual spirit soul one can very easily
understand the supreme spirit soul. If one thus realizes that the individual soul
is subordinate to the supreme spirit soul, he achieves self-realization. As
explained in the Thirteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä, there are two souls
within the body. The body is called kñetra, and there are two kñetra jïas, or
occupants of the body, namely the Supersoul (Paramätmä) and the individual
soul. The Supersoul and the individual soul are like two birds sitting on the
same tree (the material body). One bird, the individual, forgetful bird, is eating
the fruit of the tree, not caring for the instructions of the other bird, which is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
904
only a witness to the activities of the first bird, who is his friend. When the
forgetful bird comes to understand the supreme friend who is always with him
and trying to give him guidance in different bodies, he takes shelter at the
lotus feet of that supreme bird. As explained in the yoga process,
dhyänävasthita-tad-gatena manasä paçyanti yaà yoginaù [SB 12.13.1]. When one
actually becomes a perfect yogé, by meditation he can see the supreme friend
and surrender unto Him. This is the beginning of bhakti-yoga, or actual life in
Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 45
SvaTMav*ta& MaYaeTQa& Tae SauGauáMaiPa vi<aRTaMa( )
VYaPaeTa& l/aek-Xaaña>Yaa& >avaNa( ih >aGavTPar" )) 45 ))
svätma-våttaà mayetthaà te
suguptam api varëitam
vyapetaà loka-çästräbhyäà
bhavän hi bhagavat-paraù
SYNONYMS
sva-ätma-våttam—the information of the history of self-realization; mayä—by
me; ittham—in this way; te—unto you; su-guptam—extremely confidential;
api—although; varëitam—explained; vyapetam—without;
loka-çästräbhyäm—the opinion of the common man or common literatures;
bhavän—your good self; hi—indeed; bhagavat-paraù—having fully realized the
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja, you are certainly a self-realized soul and a devotee of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
905
Supreme Lord. You do not care for public opinion or so-called scriptures. For
this reason I have described to you without hesitation the history of my
self-realization.
PURPORT
A person who is actually a devotee of Kåñëa does not care about so-called
public opinion and Vedic or philosophical literatures. Prahläda Mahäräja, who
is such a devotee, always defied the false instructions of his father and the
so-called teachers who were appointed to teach him. Instead, he simply
followed the instructions of Närada Muni, his guru, and thus he always
remained a stalwart devotee. This is the nature of an intelligent devotee. The
Çrémad-Bhägavatam instructs, yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair yajanti hi sumedhasaù
[SB 11.5.32]. One who is actually very intelligent must join the Kåñëa
consciousness movement, realizing his own self as an eternal servant of Kåñëa,
and thus practice constant chanting of the holy name of the Lord—Hare
Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma
Räma, Hare Hare.
TEXT 46
é[qNaard ovac
DaMa| PaarMah&SYa& vE MauNae" é[uTvaSaureìr" )
PaUJaiYaTva TaTa" Pa[qTa AaMaN}Ya Pa[YaYaaE Ga*hMa( )) 46 ))
çré-närada uväca
dharmaà päramahaàsyaà vai
muneù çrutväsureçvaraù
püjayitvä tataù préta
ämantrya prayayau gåham
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
906
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; dharmam—the occupational duty;
päramahaàsyam—of the paramahaàsas, the most perfect human beings;
vai—indeed; muneù—from the saintly person; çrutvä—thus hearing;
asura-éçvaraù—the King of the asuras, Prahläda Mahäräja; püjayitvä—by
worshiping the saintly person; tataù—thereafter; prétaù—being very pleased;
ämantrya—taking permission; prayayau—left that place; gåham—for his
home.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: After Prahläda Mahäräja, the King of the demons,
heard these instructions from the saint, he understood the occupational duties
of a perfect person [paramahaàsa]. Thus he duly worshiped the saint, took his
permission and then left for his own home.
PURPORT
As quoted in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 8.128), Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu said:
kibä vipra, kibä nyäsé, çüdra kene naya
yei kåñëa-tattva-vettä sei 'guru' haya
A guru, or spiritual master, can be anyone who is well conversant with the
science of Kåñëa. Therefore although Prahläda Mahäräja was a gåhastha ruling
over the demons, he was a paramahaàsa, the best of human beings, and thus
he is our guru. In the list of gurus, or authorities, Prahläda Mahäräja's name is
therefore mentioned:
svayambhür näradaù çambhuù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
907
kumäraù kapilo manuù
prahlädo janako bhéñmo
balir vaiyäsakir vayam
The conclusion is that a paramahaàsa is an exalted devotee (bhagavat-priya).
Such a paramahaàsa may be in any stage of life—brahmacäri, gåhastha,
vänaprastha or sannyäsa—and be equally liberated and exalted.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Thirteenth Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Behavior of a Perfect Person."
14. Ideal Family Life
This chapter describes the occupational duties of the householder according
to the time, the country and the performer. When Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja
became very much inquisitive about the occupational duties for the
householder, Närada Muni advised him that a gåhastha's first duty is to be fully
dependent on Väsudeva, Kåñëa, and to try to satisfy Him in all respects by
executing one's prescribed devotional service. This devotional service will
depend on the instructions of authorities and the association of devotees who
are actually engaged in devotional service. The beginning of devotional service
is çravaëam, or hearing. One must hear from the mouths of realized souls. In
this way the gåhastha's attraction to his wife and children will gradually be
reduced.
As for the maintenance of his family, a gåhastha, while earning what he
requires for his living, must be very conscientious and must not undergo
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
908
extraordinary endeavor simply to accumulate money and unnecessarily
increase in material comforts. Although a gåhastha should externally be very
active in earning his livelihood, he should internally be situated as a fully
self-realized person, without attachment for material gains. His dealings with
family members or friends should be performed simply to fulfill their purpose;
one should not be extravagantly engaged in this way. Instructions from family
members and society should be accepted superficially, but in essence the
gåhastha should be engaged in occupational duties advised by the spiritual
master and çästra. Specifically a gåhastha should engage in agricultural
activities to earn money. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (18.44),
kåñi-go-rakñya-väëijyam-agriculture, cow protection and trade-are special
duties of gåhasthas. If by chance or by the grace of the Lord more money comes,
it should be properly engaged for the Kåñëa consciousness movement. One
should not be eager to earn more money simply for sensual pleasure. A gåhastha
should always remember that one who is endeavoring to accumulate more
money than necessary is to be considered a thief and is punishable by the laws
of nature.
A gåhastha should be very much affectionate toward lower animals, birds
and bees, treating them exactly like his own children. A gåhastha should not
indulge in killing animals or birds for sense gratification. He should provide
the necessities of life even to the dogs and the lowest creatures and should not
exploit others for sense gratification. Factually, according to the instructions
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, every gåhastha is a great communist who provides the
means of living for everyone. Whatever a gåhastha may possess he should
equally distribute to all living entities, without discrimination. The best
process is to distribute prasäda.
A gåhastha should not be very much attached to his wife; he should engage
even his own wife in serving a guest with all attention. Whatever money a
gåhastha accumulates by the grace of God he should spend in five activities,
namely worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, receiving Vaiñëavas
and saintly persons, distributing prasäda to the general public and to all living
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
909
entities, offering prasäda to his forefathers, and also offering prasäda to his
own self. Gåhasthas should always be ready to worship everyone as mentioned
above. The gåhastha should not eat anything not offered to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. As it is said in the Bhagavad-gétä (3.13),
yajïa-çiñöäçinaù santo mucyante sarva-kilbiñaiù: "The devotees of the Lord are
released from all kinds of sins because they eat food that is offered first for
sacrifice." The gåhastha should also visit the holy places of pilgrimage
mentioned in the puräëas. In this way he should fully engage in worshiping the
Supreme Personality of Godhead for the benefit of his family, his society, his
country, and humanity at large.
TEXT 1
é[qYauiDaiïr ovac
Ga*hSQa WTaa& Padvq& iviDaNaa YaeNa caÅSaa )
YaaYaaÕev‰ze b]Uih Maad*Xaae Ga*hMaU!Daq" )) 1 ))
çré-yudhiñöhira uväca
gåhastha etäà padavéà
vidhinä yena cäïjasä
yäyäd deva-åñe brühi
mädåço gåha-müòha-dhéù
SYNONYMS
çré-yudhiñöhiraù uväca—Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja said; gåhasthaù—a person living
with his family; etäm—this (the process mentioned in the previous chapter);
padavém—position of liberation; vidhinä—according to the instructions of
Vedic scripture; yena—by which; ca—also; aïjasä—easily; yäyät—may get;
deva-åñe—O great sage among the demigods; brühi—kindly explain;
mädåçaù—such as me; gåha-müòha-dhéù—completely ignorant of the goal of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
910
life.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira inquired from Närada Muni: O my lord, O great sage,
kindly explain how we who are staying at home without knowledge of the goal
of life may also easily attain liberation, according to the instructions of the
Vedas.
PURPORT
In the previous chapters the great sage Närada has explained how a
brahmacäré, a vänaprastha and a sannyäsé should act. He first explained the
dealings of a brahmacäré, vänaprastha and sannyäsé because these three
äçramas, or statuses of life, are extremely important for fulfillment of the goal
of life. One should note that in the brahmacäré-äçrama, vänaprastha-äçrama
and sannyäsa-äçrama there is no scope for sex life, whereas sex is allowed in
gåhastha life under regulations. Närada Muni, therefore, first described
brahmacarya, vänaprastha and sannyäsa because he wanted to stress that sex is
not at all necessary, although one who absolutely requires it is allowed to enter
gåhastha life, or household life, which is also regulated by the çästras and guru.
Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja could understand all this. Therefore, as a gåhastha, he
presented himself as gåha-müòha-dhéù, one who is completely ignorant of the
goal of life. A person who remains a householder in family life is certainly
ignorant of life's goal; he is not very much advanced in intelligence. As soon as
possible, one should give up his so-called comfortable life at home and prepare
to undergo austerity, or tapasya. Tapo divyaà putrakä [SB 5.5.1]. According to
the instructions given by Åñabhadeva to His sons, we should not create a
so-called comfortable situation, but must prepare to undergo austerity. This is
how a human being should actually live to fulfill life's ultimate goal.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
911
TEXT 2
é[qNaard ovac
Ga*heZvviSQaTaae raJaiN§-Yaa" ku-vRNYaQaaeicTaa" )
vaSaudevaPaR<a& Saa+aaduPaaSaqTa MahaMauNaqNa( )) 2 ))
çré-närada uväca
gåheñv avasthito räjan
kriyäù kurvan yathocitäù
väsudevärpaëaà säkñäd
upäséta mahä-munén
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni replied; gåheñu—at home;
avasthitaù—staying (a householder generally stays home with his wife and
children); räjan—O King; kriyäù—activities; kurvan—performing;
yathocitäù—suitable (as instructed by the guru and çästra); väsudeva—unto
Lord Väsudeva; arpaëam—dedicating; säkñät—directly; upäséta—should
worship; mahä-munén—the great devotees.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni replied: My dear King, those who stay at home as
householders must act to earn their livelihood, and instead of trying to enjoy
the results of their work themselves, they should offer these results to Kåñëa,
Väsudeva. How to satisfy Väsudeva in this life can be perfectly understood
through the association of great devotees of the Lord.
PURPORT
The format for gåhastha life should be dedication to the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
912
Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gétä (6.1) it is said:
anäçritaù karma-phalaà
käryaà karma karoti yaù
sa sannyäsé ca yogé ca
na niragnir na cäkriyaù
"One who is unattached to the fruits of his work and who works as he is
obligated is in the renounced order of life, and he is the true mystic, not he
who lights no fire and performs no work." Whether one acts as a brahmacäré,
gåhastha, vänaprastha or sannyäsé, he must act only for the satisfaction of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva-Kåñëa, the son of Vasudeva. This
should be the principle for everyone's life. Närada Muni has already described
the principles of life for a brahmacäré, vänaprastha and sannyäsé, and now he is
describing how a gåhastha should live. The basic principle is to satisfy the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The science of satisfying the Supreme Lord can be learned as described
here: säkñäd upäséta mahä-munén. The word mahä-munén refers to great saintly
persons or devotees. Saintly persons are generally known as munis, or
thoughtful philosophers concerned with transcendental subject matters, and
mahä-munén refers to those who have not only thoroughly studied the goal of
life but who are actually engaged in satisfying the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Väsudeva. These persons are known as devotees. Unless one
associates with devotees, one cannot learn the science of väsudevärpaëa, or
dedicating one's life to Väsudeva, Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
In India the principles of this science were followed strictly. Even fifty
years ago, I saw that in the villages of Bengal and the suburbs of Calcutta,
people engaged in hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam daily when all their activities
ended, or at least in the evening before going to bed. Everyone would hear the
Bhägavatam. Bhägavata classes were held in every village, and thus people had
the advantage of hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which describes everything
about the aim of life—liberation or salvation. This will be clearly explained in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
913
the next verses.
TEXTS 3-4
é*<vN>aGavTaae_>aq+<aMavTaark-QaaMa*TaMa( )
é[ÕDaaNaae YaQaak-al/MauPaXaaNTaJaNaav*Ta" )) 3 ))
SaTSa(r)aC^NakE-" Sa(r)MaaTMaJaaYaaTMaJaaidzu )
ivMauÄeNMauCYaMaaNaezu SvYa& SvPanvduiTQaTa" )) 4 ))
çåëvan bhagavato 'bhékñëam
avatära-kathämåtam
çraddadhäno yathä-kälam
upaçänta-janävåtaù
sat-saìgäc chanakaiù saìgam
ätma-jäyätmajädiñu
vimuïcen mucyamäneñu
svayaà svapnavad utthitaù
SYNONYMS
çåëvan—hearing; bhagavataù—of the Lord; abhékñëam—always; avatära—of
the incarnations; kathä—narrations; amåtam—the nectar;
çraddadhänaù—being very faithful in hearing about the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; yathä-kälam—according to time (generally a gåhastha can find
time in the evening or in the afternoon); upaçänta—completely relieved of
material activities; jana—by persons; ävåtaù—being surrounded;
sat-saìgät—from such good association; çanakaiù—gradually;
saìgam—association; ätma—in the body; jäyä—wife; ätma-ja-ädiñu—as well
as in children; vimuïcet—one should get free from the attachment for such
association; mucyamäneñu—being severed (from him); svayam—personally;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
914
svapna-vat—like a dream; utthitaù—awakened.
TRANSLATION
A gåhastha must associate again and again with saintly persons, and with
great respect he must hear the nectar of the activities of the Supreme Lord and
His incarnations as these activities are described in Çrémad-Bhägavatam and
other Puräëas. Thus one should gradually become detached from affection for
his wife and children, exactly like a man awakening from a dream.
PURPORT
The Kåñëa consciousness movement has been established to give gåhasthas
all over the world an opportunity to hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam and
Bhagavad-gétä specifically. The process, as described in many ways, is one of
hearing and chanting (çåëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù [SB
1.2.17]). Everyone, especially the gåhasthas, who are müòha-dhé, ignorant about
the goal of life, should be given opportunities to hear about Kåñëa. Simply by
hearing, by attending lectures in the different centers of the Kåñëa
consciousness movement, where topics of Kåñëa from Bhagavad-gétä and
Çrémad-Bhägavatam are discussed, they will be purified of their sinful
inclination for constant indulgence in illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and
gambling, which have all become prominent in modern days. Thus they can be
raised to the status of light. Puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù. Simply by joining the
kértana—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare
Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare—and by hearing about Kåñëa from
Bhagavad-gétä, one must be purified, especially if he also takes prasäda. This is
all going on in the Kåñëa consciousness movement.
Another specific description here is çåëvan bhagavato 'bhékñëam
avatära-kathämåtam. It is not that because one has once finished Bhagavad-gétä
he should not hear it again. The word abhékñëam is very important. We should
hear again and again. There is no question of stopping: even if one has read
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
915
these topics many times, he should go on reading again and again because
bhagavat-kathä, the words spoken by Kåñëa and spoken by Kåñëa's devotees
about Kåñëa, are amåtam, nectar. The more one drinks this amåtam, the more
he advances in his eternal life.
The human form of life is meant for liberation, but unfortunately, due to
the influence of Kali-yuga, every day the gåhasthas are working hard like asses.
Early in the morning they rise and travel even a hundred miles away to earn
bread. Especially in the Western countries, I have seen that people awaken at
five o'clock to go to offices and factories to earn their livelihood. People in
Calcutta and Bombay also do this every day. They work very hard in the office
or factory, and again they spend three or four hours in transportation
returning home. Then they retire at ten o'clock and again rise early in the
morning to go to their offices and factories. This kind of hard labor is
described in the çästras as the life of pigs and stool-eaters. Näyaà deho
deha-bhäjäà nåloke kañöän kämän arhate vid-bhujäà ye: [SB 5.5.1] "Of all living
entities who have accepted material bodies in this world, one who has been
awarded this human form should not work hard day and night simply for sense
gratification, which is available even for dogs and hogs that eat stool." (SB
5.5.1) One must find some time for hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam and
Bhagavad-gétä. This is Vedic culture. One should work eight hours at the most
to earn his livelihood, and either in the afternoon or in the evening a
householder should associate with devotees to hear about the incarnations of
Kåñëa and His activities and thus be gradually liberated from the clutches of
mäyä. However, instead of finding time to hear about Kåñëa, the householders,
after working hard in offices and factories, find time to go to a restaurant or a
club where instead of hearing about Kåñëa and His activities they are very
much pleased to hear about the political activities of demons and nondevotees
and to enjoy sex, wine, women and meat and in this way waste their time. This
is not gåhastha life, but demoniac life. The Kåñëa consciousness movement,
however, with its centers all over the world, gives such fallen and condemned
persons an opportunity to hear about Kåñëa.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
916
In a dream we form a society of friendship and love, and when we awaken
we see that it has ceased to exist. Similarly, one's gross society, family and love
are also a dream, and this dream will be over as soon as one dies. Therefore,
whether one is dreaming in a subtle way or a gross way, these dreams are all
false and temporary. One's real business is to understand that one is soul (ahaà
brahmäsmi(38)) and that his activities should therefore be different. Then one
can be happy.
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
"One who is transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman
and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is
equally disposed toward all living entities. In that state he attains pure
devotional service unto Me." (Bg. 18.54) One who is engaged in devotional
service can very easily be liberated from the dream of materialistic life.
TEXT 5
YaavdQaRMauPaaSaqNaae dehe Gaehe c Pai<@Ta" )
ivr¢-ae r¢-vTa( Ta}a Na*l/aeke- NarTaa& NYaSaeTa( )) 5 ))
yävad-artham upäséno
dehe gehe ca paëòitaù
virakto raktavat tatra
nå-loke naratäà nyaset
SYNONYMS
yävat-artham—as much endeavor for one's livelihood as necessary;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
917
upäsénaù—earning; dehe—in the body; gehe—in family matters; ca—also;
paëòitaù—one who is learned; viraktaù—not at all attached; rakta-vat—as if
very much attached; tatra—in this; nå-loke—human society; naratäm—the
human form of life; nyaset—one should depict.
TRANSLATION
While working to earn his livelihood as much as necessary to maintain body
and soul together, one who is actually learned should live in human society
unattached to family affairs, although externally appearing very much attached.
PURPORT
This is the picture of ideal family life. When Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
asked Rämänanda Räya about the goal of life, Rämänanda Räya described it in
different ways, according to the recommendations of the revealed scriptures,
and finally Çré Rämänanda Räya explained that one may stay in his own
position, whether as a brähmaëa, a çüdra, a sannyäsé or whatever, but one must
try to inquire about life's goal (athäto brahma jijïäsä). This is the proper
utilization of the human form of life. When one misuses the gift of the human
form by unnecessarily indulging in the animal propensities of eating, sleeping,
mating and defending and does not try to get out of the clutches of mäyä,
which subjects one to repeated birth, death, old age and disease, one is again
punished by being forced to descend to the lower species and undergo
evolution according to the laws of nature. prakåteù kriyamäëäni guëaiù
karmäëi sarvaçaù [Bg. 3.27]. Being completely under the grip of material
nature, the living entity must evolve again from the lower species to the higher
species until he at last returns to human life and gets the chance to be freed
from the material clutches. A wise man, however, learns from the çästras and
guru that we living entities are all eternal but are put into troublesome
conditions because of associating with different modes under the laws of
material nature. He therefore concludes that in the human form of life he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
918
should not endeavor for unnecessary necessities, but should live a very simple
life, just maintaining body and soul together. Certainly one requires some
means of livelihood, and according to one's varëa and äçrama this means of
livelihood is prescribed in the çästras. One should be satisfied with this.
Therefore, instead of hankering for more and more money, a sincere devotee
of the Lord tries to invent some ways to earn his livelihood, and when he does
so Kåñëa helps him. Earning one's livelihood, therefore, is not a problem. The
real problem is how to get free from the bondage of birth, death and old age.
Attaining this freedom, and not inventing unnecessary necessities, is the basic
principle of Vedic civilization. One should be satisfied with whatever means of
life comes automatically. The modern materialistic civilization is just the
opposite of the ideal civilization. Every day the so-called leaders of modern
society invent something contributing to a cumbersome way of life that
implicates people more and more in the cycle of birth, death, old age and
disease.
TEXT 6
jaTaYa" iPaTaraE Pau}aa >a]aTar" Sauôdae_Pare )
Yad( vdiNTa YaidC^iNTa caNauMaaedeTa iNaMaRMa" )) 6 ))
jïätayaù pitarau puträ
bhrätaraù suhådo 'pare
yad vadanti yad icchanti
cänumodeta nirmamaù
SYNONYMS
jïätayaù—relatives, family members; pitarau—the father and mother;
puträù—children; bhrätaraù—brothers; suhådaù—friends; apare—and others;
yat—whatever; vadanti—they suggest (in regard to one's means of livelihood);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
919
yat—whatever; icchanti—they wish; ca—and; anumodeta—he should agree;
nirmamaù—but without taking them seriously.
TRANSLATION
An intelligent man in human society should make his own program of
activities very simple. If there are suggestions from his friends, children,
parents, brothers or anyone else, he should externally agree, saying, "Yes, that
is all right," but internally he should be determined not to create a cumbersome
life in which the purpose of life will not be fulfilled.
TEXT 7
idVYa& >aaEMa& caNTarq+a& ivtaMaCYauTaiNaiMaRTaMa( )) 7 ))
TaTa( SavRMauPaYauÅaNa WTaTa( ku-YaaRTa( SvTaae buDa"
divyaà bhaumaà cäntarékñaà
vittam acyuta-nirmitam
tat sarvam upayuïjäna
etat kuryät svato budhaù
SYNONYMS
divyam—easily obtained because of rainfall from the sky; bhaumam—obtained
from the mines and the sea; ca—and; äntarékñam—obtained by chance;
vittam—all property; acyuta-nirmitam—created by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tat—those things; sarvam—all; upayuïjäna—utilizing (for all
human society or all living beings); etat—this (maintaining body and soul
together); kuryät—one must do; svataù—obtained of itself, without extra
endeavor; budhaù—the intelligent person.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
920
TRANSLATION
The natural products created by the Supreme Personality of Godhead should
be utilized to maintain the bodies and souls of all living entities. The necessities
of life are of three types: those produced from the sky [from rainfall], from the
earth [from the mines, the seas or the fields], and from the atmosphere [that
which is obtained suddenly and unexpectedly].
PURPORT
We living entities in different forms are all children of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, as confirmed by the Lord in Bhagavad-gétä (14.4):
sarva-yoniñu kaunteya
mürtayaù sambhavanti yäù
täsäà brahma mahad-yonir
ahaà béja-pradaù pitä
"It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kunté, are made
possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-giving father."
The Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, is the father of all living entities in different species
and forms. One who is intelligent can see that all living entities in the
8,400,000 bodily forms are part of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
are His sons. Everything within the material and spiritual worlds is the
property of the Supreme Lord (éçäväsyam idaà sarvam [Éço mantra 1]), and
therefore everything has a relationship with Him. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé says in
this regard:
präpaïcikatayä buddhyä
hari-sambandhi-vastunaù
mumukñubhiù parityägo
vairägyaà phalgu kathyate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
921
"One who rejects anything without knowledge of its relationship to Kåñëa is
incomplete in his renunciation." (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.256) Although
Mäyävädé philosophers say that the material creation is false, actually it is not
false; it is factual, but the idea that everything belongs to human society is
false. Everything belongs to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for
everything is created by Him. All living entities, being the Lord's sons, His
eternal parts and parcels, have the right to use their father's property by
nature's arrangement. As stated in the Upaniñads, tena tyaktena bhuïjéthä mä
gådhaù kasya svid dhanam [Éço mantra 1]. Everyone should be satisfied with the
things allotted him by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; no one should
encroach upon another's rights or property.
In Bhagavad-gétä it is said:
annäd bhavanti bhütäni
parjanyäd anna-sambhavaù
yajïäd bhavati parjanyo
yajïaù karma-samudbhavaù
"All living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from rains. Rains
are produced by performance of yajïa [sacrifice], and yajïa is born of
prescribed duties." (Bg. 3.14) When food grains are sufficiently produced, both
animals and human beings can be nourished without difficulty for their
maintenance. This is nature's arrangement. prakåteù kriyamäëa-ni guëaiù
karmäëi sarvaçaù [Bg. 3.27]. Everyone is acting under the influence of material
nature, and only fools think they can improve upon what God has created.
The householders are specifically responsible for seeing that the laws of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead are maintained, without fighting between
men, communities, societies or nations. Human society should properly utilize
the gifts of God, especially the food grains that grow because of rain falling
from the sky. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, yajïäd bhavati parjanyaù [Bg. 3.14]. So
that rainfall will be regulated, humanity should perform yajïas, sacrifices.
Yajïas were previously performed with offerings of oblations of ghee and food
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
922
grains, but in this age, of course, this is no longer possible, for the production
of ghee and food grains has diminished because of the sinful life of human
society. However, people should take to Kåñëa consciousness and chant the
Hare Kåñëa mantra, as recommended in the çästras (yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair
yajanti hi sumedhasaù [SB 11.5.32]). If people throughout the world take to the
Kåñëa consciousness movement and chant the easy sound vibration of the
transcendental name and fame of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there
will be no scarcity of rainfall; consequently food grains, fruits and flowers will
be properly produced, and all the necessities of life will be easily obtained.
Gåhasthas, or householders, should take the responsibility for organizing such
natural production. It is therefore said, tasyaiva hetoù prayateta kovidaù. An
intelligent person should try to spread Kåñëa consciousness through the
chanting of the holy name of the Lord, and all the necessities of life will
automatically follow.
TEXT 8
Yaavd( i>a]YaeTa Ja#=r& TaavTa( SvTv& ih deihNaaMa( )
AiDak&- Yaae_i>aMaNYaeTa Sa STaeNaae d<@MahRiTa )) 8 ))
yävad bhriyeta jaöharaà
tävat svatvaà hi dehinäm
adhikaà yo 'bhimanyeta
sa steno daëòam arhati
SYNONYMS
yävat—as much as; bhriyeta—may be filled; jaöharam—the stomach;
tävat—that much; svatvam—proprietorship; hi—indeed; dehinäm—of the
living entities; adhikam—more than that; yaù—anyone who;
abhimanyeta—may accept; saù—he; stenaù—a thief; daëòam—punishment;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
923
arhati—deserves.
TRANSLATION
One may claim proprietorship to as much wealth as required to maintain
body and soul together, but one who desires proprietorship over more than that
must be considered a thief, and he deserves to be punished by the laws of
nature.
PURPORT
By God's favor we sometimes get large quantities of food grains or suddenly
receive some contribution or unexpected profit in business. In this way we may
get more money than needed. So, how should that be spent? There is no need
to accumulate money in the bank merely to increase one's bank balance. Such
a mentality is described in Bhagavad-gétä (16.13) as asuric, demoniac.
idam adya mayä labdham
imaà präpsye manoratham
idam astédam api me
bhaviñyati punar dhanam
"The demoniac person thinks, 'So much wealth do I have today, and I will gain
more according to my schemes. So much is mine now, and it will increase in
the future, more and more.' " The asura is concerned with how much wealth he
has in the bank today and how it will increase tomorrow, but unrestricted
accumulation of wealth is not permitted either by the çästra or, in the modern
age, by the government. Actually, if one has more than one requires for his
necessities, the extra money should be spent for Kåñëa. According to the Vedic
civilization, it should all be given to the Kåñëa consciousness movement, as
ordered by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (9.27):
yat karoñi yad açnäsi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
924
yaj juhoñi dadäsi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kuruñva mad-arpaëam
"O son of Kunté, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give
away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done as an
offering unto Me." Gåhasthas should spend extra money only for the Kåñëa
consciousness movement.
The gåhasthas should give contributions for constructing temples of the
Supreme Lord and for preaching of Çrémad Bhagavad-gétä, or Kåñëa
consciousness, all over the world. Çåëvan bhagavato'bhékñëam
avatära-kathämåtam. In the çästras—the puräëas and other Vedic
literatures—there are so many narrations describing the transcendental
activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and everyone should hear
them again and again. For example, even if we read the entire Bhagavad-gétä
every day, all eighteen chapters(39), in each reading we shall find a new
explanation. That is the nature of transcendental literature. The Kåñëa
consciousness movement therefore affords one an opportunity to spend his
extra earnings for the benefit of all human society by expanding Kåñëa
consciousness. In India especially we see hundreds and thousands of temples
that were constructed by the wealthy men of society who did not want to be
called thieves and be punished.
This verse is very important. As stated here, one who accumulates more
money than needed is a thief, and by the laws of nature he will be punished.
One who acquires more money than necessary becomes desirous of enjoying
material comforts more and more. Materialists are inventing so many artificial
necessities, and those who have money, being allured by such artificial
necessities, try to accumulate money to possess more and more. This is the idea
of modern economic development. Everyone is engaged in earning money, and
the money is kept in the bank, which then offers money to the public. In this
cycle of activities, everyone is engaged in getting more and more money, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
925
therefore the ideal goal of human life is being lost. Concisely, it may be said
that everyone is a thief and is liable to be punished. Punishment by the laws of
nature takes place in the cycle of birth and death. No one dies fully satisfied by
the fulfillment of material desires, for that is not possible. Therefore at the
time of one's death one is very sorry, being unable to fulfill his desires. By the
laws of nature one is then offered another body to fulfill his unsatisfied desires,
and upon taking birth again, accepting another material body, one voluntarily
accepts the threefold miseries of life.
TEXT 9
Ma*Gaaeí\%rMak-aR%uSarqSa*P%GaMai+ak-a" )
AaTMaNa" Pau}avTa( PaXYaetaErezaMaNTar& ik-YaTa( )) 9 ))
mågoñöra-khara-markäkhusarésåp
khaga-makñikäù
ätmanaù putravat paçyet
tair eñäm antaraà kiyat
SYNONYMS
måga—deer; uñöra—camels; khara—asses; marka—monkeys; äkhu—mice;
sarésåp—snakes; khaga—birds; makñikäù—flies; ätmanaù—of one's self;
putra-vat—like the sons; paçyet—one should see; taiù—with those sons;
eñäm—of these animals; antaram—difference; kiyat—how little.
TRANSLATION
One should treat animals such as deer, camels, asses, monkeys, mice, snakes,
birds and flies exactly like one's own son. How little difference there actually is
between children and these innocent animals.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
926
PURPORT
One who is in Kåñëa consciousness understands that there is no difference
between the animals and the innocent children in one's home. Even in
ordinary life, it is our practical experience that a household dog or cat is
regarded on the same level as one's children, without any envy. Like children,
the unintelligent animals are also sons of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and therefore a Kåñëa conscious person, even though a householder, should
not discriminate between children and poor animals. Unfortunately, modern
society has devised many means for killing animals in different forms of life.
For example, in the agricultural fields there may be many mice, flies and other
creatures that disturb production, and sometimes they are killed by pesticides.
In this verse, however, such killing is forbidden. Every living entity should be
nourished by the food given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Human
society should not consider itself the only enjoyer of all the properties of God;
rather, men should understand that all the other animals also have a claim to
God's property. In this verse even the snake is mentioned, indicating that a
householder should not be envious even of a snake. If everyone is fully satisfied
by eating food that is a gift from the Lord, why should there be envy between
one living being and another? In modern days people are very much inclined
toward communistic ideas of society, but we do not think that there can be any
better communistic idea than that which is explained in this verse of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Even in the communistic countries the poor animals are
killed without consideration, although they also should have the right to take
their allotted food with which to live.
TEXT 10
i}avGa| NaaiTak*-C^\e<a >aJaeTa Ga*hMaeDYaiPa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
927
YaQaadeXa& YaQaak-al&/ YaavÕEvaePaPaaidTaMa( )) 10 ))
tri-vargaà nätikåcchreëa
bhajeta gåha-medhy api
yathä-deçaà yathä-kälaà
yävad-daivopapäditam
SYNONYMS
tri-vargam—three principles, namely religiosity, economic development and
sense gratification; na—not; ati-kåcchreëa—by very severe endeavor;
bhajeta—should execute; gåha-medhé—a person interested only in family life;
api—although; yathä-deçam—according to the place; yathä-kälam—according
to the time; yävat—as much as; daiva—by the grace of the Lord;
upapäditam—obtained.
TRANSLATION
Even if one is a householder rather than a brahmacäré, a sannyäsé or a
vänaprastha, one should not endeavor very hard for religiosity, economic
development or satisfaction of the senses. Even in householder life, one should
be satisfied to maintain body and soul together with whatever is available with
minimum endeavor, according to place and time, by the grace of the Lord. One
should not engage oneself in ugra-karma.
PURPORT
In human life there are four principles to be fulfilled-dharma, artha, käma
and mokña (religion, economic development, sense gratification, and
liberation). First one should be religious, observing various rules and
regulations, and then one must earn some money for maintenance of his
family and the satisfaction of his senses. The most important ceremony for
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
928
sense gratification is marriage because sexual intercourse is one of the
principal necessities of the material body. Yan maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukhaà
hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. Although sexual intercourse is not a very exalted
requisite in life, both animals and men require some sense gratification
because of material propensities. One should be satisfied with married life and
not expend energy for extra sense gratification or sex life.
As for economic development, the responsibility for this should be
entrusted mainly to the vaiçyas and gåhasthas. Human society should be
divided into varëas and äçramas-brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya, çüdra,
brahmacarya, gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa. Economic development is
necessary for gåhasthas. Brähmaëa gåhasthas should be satisfied with a life of
adhyayana, adhyäpana, yajana and yäjana—being learned scholars, teaching
others to be scholars, learning how to worship the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Viñëu, and also teaching others how to worship Lord Viñëu, or even
the demigods. A brähmaëa should do this without remuneration, but he is
allowed to accept charity from a person whom he teaches how to be a human
being. As for the kñatriyas, they are supposed to be the kings of the land, and
the land should be distributed to the vaiçyas for agricultural activities, cow
protection and trade. Çüdras must work; sometimes they should engage in
occupational duties as cloth manufacturers, weavers, blacksmiths, goldsmiths,
brass-smiths, and so on, or else they should engage in hard labor to produce
food grains.
These are the different occupational duties by which men should earn their
livelihood, and in this way human society should be simple. At the present
moment, however, everyone is engaged in technological advancement, which
is described in Bhagavad-gétä as ugra-karma—extremely severe endeavor. This
ugra-karma is the cause of agitation within the human mind. Men are
engaging in many sinful activities and becoming degraded by opening
slaughterhouses, breweries and cigarette factories, as well as nightclubs and
other establishments for sense enjoyment. In this way they are spoiling their
lives. In all of these activities, of course, householders are involved, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
929
therefore it is advised here, with the use of the word api, that even though one
is a householder, one should not engage himself in severe hardships. One's
means of livelihood should be extremely simple. As for those who are not
gåhasthas—the brahmacärés, vänaprasthas and sannyäsés—they don't have to
do anything but strive for advancement in spiritual life. This means that three
fourths of the entire population should stop sense gratification and simply be
engaged in the advancement of Kåñëa consciousness. Only one fourth of the
population should be gåhastha, and that should be according to laws of
restricted sense gratification. The gåhasthas, vänaprasthas, brahmacärés and
sannyäsés should endeavor together with their total energy to become Kåñëa
conscious. This type of civilization is called daiva-varëäçrama. One of the
objectives of the Kåñëa consciousness movement is to establish this
daiva-varëäçrama, but not to encourage so-called varëäçrama without
scientifically organized endeavor by human society.
TEXT 11
AaìagaaNTae_vSaaiYa>Ya" k-aMaaNSa&iv>aJaed( YaQaa )
APYaek-aMaaTMaNaae dara& Na*<aa& SvTvGa]hae YaTa" )) 11 ))
äçväghänte 'vasäyibhyaù
kämän saàvibhajed yathä
apy ekäm ätmano däräà
nåëäà svatva-graho yataù
SYNONYMS
ä—even up to; çva—the dog; agha—sinful animals or living entities; ante
avasäyibhyaù—unto the caëòälas, the lowest of men (dog-eaters and
hog-eaters); kämän—the necessities of life; saàvibhajet—should divide;
yathä—as much as (deserved); api—even; ekäm—one; ätmanaù—own;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
930
däräm—the wife; nåëäm—of the people in general; svatva-grahaù—the wife is
accepted as being identical with one's self; yataù—because of which.
TRANSLATION
Dogs, fallen persons and untouchables, including caëòälas [dog-eaters],
should all be maintained with their proper necessities, which should be
contributed by the householders. Even one's wife at home, with whom one is
most intimately attached, should be offered for the reception of guests and
people in general.
PURPORT
Although in modern society the dog is accepted as part of one's household
paraphernalia, in the Vedic system of household life the dog is untouchable; as
mentioned here, a dog may be maintained with proper food, but it cannot be
allowed to enter one's house, what to speak of the bedroom. Outcastes or
untouchable caëòälas should also be provided with the necessities for life. The
word used in this connection is yathä, which means "as much as deserved." The
outcastes should not be given money with which to indulge in more than they
need, for otherwise they will misuse it. At the present moment, for example,
low-class men are generally paid quite amply, but instead of using their money
to cultivate knowledge and advance in life, such low-class men use their extra
money for wine-drinking and similar sinful activities. As mentioned in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.13), cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù: there
must be four divisions of human society according to the work and qualities of
men. Men with the lowest qualities cannot do any work that requires higher
intelligence. However, although such a division of men must exist according to
their quality and work, it is suggested herewith that everyone must have the
necessities of life. The communists of the present day are in favor of supplying
the necessities of life to everyone, but they consider only the human beings
and not the lower animals. The Bhägavatam's principles are so broad, however,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
931
that it recommends that the necessities of life be supplied to everyone, man or
animal, regardless of good or bad qualities.
The idea of giving even one's wife to the service of the public is that one's
intimate relationship with his wife, or one's excessive attachment for his wife,
by which one thinks his wife to be his better half or to be identical with
himself, must gradually be given up. As formerly suggested, the idea of
ownership, even of one's family, must be abandoned. The dream of material
life is the cause of bondage in the cycle of birth and death, and therefore one
should give up this dream. Consequently, in the human form of life one's
attachment for his wife should be given up, as suggested herein.
TEXT 12
Jaùad( YadQaeR SvaNa( Pa[a<aaNhNYaad( va iPaTar& GauåMa( )
TaSYaa& SvTv& iñYaa& Jaùad( YaSTaeNa ùiJaTaae iJaTa" )) 12 ))
jahyäd yad-arthe svän präëän
hanyäd vä pitaraà gurum
tasyäà svatvaà striyäà jahyäd
yas tena hy ajito jitaù
SYNONYMS
jahyät—one may give up; yat-arthe—for whom; svän—one's own;
präëän—life; hanyät—one may kill; vä—or; pitaram—the father; gurum—the
teacher or spiritual master; tasyäm—unto her; svatvam—ownership;
striyäm—unto the wife; jahyät—one must give up; yaù—one who (the
Supreme Personality of Godhead); tena—by him; hi—indeed; ajitaù—cannot
be conquered; jitaù—conquered.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
932
TRANSLATION
One so seriously considers one's wife to be his own that he sometimes kills
himself for her or kills others, including even his parents or his spiritual master
or teacher. Therefore if one can give up his attachment to such a wife, he
conquers the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is never conquered by
anyone.
PURPORT
Every husband is too much attached to his wife. Therefore, to give up one's
connection with his wife is extremely difficult, but if one can somehow or
other give it up for the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then
the Lord Himself, although not able to be conquered by anyone, comes very
much under the control of the devotee. And if the Lord is pleased with a
devotee, what is there that is unobtainable? Why should one not give up his
affection for his wife and children and take shelter of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead? Where is the loss of anything material? Householder life means
attachment for one's wife, whereas sannyäsa means detachment from one's
wife and attachment to Kåñëa.
TEXT 13
k*-iMaivÌSMaiNaïaNTa& Kved& TauC^& k-le/vrMa( )
Kv TadqYariTa>aaRYaaR KvaYaMaaTMaa Na>aX^id" )) 13 ))
kåmi-viò-bhasma-niñöhäntaà
kvedaà tucchaà kalevaram
kva tadéya-ratir bhäryä
kväyam ätmä nabhaç-chadiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
933
SYNONYMS
kåmi—insects, germs; viö—stool; bhasma—ashes; niñöha—attachment;
antam—at the end; kva—what is; idam—this (body); tuccham—very
insignificant; kalevaram—material tabernacle; kva—what is that;
tadéya-ratiù—attraction for that body; bhäryä—wife; kva ayam—what is the
value of this body; ätmä—the Supreme Soul; nabhaù-chadiù—all-pervading
like the sky.
TRANSLATION
Through proper deliberation, one should give up attraction to his wife's body
because that body will ultimately be transformed into small insects, stool or
ashes. What is the value of this insignificant body? How much greater is the
Supreme Being, who is all-pervading like the sky?
PURPORT
Here also, the same point is stressed: one should give up attachment for his
wife—or, in other words, for sex life. If one is intelligent, he can think of his
wife's body as nothing but a lump of matter that will ultimately be transformed
into small insects, stool or ashes. In different societies there are different ways
of dealing with the human body at the time of the funeral ceremony. In some
societies the body is given to the vultures to be eaten, and therefore the body
ultimately turns to vulture stool. Sometimes the body is merely abandoned,
and in that case the body is consumed by small insects. In some societies the
body is immediately burned after death, and thus it becomes ashes. In any case,
if one intelligently considers the constitution of the body and the soul beyond
it, what is the value of the body? Antavanta ime dehä nityasyoktäù çarériëaù:
[Bg. 2.18] the body may perish at any moment, but the soul is eternal. If one
gives up attachment for the body and increases his attachment for the spirit
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
934
soul, his life is successful. It is merely a matter of deliberation.
TEXT 14
iSaÖEYaRjaviXaíaQaOE" k-LPaYaed( v*itaMaaTMaNa" )
Xaeze SvTv& TYaJaNPa[aj" Padvq& MahTaaiMaYaaTa( )) 14 ))
siddhair yajïävaçiñöärthaiù
kalpayed våttim ätmanaù
çeñe svatvaà tyajan präjïaù
padavéà mahatäm iyät
SYNONYMS
siddhaiù—things obtained by the grace of the Lord;
yajïä-avaçiñöa-arthaiù—things obtained after a sacrifice is offered to the Lord
or after the recommended païca-sünä yajïa is performed; kalpayet—one
should consider; våttim—the means of livelihood; ätmanaù—for the self;
çeñe—at the end; svatvam—so-called proprietorship over one's wife, children,
home, business and so on; tyajan—giving up; präjïaù—those who are wise;
padavém—the position; mahatäm—of the great personalities who are fully
satisfied in spiritual consciousness; iyät—should achieve.
TRANSLATION
An intelligent person should be satisfied with eating prasäda [food offered to
the Lord] or with performing the five different kinds of yajïa [païca-sünä]. By
such activities, one can give up attachment for the body and so-called
proprietorship with reference to the body. When one is able to do this, he is
firmly fixed in the position of a mahätmä.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
935
PURPORT
Nature already has an arrangement to feed us. By the order of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, there is an arrangement for eatables for every living
entity within the 8,400,000 forms of life. Eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän.
Every living entity has to eat something, and in fact the necessities for his life
have already been provided by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord
has provided food for both the elephant and the ant. All living beings are
living at the cost of the Supreme Lord, and therefore one who is intelligent
should not work very hard for material comforts. Rather, one should save his
energy for advancing in Kåñëa consciousness. All created things in the sky, in
the air, on land and in the sea belong to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and every living being is provided with food. Therefore one should not be very
much anxious about economic development and unnecessarily waste time and
energy with the risk of falling down in the cycle of birth and death.
TEXT 15
devaNa*zqNa( Na*>aUTaaiNa iPaTa›NaaTMaaNaMaNvhMa( )
Svv*tYaaGaTaivtaeNa YaJaeTa Pauåz& Pa*Qak(- )) 15 ))
devän åñén nå-bhütäni
pitèn ätmänam anvaham
sva-våttyägata-vittena
yajeta puruñaà påthak
SYNONYMS
devän—unto the demigods; åñén—unto the great sages; nå—unto human
society; bhütäni—unto the living entities in general; pitèn—unto the
forefathers; ätmänam—one's self or the Supreme Self; anvaham—daily;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
936
sva-våttyä—by one's means of livelihood; ägata-vittena—money that
automatically comes; yajeta—one should worship; puruñam—the person
situated in everyone's heart; påthak—separately.
TRANSLATION
Every day, one should worship the Supreme Being who is situated in
everyone's heart, and on this basis one should separately worship the demigods,
the saintly persons, ordinary human beings and living entities, one's forefathers
and one's self. In this way one is able to worship the Supreme Being in the core
of everyone's heart.
TEXT 16
YaùaRTMaNaae_iDak-araÛa" SavaR" SYauYaRjSaMPad" )
vETaaiNake-Na iviDaNaa AiGanhae}aaidNaa YaJaeTa( )) 16 ))
yarhy ätmano 'dhikärädyäù
sarväù syur yajïa-sampadaù
vaitänikena vidhinä
agni-hoträdinä yajet
SYNONYMS
yarhi—when; ätmanaù—of one's self; adhikära-ädyäù—things possessed by
him under full control; sarväù—everything; syuù—becomes;
yajïa-sampadaù—paraphernalia for performing yajïa, or the means for
pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vaitänikena—with authorized
books that direct the performance of yajïa; vidhinä—according to regulative
principles; agni-hotra-ädinä—by offering sacrifices to the fire, etc.; yajet—one
should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
937
TRANSLATION
When one is enriched with wealth and knowledge which are under his full
control and by means of which he can perform yajïa or please the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, one must perform sacrifices, offering oblations to the
fire according to the directions of the çästras. In this way one should worship
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
If a gåhastha, or householder, is sufficiently educated in Vedic knowledge
and has become sufficiently rich to offer worship to please the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he must perform yajïas as directed by the authorized
scriptures. Bhagavad-gétä (3.9) clearly says, yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra loko
'yaà karma-bandhanaù: everyone may be engaged in his occupational duties,
but the result of these duties should be offered for sacrifice to satisfy the
Supreme Lord. If one is fortunate enough to possess transcendental knowledge
as well as the money with which to perform sacrifices, one must do it according
to the directions given in the çästras. It is said in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (12.3.52):
kåte yad dhyäyato viñëuà
tretäyäà yajato makhaiù
dväpare paricaryäyäà
kalau tad dhari-kértanät
The entire Vedic civilization aims at satisfying the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This was possible in Satya-yuga by meditation upon the Supreme
Lord within the core of one's heart and in Tretä-yuga by the performance of
costly yajïas. The same goal could be achieved in Dväpara-yuga by worship of
the Lord in the temple, and in this age of Kali one can achieve the same goal
by performing saìkértana-yajïa. Therefore one who has education and wealth
must use them to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead by helping the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
938
saìkértana movement that has already begun—the Hare Kåñëa movement, or
Kåñëa consciousness movement. All educated and wealthy persons must join
this movement, since money and education are meant for service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. If money and education are not engaged in
the service of the Lord, these valuable assets must be engaged in the service of
mäyä. The education of so-called scientists, philosophers and poets is now
engaged in the service of mäyä, and the wealth of the rich is also engaged in
mäyä's service. The service of mäyä, however, creates a chaotic condition in
the world. Therefore the wealthy man and the educated man should sacrifice
their knowledge and opulence by dedicating them for the satisfaction of the
Supreme Lord and joining this saìkértana movement (yajïaiù
saìkértana-präyair yajanti hi sumedhasaù [SB 11.5.32]).
TEXT 17
Na ùiGanMau%Taae_Ya& vE >aGavaNSavRYaj>auk(- )
wJYaeTa hivza raJaNYaQaa ivPa[Mau%e huTaE" )) 17 ))
na hy agni-mukhato 'yaà vai
bhagavän sarva-yajïa-bhuk
ijyeta haviñä räjan
yathä vipra-mukhe hutaiù
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—indeed; agni—fire; mukhataù—from the mouth or the flames;
ayam—this; vai—certainly; bhagavän—Lord Çré Kåñëa; sarva-yajïa-bhuk—the
enjoyer of the results of all kinds of sacrifices; ijyeta—is worshiped; haviñä—by
offering of clarified butter; räjan—O King; yathä—as much as;
vipra-mukhe—through the mouth of a brähmaëa; hutaiù—by offering him
first-class food.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
939
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, is the enjoyer of sacrificial
offerings. Yet although His Lordship eats the oblations offered in the fire, my
dear King, He is still more satisfied when nice food made of grains and ghee is
offered to Him through the mouths of qualified brähmaëas.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (3.9), yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra loko 'yaà
karma-bandhanaù: all fruitive activities should be performed for sacrifice,
which should be directed toward pleasing Kåñëa. As stated elsewhere in
Bhagavad-gétä (5.29), bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà sarva-loka-maheçvaram: He is
the Supreme Lord and enjoyer of everything. However, although sacrifice may
be offered to please Kåñëa, He is more pleased when grains and ghee, instead of
being offered in the fire, are prepared as prasäda and distributed, first to the
brähmaëas and then to others. This system pleases Kåñëa more than anything
else. Furthermore, at the present time there is very little chance to offer
sacrifices by pouring oblations of food grains and ghee into the fire. Especially
in India, there is practically no ghee; for everything that should be done with
ghee, people use a certain type of oil preparation. Oil, however, is never
recommended for offering in a sacrificial fire. In Kali-yuga, the available
quantity of food grains and ghee is gradually diminishing, and people are
embarrassed that they cannot produce sufficient ghee and food grains. Under
the circumstances, the çästras enjoin, yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair yajanti hi
sumedhasaù: [SB 11.5.32] in this age, those who are intellectual offer yajïa, or
perform sacrifices, through the saìkértana movement. Everyone should join
the saìkértana movement, offering to the fire of this movement the oblations
of his knowledge and riches. In our saìkértana movement, or Hare Kåñëa
movement, we offer sumptuous prasäda to the Deity and later distribute the
same prasäda to the brähmaëas, the Vaiñëavas and then to the people in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
940
general. Kåñëa's prasäda is offered to the brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas, and the
prasäda of the brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas is offered to the general populace.
This kind of sacrifice—chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mantra and distribution of
prasäda—is the most perfect and bona fide way of offering sacrifice for the
pleasure of Yajïa, or Viñëu.
TEXT 18
TaSMaad( b]aø<adevezu MaTYaaRidzu YaQaahRTa" )
TaESTaE" k-aMaEYaRJaSvENa& +ae}aj& b]aø<aaNaNau )) 18 ))
tasmäd brähmaëa-deveñu
martyädiñu yathärhataù
tais taiù kämair yajasvainaà
kñetra-jïaà brähmaëän anu
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; brähmaëa-deveñu—through the brähmaëas and the
demigods; martya-ädiñu—through ordinary human beings and other living
entities; yathä-arhataù—according to your ability; taiù taiù—with all those;
kämaiù—various objects of enjoyment such as sumptuous food, flower
garlands, sandalwood paste, etc.; yajasva—you should worship; enam—this;
kñetra-jïam—Supreme Lord situated in the hearts of all beings;
brähmaëän—the brähmaëas; anu—after.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, my dear King, first offer prasäda unto the brähmaëas and the
demigods, and after sumptuously feeding them you may distribute prasäda to
other living entities according to your ability. In this way you will be able to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
941
worship all living entities—or, in other words, the supreme living entity within
every living entity.
PURPORT
To distribute prasäda to all living entities, the process is that we must first
offer prasäda to the brähmaëas and the Vaiñëavas, for the demigods are
represented by the brähmaëas. In this way the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is situated in everyone's heart, will be worshiped. This is the
Vedic system of offering prasäda. Whenever there is a ceremony for
distribution of prasäda, the prasäda is offered first to the brähmaëas, then to
the children and old men, then to the women, and then to animals like dogs
and other domestic animals. When it is said that Näräyaëa, the Supreme
Being, is situated in everyone's heart, this does not mean that everyone has
become Näräyaëa or that a particular poor man has become Näräyaëa. Such a
conclusion is rejected herein.
TEXT 19
ku-YaaRdParPa+aqYa& MaaiSa Pa[aEïPade iÜJa" )
é[aÖ& iPa}aaeYaRQaaivta& TaØNDaUNaa& c ivtavaNa( )) 19 ))
kuryäd apara-pakñéyaà
mäsi prauñöha-pade dvijaù
çräddhaà pitror yathä-vittaà
tad-bandhünäà ca vittavän
SYNONYMS
kuryät—one should perform; apara-pakñéyam—during the fortnight of the
dark moon; mäsi—in the month of Äçvina (October-November);
prauñöha-pade—in the month of Bhädra (August-September);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
942
dvijaù—twice-born; çräddham—oblations; pitroù—unto the forefathers;
yathä-vittam—according to one's means of income; tat-bandhünäm ca—as well
as relatives of forefathers; vitta-vän—one who is sufficiently rich.
TRANSLATION
A brähmaëa who is sufficiently rich must offer oblations to the forefathers
during the dark-moon fortnight in the latter part of the month of Bhädra.
Similarly, he should offer oblations to the relatives of the forefathers during the
mahälayä ceremonies in the month of Äçvina.*(40)
TEXTS 20-23
AYaNae ivzuve ku-YaaRd( VYaTaqPaaTae idNa+aYae )
cNd]aidTYaaeParaGae c ÜadXYaa& é[v<aezu c )) 20 ))
Ta*TaqYaaYaa& éu(c)-Pa+ae NavMYaaMaQa k-aiTaRke- )
cTaSa*ZvPYaík-aSau heMaNTae iXaiXare TaQaa )) 21 ))
Maagae c iSaTaSaáMYaa& Magaarak-aSaMaaGaMae )
rak-Yaa caNauMaTYaa c MaaSa+aaRi<a YauTaaNYaiPa )) 22 ))
ÜadXYaaMaNauraDaa SYaaC^\v<aiSTaó otara" )
iTaSa*Zvek-adXaq vaSau JaNMa+aRé[ae<aYaaeGaYauk(- )) 23 ))
ayane viñuve kuryäd
vyatépäte dina-kñaye
candrädityoparäge ca
dvädaçyäà çravaëeñu ca
tåtéyäyäà çukla-pakñe
navamyäm atha kärtike
catasåñv apy añöakäsu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
943
hemante çiçire tathä
mäghe ca sita-saptamyäà
maghä-räkä-samägame
räkayä cänumatyä ca
mäsarkñäëi yutäny api
dvädaçyäm anurädhä syäc
chravaëas tisra uttaräù
tisåñv ekädaçé väsu
janmarkña-çroëa-yoga-yuk
SYNONYMS
ayane—on the day when the sun begins to move north, or Makara-saìkränti,
and on the day when the sun begins to move south, or Karkaöa-saìkränti;
viñuve—on the Meña-saìkränti and on the Tulä-saìkränti; kuryät—one should
perform; vyatépäte—in the yoga named Vyatépäta; dina-kñaye—on that day in
which three tithis are combined; candra-äditya-uparäge—at the time of the
eclipse of either the moon or the sun; ca—and also; dvädaçyäm çravaëeñu—on
the twelfth lunar day and in the nakñatra named Çravaëa; ca—and;
tåtéyäyäm—on the Akñaya-tåtéyä day; çukla-pakñe—in the bright fortnight of
the month; navamyäm—on the ninth lunar day; atha—also; kärtike—in the
month of Kärtika (October-November); catasåñu—on the four; api—also;
añöakäsu—on the Añöakäs; hemante—before the winter season; çiçire—in the
winter season; tathä—and also; mäghe—in the month of Mägha
(January-February); ca—and; sita-saptamyäm—on the seventh lunar day of
the bright fortnight; maghä-räkä-samägame—in the conjunction of
Maghä-nakñatra and the full-moon day; räkayä—with a day of the completely
full moon; ca—and; anumatyä—with a full-moon day when the moon is
slightly less than completely full; ca—and; mäsa-åkñäëi—the nakñatras that
are the sources of the names of the various months; yutäni—are conjoined;
api—also; dvädaçyäm—on the twelfth lunar day; anurädhä—the nakñatra
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
944
named Anurädhä; syät—may occur; çravaëaù—the nakñatra named Çravaëa;
tisraù—the three (nakñatras); uttaräù—the nakñatras named Uttarä
(Uttara-phalguné, Uttaräñäòhä and Uttara-bhädrapadä); tisåñu—on three;
ekädaçé—the eleventh lunar day; vä—or; äsu—on these; janma-åkña—of one's
own janma-nakñatra, or birth star; çroëa—of Çravaëa-nakñatra; yoga—by a
conjunction; yuk—having.
TRANSLATION
One should perform the çräddha ceremony on the Makara-saìkränti [the day
when the sun begins to move north] or on the Karkaöa-saìkränti [the day when
the sun begins to move south]. One should also perform this ceremony on the
Meña-saìkränti day and the Tulä-saìkränti day, in the yoga named Vyatépäta,
on that day in which three lunar tithis are conjoined, during an eclipse of either
the moon or the sun, on the twelfth lunar day, and in the Çravaëa-nakñatra.
One should perform this ceremony on the Akñaya-tåtéyä day, on the ninth lunar
day of the bright fortnight of the month of Kärtika, on the four añöakäs in the
winter season and cool season, on the seventh lunar day of the bright fortnight
of the month of Mägha, during the conjunction of Maghä-nakñatra and the
full-moon day, and on the days when the moon is completely full, or not quite
completely full, when these days are conjoined with the nakñatras from which
the names of certain months are derived. One should also perform the çräddha
ceremony on the twelfth lunar day when it is in conjunction with any of the
nakñatras named Anurädhä, Çravaëa, Uttara-phalguné, Uttaräñäòhä or
Uttara-bhädrapadä. Again, one should perform this ceremony when the
eleventh lunar day is in conjunction with either Uttara-phalguné, Uttaräñäòhä
or Uttara-bhädrapadä. Finally, one should perform this ceremony on days
conjoined with one's own birth star [janma-nakñatra] or with Çravaëa-nakñatra.
PURPORT
The word ayana means "path" or "going." The six months when the sun
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
945
moves toward the north are called uttaräyaëa, or the northern path, and the
six months when it moves south are called dakñiëäyana, or the southern path.
These are mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä (8.24-25). The first day when the sun
begins to move north and enter the zodiacal sign of Capricorn is called
Makara-saìkränti, and the first day when the sun begins to move south and
enter the sign of Cancer is called Karkaöa-saìkränti. On these two days of the
year, one should perform the çräddha ceremony.
Viñuva, or Viñuva-saìkränti, means Meña-saìkränti, or the day on which
the sun enters the sign Aries. Tulä-saìkränti is the day on which the sun
enters the sign Libra. Both of these days occur only once within a year. The
word yoga refers to a certain relationship between the sun and moon as they
move in the sky. There are twenty-seven different degrees of yoga, of which
the seventeenth is called Vyatépäta. On the day when this occurs, one should
perform the çräddha ceremony. A tithi, or lunar day, consists of the distance
between the longitude of the sun and that of the moon. Sometimes a tithi is
less than twenty-four hours. When it starts after sunrise on a certain day and
ends before the sunrise of the following day, the previous tithi and the
following tithi both "touch" the twenty-four-hour day between the sunrises.
This is called tryaha-sparça, or a day touched by some portion of three tithis.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has given quotations from many çästras stating that the
çräddha ceremony of oblations to the forefathers should not be performed on
Ekädaçé tithi. When the tithi of the death anniversary falls on the Ekädaçé day,
the çräddha ceremony should be held not on Ekädaçé but on the next day, or
dvädaçé. In the Brahma-vaivarta Puräëa it is said:
ye kurvanti mahépäla
çräddhaà caikädaçi-dine
trayas te narakaà yänti
dätä bhoktä ca prerakaù
If one performs the çräddha ceremony of oblations to the forefathers on the
Ekädaçé tithi, then the performer, the forefathers for whom the çräddha is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
946
observed, and the purohita, or the family priest who encourages the ceremony,
all go to hell.
TEXT 24
Ta WTae é[eYaSa" k-al/a Na›<aa& é[eYaaeivvDaRNaa" )
ku-YaaRTa( SavaRTMaNaETaezu é[eYaae_Maaega& TadaYauz" )) 24 ))
ta ete çreyasaù kälä
nèëäà çreyo-vivardhanäù
kuryät sarvätmanaiteñu
çreyo 'moghaà tad-äyuñaù
SYNONYMS
te—therefore; ete—all these (descriptions of astronomical calculations);
çreyasaù—of auspiciousness; käläù—times; nèëäm—for human beings;
çreyaù—auspiciousness; vivardhanäù—increase; kuryät—one should perform;
sarva-ätmanä—by other activities (not only the çräddha ceremony); eteñu—in
these (seasons); çreyaù—(causing) auspiciousness; amogham—and success;
tat—of a human being; äyuñaù—of the duration of life.
TRANSLATION
All of these seasonal times are considered extremely auspicious for
humanity. At such times, one should perform all auspicious activities, for by
such activities a human being attains success in his short duration of life.
PURPORT
When one comes to the human form of life through natural evolution, one
must then take the responsibility for further progress. As stated in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
947
Bhagavad-gétä (9.25), yänti deva-vratä devän: one who worships the demigods
can be promoted to their planets. Yänti mad-yäjino 'pi mäm: and if one
practices devotional service to the Lord, he goes back home, back to Godhead.
In the human form of life, therefore, one is meant to act auspiciously in order
to return home, back to Godhead. Devotional service, however, does not
depend on material conditions. Ahaituky apratihatä. Of course, for those who
are engaged in fruitive activities on the material platform, the times and
seasons mentioned above are extremely congenial.
TEXT 25
Wzu òaNa& JaPaae haeMaae v]Ta& deviÜJaacRNaMa( )
iPaTa*devNa*>aUTae>Yaae Yad( dta& TaÖyNaìrMa( )) 25 ))
eñu snänaà japo homo
vrataà deva-dvijärcanam
pitå-deva-nå-bhütebhyo
yad dattaà tad dhy anaçvaram
SYNONYMS
eñu—in all these (seasonal times); snänam—bathing in the Ganges, Yamunä
or any other sacred places; japaù—chanting; homaù—performing fire
sacrifices; vratam—executing vows; deva—the Supreme Lord;
dvija-arcanam—worshiping the brähmaëas or Vaiñëavas; pitå—unto the
forefathers; deva—demigods; nå—human beings in general; bhütebhyaù—and
all other living entities; yat—whatever; dattam—offered; tat—that;
hi—indeed; anaçvaram—permanently beneficial.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
948
During these periods of seasonal change, if one bathes in the Ganges, in the
Yamunä or in another sacred place, if one chants, offers fire sacrifices or
executes vows, or if one worships the Supreme Lord, the brähmaëas, the
forefathers, the demigods and the living entities in general, whatever he gives in
charity yields a permanently beneficial result.
TEXT 26
Sa&Sk-ark-al/ae JaaYaaYaa APaTYaSYaaTMaNaSTaQaa )
Pa[eTaSa&SQaa Ma*Taahê k-MaR<Ya>YaudYae Na*Pa )) 26 ))
saàskära-kälo jäyäyä
apatyasyätmanas tathä
preta-saàsthä måtähaç ca
karmaëy abhyudaye nåpa
SYNONYMS
saàskära-kälaù—at the proper time indicated for Vedic reformatory
performances; jäyäyäù—for the wife; apatyasya—for the children;
ätmanaù—and one's own self; tathä—as well as; preta-saàsthä—funeral
ceremonies; måta-ahaù—annual death ceremonies; ca—and; karmaëi—of
fruitive activity; abhyudaye—for furtherance; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King Yudhiñöhira, at the time prescribed for reformatory ritualistic
ceremonies for one's self, one's wife or one's children, or during funeral
ceremonies and annual death ceremonies, one must perform the auspicious
ceremonies mentioned above in order to flourish in fruitive activities.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
949
PURPORT
The Vedas recommend many ritualistic ceremonies to be performed with
one's wife, on the birthdays of one's children, or during funeral ceremonies,
and there are also personal reformatory methods like initiation. These must be
observed according to time and circumstances and the directions of the çästra.
Bhagavad-gétä strongly recommends, jïätvä çästra-vidhänoktam: everything
must be performed as indicated in the çästras. For Kali-yuga, the çästras enjoin
that saìkértana-yajïa be performed always: kértanéyaù sadä hariù [Cc. Ädi
17.31]. All the ritualistic ceremonies recommended in the çästras must be
preceded and followed by saìkértana. This is the recommendation of Çréla Jéva
Gosvämé.
TEXTS 27-28
AQa deXaaNPa[v+YaaiMa DaMaaRidé[eYaAavhaNa( )
Sa vE Pau<YaTaMaae deXa" SaTPaa}a& Ya}a l/>YaTae )) 27 ))
ibMb& >aGavTaae Ya}a SavRMaeTaÀracrMa( )
Ya}a h b]aø<aku-l&/ TaPaaeivÛadYaaiNvTaMa( )) 28 ))
atha deçän pravakñyämi
dharmädi-çreya-ävahän
sa vai puëyatamo deçaù
sat-pätraà yatra labhyate
bimbaà bhagavato yatra
sarvam etac caräcaram
yatra ha brähmaëa-kulaà
tapo-vidyä-dayänvitam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
950
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; deçän—places; pravakñyämi—I shall describe;
dharma-ädi—religious performances, etc.; çreya—auspiciousness;
ävahän—which can bring; saù—that; vai—indeed; puëya-tamaù—the most
sacred; deçaù—place; sat-pätram—a Vaiñëava; yatra—wherein; labhyate—is
available; bimbam—the Deity (in the temple); bhagavataù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead (who is the support); yatra—where; sarvam etat—of
this entire cosmic manifestation; cara-acaram—with all the moving and
nonmoving living entities; yatra—wherein; ha—indeed;
brähmaëa-kulam—association with brähmaëas; tapaù—austerities;
vidyä—education; dayä—mercy; anvitam—endowed with.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: Now I shall describe the places where religious
performances may be well executed. Any place where a Vaiñëava is available is
an excellent place for all auspicious activities. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the support of this entire cosmic manifestation, with all its moving
and nonmoving living entities, and the temple where the Deity of the Lord is
installed is a most sacred place. Furthermore, places where learned brähmaëas
observe Vedic principles by means of austerity, education and mercy are also
most auspicious and sacred.
PURPORT
In this verse it is indicated that a Vaiñëava temple where the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is worshiped, and where Vaiñëavas are engaged
in the service of the Lord, is the best sacred place for performing any religious
ceremonies. At the present day, especially in big, big cities, people live in small
apartments and are not able to establish a Deity or temple. Under the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
951
circumstances, therefore, the centers and temples being established by the
expanding Kåñëa consciousness movement are the best sacred places for
performing religious ceremonies. Although people in general are no longer
interested in religious ceremonies or Deity worship, the Kåñëa consciousness
movement gives everyone the chance to advance in spiritual life by becoming
Kåñëa conscious.
TEXT 29
Ya}a Ya}a hrercaR Sa deXa" é[eYaSaa& PadMa( )
Ya}a Ga(r)adYaae NaÛ" Paura<aezu c ivé[uTaa" )) 29 ))
yatra yatra harer arcä
sa deçaù çreyasäà padam
yatra gaìgädayo nadyaù
puräëeñu ca viçrutäù
SYNONYMS
yatra yatra—wherever; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa;
arcä—the Deity is worshiped; saù—that; deçaù—place, country or
neighborhood; çreyasäm—of all auspiciousness; padam—the place;
yatra—wherever; gaìgä-ädayaù—like the Ganges, Yamunä, Narmadä and
Käveré; nadyaù—sacred rivers; puräëeñu—in the puräëas (supplementary
Vedic literature); ca—also; viçrutäù—are celebrated.
TRANSLATION
Auspicious indeed are the places where there is a temple of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, in which He is duly worshiped, and also the
places where there flow the celebrated sacred rivers mentioned in the Puräëas,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
952
the supplementary Vedic literatures. Anything spiritual done there is certainly
very effective.
PURPORT
There are many atheists who oppose the worship of the Deity of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in the temple. In this verse, however, it is
authoritatively stated that any place where the Deity is worshiped is
transcendental; it does not belong to the material world. It is also said that the
forest is in the mode of goodness, and therefore those who want to cultivate
spiritual life are advised to go to the forest (vanaà gato yad dharim äçrayeta [SB
7.5.5]). But one should not go to the forest simply to live like a monkey.
Monkeys and other ferocious animals also live in the forest, but a person who
goes to the forest for spiritual culture must accept the lotus feet of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as shelter (vanaà gato yad dharim äçrayeta.
One should not be satisfied simply to go to the forest; one must take shelter of
the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this age, therefore,
since it is impossible to go to the forest for spiritual culture, one is
recommended to live in the temple community as a devotee, regularly worship
the Deity, follow the regulative principles and thus make the place like
Vaikuëöha. The forest may be in goodness, the cities and villages in passion,
and the brothels, hotels and restaurants in ignorance, but when one lives in
the temple community he lives in Vaikuëöha. Therefore it is said here,
çreyasäà padam: it is the best, most auspicious place.
In many places throughout the world we are constructing communities to
give shelter to devotees and worship the Deity in the temple. The Deity
cannot be worshiped except by devotees. Temple worshipers who fail to give
importance to the devotees are third class. They are kaniñöha-adhikärés in the
lower stage of spiritual life. As it is said in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.2.47):
arcäyäm eva haraye
püjäà yaù çraddhayehate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
953
na tad-bhakteñu cänyeñu
sa bhaktaù präkåtaù småtaù
"A person who is very faithfully engaged in the worship of the Deity in the
temple but does not know how to behave toward devotees or people in general
is called a präkåta-bhakta, or kaniñöha-adhikäré." Therefore, in the temple there
must be the Deity of the Lord, and the Lord should be worshiped by the
devotees. This combination of the devotees and the Deity creates a first-class
transcendental place.
Aside from this, if a gåhastha devotee worships the çälagräma-çilä, or the
form of the Deity at home, his home also becomes a very great place. It was
therefore customary for members of the three higher classes—namely the
brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas—to worship the çälagräma-çilä, or a small
Deity of Rädhä-Kåñëa or Sétä-Räma in each and every home. This made
everything auspicious. But now they have given up the Deity worship. Men
have become modernized and are consequently indulging in all sorts of sinful
activities, and therefore they are extremely unhappy.
According to Vedic civilization, therefore, the holy places of pilgrimage are
considered most sacred, and still there are hundreds and thousands of holy
places like Jagannätha Puré, Våndävana, Hardwar, Rämeçvara, Prayäga and
Mathurä. India is the place for worshiping or for cultivating spiritual life. The
Kåñëa consciousness movement invites everyone from all over the world,
without discrimination as to caste or creed, to come to its centers and cultivate
spiritual life perfectly.
TEXTS 30-33
Sara&iSa PauZk-radqiNa +ae}aa<YahaRié[TaaNYauTa )
ku-å+ae}a& GaYaiXar" Pa[YaaGa" Paul/haé[Ma" )) 30 ))
NaEiMaz& f-aLGauNa& SaeTau" Pa[>aaSaae_Qa ku-XaSQal/I )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
954
vara<aSaq MaDauPaurq PaMPaa ibNduSarSTaQaa )) 31 ))
NaaraYa<aaé[Maae NaNda SaqTaaraMaaé[MaadYa" )
SaveR ku-l/acl/a raJaNMaheNd]Mal/YaadYa" )) 32 ))
WTae Pau<YaTaMaa deXaa hrercaRié[Taaê Yae )
WTaaNdeXaaNa( iNazeveTa é[eYaSk-aMaae ù>aq+<aXa" )
DaMaaeR ù}aeihTa" Pau&Saa& SahóaiDaf-l/aedYa" )) 33 ))
saräàsi puñkarädéni
kñeträëy arhäçritäny uta
kurukñetraà gaya-çiraù
prayägaù pulahäçramaù
naimiñaà phälgunaà setuù
prabhäso 'tha kuça-sthalé
väräëasé madhu-puré
pampä bindu-saras tathä
näräyaëäçramo nandä
sétä-rämäçramädayaù
sarve kuläcalä räjan
mahendra-malayädayaù
ete puëyatamä deçä
harer arcäçritäç ca ye
etän deçän niñeveta
çreyas-kämo hy abhékñëaçaù
dharmo hy atrehitaù puàsäà
sahasrädhi-phalodayaù
SYNONYMS
saräàsi—lakes; puñkara-ädéni—such as Puñkara; kñeträëi—sacred places (like
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
955
Kurukñetra, Gayäkñetra and Jagannätha Puré); arha—for worshipable, saintly
persons; äçritäni—places of shelter; uta—celebrated; kurukñetram—a
particular sacred place (dharma-kñetra); gaya-çiraù—the place known as Gayä,
where Gayäsura took shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Viñëu;
prayägaù—Allahabad, at the confluence of the two sacred rivers Ganges and
Yamunä; pulaha-äçramaù—the residence of Pulaha Muni; naimiñam—the
place known as Naimiñäraëya (near Lucknow); phälgunam—the place where
the Phälgu River flows; setuù—Setubandha, where Lord Rämacandra
constructed a bridge between India and Laìkä; prabhäsaù—Prabhäsakñetra;
atha—as well as; kuça-sthalé—Dväravaté, or Dvärakä; väräëasé—Benares;
madhu-puré—Mathurä; pampä—a place where there is a lake called Pampä;
bindu-saraù—the place where Bindu-sarovara is situated; tathä—there;
näräyaëa-äçramaù—known as Badarikäçrama; nandä—the place where the
Nandä River flows; sétä-räma—of Lord Rämacandra and mother Sétä;
äçrama-ädayaù—places of shelter like Citraküöa; sarve—all (such places);
kuläcaläù—hilly tracts of land; räjan—O King; mahendra—known as
Mahendra; malaya-ädayaù—and others, like Malayäcala; ete—all of them;
puëya-tamäù—extremely sacred; deçäù—places; hareù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; arca-äçritäù—places where the Deity of Rädhä-Kåñëa
is worshiped (such as big American cities like New York, Los Angeles and San
Francisco, and European cities like London and Paris, or wherever there are
centers of Kåñëa consciousness); ca—as well as; ye—those which; etän
deçän—all these countries; niñeveta—should worship or visit;
çreyaù-kämaù—one who desires auspiciousness; hi—indeed;
abhékñëaçaù—again and again; dharmaù—religious activities; hi—from which;
atra—in these places; éhitaù—performed; puàsäm—of the persons;
sahasra-adhi—more than a thousand times; phala-udayaù—effective.
TRANSLATION
The sacred lakes like Puñkara and places where saintly persons live, like
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
956
Kurukñetra, Gayä, Prayäga, Pulahäçrama, Naimiñäraëya, the banks of the
Phälgu River, Setubandha, Prabhäsa, Dvärakä, Väräëasé, Mathurä, Pampä,
Bindu-sarovara, Badarikäçrama [Näräyaëäçrama], the places where the Nandä
River flows, the places where Lord Rämacandra and mother Sétä took shelter,
such as Citraküöa, and also the hilly tracts of land known as Mahendra and
Malaya—all of these are to be considered most pious and sacred. Similarly,
places outside India where there are centers of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement and where Rädhä-Kåñëa Deities are worshiped must all be visited
and worshiped by those who want to be spiritually advanced. One who intends
to advance in spiritual life may visit all these places and perform ritualistic
ceremonies to get results a thousand times better than the results of the same
activities performed in any other place.
PURPORT
In these verses and in verse twenty-nine, stress is given to one point: harer
arcäçritäç ca ye or harer arcä. In other words, any place where the Deity of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshiped by devotees is most significant.
The Kåñëa consciousness movement is giving the population of the entire
world a chance to take advantage of Kåñëa consciousness through the
ISKCON centers, where one may perform Deity worship and chant the Hare
Kåñëa mahä-mantra and in this way obtain results with effectiveness increased
a thousand times. This constitutes the best welfare activity for human society.
This was Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu's mission as it was predicted by Him in the
Caitanya-bhägavata (Antya 4.126):
påthivéte äche yata nagarädi-gräma
sarvatra pracära haibe mora näma
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu wanted the Hare Kåñëa movement, with installed
Deities, to spread to every village and town in the world, so that everyone in
the world might take advantage of this movement and become all-auspicious in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
957
spiritual life. Without spiritual life, nothing is auspicious. Moghäçä
mogha-karmäëo mogha jïänä vicetasaù (Bg. 9.12). No one can become
successful in fruitive activities or speculative knowledge without being Kåñëa
conscious. As recommended in the çästras, everyone should be very eagerly
interested in taking part in the Kåñëa consciousness movement and
understanding the value of spiritual life.
TEXT 34
Paa}a& Tv}a iNaå¢&- vE k-ivi>a" Paa}aivtaMaE" )
hirrevEk- ovsXa YaNMaYa& vE cracrMa( )) 34 ))
pätraà tv atra niruktaà vai
kavibhiù pätra-vittamaiù
harir evaika urvéça
yan-mayaà vai caräcaram
SYNONYMS
pätram—the true person to whom charity must be given; tu—but; atra—in the
world; niruktam—decided; vai—indeed; kavibhiù—by learned scholars;
pätra-vittamaiù—who are expert in finding the actual person to whom charity
must be given; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; eva—indeed;
ekaù—only one; urvé-éça—O King of the earth; yat-mayam—in whom
everything is resting; vai—from whom everything is coming; cara-acaram—all
that is moving or nonmoving within this universe.
TRANSLATION
O King of the earth, it has been decided by expert, learned scholars that only
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, in whom all that is moving or
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
958
nonmoving within this universe is resting and from whom everything is coming,
is the best person to whom everything must be given.
PURPORT
Whenever we perform some religious act in terms of dharma, artha, käma
and mokña, we must perform it according to the time, place and person (käla,
deça, pätra). Närada Muni has already described the deça (place) and käla
(time). The käla has been described in verses twenty through twenty-four,
beginning with the words ayane viñuve kuryäd vyatépäte dina-kñaye. And the
places for giving charity or performing ritualistic ceremonies have been
described in verses thirty through thirty-three, beginning with saräàsi
puñkarädéni kñeträëy arhäçritäny uta. Now, to whom everything must be given
is decided in this verse. Harir evaika urvéça yan-mayaà vai caräcaram. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is the root of everything, and
therefore He is the best pätra, or person, to whom everything must be given. In
Bhagavad-gétä (5.29) it is said:
bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram
suhådaà sarva-bhütänäà
jïätvä mäà çäntim åcchati
If one wants to enjoy real peace and prosperity, he should give everything to
Kåñëa, who is the real enjoyer, real friend and real proprietor. It is therefore
said:
yathä taror müla-niñecanena
tåpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaçäkhäù
präëopahäräc ca yathendriyäëäà
tathaiva sarvärhaëam acyutejyä
(SB 4.31.14)
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
959
By worshiping or satisfying Acyuta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa, one can satisfy everyone, just as one can water the branches, leaves and
flowers of a tree simply by watering its root or as one satisfies all the senses of
the body by giving food to the stomach. Therefore, a devotee simply offers
everything to the Supreme Personality of Godhead to receive the best results
of charity, religious performances, sense gratification and even liberation
(dharma, artha, käma, mokña [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ädi 1.90]).
TEXT 35
devZYaRhRTSau vE SaTSau Ta}a b]øaTMaJaaidzu )
raJaNYadGa]PaUJaaYaa& MaTa" Paa}aTaYaaCYauTa" )) 35 ))
devarñy-arhatsu vai satsu
tatra brahmätmajädiñu
räjan yad agra-püjäyäà
mataù pätratayäcyutaù
SYNONYMS
deva-åñi—among the demigods and great saintly persons, including Närada
Muni; arhatsu—the most venerable and worshipable personalities;
vai—indeed; satsu—the great devotees; tatra—there (at the Räjasüya-yajïa);
brahma-ätma-jädiñu—and the sons of Lord Brahmä (such as Sanaka,
Sanandana, Sanat and Sanätana); räjan—O King; yat—from whom;
agra-püjäyäm—the first to be worshiped; mataù—decision;
pätratayä—selected as the best person to preside over the Räjasüya-yajïa;
acyutaù—Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
960
O King Yudhiñöhira, the demigods, many great sages and saints including
even the four sons of Lord Brahmä, and I myself were present at your Räjasüya
sacrificial ceremony, but when there was a question of who should be the first
person worshiped, everyone decided upon Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Person.
PURPORT
This is a reference to the Räjasüya sacrifice performed by Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira. In that meeting there was a great turmoil over selecting the best
person to be worshiped first. Everyone decided to worship Çré Kåñëa. The only
protest came from Çiçupäla, and because of his vehement opposition he was
killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 36
JaqvraiXai>arak-I<aR A<@k-aeXaax(iga]Paae MahaNa( )
TaNMaUl/TvadCYauTaeJYaa SavRJaqvaTMaTaPaR<aMa( )) 36 ))
jéva-räçibhir äkérëa
aëòa-koçäìghripo mahän
tan-mülatväd acyutejyä
sarva-jévätma-tarpaëam
SYNONYMS
jéva-räçibhiù—by millions and millions of living entities; äkérëaù—filled up or
spread over; aëòa-koça—the whole universe; aìghripaù—like a tree;
mahän—very, very great; tat-mülatvät—because of being the root of this tree;
acyuta-ijyä—worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva—of all;
jéva-ätma—living entities; tarpaëam—satisfaction.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
961
TRANSLATION
The entire universe, which is full of living entities, is like a tree whose root
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Acyuta [Kåñëa]. Therefore simply by
worshiping Lord Kåñëa one can worship all living entities.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (10.8) the Lord says:
ahaà sarvasya prabhavo
mattaù sarvaà pravartate
iti matvä bhajante mäà
budhä bhäva-samanvitäù
"I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from
Me. The wise who perfectly know this engage in My devotional service and
worship Me with all their hearts." People are very much anxious to give service
to other living entities, especially to the poor, but although they have
manufactured many ways to give such help, actually they are expert in killing
the poor living entities. This sort of service or mercy is not recommended in
the Vedic wisdom. As stated in a previous verse, it has been decided
(niruktam) by expert saintly persons that Kåñëa is the root of everything and
that worshiping Kåñëa is worshiping everyone, just as supplying water to the
root of a tree means satisfying all of its branches and twigs.
Another point is that this universe is full of living entities from top to
bottom, on every planet (jéva-räçibhir äkérëaù). Modern scientists and so-called
scholars think that there are no living entities on planets other than this one.
Recently they have said that they have gone to the moon but did not find any
living entities there. But Çrémad-Bhägavatam and the other Vedic literatures
do not agree with this foolish conception. There are living entities
everywhere, not only one or two but jéva-räçibhiù—many millions of living
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
962
entities. Even on the sun there are living entities, although it is a fiery planet.
The chief living entity on the sun is called Vivasvän (imaà vivasvate yogaà
proktavän aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]). All the different planets are filled with
different types of living entities according to different living conditions. To
suggest that only this planet is filled with living entities and that others are
vacant is foolish. This betrays a lack of real knowledge.
TEXT 37
Paura<YaNaeNa Sa*íaiNa Na*iTaYaRGa*izdevTaa" )
XaeTae JaqveNa æPae<a Paurezu Pauåzae ùSaaE )) 37 ))
puräëy anena såñöäni
nå-tiryag-åñi-devatäù
çete jévena rüpeëa
pureñu puruño hy asau
SYNONYMS
puräëi—residential places or bodies; anena—by Him (the Supreme Personality
of Godhead); såñöäni—among those creations; nå—man; tiryak—other than
human beings (animals, birds, etc); åñi—saintly persons; devatäù—and
demigods; çete—lies down; jévena—with the living entities; rüpeëa—in the
form of Paramätmä; pureñu—within these residential places or bodies;
puruñaù—the Supreme Lord; hi—indeed; asau—He (the Personality of
Godhead).
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has created many residential places
like the bodies of human beings, animals, birds, saints and demigods. In all of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
963
these innumerable bodily forms, the Lord resides with the living being as
Paramätmä. Thus He is known as the puruñävatära.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (18.61) it is said:
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of
the material energy." The living entity, who is part and parcel of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, exists on the mercy of the Lord, who is always with
him in any form of body. The living entity desires a particular type of material
enjoyment, and thus the Lord supplies him with a body, which is like a
machine. Just to keep him alive in that body, the Lord remains with him as the
puruña (Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu). This is also confirmed in Brahma-saàhitä (5.35):
eko 'py asau racayituà jagad-aëòa-koöià
yac-chaktir asti jagad-aëòa-cayä yad-antaù
aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-sthaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who enters the existence of
every universe and every atom by one of His plenary portions and thus
manifests His infinite energy throughout the material creation." The living
entity, being part and parcel of the Lord, is known as jéva. The Supreme Lord
puruña remains with the jéva to enable him to enjoy material facilities.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
964
TEXT 38
TaeZvev >aGavaNraJa&STaarTaMYaeNa vTaRTae )
TaSMaaTa( Paa}a& ih Pauåzae YaavaNaaTMaa YaQaeYaTae )) 38 ))
teñv eva bhagavän räjaàs
täratamyena vartate
tasmät pätraà hi puruño
yävän ätmä yatheyate
SYNONYMS
teñu—among the different types of bodies (demigod, human, animal, bird,
etc.); eva—indeed; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His
Paramätmä feature; räjan—O King; täratamyena—comparatively, more or less;
vartate—is situated; tasmät—therefore; pätram—the Supreme Person;
hi—indeed; puruñaù—Paramätmä; yävän—as far as; ätmä—the degree of
understanding; yathä—development of austerity and penance; éyate—is
manifest.
TRANSLATION
O King Yudhiñöhira, the Supersoul in every body gives intelligence to the
individual soul according to his capacity for understanding. Therefore the
Supersoul is the chief within the body. The Supersoul is manifested to the
individual soul according to the individual's comparative development of
knowledge, austerity, penance and so on.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) it is said, mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in His localized aspect gives intelligence to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
965
the individual soul as far as he is able to grasp it. Therefore we find the
individual soul in different high and low positions. A living entity with the
body of a bird or beast cannot take instructions from the Supreme Soul as
adequately as an advanced human being. Thus there are gradations of bodily
forms. In human society, the perfect brähmaëa is supposed to be the most
advanced in spiritual consciousness, and further advanced than the brähmaëa
is the Vaiñëava. Therefore the best persons are the Vaiñëavas and Viñëu.
When charity is to be given, one should take instruction from Bhagavad-gétä
(17.20):
dätavyam iti yad dänaà
déyate 'nupakäriëe
deçe käle ca pätre ca
tad dänaà sättvikaà småtam
"That gift which is given out of duty, at the proper time and place, to a worthy
person, and without expectation of return, is considered to be charity in the
mode of goodness." One should give charity to the brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas,
for thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead will be worshiped. In this
connection, Çréla Madhväcärya comments:
brahmädi-sthävaränteñu
na viçeño hareù kvacit
vyakti-mätra-viçeñeëa
täratamyaà vadanti ca
Beginning from Brahmä down to the ant, everyone is conducted by the
Supersoul (éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati [Bg. 18.61]). But
because of a particular person's advancement in spiritual consciousness, he is
considered to be important. Therefore, the brähmaëa Vaiñëava is important,
and, above all, the Supersoul, the Personality of Godhead, is the most
important personality.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
966
TEXT 39
d*îa Taeza& iMaQaae Na*<aaMavjaNaaTMaTaa& Na*Pa )
}aeTaaidzu hrercaR i§-YaaYaE k-ivi>a" k*-Taa )) 39 ))
dåñövä teñäà mitho nåëäm
avajïänätmatäà nåpa
tretädiñu harer arcä
kriyäyai kavibhiù kåtä
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—after practically seeing; teñäm—among the brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas;
mithaù—mutually; nåëäm—of human society; avajïäna-ätmatäm—the
mutually disrespectful behavior; nåpa—O King; tretä-ädiñu—beginning from
Tretä-yuga; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; arcä—the Deity
worship (in the temple); kriyäyai—for the purpose of introducing the method
of worship; kavibhiù—by learned persons; kåtä—has been done.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, when great sages and saintly persons saw mutually
disrespectful dealings at the beginning of Tretä-yuga, Deity worship in the
temple was introduced with all paraphernalia.
PURPORT
As it is said in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (12.3.52):
kåte yad dhyäyato viñëuà
tretäyäà yajato makhaiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
967
dväpare paricaryäyäà
kalau tad dhari-kértanät
"Whatever result one obtained in Satya-yuga by meditating on Viñëu, in
Tretä-yuga by performing sacrifices and in Dväpara-yuga by serving the Lord's
lotus feet one can also obtain in Kali-yuga simply by chanting the Hare Kåñëa
mahä-mantra." In Satya-yuga, every person was spiritually advanced, and there
was no envy between great personalities. Gradually, however, because of
material contamination with the advance of the ages, disrespectful dealings
appeared even among brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas. Actually, an advanced
Vaiñëava is to be respected more than Viñëu. As stated in the Padma Puräëa,
ärädhanänäà sarveñäà viñëor ärädhanaà param: of all kinds of worship,
worship of Lord Viñëu is the best. Tasmät parataraà devi tadéyänäà
samarcanam: and recommended more than worship of Viñëu is worship of the
Vaiñëava.
Formerly, all activities were performed in connection with Viñëu, but after
Satya-yuga there were symptoms of disrespectful dealings among Vaiñëavas.
Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has said that a Vaiñëava is he who has helped
others become Vaiñëavas. An example of one who has converted many others
into Vaiñëavas is Närada Muni. A powerful Vaiñëava who has converted
others into Vaiñëavas is to be worshiped, but because of material
contamination, sometimes such an exalted Vaiñëava is disrespected by other,
minor Vaiñëavas. When great saintly persons saw this contamination, they
introduced worship of the Deity in the temple. This began in Tretä-yuga and
was especially prominent in Dväpara-yuga (dväpare paricaryäyäà). But in
Kali-yuga, worship of the Deity is being neglected. Therefore chanting of the
Hare Kåñëa mantra is more powerful than Deity worship. Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu set a practical example in that He did not establish any temples
or Deities, but He profusely introduced the saìkértana movement. Therefore
Kåñëa consciousness preachers should give more stress to the saìkértana
movement, especially by distributing transcendental literature more and more.
This helps the saìkértana movement. Whenever there is a possibility to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
968
worship the Deity, we may establish many centers, but generally we should
give more stress to the distribution of transcendental literature, for this will be
more effective in converting people to Kåñëa consciousness.
It is said in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.2.47):
arcäyäm eva haraye
püjäà yaù çraddhayehate
na tad-bhakteñu cänyeñu
sa bhaktaù präkåtaù småtaù
"A person who is very faithfully engaged in the worship of the Deity in the
temple but does not know how to behave toward devotees or people in general
is called a präkåta-bhakta, or kaniñöha-adhikäré." A präkåta devotee, or neophyte
devotee, is still on the material platform. He certainly engages in worshiping
the Deity, but he cannot appreciate the activities of a pure devotee. It has
actually been seen that even an authorized devotee who is engaged in the
service of the Lord by preaching the mission of Kåñëa consciousness is
sometimes criticized by neophyte devotees. Such neophytes are described by
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura: sarva-präëi-sammänanäsamarthänäm avajïä
spardhädimatäà tu bhagavat-pratimaiva pätram ity äha. For those who cannot
properly appreciate the activities of authorized devotees, Deity worship is the
only way for spiritual advancement. In the Caitanya-caritämåta (Antya 7.11) it
is clearly said, kåñëa-çakti vinä nahe tära pravartana: without being authorized
by Kåñëa, one cannot preach the holy name of the Lord throughout the entire
world. Nevertheless, a devotee who does so is criticized by neophyte devotees,
kaniñöha-adhikärés, who are on the lower stages of devotional service. For them,
Deity worship is strongly recommended.
TEXT 40
TaTaae_caRYaa& hir„& ke-icTa( Sa&é[ÖaYa SaPaYaRYaa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
969
oPaaSaTa oPaaSTaaiPa NaaQaRda PauåziÜzaMa( )) 40 ))
tato 'rcäyäà harià kecit
saàçraddhäya saparyayä
upäsata upästäpi
närthadä puruña-dviñäm
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; arcäyäm—the Deity; harim—who is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead (the form of the Lord being identical with the Lord);
kecit—someone; saàçraddhäya—with great faith; saparyayä—and with the
required paraphernalia; upäsate—worships; upästä api—although worshiping
the Deity (with faith and regularity); na—not; artha-dä—beneficial;
puruña-dviñäm—for those who are envious of Lord Viñëu and His devotees.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes a neophyte devotee offers all the paraphernalia for worshiping the
Lord, and he factually worships the Lord as the Deity, but because he is envious
of the authorized devotees of Lord Viñëu, the Lord is never satisfied with his
devotional service.
PURPORT
Deity worship is especially meant for purifying the neophyte devotees.
Actually, however, preaching is more important. In Bhagavad-gétä (18.69) it is
said, na ca tasmän manuñyeñu kaçcin me priya-kåttamaù: if one wants to be
recognized by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he must preach the glories
of the Lord. One who worships the Deity must therefore be extremely
respectful to preachers; otherwise simply worshiping the Deity will keep one in
the lower stage of devotion.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
970
TEXT 41
PauåzeZviPa raJaeNd] SauPaa}a& b]aø<a& ivdu" )
TaPaSaa ivÛYaa Tauíya Datae ved& hreSTaNauMa( )) 41 ))
puruñeñv api räjendra
supätraà brähmaëaà viduù
tapasä vidyayä tuñöyä
dhatte vedaà hares tanum
SYNONYMS
puruñeñu—among persons; api—indeed; räja-indra—O best of kings;
su-pätram—the best person; brähmaëam—the qualified brähmaëa;
viduù—one should know; tapasä—due to austerity; vidyayä—education;
tuñöyä—and satisfaction; dhatte—he assumes; vedam—the transcendental
knowledge known as Veda; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tanum—body, or representation.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, of all persons a qualified brähmaëa must be accepted as the
best within this material world because such a brähmaëa, by practicing
austerity, Vedic studies and satisfaction, becomes the counterpart body of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
From the Vedas we learn that the Personality of Godhead is the Supreme
Person. Every living entity is an individual person, and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is the Supreme Person. A brähmaëa who is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
971
well versed in Vedic knowledge and fully conversant with transcendental
matters becomes a representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
therefore one should worship such a brähmaëa or Vaiñëava. A Vaiñëava is
superior to a brähmaëa because whereas a brähmaëa knows that he is
Brahman, not matter, a Vaiñëava knows that he is not only Brahman but also
an eternal servant of the Supreme Brahman. Therefore, worship of a Vaiñëava
is superior to worship of the Deity in the temple. Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura says, säkñäd dharitvena samasta-çästraiù: in all the scriptures the
spiritual master, who is the best of the brähmaëas, the best of the Vaiñëavas, is
considered to be as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This does not
mean, however, that the Vaiñëava thinks himself God, for this is blasphemous.
Although a brähmaëa or Vaiñëava is worshiped as being as good as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, such a devotee always remains a faithful
servant of the Lord and never tries to enjoy the prestige that might accrue to
him from being the Supreme Lord's representative.
TEXT 42
NaNvSYa b]aø<aa raJaNk*-Z<aSYa JaGadaTMaNa" )
PauNaNTa" PaadrJaSaa i}al/aek-I& dEvTa& MahTa( )) 42 ))
nanv asya brähmaëä räjan
kåñëasya jagad-ätmanaù
punantaù päda-rajasä
tri-lokéà daivataà mahat
SYNONYMS
nanu—but; asya—by Him; brähmaëäù—the qualified brähmaëas; räjan—O
King; kåñëasya—by Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
jagat-ätmanaù—who is the life and soul of the whole creation;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
972
punantaù—sanctifying; päda-rajasä—by the dust of their lotus feet;
tri-lokém—the three worlds; daivatam—worshipable; mahat—most exalted.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Yudhiñöhira, the brähmaëas, especially those engaged in
preaching the glories of the Lord throughout the entire world, are recognized
and worshiped by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the heart and
soul of all creation. The brähmaëas, by their preaching, sanctify the three
worlds with the dust of their lotus feet, and thus they are worshipable even for
Kåñëa.
PURPORT
As admitted by Lord Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä (18.69), na ca tasmän
manuñyeñu kaçcin me priya-kåttamaù. The brähmaëas preach the cult of Kåñëa
consciousness all around the world, and therefore, although they worship
Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord also recognizes them as
worshipable. The relationship is reciprocal. The brähmaëas want to worship
Kåñëa, and similarly Kåñëa wants to worship the brähmaëas. In conclusion,
therefore, brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas who are engaged in preaching the glories
of the Lord must be worshiped by religionists, philosophers and people in
general. At the Räjasüya-yajïa of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, many hundreds and
thousands of brähmaëas were present, yet Kåñëa was selected to be worshiped
first. Therefore, Kåñëa is always the Supreme Person, but by His causeless
mercy He recognizes the brähmaëas as dearmost to Him.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Fourteenth Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Ideal Family Life."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
973
15. Instructions for Civilized Human Beings
The summary of the Fifteenth Chapter is as follows. In the previous
chapter, Çré Närada Muni proved the importance of the brähmaëa in society.
Now, in this chapter, he will show the differences between different grades of
brähmaëas. Among the brähmaëas, some are householders and are mostly
attached to fruitive activities or the betterment of social conditions. Above
them, however, are brähmaëas who are very much attracted by austerities and
penances and who retire from family life. They are known as vänaprasthas.
Other brähmaëas are very much interested in studying the Vedas and
explaining the purport of the Vedas to others. Such brähmaëas are called
brahmacärés. And still other brähmaëas are interested in different types of
yoga, especially bhakti-yoga and jïäna-yoga. Such brähmaëas are mostly
sannyäsés, members of the renounced order of life.
As far as householders are concerned, they engage in different types of
scriptural activities, especially in offering oblations to their forefathers and
giving as charity to other brähmaëas the paraphernalia engaged in such
sacrifices. Generally the charity is given to sannyäsés, brähmaëas in the
renounced order of life. If such a sannyäsé is not available, the charity is given
to brähmaëa householders engaged in fruitive activities.
One should not make very elaborate arrangements to perform the çräddha
ceremony of offering oblations to one's forefathers. The best process for the
çräddha ceremony is to distribute bhägavata-prasäda (remnants of food that
has first been offered to Kåñëa) to all of one's forefathers and relatives. This
makes a first-class çräddha ceremony. In the çräddha ceremony there is no need
to offer meat or eat meat. Unnecessary killing of animals must be avoided.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
974
Those who are in the lower grades of society prefer to perform sacrifices by
killing animals, but one who is advanced in knowledge must avoid such
unnecessary violence.
Brähmaëas should execute their regulative duties in worshiping Lord Viñëu.
Those who are advanced in knowledge of religious principles must avoid five
kinds of irreligion, known as vidharma, para-dharma, dharmäbhäsa, upadharma
and chala-dharma. One must act according to the religious principles that suit
his constitutional position; it is not that everyone must adhere to the same
type of religion. A general principle is that a poor man should not
unnecessarily endeavor for economic development. One who refrains from
such endeavors but who engages in devotional service is most auspicious.
One who is not satisfied with the mind must fall to degradation. One must
conquer lusty desires, anger, greed, fear, lamentation, illusion, fright,
unnecessary talks on material subjects, violence, the four miseries of material
existence, and the three material qualities. That is the objective of human life.
One who has no faith in the spiritual master, who is identical with Çré Kåñëa,
cannot get any benefit from reading çästra. One should never consider the
spiritual master an ordinary human being, even though the members of the
spiritual master's family may think of him as such. Meditation and other
processes of austerity are useful only if they help in advancement toward
Kåñëa consciousness; otherwise, they are simply a waste of time and labor. For
those who are not devotees, such meditation and austerity cause falldown.
Every householder should be very careful because even though a
householder may try to conquer the senses, he becomes a victim to the
association of relatives and falls down. Thus a gåhastha must become a
vänaprastha or sannyäsé, live in a secluded place, and be satisfied with food
gotten by begging from door to door. He must chant the oàkära mantra or
Hare Kåñëa mantra, and in this way he will perceive transcendental bliss
within himself. After taking sannyäsa, however, if one returns to gåhastha life,
he is called a väntäçé, which means "one who eats his own vomit." Such a
person is shameless. A householder should not give up the ritualistic
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
975
ceremonies, and a sannyäsé should not live in society. If a sannyäsé is agitated
by the senses, he is a cheater influenced by the modes of passion and
ignorance. When one assumes a role in goodness by starting philanthropic and
altruistic activities, such activities become impediments on the path of
devotional service.
The best process for advancing in devotional service is to abide by the
orders of the spiritual master, for only by his direction can one conquer the
senses. Unless one is completely Kåñëa conscious, there is a chance of falling
down. Of course, in performing ritualistic ceremonies and other fruitive
activities there are also many dangers at every moment. Fruitive activities
have been divided into twelve portions. Because of performing fruitive
activities, which are called the path of dharma, one has to accept the cycle of
birth and death, but when one takes the path of mokña, or liberation, which is
described in Bhagavad-gétä as arcanä-märga, one can get relief from the cycle
of birth and death. The Vedas describe these two paths as pitå-yäna and
deva-yäna. Those who follow the paths of pitå-yäna and deva-yäna are never
bewildered, even while in the material body. A monistic philosopher who
gradually develops control of the senses understands that the objective of all
the different äçramas, the statuses of life, is salvation. One must live and act
according to çästras.
If one who is performing the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies becomes a
devotee, even if he is a gåhastha, he can receive the causeless mercy of Kåñëa.
The objective of a devotee is to return home, back to Godhead. Such a
devotee, even though not performing ritualistic ceremonies, advances in
spiritual consciousness by the supreme will of the Personality of Godhead. One
may actually become successful in spiritual consciousness by the mercy of
devotees, or one may fall from spiritual consciousness by being disrespectful to
devotees. In this regard, Närada Muni narrated the history of how he had
fallen from the Gandharva kingdom, how he was born in a çüdra family, and
how by serving exalted brähmaëas he become the son of Lord Brahmä and was
reinstated in his transcendental position. After narrating all these stories,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
976
Närada Muni praised the mercy received from the Lord by the Päëòavas.
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, after hearing from Närada, become ecstatic in love of
Kåñëa, and then Närada Muni left that place and returned to his own place.
Thus Çukadeva Gosvämé, having described various descendants of the
daughters of Dakña, ends the Seventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 1
é[qNaard ovac
k-MaRiNaïa iÜJaa" ke-icTa( TaPaaeiNaïa Na*PaaPare )
SvaDYaaYae_NYae Pa[vcNae ke-cNa jaNaYaaeGaYaae" )) 1 ))
çré-närada uväca
karma-niñöhä dvijäù kecit
tapo-niñöhä nåpäpare
svädhyäye 'nye pravacane
kecana jïäna-yogayoù
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; karma-niñöhäù—attached to ritualistic
ceremonies (according to one's social status as a brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya or
çüdra); dvi-jäù—the twice-born (especially the brähmaëas); kecit—some;
tapaù-niñöhäù—very much attached to austerities and penances; nåpa—O
King; apare—others; svädhyäye—in studying Vedic literature; anye—others;
pravacane—delivering speeches on Vedic literature; kecana—some;
jïäna-yogayoù—in culturing knowledge and practicing bhakti-yoga.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: My dear King, some brähmaëas are very much
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
977
attached to fruitive activities, some are attached to austerities and penances, and
still others study the Vedic literature, whereas some, although very few,
cultivate knowledge and practice different yogas, especially bhakti-yoga.
TEXT 2
jaNaiNaïaYa deYaaiNa k-VYaaNYaaNaNTYaiMaC^Taa )
dEve c Tad>aave SYaaidTare>Yaae YaQaahRTa" )) 2 ))
jïäna-niñöhäya deyäni
kavyäny änantyam icchatä
daive ca tad-abhäve syäd
itarebhyo yathärhataù
SYNONYMS
jïäna-niñöhäya—to the impersonalist or the transcendentalist desiring to
merge into the Supreme; deyäni—to be given in charity; kavyäni—ingredients
offered to the forefathers as oblations; änantyam—liberation from material
bondage; icchatä—by a person desiring; daive—the ingredients to be offered to
the demigods; ca—also; tat-abhäve—in the absence of such advanced
transcendentalists; syät—it should be done; itarebhyaù—to others (namely,
those addicted to fruitive activities); yathä-arhataù—comparatively or with
discrimination.
TRANSLATION
A person desiring liberation for his forefathers or himself should give charity
to a brähmaëa who adheres to impersonal monism [jïäna-niñöhä]. In the
absence of such an advanced brähmaëa, charity may be given to a brähmaëa
addicted to fruitive activities [karma-käëòa].
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
978
PURPORT
There are two processes by which to get free from material bondage. One
involves jïäna-käëòa and karma-käëòa, and the other involves
upäsanä-käëòa. Vaiñëavas never want to merge into the existence of the
Supreme; rather, they want to be everlastingly servants of the Lord to render
loving service unto Him. In this verse the words änantyam icchatä refer to
persons who desire to achieve liberation from material bondage and merge into
the existence of the Lord. Devotees, however, whose objective is to associate
personally with the Lord, have no desire to accept the activities of
karma-käëòa or jïäna-käëòa, for pure devotional service is above both
karma-käëòa and jïäna-käëòa. Anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
[Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(41)]. In pure devotional service there is not even
a pinch of jïäna or karma. Consequently, when Vaiñëavas distribute charity,
they do not need to find a brähmaëa performing the activities of jïäna-käëòa
or karma-käëòa. The best example in this regard is provided by Advaita
Gosvämé, who, after performing the çräddha ceremony for his father, offered
charity to Haridäsa Öhäkura, although it was known to everyone that Haridäsa
Öhäkura was born in a Mohammedan family, not a brähmaëa family, and was
not interested in the activities of jïäna-käëòa or karma-käëòa.
Charity, therefore, should be given to the first-class transcendentalist, the
devotee, because the çästras recommend:
muktänäm api siddhänäà
näräyaëa-paräyaëaù
sudurlabhaù praçäntätmä
koöiñv api mahä-mune
"O great sage, among many millions who are liberated and perfect in
knowledge of liberation, one may be a devotee of Lord Näräyaëa, or Kåñëa.
Such devotees, who are fully peaceful, are extremely rare." (SB 6.14.5) A
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
979
Vaiñëava is in a higher position than a jïäné, and therefore Advaita Äcärya
selected Haridäsa Öhäkura to be the person to accept His charity. The
Supreme Lord also says:
na me 'bhaktaç catur-vedé
mad-bhaktaù çva-pacaù priyaù
tasmai deyaà tato grähyaà
sa ca püjyo yathä hy aham
"Even though a person is a very learned scholar of the Sanskrit Vedic
literatures, he is not accepted as My devotee unless he is pure in devotional
service. However, even though a person is born in a family of dog-eaters, he is
very dear to Me if he is a pure devotee who has no motive to enjoy fruitive
activity or mental speculation. Indeed, all respect should be given to him, and
whatever he offers should be accepted. Such devotees are as worshipable as I
am." (Hari-bhakti-viläsa 10.127) Therefore, even if not born in a brähmaëa
family, a devotee, because of his devotion to the Lord, is above all kinds of
brähmaëas, whether they be karma-käëòés or jïäna-käëòés.
In this regard, it may be mentioned that brähmaëas in Våndävana who are
karma-käëòés and jïäna-käëòés sometimes decline to accept invitations to our
temple because our temple is known as the aìgarejé temple, or "Anglican
temple." But in accordance with the evidence given in the çästra and the
example set by Advaita Äcärya, we give prasäda to devotees regardless of
whether they come from India, Europe or America. It is the conclusion of the
çästra that instead of feeding many jïäna-käëòé or karma-käëòé brähmaëas, it
is better to feed a pure Vaiñëava, regardless of where he comes from. This is
also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.30):
api cet su-duräcäro
bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù
samyag vyavasito hi saù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
980
"Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly
situated." Thus it doesn't matter whether a devotee comes from a brähmaëa
family or non-brähmaëa family; if he is fully devoted to Kåñëa, he is a sädhu.
TEXT 3
ÜaE dEve iPaTa*k-aYaeR }aqNaekE-k-Mau>aYa}a va )
>aaeJaYaeTa( SauSaMa*Öae_iPa é[aÖe ku-YaaRà ivSTarMa( )) 3 ))
dvau daive pitå-kärye trén
ekaikam ubhayatra vä
bhojayet susamåddho 'pi
çräddhe kuryän na vistaram
SYNONYMS
dvau—two; daive—during the period when oblations are offered to the
demigods; pitå-kärye—in the çräddha ceremony, in which oblations are offered
to the forefathers; trén—three; eka—one; ekam—one; ubhayatra—for both
occasions; vä—either; bhojayet—one should feed; su-samåddhaù api—even
though one is very rich; çräddhe—when offering oblations to the forefathers;
kuryät—one should do; na—not; vistaram—very expensive arrangements.
TRANSLATION
During the period for offering oblations to the demigods, one should invite
only two brähmaëas, and while offering oblations to the forefathers, one may
invite three brähmaëas. Or, in either case, only one brähmaëa will suffice. Even
though one is very opulent, he should not endeavor to invite more brähmaëas or
make various expensive arrangements on those occasions.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
981
PURPORT
As we have already mentioned, Çréla Advaita Äcärya, during the generally
observed ceremony to offer oblations to the forefathers, invited only Haridäsa
Öhäkura. Thus He followed this principle: na me'bhaktaç catur-vedé
mad-bhaktaù çva-pacaù priyaù. The Lord says, "It is not necessary that one
become very expert in Vedic knowledge before he can become My bhakta, or
devotee. Even if one is born in a family of dog-eaters, he can become My
devotee and be very dear to Me, in spite of having taken birth in such a family.
Therefore, offerings should be given to My devotee, and whatever My devotee
has offered Me should be accepted." Following this principle, one should invite
a first-class brähmaëa or Vaiñëava—a realized soul—and feed him while
observing the çräddha ceremony to offer oblations to one's forefathers.
TEXT 4
deXak-al/aeicTaé[Öad]VYaPaa}aahR<aaiNa c )
SaMYaGa( >aviNTa NaETaaiNa ivSTaraTa( SvJaNaaPaR<aaTa( )) 4 ))
deça-kälocita-çraddhädravya-
päträrhaëäni ca
samyag bhavanti naitäni
vistarät sva-janärpaëät
SYNONYMS
deça—place; käla—time; ucita—proper; çraddhä—respect;
dravya—ingredients; pätra—a suitable person; arhaëäni—paraphernalia for
worship; ca—and; samyak—proper; bhavanti—are; na—not; etäni—all these;
vistarät—due to expansion; sva-jana-arpaëät—or due to inviting relatives.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
982
TRANSLATION
If one arranges to feed many brähmaëas or relatives during the çräddha
ceremony, there will be discrepancies in the time, place, respectability and
ingredients, the person to be worshiped, and the method of offering worship.
PURPORT
Närada Muni has prohibited unnecessarily gorgeous arrangements to feed
relatives or brähmaëas during the çräddha ceremony. Those who are materially
opulent spend lavishly during this ceremony. Indians spend especially lavishly
on three occasions—at the birth of a child, at marriage and while observing
the çräddha ceremony—but the çästras prohibit the excessive expenditures
involved in inviting many brähmaëas and relatives, especially during the
çräddha ceremony.
TEXT 5
deXae k-ale/ c SaMPa[aáe MauNYaà& hirdEvTaMa( )
é[ÖYaa iviDavTa( Paa}ae NYaSTa& k-aMaDauGa+aYaMa( )) 5 ))
deçe käle ca sampräpte
muny-annaà hari-daivatam
çraddhayä vidhivat pätre
nyastaà kämadhug akñayam
SYNONYMS
deçe—in a proper place, namely a holy place of pilgrimage; käle—at an
auspicious time; ca—also; sampräpte—when available;
muni-annam—foodstuffs prepared with ghee and suitable to be eaten by great
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
983
saintly persons; hari-daivatam—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Hari; çraddhayä—with love and affection; vidhi-vat—according to the
directions of the spiritual master and the çästras; pätre—unto the suitable
person; nyastam—if it is so offered; kämadhuk—becomes a source of
prosperity; akñayam—everlasting.
TRANSLATION
When one gets the opportunity of a suitable auspicious time and place, one
should, with love, offer food prepared with ghee to the Deity of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and then offer the prasäda to a suitable person—a
Vaiñëava or brähmaëa. This will be the cause of everlasting prosperity.
TEXT 6
devizRiPaTa*>aUTae>Ya AaTMaNae SvJaNaaYa c )
Aà& Sa&iv>aJaNPaXYaeTa( Sav| TaTa( PauåzaTMak-Ma( )) 6 ))
devarñi-pitå-bhütebhya
ätmane sva-janäya ca
annaà saàvibhajan paçyet
sarvaà tat puruñätmakam
SYNONYMS
deva—unto the demigods; åñi—saintly persons; pitå—forefathers;
bhütebhyaù—the living entities in general; ätmane—relatives;
sva-janäya—family members and friends; ca—and; annam—foodstuff
(prasäda); saàvibhajan—offering; paçyet—one should see; sarvam—all;
tat—them; puruña-ätmakam—related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
984
TRANSLATION
One should offer prasäda to the demigods, the saintly persons, one's
forefathers, the people in general, one's family members, one's relatives and
one's friends, seeing them all as devotees of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
PURPORT
As mentioned above, it is recommended that everyone distribute prasäda,
considering every living being a part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. Even in
feeding the poor, one should distribute prasäda. In Kali-yuga there is a scarcity
of food almost every year, and thus philanthropists spend lavishly to feed the
poor. For this they invent the term daridra-näräyaëa-sevä. This is prohibited.
One should distribute sumptuous prasäda, considering everyone a part of the
Supreme Lord, but one should not juggle words to make a poor man Näräyaëa.
Everyone is related to the Supreme Lord, but one should not mistakenly think
that because one is related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he has
become the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa. Such a Mäyäväda
philosophy is extremely dangerous, especially for a devotee. Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu has therefore strictly forbidden us to associate with Mäyävädé
philosophers. Mäyävädi-bhäñya çunile haya sarva-näça: if one associates with
the Mäyäväda philosophy, his devotional life is doomed.
TEXT 7
Na dÛadaiMaz& é[aÖe Na caÛad( DaMaRTatvivTa( )
MauNYaàE" SYaaTPara Pa[qiTaYaRQaa Na Paéuih&SaYaa )) 7 ))
na dadyäd ämiñaà çräddhe
na cädyäd dharma-tattvavit
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
985
muny-annaiù syät parä prétir
yathä na paçu-hiàsayä
SYNONYMS
na—never; dadyät—should offer; ämiñam—meat, fish, eggs and so on;
çräddhe—in the performance of the çräddha ceremony; na—nor; ca—also;
adyät—one should eat personally; dharma-tattva-vit—one who is actually
learned in regard to religious activities; muni-annaiù—by preparations made
with ghee for saintly persons; syät—should be; parä—first-class;
prétiù—satisfaction; yathä—for the forefathers and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; na—not; paçu-hiàsayä—by killing animals unnecessarily.
TRANSLATION
A person fully aware of religious principles should never offer anything like
meat, eggs or fish in the çräddha ceremony, and even if one is a kñatriya, he
himself should not eat such things. When suitable food prepared with ghee is
offered to saintly persons, the function is pleasing to the forefathers and the
Supreme Lord, who are never pleased when animals are killed in the name of
sacrifice.
TEXT 8
NaETaad*Xa" Parae DaMaaeR Na*<aa& SaÖMaRiMaC^TaaMa( )
NYaaSaae d<@SYa >aUTaezu MaNaaeva¡-aYaJaSYa Ya" )) 8 ))
naitädåçaù paro dharmo
nåëäà sad-dharmam icchatäm
nyäso daëòasya bhüteñu
mano-väk-käyajasya yaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
986
SYNONYMS
na—never; etädåçaù—like this; paraù—a supreme or superior;
dharmaù—religion; nåëäm—of persons; sat-dharmam—superior religion;
icchatäm—being desirous of; nyäsaù—giving up; daëòasya—causing trouble
because of envy; bhüteñu—unto the living entities; manaù—in terms of the
mind; väk—words; käya-jasya—and body; yaù—which.
TRANSLATION
Persons who want to advance in superior religion are advised to give up all
envy of other living entities, whether in relationship to the body, words or
mind. There is no religion superior to this.
TEXT 9
Wke- k-MaRMaYaaNa( YajaNa( jaiNaNaae YajivtaMaa" )
AaTMaSa&YaMaNae_Naqha JauûiTa jaNadqiPaTae )) 9 ))
eke karmamayän yajïän
jïänino yajïa-vittamäù
ätma-saàyamane 'néhä
juhvati jïäna-dépite
SYNONYMS
eke—some; karma-mayän—resulting in a reaction (such as the killing of
animals); yajïän—sacrifices; jïäninaù—persons advanced in knowledge;
yajïa-vit-tamäù—who know perfectly well the purpose of sacrifice;
ätma-saàyamane—by self-control; anéhäù—who are without material desires;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
987
juhvati—execute sacrifice; jïäna-dépite—enlightened in perfect knowledge.
TRANSLATION
Because of an awakening of spiritual knowledge, those who are intelligent in
regard to sacrifice, who are actually aware of religious principles and who are
free from material desires, control the self in the fire of spiritual knowledge, or
knowledge of the Absolute Truth. They may give up the process of ritualistic
ceremonies.
PURPORT
People are generally very much interested in karma-käëòa ritualistic
ceremonies for elevation to the higher planetary systems, but when one
awakens his spiritual knowledge, he becomes uninterested in such elevation
and engages himself fully in jïäna-yajïa to find the objective of life. The
objective of life is to stop completely the miseries of birth and death and to
return home, back to Godhead. When one cultivates knowledge for this
purpose, he is considered to be on a higher platform than one who is engaged
in karma-yajïa, or fruitive activities.
TEXT 10
d]VYaYajEYaR+YaMaa<a& d*îa >aUTaaiNa ib>YaiTa )
Wz Maak-å<aae hNYaadTaJjae ùSauTa*Pa( Da]uvMa( )) 10 ))
dravya-yajïair yakñyamäëaà
dåñövä bhütäni bibhyati
eña mäkaruëo hanyäd
ataj-jïo hy asu-tåp dhruvam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
988
SYNONYMS
dravya-yajïaiù—with animals and other eatable things; yakñyamäëam—the
person engaged in such sacrifices; dåñövä—by seeing; bhütäni—the living
entities (animals); bibhyati—become afraid; eñaù—this person (the performer
of sacrifice); mä—us; akaruëaù—who is inhumane and merciless; hanyät—will
kill; a-tat-jïaù—most ignorant; hi—indeed; asu-tåp—who is most satisfied by
killing others; dhruvam—certainly.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing the person engaged in performing the sacrifice, animals meant
to be sacrificed are extremely afraid, thinking, "This merciless performer of
sacrifices, being ignorant of the purpose of sacrifice and being most satisfied by
killing others, will surely kill us."
PURPORT
Animal sacrifice in the name of religion is current practically all over the
world in every established religion. It is said that Lord Jesus Christ, when
twelve years old, was shocked to see the Jews sacrificing birds and animals in
the synagogues and that he therefore rejected the Jewish system of religion and
started the religious system of Christianity, adhering to the Old Testament
commandment "Thou shalt not kill." At the present day, however, not only are
animals killed in the name of sacrifice, but the killing of animals has increased
enormously because of the increasing number of slaughterhouses. Slaughtering
animals, either for religion or for food, is most abominable and is condemned
herein. Unless one is merciless, one cannot sacrifice animals, either in the
name of religion or for food.
TEXT 11
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
989
TaSMaad( dEvaePaPaàeNa MauNYaàeNaaiPa DaMaRivTa( )
SaNTauíae_hrh" ku-YaaRiàTYaNaEiMaitak-I" i§-Yaa" )) 11 ))
tasmäd daivopapannena
muny-annenäpi dharmavit
santuñöo 'har ahaù kuryän
nitya-naimittikéù kriyäù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; daiva-upapannena—obtainable very easily by the grace of
the Lord; muni-annena—with food (prepared in ghee and offered to the
Supreme Lord); api—indeed; dharma-vit—one who is actually advanced in
religious principles; santuñöaù—very happily; ahaù ahaù—day after day;
kuryät—one should perform; nitya-naimittikéù—regular and occasional;
kriyäù—duties.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, day by day, one who is actually aware of religious principles and
is not heinously envious of poor animals should happily perform daily sacrifices
and those for certain occasions with whatever food is available easily by the
grace of the Lord.
PURPORT
The word dharmavit, meaning "one who knows the actual purpose of
religion," is very significant. As explained in Bhagavad-gétä (18.66),
sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja: becoming Kåñëa conscious
is the topmost stage in understanding of religious principles. One who reaches
this stage performs the arcanä process in devotional service. Anyone, whether
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
990
a gåhastha or a sannyäsé, can keep small Deities of the Lord suitably packed or,
if possible, installed, and thus worship the Deities of Rädhä-Kåñëa, Sétä-Räma,
Lakñmé-Näräyaëa, Lord Jagannätha or Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu by offering
food prepared in ghee and then offering the sanctified prasäda to the
forefathers, demigods and other living entities as a matter of routine daily
work. All the centers of our Kåñëa consciousness movement have Deity
worship programs very nicely going on in which food is offered to the Deity
and distributed to the first-class brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas and even to the
people in general. This performance of sacrifice brings complete satisfaction.
The members of the Kåñëa consciousness movement engage daily in such
transcendental activities. Thus in our Kåñëa consciousness movement there is
no question at all of killing animals.
TEXT 12
ivDaMaR" ParDaMaRê Aa>aaSa oPaMaa ^l/" )
ADaMaRXaa%a" PaÄeMaa DaMaRjae_DaMaRvTa( TYaJaeTa( )) 12 ))
vidharmaù para-dharmaç ca
äbhäsa upamä chalaù
adharma-çäkhäù païcemä
dharma-jïo 'dharmavat tyajet
SYNONYMS
vidharmaù—irreligion; para-dharmaù—religious principles practiced by others;
ca—and; äbhäsaù—pretentious religious principles; upamä—principles that
appear religious but are not; chalaù—a cheating religion;
adharma-çäkhäù—which are different branches of irreligion; païca—five;
imäù—these; dharma-jïaù—one who is aware of religious principles;
adharma-vat—accepting them as irreligious; tyajet—should give up.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
991
TRANSLATION
There are five branches of irreligion, appropriately known as irreligion
[vidharma], religious principles for which one is unfit [para-dharma],
pretentious religion [äbhäsa], analogical religion [upadharma] and cheating
religion [chala-dharma]. One who is aware of real religious life must abandon
these five as irreligious.
PURPORT
Any religious principles opposed to the principle of surrendering to the
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, are to be considered
religious principles of irregularity or cheating, and one who is actually
interested in religion must give them up. One should simply follow the
instructions of Kåñëa and surrender unto Him. To do this, of course, one needs
very good intelligence, which may be awakened after many, many births
through good association with devotees and the practice of Kåñëa
consciousness. Everything but the principle of religion recommended by
Kåñëa-sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]—should
be given up as irreligion.
TEXT 13
DaMaRbaDaae ivDaMaR" SYaaTa( ParDaMaaeR_NYacaeidTa" )
oPaDaMaRSTau Paa%<@ae dM>aae va XaBdi>aC^l/" )) 13 ))
dharma-bädho vidharmaù syät
para-dharmo 'nya-coditaù
upadharmas tu päkhaëòo
dambho vä çabda-bhic chalaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
992
SYNONYMS
dharma-bädhaù—obstructs the execution of one's own religious principles;
vidharmaù—against the principles of religion; syät—should be;
para-dharmaù—imitating religious systems for which one is unfit;
anya-coditaù—which is introduced by someone else; upadharmaù—concocted
religious principles; tu—indeed; päkhaëòaù—by one who is against the
principles of Vedas, standard scriptures; dambhaù—who is falsely proud;
vä—or; çabda-bhit—by word jugglery; chalaù—a cheating religious system.
TRANSLATION
Religious principles that obstruct one from following his own religion are
called vidharma. Religious principles introduced by others are called
para-dharma. A new type of religion created by one who is falsely proud and
who opposes the principles of the Vedas is called upadharma. And
interpretation by one's jugglery of words is called chala-dharma.
PURPORT
To create a new type of dharma has become fashionable in this age.
So-called svämés and yogés support that one may follow any type of religious
system, according to one's own choice, because all systems are ultimately the
same. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam, however, such fashionable ideas are called
vidharma because they go against one's own religious system. The real religious
system is described by the Supreme Personality of Godhead: sarva-dharmän
parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]. The real religious system is that
of surrender to the lotus feet of the Lord. In the Sixth Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, in connection with Ajämila's deliverance, Yamaräja says,
dharmaà tu säkñäd bhagavat-praëétam: [SB 6.3.19] real religion is that which is
given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, just as real law is that which is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
993
given by the government. No one can manufacture actual law at home, nor
can one manufacture actual religion. Elsewhere it is said, sa vai puàsäà paro
dharmo yato bhaktir adhokñaje: [SB 1.2.6] the real religious system is that which
leads one to become a devotee of the Supreme Lord. Therefore, anything
opposed to this religious system of progressive Kåñëa consciousness is called
vidharma, para-dharma, upadharma or chala-dharma. Misinterpretation of
Bhagavad-gétä is chala-dharma. When Kåñëa directly says something and some
rascal interprets it to mean something different, this is chala-dharma—a
religious system of cheating—or çabda-bhit, a jugglery of words. One should be
extremely careful to avoid these various types of cheating systems of religion.
TEXT 14
YaiSTvC^Yaa k*-Ta" PauiM>ara>aaSaae ùaé[MaaTa( Pa*Qak(- )
Sv>aavivihTaae DaMaR" k-SYa Naeí" Pa[XaaNTaYae )) 14 ))
yas tv icchayä kåtaù pumbhir
äbhäso hy äçramät påthak
sva-bhäva-vihito dharmaù
kasya neñöaù praçäntaye
SYNONYMS
yaù—that which; tu—indeed; icchayä—whimsically; kåtaù—conducted;
pumbhiù—by persons; äbhäsaù—dim reflection; hi—indeed; äçramät—from
one's own order of life; påthak—different; sva-bhäva—according to one's own
nature; vihitaù—regulated; dharmaù—religious principle; kasya—in what
respect; na—not; iñöaù—capable; praçäntaye—for relieving all kinds of
distress.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
994
TRANSLATION
A pretentious religious system manufactured by one who willfully neglects
the prescribed duties of his order of life is called äbhäsa [a dim reflection or false
similarity]. But if one performs the prescribed duties for his particular äçrama
or varëa, why are they not sufficient to mitigate all material distresses?
PURPORT
It is indicated here that everyone should strictly follow the principles of
varëa and äçrama as given in the çästra. In the Viñëu Puräëa (3.8.9) it is said:
varëäçramäcäravatä
puruñeëa paraù pumän
viñëur ärädhyate panthä
nänyat tat-toña-käraëam
[Cc. Madhya 8.58]
One should focus upon the destination for progress, which is to become Kåñëa
conscious. This is the aim and end of all varëas and äçramas. However, if
Viñëu is not worshiped, the followers of the varëäçrama institution
manufacture some concocted God. Thus it has now become fashionable for
any rascal or fool to be elected God, and there are many missionaries who have
concocted their own gods, giving up their relationship with the real God. In
Bhagavad-gétä it is clearly said that one who worships the demigods has lost his
intelligence. Nonetheless we find that even an illiterate person who has lost all
intelligence is elected God, and although he has a temple, it has meat-eating
sannyäsés, and many polluted activities go on there. This type of religious
system, which misguides its poor followers, is strictly forbidden. Such
pretentious religions should be stopped altogether.
The original system is that a brähmaëa should actually become a brähmaëa;
he should not only take birth in a brähmaëa family, but must also be qualified.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
995
Also, even if one is not born in a brähmaëa family but has brahminical
qualifications, he must be considered a brähmaëa. By strictly following this
system, one can be happy without extra endeavor. Sva-bhäva-vihito dharmaù
kasya neñöaù praçäntaye. The real aim of life is to mitigate distress, and one can
do this very easily by following the principles of çästra.
TEXT 15
DaMaaRQaRMaiPa NaeheTa Yaa}aaQa| vaDaNaae DaNaMa( )
ANaqhaNaqhMaaNaSYa Mahaheirv v*itada )) 15 ))
dharmärtham api neheta
yäträrthaà vädhano dhanam
anéhänéhamänasya
mahäher iva våttidä
SYNONYMS
dharma-artham—in religion or economic development; api—indeed; na—not;
éheta—should try to obtain; yäträ-artham—just to maintain the body and soul
together; vä—either; adhanaù—one who has no wealth; dhanam—money;
anéhä—the desirelessness; anéhamänasya—of a person who does not endeavor
even to earn his livelihood; mahä-aheù—the great serpent known as the
python; iva—like; våtti-dä—which obtains its livelihood without endeavor.
TRANSLATION
Even if a man is poor, he should not endeavor to improve his economic
condition just to maintain his body and soul together or to become a famous
religionist. Just as a great python, although lying in one place, not endeavoring
for its livelihood, gets the food it needs to maintain body and soul, one who is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
996
desireless also obtains his livelihood without endeavor.
PURPORT
Human life is simply meant for developing Kåñëa consciousness. One need
not even try to earn a livelihood to maintain body and soul together. This is
illustrated here by the example of the great python, which lies in one place,
never going here and there to earn a livelihood to maintain itself, and yet is
maintained by the grace of the Lord. As advised by Närada Muni (SB 1.5.18),
tasyaiva hetoù prayateta kovidaù: one should simply endeavor to increase his
Kåñëa consciousness. One should not desire to do anything else, even to earn
his livelihood. There are many, many examples of this attitude. Mädhavendra
Puré, for instance, would never go to anyone to ask for food. Çukadeva
Gosvämé has also said, kasmäd bhajanti kavayo dhana-durmadändhän [SB 2.2.5].
Why should one approach a person who is blind with wealth? Rather, one
should depend on Kåñëa, and He will give everything. All the members of our
Kåñëa consciousness movement, whether they be gåhasthas or sannyäsés, should
try to spread the Kåñëa consciousness movement with determination, and
Kåñëa will supply all necessities. The process of äjagara-våtti, the means of
livelihood of a python, is very much appreciated in this regard. Even though
one may be very poor, he should simply try to advance in Kåñëa consciousness
and not endeavor to earn his livelihood.
TEXT 16
SaNTauíSYa iNarqhSYa SvaTMaaraMaSYa YaTa( Sau%Ma( )
ku-TaSTaTa( k-aMal/ae>aeNa DaavTaae_QaeRhYaa idXa" )) 16 ))
santuñöasya niréhasya
svätmärämasya yat sukham
kutas tat käma-lobhena
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
997
dhävato 'rthehayä diçaù
SYNONYMS
santuñöasya—of one who is fully satisfied in Kåñëa consciousness;
niréhasya—who does not endeavor for his livelihood; sva—own;
ätma-ärämasya—who is self-satisfied; yat—that; sukham—happiness;
kutaù—where; tat—such happiness; käma-lobhena—impelled by lust and
greed; dhävataù—of one who is wandering here and there; artha-éhayä—with a
desire for accumulating wealth; diçaù—in all directions.
TRANSLATION
One who is content and satisfied and who links his activities with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead residing in everyone's heart enjoys
transcendental happiness without endeavoring for his livelihood. Where is such
happiness for a materialistic man who is impelled by lust and greed and who
therefore wanders in all directions with a desire to accumulate wealth?
TEXT 17
Sada SaNTauíMaNaSa" SavaR" iXavMaYaa idXa" )
XakR-rak-<$=k-aid>Yaae YaQaaePaaNaTPad" iXavMa( )) 17 ))
sadä santuñöa-manasaù
sarväù çivamayä diçaù
çarkarä-kaëöakädibhyo
yathopänat-padaù çivam
SYNONYMS
sadä—always; santuñöa-manasaù—for a person who is self-satisfied;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
998
sarväù—everything; çiva-mayäù—auspicious; diçaù—in all directions;
çarkarä—from pebbles; kaëöaka-ädibhyaù—and thorns, etc.; yathä—as;
upänat-padaù—for a person who has suitable shoes; çivam—there is no danger
(auspicious).
TRANSLATION
For a person who has suitable shoes on his feet, there is no danger even
when he walks on pebbles and thorns. For him, everything is auspicious.
Similarly, for one who is always self-satisfied there is no distress; indeed, he
feels happiness everywhere.
TEXT 18
SaNTauí" ke-Na va raJaà vTaeRTaaiPa vair<aa )
AaEPaSQYaJaEûyk-aPaR<Yaad( Ga*hPaal/aYaTae JaNa" )) 18 ))
santuñöaù kena vä räjan
na vartetäpi väriëä
aupasthya-jaihvya-kärpaëyäd
gåha-päläyate janaù
SYNONYMS
santuñöaù—a person who is always self-satisfied; kena—why; vä—or; räjan—O
King; na—not; varteta—should live (happily); api—even; väriëä—by drinking
water; aupasthya—due to the genitals; jaihvya—and the tongue;
kärpaëyät—because of a wretched or miserly condition; gåha-päläyate—he
becomes exactly like a household dog; janaù—such a person.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
999
TRANSLATION
My dear King, a self-satisfied person can be happy even with only drinking
water. However, one who is driven by the senses, especially by the tongue and
genitals, must accept the position of a household dog to satisfy his senses.
PURPORT
According to the çästras, a brähmaëa, or a cultured person in Kåñëa
consciousness, will not enter anyone's service to maintain body and soul
together, and especially not for satisfaction of the senses. A true brähmaëa is
always satisfied. Even if he has nothing to eat, he can drink a little water and
be satisfied. This is only a matter of practice. Unfortunately, however, no one
is educated in how to be satisfied in self-realization. As explained above, a
devotee is always satisfied because he feels the presence of the Supersoul
within his heart and thinks of Him twenty-four hours a day. That is real
satisfaction. A devotee is never driven by the dictations of the tongue and
genitals, and thus he is never victimized by the laws of material nature.
TEXT 19
ASaNTauíSYa ivPa[SYa TaeJaae ivÛa TaPaae YaXa" )
óvNTaqiNd]Yal/aELYaeNa jaNa& cEvavk-IYaRTae )) 19 ))
asantuñöasya viprasya
tejo vidyä tapo yaçaù
sravanténdriya-laulyena
jïänaà caivävakéryate
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1000
asantuñöasya—of one who is not self-satisfied; viprasya—of such a brähmaëa;
tejaù—strength; vidyä—education; tapaù—austerity; yaçaù—fame;
sravanti—dwindle; indriya—of the senses; laulyena—because of greed;
jïänam—knowledge; ca—and; eva—certainly; avakéryate—gradually vanishes.
TRANSLATION
Because of greed for the sake of the senses, the spiritual strength, education,
austerity and reputation of a devotee or brähmaëa who is not self-satisfied
dwindle, and his knowledge gradually vanishes.
TEXT 20
k-aMaSYaaNTa& ih +auta*@(>Yaa& §-aeDaSYaETaTf-l/aedYaaTa( )
JaNaae YaaiTa Na l/ae>aSYa iJaTva >au¤-a idXaae >auv" )) 20 ))
kämasyäntaà hi kñut-tåòbhyäà
krodhasyaitat phalodayät
jano yäti na lobhasya
jitvä bhuktvä diço bhuvaù
SYNONYMS
kämasya—of the desire for sense gratification or the urgent needs of the body;
antam—end; hi—indeed; kñut-tåòbhyäm—by one who is very hungry or
thirsty; krodhasya—of anger; etat—this; phala-udayät—by venting
chastisement and its reaction; janaù—a person; yäti—crosses over; na—not;
lobhasya—greed; jitvä—conquering; bhuktvä—enjoying; diçaù—all directions;
bhuvaù—of the globe.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1001
TRANSLATION
The strong bodily desires and needs of a person disturbed by hunger and
thirst are certainly satisfied when he eats. Similarly, if one becomes very angry,
that anger is satisfied by chastisement and its reaction. But as for greed, even if
a greedy person has conquered all the directions of the world or has enjoyed
everything in the world, still he will not be satisfied.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (3.37) it is stated that lust, anger and greed are the causes
of the conditioned soul's bondage in this material world. Käma eña krodha eña
rajo-guëa-samudbhavaù. When strong lusty desires for sense gratification are
unfulfilled, one becomes angry. This anger can be satisfied when one chastises
his enemy, but when there is an increase in lobha, or greed, which is the
greatest enemy caused by rajo-guëa, the mode of passion, how can one advance
in Kåñëa consciousness?
If one is very greedy to enhance his Kåñëa consciousness, this is a great
boon. Tatra laulyam ekalaà mülam. This is the best path available.
TEXT 21
Pai<@Taa bhvae raJaNbhuja" Sa&XaYaiC^d" )
SadSaSPaTaYaae_PYaeke- ASaNTaaezaTa( PaTaNTYaDa" )) 21 ))
paëòitä bahavo räjan
bahu-jïäù saàçaya-cchidaù
sadasas patayo 'py eke
asantoñät patanty adhaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1002
SYNONYMS
paëòitäù—very learned scholars; bahavaù—many; räjan—O King
(Yudhiñöhira); bahu-jïäù—persons with varied experience;
saàçaya-cchidaù—expert in legal advice; sadasaù patayaù—persons eligible to
become presidents of learned assemblies; api—even; eke—by one
disqualification; asantoñät—simply by dissatisfaction or greed; patanti—fall
down; adhaù—into hellish conditions of life.
TRANSLATION
O King Yudhiñöhira, many persons with varied experience, many legal
advisers, many learned scholars and many persons eligible to become presidents
of learned assemblies fall down into hellish life because of not being satisfied
with their positions.
PURPORT
For spiritual advancement, one should be materially satisfied, for if one is
not materially satisfied, his greed for material development will result in the
frustration of his spiritual advancement. There are two things that nullify all
good qualities. One is poverty. Daridra-doño guëa-räçi-näçé. If one is
poverty-stricken, all his good qualities become null and void. Similarly, if one
becomes too greedy, his good qualifications are lost. Therefore the adjustment
is that one should not be poverty-stricken, but one must try to be fully satisfied
with the bare necessities of life and not be greedy. For a devotee to be satisfied
with the bare necessities is therefore the best advice for spiritual advancement.
Learned authorities in devotional life consequently advise that one not
endeavor to increase the number of temples and maöhas. Such activities can be
undertaken only by devotees experienced in propagating the Kåñëa
consciousness movement. All the äcäryas in South India, especially Çré
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1003
Rämänujäcärya, constructed many big temples, and in North India all the
Gosvämés of Våndävana constructed large temples. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura also constructed large centers, known as Gauòéya Maöhas.
Therefore temple construction is not bad, provided proper care is taken for the
propagation of Kåñëa consciousness. Even if such endeavors are considered
greedy, the greed is to satisfy Kåñëa, and therefore these are spiritual activities.
TEXT 22
ASaªLPaaÂYaeTa( k-aMa& §-aeDa& k-aMaivvJaRNaaTa( )
AQaaRNaQaeR+aYaa l/ae>a& >aYa& TatvavMaXaRNaaTa( )) 22 ))
asaìkalpäj jayet kämaà
krodhaà käma-vivarjanät
arthänarthekñayä lobhaà
bhayaà tattvävamarçanät
SYNONYMS
asaìkalpät—by determination; jayet—one should conquer; kämam—lusty
desire; krodham—anger; käma-vivarjanät—by giving up the objective of sense
desire; artha—accumulation of wealth; anartha—a cause of trouble;
ékñayä—by considering; lobham—greed; bhayam—fear; tattva—the truth;
avamarçanät—by considering.
TRANSLATION
By making plans with determination, one should give up lusty desires for
sense gratification. Similarly, by giving up envy one should conquer anger, by
discussing the disadvantages of accumulating wealth one should give up greed,
and by discussing the truth one should give up fear.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1004
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has suggested how one can conquer
lusty desires for sense gratification. One cannot give up thinking of women,
for thinking in this way is natural; even while walking on the street, one will
see so many women. However, if one is determined not to live with a woman,
even while seeing a woman he will not become lusty. If one is determined not
to have sex, he can automatically conquer lusty desires. The example given in
this regard is that even if one is hungry, if on a particular day he is determined
to observe fasting, he can naturally conquer the disturbances of hunger and
thirst. If one is determined not to be envious of anyone, he can naturally
conquer anger. Similarly, one can give up the desire to accumulate wealth
simply by considering how difficult it is to protect the money in one's
possession. If one keeps a large amount of cash with him, he is always anxious
about keeping it properly. Thus if one discusses the disadvantages of
accumulating wealth, he can naturally give up business without difficulty.
TEXT 23
AaNvqi+aKYaa Xaaek-MaaehaE dM>a& MahduPaaSaYaa )
YaaeGaaNTaraYaaNa( MaaENaeNa ih&Saa& k-aMaaÛNaqhYaa )) 23 ))
änvékñikyä çoka-mohau
dambhaà mahad-upäsayä
yogäntaräyän maunena
hiàsäà kämädy-anéhayä
SYNONYMS
änvékñikyä—by deliberation upon material and spiritual subject matters;
çoka—lamentation; mohau—and illusion; dambham—false pride; mahat—a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1005
Vaiñëava; upäsayä—by serving; yoga-antaräyän—obstacles on the path of
yoga; maunena—by silence; hiàsäm—envy; käma-ädi—for sense gratification;
anéhayä—without endeavor.
TRANSLATION
By discussing spiritual knowledge one can conquer lamentation and illusion,
by serving a great devotee one can become prideless, by keeping silent one can
avoid obstacles on the path of mystic yoga, and simply by stopping sense
gratification one can conquer envy.
PURPORT
If one's son has died, one may certainly be affected by lamentation and
illusion and cry for the dead son, but one may overcome lamentation and
illusion by considering the verses of Bhagavad-gétä.
jätasya hi dhruvo måtyur
dhruvaà janma måtasya ca
As the soul transmigrates, one who has taken birth must give up the present
body, and then he must certainly accept another body. This should be no cause
for lamentation. Therefore Lord Kåñëa says, dhéras tatra na muhyati: [Bg. 2.13]
one who is dhéra, or sober, who is learned in philosophy and established in
knowledge, cannot be unhappy over the transmigration of the soul.
TEXT 24
k*-PaYaa >aUTaJa& du"%& dEv& JaùaTa( SaMaaiDaNaa )
AaTMaJa& YaaeGavqYaeR<a iNad]a& SatviNazevYaa )) 24 ))
kåpayä bhütajaà duùkhaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1006
daivaà jahyät samädhinä
ätmajaà yoga-véryeëa
nidräà sattva-niñevayä
SYNONYMS
kåpayä—by being merciful to all other living entities; bhüta-jam—because of
other living entities; duùkham—suffering; daivam—sufferings imposed by
providence; jahyät—one should give up; samädhinä—by trance or meditation;
ätma-jam—sufferings due to the body and mind; yoga-véryeëa—by practicing
haöha-yoga, präëäyäma and so forth; nidräm—sleeping; sattva-niñevayä—by
developing brahminical qualifications or the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
By good behavior and freedom from envy one should counteract sufferings
due to other living entities, by meditation in trance one should counteract
sufferings due to providence, and by practicing haöha-yoga, präëäyäma and so
forth one should counteract sufferings due to the body and mind. Similarly, by
developing the mode of goodness, especially in regard to eating, one should
conquer sleep.
PURPORT
By practice, one should avoid eating in such a way that other living entities
will be disturbed and suffer. Since I suffer when pinched or killed by others, I
should not attempt to pinch or kill any other living entity. People do not know
that because of killing innocent animals they themselves will have to suffer
severe reactions from material nature. Any country where people indulge in
unnecessary killing of animals will have to suffer from wars and pestilence
imposed by material nature. Comparing one's own suffering to the suffering of
others, therefore, one should be kind to all living entities. One cannot avoid
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1007
the sufferings inflicted by providence, and therefore when suffering comes one
should fully absorb oneself in chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra. One can avoid
sufferings from the body and mind by practicing mystic haöha-yoga.
TEXT 25
rJaSTaMaê SatveNa Satv& caePaXaMaeNa c )
WTaTa( Sav| GauraE >a¢-ya Pauåzae ùÅSaa JaYaeTa( )) 25 ))
rajas tamaç ca sattvena
sattvaà copaçamena ca
etat sarvaà gurau bhaktyä
puruño hy aïjasä jayet
SYNONYMS
rajaù tamaù—the modes of passion and ignorance; ca—and; sattvena—by
developing the mode of goodness; sattvam—the mode of goodness; ca—also;
upaçamena—by giving up attachment; ca—and; etat—these; sarvam—all;
gurau—unto the spiritual master; bhaktyä—by rendering service in devotion;
puruñaù—a person; hi—indeed; aïjasä—easily; jayet—can conquer.
TRANSLATION
One must conquer the modes of passion and ignorance by developing the
mode of goodness, and then one must become detached from the mode of
goodness by promoting oneself to the platform of çuddha-sattva. All this can be
automatically done if one engages in the service of the spiritual master with
faith and devotion. In this way one can conquer the influence of the modes of
nature.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1008
PURPORT
Just by treating the root cause of an ailment, one can conquer all bodily
pains and sufferings. Similarly, if one is devoted and faithful to the spiritual
master, he can conquer the influence of sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa
very easily. Yogés and jïänés practice in many ways to conquer the senses, but
the bhakta immediately attains the mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead through the mercy of the spiritual master. Yasya prasädäd
bhagavat-prasädo **(42). If the spiritual master is favorably inclined, one
naturally receives the mercy of the Supreme Lord, and by the mercy of the
Supreme Lord one immediately becomes transcendental, conquering all the
influences of sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa within this material world.
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (sa guëän samatétyaitän brahma-bhüyäya
kalpate [Bg. 14.26]). If one is a pure devotee acting under the directions of the
guru, one easily gets the mercy of the Supreme Lord and thus becomes
immediately situated on the transcendental platform. This is explained in the
next verse.
TEXT 26
YaSYa Saa+aad( >aGaviTa jaNadqPaPa[de GauraE )
MaTYaaRSaÖq" é[uTa& TaSYa Sav| ku-ÅrXaaEcvTa( )) 26 ))
yasya säkñäd bhagavati
jïäna-dépa-prade gurau
martyäsad-dhéù çrutaà tasya
sarvaà kuïjara-çaucavat
SYNONYMS
yasya—one who; säkñät—directly; bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1009
Godhead; jïäna-dépa-prade—who enlightens with the torch of knowledge;
gurau—unto the spiritual master; martya-asat-dhéù—considers the spiritual
master to be like an ordinary human being and maintains such an unfavorable
attitude; çrutam—Vedic knowledge; tasya—for him; sarvam—everything;
kuïjara-çauca-vat—like the bath of an elephant in a lake.
TRANSLATION
The spiritual master should be considered to be directly the Supreme Lord
because he gives transcendental knowledge for enlightenment. Consequently,
for one who maintains the material conception that the spiritual master is an
ordinary human being, everything is frustrated. His enlightenment and his
Vedic studies and knowledge are like the bathing of an elephant.
PURPORT
It is recommended that one honor the spiritual master as being on an equal
status with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Säkñäd dharitvena
samasta-çästraiù. This is enjoined in every scripture. Äcäryaà mäà vijänéyät
[SB 11.17.27]. One should consider the äcärya to be as good as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In spite of all these instructions, if one considers the
spiritual master an ordinary human being, one is doomed. His study of the
Vedas and his austerities and penances for enlightenment are all useless, like
the bathing of an elephant. An elephant bathes in a lake quite thoroughly, but
as soon as it comes on the shore it takes some dust from the ground and strews
it over its body. Thus there is no meaning to the elephant's bath. One may
argue by saying that since the spiritual master's relatives and the men of his
neighborhood consider him an ordinary human being, what is the fault on the
part of the disciple who considers the spiritual master an ordinary human
being? This will be answered in the next verse, but the injunction is that the
spiritual master should never be considered an ordinary man. One should
strictly adhere to the instructions of the spiritual master, for if he is pleased,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1010
certainly the Supreme Personality of Godhead is pleased. Yasya prasädäd
bhagavat-prasädo yasyäprasädän na gatiù kuto 'pi **(43).
TEXT 27
Wz vE >aGavaNSaa+aaTa( Pa[DaaNaPauåzeìr" )
YaaeGaeìrEivRMa*GYaax(iga]l/aeRk-ae Ya& MaNYaTae NarMa( )) 27 ))
eña vai bhagavän säkñät
pradhäna-puruñeçvaraù
yogeçvarair vimågyäìghrir
loko yaà manyate naram
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; vai—indeed; bhagavän—Supreme Personality of Godhead;
säkñät—directly; pradhäna—the chief cause of the material nature; puruña—of
all living entities or of the puruñävatära, Lord Viñëu; éçvaraù—the supreme
controller; yoga-éçvaraiù—by great saintly persons, yogés;
vimågya-aìghriù—Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet, which are sought; lokaù—people in
general; yam—Him; manyate—consider; naram—a human being.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, is the master of all other
living entities and of the material nature. His lotus feet are sought and
worshiped by great saintly persons like Vyäsa. Nonetheless, there are fools who
consider Lord Kåñëa an ordinary human being.
PURPORT
The example of Lord Kåñëa's being the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1011
appropriate in regard to understanding the spiritual master. The spiritual
master is called sevaka-bhagavän, the servitor Personality of Godhead, and
Kåñëa is called sevya-bhagavän, the Supreme Personality of Godhead who is to
be worshiped. The spiritual master is the worshiper God, whereas the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is the worshipable God. This is the difference
between the spiritual master and the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Another point: Bhagavad-gétä, which constitutes the instructions of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is presented by the spiritual master as it is,
without deviation. Therefore the Absolute Truth is present in the spiritual
master. As clearly stated in Text 26, jïäna-dépa-prade. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead gives real knowledge to the entire world, and the
spiritual master, as the representative of the Supreme Godhead, carries the
message throughout the world. Therefore, on the absolute platform, there is no
difference between the spiritual master and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. If someone considers the Supreme Personality—Kåñëa or Lord
Rämacandra—to be an ordinary human being, this does not mean that the
Lord becomes an ordinary human being. Similarly, if the family members of
the spiritual master, who is the bona fide representative of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, consider the spiritual master an ordinary human
being, this does not mean that he becomes an ordinary human being. The
spiritual master is as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
therefore one who is very serious about spiritual advancement must regard the
spiritual master in this way. Even a slight deviation from this understanding
can create disaster in the disciple's Vedic studies and austerities.
TEXT 28
zÍGaRSa&YaMaEk-aNTaa" SavaR iNaYaMacaedNaa" )
TadNTaa Yaid Naae YaaeGaaNaavheYau" é[Maavha" )) 28 ))
ñaò-varga-saàyamaikäntäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1012
sarvä niyama-codanäù
tad-antä yadi no yogän
ävaheyuù çramävahäù
SYNONYMS
ñaö-varga—the six elements, namely the five working senses and the mind;
saàyama-ekäntäù—the ultimate aim of subjugating; sarväù—all such
activities; niyama-codanäù—the regulative principles further meant for
controlling the senses and mind; tat-antäù—the ultimate goal of such
activities; yadi—if; no—not; yogän—the positive link with the Supreme;
ävaheyuù—did lead to; çrama-ävahäù—a waste of time and labor.
TRANSLATION
Ritualistic ceremonies, regulative principles, austerities and the practice of
yoga are all meant to control the senses and mind, but even after one is able to
control the senses and mind, if he does not come to the point of meditation
upon the Supreme Lord, all such activities are simply labor in frustration.
PURPORT
One may argue that one may achieve the ultimate goal of life—realization
of the Supersoul—by practicing the yoga system and ritualistic performances
according to the Vedic principles, even without staunch devotion to the
spiritual master. The actual fact, however, is that by practicing yoga one must
come to the platform of meditating upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
As stated in the scriptures, dhyänävasthita-tad-gatena manasä paçyanti yaà
yoginaù: [SB 12.13.1] a person in meditation achieves the perfection of yoga
practice when he can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By various
practices, one may come to the point of controlling the senses, but simply
controlling the senses does not bring one to a substantial conclusion. However,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1013
by staunch faith in the spiritual master and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one not only controls the senses but also realizes the Supreme Lord.
yasya deve parä bhaktir
yathä deve tathä gurau
tasyaite kathitä hy arthäù
prakäçante mahätmanaù
"Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the
spiritual master are all the imports of the Vedic knowledge automatically
revealed." (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.23) It is further stated, tuñyeyaà
sarva-bhütätmä guru-çuçrüñayä and taranty aïjo bhavärëavam. Simply by
rendering service to the spiritual master, one crosses the ocean of nescience
and returns home, back to Godhead. Thus he gradually sees the Supreme Lord
face to face and enjoys life in association with the Lord. The ultimate goal of
yoga is to come in contact with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unless
this point is achieved, one's so-called yoga practice is simply labor without any
benefit.
TEXT 29
YaQaa vaTaaRdYaae ùQaaR YaaeGaSYaaQa| Na ib>a]iTa )
ANaQaaRYa >aveYau" SMa PaUTaRiMaí& TaQaaSaTa" )) 29 ))
yathä värtädayo hy arthä
yogasyärthaà na bibhrati
anarthäya bhaveyuù sma
pürtam iñöaà tathäsataù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; värtä-ädayaù—activities like occupational or professional duties;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1014
hi—certainly; arthäù—income (from such occupational duties); yogasya—of
mystic power for self-realization; artham—benefit; na—not; bibhrati—help;
anarthäya—without value (binding one to repeated birth and death);
bhaveyuù—they are; sma—at all times; pürtam iñöam—ritualistic Vedic
ceremonies; tathä—similarly; asataù—of a materialistic nondevotee.
TRANSLATION
As professional activities or business profits cannot help one in spiritual
advancement but are a source of material entanglement, the Vedic ritualistic
ceremonies cannot help anyone who is not a devotee of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
PURPORT
If one becomes very rich through his professional activities, through trade
or through agriculture, this does not mean that he is spiritually advanced. To
be spiritually advanced is different from being materially rich. Although the
purpose of life is to become spiritually rich, unfortunate men, misguided as
they are, are always engaged in trying to become materially rich. Such material
engagements, however, do not help one in the actual fulfillment of the human
mission. On the contrary, material engagements lead one to be attracted to
many unnecessary necessities, which are accompanied by the risk that one may
be born in a degraded condition. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (14.18):
ürdhvaà gacchanti sattva-sthä
madhye tiñöhanti räjasäù
jaghanya-guëa-våtti-sthä
adho gacchanti tämasäù
"Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the higher
planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthly planets; and those in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1015
the mode of ignorance go down to the hellish worlds." Especially in this
Kali-yuga, material advancement means degradation and attraction to many
unwanted necessities that create a low mentality. Therefore,
jaghanya-guëa-våtti-sthä: since people are contaminated by the lower qualities,
they will lead their next lives either as animals or in other degraded forms of
life. Making a show of religion without Kåñëa consciousness may make one
popular in the estimation of unintelligent men, but factually such a
materialistic display of spiritual advancement does not help one at all; it will
not prevent one from missing the goal of life.
TEXT 30
YaiêtaivJaYae Yata" SYaaià"Sa(r)ae_PairGa]h" )
Wk-ae iviv¢-Xar<aae i>a+au>aOE+YaiMaTaaXaNa" )) 30 ))
yaç citta-vijaye yattaù
syän niùsaìgo 'parigrahaù
eko vivikta-çaraëo
bhikñur bhaikñya-mitäçanaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; citta-vijaye—conquering the mind; yattaù—is engaged;
syät—must be; niùsaìgaù—without contaminated association;
aparigrahaù—without being dependent (on the family); ekaù—alone;
vivikta-çaraëaù—taking shelter of a solitary place; bhikñuù—a renounced
person; bhaikñya—by begging alms just to maintain the body;
mita-açanaù—frugal in eating.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1016
One who desires to conquer the mind must leave the company of his family
and live in a solitary place, free from contaminated association. To maintain the
body and soul together, he should beg as much as he needs for the bare
necessities of life.
PURPORT
This is the process for conquering the agitation of the mind. One is
recommended to take leave of his family and live alone, maintaining body and
soul together by begging alms and eating only as much as needed to keep
himself alive. Without such a process, one cannot conquer lusty desires.
Sannyäsa means accepting a life of begging, which makes one automatically
very humble and meek and free from lusty desires. In this regard, the following
verse appears in the Småti literature:
dvandvähatasya gärhasthyaà
dhyäna-bhaìgädi-käraëam
lakñayitvä gåhé spañöaà
sannyased avicärayan
In this world of duality, family life is the cause that spoils one's spiritual life or
meditation. Specifically understanding this fact, one should accept the order
of sannyäsa without hesitation.
TEXT 31
deXae éucaE SaMae raJaNSa&SQaaPYaaSaNaMaaTMaNa" )
iSQar& Sau%& SaMa& TaiSMaàaSaqTaJvR(r) AaeiMaiTa )) 31 ))
deçe çucau same räjan
saàsthäpyäsanam ätmanaù
sthiraà sukhaà samaà tasminn
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1017
äsétarjv-aìga om iti
SYNONYMS
deçe—in a place; çucau—very sacred; same—level; räjan—O King;
saàsthäpya—placing; äsanam—on the seat; ätmanaù—one's self;
sthiram—very steady; sukham—comfortably; samam—equipoised; tasmin—on
that sitting place; äséta—one should sit down; åju-aìgaù—the body
perpendicularly straight; oà—The Vedic mantra praëava; iti—in this way.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, in a sacred and holy place of pilgrimage one should select a
place in which to perform yoga. The place must be level and not too high or
low. There one should sit very comfortably, being steady and equipoised,
keeping his body straight, and thus begin chanting the Vedic praëava.
PURPORT
Generally the chanting of oà is recommended because in the beginning
one cannot understand the Personality of Godhead. As stated in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.11):
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvaà yaj jïänam advayam
brahmeti paramätmeti
bhagavän iti çabdyate
"Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual
substance Brahman, Paramätmä or Bhagavän." Unless one is fully convinced of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one has the tendency to become an
impersonalist yogé searching for the Supreme Lord within the core of his heart
(dhyänävasthita-tad-gatena manasä paçyanti yaà yoginaù [SB 12.13.1]). Here the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1018
chanting of oàkära is recommended because in the beginning of
transcendental realization, instead of chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra,
one may chant oàkära (praëava). There is no difference between the Hare
Kåñëa mahä-mantra and oàkära because both of them are sound
representations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. praëavaù
sarva-vedeñu. In all Vedic literatures, the sound vibration oàkära is the
beginning. Oà namo bhagavate väsudeväya. The difference between chanting
oàkära and chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra is that the Hare Kåñëa mantra
may be chanted without consideration of the place or the sitting arrangements
recommended in Bhagavad-gétä (6.11):
çucau deçe pratiñöhäpya
sthiram äsanam ätmanaù
näty-ucchritaà nätinécaà
cailäjina-kuçottaram
"To practice yoga, one should go to a secluded place and should lay kuça grass
on the ground and then cover it with a deerskin and a soft cloth. The seat
should neither be too high nor too low and should be situated in a sacred
place." The Hare Kåñëa mantra may be chanted by anyone, without
consideration of the place or how one sits. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has
openly declared, niyamitaù smaraëe na kälaù. In chanting the Hare Kåñëa
mahä-mantra there are no particular injunctions regarding one's sitting place.
The injunction niyamitaù smaraëe na kälaù includes deça, käla and
pätra—place, time and the individual. Therefore anyone may chant the Hare
Kåñëa mantra, without consideration of the time and place. Especially in this
age, Kali-yuga, it is very difficult to find a suitable place according to the
recommendations of Bhagavad-gétä. The Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra, however,
may be chanted at any place and any time, and this will bring results very
quickly. Yet even while chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra one may observe
regulative principles. Thus while sitting and chanting one may keep his body
straight, and this will help one in the chanting process; otherwise one may feel
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1019
sleepy.
TEXTS 32-33
Pa[a<aaPaaNaaE SaiàåNDYaaTa( PaUrku-M>ak-reckE-" )
YaavNMaNaSTYaJaeTa( k-aMaaNa( SvNaaSaaGa]iNarq+a<a" )) 32 ))
YaTaae YaTaae iNa"SariTa MaNa" k-aMahTa& >a]MaTa( )
TaTaSTaTa oPaaôTYa ôid åNDYaaC^NaEbuRDa" )) 33 ))
präëäpänau sannirundhyät
püra-kumbhaka-recakaiù
yävan manas tyajet kämän
sva-näsägra-nirékñaëaù
yato yato niùsarati
manaù käma-hataà bhramat
tatas tata upähåtya
hådi rundhyäc chanair budhaù
SYNONYMS
präëa—incoming breath; apänau—outgoing breath; sannirundhyät—should
stop; püra-kumbhaka-recakaiù—by inhaling, exhaling and holding, which are
technically known as püraka, kumbhaka and recaka; yävat—so long;
manaù—the mind; tyajet—should give up; kämän—all material desires;
sva—one's own; näsa-agra—the tip of the nose; nirékñaëaù—looking at; yataù
yataù—from whatever and wherever; niùsarati—withdraws; manaù—the
mind; käma-hatam—being defeated by lusty desires; bhramat—wandering;
tataù tataù—from here and there; upähåtya—after bringing it back;
hådi—within the core of the heart; rundhyät—should arrest (the mind);
çanaiù—gradually, by practice; budhaù—a learned yogé.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1020
TRANSLATION
While continuously staring at the tip of the nose, a learned yogé practices the
breathing exercises through the technical means known as püraka, kumbhaka
and recaka—controlling inhalation and exhalation and then stopping them both.
In this way the yogé restricts his mind from material attachments and gives up
all mental desires. As soon as the mind, being defeated by lusty desires, drifts
toward feelings of sense gratification, the yogé should immediately bring it back
and arrest it within the core of his heart.
PURPORT
The practice of yoga is concisely explained herein. When this practice of
yoga is perfect, one sees the Supersoul, the Paramätmä feature of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, within the core of one's heart. However, in
Bhagavad-gétä (6.47) the Supreme Lord says:
yoginäm api sarveñäm
mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù
"Of all yogés, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is
the highest of all." A devotee can immediately become a perfect yogé because
he practices keeping Kåñëa constantly within the core of his heart. This is
another way to practice yoga easily. The Lord says:
man-manä bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru
"Always think of Me and become My devotee. Worship Me and offer your
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1021
homage unto Me." (Bg. 18.65) If one practices devotional service by always
keeping Kåñëa within the core of his heart (man-manäù), he immediately
becomes a first-class yogé. Furthermore, keeping Kåñëa within the mind is not a
difficult task for the devotee. For an ordinary man in the bodily concept of
life, the practice of yoga may be helpful, but one who immediately takes to
devotional service can immediately become a perfect yogé without difficulty.
TEXT 34
WvMa>YaSYaTaiêta& k-ale/NaaLPaqYaSaa YaTae" )
AiNaXa& TaSYa iNavaR<a& YaaTYaiNaNDaNaviövTa( )) 34 ))
evam abhyasyataç cittaà
kälenälpéyasä yateù
aniçaà tasya nirväëaà
yäty anindhana-vahnivat
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; abhyasyataù—of the person practicing this yoga system;
cittam—the heart; kälena—in due course of time; alpéyasä—very shortly;
yateù—of the person practicing yoga; aniçam—without cessation; tasya—of
him; nirväëam—purification from all material contamination; yäti—reaches;
anindhana—without flame or smoke; vahnivat—like a fire.
TRANSLATION
When the yogi regularly practices in this way, in a short time his heart
becomes fixed and free from disturbance, like a fire without flames or smoke.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1022
Nirväëa means the cessation of all material desires. Sometimes
desirelessness is understood to imply an end to the workings of the mind, but
this is not possible. The living entity has senses, and if the senses stopped
working, the living entity would no longer be a living entity; he would be
exactly like stone or wood. This is not possible. Because he is living, he is nitya
and cetana—eternally sentient. For those who are not very advanced, the
practice of yoga is recommended in order to stop the mind from being agitated
by material desires, but if one fixes his mind on the lotus feet of Kåñëa, his
mind naturally becomes peaceful very soon. This peace is described in
Bhagavad-gétä (5.29):
bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram
suhådaà sarva-bhütänäà
jïätvä mäà çäntim åcchati
If one can understand Kåñëa as the supreme enjoyer, the supreme proprietor of
everything, and the supreme friend of everyone, one is established in peace
and is free from material agitation. However, for one who cannot understand
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the practice of yoga is recommended.
TEXT 35
k-aMaaidi>arNaaivÖ& Pa[XaaNTaai%l/v*ita YaTa( )
icta& b]øSau%SPa*í& NaEvaeitaïeTa k-ihRicTa( )) 35 ))
kämädibhir anäviddhaà
praçäntäkhila-våtti yat
cittaà brahma-sukha-spåñöaà
naivottiñöheta karhicit
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1023
SYNONYMS
käma-ädibhiù—by various lusty desires; anäviddham—unaffected;
praçänta—calm and peaceful; akhila-våtti—in every respect, or in all activities;
yat—that which; cittam—consciousness; brahma-sukha-spåñöam—being
situated on the transcendental platform in eternal bliss; na—not; eva—indeed;
uttiñöheta—can come out; karhicit—at any time.
TRANSLATION
When one's consciousness is uncontaminated by material lusty desires, it
becomes calm and peaceful in all activities, for one is situated in eternal blissful
life. Once situated on that platform, one does not return to materialistic
activities.
PURPORT
Brahma-sukha-spåñöam is also described in Bhagavad-gétä (18.54):
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
"One who is transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman
and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is
equally disposed toward every living entity. In this situation, he begins
transcendental activities, or devotional service to the Lord." Generally, once
elevated to the transcendental platform of brahma-sukha, transcendental bliss,
one never comes down. But if one does not engage in devotional service, there
is a chance of his returning to the material platform. Äruhya kåcchreëa paraà
padaà tataù patanty adho 'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù: [SB 10.2.32] one may rise
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1024
to the platform of brahma-sukha, transcendental bliss, but even from that
platform one may fall down to the material platform if he does not engage
himself in devotional service.
TEXT 36
Ya" Pa[v]JYa Ga*haTa( PaUv| i}avGaaRvPaNaaTa( PauNa" )
Yaid SaeveTa TaaiN>a+au" Sa vE vaNTaaXYaPa}aPa" )) 36 ))
yaù pravrajya gåhät pürvaà
tri-vargävapanät punaù
yadi seveta tän bhikñuù
sa vai väntäçy apatrapaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; pravrajya—being finished for good and leaving for the forest
(being situated in transcendental bliss); gåhät—from home; pürvam—at first;
tri-varga—the three principles of religion, economic development and sense
gratification; ävapanät—from the field in which they are sown; punaù—again;
yadi—if; seveta—should accept; tän—materialistic activities; bhikñuù—a
person who has accepted the sannyäsa order; saù—that person; vai—indeed;
vänta-äçé—one who eats his own vomit; apatrapaù—without shame.
TRANSLATION
One who accepts the sannyäsa order gives up the three principles of
materialistic activities in which one indulges in the field of household
life—namely religion, economic development and sense gratification. One who
first accepts sannyäsa but then returns to such materialistic activities is to be
called a väntäçé, or one who eats his own vomit. He is indeed a shameless
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1025
person.
PURPORT
Materialistic activities are regulated by the institution of
varëäçrama-dharma. Without varëäçrama-dharma, materialistic activities
constitute animal life. Yet even in human life, while observing the principles
of varëa and äçrama-brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya, çüdra, brahmacarya, gåhastha,
vänaprastha and sannyäsa—one must ultimately accept sannyäsa, the
renounced order, for only by the renounced order can one be situated in
brahma-sukha, or transcendental bliss. In brahma-sukha one is no longer
attracted by lusty desires. Indeed, when one is no longer disturbed, especially
by lusty desires for sexual indulgence, he is fit to become a sannyäsé. Otherwise,
one should not accept the sannyäsa order. If one accepts sannyäsa at an
immature stage, there is every possibility of his being attracted by women and
lusty desires and thus again becoming a so-called gåhastha or a victim of
women. Such a person is most shameless, and he is called väntäçé, or one who
eats that which he has already vomited. He certainly leads a condemned life.
In our Kåñëa consciousness movement it is advised, therefore, that the
sannyäsés and brahmacärés keep strictly aloof from the association of women so
that there will be no chance of their falling down again as victims of lusty
desires.
TEXT 37
YaE" Svdeh" SMa*Taae_NaaTMaa MaTYaaeR iv$(k*-iMa>aSMavTa( )
Ta WNaMaaTMaSaaTk*-Tva ëagaYaiNTa ùSataMaa" )) 37 ))
yaiù sva-dehaù småto 'nätmä
martyo viö-kåmi-bhasmavat
ta enam ätmasät kåtvä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1026
çläghayanti hy asattamäù
SYNONYMS
yaiù—by sannyäsés who; sva-dehaù—own body; småtaù—consider;
anätmä—different from the soul; martyaù—subjected to death; viö—becoming
stool; kåmi—worms; bhasma-vat—or ashes; te—such persons; enam—this body;
ätmasät kåtvä—again identifying with the self; çläghayanti—glorify as very
important; hi—indeed; asat-tamäù—the greatest rascals.
TRANSLATION
Sannyäsés who first consider that the body is subject to death, when it will
be transformed into stool, worms or ashes, but who again give importance to the
body and glorify it as the self, are to be considered the greatest rascals.
PURPORT
A sannyäsé is one who has clearly understood, through advancement in
knowledge, that Brahman—he, the person himself—is the soul, not the body.
One who has this understanding may take sannyäsa, for he is situated in the
"ahaà brahmäsmi(44)" position. Brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä na çocati na
käìkñati [Bg. 18.54]. Such a person, who no longer laments or hankers to
maintain his body and who can accept all living entities as spirit souls, can
then enter the devotional service of the Lord. If one does not enter the
devotional service of the Lord but artificially considers himself Brahman or
Näräyaëa, not perfectly understanding that the soul and body are different,
one certainly falls down (patanty adhaù). Such a person again gives importance
to the body. There are many sannyäsés in India who stress the importance of
the body. Some of them give special importance to the body of the poor man,
accepting him as daridra-näräyaëa, as if Näräyaëa had a material body. Many
other sannyäsés stress the importance of the social position of the body as a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1027
brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya or çüdra. Such sannyäsés are considered the greatest
rascals (asattamäù). They are shameless because they have not yet understood
the difference between the body and the soul and instead have accepted the
body of a brähmaëa to be a brähmaëa. Brahmanism (brähmaëya) consists of
the knowledge of Brahman. But actually the body of a brähmaëa is not
Brahman. Similarly, the body is neither rich nor poor. If the body of a poor
man were daridra-näräyaëa, this would mean that the body of a rich man, on
the contrary, must be dhané-näräyaëa. Therefore sannyäsés who do not know
the meaning of Näräyaëa, those who regard the body as Brahman or as
Näräyaëa, are described here as asattamäù, the most abominable rascals.
Following the bodily concept of life, such sannyäsés make various programs to
serve the body. They conduct farcical missions consisting of so-called religious
activities meant to mislead all of human society. These sannyäsés have been
described herein as apatrapaù and asattamäù—shameless and fallen from
spiritual life.
TEXTS 38-39
Ga*hSQaSYa i§-YaaTYaaGaae v]TaTYaaGaae v$=aeriPa )
TaPaiSvNaae Ga]aMaSaeva i>a+aaeiriNd]Yal/ael/Taa )) 38 ))
Aaé[MaaPaSada ùeTae %Lvaé[Maiv@MbNaa" )
devMaaYaaivMaU!a&STaaNauPae+aeTaaNauk-MPaYaa )) 39 ))
gåhasthasya kriyä-tyägo
vrata-tyägo vaöorapi
tapasvino gräma-sevä
bhikñor indriya-lolatä
äçramäpasadä hy ete
khalv äçrama-viòambanäù
deva-mäyä-vimüòhäàs tän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1028
upekñetänukampayä
SYNONYMS
gåhasthasya—for a person situated in householder life; kriyä-tyägaù—to give
up the duty of a householder; vrata-tyägaù—to give up vows and austerity;
vaöoù—for a brahmacäré; api—also; tapasvinaù—for a vänaprastha, one who
has adopted a life of austerities; gräma-sevä—to live in a village and serve the
people therein; bhikñoù—for a sannyäsé who lived by begging alms;
indriya-lolatä—addicted to sense enjoyment; äçrama—of the spiritual orders
of life; apasadäù—the most abominable; hi—indeed; ete—all these;
khalu—indeed; äçrama-viòambanäù—imitating and therefore cheating the
different spiritual orders; deva-mäyä-vimüòhän—who are bewildered by the
external energy of the Supreme Lord; tän—them; upekñeta—one should reject
and not accept as genuine; anukampayä—or by compassion (teach them real
life).
TRANSLATION
It is abominable for a person living in the gåhastha-äçrama to give up the
regulative principles, for a brahmacäré not to follow the brahmacäré vows while
living under the care of the guru, for a vänaprastha to live in the village and
engage in so-called social activities, or for a sannyäsé to be addicted to sense
gratification. One who acts in this way is to be considered the lowest renegade.
Such a pretender is bewildered by the external energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and one should either reject him from any position, or
taking compassion upon him, teach him, if possible, to resume his original
position.
PURPORT
We have repeatedly stressed that human culture does not begin unless one
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1029
takes to the principles of varëäçrama-dharma. Although gåhastha life is a
concession for the enjoyment of sex, one cannot enjoy sex without following
the rules and regulations of householder life. Furthermore, as already
instructed, a brahmacäré must live under the care of the guru: brahmacäré
guru-kule vasan dänto guror hitam [SB 7.12.1]. If a brahmacäré does not live
under the care of the guru, if a vänaprastha engages in ordinary activities, or if
a sannyäsé is greedy and eats meat, eggs and all kinds of nonsense for the
satisfaction of his tongue, he is a cheater and should immediately be rejected as
unimportant. Such persons should be shown compassion, and if one has
sufficient strength one should teach them to stop them from following the
wrong path in life. Otherwise one should reject them and pay them no
attention.
TEXT 40
AaTMaaNa& ced( ivJaaNaqYaaTa( Par& jaNaDauTaaXaYa" )
ik-iMaC^Nk-SYa va heTaaedeRh& PauZ<aaiTa l/MPa$=" )) 40 ))
ätmänaà ced vijänéyät
paraà jïäna-dhutäçayaù
kim icchan kasya vä hetor
dehaà puñëäti lampaöaù
SYNONYMS
ätmänam—the soul and the Supersoul; cet—if; vijänéyät—can understand;
param—who are transcendental, beyond this material world; jïäna—by
knowledge; dhuta-äçayaù—one who has cleansed his consciousness;
kim—what; icchan—desiring material comforts; kasya—for whom; vä—or;
hetoù—for what reason; deham—the material body; puñëäti—he maintains;
lampaöaù—being unlawfully addicted to sense gratification.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1030
TRANSLATION
The human form of body is meant for understanding the self and the
Supreme Self, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, both of whom are
transcendentally situated. If both of them can be understood when one is
purified by advanced knowledge, for what reason and for whom does a foolish,
greedy person maintain the body for sense gratification?
PURPORT
Of course, everyone in this material world is interested in maintaining the
body for sense gratification, but by cultivating knowledge one should gradually
understand that the body is not the self. Both the soul and the Supersoul are
transcendental to the material world. This is to be understood in the human
form of life, especially when one takes sannyäsa. A sannyäsé, one who has
understood the self, should be engaged in elevating the self and associating
with the Superself. Our Kåñëa consciousness movement is meant for elevating
the living being for promotion back home, back to Godhead. Seeking such
elevation is one's duty in the human form of life. Unless one performs this
duty, why should one maintain the body? Especially if a sannyäsé not only
maintains the body by ordinary means but does everything to maintain the
body, including even eating meat and other abominable things, he must be a
lampaöaù, a greedy person simply engaged in sense gratification. A sannyäsé
must specifically remove himself from the urges of the tongue, belly and
genitals, which disturb one as long as one is not fully aware that the body is
separate from the soul.
TEXT 41
Aahu" Xarqr& rQaiMaiNd]Yaai<a
hYaaNa>aqzUNa( MaNa wiNd]YaeXaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1031
vTMaaRiNa Maa}aa iDaz<aa& c SaUTa&
Satv& b*hd( bNDaurMaqXaSa*íMa( )) 41 ))
ähuù çaréraà ratham indriyäëi
hayän abhéñün mana indriyeçam
vartmäni mäträ dhiñaëäà ca sütaà
sattvaà båhad bandhuram éça-såñöam
SYNONYMS
ähuù—it is said; çaréram—the body; ratham—the chariot; indriyäëi—the
senses; hayän—the horses; abhéñün—the reins; manaù—the mind; indriya—of
the senses; éçam—the master; vartmäni—the destinations; mäträù—the sense
objects; dhiñaëäm—the intelligence; ca—and; sütam—the chariot driver;
sattvam—consciousness; båhat—great; bandhuram—bondage; éça—by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; såñöam—created.
TRANSLATION
Transcendentalists who are advanced in knowledge compare the body, which
is made by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, to a chariot. The
senses are like the horses; the mind, the master of the senses, is like the reins;
the objects of the senses are the destinations; intelligence is the chariot driver;
and consciousness, which spreads throughout the body, is the cause of bondage
in this material world.
PURPORT
For a bewildered person in the materialistic way of life, the body, the mind
and the senses, which are engaged in sense gratification, are the cause of
bondage to repeated birth, death, old age and disease. But for one who is
advanced in spiritual knowledge, the same body, senses and mind are the cause
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1032
of liberation. This is confirmed in the Kaöha Upaniñad (1.3.3-4,9) as follows:
ätmänaà rathinaà viddhi
çaréraà ratham eva ca
buddhià tu särathià viddhi
manaù pragraham eva ca
indriyäëi hayän ähur
viñayäàs teñu gocarän
so 'dhvanaù päram äpnoti
tad viñëoù paramaà padam
The soul is the occupant of the chariot of the body, of which the driver is the
intelligence. The mind is the determination to reach the destination, the
senses are the horses, and the sense objects are also included in that activity.
Thus one can reach the destination, Viñëu, who is paramaà padam, the
supreme goal of life. In conditioned life the consciousness in the body is the
cause of bondage, but the same consciousness, when transformed into Kåñëa
consciousness, becomes the cause for one's returning home, back to Godhead.
The human body, therefore, may be used in two ways—for going to the
darkest regions of ignorance or for going forward, back home, back to
Godhead. To go back to Godhead, the path is mahat-sevä, to accept the
self-realized spiritual master. Mahat-seväà dväram ähur vimukteù [SB 5.5.2]. For
liberation, one should accept the direction of authorized devotees who can
actually endow one with perfect knowledge. On the other hand, tamo-dväraà
yoñitäà saìgi-saìgam: if one wants to go to the darkest regions of material
existence, one may continue to associate with persons who are attached to
women (yoñitäà saìgi-saìgam). The word yoñit means "woman." Persons who
are too materialistic are attached to women.
It is said, therefore, ätmänaà rathinaà viddhi çaréraà ratham eva ca. The
body is just like a chariot or car in which one may go anywhere. One may drive
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1033
well, or else one may drive whimsically, in which case it is quite possible that
he may have an accident and fall into a ditch. In other words, if one takes
directions from the experienced spiritual master one can go back home, back
to Godhead; otherwise, one may return to the cycle of birth and death.
Therefore Kåñëa personally advises:
açraddadhänäù puruñä
dharmasyäsya parantapa
apräpya mäà nivartante
måtyu-saàsära-vartmani
"Those who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot attain
Me, O conqueror of foes, but return to birth and death in this material world."
(Bg. 9.3) The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, personally gives
instructions on how one can return home, back to Godhead, but if one does
not care to listen to His instructions, the result will be that one will never go
back to Godhead, but will continue life in this miserable condition of repeated
birth and death in material existence (måtyu-saàsära-vartmani).
The advice of experienced transcendentalists, therefore, is that the body be
fully engaged for achieving the ultimate goal of life (svärtha-gatim). The real
interest or goal of life is to return home, back to Godhead. To enable one to
fulfill this purpose, there are so many Vedic literatures, including
Vedänta-sütra, the Upaniñads, Bhagavad-gétä, Mahäbhärata and the Rämäyaëa.
One should take lessons from these Vedic literatures and learn how to practice
nivåtti-märga. Then one's life will be perfect. The body is important as long as
it has consciousness. Without consciousness, the body is merely a lump of
matter. Therefore, to return home, back to Godhead, one must change his
consciousness from material consciousness to Kåñëa consciousness. One's
consciousness is the cause of material bondage, but if this consciousness is
purified by bhakti-yoga, one can then understand the falsity of his upädhi, his
designations as Indian, American, Hindu, Muslim, Christian and so on.
Sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. One must
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1034
forget these designations and use this consciousness only for the service of
Kåñëa. Therefore if one takes advantage of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement, his life is certainly successful.
TEXT 42
A+a& dXaPa[a<aMaDaMaRDaMaaOE
c§e-_i>aMaaNa& riQaNa& c JaqvMa( )
DaNauihR TaSYa Pa[<av& Pa#=iNTa
Xar& Tau Jaqv& ParMaev l/+YaMa( )) 42 ))
akñaà daça-präëam adharma-dharmau
cakre 'bhimänaà rathinaà ca jévam
dhanur hi tasya praëavaà paöhanti
çaraà tu jévaà param eva lakñyam
SYNONYMS
akñam—the spokes (on the chariot wheel); daça—ten; präëam—the ten kinds
of air flowing within the body; adharma—irreligion; dharmau—religion (two
sides of the wheel, up and down); cakre—in the wheel; abhimänam—false
identification; rathinam—the charioteer or master of the body; ca—also;
jévam—the living entity; dhanuù—the bow; hi—indeed; tasya—his;
praëavam—the Vedic mantra oàkära; paöhanti—it is said; çaram—an arrow;
tu—but; jévam—the living entity; param—the Supreme Lord; eva—indeed;
lakñyam—the target.
TRANSLATION
The ten kinds of air acting within the body are compared to the spokes of
the chariot's wheels, and the top and bottom of the wheel itself are called
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1035
religion and irreligion. The living entity in the bodily concept of life is the
owner of the chariot. The Vedic mantra praëava is the bow, the pure living
entity himself is the arrow, and the target is the Supreme Being.
PURPORT
Ten kinds of life air always flow within the material body. They are called
präëa, apäna, samäna, vyäna, udäna, näga, kürma, kåkala, devadatta and
dhanaïjaya. They are compared here to the spokes of the chariot's wheels. The
life air is the energy for all of a living being's activities, which are sometimes
religious and sometimes irreligious. Thus religion and irreligion are said to be
the upper and lower portions of the chariot's wheels. When the living entity
decides to go back home, back to Godhead, his target is Lord Viñëu, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the conditioned state of life, one does not
understand that the goal of life is the Supreme Lord. Na te viduù svärtha-gatià
hi viñëuà duräçayä ye bahir-artha-mäninaù [SB 7.5.31]. The living entity tries to
be happy within this material world, not understanding the target of his life.
When he is purified, however, he gives up his bodily conception of life and his
false identity as belonging to a certain community, a certain nation, a certain
society, a certain family and so on (sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà tat-paratvena
nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]). Then he takes the arrow of his purified life,
and with the help of the bow—the transcendental chanting of praëava, or the
Hare Kåñëa mantra—he throws himself toward the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has commented that because the
words "bow" and "arrow" are used in this verse, one might argue that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and the living entity have become enemies.
However, although the Supreme Personality of Godhead may become the
so-called enemy of the living being, this is His chivalrous pleasure. For
example, the Lord fought with Bhéñma, and when Bhéñma pierced the Lord's
body on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, this was a kind of humor or relationship,
of which there are twelve. When the conditioned soul tries to reach the Lord
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1036
by hurling an arrow at Him, the Lord takes pleasure, and the living entity
gains the profit of going back home, back to Godhead. Another example given
in this regard is that Arjuna, as a result of piercing the ädhära-ména, or the fish
within the cakra, achieved the valuable gain of Draupadé. Similarly, if with the
arrow of chanting the holy name of the Lord one pierces Lord Viñëu's lotus
feet, by dint of performing this heroic activity of devotional service one
receives the benefit of returning home, back to Godhead.
TEXTS 43-44
raGaae Üezê l/ae>aê Xaaek-MaaehaE >aYa& Mad" )
MaaNaae_vMaaNaae_SaUYaa c MaaYaa ih&Saa c MaTSar" )) 43 ))
rJa" Pa[Maad" +auiàd]a Xa}avSTvevMaadYa" )
rJaSTaMa"Pa[k*-TaYa" SatvPa[k*-TaYa" KvicTa( )) 44 ))
rägo dveñaç ca lobhaç ca
çoka-mohau bhayaà madaù
mäno 'vamäno 'süyä ca
mäyä hiàsä ca matsaraù
rajaù pramädaù kñun-nidrä
çatravas tv evam ädayaù
rajas-tamaù-prakåtayaù
sattva-prakåtayaù kvacit
SYNONYMS
rägaù—attachment; dveñaù—hostility; ca—also; lobhaù—greed; ca—also;
çoka—lamentation; mohau—illusion; bhayam—fear; madaù—madness;
mänaù—false prestige; avamänaù—insult; asüyä—finding fault with others;
ca—also; mäyä—deception; hiàsä—envy; ca—also; matsaraù—intolerance;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1037
rajaù—passion; pramädaù—bewilderment; kñut—hunger; nidrä—sleep;
çatravaù—enemies; tu—indeed; evam ädayaù—even other such conceptions of
life; rajaù-tamaù—because of the conception of passion and ignorance;
prakåtayaù—causes; sattva—because of the conception of goodness;
prakåtayaù—causes; kvacit—sometimes.
TRANSLATION
In the conditioned stage, one's conceptions of life are sometimes polluted by
passion and ignorance, which are exhibited by attachment, hostility, greed,
lamentation, illusion, fear, madness, false prestige, insults, fault-finding,
deception, envy, intolerance, passion, bewilderment, hunger and sleep. All of
these are enemies. Sometimes one's conceptions are also polluted by goodness.
PURPORT
The actual aim of life is to go back home, back to Godhead, but there are
many hindrances created by the three modes of material nature—sometimes
by a combination of rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa, the modes of passion and
ignorance, and sometimes by the mode of goodness. In the material world,
even if one is a philanthropist, a nationalist and a good man according to
materialistic estimations, these conceptions of life form a hindrance to
spiritual advancement. How much more of a hindrance, then, are hostility,
greed, illusion, lamentation and too much attachment to material enjoyment?
To progress toward the target of Viñëu, which is our real self-interest, one must
become very powerful in conquering these various hindrances or enemies. In
other words, one should not be attached to being a good man or a bad man in
this material world.
In this material world, so-called goodness and badness are the same because
they consist of the three modes of material nature. One must transcend this
material nature. Even the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies consist of the three
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1038
modes of material nature. Therefore Kåñëa advised Arjuna:
traiguëya-viñayä vedä
nistraiguëyo bhavärjuna
nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
niryoga-kñema ätmavän
"The Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material nature.
Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all of them. Be free
from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and safety, and be established
in the self." (Bg. 2.45) Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says, ürdhvaà
gacchanti sattva-sthäù: [Bg. 14.18] if one becomes a very good person—in other
words, if one is in the mode of goodness—he may be elevated to the higher
planetary systems. Similarly, if one is infected by rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa, he
may remain in this world or go down to the animal kingdom. But all of these
situations are hindrances on the path of spiritual salvation. Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu therefore says:
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
[Cc. Madhya 19.151]
If one is fortunate enough to transcend all this so-called goodness and badness
and come to the platform of devotional service by the mercy of Kåñëa and the
guru, his life becomes successful. In this regard, one must be very bold so that
he can conquer these enemies of Kåñëa consciousness. Not caring for the good
and bad of this material world, one must boldly propagate Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 45
Yaavà*k-aYarQaMaaTMavXaaePak-LPa&
Datae Gairïcr<aacRNaYaa iNaXaaTaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1039
jaNaaiSaMaCYauTabl/ae dDadSTaXa}au"
SvaNaNdTauí oPaXaaNTa wd& ivJaùaTa( )) 45 ))
yävan nå-käya-ratham ätma-vaçopakalpaà
dhatte gariñöha-caraëärcanayä niçätam
jïänäsim acyuta-balo dadhad asta-çatruù
svänanda-tuñöa upaçänta idaà vijahyät
SYNONYMS
yävat—as long as; nå-käya—this human form of body; ratham—considered to
be a chariot; ätma-vaça—dependent upon one's own control; upakalpam—in
which there are many other subordinate parts; dhatte—one possesses;
gariñöha-caraëa—the lotus feet of the superiors (namely the spiritual master
and his predecessors); arcanayä—by serving; niçätam—sharpened;
jïäna-asim—the sword or weapon of knowledge; acyuta-balaù—by the
transcendental strength of Kåñëa; dadhat—holding; asta-çatruù—until the
enemy is defeated; sva-änanda-tuñöaù—being fully self-satisfied by
transcendental bliss; upaçäntaù—the consciousness being cleansed of all
material contamination; idam—this body; vijahyät—one should give up.
TRANSLATION
As long as one has to accept a material body, with its different parts and
paraphernalia, which are not fully under one's control, one must have the lotus
feet of his superiors, namely his spiritual master and the spiritual master's
predecessors. By their mercy, one can sharpen the sword of knowledge, and
with the power of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's mercy one must then
conquer the enemies mentioned above. In this way, the devotee should be able
to merge into his own transcendental bliss, and then he may give up his body
and resume his spiritual identity.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1040
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (4.9) the Lord says:
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." This is the highest perfection of life, and
the human body is meant for this purpose. It is said in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(11.20.17):
nå-deham ädyaà sulabhaà sudurlabhaà
plavaà sukalpaà guru-karëadhäram
mayänukülena nabhasvateritaà
pumän bhaväbdhià na taret sa ätma-hä
This human form of body is a most valuable boat, and the spiritual master is
the captain, guru-karëadhäram, to guide the boat in plying across the ocean of
nescience. The instruction of Kåñëa is a favorable breeze. One must use all
these facilities to cross over the ocean of nescience. Since the spiritual master
is the captain, one must serve the spiritual master very sincerely so that by his
mercy one will be able to get the mercy of the Supreme Lord.
A significant word here is acyuta-balaù. The spiritual master is certainly
very merciful to his disciples, and consequently by satisfying him a devotee
gets strength from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu therefore says, guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja: [Cc.
Madhya 19.151] one must first please the spiritual master, and then one
automatically pleases Kåñëa and gets the strength with which to cross the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1041
ocean of nescience. If one seriously desires to return home, back to Godhead,
one must therefore become strong enough by pleasing the spiritual master, for
thus one gets the weapon with which to conquer the enemy, and one also gets
the grace of Kåñëa. Simply getting the weapon of jïäna is insufficient. One
must sharpen the weapon by serving the spiritual master and adhering to his
instructions. Then the candidate will get the mercy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In general warfare one must take help from his
chariot and horses in order to conquer his enemy, and after conquering his
enemies he may give up the chariot and its paraphernalia. Similarly, as long as
one has a human body, one should fully use it to obtain the highest perfection
of life, namely going back home, back to Godhead.
The perfection of knowledge is certainly to become transcendentally
situated (brahma-bhüta [SB 4.30.20]). As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.54):
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
"One who is transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman
and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is
equally disposed toward all living entities. In that state he attains pure
devotional service." Simply by cultivating knowledge as the impersonalists do,
one cannot get out of the clutches of mäyä. One must attain the platform of
bhakti.
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä
viçate tad-anantaram
"One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1042
service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by such
devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God." (Bg. 18.55) Unless one has
attained the stage of devotional service and the mercy of the spiritual master
and Kåñëa, there is a possibility that one may fall down and again accept a
material body. Therefore Kåñëa stresses in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."
The word tattvataù, meaning "in reality," is very important. Tato mäà
tattvato jïätvä. Unless one understands Kåñëa in truth by the mercy of the
spiritual master, one is not free to give up his material body. As it is said,
äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù patanty adho 'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù:
[SB 10.2.32] if one neglects to serve the lotus feet of Kåñëa, one cannot become
free from the material clutches simply by knowledge. Even if one attains the
stage of brahma-padam, merging in Brahman, without bhakti he is prone to fall
down. One must be very careful in regard to the danger of falling down again
into material bondage. The only insurance is to come to the stage of bhakti,
from which one is sure not to fall. Then one is free from the activities of the
material world. In summary, as stated by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, one must
get in touch with a bona fide spiritual master coming in the paramparä of
Kåñëa consciousness, for by his mercy and instructions one is able to get
strength from Kåñëa. Thus one engages in devotional service and attains the
ultimate goal of life, the lotus feet of Viñëu.
Significant in this verse are the words jïänäsim acyuta-balaù. Jïänäsim, the
sword of knowledge, is given by Kåñëa, and when one serves the guru and
Kåñëa in order to hold the sword of Kåñëa's instructions, Balaräma gives one
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1043
strength. Balaräma is Nityänanda. Vrajendra-nandana yei, çacé-suta haila sei,
balaräma ha-ila nitäi. This bala—Balaräma—comes with Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, and both of Them are so merciful that in this age of Kali one
may very easily take shelter of Their lotus feet. They come especially to deliver
the fallen souls of this age. päpé täpé yata chila, hari-näme uddhärila. Their
weapon is saìkértana, hari-näma. Thus one should accept the sword of
knowledge from Kåñëa and be strong with the mercy of Balaräma. We are
therefore worshiping Kåñëa-Balaräma in Våndävana. In the Muëòaka
Upaniñad (3.2.4) it is said:
näyam ätmä bala-hénena labhyo
na ca pramädät tapaso väpy aliìgät
etair upäyair yatate yas tu vidväàs
tasyaiña ätmä viçate brahma-dhäma
One cannot attain the goal of life without the mercy of Balaräma. Çré
Narottama däsa Öhäkura therefore says, nitäiyera karuëä habe, vraje
rädhä-kåñëa päbe: when one receives the mercy of Balaräma, Nityänanda, one
can attain the lotus feet of Rädhä and Kåñëa very easily.
se sambandha nähi yära, båthä janma gela tära,
vidyä-kule hi karibe tära
If one has no connection with Nitäi, Balaräma, then even though one is a very
learned scholar or jïäné or has taken birth in a very respectable family, these
assets will not help him. We must therefore conquer the enemies of Kåñëa
consciousness with the strength received from Balaräma.
TEXT 46
NaaeceTa( Pa[MataMaSaidiNd]YavaiJaSaUTaa
NaqTvaeTPaQa& ivzYadSYauzu iNai+aPaiNTa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1044
Tae dSYav" SahYaSaUTaMaMau& TaMaae_NDae
Sa&SaarkU-Pa oåMa*TYau>aYae i+aPaiNTa )) 46 ))
nocet pramattam asad-indriya-väji-sütä
nétvotpathaà viñaya-dasyuñu nikñipanti
te dasyavaù sahaya-sütam amuà tamo 'ndhe
saàsära-küpa uru-måtyu-bhaye kñipanti
SYNONYMS
nocet—if we do not follow the instructions of Acyuta, Kåñëa, and do not take
shelter of Balaräma; pramattam—careless, inattentive; asat—which are always
prone to material consciousness; indriya—the senses; väji—acting as the
horses; sütäù—the chariot driver (intelligence); nétvä—bringing;
utpatham—to the roadway of material desire; viñaya—the sense objects;
dasyuñu—in the hands of the plunderers; nikñipanti—throw; te—those;
dasyavaù—plunderers; sa—with; haya-sütam—the horses and chariot driver;
amum—all of them; tamaù—dark; andhe—blind; saàsära-küpe—into the well
of material existence; uru—great; måtyu-bhaye—fear of death;
kñipanti—throw.
TRANSLATION
Otherwise, if one does not take shelter of Acyuta and Baladeva, then the
senses, acting as the horses, and the intelligence, acting as the driver, both being
prone to material contamination, inattentively bring the body, which acts as the
chariot, to the path of sense gratification. When one is thus attracted again by
the rogues of viñaya—eating, sleeping and mating—the horses and chariot
driver are thrown into the blinding dark well of material existence, and one is
again put into a dangerous and extremely fearful situation of repeated birth and
death.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1045
PURPORT
Without the protection of Gaura-Nitäi—Kåñëa and Balaräma—one cannot
get out of the dark well of ignorance in material existence. This is indicated
here by the word nocet, which means that one will always remain in the dark
well of material existence. The living entity must get strength from
Nitäi-Gaura, or Kåñëa-Balaräma. Without the mercy of Nitäi-Gaura, there is
no way to come out of this dark well of ignorance. As stated in the
Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 1.2):
vande çré-kåñëa-caitanyanityänandau
sahoditau
gauòodaye puñpavantau
citrau çandau tamo-nudau
"I offer my respectful obeisances unto Çré Kåñëa Caitanya and Lord
Nityänanda, who are like the sun and moon. They have arisen simultaneously
on the horizon of Gauòa to dissipate the darkness of ignorance and thus
wonderfully bestow benediction upon all." This material world is a dark well of
ignorance. The fallen soul in this dark well must take shelter of the lotus feet
of Gaura-Nitäi, for thus he can easily emerge from material existence. Without
Their strength, simply attempting to get out of the clutches of matter by
speculative knowledge will be insufficient.
TEXT 47
Pa[v*ta& c iNav*ta& c iÜivDa& k-MaR vEidk-Ma( )
AavTaRTae Pa[v*taeNa iNav*taeNaaénuTae_Ma*TaMa( )) 47 ))
pravåttaà ca nivåttaà ca
dvi-vidhaà karma vaidikam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1046
ävartate pravåttena
nivåttenäçnute 'måtam
SYNONYMS
pravåttam—inclination for material enjoyment; ca—and; nivåttam—cessation
of material enjoyment; ca—and; dvi-vidham—these two varieties; karma—of
activities; vaidikam—recommended in the Vedas; ävartate—one travels up and
down through the cycle of saàsära; pravåttena—by an inclination for enjoying
material activities; nivåttena—but by ceasing such activities; açnute—one
enjoys; amåtam—eternal life.
TRANSLATION
According to the Vedas, there are two kinds of activities-pravåtti and nivåtti.
Pravåtti activities involve raising oneself from a lower to a higher condition of
materialistic life, whereas nivåtti means the cessation of material desire.
Through pravåtti activities one suffers from material entanglement, but by
nivåtti activities one is purified and becomes fit to enjoy eternal, blissful life.
PURPORT
As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (16.7), pravåttià ca nivåttià ca janä na vidur
äsuräù: the asuras, nondevotees, cannot distinguish between pravåtti and
nivåtti. Whatever they like they do. Such persons think themselves
independent of the strong material nature, and therefore they are
irresponsible and do not care to act piously. Indeed, they do not distinguish
between pious and impious activity. Bhakti, of course, does not depend on
pious or impious activity. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.6):
sa vai puàsäm paro dharmo
yato bhaktir adhokñaje
ahaituky apratihatä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1047
yayätmä suprasédati
"The supreme occupation [dharma] for all humanity is that by which men can
attain to loving devotional service unto the transcendent Lord. Such
devotional service must be unmotivated and uninterrupted in order to
completely satisfy the self." Nonetheless, those who act piously have a better
chance to become devotees. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.16), catur-vidhä
bhajante mäà janäù sukåtino 'rjuna: "O Arjuna, four kinds of pious men render
devotional service unto Me." One who takes to devotional service, even with
some material motive, is considered pious, and because he has come to Kåñëa,
he will gradually come to the stage of bhakti. Then, like Dhruva Mahäräja, he
will refuse to accept any material benediction from the Lord (svämin kåtärtho
'smi varaà na yäce [Cc. Madhya 22.42]). Therefore, even if one is materially
inclined, one may take to the shelter of the lotus feet of Kåñëa and Balaräma,
or Gaura and Nitäi, so that he will very soon be purified of all material desires
(kñipraà bhavati dharmätmä çaçvac chäntià nigacchati). As soon as one is freed
from inclinations toward pious and impious activities, he becomes a perfect
candidate for returning home, back to Godhead.
TEXTS 48-49
ih&ó& d]VYaMaYa& k-aMYaMaiGanhae}aaÛXaaiNTadMa( )
dXaRê PaU<aRMaaSaê caTauMaaRSYa& Paéu" SauTa" )) 48 ))
WTaidí& Pa[v*taa:Ya& huTa& Pa[huTaMaev c )
PaUTa| Saural/YaaraMakU-PaaJaqVYaaidl/+a<aMa( )) 49 ))
hiàsraà dravyamayaà kämyam
agni-hoträdy-açäntidam
darçaç ca pürëamäsaç ca
cäturmäsyaà paçuù sutaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1048
etad iñöaà pravåttäkhyaà
hutaà prahutam eva ca
pürtaà surälayärämaküpäjévyädi-
lakñaëam
SYNONYMS
hiàsram—a system of killing and sacrificing animals;
dravya-mayam—requiring much paraphernalia; kämyam—full of unlimited
material desires; agni-hotra-ädi—ritualistic ceremonies such as the
agni-hotra-yajïa; açänti-dam—causing anxieties; darçaù—the darça ritualistic
ceremony; ca—and; pürëamäsaù—the pürëamäsa ritualistic ceremony;
ca—also; cäturmäsyam—observing four months of regulative principles;
paçuù—the ceremony of sacrificing animals or paçu-yajïa; sutaù—the
soma-yajïa; etat—of all this; iñöam—the goal; pravåtta-äkhyam—known as
material attachment; hutam—Vaiçvadeva, an incarnation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; prahutam—a ceremony called Baliharaëa;
eva—indeed; ca—also; pürtam—for the benefit of the public;
sura-älaya—constructing temples for demigods; äräma—resting houses and
gardens; küpa—digging wells; äjévya-ädi—activities like distributing food and
water; lakñaëam—symptoms.
TRANSLATION
The ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices known as agni-hotra-yajïa,
darça-yajïa, pürëamäsa-yajïa, cäturmäsya-yajïa, paçu-yajïa and soma-yajïa are
all symptomized by the killing of animals and the burning of many valuables,
especially food grains, all for the fulfillment of material desires and the creation
of anxiety. Performing such sacrifices, worshiping Vaiçvadeva, and performing
the ceremony of Baliharaëa, which all supposedly constitute the goal of life, as
well as constructing temples for demigods, building resting houses and gardens,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1049
digging wells for the distribution of water, establishing booths for the
distribution of food, and performing activities for public welfare—these are all
symptomized by attachment to material desires.
TEXTS 50-51
d]VYaSaU+MaivPaak-ê DaUMaae rai}arPa+aYa" )
AYaNa& di+a<a& SaaeMaae dXaR AaeziDavqåDa" )) 50 ))
Aà& reTa wiTa +MaeXa iPaTa*YaaNa& PauNa>aRv" )
WkE-k-XYaeNaaNauPaUv| >aUTva >aUTveh JaaYaTae )) 51 ))
dravya-sükñma-vipäkaç ca
dhümo rätrir apakñayaù
ayanaà dakñiëaà somo
darça oñadhi-vérudhaù
annaà reta iti kñmeça
pitå-yänaà punar-bhavaù
ekaikaçyenänupürvaà
bhütvä bhütveha jäyate
SYNONYMS
dravya-sükñma-vipäkaù—the paraphernalia offered as oblations in the fire,
such as food grains mixed with ghee; ca—and; dhümaù—turned to smoke, or
the demigod in charge of smoke; rätriù—the demigod in charge of night;
apakñayaù—in the dark fortnight of the moon; ayanam—the demigod in
charge of the passing of the sun; dakñiëam—in the southern zone; somaù—the
moon; darçaù—returning; oñadhi—plant life (on the surface of the earth);
vérudhaù—vegetation in general (the birth of lamentation); annam—food
grains; retaù—semen; iti—in this way; kñma-éça—O King Yudhiñöhira, lord of
the earth; pitå-yänam—the way of taking birth from the father's semen;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1050
punaù-bhavaù—again and again; eka-ekaçyena—one after another;
anupürvam—successively, according to the gradation; bhütvä—taking birth;
bhütvä—again taking birth; iha—in this material world; jäyate—one exists in
the materialistic way of life.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Yudhiñöhira, when oblations of ghee and food grains like
barley and sesame are offered in sacrifice, they turn into celestial smoke, which
carries one to successively higher planetary systems like the kingdoms of
Dhumä, Rätri, Kåñëapakña, Dakñiëam and ultimately the moon. Then,
however, the performers of sacrifice descend again to earth to become herbs,
creepers, vegetables and food grains. These are eaten by different living entities
and turned to semen, which is injected into female bodies. Thus one takes birth
again and again.
PURPORT
This is explained in Bhagavad-gétä (9.21):
te taà bhuktvä svarga-lokaà viçälaà
kñéëe puëye martya-lokaà viçanti
evaà trayé-dharmam anuprapannä
gatägataà käma-kämä labhante
"When those who follow the pravåtti-märga have enjoyed heavenly sense
pleasure, they return to this mortal planet again. Thus, through the Vedic
principles, they achieve only flickering happiness." Following the
pravåtti-märga, the living entity who desires to be promoted to the higher
planetary systems performs sacrifices regularly, and how he goes up and comes
down again is described here in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, as well as in
Bhagavad-gétä. It is also said, traiguëya-viñayä vedäù: "The Vedas deal mainly
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1051
with the three modes of material nature." The Vedas, especially three Vedas,
namely Säma, Yajur and Åk, vividly describe this process of ascending to the
higher planets and returning. But Kåñëa advises Arjuna, traiguëya-viñayä vedä
nistraiguëyo bhavärjuna: one has to transcend these three modes of material
nature, and then one will be released from the cycle of birth and death.
Otherwise, although one may be promoted to a higher planetary system such as
Candraloka, one must again come down (kñéëe puëye martya-lokaà viçanti [Bg.
9.21]). After one's enjoyment due to pious activities is finished, one must
return to this planet in rainfall and first take birth as a plant or creeper, which
is eaten by various animals, including human beings, and turned to semen.
This semen is injected into the female body, and thus the living entity takes
birth. Those who return to earth in this way take birth especially in higher
families like those of brähmaëas.
It may be remarked in this connection that even the modern so-called
scientists who are going to the moon are not able to stay there, but are
returning to their laboratories. Therefore, whether one goes to the moon by
modern mechanical arrangements or by performing pious activities, one must
return to earth. That is clearly stated in this verse and explained in
Bhagavad-gétä. Even if one goes to the higher planetary systems (yänti
deva-vratä devän [Bg. 9.25]), one's place there is not secure; one must return to
martya-loka. Äbrahma-bhuvanäl lokäù punar ävartino 'rjuna: [Bg. 8.16] aside
from the moon, even if one goes to Brahmaloka, one must return. Yaà präpya
na nivartante tad dhäma paramaà mama: but if one goes back home, back to
Godhead, he need not return to this material world.
TEXT 52
iNazek-aidXMaXaaNaaNTaE" Sa&Sk-arE" Sa&Sk*-Taae iÜJa" )
wiNd]Yaezu i§-YaaYajaNa( jaNadqPaezu JauûiTa )) 52 ))
niñekädi-çmaçänäntaiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1052
saàskäraiù saàskåto dvijaù
indriyeñu kriyä-yajïän
jïäna-dépeñu juhvati
SYNONYMS
niñeka-ädi—the beginning of life (the purificatory process of garbhädhäna,
performed when the father begets a child by discharging semen into the womb
of the mother); çmaçäna-antaiù—and at death, when the body is put into a
crematorium and burnt to ashes; saàskäraiù—by such purificatory processes;
saàskåtaù—purified; dvijaù—a twice-born brähmaëa; indriyeñu—into the
senses; kriyä-yajïän—activities and sacrifices (which elevate one to a higher
planetary system); jïäna-dépeñu—by enlightenment in real knowledge;
juhvati—offers.
TRANSLATION
A twice-born brähmaëa [dvija] gains his life by the grace of his parents
through the process of purification known as garbhädhäna. There are also other
processes of purification, until the end of life, when the funeral ceremony
[antyeñöi-kriyä] is performed. Thus in due course a qualified brähmaëa becomes
uninterested in materialistic activities and sacrifices, but he offers the sensual
sacrifices, in full knowledge, into the working senses, which are illuminated by
the fire of knowledge.
PURPORT
Those interested in materialistic activities remain in the cycle of birth and
death. Pravåtti-märga, or the inclination to stay in the material world to enjoy
varieties of sense gratification, has been explained in the previous verse. Now,
in this verse, it is explained that one who has perfect brahminical knowledge
rejects the process of elevation to higher planets and accepts nivåtti-märga; in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1053
other words, he prepares himself to go back home, back to Godhead. Those
who are not brähmaëas but atheists do not know what is pravåtti-märga or
nivåtti-märga; they simply want to obtain pleasure at any cost. Our Kåñëa
consciousness movement is therefore training devotees to give up the
pravåtti-märga and accept the nivåtti-märga in order to return home, back to
Godhead. This is a little difficult to understand, but it is very easy if one takes
to Kåñëa consciousness seriously and tries to understand Kåñëa. A Kåñëa
conscious person can understand that performing yajïa according to the
karma-käëòa system is a useless waste of time and that merely giving up the
karma-käëòa and accepting the process of speculation is also unfruitful.
Therefore Narottama däsa Öhäkura has sung in his prema-bhakti-candrikä:
karma-käëòa, jïäna-käëòa, kevala viñera bhäëòa
'amåta' baliyä yebä khäya
nänä yoni sadä phire, kadarya bhakñaëa kare,
tära janma adhaù-päte yäya
A life of karma-käëòa or jïäna-käëòa is like a poison pot, and one who takes
to such a life is doomed. In the karma-käëòa system, one is destined to accept
birth and death again and again. Similarly, with jïäna-käëòa one falls down
again to this material world. Only worship of the Supreme Person offers one
the safety of going back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 53
wiNd]Yaai<a MaNaSYaUMaaOE vaic vEk-airk&- MaNa" )
vac& v<aRSaMaaMNaaYae TaMa( pk-are Svre NYaSaeTa( )
pk-ar& ibNdaE Naade Ta& Ta& Tau Pa[a<ae MahTYaMauMa( )) 53 ))
indriyäëi manasy ürmau
väci vaikärikaà manaù
väcaà varëa-samämnäye
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1054
tam oàkäre svare nyaset
oàkäraà bindau näde taà
taà tu präëe mahaty amum
SYNONYMS
indriyäëi—the senses (acting and knowledge-gathering); manasi—in the
mind; ürmau—in the waves of acceptance and rejection; väci—in the words;
vaikärikam—infected by changes; manaù—the mind; väcam—the words;
varëa-samämnäye—in the aggregate of all alphabets; tam—that (aggregate of
all alphabets); oàkäre—in the concise form of oàkära; svare—in the
vibration; nyaset—one should give up; oàkäram—the concise sound vibration;
bindau—in the point of oàkära; näde—in the sound vibration; tam—that;
tam—that (sound vibration); tu—indeed; präëe—in the life air; mahati—unto
the Supreme; amum—the living entity.
TRANSLATION
The mind is always agitated by waves of acceptance and rejection. Therefore
all the activities of the senses should be offered into the mind, which should be
offered into one's words. Then one's words should be offered into the aggregate
of all alphabets, which should be offered into the concise form oàkära. Oàkära
should be offered into the point bindu, bindu into the vibration of sound, and
that vibration into the life air. Then the living entity, who is all that remains,
should be placed in Brahman, the Supreme. This is the process of sacrifice.
PURPORT
The mind is always agitated by acceptance and rejection, which are
compared to mental waves that are constantly tossing. The living entity is
floating in the waves of material existence because of his forgetfulness. Çréla
Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has therefore sung in his Gétävalé: miche mäyära vaçe,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1055
yäccha bhese', khäccha häbuòubu, bhäi. "My dear mind, under the influence of
mäyä you are being carried away by the waves of rejection and acceptance.
Simply take shelter of Kåñëa." Jéva kåñëa-däsa, ei viçväsa, karle ta' ära duùkha
näi: if we simply regard the lotus feet of Kåñëa as our ultimate shelter, we shall
be saved from all these waves of mäyä, which are variously exhibited as mental
and sensual activities and the agitation of rejection and acceptance. Kåñëa
instructs in Bhagavad-gétä (18.66):
sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù
"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver
you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." Therefore if we simply place
ourselves at the lotus feet of Kåñëa by taking to Kåñëa consciousness and
keeping always in touch with Him by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra, we
need not take much trouble in arranging to return to the spiritual world. By
the mercy of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, this is very easy.
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
TEXT 54
AiGan" SaUYaaeR idva Pa[aõ" éu(c)-ae rak-aetar& Svra$( )
ivìae_Qa TaEJaSa" Pa[ajSTauYaR AaTMaa SaMaNvYaaTa( )) 54 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1056
agniù süryo divä prähëaù
çuklo räkottaraà sva-räö
viçvo 'tha taijasaù präjïas
turya ätmä samanvayät
SYNONYMS
agniù—fire; süryaù—sun; divä—day; prähëaù—the end of the day;
çuklaù—the bright fortnight of the moon; räka—the full moon at the end of
the çukla-pakña; uttaram—the period when the sun passes to the north;
sva-räö—the Supreme Brahman or Lord Brahmä; viçvaù—gross designation;
atha—Brahmaloka, the ultimate in material enjoyment; taijasaù—subtle
designation; präjïaù—the witness in the causal designation;
turyaù—transcendental; ätmä—the soul; samanvayät—as a natural
consequence.
TRANSLATION
On his path of ascent, the progressive living entity enters the different
worlds of fire, the sun, the day, the end of the day, the bright fortnight, the full
moon, and the passing of the sun in the north, along with their presiding
demigods. When he enters Brahmaloka, he enjoys life for many millions of
years, and finally his material designation comes to an end. He then comes to a
subtle designation, from which he attains the causal designation, witnessing all
previous states. Upon the annihilation of this causal state, he attains his pure
state, in which he identifies with the Supersoul. In this way the living entity
becomes transcendental.
TEXT 55
devYaaNaiMad& Pa[ahu>aURTva >aUTvaNauPaUvRXa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1057
AaTMaYaaJYauPaXaaNTaaTMaa ùaTMaSQaae Na iNavTaRTae )) 55 ))
deva-yänam idaà prähur
bhütvä bhütvänupürvaçaù
ätma-yäjy upaçäntätmä
hy ätma-stho na nivartate
SYNONYMS
deva-yänam—the process of elevation known as deva-yäna; idam—on this
(path); prähuù—it is said; bhütvä bhütvä—having repeated birth;
anupürvaçaù—consecutively; ätma-yäjé—one who is eager for self-realization;
upaçänta-ätmä—completely free from all material desires; hi—indeed;
ätma-sthaù—situated in his own self; na—not; nivartate—does return.
TRANSLATION
This gradual process of elevation for self-realization is meant for those who
are truly aware of the Absolute Truth. After repeated birth on this path, which
is known as deva-yäna, one attains these consecutive stages. One who is
completely free from all material desires, being situated in the self, need not
traverse the path of repeated birth and death.
TEXT 56
Ya WTae iPaTa*devaNaaMaYaNae vediNaiMaRTae )
Xaañe<a c+auza ved JaNaSQaae_iPa Na MauùiTa )) 56 ))
ya ete pitå-devänäm
ayane veda-nirmite
çästreëa cakñuñä veda
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1058
jana-stho 'pi na muhyati
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; ete—on this path (as recommended above);
pitå-devänäm—known as pitå-yäna and deva-yäna; ayane—on this path;
veda-nirmite—recommended in the Vedas; çästreëa—by regular study of the
scriptures; cakñuñä—by enlightened eyes; veda—is fully aware; jana-sthaù—a
person situated in a material body; api—even though; na—never; muhyati—is
bewildered.
TRANSLATION
Even though situated in a material body, one who is fully aware of the paths
known as pitå-yäna and deva-yäna, and who thus opens his eyes in terms of
Vedic knowledge, is never bewildered in this material world.
PURPORT
Äcäryavän puruño veda: one who is guided by the bona fide spiritual master
knows everything as stated in the Vedas, which set forth the standard of
infallible knowledge. As recommended in Bhagavad-gétä, äcäryopäsanam: one
must approach the äcärya for real knowledge. Tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum
eväbhigacchet: [MU 1.2.12(45)] one must approach the äcärya, for then one will
receive perfect knowledge. When guided by the spiritual master, one attains
the ultimate goal of life.
TEXT 57
AadavNTae JaNaaNaa& Sad( bihrNTa" ParavrMa( )
jaNa& jeYa& vcae vaCYa& TaMaae JYaaeiTaSTvYa& SvYaMa( )) 57 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1059
ädäv ante janänäà sad
bahir antaù parävaram
jïänaà jïeyaà vaco väcyaà
tamo jyotis tv ayaà svayam
SYNONYMS
ädau—in the beginning; ante—at the end; janänäm—of all living entities;
sat—always existing; bahiù—externally; antaù—internally;
para—transcendental; avaram—material; jïänam—knowledge; jïeyam—the
objective; vacaù—expression; väcyam—the ultimate object; tamaù—darkness;
jyotiù—light; tu—indeed; ayam—this one (the Supreme Lord);
svayam—Himself.
TRANSLATION
He who exists internally and externally, at the beginning and end of
everything and of all living beings, as that which is enjoyable and as the enjoyer
of everything, superior and inferior, is the Supreme Truth. He always exists as
knowledge and the object of knowledge, as expression and the object of
understanding, as darkness and as light. Thus He, the Supreme Lord, is
everything.
PURPORT
Here the Vedic aphorism sarvaà khalv idaà brahma is explained. It is also
explained in the catuù-çloké Bhägavatam [SB 2.9.33/34/35/36]. Aham eväsam
evägre. The Supreme Lord existed in the beginning, He exists after the
creation and maintains everything, and after destruction everything merges in
Him, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (prakåtià yänti mämikäm). Thus the Supreme
Lord is actually everything. In the conditioned state, we are bewildered in our
understanding, but in the perfect stage of liberation we can understand that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1060
Kåñëa is the cause of everything.
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
"Kåñëa, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal,
blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is
the prime cause of all causes." (Bs. 5.1) This is the perfection of knowledge.
TEXT 58
AabaiDaTaae_iPa ùa>aaSaae YaQaa vSTauTaYaa SMa*Ta" )
dugaR$=TvadEiNd]Yak&- TaÜdQaRivk-iLPaTaMa( )) 58 ))
äbädhito 'pi hy äbhäso
yathä vastutayä småtaù
durghaöatväd aindriyakaà
tadvad artha-vikalpitam
SYNONYMS
äbädhitaù—rejected; api—although; hi—certainly; äbhäsaù—a reflection;
yathä—as; vastutayä—a form of reality; småtaù—accepted;
durghaöatvät—because of being very difficult to prove the reality;
aindriyakam—knowledge derived from the senses; tadvat—similarly;
artha—reality; vikalpitam—speculated or doubtful.
TRANSLATION
Although one may consider the reflection of the sun from a mirror to be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1061
false, it has its factual existence. Accordingly, to prove by speculative
knowledge that there is no reality would be extremely difficult.
PURPORT
The impersonalists try to prove that the varieties in the vision of the
empiric philosopher are false. The impersonalist philosophy, vivarta-väda,
generally cites the acceptance of a rope to be a snake as an example of this
fact. According to this example, the varieties within our vision are false, just as
a rope seen to be a snake is false. The Vaiñëavas say, however, that although
the idea that the rope is a snake is false, the snake is not false; one has
experience of a snake in reality, and therefore he knows that although the
representation of the rope as a snake is false or illusory, there is a snake in
reality. Similarly, this world, which is full of varieties, is not false; it is a
reflection of the reality in the Vaikuëöha world, the spiritual world.
The reflection of the sun from a mirror is nothing but light within
darkness. Thus although it is not exactly sunlight, without the sunlight the
reflection would be impossible. Similarly, the varieties of this world would be
impossible unless there were a real prototype in the spiritual world. The
Mäyävädé philosopher cannot understand this, but a real philosopher must be
convinced that light is not possible at all without a background of sunlight.
Thus the jugglery of words used by the Mäyävädé philosopher to prove that this
material world is false may amaze inexperienced children, but a man with full
knowledge knows perfectly well that there cannot be any existence without
Kåñëa. Therefore a Vaiñëava insists on the platform of somehow or other
accepting Kåñëa (tasmät kenäpy upäyena manaù kåñëe niveçayet [SB 7.1.32]).
When we raise our unmixed faith to the lotus feet of Kåñëa, everything is
revealed. Kåñëa also says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.1):
mayy äsakta-manäù pärtha
yogaà yuïjan mad-äçrayaù
asaàçayaà samagraà mäà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1062
yathä jïäsyasi tac chåëu
"Now hear, O son of Påthä [Arjuna], how by practicing yoga in full
consciousness of Me, with mind attached to Me, you can know Me in full, free
from doubt." Simply by raising one's staunch faith in Kåñëa and His
instructions, one can understand reality without a doubt (asaàçayaà
samagraà mäm). One can understand how Kåñëa's material and spiritual
energies are working and how He is present everywhere although everything is
not Him. This philosophy of acintya-bhedäbheda, inconceivable oneness and
difference, is the perfect philosophy enunciated by the Vaiñëavas. Everything
is an emanation from Kåñëa, but it is not that everything must therefore be
worshiped. Speculative knowledge cannot give us reality as it is, but will
continue to be nefariously imperfect. So-called scientists try to prove that
there is no God and that everything is happening because of the laws of
nature, but this is imperfect knowledge because nothing can work unless
directed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is explained in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.10) by the Lord Himself:
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sacaräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunté, and it is
producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is
created and annihilated again and again." In this regard, Çréla Madhväcärya
gives this note: durghaöatväd arthatvena parameçvareëaiva kalpitam. The
background of everything is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva.
Väsudevaù sarvam iti sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù [Bg. 7.19]. This can be
understood by a mahätmä who is perfect in knowledge. Such a mahätmä is
rarely seen.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1063
TEXT 59
i+aTYaadqNaaiMahaQaaRNaa& ^aYaa Na k-TaMaaiPa ih )
Na SaºaTaae ivk-arae_iPa Na Pa*Qax( NaaiNvTaae Ma*za )) 59 ))
kñity-ädénäm ihärthänäà
chäyä na katamäpi hi
na saìghäto vikäro 'pi
na påthaì nänvito måñä
SYNONYMS
kñiti-ädénäm—of the five elements, beginning with the earth; iha—in this
world; arthänäm—of those five elements; chäyä—shadow; na—neither;
katamä—which of them; api—indeed; hi—certainly; na—nor;
saìghätaù—combination; vikäraù—transformation; api—although; na
påthak—nor separated; na anvitaù—nor inherent in; måñä—all these theories
are without substance.
TRANSLATION
In this world there are five elements—namely earth, water, fire, air and
ether—but the body is not a reflection of them, nor a combination or
transformation of them. Because the body and its ingredients are neither
distinct nor amalgamated, all such theories are insubstantial.
PURPORT
A forest is certainly a transformation of the earth, but one tree does not
depend on another tree; if one is cut down, this does not mean that the others
are cut down. Therefore, the forest is neither a combination nor a
transformation of the trees. The best explanation is given by Kåñëa Himself:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1064
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings
are in Me, but I am not in them." (Bg. 9.4) Everything is an expansion of
Kåñëa's energy. As it is said, paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate: [Cc. Madhya
13.65, purport] the Lord has multi-energies, which are expressed in different
ways. The energies are existing, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead also
exists simultaneously; because everything is His energy, He is simultaneously
one with everything and different from everything. Thus our speculative
theories that ätmä, the living force, is a combination of matter, that matter is a
transformation of the soul, or that the body is part of the soul are all
insubstantial.
Since all the Lord's energies are simultaneously existing, one must
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But although He is
everything, He is not present in everything. The Lord must be worshiped in
His original form as Kåñëa. He can also present Himself in any one of His
various expanded energies. When we worship the Deity of the Lord in the
temple, the Deity appears to be stone or wood. Now, because the Supreme Lord
does not have a material body, He is not stone or wood, yet stone and wood are
not different from Him. Thus by worshiping stone or wood we get no result,
but when the stone and wood are represented in the Lord's original form, by
worshiping the Deity we get the desired result. This is supported by Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu's philosophy, acintya-bhedäbheda, which explains how
the Lord can present Himself everywhere and anywhere in a form of His
energy to accept service from the devotee.
TEXT 60
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1065
DaaTavae_vYaivTvaÀ TaNMaa}aavYavEivRNaa )
Na SYauùRSaTYavYaivNYaSaàvYavae_NTaTa" )) 60 ))
dhätavo 'vayavitväc ca
tan-mäträvayavair vinä
na syur hy asaty avayaviny
asann avayavo 'ntataù
SYNONYMS
dhätavaù—the five elements; avayavitvät—being the cause of the bodily
conception; ca—and; tat-mätra—the sense objects (sound, taste, touch, etc.);
avayavaiù—the subtle parts; vinä—without; na—not; syuù—can exist;
hi—indeed; asati—unreal; avayavini—in the formation of the body;
asan—not existing; avayavaù—the part of the body; antataù—at the end.
TRANSLATION
Because the body is formed of the five elements, it cannot exist without the
subtle sense objects. Therefore, since the body is false, the sense objects are also
naturally false or temporary.
TEXT 61
SYaaTa( Saad*XYa>a]MaSTaavd( ivk-LPae SaiTa vSTauNa" )
JaaGa]TSvaPaaE YaQaa SvPane TaQaa iviDaiNazeDaTaa )) 61 ))
syät sädåçya-bhramas tävad
vikalpe sati vastunaù
jägrat-sväpau yathä svapne
tathä vidhi-niñedhatä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1066
SYNONYMS
syät—it so becomes; sädåçya—similarity; bhramaù—mistake; tävat—as long as;
vikalpe—in separation; sati—the part; vastunaù—from the substance;
jägrat—waking; sväpau—sleeping; yathä—as; svapne—in a dream;
tathä—similarly; vidhi-niñedhatä—the regulative principles, consisting of
injunctions and prohibitions.
TRANSLATION
When a substance and its parts are separated, the acceptance of similarity
between one and the other is called illusion. While dreaming, one creates a
separation between the existences called wakefulness and sleep. It is in such a
state of mind that the regulative principles of the scriptures, consisting of
injunctions and prohibitions, are recommended.
PURPORT
In material existence there are many regulative principles and formalities.
If material existence is temporary or false, this does not mean that the spiritual
world, although similar, is also false. That one's material body is false or
temporary does not mean that the body of the Supreme Lord is also false or
temporary. The spiritual world is real, and the material world is similar to it.
For example, in the desert we sometimes find a mirage, but although the water
in a mirage is false, this does not mean that there is no water in reality; water
exists, but not in the desert. Similarly, nothing real is in this material world,
but reality is in the spiritual world. The Lord's form and His abode—Goloka
Våndävana in the Vaikuëöha planets—are eternal realities.
From Bhagavad-gétä we understand that there is another prakåti, or nature,
which is real. This is explained by the Lord Himself in the Eighth Chapter of
Bhagavad-gétä (8.19-21):
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1067
bhüta-grämaù sa eväyaà
bhütvä bhütvä praléyate
rätry-ägame 'vaçaù pärtha
prabhavaty ahar-ägame
paras tasmät tu bhävo 'nyo
'vyakto 'vyaktät sanätanaù
yaù sa sarveñu bhüteñu
naçyatsu na vinaçyati
avyakto 'kñara ity uktas
tam ähuù paramäà gatim
yaà präpya na nivartante
tad dhäma paramaà mama
"Again and again the day of Brahmä comes, and all living beings are active;
and again the night falls, O Pärtha, and they are helplessly dissolved. Yet there
is another nature, which is eternal and is transcendental to this manifested
and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is never annihilated. When all in
this world is annihilated, that part remains as it is. That supreme abode is
called unmanifested and infallible, and it is the supreme destination. When
one goes there, he never comes back. That is My supreme abode." The material
world is a reflection of the spiritual world. The material world is temporary or
false, but the spiritual world is an eternal reality.
TEXT 62
>aavaÜETa& i§-YaaÜETa& d]VYaaÜETa& TaQaaTMaNa" )
vTaRYaNSvaNau>aUTYaeh }aqNSvPanaNDauNauTae MauiNa" )) 62 ))
bhävädvaitaà kriyädvaitaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1068
dravyädvaitaà tathätmanaù
vartayan svänubhütyeha
trén svapnän dhunute muniù
SYNONYMS
bhäva-advaitam—oneness in one's conception of life; kriyä-advaitam—oneness
in activities; dravya-advaitam—oneness in different paraphernalia; tathä—as
well as; ätmanaù—of the soul; vartayan—considering; sva—one's own;
anubhütyä—according to realization; iha—in this material world; trén—the
three; svapnän—living conditions (wakefulness, dreaming and sleep);
dhunute—gives up; muniù—the philosopher or speculator.
TRANSLATION
After considering the oneness of existence, activity and paraphernalia and
after realizing the self to be different from all actions and reactions, the mental
speculator [muni], according to his own realization, gives up the three states of
wakefulness, dreaming and sleep.
PURPORT
The three words bhävädvaita, kriyädvaita and dravyädvaita are explained in
the following verses. However, one has to give up all the nonduality of
philosophical life in the material world and come to the actual life of reality in
the spiritual world in order to attain perfection.
TEXT 63
k-aYaRk-ar<avSTvEKYadXaRNa& Pa$=TaNTauvTa( )
AvSTauTvad( ivk-LPaSYa >aavaÜETa& TaduCYaTae )) 63 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1069
kärya-käraëa-vastv-aikyadarçanaà
paöa-tantuvat
avastutväd vikalpasya
bhävädvaitaà tad ucyate
SYNONYMS
kärya—the result or effect; käraëa—the cause; vastu—substance;
aikya—oneness; darçanam—observation; paöa—the cloth; tantu—the thread;
vat—like; avastutvät—because of being ultimately unreality; vikalpasya—of
differentiation; bhäva-advaitam—the conception of oneness; tat ucyate—that
is called.
TRANSLATION
When one understands that result and cause are one and that duality is
ultimately unreal, like the idea that the threads of a cloth are different from the
cloth itself, one reaches the conception of oneness called bhävädvaita.
TEXT 64
Yad( b]øi<a Pare Saa+aaTa( SavRk-MaRSaMaPaR<aMa( )
MaNaaeva¢-Naui>a" PaaQaR i§-YaaÜETa& TaduCYaTae )) 64 ))
yad brahmaëi pare säkñät
sarva-karma-samarpaëam
mano-väk-tanubhiù pärtha
kriyädvaitaà tad ucyate
SYNONYMS
yat—that which; brahmaëi—in the Supreme Brahman; pare—transcendental;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1070
säkñät—directly; sarva—of all; karma—activities; samarpaëam—dedication;
manaù—by the mind; väk—the words; tanubhiù—and the body; pärtha—O
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira; kriyä-advaitam—oneness in activities; tat ucyate—it is
called.
TRANSLATION
My dear Yudhiñöhira [Pärtha], when all the activities one performs with his
mind, words and body are dedicated directly to the service of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, one reaches oneness of activities, called kriyädvaita.
PURPORT
The Kåñëa consciousness movement is teaching people how to come to the
stage of dedicating everything to the service of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.27):
yat karoñi yad açnäsi
yaj juhoñi dadäsi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kuruñva mad-arpaëam
"O son of Kunté, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give
away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done as an
offering unto Me." If whatever we do, whatever we eat, whatever we think and
whatever we plan is for the advancement of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement, this is oneness. There is no difference between chanting for Kåñëa
consciousness and working for Kåñëa consciousness. On the transcendental
platform, they are one. But we must be guided by the spiritual master about
this oneness; we should not manufacture our own oneness.
TEXT 65
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1071
AaTMaJaaYaaSauTaadqNaaMaNYaeza& SavRdeihNaaMa( )
YaTa( SvaQaRk-aMaYaaerEKYa& d]VYaaÜETa& TaduCYaTae )) 65 ))
ätma-jäyä-sutädénäm
anyeñäà sarva-dehinäm
yat svärtha-kämayor aikyaà
dravyädvaitaà tad ucyate
SYNONYMS
ätma—of one's self; jäyä—wife; suta-ädénäm—and children; anyeñäm—of
one's relatives, etc.; sarva-dehinäm—of all other living entities; yat—whatever;
sva-artha-kämayoù—of one's ultimate goal and benefit; aikyam—oneness;
dravya-advaitam—oneness of interest; tat ucyate—it is called.
TRANSLATION
When the ultimate goal and interest of one's self, one's wife, one's children,
one's relatives and all other embodied living beings is one, this is called
dravyädvaita, or oneness of interest.
PURPORT
The actual interest of all living entities—indeed, the goal of life—is to
return home, back to Godhead. This is the interest of one's own self, one's
wife, one's children, one's disciples and one's friends, relatives, countrymen
and all humanity. The Kåñëa consciousness movement can give directions for
management by which everyone can partake in Kåñëa conscious activities and
reach the ultimate goal, which is known as svärtha-gatim. This objective of
everyone's interest is Viñëu, but because people do not know this (na te viduù
svärtha-gatià hi viñëum [SB 7.5.31]), they are making various plans by which to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1072
fulfill so many concocted interests in life. The Kåñëa consciousness movement
is trying to bring everyone to the highest interest. The process may be
differently named, but if the aim is one, people should follow it to achieve the
ultimate goal in life. Unfortunately, people are thinking of different interests,
and blind leaders are misleading them. Everyone is trying to reach the goal of
complete happiness materially; because people do not know what complete
happiness is, they are materially diverted toward different interests.
TEXT 66
Yad( YaSYa vaiNaizÖ& SYaad( YaeNa Ya}a YaTaae Na*Pa )
Sa TaeNaeheTa k-aYaaRi<a Narae NaaNYaErNaaPaid )) 66 ))
yad yasya väniñiddhaà syäd
yena yatra yato nåpa
sa teneheta käryäëi
naro nänyair anäpadi
SYNONYMS
yat—whatever; yasya—of a man; vä—either; aniñiddham—not forbidden;
syät—it is so; yena—by which means; yatra—in place and time; yataù—from
which; nåpa—O King; saù—such a person; tena—by such a process;
éheta—should perform; käryäëi—prescribed activities; naraù—a person;
na—not; anyaiù—by other ways; anäpadi—in the absence of danger.
TRANSLATION
In normal conditions, in the absence of danger, O King Yudhiñöhira, a man
should perform his prescribed activities according to his status of life with the
things, endeavors, process and living place that are not forbidden for him, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1073
not by any other means.
PURPORT
This instruction is given for men in all statuses of life. Generally society is
divided into brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas, çüdras, brahmacärés, vänaprasthas,
sannyäsés and gåhasthas. Everyone must act according to his position and try to
please the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for that will make one's life
successful. This was instructed in Naimiñäraëya:
ataù pumbhir dvija-çreñöhä
varëäçrama-vibhägaçaù
svanuñöhitasya dharmasya
saàsiddhir hari-toñaëam
"O best among the twice-born, it is therefore concluded that the highest
perfection one can achieve, by discharging his prescribed duties [dharma]
according to caste divisions and order of life, is to please the Lord Hari." (SB
1.2.13) Everyone should act according to his occupational duties just to please
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then everyone will be happy.
TEXT 67
WTaErNYaEê vedae¢E-vRTaRMaaNa" Svk-MaRi>a" )
Ga*he_PYaSYa GaiTa& YaaYaad( raJa&STaÙi¢->aax( Nar" )) 67 ))
etair anyaiç ca vedoktair
vartamänaù sva-karmabhiù
gåhe 'py asya gatià yäyäd
räjaàs tad-bhakti-bhäì naraù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1074
SYNONYMS
etaiù—by these ways; anyaiù—by other ways; ca—and; veda-uktaiù—as
directed in the Vedic literatures; vartamänaù—abiding; sva-karmabhiù—by
one's occupational duties; gåhe api—even at home; asya—of Lord Kåñëa;
gatim—destination; yäyät—can reach; räjan—O King; tat-bhakti-bhäk—who
renders devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
naraù—any person.
TRANSLATION
O King, one should perform his occupational duties according to these
instructions, as well as other instructions given in the Vedic literature, just to
remain a devotee of Lord Kåñëa. Thus, even while at home, one will be able to
reach the destination.
PURPORT
The ultimate goal of life is Viñëu, Kåñëa. Therefore, either by Vedic
regulative principles or by materialistic activities, if one tries to reach the
destination of Kåñëa, that is the perfection of life. Kåñëa should be the target;
everyone should try to reach Kåñëa, from any position of life.
Kåñëa accepts service from anyone. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.32):
mäà hi pärtha vyapäçritya
ye 'pi syuù päpa-yonayaù
striyo vaiçyäs tathä çüdräs
te 'pi yänti paräà gatim
"O son of Påthä, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth—women, vaiçyas [merchants], as well as çüdras [workers]—can approach
the supreme destination." It does not matter what one's position is; if one aims
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1075
at reaching Kåñëa by performing his occupational duty under the direction of
the spiritual master, his life is successful. It is not that only sannyäsés,
vänaprasthas and brahmacärés can reach Kåñëa. A gåhastha, a householder, can
also reach Kåñëa, provided he becomes a pure devotee without material desires.
An example of this is cited in the next verse.
TEXT 68
YaQaa ih YaUYa& Na*Padev duSTYaJaa‚
daPaÓ<aadutarTaaTMaNa" Pa[>aae" )
YaTPaadPaªeåhSaevYaa >ava‚
NaharzqiàiJaRTaidGGaJa" §-TaUNa( )) 68 ))
yathä hi yüyaà nåpa-deva dustyajäd
äpad-gaëäd uttaratätmanaù prabhoù
yat-päda-paìkeruha-sevayä bhavän
ahärañén nirjita-dig-gajaù kratün
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; hi—indeed; yüyam—all of you (Päëòavas); nåpa-deva—O lord of
the kings, human beings and demigods; dustyajät—insurmountable;
äpat—dangerous conditions; gaëät—from all; uttarata—escaped;
ätmanaù—own; prabhoù—of the Lord; yat-päda-paìkeruha—whose lotus feet;
sevayä—by serving; bhavän—yourself; ahärañét—performed;
nirjita—defeating; dik-gajaù—the most powerful enemies, who were like
elephants; kratün—ritualistic ceremonies.
TRANSLATION
O King Yudhiñöhira, because of your service to the Supreme Lord, all of you
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1076
Päëòavas defeated the greatest dangers posed by numerous kings and demigods.
By serving the lotus feet of Kåñëa, you conquered great enemies, who were like
elephants, and thus you collected ingredients for sacrifice. By His grace, may
you be delivered from material involvement.
PURPORT
Placing himself as an ordinary householder, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira inquired
from Närada Muni how a gåha-müòha-dhé, a person who is entangled in
household life and who thus continues to remain a fool, can be delivered.
Närada Muni encouraged Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira by saying, "You are already on
the safe side because you, along with your entire family, have become a pure
devotee of Kåñëa." By Kåñëa's grace, the Päëòavas conquered in the Battle of
Kurukñetra and were saved from many dangers posed not only by kings but
sometimes even by the demigods. Thus they are a practical example of how to
live in security and safety by the grace of Kåñëa. Everyone should follow the
example of the Päëòavas, who showed how to be saved by the grace of Kåñëa.
Our Kåñëa consciousness movement is intended to teach how everyone can
live peacefully in this material world and at the end of life return home, back
to Godhead. In the material world there are always dangers at every step
(padaà padaà yad vipadäà na teñäm [SB 10.14.58]). Nonetheless, if one takes
shelter of Kåñëa without hesitation and keeps under the shelter of Kåñëa, he
can easily cross the ocean of nescience. Samäçritä ye pada-pallava-plavaà
mahat-padaà puëya-yaço muräreù. To the devotee, this great ocean of
nescience becomes like a puddle of water in the hoofprint of a cow. A pure
devotee, without embarrassing himself by trying for elevation in so many ways,
stays in the safest position as a servant of Kåñëa, and thus his life is eternally
safe without a doubt.
TEXT 69
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1077
Ah& Paura>av& k-iêd( GaNDavR oPabhR<a" )
NaaManaTaqTae Mahak-LPae GaNDavaR<aa& SauSaMMaTa" )) 69 ))
ahaà puräbhavaà kaçcid
gandharva upabarhaëaù
nämnätéte mahä-kalpe
gandharväëäà susammataù
SYNONYMS
aham—I myself; purä—formerly; abhavam—existed as; kaçcit
gandharvaù—one of the denizens of Gandharvaloka;
upabarhaëaù—Upabarhaëa; nämnä—by the name; atéte—long, long ago;
mahä-kalpe—in a life of Brahmä, which is known as a mahä-kalpa;
gandharväëäm—among the Gandharvas; su-sammataù—a very respectable
person.
TRANSLATION
Long, long ago, in another mahä-kalpa [millennium of Brahmä], I existed as
the Gandharva known as Upabarhaëa. I was very respected by the other
Gandharvas.
PURPORT
Çréla Närada Muni is giving a practical example from his past life. Formerly,
during the previous lifetime of Lord Brahmä, Närada Muni was one of the
denizens of Gandharvaloka, but unfortunately, as will be explained, he fell
from his exalted position in Gandharvaloka, where the inhabitants are
extremely beautiful and expert in singing, to become a çüdra. Nonetheless,
because of his association with devotees, he became more fortunate than he
was in Gandharvaloka. Even though cursed by the prajäpatis to become a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1078
çüdra, in his next life he became the son of Lord Brahmä.
The word mahä-kalpe is described by Çréla Madhväcärya as
atéta-brahma-kalpe. Brahmä dies at the end of a life of many millions of years.
The day of Brahmä is described in Bhagavad-gétä (8.17):
sahasra-yuga-paryantam
ahar yad brahmaëo viduù
rätrià yuga-sahasräntäà
te 'ho-rätra-vido janäù
"By human calculation, a thousand ages taken together is the duration of
Brahmä's one day. And such also is the duration of his night." Bhagavän Çré
Kåñëa can remember incidents from millions of years ago. Similarly, His pure
devotee like Närada Muni can also remember incidents from a past life
millions and millions of years ago.
TEXT 70
æPaPaeXal/MaaDauYaRSaaEGaNDYaiPa[YadXaRNa" )
ñq<aa& iPa[YaTaMaae iNaTYa& Mata" SvPaurl/MPa$=" )) 70 ))
rüpa-peçala-mädhuryasaugandhya-
priya-darçanaù
stréëäà priyatamo nityaà
mattaù sva-pura-lampaöaù
SYNONYMS
rüpa—beauty; peçala—formation of the body; mädhurya—attractiveness;
saugandhya—very fragrant, being decorated with various flower garlands and
sandalwood pulp; priya-darçanaù—very beautiful to see; stréëäm—of the
women; priya-tamaù—naturally attracted; nityam—daily; mattaù—proud like
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1079
a madman; sva-pura—in his own city; lampaöaù—very much attached to
women because of lusty desires.
TRANSLATION
I had a beautiful face and a pleasing, attractive bodily structure. Decorated
with flower garlands and sandalwood pulp, I was most pleasing to the women of
my city. Thus I was bewildered, always feeling lusty desires.
PURPORT
From the description of the beauty of Närada Muni when he was one of the
denizens of Gandharvaloka, it appears that everyone on that planet is
extremely beautiful and pleasing and always decorated with flowers and
sandalwood. Upabarhaëa was Närada Muni's name previously. Upabarhaëa
was specifically expert in decorating himself to attract the attention of women,
and thus he became a playboy, as described in the next verse. To be a playboy
in this life is unfortunate because too much attraction to women will lead one
to fall into the association of çüdras, who can easily take advantage of mingling
with women without restriction. In this present age of Kali, when people are
mandäù sumanda-matayaù—very bad because of a çüdra mentality—such free
mingling is prominent. Among the higher classes—brähmaëa, kñatriya and
vaiçya—there is no chance for men to mingle with women freely, but in the
çüdra community such mingling is open. Because there is no cultural education
in this age of Kali, everyone is spiritually untrained, and everyone is therefore
to be considered çüdra (açuddhäù çüdra-kalpä hi brähmaëäù kali-sambhaväù).
When all the people become çüdras, certainly they are very bad (mandäù
sumanda-matayaù). Thus they manufacture their own way of life, with the
result that they gradually become unfortunate (manda-bhägyäù), and
furthermore they are always disturbed by various circumstances.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1080
TEXT 71
Wk-da devSa}ae Tau GaNDavaRPSarSaa& Ga<aa" )
oPahUTaa ivìSa*iG>ahRirGaaQaaePaGaaYaNae )) 71 ))
ekadä deva-satre tu
gandharväpsarasäà gaëäù
upahütä viçva-sågbhir
hari-gäthopagäyane
SYNONYMS
ekadä—once upon a time; deva-satre—in an assembly of the demigods;
tu—indeed; gandharva—of the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka;
apsarasäm—and the inhabitants of Apsaroloka; gaëäù—all; upahütäù—were
invited; viçva-sågbhiù—by the great demigods known as the prajäpatis;
hari-gätha-upagäyane—on an occasion of kértana for glorifying the Supreme
Lord.
TRANSLATION
Once there was a saìkértana festival to glorify the Supreme Lord in an
assembly of the demigods, and the Gandharvas and Apsaräs were invited by the
prajäpatis to take part in it.
PURPORT
Saìkértana means chanting of the holy name of the Lord. The Hare Kåñëa
movement is not a new movement as people sometimes mistakenly think. The
Hare Kåñëa movement is present in every millennium of Lord Brahmä's life,
and the holy name is chanted in all the higher planetary systems, including
Brahmaloka and Candraloka, not to speak of Gandharvaloka and Apsaroloka.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1081
The saìkértana movement that was started in this world five hundred years
ago by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is therefore not a new movement.
Sometimes, because of our bad luck, this movement is stopped, but Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu and His servants again start the movement for the
benefit of the entire world or, indeed, the entire universe.
TEXT 72
Ah& c GaaYa&STaiÜÜaNa( ñqi>a" Pairv*Taae GaTa" )
jaTva ivìSa*JaSTaNMae hel/Na& XaePauraeJaSaa )
Yaaih Tv& éUd]TaaMaaéu Naíé[q" k*-Tahel/Na" )) 72 ))
ahaà ca gäyaàs tad-vidvän
strébhiù parivåto gataù
jïätvä viçva-såjas tan me
helanaà çepur ojasä
yähi tvaà çüdratäm äçu
nañöa-çréù kåta-helanaù
SYNONYMS
aham—I myself; ca—and; gäyan—singing the glories of other demigods rather
than those of the Lord; tat-vidvän—knowing very well the art of singing;
strébhiù—by women; parivåtaù—being surrounded; gataù—went there;
jïätvä—knowing well; viçva-såjaù—the prajäpatis, to whom the management
of universal affairs was entrusted; tat—the attitude of my singing; me—my;
helanam—negligence; çepuù—cursed; ojasä—with great force; yähi—become;
tvam—you; çüdratäm—a çüdra; äçu—immediately; nañöa—devoid of;
çréù—beauty; kåta-helanaù—because of transgressing the etiquette.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1082
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni continued: Being invited to that festival, I also joined, and,
surrounded by women, I began musically singing the glories of the demigods.
Because of this, the prajäpatis, the great demigods in charge of the affairs of the
universe, forcefully cursed me with these words: "Because you have committed
an offense, may you immediately become a çüdra, devoid of beauty."
PURPORT
As far as kértana is concerned, the çästras say, çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù:
[SB 7.5.23] one should chant the glories of the Supreme Lord and the holy
name of the Supreme Lord. This is clearly stated. Çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù:
one should chant about and glorify Lord Viñëu, not any demigod.
Unfortunately, there are foolish persons who invent some process of kértana
on the basis of a demigod's name. This is an offense. Kértana means glorifying
the Supreme Lord, not any demigod. Sometimes people invent kälé-kértana or
çiva-kértana, and even big sannyäsés in the Mäyäväda school say that one may
chant any name and still get the same result. But here we find that millions
and millions of years ago, when Närada Muni was a Gandharva, he neglected
the order to glorify the Lord, and being mad in the association of women, he
began to chant otherwise. Thus he was cursed to become a çüdra. His first
offense was that he went to join the saìkértana party in the company of lusty
women, and another offense was that he considered ordinary songs, like
cinema songs and other such songs, to be equal to saìkértana. For this offense
he was punished with becoming a çüdra.
TEXT 73
TaavÕaSYaaMah& Jaje Ta}aaiPa b]øvaidNaaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1083
éué[UzYaaNauz(r)e<a Pa[aáae_h& b]øPau}aTaaMa( )) 73 ))
tävad däsyäm ahaà jajïe
taträpi brahma-vädinäm
çuçrüñayänuñaìgeëa
präpto 'haà brahma-putratäm
SYNONYMS
tävat—since being cursed; däsyäm—in the womb of a maidservant; aham—I;
jajïe—took birth; taträpi—although (being a çüdra); brahma-vädinäm—unto
persons well conversant with the Vedic knowledge; çuçrüñayä—by rendering
service; anuñaìgeëa—simultaneously; präptaù—obtained; aham—I;
brahma-putratäm—a birth as the son of Lord Brahmä (in this life).
TRANSLATION
Although I took birth as a çüdra from the womb of a maidservant, I engaged
in the service of Vaiñëavas who were well-versed in Vedic knowledge.
Consequently, in this life I got the opportunity to take birth as the son of Lord
Brahmä.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.32):
mäà hi pärtha vyapäçritya
ye 'pi syuù päpa-yonayaù
striyo vaiçyäs tathä çüdräs
te 'pi yänti paräà gatim
"O son of Påthä, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth—women, vaiçyas [merchants], as well as çüdras [workers]—can approach
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1084
the supreme destination." It doesn't matter whether a person is born as a çüdra,
a woman or a vaiçya; if he associates with devotees repeatedly or always
(sädhu-saìgena), he can be elevated to the highest perfection. Närada Muni is
explaining this in relation to his own life. The saìkértana movement is
important, for regardless of whether one is a çüdra, vaiçya, mleccha, yavana or
whatever, if one associates with a pure devotee, follows his instructions and
serves the pure devotee, his life is successful. This is bhakti. Änukülyena
kåñëänuçélanam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. Bhakti consists of serving Kåñëa and His
devotees very favorably. Anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam [Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu
1.1.11(46)]. If one has no desire other than to serve Kåñëa and His devotee,
then his life is successful. This is explained by Närada Muni through this
practical example from his own life.
TEXT 74
DaMaRSTae Ga*hMaeDaqYaae vi<aRTa" PaaPaNaaXaNa" )
Ga*hSQaae YaeNa PadvqMaÅSaa NYaaiSaNaaiMaYaaTa( )) 74 ))
dharmas te gåha-medhéyo
varëitaù päpa-näçanaù
gåhastho yena padavém
aïjasä nyäsinäm iyät
SYNONYMS
dharmaù—that religious process; te—to you; gåha-medhéyaù—although
attached to household life; varëitaù—explained (by me); päpa-näçanaù—the
destruction of sinful reactions; gåhasthaù—a person in household life;
yena—by which; padavém—the position; aïjasä—very easily; nyäsinäm—of
those in the renounced order of life; iyät—can obtain.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1085
TRANSLATION
The process of chanting the holy name of the Lord is so powerful that by
this chanting even householders [gåhasthas] can very easily gain the ultimate
result achieved by persons in the renounced order. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, I
have now explained to you that process of religion.
PURPORT
This is a confirmation of the Kåñëa consciousness movement. Anyone who
takes part in this movement, regardless of what he is, can gain the topmost
result achieved by a perfect sannyäsé, namely brahma jïäna (spiritual
knowledge). Even more important, he can advance in devotional service.
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira thought that because he was a gåhastha there was no
hope of his being liberated, and therefore he asked Närada Muni how he could
get out of material entanglement. But Närada Muni, citing a practical example
from his own life, established that by associating with devotees and chanting
the Hare Kåñëa mantra, any man in any condition of life can achieve the
highest perfection without a doubt.
TEXT 75
YaUYa& Na*l/aeke- bTa >aUir>aaGaa
l/aek&- PauNaaNaa MauNaYaae_i>aYaiNTa )
Yaeza& Ga*haNaavSaTaqiTa Saa+aad(
GaU!& Par& b]ø MaNauZYail/(r)Ma( )) 75 ))
yüyaà nå-loke bata bhüri-bhägä
lokaà punänä munayo 'bhiyanti
yeñäà gåhän ävasatéti säkñäd
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1086
güòhaà paraà brahma manuñya-liìgam
SYNONYMS
yüyam—all of you Päëòavas; nå-loke—in this material world; bata—indeed;
bhüri-bhägäù—extremely fortunate; lokam—all the planets of the universe;
punänäù—who can purify; munayaù—great saintly persons; abhiyanti—come
to visit (just like ordinary persons); yeñäm—of whom; gåhän—the house of the
Päëòavas; ävasati—resides; iti—thus; säkñät—directly; güòham—very
confidential; param—transcendental; brahma—the Parabrahman, Kåñëa;
manuñya-liìgam—as if an ordinary human being.
TRANSLATION
My dear Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, you Päëòavas are so very fortunate in this
world that many, many great saints, who can purify all the planets of the
universe, come to your house just like ordinary visitors. Furthermore, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is living confidentially with you in
your house, just like your brother.
PURPORT
Here is a statement exalting a Vaiñëava. In human society, a brähmaëa is
the most respected person. A brähmaëa is one who can understand Brahman,
the impersonal Brahman, but hardly ever can one understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is described by Arjuna in Bhagavad-gétä as paraà
brahma. A brähmaëa may be extremely fortunate in having achieved brahma
jïäna, but the Päëòavas were so exalted that the Parabrahman, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, was living in their house like an ordinary human
being. The word bhüri-bhägäù indicates that the Päëòavas were in a still higher
position than brahmacärés and brähmaëas. In the following verses, Närada
Muni repeatedly glorifies the position of the Päëòavas.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1087
TEXT 76
Sa va AYa& b]ø MahiÜMa*GYa‚
kE-vLYaiNavaR<aSau%aNau>aUiTa" )
iPa[Ya" Sauôd( v" %lu/ MaaTaule/Ya
AaTMaahR<aqYaae iviDak*-d( Gauåê )) 76 ))
sa vä ayaà brahma mahad-vimågyakaivalya-
nirväëa-sukhänubhütiù
priyaù suhåd vaù khalu mätuleya
ätmärhaëéyo vidhi-kåd guruç ca
SYNONYMS
saù—that Supreme Personality of Godhead; vä—either; ayam—Kåñëa;
brahma—the Supreme Brahman; mahat-vimågya—sought by great, great
saintly persons (devotees of Kåñëa); kaivalya-nirväëa-sukha—of liberation and
transcendental bliss; anubhütiù—for the realization; priyaù—very dear;
suhåt—the well-wisher; vaù—of all of you Päëòavas; khalu—famous as;
mätuleyaù—the son of your maternal uncle; ätmä—heart and soul;
arhaëéyaù—the most worshipable person; vidhi-kåt—giving direction;
guruù—your spiritual master; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
How wonderful it is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Parabrahman, Kåñëa, who is sought by great, great sages for the sake of
liberation and transcendental bliss, is acting as your best well-wisher, your
friend, your cousin, your heart and soul, your worshipable director, and your
spiritual master.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1088
PURPORT
Kåñëa can become the director and spiritual master of anyone who is
serious about getting the mercy of Kåñëa. The Lord sends the spiritual master
to train a devotee, and when the devotee is advanced, the Lord acts as the
spiritual master within his heart.
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
[Bg. 10.10]
"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give the
understanding by which they can come to Me." Kåñëa does not become the
direct spiritual master unless one is fully trained by His representative spiritual
master. Therefore, as we have already discussed, the Lord's representative
spiritual master should not be considered an ordinary human being. The
representative spiritual master never gives any false knowledge to his disciple,
but only perfect knowledge. Thus he is the representative of Kåñëa. Kåñëa
helps as the guru, or spiritual master, from within and from without. From
without He helps the devotee as His representative, and from within He talks
personally with the pure devotee and gives him instructions by which he may
return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 77
Na YaSYa Saa+aaÙvPaÚJaaid>aq
æPa& iDaYaa vSTauTaYaaePavi<aRTaMa( )
MaaENaeNa >a¢-yaePaXaMaeNa PaUiJaTa"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1089
Pa[SaqdTaaMaez Sa SaaTvTaa& PaiTa" )) 77 ))
na yasya säkñäd bhava-padmajädibhé
rüpaà dhiyä vastutayopavarëitam
maunena bhaktyopaçamena püjitaù
prasédatäm eña sa sätvatäà patiù
SYNONYMS
na—not; yasya—of whom (Lord Çré Kåñëa); säkñät—directly; bhava—by Lord
Çiva; padma-ja-ädibhiù—Lord Brahmä and others; rüpam—the form;
dhiyä—by meditation; vastutayä—factually; upavarëitam—could be explained;
maunena—by silence; bhaktyä—by devotional service; upaçamena—by
finishing all material activities; püjitaù—one who is so worshiped;
prasédatäm—may be pleased with us; eñaù—this; saù—the same Personality of
Godhead; sätvatäm—of the devotees; patiù—who is the maintainer, master
and guide.
TRANSLATION
Present here now is the same Supreme Personality of Godhead whose true
form cannot be understood even by such great personalities as Lord Brahmä and
Lord Çiva. He is realized by devotees because of their unflinching surrender.
May that same Personality of Godhead, who is the maintainer of His devotees
and who is worshiped by silence, by devotional service and by cessation of
material activities, be pleased with us.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa is not properly understood even by such exalted personalities as
Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä, what to speak of ordinary men, but by His
causeless mercy He bestows the benediction of devotion upon His devotees,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1090
who can thus understand Kåñëa as He is. Bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç
cäsmi tattvataù [Bg. 18.55]. No one within this universe can understand Kåñëa
in truth, but if one engages in devotional service one can understand Him
perfectly well. This is also confirmed by the Lord in the Seventh Chapter of
Bhagavad-gétä (7.1):
mayy äsakta-manäù pärtha
yogaà yuïjan mad-äçrayaù
asaàçayaà samagraà mäà
yathä jïäsyasi tac chåëu
"Now, hear, O son of Påthä [Arjuna], how by practicing yoga in full
consciousness of Me, with mind attached to Me, you can know Me in full, free
from doubt." Lord Kåñëa Himself teaches how one can understand Him
perfectly well, without a doubt. Not only the Päëòavas but everyone who
sincerely accepts the instructions of Kåñëa can understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead as He is. After instructing Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja,
Närada Muni prays for the Lord's blessings that He be pleased with everyone
and that everyone become perfect in God consciousness and return home,
back to Godhead.
TEXT 78
é[qéuk- ovac
wiTa devizR<aa Pa[ae¢&- iNaXaMYa >arTazR>a" )
PaUJaYaaMaaSa SauPa[qTa" k*-Z<a& c Pa[eMaivûl/" )) 78 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti devarñiëä proktaà
niçamya bharatarñabhaù
püjayäm äsa suprétaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1091
kåñëaà ca prema-vihvalaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; deva-åñiëä—by the
great saint (Närada Muni); proktam—described; niçamya—hearing;
bharata-åñabhaù—the best of the descendants in Bhärata Mahäräja's dynasty,
namely Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira; püjayäm äsa—worshiped; su-prétaù—being
extremely pleased; kåñëam—unto Lord Kåñëa; ca—also; prema-vihvalaù—in
the ecstasy of love of Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, the best member of the
Bhärata dynasty, thus learned everything from the descriptions of Närada
Muni. After hearing these instructions, he felt great pleasure from within his
heart, and in great ecstasy, love and affection, he worshiped Lord Kåñëa.
PURPORT
It is natural that when someone belonging to one's family circle is
understood to be very great, one becomes ecstatic in love, thinking, "Oh, such
a great personality is our relative!" When Çré Kåñëa, who was already known to
the Päëòavas, was further described by Närada Muni to be the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, naturally the Päëòavas were amazed, thinking, "The
Supreme Personality of Godhead is with us as our cousin!" Certainly their
ecstasy was extraordinary.
TEXT 79
k*-Z<aPaaQaaRvuPaaMaN}Ya PaUiJaTa" Pa[YaYaaE MauiNa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1092
é[uTva k*-Z<a& Par& b]ø PaaQaR" ParMaiviSMaTa" )) 79 ))
kåñëa-pärthäv upämantrya
püjitaù prayayau muniù
çrutvä kåñëaà paraà brahma
pärthaù parama-vismitaù
SYNONYMS
kåñëa—Lord Kåñëa; pärthau—and Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira;
upämantrya—bidding farewell; püjitaù—being worshiped by them;
prayayau—left (that place); muniù—Närada Muni; çrutvä—after hearing;
kåñëam—about Kåñëa; param brahma—as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; pärthaù—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira; parama-vismitaù—became most
amazed.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni, being worshiped by Kåñëa and Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, bade
them farewell and went away. Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja, having heard that Kåñëa,
his cousin, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was struck with wonder.
PURPORT
After hearing the conversation between Närada and Yudhiñöhira, if one
still has any doubts about Kåñëa's being the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
one should immediately give them up. Asaàçayaà samagram. Without any
doubt and without any defect, one should understand Kåñëa to be the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and thus surrender at His lotus feet. Ordinary persons
do not do this, even after hearing all the Vedas, but if one is fortunate,
although it may be even after many, many births, he comes to this conclusion
(bahünäà janmanäm ante jïänavän mäà prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1093
TEXT 80
wiTa da+aaYa<aqNaa& Tae Pa*QaGv&Xaa" Pa[k-IiTaRTaa" )
devaSaurMaNauZYaaÛa l/aek-a Ya}a cracra" )) 80 ))
iti däkñäyaëénäà te
påthag vaàçäù prakértitäù
deväsura-manuñyädyä
lokä yatra caräcaräù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; däkñäyaëénäm—of the daughters of Mahäräja Dakña, like Aditi and
Diti; te—to you; påthak—separately; vaàçäù—the dynasties;
prakértitäù—described (by me); deva—the demigods; asura—demons;
manuñya—and human beings; ädyäù—and so on; lokäù—all the planets within
the universe; yatra—wherein; cara-acaräù—moving and nonmoving living
entities.
TRANSLATION
On all the planets within this universe, the varieties of living entities,
moving and nonmoving, including the demigods, demons and human beings,
were all generated from the daughters of Mahäräja Dakña. I have now described
them and their different dynasties.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Fifteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Instructions for Civilized Human Beings."
—Completed on the night of Vaiçäkhé Çukla Ekädaçé, the tenth of May,
1976, in the temple of the Pancatattva, New Navadvipa (Honolulu), by the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1094
mercy of çré-kåñëa-caitanya prabhu nityänanda çré-advaita gadädhara
çréväsädi-gaura-bhakta-vånda. Thus we may happily chant Hare Kåñëa, Hare
Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare
Hare.
END OF THE SEVENTH CANTO
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com

Srimad Bhagavatam
Seventh Canto
e-book
This e-book and others are available for download at:
www.e-vedas.com
Hard bound books may be purchased at:
www.thekrishnastore.com
Email comments or questions to:
comments@evedas.com
This e-book was completed on December 13,2005
e-books copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved
www.krishna.com
Distributed by e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers