"Srimad Bhagavatam – Fifth Canto"
by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE:
This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of this book, and is NOT FOR
RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only,
under the "fair use" guidelines established by international copyright laws. You
may use this electronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your
own private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, student
papers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluation copy to
others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyright information intact and
do not add or subtract anything to this file and its contents. You may not reproduce
more than ten percent (10%) of this book in any medium without the express
written permission from the copyright holders.
Reference any excerpts in the following way: “Excerpted from “Srimad
Bhagavatam Fifth Canto” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of
the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.krishna.com.”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2004 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90034, USA. All
rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluate
dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,
www.krishna.com.

About the Author
His Divine Grace AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most
distinguished teacher of Vedic religion and thought, is the author of
Bhagavad-gita As It Is, Srimad-Bhagavatam, The Sri Isopanisad and many
other English versions of Vedic literature. He is the Founder-Arcarya of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness, which has hundreds of
centers throughout the world.
For more information about His Divine Grace visit:
http://www.krishna.com/newsite/main.php?id=7
1
1. The Activities of Mahäräja Priyavrata
This chapter describes how King Priyavrata enjoyed royal opulence and
majesty and then returned to full knowledge. King Priyavrata was detached
from worldly opulence, and then he became attached to his kingdom, but
finally he again became detached from material enjoyment and thus achieved
liberation. When King Parékñit heard about this, he was struck with wonder,
but he was somewhat bewildered as to how a devotee with no attachment for
material enjoyment could later become attached to it. Thus in astonishment
he questioned Çukadeva Gosvämé about this.
In response to the King's inquiries, Çukadeva Gosvämé said that devotional
service, being transcendental, cannot be deviated by any material influences.
Priyavrata had received transcendental knowledge from the instructions of
Närada, and therefore he did not want to enter a materialistic life of
enjoyment in a kingdom. He accepted the kingdom, however, at the request of
such superior demigods as Lord Brahmä and Lord Indra, the King of heaven.
Everything is under the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the supreme controller, and everyone must work accordingly. Just as a bull is
controlled by a rope tied to its nose, so all conditioned souls are forced to work
under the spells of the modes of nature. A civilized man, therefore, works
according to the institution of varëa and äçrama. Even in materialistic life,
however, no one is free to act. Everyone is compelled to accept a certain type
of body offered by the Supreme Lord and thus be allotted different grades of
happiness and distress. Therefore even if one artificially leaves home and goes
to the forest, he again becomes attached to materialistic life. Family life is
compared to a fortress for practicing sense control. When the senses are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
2
controlled. one may live either at home or in the forest; there is no difference.
When Mahäräja Priyavrata, following the instruction of Lord Brahmä.
accepted the royal throne, his father, Manu, left home for the forest. Mahäräja
Priyavrata then married Barhiñmaté, the daughter of Viçvakarmä. In the womb
of Barhiñmaté he begot ten sons, named Ägnédhra, Idhmajihva, Yajïabähu,
Mahävéra, Hiraëyaretä, Ghåtapåñöha, Savana, Medhätithi, Vétihotra and Kavi.
He also begot one daughter, whose name was Ürjasvaté. Mahäräja Priyavrata
lived with his wife and family for many thousands of years. The impressions
from the rims of Mahäräja Priyavrata's chariot wheels created seven oceans
and seven islands. Of the ten sons of Priyavrata, three sons named Kavi,
Mahävéra and Savana accepted sannyäsa, the fourth order of life, and the
remaining seven sons became the rulers of the seven islands. Mahäräja
Priyavrata also had a second wife, in whom he begot three sons named
Uttama, Raivata and Tämasa. All of them were elevated to the post of Manu.
Çukadeva Gosvämé thus described how Mahäräja Priyavrata achieved
liberation.
TEXT 1
raJaaevac
iPa[Yav]Taae >aaGavTa AaTMaaraMa" k-Qa& MauNae )
Ga*he_rMaTa YaNMaUl/" k-MaRbNDa" Para>av" )) 1 ))
räjoväca
priyavrato bhägavata
ätmärämaù kathaà mune
gåhe 'ramata yan-mülaù
karma-bandhaù paräbhavaù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
3
räjä uväca—King Parékñit said; priya-vrataù—King Priyavrata;
bhägavataù—the great devotee; ätma-ärämaù—who takes pleasure in
self-realization; katham—why; mune—O great sage; gåhe—at home;
aramata—enjoyed; yat-mülaù—having which as the root cause;
karma-bandhaù—the bondage of fruitive activities; paräbhavaù—the defeat of
one's human mission.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé: O great sage, why did King
Priyavrata, who was a great, self-realized devotee of the Lord, remain in
household life, which is the root cause of the bondage of karma [fruitive
activities] and which defeats the mission of human life?
PURPORT
In the Fourth Canto, Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé explains that Närada Muni
perfectly instructed King Priyavrata about the mission of human life. The
mission of human life is to realize one's self and then gradually to go back
home, back to Godhead. Since Närada Muni instructed the King fully on this
subject, why did he again enter household life, which is the main cause of
material bondage? Mahäräja Parékñit was greatly astonished that King
Priyavrata remained in household life, especially since he was not only a
self-realized soul but also a first-class devotee of the Lord. A devotee actually
has no attraction for household life, but surprisingly, King Priyavrata enjoyed
household life very much. One may argue, "Why is it wrong to enjoy household
life?" The reply is that in household life one becomes bound by the results of
fruitive activities. The essence of household life is sense enjoyment, and as
long as one engrosses his mind in working hard for sense enjoyment, one
becomes bound by the reactions of fruitive activities. This ignorance of
self-realization is the greatest defeat in human life. The human form of life is
especially meant for getting out of the bondage of fruitive activities, but as
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
4
long as one is forgetful of his life's mission and acts like an ordinary
animal—eating, sleeping, mating and defending—he must continue his
conditioned life of material existence. Such a life is called svarüpa-vismåti,
forgetfulness of one's real constitutional position. Therefore in Vedic
civilization one is trained in the very beginning of life as a brahmacäré. A
brahmacäré must execute austerities and refrain from sex indulgence.
Therefore if one is completely trained in the principles of brahmacarya, he
generally does not enter household life. He is then called a
naiñöhika-brahmacäré, which indicates total celibacy. King Parékñit was thus
astonished that the great King Priyavrata, although trained in the principles of
naiñöhika-brahmacarya, entered household life.
The words bhägavata ätmärämaù are very significant in this verse. If one is
self-satisfied as is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is called bhägavata
ätmärämaù. There are different types of satisfaction. Karmés are satisfied in
their fruitive activities, jïänés are satisfied to merge into the effulgence of
Brahman, and devotees are satisfied to engage in the Lord's service. The Lord
is self-satisfied because He is fully opulent, and one who is satisfied by serving
Him is called bhägavata ätmärämaù. Manuñyäëäà sahasreñu: [Bg. 7.3] out of
many thousands of persons, one may endeavor for liberation, and of many
thousands of persons attempting to become liberated, one may achieve
liberation from the anxieties of material existence and become self-satisfied.
Even that satisfaction, however, is not the ultimate satisfaction. The jïänés
and the karmés have desires, as do the yogés, but devotees have no desires.
Satisfaction in the service of the Lord is called akäma, freedom from desire,
and this is the ultimate satisfaction. Therefore Mahäräja Parékñit inquired,
"How could one who was fully satisfied on the highest platform be satisfied
with family life?"
The word paräbhavaù in this verse is also significant. When one is satisfied
in family life, he is doomed because he must already have forgotten his
relationship with the Lord. Prahläda Mahäräja describes how the activities of
family life implicate one more and more. Ätma-pätaà gåham andha-küpam:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
5
household life is like a dark well. If one falls into this well, his spiritual death is
assured. How Priyavrata Mahäräja remained a liberated paramahaàsa even
within family life is described in the next verse.
TEXT 2
Na NaUNa& Mau¢-Sa(r)aNaa& Taad*XaaNaa& iÜJazR>a )
Ga*heZvi>aiNaveXaae_Ya& Pau&Saa& >aivTauMahRiTa )) 2 ))
na nünaà mukta-saìgänäà
tädåçänäà dvijarñabha
gåheñv abhiniveço 'yaà
puàsäà bhavitum arhati
SYNONYMS
na—not; nünam—certainly; mukta-saìgänäm—who are free from
attachment; tädåçänäm—such; dvija-åñabha—O greatest of the brähmaëas;
gåheñu—to family life; abhiniveçaù—excessive attachment; ayam—this;
puàsäm—of persons; bhavitum—to be; arhati—is possible.
TRANSLATION
Devotees are certainly liberated persons. Therefore, O greatest of the
brähmaëas, they cannot possibly be absorbed in family affairs.
PURPORT
In Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu it is said that by executing devotional service to
the Lord, one can understand the transcendental position of the living being
and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead cannot be understood by any means except bhakti. The Lord
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
6
confirms this in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.14.21). Bhaktyäham ekayä grähyaù:
"only by executing devotional service can one appreciate Me." Similarly, in
Bhagavad-gétä (18.55) Lord Kåñëa says, bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti: "simply by
discharging devotional service, one can understand Me." Thus for a bhakta to
become attached to family affairs is impossible, since a bhakta and his
associates are liberated. Everyone is searching after änanda, or bliss, but in the
material world there can never be any bliss. It is only possible in devotional
service. Attachment for family affairs and devotional service are incompatible.
Therefore Mahäräja Parékñit was somewhat surprised to hear that Mahäräja
Priyavrata was simultaneously attached to devotional service and to family life.
TEXT 3
MahTaa& %lu/ ivPa[zeR otaMaëaek-PaadYaae" )
^aYaaiNav*RTaictaaNaa& Na ku-$u=Mbe SPa*haMaiTa" )) 3 ))
mahatäà khalu viprarñe
uttamaçloka-pädayoù
chäyä-nirvåta-cittänäà
na kuöumbe spåhä-matiù
SYNONYMS
mahatäm—of great devotees; khalu—certainly; vipra-åñe—O great sage among
the brähmaëas; uttama-çloka-pädayoù—of the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; chäyä—by the shade; nirvåta—satiated;
cittänäm—whose consciousness; na—never; kuöumbe—to family members;
spåhä-matiù—consciousness with attachment.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
7
Elevated mahätmäs who have taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are fully satiated by the shade of those lotus feet. Their
consciousness cannot possibly become attached to family members.
PURPORT
Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura has sung, nitäi pada-kamala, koöé-candra
suçétala, ye chäyäya jagat juòäya. He describes the shade of the lotus feet of
Lord Nityänanda as being so nice and cooling that all materialists, who are
always in the blazing fire of material activities, may come under the shade of
His lotus feet and be fully relieved and satiated. The distinction between
family life and spiritual life can be experienced by any person who has
undergone the tribulations of living with a family. One who comes under the
shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord never becomes attracted by the activities of
family life. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.59), paraà dåñövä nivartate: one gives
up lower engagements when he experiences a higher taste. Thus one becomes
detached from family life as soon as he comes under the shelter of the lotus
feet of the Lord.
TEXT 4
S&aXaYaae_Ya& MahaNa( b]øNdaraGaarSauTaaidzu )
Sa¢-SYa YaiTSaiÖr>aUTk*-Z<ae c MaiTarCYauTaa )) 4 ))
saàçayo 'yaà mahän brahman
därägära-sutädiñu
saktasya yat siddhir abhüt
kåñëe ca matir acyutä
SYNONYMS
saàçayaù—doubt; ayam—this; mahän—great; brahman—O brähmaëa;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
8
dära—to the wife; ägära—home; suta—children; ädiñu—and so on;
saktasya—of a person attached; yat—because; siddhiù—perfection;
abhüt—became; kåñëe—unto Kåñëa; ca—also; matiù—attachment;
acyutä—infallible.
TRANSLATION
The King continued: O great brähmaëa, this is my great doubt. How was it
possible for a person like King Priyavrata, who was so attached to wife, children
and home, to achieve the topmost infallible perfection in Kåñëa consciousness?
PURPORT
King Parékñit wondered how a person so attached to wife, children and
home could become so perfectly Kåñëa conscious. Prahläda Mahäräja has said:
matir na kåñëe parataù svato vä
mitho 'bhipadyeta gåha-vratänäm
A gåhavrata, one who has taken a vow to execute family duties, has no chance
to become Kåñëa conscious. This is because most gåhavratas are guided by sense
gratification and therefore gradually glide down to the darkest regions of
material existence (adänta-gobhir viçatäà tamisram [SB 7.5.30]). How can they
possibly become perfect in Kåñëa consciousness? Mahäräja Parékñit asked
Çukadeva Gosvämé to resolve this great doubt.
TEXT 5
é[qXauk- ovac
ba!Mau¢&- >aGavTa otaMaëaek-SYa é[qMaÀr<aarivNdMak-rNdrSa AaveiXaTa‚
ceTaSaae >aaGavTaParMah&Sa diYaTak-Qaa& ik-iÄdNTaraYaivhTaa& Sva& iXavTaMaa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
9
Padvq& Na Pa[aYae<a ihNviNTa )) 5 ))
çré-çuka uväca
bäòham uktaà bhagavata uttamaçlokasya
çrémac-caraëäravinda-makaranda-rasa äveçita-cetaso
bhägavata-paramahaàsa-dayita-kathäà kiïcid antaräya-vihatäà sväà
çivatamäà padavéà na präyeëa hinvanti.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; bäòham—correct; uktam—what
you have said; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead;
uttama-çlokasya—who is praised with excellent verses;
çrémat-caraëa-aravinda—of the feet, which are just like the most beautiful
fragrant lotus flowers; makaranda—honey; rase—in the nectar;
äveçita—absorbed; cetasaù—whose hearts; bhägavata—to the devotees;
paramahaàsa—liberated persons; dayita—pleasing; kathäm—glorification;
kiïcit—sometimes; antaräya—by impediments; vihatäm—checked;
sväm—own; çiva-tamäm—most exalted; padavém—position; na—do not;
präyeëa—almost always; hinvanti—give up.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: What you have said is correct. The glories of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is praised in eloquent, transcendental
verses by such exalted personalities as Brahmä, are very pleasing to great
devotees and liberated persons. One who is attached to the nectarean honey of
the Lord's lotus feet, and whose mind is always absorbed in His glories, may
sometimes be checked by some impediment, but he still never gives up the
exalted position he has acquired.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
10
PURPORT
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé accepted both of the King's propositions—that a
person who is advanced in Kåñëa consciousness cannot embrace materialistic
life again and that one who has embraced materialistic life cannot take up
Kåñëa consciousness at any stage of his existence. Although accepting both
these statements, Çukadeva Gosvämé qualified them by saying that a person
who has once absorbed his mind in the glories of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead may sometimes be influenced by impediments, but he still does not
give up his exalted devotional position.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, there are two kinds of
impediments to devotional service. The first is an offense at the lotus feet of a
Vaiñëava. This is called vaiñëava-aparädha. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu warned
His devotees not to commit vaiñëava-aparädha, which He described as the mad
elephant offense. When a mad elephant enters a beautiful garden, it destroys
everything, leaving a barren field. Similarly, the power of vaiñëava-aparädha is
so great that even an advanced devotee becomes almost devoid of his spiritual
assets if he commits it. Since Kåñëa consciousness is eternal, it cannot be
destroyed altogether, but advancement may be checked for the time being.
Thus vaiñëava-aparädha is one kind of impediment to devotional service.
Sometimes, however, the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His devotee
desires to impede one's devotional service. For example, Hiraëyakaçipu and
Hiraëyäkña were formerly Jaya and Vijaya, the gatekeepers in Vaikuëöha, but
by the desire of the Lord, they became His enemies for three lives. Thus the
desire of the Lord is another kind of impediment. But in both cases, the pure
devotee, once advanced in Kåñëa consciousness, cannot be lost. Following the
orders of his superiors (Sväyambhuva and Lord Brahmä), Priyavrata accepted
family life, but this did not mean he lost his position in devotional service.
Kåñëa consciousness is perfect and eternal, and therefore it cannot be lost
under any circumstances. Because the material world is full of obstructions to
advancement in Kåñëa consciousness, there may appear to be many
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
11
impediments, yet Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, declares in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.31), kaunteya pratijänéhi na me bhaktaù praëaçyati: once one
has taken shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord, he cannot be lost.
In this verse, the word çivatamäm is very significant. Çivatamäm means "the
most auspicious." The devotional path is so auspicious that a devotee cannot be
lost under any circumstances. This is described in the Çrémad Bhagavad-gétä by
the Lord Himself. pärtha naiveha nämutra vinäças tasya vidyate: "My dear
Arjuna, for a devotee there is no question of being lost, either in this life or in
the next." (Bg. 6.40) In Bhagavad-gétä (6.43) the Lord clearly explains how this
is so.
tatra taà buddhi-saàyogaà
labhate paurva-dehikam
yatate ca tato bhüyaù
saàsiddhau kuru-nandana
By the order of the Lord, a perfect devotee sometimes comes to this material
world like an ordinary human being. Because of his previous practice, such a
perfect devotee naturally becomes attached to devotional service, apparently
without cause. Despite all kinds of impediments due to surrounding
circumstances, he automatically perseveres in devotional service and gradually
advances until he once again becomes perfect. Bilvamaìgala Öhäkura had
been an advanced devotee in his previous life, but in his next life he became
greatly fallen and was attached to a prostitute. Suddenly, however, his entire
behavior was changed by the words of the very prostitute who had so much
attracted him, and he became a great devotee. In the lives of exalted devotees,
there are many such instances, proving that once one has taken to the shelter
of the lotus feet of the Lord, he cannot be lost (kaunteya pratijänéhi na me
bhaktaù praëaçyati [Bg. 9.31]).
The fact is, however, that one becomes a devotee when he is completely
freed from all reactions to sinful life. As Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä (7.28):
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
12
yeñäà tv anta-gataà päpaà
janänäà puëya-karmaëäm
te dvanda-moha-nirmuktä
bhajante mäà dåòha-vratäù
"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful
actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of
illusion, engage themselves in My service with determination." On the other
hand, as Prahläda Mahäräja said:
matir na kåñëe parataù svato vä
mitho 'bhipadyeta gåha-vratänäm
A person who is too attached to materialistic family life—home, family, wife,
children and so on—cannot develop Kåñëa consciousness.
These apparent contradictions are resolved in the life of a devotee by the
grace of the Supreme Lord, and therefore a devotee is never bereft of his
position on the path of liberation, which is described in this verse as
çivatamäà padavém.
TEXT 6
YaihR vav h raJaNa( Sa raJaPau}a" iPa[Yav]Ta" ParMa>aaGavTaae NaardSYa
cr<aaePaSaevYaaÅSaavGaTaParMaaQaRSaTatvae b]øSa}ae<a dqi+aZYaMaa<aae_viNaTal/‚
PairPaal/NaaYaaMNaaTaPa[vrGau<aGa<aEk-aNTa>aaJaNaTaYaa SviPa}aaePaaMaiN}aTaae >aGaviTa
vaSaudev WvaVYavDaaNaSaMaaiDaYaaeGaeNa SaMaaveiXaTaSak-l/k-ark-i§-Yaak-l/aPaae
NaEva>YaNaNdÛÛiPa TadPa[TYaaMNaaTaVYa& TadiDak-r<a AaTMaNaae_NYaSMaadSaTaae_iPa
Para>avMaNvq+aMaa<a" )) 6 ))
yarhi väva ha räjan sa räja-putraù priyavrataù parama-bhägavato näradasya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
13
caraëopasevayäïjasävagata-paramärtha-satattvo brahma-satreëa dékñiñyamäëo
'vani-tala-paripälanäyämnäta-pravara-guëa-gaëaikänta-bhäjanatayä
sva-pitropämantrito bhagavati väsudeva evävyavadhäna-samädhi-yogena
samäveçita-sakala-käraka-kriyä-kaläpo naiväbhyanandad yadyapi tad
apratyämnätavyaà tad-adhikaraëa ätmano 'nyasmäd asato 'pi paräbhavam
anvékñamäëaù.
SYNONYMS
yarhi—because; väva ha—indeed; räjan—O King; saù—he; räja-putraù—the
Prince; priyavrataù—Priyavrata; parama—supreme; bhägavataù—devotee;
näradasya—of Närada; caraëa—the lotus feet; upasevayä—by serving;
aïjasä—quickly; avagata—became aware of; parama-artha—transcendental
subject matter; sa-tattvaù—with all knowable facts; brahma-satreëa—by
continuous discussion of the Supreme; dékñiñyamäëaù—desiring to fully
dedicate himself; avani-tala—the surface of the globe; paripälanäya—to rule
over; ämnäta—directed in the revealed scriptures; pravara—highest; guëa—of
qualities; gaëa—the sum total; ekänta—without deviation;
bhäjanatayä—because of his possessing; sva-piträ—by his father;
upämantritaù—being asked; bhagavati—in the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; väsudeve—the all-pervading Lord; eva—certainly;
avyavadhäna—without cessation; samädhi-yogena—by practicing yoga in
complete absorption; samäveçita—completely dedicated; sakala—all;
käraka—senses; kriyä-kaläpaù—whose total activities; na—not; eva—thus;
abhyanandat—welcomed; yadyapi—although; tat—that;
apratyämnätavyam—not to be rejected for any reason; tat-adhikaraëe—in
occupying that post; ätmanaù—of himself; anyasmät—by other engagements;
asataù—material; api—certainly; paräbhavam—deterioration;
anvékñamäëaù—foreseeing.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
14
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, Prince Priyavrata was a great
devotee because he sought the lotus feet of Närada, his spiritual master, and
thus achieved the highest perfection in transcendental knowledge. With
advanced knowledge, he always engaged in discussing spiritual subjects and did
not divert his attention to anything else. The Prince's father then asked him to
take charge of ruling the world. He tried to convince Priyavrata that this was
his duty as indicated in the revealed scriptures. Prince Priyavrata, however, was
continuously practicing bhakti-yoga by constantly remembering the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, thus engaging all his senses in the service of the Lord.
Therefore, although the order of his father could not be rejected, the Prince did
not welcome it. Thus he very conscientiously raised the question of whether he
might be diverted from devotional service by accepting the responsibility of
ruling over the world.
PURPORT
Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura has sung, chäòiyä vaiñëava-sevä nistära
päyeche kebä: "Without serving the lotus feet of a pure Vaiñëava or spiritual
master, no one has ever attained perfect liberation from material bondage."
prince Priyavrata regularly served the lotus feet of Närada, and thus the Prince
perfectly understood transcendental subjects in truth (sa-tattvaù). The word
sa-tattvaù means that Priyavrata knew all the facts about the spirit soul, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the relationship between the spirit soul
and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and he also knew all about this
material world and the relationship of the spirit soul and the Supreme Lord
within the material world. Thus the Prince decided to engage himself only in
rendering service to the Lord.
When Priyavrata's father, Sväyambhuva Manu, requested him to accept the
responsibility of ruling over the world, he did not welcome the suggestion. This
is the symptom of a great, liberated devotee. Even though engaged in worldly
affairs, he does not take pleasure in them, but remains always absorbed in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
15
Lord's service. While thus serving the Lord, he deals externally with worldly
affairs without being affected. For example, although he has no attraction for
his children, he cares for them and educates them to become devotees.
Similarly, he speaks to his wife with affectionate words, but he is not attached
to her. By rendering devotional service, a devotee acquires all the good
qualities of the Supreme Lord. Lord Kåñëa had sixteen thousand wives, all of
them very beautiful, and although He dealt with each of them as a beloved
husband, He was not attracted or attached to any of them. In the same way,
although a devotee may enter family life and act very affectionately toward his
wife and children, he is never attached to these activities.
This verse states that by serving the lotus feet of his spiritual master, prince
Priyavrata very soon attained the perfectional stage of Kåñëa consciousness.
This is the only way to advance in spiritual life. As stated in the Vedas:
yasya deve parä bhaktir
yathä deve tathä gurau
tasyaite kathitä hy arthäù
prakäçante mahätmanaù
[ÇU 6.23(1)]
"If one has unflinching faith in the Supreme Lord and the spiritual master, the
essence of all Vedic knowledge is revealed to him. (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.23)
A devotee always thinks of the Lord continuously. While chanting the Hare
Kåñëa mantra, the words Kåñëa and Hare immediately remind him of all the
Lord's activities. Since his entire life is engaged in the service of the Lord, a
devotee cannot forget the Lord at any time. Just as an ordinary man always
engages his mind in material activities, a devotee always engages his mind in
spiritual activities. This is called brahma-satra, or meditating upon the
Supreme Lord always. Prince Priyavrata was perfectly initiated into this
practice by Çré Närada.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
16
TEXT 7
AQa h >aGavaNaaiddev WTaSYa Gau<aivSaGaRSYa Pairb*&h<aaNauDYaaNaVYaviSaTa
Sak-l/JaGadi>aPa[aYa AaTMaYaaeiNari%l/iNaGaMaiNaJaGa<aPairveiíTa" Sv>avNaa‚
dvTaTaar )) 7 ))
atha ha bhagavän ädi-deva etasya guëa-visargasya
paribåàhaëänudhyäna-vyavasita-sakala-jagad-abhipräya ätma-yonir
akhila-nigama-nija-gaëa-pariveñöitaù sva-bhavanäd avatatära.
SYNONYMS
atha—thus; ha—indeed; bhagavän—the most powerful; ädi-devaù—the first
demigod; etasya—of this universe; guëa-visargasya—the creation of the three
modes of material nature; paribåàhaëa—the welfare; anudhyäna—always
thinking of; vyavasita—known; sakala—whole; jagat—of the universe;
abhipräyaù—by whom the ultimate purpose; ätma—the Supreme Self;
yoniù—whose source of birth; akhila—all; nigama—by the Vedas;
nija-gaëa—by personal associates; pariveñöitaù—being surrounded;
sva-bhavanät—from his own abode; avatatära—descended.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: The first created being and most powerful
demigod in this universe is Lord Brahmä, who is always responsible for
developing universal affairs. Born directly from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, he dedicates his activities to the welfare of the entire universe, for he
knows the purpose of the universal creation. This supremely powerful Lord
Brahmä, accompanied by his associates and the personified Vedas, left his own
abode in the highest planetary system and descended to the place of Prince
Priyavrata's meditation.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
17
PURPORT
Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Self (ätmä), is the source of everything, as
explained in the Vedänta-sütra: janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1]. Because Brahmä
was born directly from Lord Viñëu, he is called ätma-yoni. He is also called
bhagavän, although generally bhagavän refers to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (Viñëu or Lord Kåñëa). Sometimes great personalities—such as
demigods like Lord Brahmä, Närada or Lord Çiva—are also addressed as
bhagavän because they carry out the purpose of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Lord Brahmä is called bhagavän because he is the secondary creator
of this universe. He is always thinking of how to improve the situation of the
conditioned souls who have come to the material world to enjoy material
activities. For this reason, he disseminates the Vedic knowledge throughout
the universe for everyone's guidance.
Vedic knowledge is divided into two parts: pravåtti-märga and nivåtti-märga.
Nivåtti-märga is the path of negating sense enjoyment, and pravåtti-märga is
the path by which the living entities are given a chance to enjoy and at the
same time are directed in such a way that they can go back home, back to
Godhead. Because ruling over this universe is a great responsibility, Brahmä
must force many Manus in different ages to take charge of universal affairs.
Under each Manu there are different kings who also execute the purpose of
Lord Brahmä. It is understood from previous explanations that the father of
Dhruva Mahäräja, King Uttänapäda, ruled over the universe because his elder
brother, Priyavrata, practiced austerity from the very beginning of his life.
Thus up to the point of the Pracetäs, the kings of the universe were all
descendants of Uttänapäda Mahäräja. Since there were no suitable kings after
the Pracetäs, Sväyambhuva Manu went to the Gandhamädana Hill to bring
back his eldest son, Priyavrata, who was meditating there. Sväyambhuva Manu
requested Priyavrata to rule over the universe. When he refused, Lord Brahmä
descended from the supreme planetary system, known as Satyaloka, to request
Priyavrata to accept the order. Lord Brahmä did not come alone. He came with
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
18
other great sages like Maréci, Ätreya and Vasiñöha. To convince Priyavrata
that it was necessary for him to follow the Vedic injunctions and accept the
responsibility of ruling over the world, Lord Brahmä also brought with him the
personified Vedas, his constant associates.
A significant word in this verse is sva-bhavanät, indicating that Lord
Brahmä descended from his own abode. Every demigod has his own abode.
Indra, the King of the demigods, has his own abode, as do Candra, the lord of
the moon planet, and Sürya, the predominating deity of the sun planet. There
are many millions of demigods, and the stars and planets are their respective
homes. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä. Yänti deva-vratä devän: [Bg. 9.25]
"Those who worship the demigods go to their different planetary systems."
Lord Brahmä's abode. the highest planetary system, is called Satyaloka or
sometimes Brahmaloka. Brahmaloka usually refers to the spiritual world. The
abode of Lord Brahmä is Satyaloka, but because Lord Brahmä resides there, it
is also sometimes called Brahmaloka.
TEXT 8
Sa Ta}a Ta}a GaGaNaTal/ o@uPaiTairv ivMaa Naavil/i>arNauPaQaMaMarPairv*!Er‚
i>aPaUJYaMaaNa" PaiQa PaiQa c væQaXa" iSaÖGaNDavRSaaDYacar<aMauiNaGa<aEåPa‚
GaqYaMaaNaae GaNDaMaadNad]ae<aqMav>aaSaYaàuPaSaSaPaR )) 8 ))
sa tatra tatra gagana-tala uòu-patir iva vimänävalibhir anupatham
amara-parivåòhair abhipüjyamänaù pathi pathi ca varüthaçaù
siddha-gandharva-sädhya-cäraëa-muni-gaëair upagéyamäno
gandha-mädana-droëém avabhäsayann upasasarpa.
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Lord Brahmä); tatra tatra—here and there; gagana-tale—under the
canopy of the sky; uòu-patiù—the moon; iva—like; vimäna-ävalibhiù—in their
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
19
different airplanes; anupatham—along the path; amara—of the demigods;
parivåòhaiù—by the leaders; abhipüjyamänaù—being worshiped; pathi
pathi—on the way, one after another; ca—also; varüthaçaù—in groups;
siddha—by the residents of Siddhaloka; gandharva—by the residents of
Gandharvaloka; sädhya—by the residents of Sädhyaloka; cäraëa—by the
residents of Cäraëaloka; muni-gaëaiù—and by great sages;
upagéyamänaù—being worshiped; gandha-mädana—of the planet where the
Gandhamädana Hill is found; droëém—the border;
avabhäsayan—illuminating; upasasarpa—he approached.
TRANSLATION
As Lord Brahmä descended on his carrier, the great swan, all the residents of
the planets named Siddhaloka, Gandharvaloka, Sädhyaloka and Cäraëaloka, as
well as great sages and demigods flying in their different airplanes, assembled
within the canopy of the sky to receive Lord Brahmä and worship him. As he
received respect and adoration from the residents of the various planets, Lord
Brahmä appeared just like the full moon surrounded by illuminating stars. Lord
Brahmä's great swan then arrived at the border of Gandhamädana Hill and
approached Prince Priyavrata, who was sitting there.
PURPORT
It appears from this description that there is regular interplanetary travel
between the planets of the demigods. Another significant point is that there is
a planet covered mostly by great mountains, one of which is Gandhamädana
Hill. Three great personalities—Priyavrata, Närada and Sväyambhuva
Manu—were sitting on this hill. According to Brahmä-saàhitä, each universe
is filled with different planetary systems, and every system has a unique
opulence. For example, on Siddhaloka, all the residents are very advanced in
the powers of mystic yoga. They can fly from one planet to another without
airplanes or other flying machines. Similarly, the residents of Gandharvaloka
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
20
are expert in musical science, and those on Sädhyaloka are all great saints. The
interplanetary system undoubtedly exists, and residents of different planets
may go from one to another. On this earth, however, we have not invented
any machine that can go directly from one planet to another, although an
unsuccessful attempt has been made to go directly to the moon.
TEXT 9
Ta}a h va WNa& devizRh|SaYaaNaeNa iPaTar& >aGavNTa& ihr<YaGa>aRMauPal/>aMaaNa"
SahSaEvaeTQaaYaahR<aeNa Sah iPaTaaPau}aa>YaaMavihTaaÅil/åPaTaSQae )) 9 ))
tatra ha vä enaà devarñir haàsa-yänena pitaraà bhagavantaà
hiraëya-garbham upalabhamänaù sahasaivotthäyärhaëena saha
pitä-puträbhyäm avahitäïjalir upatasthe.
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; ha vä—certainly; enam—him; deva-åñiù—the great saint Närada;
haàsa-yänena—by the swan carrier; pitaram—his father; bhagavantam—most
powerful; hiraëya-garbham—Lord Brahmä; upalabhamänaù—understanding;
sahasä eva—immediately; utthäya—having stood up; arhaëena—with
paraphernalia for worship; saha—accompanied; pitä-puträbhyäm—by
Priyavrata and his father. Sväyambhuva Manu; avahita-aïjaliù—with respect
and folded hands; upatasthe—worshiped.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, the father of Närada Muni, is the supreme person within this
universe. As soon as Närada saw the great swan, he could understand that Lord
Brahmä had arrived. Therefore he immediately stood up, along with
Sväyambhuva Manu and his son Priyavrata, whom Närada was instructing.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
21
Then they folded their hands and began to worship Lord Brahmä with great
respect.
PURPORT
As stated in the previous verse, Lord Brahmä was accompanied by other
demigods, but his specific carrier was the great swan. Therefore as soon as
Närada Muni saw the swan, he could understand that his father, Lord Brahmä,
who is also known as Hiraëyagarbha, was arriving. Thus he immediately stood
up with Sväyambhuva Manu and his son Priyavrata to receive Lord Brahmä
and offer him respect.
TEXT 10
aGavaNaiPa >aarTa TaduPaNaqTaahR<a" SaU¢-vake-NaaiTaTaraMauidTaGau<aGa<aavTaarSau‚
JaYa" iPa[Yav]TaMaaid PauåzSTa& SadYahaSaavl/aek- wiTa haevac )) 10 ))
bhagavän api bhärata tad-upanétärhaëaù sükta-väkenätitaräm
udita-guëa-gaëävatära-sujayaù priyavratam ädi-puruñas taà
sadaya-häsävaloka iti hoväca.
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—Lord Brahmä; api—moreover; bhärata—O King Parékñit; tat—by
them; upanéta—brought forward; arhaëaù—worshipable paraphernalia;
sükta—according to Vedic etiquette; väkena—by language; atitaräm—highly;
udita—praised; guëa-gaëa—qualities; avatära—because of the descent;
su-jayaù—whose glories; priyavratam—unto Priyavrata; ädi-puruñaù—the
original person; tam—unto him; sa-daya—with compassion; häsa—smiling;
avalokaù—whose looking; iti—thus; ha—certainly; uväca—said.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
22
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, because Lord Brahmä had finally descended from
Satyaloka to Bhüloka, Närada Muni, Prince Priyavrata and Sväyambhuva
Manu came forward to offer him objects of worship and to praise him in highly
qualified language, according to Vedic etiquette. At that time, Lord Brahmä, the
original person of this universe, felt compassion for Priyavrata and, looking
upon him with a smiling face, spoke to him as follows.
PURPORT
That Lord Brahmä descended from Satyaloka to see Priyavrata indicates
that the matter was very serious. Närada Muni had come to advise Priyavrata
about the value of spiritual life, knowledge, renunciation and bhakti, and Lord
Brahmä knew that Närada's instructions were very impressive. Therefore
unless Lord Brahmä personally went to Gandhamädana Hill to request
Priyavrata, Lord Brahmä knew that prince Priyavrata would not accept his
father's order. Brahmä's purpose was to break Priyavrata's determination.
Therefore Brahmä first looked upon Priyavrata with compassion. His smile and
compassionate features also indicated that although Brahmä would request
Priyavrata to accept household life, Priyavrata would not be out of touch with
devotional service. By the blessings of a Vaiñëava, everything is possible. This
is described in Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu as kåpä-siddhi, or perfection attained
simply by the blessings of a superior person. One usually becomes liberated and
perfect by executing the regulative principles set down in the çästras.
Nonetheless, many persons have achieved perfection simply by the blessings of
a spiritual master or superior.
Priyavrata was the grandson of Lord Brahmä, and as joking competition
sometimes takes place between grandson and grandfather, in this case also
Priyavrata was determined to remain in meditation, whereas Brahmä was
determined that he rule the universe. Thus Lord Brahmä's affectionate smile
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
23
and glance meant, "My dear Priyavrata, you have decided not to accept
household life, but I have decided to convince you that you must accept it."
Actually, Brahmä had come to praise Priyavrata for his high standard of
renunciation, austerity, penance and devotion so that he would not be
deviated from devotional service, even though he would accept household life.
In this verse, one important word is sükta-väkena (by Vedic hymns). In the
Vedas, there is the following prayer to Lord Brahmä: hiraëyagarbhaù
samavartatägre bhütasya jätaù patir eka äsét. Brahmä was received with the
appropriate Vedic hymns, and because he was welcomed according to the
Vedic etiquette, he was very pleased.
TEXT 11
é[q>aGavaNauvac
iNabaeDa TaaTaedMa*Ta& b]vqiMa
MaaSaUiYaTau& devMahRSYaPa[MaeYaMa( )
vYa& >avSTae TaTa Wz MahizR‚
vRhaMa SaveR ivvXaa YaSYa idíMa( )) 11 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
nibodha tätedam åtaà bravémi
mäsüyituà devam arhasy aprameyam
vayaà bhavas te tata eña maharñir
vahäma sarve vivaçä yasya diñöam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the supreme person, Lord Brahmä, said; nibodha—kindly
hear with attention; täta—my dear son; idam—this; åtam—true; bravémi—I
am speaking; mä—not; asüyitum—to be jealous of; devam—the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
24
Personality of Godhead; arhasi—you ought; aprameyam—who is beyond our
experimental knowledge; vayam—we; bhavaù—Lord Çiva; te—your;
tataù—father; eñaù—this; mahä-åñiù—Närada; vahämaù—carry out;
sarve—all; vivaçäù—unable to deviate; yasya—of whom; diñöam—the order.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, the supreme person within this universe, said: My dear
Priyavrata, kindly hear attentively what I shall say to you. Do not be jealous of
the Supreme Lord, who is beyond our experimental measurements. All of us,
including Lord Çiva, your father and the great sage Mahärñi Närada, must carry
out the order of the Supreme. We cannot deviate from His order.
PURPORT
Of the twelve great authorities in devotional service, four—Lord Brahmä
himself, his son Närada, Sväyambhuva Manu and Lord Çiva—were present
before Priyavrata. They were accompanied by many other authoritative sages.
Brahmä first wanted to impress upon Priyavrata that although these great
personalities are all authorities, they cannot possibly disobey the orders of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is described in this verse as deva, which
means "always glorious." The power, glory and potencies of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead can never be diminished. In the Éçopaniñad, the Lord is
described as apäpa-viddha, which indicates that He is never affected by
anything materially considered sinful. Similarly, Çrémad-Bhägavatam describes
the Supreme Personality of Godhead as being so powerful that nothing we
might consider abominable can affect Him. An example sometimes given to
explain the position of the Supreme Lord is that of the sun, which evaporates
urine from the earth but is never affected by contamination. The Supreme
Lord can never be accused of doing anything wrong.
When Lord Brahmä went to induce Priyavrata to accept the responsibility
for ruling the universe, he did not go whimsically; he was following the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
25
dictations of the Supreme Lord. Indeed, Brahmä and other genuine authorities
never do anything without His permission. The Supreme Lord is situated in
everyone's heart. In the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is said, tene brahma
hådä ya ädi-kavaye: [SB 1.1.1] the Lord dictated Vedic knowledge to Brahmä
through his heart. The more a living entity is purified by devotional service,
the more he comes in direct contact with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, as confirmed in Çrémad Bhagavad-gétä:
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give the
understanding by which they can come to Me." (Bg. 10.10) Lord Brahmä,
therefore, had not come to Priyavrata by his own whims: rather, it is
understood that he had been ordered to persuade Priyavrata by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whose activities cannot be understood by material
senses and who is therefore described herein as aprameya. Thus Lord Brahmä
first advised Priyavrata to hear his words with attention and without envy.
Why one is induced to perform certain acts despite his desire to do
something else is indicated herein. One cannot disobey the orders of the
Supreme Lord, even if one is as powerful as Lord Çiva. Lord Brahmä. Manu or
the great sage Närada. All these authorities are certainly very powerful, but
they do not have the power to disobey the orders of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Since Lord Brahmä had come to Priyavrata in accordance with
the orders of the Supreme Lord, he first wanted to dispel any suspicions that
he might be acting as Priyavrata's enemy. Lord Brahmä was following the
orders of the Supreme Lord, and therefore it would be worthwhile for
Priyavrata to accept Lord Brahmä's order, as the Lord desired.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
26
TEXT 12
Na TaSYa k-iêtaPaSaa ivÛYaa va
Na YaaeGavqYaeR<a MaNaqzYaa va )
NaEvaQaRDaMaOE" ParTa" SvTaae va
k*-Ta& ivhNTau& TaNau>a*iÜ>aUYaaTa( )) 12 ))
na tasya kaçcit tapasä vidyayä vä
na yoga-véryeëa manéñayä vä
naivärtha-dharmaiù parataù svato vä
kåtaà vihantuà tanu-bhåd vibhüyät
SYNONYMS
na—never; tasya—His; kaçcit—anyone; tapasä—by austerity; vidyayä—by
education; vä—or; na—never; yoga—by power of mystic yoga; véryeëa—by
personal strength; manéñayä—by intelligence; vä—or; na—never;
eva—certainly; artha—by material opulence; dharmaiù—by the power of
religion; parataù—by any external power; svataù—by personal endeavor;
vä—or; kåtam—the order; vihantum—to avoid; tanu-bhåt—a living entity who
has accepted a material body; vibhüyät—is able.
TRANSLATION
One cannot avoid the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, not by
the strength of severe austerities, an exalted Vedic education, or the power of
mystic yoga, physical prowess or intellectual activities. Nor can one use his
power of religion, his material opulence or any other means, either by himself or
with the help of others, to defy the orders of the Supreme Lord. That is not
possible for any living being, from Brahmä down to the ant.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
27
PURPORT
In the Garga Upaniñad, Gargamuni says to his wife, etasya vä akñarasya
praçäsane gargi süryä-candramasau vidhåtau tiñöhataù: "My dear Gargé,
everything is under the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even
the sun, the moon and other controllers and demigods like Lord Brahmä and
King Indra are all under His control." An ordinary human being or animal
who has accepted a material body cannot go beyond the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead's control. A material body includes senses.
However, the sense activities of so-called scientists who try to be free from
God's law or the laws of nature are useless. This is also confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (7.14). Mama mäyä duratyayä: it is impossible to surpass the
control of material nature, for the Supreme Personality of Godhead is working
behind it. Sometimes we are proud of our austerities, penances and mystic
yogic powers, but it is clearly stated herein that one cannot surpass the laws
and directions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, either by dint of mystic
power, a scientific education, or austerities and penances. It is impossible.
The word manéñayä ("by intelligence") is of special significance. Priyavrata
might argue that Lord Brahmä was requesting him to accept family life and the
responsibility for ruling a kingdom, although Närada Muni had advised him
not to enter household life and be entangled in material affairs. Whom to
accept would be a puzzle for Priyavrata because both Lord Brahmä and Närada
Muni are authorities. Under the circumstances, the use of the word manéñayä
is very appropriate, for it indicates that since both Närada Muni and Lord
Brahmä are authorized to give instruction, Priyavrata should neglect neither of
them but should use his intelligence to follow the advice of both. To solve such
dilemmas, Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has given a very clear conception of
intelligence. He says:
anäsaktasya viñayän
yathärham upayuïjataù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
28
nirbandhaù kåñëa-sambandhe
yuktaà vairägyam ucyate
Viñayän, material affairs, should be accepted without attachment. and
everything should be dovetailed with the service of the Lord. That is real
intelligence (manéñä). Becoming a family man or king in the material world is
not harmful if one accepts everything for Kåñëa's service. That necessitates
clear intelligence. Mäyävädé philosophers say, brahma satyaà jagan mithyä:
this material world is false, and only the Absolute Truth is real. However, an
intelligent devotee in the line of Lord Brahmä and the great sage Närada—or,
in other words, in the Brahma-sampradäya—does not consider this world false.
That which is created by the Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be false,
but using it for enjoyment is. Everything is meant to be enjoyed by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (5.29).
Bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà sarva-loka-maheçvaram: the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the supreme proprietor and enjoyer, and therefore everything
should be dovetailed for His enjoyment and service. Regardless of one's
circumstances, favorable or unfavorable, one should use everything to serve
the Supreme Lord. That is the perfect way to use one's intelligence.
TEXT 13
>avaYa NaaXaaYa c k-MaR k-Tau|
Xaaek-aYa MaaehaYa Sada >aYaaYa )
Sau%aYa du"%aYa c dehYaaeGa‚
MaVYa¢-idí& JaNaTaa(r) Datae )) 13 ))
bhaväya näçäya ca karma kartuà
çokäya mohäya sadä bhayäya
sukhäya duùkhäya ca deha-yogam
avyakta-diñöaà janatäìga dhatte
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
29
SYNONYMS
bhaväya—for birth; näçäya—for death; ca—also; karma—activity; kartum—to
do; çokäya—for bereavement; mohäya—for illusion; sadä—always;
bhayäya—for fear; sukhäya—for happiness; duùkhäya—for distress; ca—also;
deha-yogam—connection with a material body; avyakta—by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; diñöam—directed; janatä—the living entities;
aìga—O Priyavrata; dhatte—accept.
TRANSLATION
My dear Priyavrata, by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all
living entities accept different types of bodies for birth and death, activity,
lamentation, illusion, fear of future dangers, and happiness and distress.
PURPORT
Every living entity who has come to this material world has come here for
material enjoyment, but according to his own karma, activities, he must accept
a certain type of body given to him by material nature under the order of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (3.27), prakåteù
kriyamäëäni guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù: everything is being done by prakåti,
material nature, under the direction of the Supreme Lord. Modern scientists
do not know why there are varieties of bodies in 8,400,000 forms. The fact is
that all these bodies are ordained for the living entities by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead according to the living entities' desires. He gives the
living entities freedom to act as they like, but on the other hand they must
accept a body according to the reactions of their activities. Thus there are
different types of bodies. Some living entities have short durations of life,
whereas others live for fantastic durations. Every one of them, however, from
Brahmä down to the ant, acts according to the direction of the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
30
Personality of Godhead, who is sitting in everyone's heart. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (15.15):
sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo
mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca
"I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance. knowledge
and forgetfulness." It is not a fact, however, that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead gives direction to certain living entities in one way and other living
entities in another way. The truth is that every living entity has a certain
desire, and the Supreme Lord gives him a chance to fulfill it. The best course,
therefore, is to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead and act
according to His desire. One who does so is liberated.
TEXT 14
YaÜaic TaNTYaa& Gau<ak-MaRdaMai>a"
SauduSTarEvRTSa vYa& SauYaaeiJaTaa" )
SaveR vhaMaae bil/MaqìraYa
Pa[aeTaa NaSaqv iÜPade cTauZPad" )) 14 ))
yad-väci tantyäà guëa-karma-dämabhiù
sudustarair vatsa vayaà suyojitäù
sarve vahämo balim éçvaräya
protä naséva dvi-pade catuñ-padaù
SYNONYMS
yat—of whom; väci—in the form of Vedic instruction; tantyäm—to a long
rope; guëa—of quality; karma—and work; dämabhiù—by the ropes;
su-dustaraiù—very difficult to avoid; vatsa—my dear boy; vayam—we;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
31
su-yojitäù—are engaged; sarve—all; vahämaù—carry out; balim—orders to
please Him; éçvaräya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
protäù—being bound; nasi—in the nose; iva—like; dvi-pade—to the
two-legged (driver); catuù-padaù—the four-legged (bulls).
TRANSLATION
My dear boy, all of us are bound by the Vedic injunctions to the divisions of
varëäçrama according to our qualities and work. These divisions are difficult to
avoid because they are scientifically arranged. We must therefore carry out our
duties of varëäçrama-dharma, like bulls obliged to move according to the
direction of a driver pulling on ropes knotted to their noses.
PURPORT
In this verse, the words tantyäà guëa-karma-dämabhiù are very important.
We each get a body according to our association with the guëas, the qualities
or modes of material nature, and we act accordingly. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä, the four orders of the social system—namely brähmaëa,
kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra—are arranged according to guëa and karma, their
qualities and work. There is some controversy about this, however, because
some say that since one receives a body according to the guëa and karma of his
past life, it is one's birth that determines his social status. Others say, however,
that one's birth according to the guëa and karma of his past life is not the
essential consideration, since one can change his guëa and karma even in this
life. Thus they say that the four divisions of the social order—brähmaëa,
kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra—should be arranged according to the guëa and
karma of this life. This version is confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam by Närada
Muni. While instructing Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira about the symptoms of guëa
and karma, Närada Muni said that these symptoms must govern the division of
society. In other words, if a person born in the family of a brähmaëa has the
symptoms of a çüdra, he should be designated as a çüdra. Similarly, if a çüdra
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
32
has brahminical qualities, he should be designated a brähmaëa.
The varëäçrama system is scientific. Therefore if we accept the divisions of
varëa and äçrama according to the Vedic instructions, our lives will be
successful. Unless human society is thus divided and arranged, it cannot be
perfect. As stated in the Viñëu Puräëa (3.8.9):
varëäçramäcäravatä
puruñeëa paraù pumän
viñëur ärädhyate panthä
nänyat tat-toña-käraëam
[Cc. Madhya 8.58]
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu, is worshiped by the proper
execution of prescribed duties in the system of varëa and äçrama. There is no
other way to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One must be
situated in the institution of the four varëas and äçramas." All of human
society is meant to worship Lord Viñëu. At the present moment, however,
human society does not know that this is the ultimate goal or perfection of life.
Therefore instead of worshiping Lord Viñëu. People have been educated to
worship matter. According to the direction of modern society, men think they
can advance in civilization by manipulating matter to build skyscrapers, big
roads, automobiles and so on. Such a civilization must certainly be called
materialistic because its people do not know the goal of life. The goal of life is
to reach Viñëu, but instead of reaching Viñëu, people are bewildered by the
external manifestation of the material energy. Therefore progress in material
advancement is blind, and the leaders of such material advancement are also
blind. They are leading their followers in the wrong way.
It is best, therefore, to accept the injunctions of the Vedas, which are
mentioned in this verse as yad-väci. In accordance with those injunctions,
everyone should find out whether he is a brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya or çüdra
and should thus be educated accordingly. Then his life will be successful.
Otherwise, all of human society will be confused. If human society is divided
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
33
scientifically according to varëa and äçrama, and if the Vedic directions are
followed, one's life, regardless of his position, will be successful. It is not that
brähmaëas will be elevated to the transcendental platform but not the çüdras.
If the Vedic injunctions are followed, all of them—brähmaëas, kñatriyas,
vaiçyas and çüdras—will be elevated to the transcendental platform, and their
lives will be successful. The injunctions in the Vedas are explicit directions
from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The example cited in this verse is
that bulls tied by ropes in their nostrils move according to the direction of the
driver. Similarly, if we move according to the instructions of the Vedas, the
perfect paths for our lives will be set. Otherwise, if we do not move in that way
but act according to our whimsical ideas, our lives will be spoiled by confusion
and will end in despair. Actually, because people at the present moment are
not following the instructions of the Vedas, they are all confused. We must
therefore accept this instruction by Lord Brahmä to Priyavrata as the factual
scientific direction leading to the success of life. This is also confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (16.23):
yaù çästra-vidhim utsåjya
vartate käma-kärataù
na sa siddhim aväpnoti
na sukhaà na paräà gatim
If we do not live according to the injunctions of the çästras, the Vedas, we shall
never achieve success in life, to say nothing of happiness or elevation to higher
statuses of living.
TEXT 15
wRXaai>aSa*í& ùvåNDMahe_(r)
du"%& Sau%& va Gau<ak-MaRSa(r)aTa( )
AaSQaaYa TataÛdYau» NaaQa‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
34
ê+auZMaTaaNDaa wv NaqYaMaaNaa" )) 15 ))
éçäbhisåñöaà hy avarundhmahe 'ìga
duùkhaà sukhaà vä guëa-karma-saìgät
ästhäya tat tad yad ayuìkta näthaç
cakñuñmatändhä iva néyamänäù
SYNONYMS
éça-abhisåñöam—created or given by the Lord; hi—certainly;
avarundhmahe—we have to accept; aìga—my dear Priyavrata;
duùkham—distress; sukham—happiness; vä—or; guëa-karma—with quality
and work; saìgät—by association; ästhäya—being situated in; tat tat—that
condition; yat—which body; ayuìkta—He gave; näthaù—the Supreme Lord;
cakñuñmatä—by a person having eyes; andhäù—blind men; iva—like;
néyamänäù—being conducted.
TRANSLATION
My dear Priyavrata, according to our association with different modes of
material nature, the Supreme Personality of Godhead gives us our specific
bodies and the happiness and distress we achieve. One must therefore remain
situated as he is and be conducted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
exactly as a blind man is led by a person who has eyes with which to see.
PURPORT
By material means, one cannot avoid the happiness and distress unique to
his particular body. There are 8,400,000 bodily forms, each destined to enjoy
and suffer a certain amount of happiness and distress. This we cannot change,
for the happiness and distress are ordained by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, in accordance with whose decision we have received our bodies.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
35
Since we cannot avoid the plan of the Supreme Godhead, we must agree to be
directed by Him, just as a blind man is led by a person who has eyes. Under
any circumstances, if we remain in the condition allotted to us by the Supreme
Lord and follow His instructions, we will become perfect. The main purpose of
life is to follow the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is
such instructions that constitute one's religion or occupational duty.
In Bhagavad-gétä, therefore, Lord Kåñëa says, sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm
ekaà çaraëaà vraja: "Give up all other engagements. Simply surrender unto
Me and follow Me." (Bg. 18.66) This process of surrendering by following the
instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not meant for any
particular caste or creed. A brähmaëa can surrender, and so can a kñatriya,
vaiçya or çüdra. Everyone can adopt this process. As stated in this verse,
cakñuñmatändhä iva néyamänäù: one should follow the Lord the way a blind
man follows a person who has eyes. If we follow the Supreme Personality of
Godhead by following the directions He gives in the Vedas and Bhagavad-gétä,
our lives will be successful. The Lord therefore says:
man-manä bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru
mäm evaiñyasi satyaà te
pratijäne priyo 'si me
"Always think of Me, become My devotee, and offer respect and obeisances
unto Me. Then you will certainly come back home, back to Godhead. I promise
you this because you are My very dear friend." (Bg. 18.65) This instruction is
meant for everyone—brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya or çüdra. If anyone, from any
division of life, surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and follows
His instructions, his life will be successful.
The previous verse has given the analogy of bulls moving under the
direction of the driver of a bullock cart. The bulls, being completely
surrendered to the driver, remain wherever he wants to place them and eat
whatever he wants them to eat. Similarly, being completely surrendered to the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
36
Supreme Personality of Godhead, we should not aspire for happiness, or regret
distress; we must be satisfied with the position allotted to us by the Lord. We
should follow the path of devotional service and not be dissatisfied with the
happiness and distress He has given. People in the material modes of passion
and ignorance generally cannot understand the plan of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead with its 8,400,000 forms of life, but the human form
affords one the special privilege to understand this plan, engage in devotional
service and elevate oneself to the highest position of perfection by following
the Lord's instructions. The entire world is working under the influence of the
modes of material nature, especially ignorance and passion, but if people
engage in hearing and chanting about the glories of the Supreme Lord, their
lives can be successful, and they can be elevated to the highest perfection. In
the Båhan-näradéya Puräëa, therefore, it is said:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
"In this age of Kali, there is no other way, no other way, no other way for
spiritual perfection than the holy name, the holy name, the holy name of the
Lord." Everyone should be given the chance to hear the holy names of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, for thus one will gradually come to
understand his real position in life and be elevated to the transcendental
position above the mode of goodness. Thus all impediments to his progress will
be cut to pieces. In conclusion, therefore, we must be satisfied in whatever
position we have been put into by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
we should try to engage ourselves in His devotional service. Then our lives will
be successful.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
37
TEXT 16
Mau¢-ae_iPa TaaviØ>a*YaaTSvdeh‚
MaarBDaMaénài>aMaaNaXaUNYa" )
YaQaaNau>aUTa& Pa[iTaYaaTaiNad]"
ik&- TvNYadehaYa Gau<aaà v*»e )) 16 ))
mukto 'pi tävad bibhåyät sva-deham
ärabdham açnann abhimäna-çünyaù
yathänubhütaà pratiyäta-nidraù
kià tv anya-dehäya guëän na våìkte
SYNONYMS
muktaù—a liberated person; api—even; tävat—so long; bibhåyät—must
maintain; sva-deham—his own body; ärabdham—obtained as a result of past
activity; açnan—accepting; abhimäna-çünyaù—without erroneous
conceptions; yathä—as; anubhütam—what was perceived;
pratiyäta-nidraù—one who has awakened from sleep; kim tu—but;
anya-dehäya—for another material body; guëän—the material qualities;
na—never; våìkte—enjoys.
TRANSLATION
Even if one is liberated, he nevertheless accepts the body he has received
according to his past karma. Without misconceptions, however, he regards his
enjoyment and suffering due to that karma the way an awakened person regards
a dream he had while sleeping. He thus remains steadfast and never works to
achieve another material body under the influence of the three modes of
material nature.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
38
PURPORT
The difference between a liberated and conditioned soul is that the
conditioned soul is under the concept of bodily life, whereas a liberated person
knows that he is not the body but a spirit, different from the body. Priyavrata
might have thought that although a conditioned soul is forced to act according
to the laws of nature, why should he, who was far advanced in spiritual
understanding, accept the same kind of bondage and impediments to spiritual
advancement? To answer this doubt, Lord Brahmä informed him that even
those who are liberated do not resent accepting, in the present body, the
results of their past activities. While sleeping, one dreams many unreal things,
but when he awakens he disregards them and makes progress in factual life.
Similarly, a liberated person—one who has completely understood that he is
not the body but a spirit soul—disregards past activities performed in
ignorance and performs his present activities in such a way that they produce
no reactions. This is described in Bhagavad-gétä (3.9). Yajïärthät karmaëo
'nyatra loko 'yaà karma-bandhanaù: if one performs activities for the
satisfaction of the Supreme Personality, the yajïa-puruña, his work does not
produce reactions, whereas karmés, who act for themselves, are bound by the
reactions of their work. A liberated person, therefore, does not think about
whatever he has ignorantly done in the past; instead, he acts in such a way
that he will not produce another body by fruitive activities. As clearly
mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä:
mäm ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman." (Bg. 14.26) Regardless of what we have done in our
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
39
past lives, if we engage ourselves in unalloyed devotional service to the Lord in
this life, we will always be situated in the brahma-bhüta [SB 4.30.20] (liberated)
state, free from reactions, and will not be obliged to accept another material
body. Tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna (Bg. 4.9). After giving
up the body, one who has acted in that way does not accept another material
body, but instead goes back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 17
>aYa& Pa[MataSYa vNaeZviPa SYaad(
YaTa" Sa AaSTae Sahz$(„SaPaÒ" )
iJaTaeiNd]YaSYaaTMarTaebuRDaSYa
Ga*haé[Ma" ik&- Nau k-raeTYavÛMa( )) 17 ))
bhayaà pramattasya vaneñv api syäd
yataù sa äste saha-ñaö-sapatnaù
jitendriyasyätma-rater budhasya
gåhäçramaù kià nu karoty avadyam
SYNONYMS
bhayam—fear; pramattasya—of one who is bewildered; vaneñu—in forests;
api—even; syät—there must be; yataù—because; saù—he (one who is not
self-controlled); äste—is existing; saha—with; ñaö-sapatnaù—six co-wives;
jita-indriyasya—for one who has already conquered the senses;
ätma-rateù—self-satisfied; budhasya—for such a learned man;
gåha-äçramaù—household life; kim—what; nu—indeed; karoti—can do;
avadyam—harm.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
40
Even if he goes from forest to forest, one who is not self-controlled must
always fear material bondage because he is living with six co-wives—the mind
and knowledge-acquiring senses. Even householder life, however, cannot harm a
self-satisfied, learned man who has conquered his senses.
PURPORT
Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura has sung, gåhe vä vanete thäke, 'hä gauräìga'
bale òäke: whether one is situated in the forest or at home, if he is engaged in
the devotional service of Lord Caitanya, he is a liberated person. Here this is
also repeated. For one who has not controlled his senses, going to the forest to
become a so-called yogé is meaningless. Because his uncontrolled mind and
senses are going with him, he cannot achieve anything, even by giving up
household life and staying in the forest. Formerly many mercantile men from
the up-country of India used to go to Bengal, and thus there is a familiar
saying, "If you go to Bengal, your fortune will go with you." Our first concern,
therefore, should be to control the senses, and since the senses cannot be
controlled unless engaged in the devotional service of the Lord, our most
important duty is to engage the senses in devotional service. Håñékeëa
håñékeça-sevanaà bhaktir ucyate: [Cc. Madhya 19.170] bhakti means engagement
of the purified senses in the service of the Lord.
Herein Lord Brahmä indicates that instead of going to the forest with
uncontrolled senses, it is better and more secure to engage the senses in the
service of the Lord. Even household life can do no harm to a self-controlled
person acting in this way; it cannot force him into material bondage. Çréla
Rüpa Gosvämé has further enunciated this position:
éhä yasya harer däsye
karmaëä manasä girä
nikhiläsv apy avasthäsu
jévan-muktaù sa ucyate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
41
"Regardless of one's circumstances, if one fully engages his activities, mind and
words in the devotional service of the Lord, he should be understood to be a
liberated person." Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura was a responsible officer and a
householder, yet his service to the cause of expanding the mission of Lord
Caitanya Mahäprabhu is unique. Çréla Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté Öhäkura says,
durdäntendriya-käla-sarpa-paöalé protkhäta-daàñöräyate. The sense organs are
certainly our greatest enemies, and they are therefore compared to venomous
serpents. However, if a venomous serpent is bereft of its poison fangs, it is no
longer fearful. Similarly, if the senses are engaged in the service of the Lord,
there is no need to fear their activities. The devotees in the Kåñëa
consciousness movement move within this material world, but because their
senses are fully engaged in the service of the Lord, they are always aloof from
the material world. They are always living in a transcendental position.
TEXT 18
Ya" z$( SaPaÒaNa( iviJaGaqzMaa<aae
Ga*hezu iNaivRXYa YaTaeTa PaUvRMa( )
ATYaeiTa duGaaRié[Ta OiJaRTaarqNa(
+aq<aezu k-aMa& ivcreiÜPaiêTa( )) 18 ))
yaù ñaö sapatnän vijigéñamäëo
gåheñu nirviçya yateta pürvam
atyeti durgäçrita ürjitärén
kñéëeñu kämaà vicared vipaçcit
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; ñaö—six; sapatnän—adversaries; vijigéñamäëaù—desiring to
conquer; gåheñu—in household life; nirviçya—having entered; yateta—must
try; pürvam—first; atyeti—conquers; durga-äçritaù—being in a fortified place;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
42
ürjita-arén—very strong enemies; kñéëeñu—decreased; kämam—lusty desires;
vicaret—can go; vipaçcit—the most experienced, learned.
TRANSLATION
One who is situated in household life and who systematically conquers his
mind and five sense organs is like a king in his fortress who conquers his
powerful enemies. After one has been trained in household life and his lusty
desires have decreased, he can move anywhere without danger.
PURPORT
The Vedic system of four varëas and four äçramas is very scientific, and its
entire purpose is to enable one to control the senses. Before entering
household life (gåhastha-äçrama), a student is fully trained to become
jitendriya, a conqueror of the senses. Such a mature student is allowed to
become a householder, and because he was first trained in conquering his
senses, he retires from household life and becomes vänaprastha as soon as the
strong waves of youthful life are past and he reaches the verge of old age at
fifty years or slightly more. Then, after being further trained, he accepts
sannyäsa. He is then a fully learned and renounced person who can move
anywhere and everywhere without fear of being captivated by material desires.
The senses are considered very powerful enemies. As a king in a strong fortress
can conquer powerful enemies, so a householder in gåhastha-äçrama, household
life, can conquer the lusty desires of youth and be very secure when he takes
vänaprastha and sannyäsa.
TEXT 19
Tv& TvBJaNaa>aax(ig]aSaraeJak-aeXa‚
duGaaRié[Taae iNaiJaRTaz$(„SaPaÒ" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
43
>au&+veh >aaeGaaNa( PauåzaiTaidíaNa(
ivMau¢-Sa(r)" Pa[k*-iTa& >aJaSv )) 19 ))
tvaà tv abja-näbhäìghri-saroja-koçadurgäçrito
nirjita-ñaö-sapatnaù
bhuìkñveha bhogän puruñätidiñöän
vimukta-saìgaù prakåtià bhajasva
SYNONYMS
tvam—yourself; tu—then; abja-näbha—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, whose navel is like a lotus flower; aìghri—feet; saroja—lotus;
koça—hole; durga—the stronghold; äçritaù—taken shelter of;
nirjita—conquered; ñaö-sapatnaù—the six enemies (the mind and five senses);
bhuìkñva—enjoy; iha—in this material world; bhogän—enjoyable things;
puruña—by the Supreme person; atidiñöän—extraordinarily ordered;
vimukta—liberated; saìgaù—from material association;
prakåtim—constitutional position; bhajasva—enjoy.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä continued: My dear Priyavrata, seek shelter inside the opening
in the lotus of the feet of the Lord, whose navel is also like a lotus. Thus
conquer the six sense organs [the mind and knowledge-acquiring senses].
Accept material enjoyment because the Lord, extraordinarily, has ordered you
to do this. You will thus always be liberated from material association and be
able to carry out the Lord's orders in your constitutional position.
PURPORT
There are three kinds of men within this material world. Those who are
trying to enjoy the senses to the utmost are called karmés, above them are the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
44
jïänés, who try to conquer the urges of the senses, and above them are the
yogés, who have already conquered the senses. None of them, however, are
situated in a transcendental position. Only devotees. who belong to none of
the above-mentioned groups, are transcendental. As explained in
Bhagavad-gétä (14.26):
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman." Lord Brahmä herein advises Priyavrata to remain
transcendental in the fortress not of family life but of the lotus feet of the Lord
(abja-näbhäìghri-saroja). When a bumblebee enters the opening of a lotus
flower and drinks its honey, it is fully protected by the petals of the lotus. The
bee is undisturbed by sunshine and other external influences. Similarly, one
who always seeks shelter at the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead is
protected from all dangers. It is therefore said in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(10.14.58):
samäçritä ye pada-pallava-plavaà
mahat-padaà puëya-yaço muräreù
bhavämbudhir vatsa-padaà paraà padaà
padaà padaà yad vipadäà na teñäm
For one who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, everything
becomes easier. Indeed, even crossing the great ocean of nescience
(bhavämbudhi) is exactly like crossing the hoofprint created by a calf
(vatsa-padam). For such a devotee, there is no question of remaining in a place
where every step is dangerous.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
45
Our actual duty is to carry out the supreme order of the Personality of
Godhead. If we are fixed in our determination to carry out the supreme order
of the Lord, we are always secure, regardless of where we are situated, whether
in hell or in heaven. Herein the words prakåtià bhajasva are very significant.
Prakåtim refers to one's constitutional position. Every living entity has the
constitutional position of being an eternal servant of God. Therefore Lord
Brahmä advised Priyavrata, "Be situated in your original position as an eternal
servant of the Lord. If you carry out His orders, you will never fall, even in the
midst of material enjoyment." Material enjoyment achieved by dint of one's
fruitive activities differs from material enjoyment given by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. A devotee sometimes appears to be in a very opulent
position, but he accepts that position to follow the orders of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore a devotee is never affected by material
influences. The devotees in the Kåñëa consciousness movement are preaching
all over the world in accordance with the order of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
They have to meet many karmés, but by the mercy of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, they are unaffected by material influences. He has blessed them,
as described in the Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 7.129):
kabhu nä bädhibe tomära viñaya-taraìga
punarapi ei öhäïi päbe mora saìge
A sincere devotee who engages in the service of Lord Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu by preaching His cult all over the world will never be affected by
viñaya-taraìga, material influences. On the contrary, in due course of time he
will return to the shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
and will thus have perpetual association with Him.
TEXT 20
é[qXauk- ovac
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
46
wiTa SaMai>aihTaae Maha>aaGavTaae >aGavTaiñ>auvNaGauraerNauXaaSaNaMaaTMaNaae
l/gauTaYaavNaTaiXaraeDarae ba!iMaiTa SabhuMaaNaMauvah )) 20 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti samabhihito mahä-bhägavato bhagavatas tri-bhuvana-guror anuçäsanam
ätmano laghutayävanata-çirodharo bäòham iti sabahu-mänam uväha.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus;
samabhihitaù—completely instructed; mahä-bhägavataù—the great devotee;
bhagavataù—of the most powerful Lord Brahmä; tri-bhuvana—of the three
worlds; guroù—the spiritual master; anuçäsanam—the order; ätmanaù—of
himself; laghutayä—because of inferiority; avanata—bowed down;
çirodharaù—his head; bäòham—yes, sir; iti—thus; sa-bahu-mänam—with great
respect; uväha—carried out.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After thus being fully instructed by Lord
Brahmä, who is the spiritual master of the three worlds, Priyavrata, his own
position being inferior, offered obeisances, accepted the order and carried it out
with great respect.
PURPORT
Çré Priyavrata was the grandson of Lord Brahmä. Therefore according to
social etiquette, his position was inferior. It is the duty of the inferior to carry
out the order of the superior with great respect. Priyavrata therefore
immediately said, "Yes, sir. I shall carry out your order." Priyavrata is described
as a mahä-bhägavata, a great devotee. The duty of a great devotee is to carry
out the order of the spiritual master, or the spiritual master of the spiritual
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
47
master in the paramparä system. As described in Bhagavad-gétä (4.2), evaà
paramparä präptam: one has to receive the instructions of the Supreme Lord
through the disciplic chain of spiritual masters. A devotee of the Lord always
considers himself a servant of the servant of the servant of the Lord [Cc.
Madhya 13.80].
TEXT 21
aGavaNaiPa MaNauNaa YaQaavduPak-iLPaTaaPaiciTa" iPa[Yav]TaNaardYaaerivzMaMai>aSaMaq‚
+aMaa<aYaaeraTMaSaMavSQaaNaMavax(MaNaSa& +aYaMaVYavôTa& Pa[vTaRYaàGaMaTa( )) 21 ))
bhagavän api manunä yathävad upakalpitäpacitiù priyavrata-näradayor
aviñamam abhisamékñamäëayor ätmasam avasthänam aväì-manasaà kñayam
avyavahåtaà pravartayann agamat.
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the most powerful Lord Brahmä; api—also; manunä—by Manu;
yathävat—as deserved; upakalpita-apacitiù—being worshiped;
priyavrata-näradayoù—in the presence of Priyavrata and Närada;
aviñamam—without aversion; abhisamékñamäëayoù—looking on;
ätmasam—just suitable for his position; avasthänam—to his abode;
aväk-manasam—beyond the description of mind and words; kñayam—the
planet; avyavahåtam—extraordinarily situated; pravartayan—departing;
agamat—returned.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä was then worshiped by Manu, who respectfully satisfied him as
well as he could. Priyavrata and Närada also looked upon Brahmä with no
tinges of resentment. Having engaged Priyavrata in accepting his father's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
48
request, Lord Brahmä returned to his abode, Satyaloka, which is indescribable
by the endeavor of mundane mind or words.
PURPORT
Manu was certainly very satisfied that Lord Brahmä had persuaded his son
Priyavrata to take the responsibility for ruling the world. Priyavrata and
Närada were also very satisfied. Although Brahmä had forced Priyavrata to
accept the management of worldly affairs, thus breaking his vow to remain
brahmacäré and completely engage in devotional service, Närada and
Priyavrata did not look upon Brahmä with resentment. Närada was not at all
sorry that he had been frustrated in making Priyavrata a disciple. Both
Priyavrata and Närada were exalted personalities who knew how to respect
Lord Brahmä. Therefore instead of looking upon Brahmä with resentment,
they very feelingly offered him their respect. Lord Brahmä then returned to
his celestial abode, known as Satyaloka, which is described here as being
impeccable and being unapproachable by words.
It is stated in this verse that Lord Brahmä returned to his residence, which
is as important as his own personality. Lord Brahmä is the creator of this
universe and the most exalted personality within it. His lifetime is described in
Bhagavad-gétä (8.17). Sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaëo viduù. The
total duration of the four yugas is 4,300,000 years, and when that is multiplied
a thousand times, it equals twelve hours in the life of Brahmä. Therefore we
cannot factually comprehend even twelve hours of Brahmä's life, to say
nothing of the one hundred years that constitute his entire lifetime. How,
then, can we understand his abode? The Vedic literatures describe that in
Satyaloka there is no birth, death, old age or disease. In other words, since
Satyaloka is situated next to Brahmaloka, or the Brahman effulgence, it is
almost as good as Vaikuëöhaloka. Lord Brahmä's abode is practically
indescribable from our present status. Therefore it has been described as
aväì-manasa-gocara, or beyond the description of our words and the
imagination of our minds. The Vedic literatures thus describe the abode of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
49
Lord Brahmä: yad vai parärdhyaà tad upärameñöhyaà na yatra çoko na jarä na
måtyur närtir na codvegaù. "In Satyaloka, which is situated many millions and
billions of years away, there is no lamentation, nor is there old age, death,
anxiety or the influence of enemies."
TEXT 22
MaNauriPa Pare<aEv& Pa[iTaSaiNDaTaMaNaaerQa" SaurizRvraNauMaTaeNaaTMaJaMai%l/DaraMa‚
<@l/iSQaiTaGauáYa AaSQaaPYa SvYaMaiTaivzMaivzYaivzJal/aXaYaaXaaYaa oParraMa
)) 22 ))
manur api pareëaivaà pratisandhita-manorathaù
surarñi-varänumatenätmajam akhila-dharä-maëòala-sthiti-guptaya ästhäpya
svayam ati-viñama-viñaya-viña-jaläçayäçäyä upararäma.
SYNONYMS
manuù—Sväyambhuva Manu; api—also; pareëa—by Lord Brahmä;
evam—thus; pratisandhita—executed; manaù-rathaù—his mental aspiration;
sura-åñi-vara—of the great sage Närada; anumatena—by the permission;
ätma-jam—his son; akhila—of the entire universe; dharä-maëòala—of
planets; sthiti—maintenance; guptaye—for the protection;
ästhäpya—establishing; svayam—personally; ati-viñama—very dangerous;
viñaya—material affairs; viña—of poison; jala-äçaya—ocean; äçäyäù—from
desires; upararäma—got relief.
TRANSLATION
Sväyambhuva Manu, with the assistance of Lord Brahmä, thus fulfilled his
desires. With the permission of the great sage Närada, he delivered to his son
the governmental responsibility for maintaining and protecting all the planets of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
50
the universe. He thus achieved relief from the most dangerous, poisonous ocean
of material desires.
PURPORT
Sväyambhuva Manu was practically hopeless because such a great
personality as Närada was instructing his son Priyavrata not to accept
household life. Now he was very pleased that Lord Brahmä had interfered by
inducing his son to accept the responsibility for ruling the government of the
universe. From Bhagavad-gétä we get information that Vaivasvata Manu was
the son of the sun-god and that his son, Mahäräja Ikñväku, ruled this planet
earth. Sväyambhuva Manu, however, appears to have been in charge of the
entire universe, and he entrusted to his son, Mahäräja Priyavrata, the
responsibility for maintaining and protecting all the planetary systems.
Dharä-maëòala means "planet." This earth, for instance, is called
dharä-maëòala. Akhila, however, means "all" or "universal." It is therefore
difficult to understand where Mahäräja Priyavrata was situated, but from this
literature his position certainly appears greater than that of Vaivasvata Manu,
for he was entrusted with all the planetary systems of the entire universe.
Another significant statement is that Sväyambhuva Manu took great
satisfaction from abnegating the responsibility for ruling all the planetary
systems of the universe. At present, politicians are very eager to take charge of
the government, and they engage their men in canvassing from door to door to
get votes to win the post of president or a similar exalted office. On the
contrary, however, herein we find that King Priyavrata had to be persuaded by
Lord Brahmä to accept the post of emperor of the entire universe. Similarly,
his father, Sväyambhuva Manu, felt relieved to entrust the universal
government to Priyavrata. Thus it is evident that the kings and executive
heads of government in the Vedic age never accepted their positions for sense
enjoyment. Such exalted kings, who were known as räjarñis, ruled only to
maintain and protect the kingdom for the welfare of the citizens. The history
of Priyavrata and Sväyambhuva Manu describes how exemplary, responsible
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
51
monarchs performed the duties of government with disinterest, keeping
themselves always aloof from the contamination of material attachment.
Material affairs have herein been compared to an ocean of poison. They
have been described in a similar way by Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura in one
of his songs:
saàsära-viñänale, divä-niçi hiyä jvale,
juòäite nä kainu upäya
"My heart is always burning in the fire of material existence. and I have made
no provisions for getting out of it."
golokera prema-dhana, hari-näma-saìkértana,
rati nä janmila kene täya
"The only remedy is hari-näma-saìkértana, the chanting of the Hare Kåñëa
mahä-mantra, which is imported from the spiritual world, Goloka Våndävana.
How unfortunate I am that I have no attraction for this." Manu wanted to seek
shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord, and therefore when his son Priyavrata
took charge of his worldly affairs, Manu was very relieved. That is the system
of Vedic civilization. At the end of life, one must free himself from worldly
affairs and completely engage in the service of the Lord.
The word surarñi-vara-anumatena is also significant. Manu entrusted the
government to his son with the permission of the great saint Närada. This is
particularly mentioned because although Närada wanted Priyavrata to become
free from all material affairs, when Priyavrata took charge of the universe by
the request of Lord Brahmä and Manu, Närada was also very pleased.
TEXT 23
wiTa h vav Sa JaGaTaqPaiTarqìreC^YaaiDaiNaveiXaTak-MaaRiDak-arae_i%l/JaGa‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
52
ØNDaß&SaNaParaNau>aavSYa >aGavTa AaidPauåzSYaax(ig]aYauGal/aNavrTaDYaaNaaNau>aaveNa
PairriNDaTak-zaYaaXaYaae_vdaTaae_iPa MaaNavDaRNaae MahTaa& MahqTal/MaNauXaXaaSa )) 23 ))
iti ha väva sa jagaté-patir éçvarecchayädhiniveçita-karmädhikäro
'khila-jagad-bandha-dhvaàsana-paränubhävasya bhagavata
ädi-puruñasyäìghri-yugalänavarata-dhyänänubhävena
parirandhita-kañäyäçayo 'vadäto 'pi mäna-vardhano mahatäà mahétalam
anuçaçäsa.
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; ha väva—indeed; saù—he; jagaté-patiù—the emperor of the whole
universe; éçvara-icchayä—by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
adhiniveçita—completely engaged; karma-adhikäraù—in material affairs;
akhila-jagat—of the entire universe; bandha—bondage;
dhvaàsana—destroying; para—transcendental; anubhävasya—whose
influence; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ädi-puruñasya—the original person; aìghri—on the lotus feet; yugala—two;
anavarata—constant; dhyäna-anubhävena—by meditation;
parirandhita—destroyed; kañäya—all the dirty things; äçayaù—in his heart;
avadätaù—completely pure; api—although; mäna-vardhanaù—just to give
honor; mahatäm—to superiors; mahétalam—the material world;
anuçaçäsa—ruled.
TRANSLATION
Following the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mahäräja
Priyavrata fully engaged in worldly affairs, yet he always thought of the lotus
feet of the Lord, which are the cause of liberation from all material attachment.
Although Priyavrata Mahäräja was completely freed from all material
contamination, he ruled the material world just to honor the orders of his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
53
superiors.
PURPORT
The words mäna-vardhano mahatäm ("just to show honor to superiors") are
very significant. Although Mahäräja Priyavrata was already a liberated person
and had no attraction for material things, he engaged himself fully in
governmental affairs just to show respect to Lord Brahmä. Arjuna had also
acted in the same way. Arjuna had no desire to participate in political affairs
or the fighting at Kurukñetra, but when ordered to do so by the Supreme Lord,
Kåñëa, he executed those duties very nicely. One who always thinks of the
lotus feet of the Lord is certainly above all the contamination of the material
world. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä:
yoginäm api sarveñäà
mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù
"Of all yogés, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is
the highest of all." (Bg. 6.47) Mahäräja Priyavrata. therefore, was a liberated
person and was among the highest of yogés, yet superficially he became the
emperor of the universe in accordance with the order of Lord Brahmä.
Showing respect to his superior in this way was another of his extraordinary
qualifications. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.17.28):
näräyaëa-paräù sarve
na kutaçcana bibhyati
svargäpavarga-narakeñv
api tulyärtha-darçinaù
A devotee who is actually advanced is not afraid of anything, provided be has
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
54
the opportunity to execute the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
This is the proper explanation of why Priyavrata engaged in worldly affairs
although he was a liberated person. Also, only because of this principle does a
mahä-bhägavata, who has nothing to do with the material world, come down to
the second platform of devotional service to preach the glories of the Lord all
over the world.
TEXT 24
AQa c duihTar& Pa[JaaPaTaeivRìk-MaR<a oPaYaeMae bihRZMaTaq& NaaMa TaSYaaMau h vav
AaTMaJaaNaaTMaSaMaaNaXaql/Gau<ak-MaRæPavqYaaeRdaraNdXa >aavYaaMb>aUv k-NYaa& c
YavqYaSaqMaUJaRSvTaq& NaaMa )) 24 ))
atha ca duhitaraà prajäpater viçvakarmaëa upayeme barhiñmatéà näma
tasyäm u ha väva ätmajän ätma-samäna-çéla-guëa-karma-rüpa-véryodärän
daça bhävayäm babhüva kanyäà ca yavéyasém ürjasvatéà näma.
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; ca—also; duhitaram—the daughter; prajäpateù—of one of
the prajäpatis entrusted with increasing population; viçvakarmaëaù—named
Viçvakarmä; upayeme—married; barhiñmatém—Barhiñmaté; näma—named;
tasyäm—in her; u ha—as it is celebrated; väva—wonderful; ätma-jän—sons;
ätma-samäna—exactly equal to him; çéla—character; guëa—quality;
karma—activities; rüpa—beauty; vérya—prowess; udärän—whose
magnanimity; daça—ten; bhävayäm babhüva—he begot; kanyäm—daughter;
ca—also; yavéyasém—the youngest of all; ürjasvatém—Ürjasvaté;
näma—named.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
55
Thereafter, Mahäräja Priyavrata married Barhiñmaté, the daughter of the
prajäpati named Viçvakarmä. In her he begot ten sons equal to him in beauty,
character, magnanimity and other qualities. He also begot a daughter, the
youngest of all, named Ürjasvaté.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Priyavrata not only carried out the order of Lord Brahmä by
accepting the duties of government, but also married Barhiñmaté, the daughter
of Viçvakarmä, one of the prajäpatis. Since Mahäräja Priyavrata was fully
trained in transcendental knowledge, he could have returned home and
conducted the business of government as a brahmacäré. Instead, however,
when he returned to household life, he accepted a wife also. The principle is
that when one becomes a gåhastha, he must live perfectly in that order, which
means he must live peacefully with a wife and children. When Caitanya
Mahäprabhu's first wife died, His mother requested Him to marry for a second
time. He was twenty years old and was going to take sannyäsa at the age of
twenty-four, yet by the request of His mother, He married. "As long as I am in
household life," He told His mother, "I must have a wife, for household life does
not mean staying in a house. Real household life means living in a house with
a wife."
Three words in this verse are very significant—u ha väva. These words are
used to express wonder. Priyavrata Mahäräja had taken a vow of renunciation,
but accepting a wife and begetting children have nothing to do with the path
of renunciation; these are activities on the path of enjoyment. It was a source
of great wonder, therefore, that Priyavrata Mahäräja, who had followed the
path of renunciation, had now accepted the path of enjoyment.
Sometimes we are criticized because although I am a sannyäsé, I have taken
part in the marriage ceremonies of my disciples. It must be explained, however,
that since we have started a Kåñëa conscious society and since a human society
must also have ideal marriages, to correctly establish an ideal society we must
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
56
take part in marrying some of its members, although we have taken to the path
of renunciation. This may be astonishing to persons who are not very
interested in establishing daiva-varëäçrama, the transcendental system of four
social orders and four spiritual orders. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté
Öhäkura, however, wanted to reestablish daiva-varëäçrama. In
daiva-varëäçrama there cannot be acknowledgement of social status according
to birthright because in Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the determining
considerations are guëa and karma, one's qualities and work. It is this
daiva-varëäçrama that should be established all over the world to continue a
perfect society for Kåñëa consciousness. This may be astonishing to foolish
critics, but it is one of the functions of a Kåñëa conscious society.
TEXT 25
AaGanqDa]eDMaiJaûYajbahuMahavqrihr<YareTaaega*TaPa*ïSavNaMaeDaaiTaiQavqiTahae}ak-vYa
wiTa SavR WvaiGanNaaMaaNa" )) 25 ))
ägnédhredhmajihva-yajïabähu-mahävéra-hiraëyareto-ghåtapåñöha-savana-medh
ätithi-vétihotra-kavaya iti sarva evägni-nämänaù.
SYNONYMS
ägnédhra—Ägnédhra; idhma-jihva—Idhmajihva; yajïa-bähu—Yajïabähu;
mahä-véra—Mahävéra; hiraëya-retaù—Hiraëyaretä; ghåtapåñöha—Ghåtapåñöha;
savana—Savana; medhä-tithi—Medhätithi; vétihotra—Vétihotra;
kavayaù—and Kavi; iti—thus; sarve—all these; eva—certainly; agni—of the
demigod controlling fire; nämänaù—names.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
57
The ten sons of Mahäräja Priyavrata were named Ägnédhra, Idhmajihva,
Yajïabähu, Mahävéra, Hiraëyaretä, Ghåtapåñöha, Savana, Medhätithi, Vétihotra
and Kavi. These are also names of Agni, the fire-god.
TEXT 26
WTaeza& k-ivMaRhavqr" SavNa wiTa }aYa AaSaàUßR„reTaSaSTa AaTMaivÛaYaaMa>aR‚
>aavadar>Ya k*-TaPaircYaa" PaarMah&SYaMaevaé[MaMa>aJaNa( )) 26 ))
eteñäà kavir mahävéraù savana iti traya äsann ürdhva-retasas ta
ätma-vidyäyäm arbha-bhäväd ärabhya kåta-paricayäù päramahaàsyam
eväçramam abhajan.
SYNONYMS
eteñäm—of these; kaviù—Kavi; mahävéraù—Mahävéra; savanaù—Savana;
iti—thus; trayaù—three; äsan—were; ürdhva-retasaù—completely celibate;
te—they; ätma-vidyäyäm—in transcendental knowledge; arbha-bhävät—from
childhood; ärabhya—beginning; kåta-paricayäù—very well versed;
päramahaàsyam—of the highest spiritual perfection of human life;
eva—certainly; äçramam—the order; abhajan—executed.
TRANSLATION
Three among these ten—namely Kavi, Mahävéra and Savana—lived in
complete celibacy. Thus trained in brahmacäré life from the beginning of
childhood, they were very conversant with the highest perfection, known as the
paramahaàsa-äçrama.
PURPORT
The word ürdhva-retasaù in this verse is very significant. Ürdhva-retaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
58
refers to one who can control sex life and who instead of wasting semen by
discharging it, can use this most important substance accumulated in the body
to enrich the brain. One who can completely control sex life is able to work
wonderfully with his brain, especially in remembering. Thus students who
simply hear Vedic instructions once from their teacher could remember them
verbatim without needing to read books, which therefore did not exist in
former times.
Another significant word is arbha-bhävät, which means "from very
childhood." Another meaning is "from being very affectionate to children." In
other words, paramahaàsa life is dedicated for the benefit of others. Just as a
father sacrifices many things out of affection for his son, great saintly persons
sacrifice all kinds of bodily comforts for the benefit of human society. In this
connection there is a verse concerning the six Gosvämés:
tyaktvä türëam açeña-maëòala-pati-çreëéà sadä tucchavat
bhütvä déna-gaëeçakau karuëayä kaupéna-kanthäçritau
Because of their compassion for the poor fallen souls. the six Gosvämés gave up
their exalted positions as ministers and took vows as mendicants. Thus
minimizing their bodily wants as far as possible, they each accepted only a
loincloth and a begging bowl. Thus they remained in Våndävana to execute
the orders of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu by compiling and publishing various
Vaiñëava literatures.
TEXT 27
TaiSMaàu h va oPaXaMaXaql/a" ParMazRYa" Sak-l/JaqviNak-aYaavaSaSYa >aGavTaae
vaSaudevSYa >aqTaaNaa& Xar<a>aUTaSYa é[qMaÀr<aarivNdaivrTaSMar<aaivGail/Ta‚
ParMa>ai¢-YaaeGaaNau>aaveNa Pair>aaivTaaNTaôRdYaaiDaGaTae >aGaviTa SaveRza& >aUTaaNaa‚
MaaTMa>aUTae Pa[TYaGaaTMaNYaevaTMaNaSTaadaTMYaMaivXaeze<a SaMaqYau" )) 27 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
59
tasminn u ha vä upaçama-çéläù paramarñayaù sakala-jéva-nikäyäväsasya
bhagavato väsudevasya bhétänäà çaraëa-bhütasya
çrémac-caraëäravindävirata-smaraëävigalita-parama-bhakti-yogänu-bhävena
paribhävitäntar-hådayädhigate bhagavati sarveñäà bhütänäm ätma-bhüte
pratyag-ätmany evätmanas tädätmyam aviçeñeëa saméyuù.
SYNONYMS
tasmin—in that paramahaàsa-äçrama; u—certainly; ha—so celebrated;
vä—indeed; upaçama-çéläù—in the renounced order of life;
parama-åñayaù—the great sages; sakala—all; jéva—of living entities;
nikäya—in total; äväsasya—the residence; bhagavataù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; väsudevasya—Lord Väsudeva; bhétänäm—of those
afraid of material existence; çaraëa-bhütasya—the one who is the only shelter;
çrémat—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; caraëa-aravinda—the lotus
feet; avirata—constantly; smaraëa—remembering; avigalita—completely
uncontaminated; parama—supreme; bhakti-yoga—of mystic devotional
service; anubhävena—by the prowess; paribhävita—purified; antaù—within;
hådaya—the heart; adhigate—perceived; bhagavati—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; sarveñäm—of all; bhütänäm—living entities;
ätma-bhüte—situated within the body; pratyak—directly; ätmani—with the
Supreme Supersoul; eva—certainly; ätmanaù—of the self;
tädätmyam—qualitative equality; aviçeñeëa—without differences;
saméyuù—realized.
TRANSLATION
Thus situated in the renounced order from the beginning of their lives, all
three of them completely controlled the activities of their senses and thus
became great saints. They concentrated their minds always upon the lotus feet
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the resting place of the totality
of living entities and who is therefore celebrated as Väsudeva. Lord Väsudeva is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
60
the only shelter of those who are actually afraid of material existence. By
constantly thinking of His lotus feet, these three sons of Mahäräja Priyavrata
became advanced in pure devotional service. By the prowess of their devotional
service, they could directly perceive the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
is situated in everyone's heart as the Supersoul, and realize that there was
qualitatively no difference between themselves and Him.
PURPORT
The paramahaàsa stage is the topmost position in renounced life. In
sannyäsa, the renounced order, there are four stages—kuöécaka, bahüdaka,
parivräjakäcärya and paramahaàsa. According to the Vedic system, when one
accepts the renounced order, he stays outside his village in a cottage, and his
necessities, especially his food, are supplied from home. This is called the
kuöécaka stage. When a sannyäsé advances further, he no longer accepts
anything from home: instead, he collects his necessities, especially his food,
from many places. This system is called mädhukaré, which literally means "the
profession of the bumblebees." As bumblebees collect honey from many
flowers, a little from each, so a sannyäsé should beg from door to door but not
accept very much food from any particular house; he should collect a little bit
from every house. This is called the bahüdaka stage. When a sannyäsé is still
more experienced, he travels all over the world to preach the glories of Lord
Väsudeva. He is then known as parivräjakäcärya. The sannyäsé reaches the
paramahaàsa stage when he finishes his preaching work and sits down in one
place, strictly for the sake of advancing in spiritual life. An actual
paramahaàsa is one who completely controls his senses and engages in the
unalloyed service of the Lord. Therefore all three of these sons of Priyavrata,
namely Kavi, Mahävéra and Savana, were situated in the paramahaàsa stage
from the very beginning. Their senses could not disturb them, for their senses
were completely engaged in serving the Lord. Therefore the three brothers are
described in this verse as upaçama-çéläù. Upaçama means "completely subdued."
Because they completely subdued their senses, they are understood to have
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
61
been great sages and saints.
After subduing their senses, the three brothers concentrated their minds
upon the lotus feet of Väsudeva, Lord Kåñëa. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.19),
väsudevaù sarvam iti. The lotus feet of Väsudeva are everything. Lord
Väsudeva is the reservoir of all living entities. When this cosmic manifestation
is dissolved, all living entities enter the supreme body of the Lord,
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, who merges within the body of Mahä-Viñëu. Both of
these viñëu-tattvas are väsudeva-tattvas, and therefore the great sages Kavi,
Mahävéra and Savana concentrated always upon the lotus feet of Lord
Väsudeva, Kåñëa. In this way they could understand that the Supersoul within
the heart is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they could recognize
their identity with Him. The complete description of this realization is that
simply by discharging the unalloyed form of devotional service, one can realize
his self completely. The parama-bhakti-yoga mentioned in this verse means
that a living entity, by dint of unalloyed devotional service, has no other
interest than the service of the Lord, as described in Bhagavad-gétä (väsudevaù
sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]). By parama-bhakti-yoga, by elevating oneself to the highest
platform of loving service, one can automatically be relieved from the bodily
concept of life and see the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face. As
confirmed in Brahma-saàhitä:
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
yaà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
[Bs. 5.38]
An advanced devotee, who is known as a sat, or saint, can always see within
his heart the Supreme Personality of Godhead, face to face. Kåñëa,
Çyämasundara, expands Himself by His plenary portion, and thus a devotee
can always see Him within his heart.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
62
TEXT 28
ANYaSYaaMaiPa JaaYaaYaa& }aYa" Pau}aa AaSaàutaMaSTaaMaSaae rEvTa wiTa MaNvNTa‚
raiDaPaTaYa" )) 28 ))
anyasyäm api jäyäyäà trayaù puträ äsann uttamas tämaso raivata iti
manvantarädhipatayaù.
SYNONYMS
anyasyäm—other; api—also; jäyäyäm—in the wife; trayaù—three;
puträù—sons; äsan—there were; uttamaù tämasaù raivataù—Uttama, Tämasa
and Raivata; iti—thus; manu-antara—of the manvantara millennium;
adhipatayaù—rulers.
TRANSLATION
In his other wife, Mahäräja Priyavrata begot three sons, named Uttama,
Tämasa and Raivata. All of them later took charge of manvantara millenniums.
PURPORT
In every day of Brahmä there are fourteen manvantaras. The duration of
one manvantara, the lifespan of one Manu, is seventy-one yugas, and each yuga
is 4,320,000 years. Almost all the Manus selected to rule the manvantaras came
from the family of Mahäräja Priyavrata. Three of them are particularly
mentioned herein, namely Uttama, Tämasa and Raivata.
TEXT 29
WvMauPaXaMaaYaNaezu SvTaNaYaeZvQa JaGaTaqPaiTaJaRGaTaqMabuRdaNYaek-adXa Pair‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
63
vTSara<aaMaVYaahTaai%l/Pauåzk-arSaarSaM>a*TadaedR<@YauGal/aPaqi@TaMaaEvsGau<aSTaiNaTa‚
ivriMaTaDaMaRPa[iTaPa+aae bihRZMaTYaaêaNauidNaMaeDaMaaNaPa[MaaedPa[Sar<aYaaEiz<Yav]q@aPa[‚
MauizTahaSaavl/aek-åicr+veLYaaidi>a" Para>aUYaMaaNaivvek- wvaNavbuDYaMaaNa wv
MahaMaNaa bu>auJae )) 29 ))
evam upaçamäyaneñu sva-tanayeñv atha jagaté-patir jagatém arbudäny ekädaça
parivatsaräëäm
avyähatäkhila-puruña-kära-sära-sambhåta-dor-daëòa-yugaläpéòita-maurvé-guë
a-stanita-viramita-dharma-pratipakño barhiñmatyäç cänudinam
edhamäna-pramoda-prasaraëa-yauñiëya-vréòä-pramuñita-häsävaloka-rucira-kñ
vely-ädibhiù paräbhüyamäna-viveka ivänavabudhyamäna iva mahämanä
bubhuje.
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; upaçama-ayaneñu—all well qualified; sva-tanayeñu—his own sons;
atha—thereafter; jagaté-patiù—the master of the universe; jagatém—the
universe; arbudäni—arbudas (one arbuda equals 100,000,000);
ekädaça—eleven; parivatsaräëäm—of years; avyähata—without being
interrupted; akhila—universal; puruña-kära—prowess; sära—strength;
sambhåta—endowed with; doù-daëòaù—of powerful arms; yugala—by the pair;
äpéòita—being drawn; maurvé-guëa—of the bowstring; stanita—by the loud
sound; viramita—defeated; dharma—religious principles; pratipakñaù—those
who are against; barhiñmatyäù—of his wife Barhiñmaté; ca—and;
anudinam—daily; edhamäna—increasing; pramoda—pleasing intercourse;
prasaraëa—amiability; yauñiëya—feminine behavior; vréòä—by shyness;
pramuñita—held back; häsa—laughing; avaloka—glancing; rucira—pleasing;
kñveli-ädibhiù—by exchanges of loving propensities; paräbhüyamäna—being
defeated; vivekaù—his true knowledge; iva—like; anavabudhyamänaù—a less
intelligent person; iva—like; mahä-manäù—the great soul; bubhuje—ruled.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
64
TRANSLATION
After Kavi, Mahävéra and Savana were completely trained in the
paramahaàsa stage of life, Mahäräja Priyavrata ruled the universe for eleven
arbudas of years. Whenever he was determined to fix his arrow upon his
bowstring with his two powerful arms, all opponents of the regulative principles
of religious life would flee from his presence in fear of the unparalleled prowess
he displayed in ruling the universe. He greatly loved his wife Barhiñmaté, and
with the increase of days, their exchange of nuptial love also increased. By her
feminine behavior as she dressed herself, walked, got up, smiled, laughed, and
glanced about, Queen Barhiñmaté increased his energy. Thus although he was a
great soul, he appeared lost in the feminine conduct of his wife. He behaved
with her just like an ordinary man, but actually he was a great soul.
PURPORT
In this verse, the word dharma-pratipakñaù ("opponents of religious
principles") refers not to a particular faith, but to varëäçrama-dharma, the
division of society, socially and spiritually, into four varëas (brähmaëa,
kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra) and four äçramas (brahmacarya, gåhastha,
vänaprastha and sannyäsa). To maintain proper social order and help the
citizens gradually progress toward the goal of life—namely spiritual
understanding—the principles of varëäçrama-dharma must be accepted. From
this verse, Mahäräja Priyavrata appears to have been so strict in maintaining
this institution of varëäçrama-dharma that anyone neglecting it would
immediately flee from his presence as soon as the King warned him by fighting
or administering light punishment. Indeed, Mahäräja Priyavrata would not
have to fight, for simply because of his strong determination, they dared not
disobey the rules and regulations of varëäçrama-dharma. It is said that unless
human society is regulated by varëäçrama-dharma, it is no better than a bestial
society of cats and dogs. Mahäräja Priyavrata, therefore, strictly maintained
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
65
varëäçrama-dharma by his extraordinary, unparalleled prowess.
To maintain such a life of strict vigilance, one needs encouragement from
his wife. In the varëäçrama-dharma system, certain classes, such as the
brähmaëas and sannyäsés, do not need encouragement from the opposite sex.
Kñatriyas and gåhasthas, however, actually need the encouragement of their
wives in order to execute their duties. Indeed, a gåhastha or kñatriya cannot
properly execute his responsibilities without the association of his wife. Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu personally admitted that a gåhastha must live with a
wife. Kñatriyas were even allowed to have many wives to encourage them in
discharging the duties of government. The association of a good wife is
necessary in a life of karma and political affairs. To execute his duties properly,
therefore. Mahäräja Priyavrata took advantage of his good wife Barhiñmaté,
who was always very expert in pleasing her great husband by properly dressing
herself, smiling, and exhibiting her feminine bodily features. Queen
Barhiñmaté always kept Mahäräja Priyavrata very encouraged, and thus he
executed his governmental duty very properly. In this verse iva has twice been
used to indicate that Mahäräja Priyavrata acted exactly like a henpecked
husband and thereby seemed to have lost his sense of human responsibility.
Actually, however, he was fully conscious of his position as a spirit soul,
although he seemingly behaved like an acquiescent karmé husband. Mahäräja
Priyavrata thus ruled the universe for eleven arbudas of years. One arbuda
consists of 100,000,000 years, and Mahäräja Priyavrata ruled the universe for
eleven such arbudas.
TEXT 30
Yaavdv>aaSaYaiTa SauriGairMaNauPair§-aMaNa( >aGavaNaaidTYaae vSauDaaTal/MaDaeRNaEv
Pa[TaPaTYaDaeRNaavC^adYaiTa Tada ih >aGavduPaaSaNaaePaicTaaiTaPauåzPa[>aavSTadNa‚
i>aNaNdNa( SaMaJaveNa rQaeNa JYaaeiTaMaRYaeNa rJaNaqMaiPa idNa& k-irZYaaMaqiTa Saák*-‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
66
TvSTari<aMaNauPaYaR§-aMad( iÜTaqYa wv PaTa(r)" )) 30 ))
yävad avabhäsayati sura-girim anuparikräman bhagavän ädityo vasudhä-talam
ardhenaiva pratapaty ardhenävacchädayati tadä hi
bhagavad-upäsanopacitäti-puruña-prabhävas tad anabhinandan samajavena
rathena jyotirmayena rajaném api dinaà kariñyäméti sapta-kåt vastaraëim
anuparyakrämad dvitéya iva pataìgaù.
SYNONYMS
yävat—so long; avabhäsayati—illuminates; sura-girim—the Sumeru Hill;
anuparikräman—by circumambulating; bhagavän—the most powerful;
ädityaù—sun-god; vasudhä-talam—the lower planetary system; ardhena—by
half; eva—certainly; pratapati—makes dazzling; ardhena—by half;
avacchädayati—covers with darkness; tadä—at that time; hi—certainly;
bhagavat-upäsanä—by worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
upacita—by satisfying Him perfectly; ati-puruña—superhuman;
prabhävaù—influence; tat—that; anabhinandan—without appreciating;
samajavena—by equally powerful; rathena—on a chariot;
jyotiù-mayena—dazzling; rajaném—night; api—also; dinam—day; kariñyämi—I
shall make it; iti—thus; sapta-kåt—seven times; vastaraëim—exactly following
the orbit of the sun; anuparyakrämat—circumambulated; dvitéyaù—second;
iva—like; pataìgaù—sun.
TRANSLATION
While so excellently ruling the universe, King Priyavrata once became
dissatisfied with the circumambulation of the most powerful sun-god. Encircling
Sumeru Hill on his chariot, the sun-god illuminates all the surrounding
planetary systems. However, when the sun is on the northern side of the hill,
the south receives less light, and when the sun is in the south, the north
receives less. King Priyavrata disliked this situation and therefore decided to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
67
make daylight in the part of the universe where there was night. He followed
the orbit of the sun-god on a brilliant chariot and thus fulfilled his desire. He
could perform such wonderful activities because of the power he had achieved
by worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
There is a Bengali saying which describes that someone is so powerful that
he can make the night day and the day night. That saying is current because of
the prowess of Priyavrata. His activities demonstrate how powerful he became
by worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Kåñëa is known as
Yogeçvara, the master of all mystic powers. In Bhagavad-gétä (18.78) it is said
wherever there is the master of all mystic powers (yatra yogeçvaraù kåñëaù),
victory, fortune and all other opulences are present. Devotional service is so
powerful. When a devotee achieves what he wants to accomplish, it is not by
his own mystic power but by the grace of the master of mystic power. Lord
Kåñëa: by His grace, a devotee can accomplish wonderful things unimaginable
even to the most powerful scientist.
From the description in this verse, it appears that the sun moves. According
to modern astronomers, the sun is fixed in one place, surrounded by the solar
system, but here we find that the sun is not stationary: it is rotating in a
prescribed orbit. This fact is corroborated by Brahma-saàhitä (5.52).
Yasyäjïayä bhramati saàbhåta-käla-cakraù: the sun is rotating in its fixed orbit
in accordance with the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
According to Jyotir Veda, the science of astronomy in the Vedic literature, the
sun moves for six months on the northern side of the Sumeru Hill and for six
months on the southern side. We have practical experience on this planet that
when there is summer in the north there is winter in the south and vice versa.
Modern materialistic scientists sometimes present themselves as knowing all
the ingredients of the sun, yet they are unable to offer a second sun like
Mahäräja Priyavrata's.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
68
Although Mahäräja Priyavrata devised a very powerful chariot as brilliant
as the sun, he had no desire to compete with the sun-god, for a Vaiñëava never
wants to supersede another Vaiñëava. His purpose was to give abundant
benefits in material existence. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks
that in the months of April and May the rays of Mahäräja Priyavrata's brilliant
sun were as pleasing as the rays of the moon, and in October and November,
both morning and evening, that sun provided more warmth than the sunshine.
In short, Mahäräja Priyavrata was extremely powerful, and his actions
extended his power in all directions.
TEXT 31
Yae va o h Tad]Qacr<aNaeiMak*-TaPair%aTaaSTae Saá iSaNDav AaSaNa( YaTa Wv
k*-Taa" Saá >auvae ÜqPaa" )) 31 ))
ye vä u ha tad-ratha-caraëa-nemi-kåta-parikhätäs te sapta sindhava äsan yata
eva kåtäù sapta bhuvo dvépäù.
SYNONYMS
ye—that; vä u ha—certainly; tat-ratha—of his chariot; caraëa—of the wheels;
nemi—by the rims; kåta—made; parikhätäù—trenches; te—those;
sapta—seven; sindhavaù—oceans; äsan—became; yataù—because of which;
eva—certainly; kåtäù—were made; sapta—seven; bhuvaù—of the
Bhü-maëòala; dvépäù—islands.
TRANSLATION
When Priyavrata drove his chariot behind the sun, the rims of his chariot
wheels created impressions that later became seven oceans, dividing the
planetary system known as Bhü-maëòala into seven islands.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
69
PURPORT
Sometimes the planets in outer space are called islands. We have
experience of various types of islands in the ocean, and similarly the various
planets, divided into fourteen lokas, are islands in the ocean of space. As
Priyavrata drove his chariot behind the sun, he created seven different types
of oceans and planetary systems, which altogether are known as Bhü-maëòala,
or Bhüloka. In the Gäyatré mantra, we chant, oà bhür bhuvaù svaù tat savitur
vareëyam. Above the Bhüloka planetary system is Bhuvarloka, and above that
is Svargaloka, the heavenly planetary system. All these planetary systems are
controlled by Savitä, the sun-god. By chanting the Gäyatré mantra just after
rising early in the morning, one worships the sun-god.
TEXT 32
JaMbUâ+aXaaLMail/ku-Xa§-aEÄXaak-PauZk-rSa&jaSTaeza& PairMaa<a& PaUvRSMaaTPaUvRSMaadutar
otarae YaQaaSa&:Ya& iÜGau<aMaaNaeNa bih" SaMaNTaTa oPaoeáa" )) 32 ))
jambü-plakña-çälmali-kuça-krauïca-çäka-puñkara-saàjïäs teñäà parimäëaà
pürvasmät pürvasmäd uttara uttaro yathä-saìkhyaà dvi-guëa-mänena bahiù
samantata upakÿptäù.
SYNONYMS
jambü—Jambü; plakña—Plakña; çälmali—Çälmali; kuça—Kuça;
krauïca—Krauïca; çäka—Çäka; puñkara—Puñkara; saàjïäù—known as;
teñäm—of them; parimäëam—measurement; pürvasmät pürvasmät—from the
former; uttaraù uttaraù—the following; yathä—according to;
saìkhyam—number; dvi-guëa—twice as much; mänena—with a measure;
bahiù—outside; samantataù—all around; upakÿptäù—produced.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
70
TRANSLATION
The names of the islands are Jambü, Plakña, Çälmali, Kuça, Krauïca, Çäka
and Puñkara. Each island is twice as large as the one preceding it, and each is
surrounded by a liquid substance, beyond which is the next island.
PURPORT
The ocean in each planetary system has a different type of liquid. How they
are situated is explained in the next verse.
TEXT 33
+aaraede+aurSaaedSauraedga*Taaed+aqraeddiDaMa<@aedXauÖaeda" Saá Jal/DaYa" Saá
ÜqPaPair%a wva>YaNTarÜqPaSaMaaNaa WkE-k-XYaeNa YaQaaNauPaUv| SaáSviPa bihÜs„Paezu
Pa*Qak(-PairTa oPak-iLPaTaaSTaezu JaMBvaidzu bihRZMaTaqPaiTarNauv]TaaNaaTMaJaaNaaGanq‚
Da]eDMaiJaûYajbahuihr<YareTaaega*TaPa*ïMaeDaaiTaiQavqiTahae}aSa&jaNa( YaQaa Sa&:YaeNaEkE-‚
k-iSMaàek-MaevaiDaPaiTa& ivdDae )) 33 ))
kñärodekñu-rasoda-suroda-ghåtoda-kñéroda-dadhi-maëòoda-çuddhodäù sapta
jaladhayaù sapta dvépa-parikhä iväbhyantara-dvépa-samänä ekaikaçyena
yathänupürvaà saptasv api bahir dvépeñu påthak parita upakalpitäs teñu
jambv-ädiñu barhiñmaté-patir anuvratänätmajän
ägnédhredhmajihva-yajïabähu-hiraëyareto-ghåtapåñöha-medhätithi-vétihotra-sa
àjïän yathä-saìkhyenaikaikasminn ekam evädhi-patià vidadhe.
SYNONYMS
kñära—salt; uda—water; ikñu-rasa—the liquid extract from sugarcane;
uda—water; surä—liquor; uda—water; ghåta—clarified butter; uda—water;
kñéra—milk; uda—water; dadhi-maëòa—emulsified yogurt; uda—water;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
71
çuddha-udäù—and drinking water; sapta—seven; jala-dhayaù—oceans;
sapta—seven; dvépa—islands; parikhäù—trenches; iva—like;
abhyantara—internal; dvépa—islands; samänäù—equal to; eka-ekaçyena—one
after another; yathä-anupürvam—in chronological order; saptasu—seven;
api—although; bahiù—outside; dvépeñu—in islands; påthak—separate;
paritaù—all around; upakalpitäù—situated; teñu—within them;
jambü-ädiñu—beginning with Jambü; barhiñmaté—of Barhiñmaté; patiù—the
husband; anuvratän—who were actually followers of the father's principles;
ätma-jän—sons;
ägnédhra-idhmajihva-yajïabähu-hiraëyaretaù-ghåtapåñöha-medhätithi-vétihotra-sa
àjïän—named Ägnéòhra, Idhmajihva, Yajïabähu, Hiraëyaretä, Ghåtapåñöha,
Medhätithi and Vétihotra; yathä-saìkhyena—by the same number;
eka-ekasmin—in each island; ekam—one; eva—certainly; adhi-patim—king;
vidadhe—he made.
TRANSLATION
The seven oceans respectively contain salt water, sugarcane juice, liquor,
clarified butter, milk, emulsified yogurt, and sweet drinking water. All the
islands are completely surrounded by these oceans, and each ocean is equal in
breadth to the island it surrounds. Mahäräja Priyavrata, the husband of Queen
Barhiñmaté, gave sovereignty over these islands to his respective sons, namely
Ägnédhra, Idhmajihva, Yajïabähu, Hiraëyaretä, Ghåtapåñöha, Medhätithi and
Vétihotra. Thus they all became kings by the order of their father.
PURPORT
It is to be understood that all the dvépas, or islands, are surrounded by
different types of oceans, and it is said herein that the breadth of each ocean is
the same as that of the island it surrounds. The length of the oceans, however,
cannot equal the length of the islands. According to Véraräghava Äcärya, the
breadth of the first island is 100,000 yojanas. One yojana equals eight miles,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
72
and therefore the breadth of the first island is calculated to be 800,000 miles.
The water surrounding it must have the same breadth, but its length must be
different.
TEXT 34
duihTar& caeJaRSvTaq& NaaMaaeXaNaSae Pa[aYaC^ÛSYaaMaaSaqd( devYaaNaq NaaMa k-a‚
VYaSauTaa )) 34 ))
duhitaraà corjasvatéà nämoçanase präyacchad yasyäm äséd devayäné näma
kävya-sutä.
SYNONYMS
duhitaram—the daughter; ca—also; ürjasvatém—Ürjasvaté; näma—named;
uçanase—unto the great sage Uçanä (Çukräcärya); präyacchat—he gave;
yasyäm—unto whom; äsét—there was; devayäné—Devayäné; näma—named;
kävya-sutä—the daughter of Çukräcärya.
TRANSLATION
King Priyavrata then gave his daughter, Ürjasvaté, in marriage to
Çukräcärya, who begot in her a daughter named Devayäné.
TEXT 35
NaEv&ivDa" Pauåzk-ar oå§-MaSYa
Pau&Saa& Tadx(ig]arJaSaa iJaTaz@(Gau<aaNaaMa( )
ic}a& ivdUrivGaTa" Sak*-daddqTa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
73
YaàaMaDaeYaMaDauNaa Sa JahaiTa bNDaMa( )) 35 ))
naivaà-vidhaù puruña-kära urukramasya
puàsäà tad-aìghri-rajasä jita-ñaò-guëänäm
citraà vidüra-vigataù sakåd ädadéta
yan-nämadheyam adhunä sa jahäti bandham
SYNONYMS
na—not; evam-vidhaù—like that; puruña-käraù—personal influence;
uru-kramasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puàsäm—of the
devotees; tat-aìghri—of His lotus feet; rajasä—by the dust;
jita-ñaö-guëänäm—who have conquered the influence of the six kinds of
material whips; citram—wonderful; vidüra-vigataù—the fifth-grade person, or
the untouchable; sakåt—only once; ädadéta—if he utters; yat—whose;
nämadheyam—holy name; adhunä—immediately; saù—he; jahäti—gives up;
bandham—material bondage.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, a devotee who has taken shelter of the dust from the lotus
feet of the Lord can transcend the influence of the six material whips—namely
hunger, thirst, lamentation, illusion, old age and death—and he can conquer
the mind and five senses. However, this is not very wonderful for a pure
devotee of the Lord because even a person beyond the jurisdiction of the four
castes—in other words, an untouchable—is immediately relieved of bondage to
material existence if he utters the holy name of the Lord even once.
PURPORT
Çukadeva Gosvämé was speaking to Mahäräja Parékñit about the activities of
King Priyavrata, and since the King might have had doubts about these
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
74
wonderful, uncommon activities, Çukadeva Gosvämé reassured him. "My dear
King," he said, "don't be doubtful about the wonderful activities of Priyavrata.
For a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, everything is possible
because the Lord is also known as Urukrama." Urukrama is a name for Lord
Vämanadeva, who performed the wonderful act of occupying the three worlds
with three footsteps. Lord Vämanadeva requested three paces of land from
Mahäräja Bali, and when Mahäräja Bali agreed to grant them, the Lord
immediately covered the entire world with two footsteps, and for His third step
He placed His foot upon Bali Mahäräja's head. Çré Jayadeva Gosvämé says:
chalayasi vikramaëe balim adbhuta-vämana
pada-nakha-néra-janita-jana-pävana
keçava dhåta-vamäna-rüpa jaya jagadéça hare
"All glories to Lord Keçava, who assumed the form of a dwarf. O Lord of the
universe, who takes away everything inauspicious for the devotees! O
wonderful Vämanadeva! You tricked the great demon Bali Mahäräja by Your
steps. The water that touched the nails of Your lotus feet when You pierced
through the covering of the universe purifies all living entities in the form of
the River Ganges."
Since the Supreme Lord is all-powerful, He can do things that seem
wonderful for a common man. Similarly, a devotee who has taken shelter at
the lotus feet of the Lord can also do wonderful things unimaginable to a
common man, by the grace of the dust of those lotus feet. Caitanya
Mahäprabhu therefore teaches us to take shelter of the Lord's lotus feet:
ayi nanda-tanuja kiìkaraà
patitaà mäà viñame bhaväàbudhau
kåpayä tava päda-paìkajasthita-
dhülé-sadåçaà vicintaya
[Cc. Antya 20.32, Çikñäñöaka 5]
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
75
"O son of Nanda Mahäräja, I am Your eternal servant, yet somehow or other I
have fallen into the ocean of birth and death. Please pick me up from this
ocean of death and place me as one of the atoms of Your lotus feet." Lord
Caitanya teaches us to come in touch with the dust of the Lord's lotus feet, for
then there will undoubtedly be all success.
Because of the material body, every living entity in material existence is
always disturbed by sad-guëa, six whips—hunger, thirst, lamentation, illusion,
invalidity and death. Furthermore, another sad-guëa are the mind and five
sense organs. Not to speak of a sanctified devotee, even a caëòäla, an outcaste,
who is untouchable, is immediately freed from material bondage if he utters
the holy name of the Lord even once. Sometimes caste brähmaëas argue that
unless one changes his body he cannot be accepted as a brähmaëa, for since
the present body is obtained as a result of past actions, one who has in the past
acted as a brähmaëa takes birth in a brähmaëa family. Therefore, they
contend, without such a brahminical body, one cannot be accepted as a
brähmaëa. Herein it is said, however, that even vidüra-vigata, a caëòäla—a
fifth-class untouchable—is freed if he utters the holy name even once. Being
freed means that he immediately changes his body. Sanätana Gosvämé
confirms this:
yathä käïcanatäà yäti
käàsyaà rasa-vidhänataù
tathä dékñä-vidhänena
dvijatvaà jäyate nåëäm
When a person, even though a caëòäla, is initiated by a pure devotee into
chanting the holy name of the Lord, his body changes as he follows the
instructions of the spiritual master. Although one cannot see how his body has
changed, we must accept, on the grounds of the authoritative statements of the
çästras, that he changes his body. This is to be understood without arguments.
This verse clearly says, sa jahäti bandham: "He gives up his material bondage."
The body is a symbolic representation of material bondage according to one's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
76
karma. Although sometimes we cannot see the gross body changing, chanting
the holy name of the Supreme Lord immediately changes the subtle body, and
because the subtle body changes, the living entity is immediately freed from
material bondage. After all, changes of the gross body are conducted by the
subtle body. After the destruction of the gross body, the subtle body takes the
living entity from his present gross body to another. In the subtle body, the
mind is predominant, and therefore if one's mind is always absorbed in
remembering the activities or the lotus feet of the Lord, he is to be understood
to have already changed his present body and become purified. Therefore it is
irrefutable that a caëòäla, or any fallen or lowborn person, can become a
brähmaëa simply by the method of bona fide initiation.
TEXT 36
Sa WvMaPairiMaTabl/Para§-Ma Wk-da Tau devizRcr<aaNauXaYaNaaNauPaiTaTaGau<a‚
ivSaGaRSa&SaGaeR<aaiNav*RTaiMavaTMaaNa& MaNYaMaaNa AaTMaiNaveRd wdMaah )) 36 ))
sa evam aparimita-bala-paräkrama ekadä tu
devarñi-caraëänuçayanänu-patita-guëa-visarga-saàsargeëänirvåtam
ivätmänaà manyamäna ätma-nirveda idam äha.
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Mahäräja Priyavrata); evam—thus; aparimita—unparalleled;
bala—strength; paräkramaù—whose influence; ekadä—once upon a time;
tu—then; deva-åñi—of the great saint Närada;
caraëa-anuçayana—surrendering unto the lotus feet; anu—thereafter;
patita—fallen down; guëa-visarga—with material affairs (created by the three
material modes of nature); saàsargeëa—by connection; anirvåtam—not
satisfied; iva—like; ätmänam—himself; manyamänaù—thinking like that;
ätma—self; nirvedaù—possessing renunciation; idam—this; äha—said.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
77
TRANSLATION
While enjoying his material opulences with full strength and influence,
Mahäräja Priyavrata once began to consider that although he had fully
surrendered to the great saint Närada and was actually on the path of Kåñëa
consciousness, he had somehow become again entangled in material activities.
Thus his mind now became restless, and he began to speak in a spirit of
renunciation.
PURPORT
In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.17) it is said:
tyaktvä sva-dharmaà caraëämbujaà harer
bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva väbhadram abhüd amuñya kià
ko värtha äpto 'bhajatäà sva-dharmataù
"One who has forsaken his material occupations to engage in the devotional
service of the Lord may sometimes fall down while in an immature stage, yet
there is no danger of his being unsuccessful. On the other hand, a nondevotee,
though fully engaged in occupational duties, does not gain anything." If one
somehow or other comes to the shelter of a great Vaiñëava, takes to Kåñëa
consciousness because of sentiment or realization, but in course of time falls
down because of immature understanding, he is not actually fallen, for his
having engaged in Kåñëa consciousness is a permanent asset. If one falls down,
therefore, his progress might be checked for a certain time, but it will again
become manifest at an opportune moment. Although Priyavrata Mahäräja was
serving according to the instructions of Närada Muni meant for going back
home, back to Godhead, he returned to material affairs at the request of his
father. In due course of time, however, his consciousness for serving Kåñëa
reawakened by the grace of his spiritual master, Närada.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
78
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (6.41), çucénäà çrématäà gehe yoga-bhrañöo
'bhijäyate. One who falls down from the process of bhakti-yoga is again offered
the opulence of the demigods, and after enjoying such material opulence, he is
given a chance to take birth in a noble family of a pure brähmaëa, or in a rich
family, to be given the chance to revive his Kåñëa consciousness. This actually
happened in the life of Priyavrata: he is a most glorious example of this truth.
In due course of time, he no longer wanted to enjoy his material opulences and
his wife, kingdom and sons; instead, he wanted to renounce them all.
Therefore, after having described the material opulences of Mahäräja
Priyavrata, Çukadeva Gosvämé, in this verse, describes his tendency for
renunciation.
The words devarñi-caraëänuçayana indicate that Mahäräja Priyavrata,
having fully surrendered to the great sage Devarñi Närada, was strictly
following all the devotional processes and regulative principles under his
direction. In regard to strictly following the regulative principles, Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says; daëòavat-praëämäs tän anupatitaù. By
immediately offering obeisances (daëòavat) unto the spiritual master and by
strictly following his directions, the student becomes advanced. Mahäräja
Priyavrata was doing all these things regularly.
As long as one is in the material world, he has to be under the influence of
the modes of material nature (guëa-visarga). It is not that Mahäräja Priyavrata
was freed from material influence because he possessed all material opulences.
In this material world, both the very poor man and the very rich man are
under material influences, for both wealth and poverty are creations of the
modes of material nature. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (3.27), prakåteù
kriyamäëäni guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù. According to the modes of material
nature we acquire, the material nature gives us facility for material enjoyment.
TEXT 37
Ahae ASaaßNauiïTa& Yadi>aiNaveiXaTaae_hiMaiNd]YaErivÛaricTaivzMaivzYaaNDakU-Pae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
79
Tadl/Mal/MaMauZYaa viNaTaaYaa ivNaaedMa*Ga& Maa& iDaiGDaiGaiTa GahRYaa& ck-ar )) 37 ))
aho asädhv anuñöhitaà yad abhiniveçito 'ham indriyair
avidyä-racita-viñama-viñayändha-küpe tad alam alam amuñyä vanitäyä
vinoda-mågaà mäà dhig dhig iti garhayäà cakära.
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; asädhu—not good; anuñöhitam—executed; yat—because;
abhiniveçitaù—being completely absorbed; aham—I; indriyaiù—for sense
gratification; avidyä—by nescience; racita—made; viñama—causing distress;
viñaya—sense gratification; andha-küpe—in the dark well; tat—that;
alam—insignificant; alam—of no importance; amuñyäù—of that;
vanitäyäù—wife; vinoda-mågam—just like a dancing monkey; mäm—unto me;
dhik—all condemnation; dhik—all condemnation; iti—thus;
garhayäm—criticism; cakära—he did.
TRANSLATION
The King thus began criticizing himself: Alas, how condemned I have
become because of my sense gratification! I have now fallen into material
enjoyment, which is exactly like a covered well. I have had enough! I am not
going to enjoy any more. Just see how I have become like a dancing monkey in
the hands of my wife. Because of this, I am condemned.
PURPORT
How condemned is the advancement of material knowledge can be
understood from the behavior of Mahäräja Priyavrata. He performed such
wonderful acts as creating another sun, which shined during the night, and
creating a chariot so great that its wheels formed vast oceans. These activities
are so great that modern scientists cannot even imagine how such things can
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
80
be done. Mahäräja Priyavrata acted very wonderfully in the material field of
activities, but because he was dealing in sense gratification—ruling his
kingdom and dancing to the indications of his beautiful wife—he personally
condemned himself. When we think about this example of Mahäräja
Priyavrata, we can just consider how degraded is the modern civilization of
materialistic advancement. Modern so-called scientists and other materialists
are very satisfied because they can construct great bridges, roads and machines,
but such activities are nothing comparable to those of Mahäräja Priyavrata. If
Mahäräja Priyavrata could condemn himself in spite of his wonderful
activities, how condemned we are in our so-called advancement of material
civilization. We can conclude that such advancement has nothing to do with
the problems of the living entity entangled within this material world.
Unfortunately, modern man does not understand his entanglement and how
condemned he is, nor does he know what kind of body he is going to have in
the next life. From a spiritual point of view, a great kingdom, beautiful wife
and wonderful material activities are all impediments to spiritual
advancement. Mahäräja Priyavrata had served the great sage Närada sincerely.
Therefore even though he had accepted material opulences, he could not be
deviated from his own task. He again became Kåñëa conscious. As confirmed
in Bhagavad-gétä:
nehäbhikrama-näço 'sti
pratyaväyo na vidyate
svalpam apy asya dharmasya
träyate mahato bhayät
"In devotional service there is no loss or diminution, and even a small service
rendered in devotional life is sufficient to save one from the greatest danger."
(Bg. 2.40) Such renunciation as Mahäräja Priyavrata's is possible only by the
grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Generally when people are
powerful or when they have a beautiful wife, a beautiful home and material
popularity, they become more and more entangled. Priyavrata Mahäräja,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
81
however, having been completely trained by the great sage Närada, revived his
Kåñëa consciousness in spite of all impediments.
TEXT 38
PardevTaaPa[SaadaiDaGaTaaTMaPa[TYavMaXaeRNaaNauPa[v*tae>Ya" Pau}ae>Ya wMaa& YaQaadaYa& iv>a‚
JYa >au¢->aaeGaa& c Maihzq& Ma*Tak-iMav SahMahaiv>aUiTaMaPahaYa SvYa& iNaihTaiNaveRdae
ôid Ga*hqTahirivharaNau>aavae >aGavTaae NaardSYa Padvq& PauNarevaNauSaSaar )) 38 ))
para-devatä-prasädädhigatätma-pratyavamarçenänupravåttebhyaù putrebhya
imäà yathä-däyaà vibhajya bhukta-bhogäà ca mahiñéà måtakam iva saha
mahä-vibhütim apahäya svayaà nihita-nirvedo hådi gåhéta-hari-vihäränubhävo
bhagavato näradasya padavéà punar evänusasära.
SYNONYMS
para-devatä—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prasäda—by the mercy;
adhigata—obtained; ätma-pratyavamarçena—by self-realization;
anupravåttebhyaù—who exactly follow his path; putrebhyaù—unto his sons;
imäm—this earth; yathä-däyam—exactly according to the inheritance;
vibhajya—dividing; bhukta-bhogäm—whom he enjoyed in so many ways;
ca—also; mahiñém—the Queen; måtakam iva—exactly like a dead body;
saha—with; mahä-vibhütim—great opulence; apahäya—giving up;
svayam—himself; nihita—perfectly taken to; nirvedaù—renunciation;
hådi—in the heart; gåhéta—accepted; hari—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; vihära—pastimes; anubhävaù—in such an attitude; bhagavataù—of
the great saintly person; näradasya—of Saint Närada; padavém—position;
punaù—again; eva—certainly; anusasära—began to follow.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
82
By the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mahäräja Priyavrata
reawakened to his senses. He divided all his earthly possessions among his
obedient sons. He gave up everything, including his wife, with whom he had
enjoyed so much sense gratification, and his great and opulent kingdom, and he
completely renounced all attachment. His heart, having been cleansed, became a
place of pastimes for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus he was able to
return to the path of Kåñëa consciousness, spiritual life, and resume the
position he had attained by the grace of the great saint Närada.
PURPORT
As enunciated by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu in His Çikñäñöaka,
ceto-darpaëa-märjanaà bhava-mahä-dävägni-nirväpaëam: [Cc. Antya 20.12] as
soon as one's heart is cleansed, the blazing fire of material existence is
immediately extinguished. Our hearts are meant for the pastimes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This means that one should be fully Kåñëa
conscious, thinking of Kåñëa, as He Himself advises (man-manä bhava
mad-bhakto mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]). This should be our only
business. One whose heart is not clean cannot think of the transcendental
pastimes of the Supreme Lord, but if one can once again place the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in his heart, he very easily becomes qualified to
renounce material attachment. Mäyävädé philosophers, yogés and jïänés try to
give up this material world simply by saying, brahma satyaà jagan mithyä:
"This world is false. There is no use of it. Let us take to Brahman." Such
theoretical knowledge will not help us. If we believe that Brahman is the real
truth, we have to place within our hearts the lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa, as
Mahäräja Ambaréña did (sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]). One
has to fix the lotus feet of the Lord within his heart. Then he gets the strength
to be freed from material entanglement.
Mahäräja Priyavrata was able to give up his opulent kingdom, and he also
gave up the association of his beautiful wife as if she were a dead body.
However beautiful one's wife and however attractive her bodily features, one is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
83
no longer interested in her when her body is dead. We praise a beautiful
woman for her body, but that same body, when bereft of a spirit soul, is no
longer interesting to any lusty man. Mahäräja Priyavrata was so strong, by the
grace of the Lord, that even though his beautiful wife was alive, he could give
up her association exactly like one who is forced to give up the association of a
dead wife. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu said:
na dhanaà na janaà na sundaréà
kavitäà vä jagadéça kämaye
mama janmani janmanéçvare
bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi
[Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4]
"O almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor do I desire
beautiful women, nor do I want any number of followers. I only want Your
causeless devotional service birth after birth." For one who desires to advance
in spiritual life, attachment to material opulence and attachment to a beautiful
wile are two great impediments. Such attachments are condemned even more
than suicide. Therefore anyone desiring to cross beyond material nescience
must, by the grace of Kåñëa, be freed from attachment to women and money.
When Mahäräja Priyavrata became completely free from these attachments,
he could again peacefully follow the principles instructed by the great sage
Närada.
TEXT 39
TaSYa h va WTae ëaek-a"ƒƒ
iPa[Yav]Tak*-Ta& k-MaR k-ae Nau ku-YaaRiÜNaeìrMa( )
Yaae NaeiMaiNaMNaErk-raeC^aYaa& ganNa( Saá vairDaqNa( )) 39 ))
tasya ha vä ete çlokäù—
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
84
priyavrata-kåtaà karma
ko nu kuryäd vineçvaram
yo nemi-nimnair akaroc
chäyäà ghnan sapta väridhén
SYNONYMS
tasya—his; ha vä—certainly; ete—all these; çlokäù—verses; priyavrata—by
King Priyavrata; kåtam—done; karma—activities; kaù—who; nu—then;
kuryät—can execute; vinä—without; éçvaram—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; yaù—one who; nemi—of the rim of the wheels of his chariot;
nimnaiù—by the depressions; akarot—made; chäyäm—darkness;
ghnan—dissipating; sapta—seven; väridhén—oceans.
TRANSLATION
There are many famous verses regarding Mahäräja Priyavrata's activities:
"No one but the Supreme Personality of Godhead could do what Mahäräja
Priyavrata has done. Mahäräja Priyavrata dissipated the darkness of night, and
with the rims of his great chariot, he excavated seven oceans."
PURPORT
There are many excellent verses, famous all over the world, concerning the
activities of Mahäräja Priyavrata. He is so celebrated that his activities are
compared to those of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sometimes a
sincere servant and devotee of the Lord is also called bhagavän. Çré Närada is
called bhagavän, and Lord Çiva and Vyäsadeva are also sometimes called
bhagavän. This designation, bhagavän, is sometimes conferred upon a pure
devotee by the grace of the Lord so that he will be very highly esteemed.
Mahäräja Priyavrata was such a devotee.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
85
TEXT 40
>aUSa&SQaaNa& k*-Ta& YaeNa SairiÓirvNaaidi>a" )
SaqMaa c >aUTaiNav*RTYaE ÜqPae ÜqPae iv>aaGaXa" )) 40 ))
bhü-saàsthänaà kåtaà yena
sarid-giri-vanädibhiù
sémä ca bhüta-nirvåtyai
dvépe dvépe vibhägaçaù
SYNONYMS
bhü-saàsthänam—the situation of the earth; kåtam—done; yena—by whom;
sarit—by rivers; giri—by hills and mountains; vana-ädibhiù—by forests and so
on; sémä—boundaries; ca—also; bhüta—of different nations; nirvåtyai—to
stop fighting; dvépe dvépe—on the various islands; vibhägaçaù—separately.
TRANSLATION
"To stop the quarreling among different peoples, Mahäräja Priyavrata
marked boundaries at rivers and at the edges of mountains and forests so that
no one would trespass upon another's property."
PURPORT
The example set by Mahäräja Priyavrata in marking off different states is
still followed. As indicated here, different classes of men are destined to live in
different areas, and therefore the boundaries of various tracts of land, which
are described here as islands, should be defined by different rivers, forests and
hills. This is also mentioned in relation to Mahäräja Påthu, who was born from
the dead body of his father by the manipulation of great sages. Mahäräja
Påthu's father was very sinful, and therefore a black man called Niñäda was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
86
first born from his dead body. The Naiñäda race was given a place in the forest
because by nature they are thieves and rogues. As animals are given places in
various forests and hills, men who are like animals are also destined to live
there. One cannot be promoted to civilized life unless one comes to Kåñëa
consciousness, for by nature one is destined to live in a particular situation
according to one's karma and association with the modes of nature. If men
want to live in harmony and peace, they must take to Kåñëa consciousness, for
they cannot achieve the highest standard while absorbed in the bodily concept
of life. Mahäräja Priyavrata divided the surface of the globe into different
islands so that each class of men would live peacefully and not clash with the
others. The modern idea of nationhood has gradually developed from the
divisions made by Mahäräja Priyavrata.
TEXT 41
>aaEMa& idVYa& MaaNauz& c MaihTv& k-MaRYaaeGaJaMa( )
Yaê§e- iNarYaaEPaMYa& PauåzaNauJaNaiPa[Ya" )) 41 ))
bhaumaà divyaà mänuñaà ca
mahitvaà karma-yogajam
yaç cakre nirayaupamyaà
puruñänujana-priyaù
SYNONYMS
bhaumam—of the lower planets; divyam—heavenly; mänuñam—of human
beings; ca—also; mahitvam—all opulences; karma—by fruitive activities;
yoga—by mystic power; jam—born; yaù—one who; cakre—did; niraya—with
hell; aupamyam—comparison or equality; puruña—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; anujana—to the devotee; priyaù—most dear.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
87
TRANSLATION
"As a great follower and devotee of the sage Närada, Mahäräja Priyavrata
considered hellish the opulences he had achieved by dint of fruitive activities
and mystic power, whether in the lower or heavenly planetary systems or in
human society."
PURPORT
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has said that the position of a devotee is so
superexcellent that a devotee does not consider any material opulence worth
having. There are different types of opulences on earth, in the heavenly
planets and even in the lower planetary system, known as Pätäla. A devotee,
however, knows that they are all material, and consequently he is not at all
interested in them. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, paraà dåñövä nivartate [Bg.
9.59]. Sometimes yogés and jïänés voluntarily give up all material opulences to
practice their system of liberation and taste spiritual bliss. However, they
frequently fall down because artificial renunciation of material opulences
cannot endure. One must have a superior taste in spiritual life; then he can
give up material opulence. Mahäräja Priyavrata had already tasted spiritual
bliss, and therefore he had no interest in any of the material achievements
available in the lower, higher or middle planetary systems.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Fifth Canto, First Chapter, of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Activities of Mahäräja Priyavrata."
2. The Activities of Mahäräja Ägnédhra
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
88
In this chapter, the character of Mahäräja Ägnédhra is described. When
Mahäräja Priyavrata went off for spiritual realization, his son Ägnédhra
became the ruler of Jambüdvépa, in accordance with Mahäräja Priyavrata's
instructions, and maintained its residents with the same affection a father
feels for his sons. Once Mahäräja Ägnédhra desired to have a son, and
therefore he entered a cave of Mandara Mountain to practice austerity.
Understanding his desire, Lord Brahmä sent a celestial girl named Pürvacitti
to Ägnédhra's hermitage. After dressing herself very attractively, she presented
herself before him with various feminine movements, and Ägnédhra was
naturally attracted to her. The girl's actions, expressions, smile, sweet words
and moving eyes were fascinating to him. Ägnédhra was expert in flattery.
Thus he attracted the celestial girl, who was pleased to accept him as her
husband because of his mellifluous words. She enjoyed royal happiness with
Ägnédhra for many years before returning to her abode in the heavenly
planets. In her womb Ägnédhra begot nine sons-Näbhi, Kiàpuruña, Harivarña,
Ilävåta, Ramyaka, Hiraëmaya, Kuru, Bhadräçva and Ketumäla. He gave them
nine islands with names corresponding to theirs. Ägnédhra, however, his
senses unsatisfied, was always thinking of his celestial wife, and therefore in
his next life he was born in her celestial planet. After the death of Ägnédhra,
his nine sons married nine daughters of Meru named Merudevé, Pratirüpä,
Ugradaàñöré, Latä, Ramyä, Çyämä, Näré, Bhadrä and Devavéti.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
Wv& iPaTair SaMPa[v*tae TadNauXaaSaNae vTaRMaaNa AaGanqDa]ae JaMbUÜqPaaEk-Sa" Pa[Jaa
AaErSavÖMaaRve+aMaa<a" PaYaRGaaePaaYaTa( )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
89
evaà pitari sampravåtte tad-anuçäsane vartamäna ägnédhro jambüdvépaukasaù
prajä aurasavad dharmävekñamäëaù paryagopäyat.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé; uväca—said; evam—thus; pitari—when his
father; sampravåtte—took to the path of liberation; tat-anuçäsane—according
to his order; vartamänaù—situated; ägnédhraù—King Ägnédhra;
jambü-dvépa-okasaù—the inhabitants of Jambüdvépa; prajäù—citizens;
aurasa-vat—as if they were his sons; dharma—religious principles;
avekñamäëaù—strictly observing; paryagopäyat—completely protected.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After his father, Mahäräja Priyavrata,
departed to follow the path of spiritual life by undergoing austerities, King
Ägnédhra completely obeyed his order. Strictly observing the principles of
religion, he gave full protection to the inhabitants of Jambüdvépa as if they were
his own begotten sons.
PURPORT
Following the instruction of his father, Mahäräja Priyavrata, Mahäräja
Ägnédhra ruled the inhabitants of Jambüdvépa according to religious
principles. These principles are exactly contrary to the modern principles of
faithlessness. As clearly stated here, the King protected the citizens the way a
father protects his begotten children. How he ruled the citizens is also
described here—dharmävekñamäëaù, strictly according to religious principles.
It is the duty of the executive head of a state to see that the citizens strictly
follow religious principles. The Vedic religious principles begin with
varëäçrama-dharma, the duties of the four varëas and four äçramas. Dharma
refers to principles given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The first
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
90
principle of dharma, or religion, is to observe the duties of the four orders as
enjoined by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. According to people's
qualities and activities, society should be divided into brähmaëas, kñatriyas,
vaiçyas and çüdras and then again into brahmacärés, gåhasthas, vänaprasthas
and sannyäsés. These are religious principles, and it is the duty of the head of
state to see that his citizens strictly follow them. He should not merely act
officially; he should be like a father who is always a well-wisher of his sons.
Such a father strictly observes whether his sons are performing their duties,
and sometimes he also punishes them.
Just contrary to the principles mentioned here, the presidents and chief
executives in the age of Kali are simply tax collectors who do not care whether
religious principles are observed. Indeed, the chief executives of the present
day introduce all kinds of sinful activity, especially illicit sex, intoxication,
animal killing and gambling. These sinful activities are now very prominently
manifested in India. Although a hundred years ago these four principles of
sinful life were strictly prohibited in the families of India, they have now been
introduced into every Indian family; therefore they cannot follow religious
principles. In contrast to the principles of the kings of old, the modern state is
concerned only with propaganda for levying taxes and is no longer responsible
for the spiritual welfare of the citizens. The state is now callous to religious
principles. Çrémad-Bhägavatam predicts that in Kali-yuga the government will
be entrusted with dasyu-dharma, which means the occupational duty of rogues
and thieves. Modern heads of state are rogues and thieves who plunder the
citizens instead of giving them protection. Rogues and thieves plunder without
regard for law, but in this age of Kali, as stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the
lawmakers themselves plunder the citizens. The next prediction to be fulfilled,
which is already coming to pass, is that because of the sinful activities of the
citizens and the government, rain will become increasingly scarce. Gradually
there will be complete drought and no production of food grains. People will
be reduced to eating flesh and seeds, and many good, spiritually inclined
people will have to forsake their homes because they will be too harassed by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
91
drought, taxation and famine. The Kåñëa consciousness movement is the only
hope to save the world from such devastation. It is the most scientific and
authorized movement for the actual welfare of the whole human society.
TEXT 2
Sa c k-daiciTPaTa*l/aek-k-aMa" SaurvrviNaTaa§-I@acl/d]ae<Yaa& >aGavNTa& ivì‚
Sa*Jaa& PaiTaMaa>a*TaPaircYaaeRPak-r<a AaTMaEk-aGY[ae<a TaPaSVYaaraDaYaaMb>aUv )) 2 ))
sa ca kadäcit pitåloka-kämaù sura-vara-vanitäkréòäcala-droëyäà bhagavantaà
viçva-såjäà patim äbhåta-paricaryopakaraëa ätmaikägryeëa tapasvy
ärädhayäà babhüva.
SYNONYMS
saù—he (King Ägnédhra); ca—also; kadäcit—once upon a time; pitåloka—the
Pitåloka planet; kämaù—desiring; sura-vara—of the great demigods;
vanitä—the women; äkréòä—the place of pastimes; acala-droëyäm—in one
valley of the Mandara Hill; bhagavantam—unto the most powerful (Lord
Brahmä); viçva-såjäm—of personalities who have created this universe;
patim—the master; äbhåta—having collected;
paricaryä-upakaraëaù—ingredients for worship; ätma—of the mind;
eka-agryeëa—with full attention; tapasvé—one who executes austerity;
ärädhayäm babhüva—became engaged in worshiping.
TRANSLATION
Desiring to get a perfect son and become an inhabitant of Pitåloka, Mahäräja
Ägnédhra once worshiped Lord Brahmä, the master of those in charge of
material creation. He went to a valley of Mandara Hill, where the damsels of
the heavenly planets come down to stroll. There he collected garden flowers and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
92
other necessary paraphernalia and then engaged in severe austerities and
worship.
PURPORT
The King became pitåloka-käma, or desirous of being transferred to the
planet named Pitåloka. Pitåloka is mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä (yänti
deva-vratä devän pitèn yänti pitå-vratäù [Bg. 9.25]). To go to this planet, one
needs very good sons who can make offerings to Lord Viñëu and then offer the
remnants to their forefathers. The purpose of the çräddha ceremony is to
please the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu, so that after pleasing
Him one may offer prasäda to one's forefathers and in this way make them
happy. The inhabitants of Pitåloka are generally men of the karma-käëòéya, or
fruitive activities category, who have been transferred there because of their
pious activities. They can stay there as long as their descendants offer them
viñëu-prasäda. Everyone in heavenly planets such as Pitåloka, however, must
return to earth after exhausting the effects of his pious acts. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.21), kñéëe puëye martya-lokaà viçanti: persons who perform
pious acts are transferred to higher planets, but when the effects of their pious
acts are over, they are again transferred to earth.
Since Mahäräja Priyavrata was a great devotee, how could he have begotten
a son who desired to be transferred to Pitåloka? Lord Kåñëa says, pitèn yänti
pitå-vratäù: persons who desire to go to Pitåloka are transferred there.
Similarly, yänti mad-yäjino 'pi mäm: [Bg. 9.25] persons who desire to be
transferred to the spiritual planets, Vaikuëöhalokas, can also go there. Since
Mahäräja Ägnédhra was the son of a Vaiñëava, he should have desired to be
transferred to the spiritual world, Vaikuëöhaloka. Why, then, did he desire to
be transferred to Pitåloka? In answer to this, Gosvämé Giridhara, one of the
Bhägavatam commentators, remarks that Ägnédhra was born when Mahäräja
Priyavrata was infatuated by lusty desires. This may be accepted as a fact
because sons are begotten with different mentalities according to the time of
their conception. According to the Vedic system, therefore, before a child is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
93
conceived, the garbhädhäna-saàskära is performed. This ceremony molds the
mentality of the father in such a way that when he plants his seed in the womb
of his wife, he will beget a child whose mind will be completely saturated with
a devotional attitude. At the present moment, however, there are no such
garbhädhäna-saàskäras, and therefore people generally have a lusty attitude
when they beget children. Especially in this age of Kali, there are no
garbhädhäna ceremonies; everyone enjoys sex with his wife like a cat or dog.
Therefore according to çästric injunctions, almost all the people of this age
belong to the çüdra category. Of course, although Mahäräja Ägnédhra had a
desire to be transferred to Pitåloka, this does not mean that his mentality was
that of a çüdra; he was a kñatriya.
Mahäräja Ägnédhra desired to be transferred to Pitåloka, and therefore he
needed a wife because anyone desiring to be transferred to Pitåloka must leave
behind a good son to offer yearly piëòa, or prasäda from Lord Viñëu. To have a
good son, Mahäräja Ägnédhra wanted a wife from a family of demigods.
Therefore he went to Mandara Hill. where the women of the demigods
generally come, to worship Lord Brahmä. In Bhagavad-gétä (4.12) it is said,
käìkñantaù karmaëäà siddhià yajanta iha devatäù: materialists who want
quick results in the material world worship demigods. This is also confirmed in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Çré-aiçvarya-prajepsavaù: those who desire beautiful wives,
substantial wealth and many sons worship the demigods, but an intelligent
devotee, instead of being entangled by the happiness of this material world in
the form of a beautiful wife, material opulence and children, desires to be
immediately transferred back home, back to Godhead. Thus he worships the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu.
TEXT 3
TaduPal/>Ya >aGavaNaaidPauåz" SadiSa GaaYaNTaq& PaUvRicita& NaaMaaPSarSaMa‚
i>aYaaPaYaaMaaSa )) 3 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
94
tad upalabhya bhagavän ädi-puruñaù sadasi gäyantéà pürvacittià
nämäpsarasam abhiyäpayäm äsa.
SYNONYMS
tat—that; upalabhya—understanding; bhagavän—the most powerful;
ädi-puruñaù—the first created being within this universe; sadasi—in his
assembly; gäyantém—dancing girl; pürvacittim—Pürvacitti; näma—named;
apsarasam—the heavenly dancing girl; abhiyäpayäm äsa—sent down.
TRANSLATION
Understanding King Ägnédhra's desire, the first and most powerful created
being of this universe, Lord Brahmä, selected the best of the dancing girls in his
assembly, whose name was Pürvacitti, and sent her to the King.
PURPORT
In this verse, the words bhagavän ädi-puruñaù are significant. Bhagavän
ädi-puruñaù is Lord Kåñëa. Govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi **. Lord
Kåñëa is the original person. In Bhagavad-gétä, He is also addressed by Arjuna
as puruñam ädyam, the original person, and He is called Bhagavän. In this
verse, however, we see that Lord Brahmä is described as bhagavän ädi-puruñaù.
The reason he is called bhagavän is that he fully represents the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and is the first-born creature in this universe. Lord
Brahmä could understand Mahäräja Ägnédhra's desire because he is as
powerful as Lord Viñëu. As Lord Viñëu, situated as Paramätmä, can
understand the desire of the living entity, so Lord Brahmä can also understand
the living entity's desire, for Viñëu, as a via medium, informs him. As stated in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.1.1), tene brahma hådä ya ädi-kavaye: Lord Viñëu
informs Lord Brahmä of everything from within his heart. Because Mahäräja
Ägnédhra specifically worshiped Lord Brahmä, Lord Brahmä was pleased, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
95
he sent Pürvacitti, the Apsarä, to satisfy him.
TEXT 4
Saa c Tadaé[MaaePavNaMaiTarMa<aqYa& ivivDaiNaib@iv$=iPaiv$=PaiNak-rSa&iëíPaur$=‚
l/Taaæ!SQal/ivh(r)MaiMaQauNaE" Pa[aeCYaMaaNaé[uiTai>a" Pa[iTabaeDYaMaaNaSail/l/ku-¡u-$=k-a‚
r<@vk-l/h&Saaidi>aivRic}aMauPakU-iJaTaaMal/Jal/aXaYak-Mal/ak-rMauPab>a]aMa )) 4 ))
sä ca tad-äçramopavanam ati-ramaëéyaà
vividha-nibiòa-viöapi-viöapa-nikara-saàçliñöa-puraöa-latärüòha-sthala-vihaìga
ma-mithunaiù procyamäna-çrutibhiù
pratibodhyamäna-salila-kukkuöa-käraëòava-kalahaàsädibhir vicitram
upaküjitämala-jaläçaya-kamaläkaram upababhräma.
SYNONYMS
sä—she (Pürvacitti); ca—also; tat—of Mahäräja Ägnédhra; äçrama—of the
place of meditation; upavanam—the park; ati—very; ramaëéyam—beautiful;
vividha—varieties of; nibiòa—dense; viöapi—trees; viöapa—of branches and
twigs; nikara—masses; saàçliñöa—attached; puraöa—golden; latä—with
creepers; ärüòha—going high; sthala-vihaìgama—of land birds;
mithunaiù—with pairs; procyamäna—vibrating; çrutibhiù—pleasing sounds;
pratibodhyamäna—responding; salila-kukkuöa—water fowl; käraëòava—ducks;
kala-haàsa—with various kinds of swans; ädibhiù—and so on;
vicitram—variegated; upaküjita—resounding with the vibration; amala—clear;
jala-äçaya—in the lake; kamala-äkaram—the source of lotus flowers;
upababhräma—began to walk in.
TRANSLATION
The Apsarä sent by Lord Brahmä began strolling in a beautiful park near the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
96
place where the King was meditating and worshiping. The park was beautiful
because of its dense green foliage and golden creepers. There were pairs of
varied birds such as peacocks, and in a lake there were ducks and swans, all
vibrating very sweet sounds. Thus the park was magnificently beautiful because
of the foliage, the clear water, the lotus flowers and the sweet singing of various
kinds of birds.
TEXT 5
TaSYaa" Saul/il/TaGaMaNaPadivNYaaSaGaiTaivl/aSaaYaaêaNauPad& %<a%<aaYaMaaNaåicr‚
cr<aa>ar<aSvNaMauPaak-<YaR Nardevku-Maar" SaMaaiDaYaaeGaeNaaMaqil/TaNaYaNaNail/NaMauku-‚
l/YauGal/MaqziÜk-cYYa VYací )) 5 ))
tasyäù sulalita-gamana-pada-vinyäsa-gati-viläsäyäç cänupadaà
khaëa-khaëäyamäna-rucira-caraëäbharaëa-svanam upäkarëya
naradeva-kumäraù samädhi-yogenämélita-nayana-nalina-mukula-yugalam
éñad vikacayya vyacañöa.
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—of her (Pürvacitti); sulalita—in a very beautiful;
gamana—movements; pada-vinyäsa—with styles of walking; gati—in the
progression; viläsäyäù—whose pastime; ca—also; anupadam—with every step;
khaëa-khaëäyamäna—making a tinkling sound; rucira—very pleasing;
caraëa-äbharaëa—of the ornaments on the feet; svanam—the sound;
upäkarëya—hearing; naradeva-kumäraù—the Prince; samädhi—in ecstasy;
yogena—by controlling the senses; ämélita—half-open; nayana—eyes;
nalina—of lotus; mukula—buds; yugalam—like a pair; éñat—slightly;
vikacayya—opening; vyacañöa—saw.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
97
TRANSLATION
As Pürvacitti passed by on the road in a very beautiful style and mood of her
own, the pleasing ornaments on her ankles tinkled with her every step.
Although Prince Ägnédhra was controlling his senses, practicing yoga with
half-open eyes, he could see her with his lotuslike eyes, and when he heard the
sweet tinkling of her bangles, he opened his eyes slightly more and could see
that she was just nearby.
PURPORT
It is said that yogés always think of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
within their hearts. Dhyänävasthita-tad-gatena manasä paçyanti yaà yoginaù
(SB 12.13.1). The Supreme Personality of Godhead is always observed by yogés
who practice controlling the venomous senses. As recommended in
Bhagavad-gétä, yogés should practice samprekñya näsikägram, keeping their eyes
half-open. If the eyes are closed completely, there will be a tendency to sleep.
So-called yogés sometimes practice a fashionable form of yoga by closing their
eyes and meditating, but we have actually seen such so-called yogés sleeping
and snoring while meditating. This is not the practice of yoga. To actually
practice yoga, one should keep his eyes half-open and gaze at the tip of his
nose.
Although Ägnédhra, the son of Priyavrata, was practicing mystic yoga and
trying to control his senses, the tinkling sound of Pürvacitti's ankle bells
disturbed his practice. Yoga indriya-saàyamaù: actual yoga practice means
controlling the senses. One must practice mystic yoga, to control the senses,
but the sense control of a devotee who fully engages in the service of the Lord
with his purified senses (håñékeëa håñékeça-sevanam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]) can
never be disturbed. Çréla Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté therefore stated,
durdäntendriya-käla-sarpa-paöalé protkhäta-daàñöra-yate (Caitanya-candrämåta
5). The practice of yoga is undoubtedly good because it controls the senses,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
98
which are like venomous serpents. When one engages in devotional service,
however, completely employing all the activities of the senses in the service of
the Lord, the venomous quality of the senses is completely nullified. It is
explained that a serpent is to be feared because of its poison fangs, but if those
fangs are broken. the serpent, although it seems fearsome, is not at all
dangerous. Devotees, therefore, may see hundreds and thousands of beautiful
women with fascinating bodily movements and gestures but not be allured,
whereas such women would make ordinary yogés fall. Even the advanced yogé
Viçvämitra broke his mystic practice to unite with Menakä and beget a child
known as Çakuntalä. The practice of mystic yoga, therefore, is not sufficiently
strong to control the senses. Another example is Prince Ägnédhra, whose
attention was drawn to the movements of Pürvacitti, the Apsarä, simply
because he heard the tinkling of her ankle bells. In the same way that
Viçvämitra Muni was attracted by the tinkling bangles of Menakä, Prince
Ägnédhra, upon hearing the tinkling bangles of Pürvacitti, immediately
opened his eyes to see her beautiful movements as she walked. The prince was
also very handsome. As described herein, his eyes were just like the buds of
lotus flowers. As he opened his lotuslike eyes, he could immediately see that
the Apsarä was present by his side.
TEXT 6
TaaMaevaivdUre MaDauk-rqiMav SauMaNaSa oPaiJaga]NTaq& idivJaMaNauJaMaNaaeNaYaNaaúad‚
dugaEGaRiTaivharv]q@aivNaYaavl/aek-SauSvra+aravYavEMaRNaiSa Na*<aa& ku-SauMaaYauDaSYa
ivdDaTaq& ivvr& iNaJaMau%ivGail/TaaMa*TaaSavSahaSa>aaz<aaMaaedMadaNDaMaDauk-r‚
iNak-raeParaeDaeNa d]uTaPadivNYaaSaeNa vLGauSPaNdNaSTaNak-l/Xak-br>aarrXaNaa& devq&
Tadvl/aek-NaeNa ivv*TaavSarSYa >aGavTaae Mak-rßJaSYa vXaMauPaNaqTaae Ja@vidiTa
haevac )) 6 ))
täm evävidüre madhukarém iva sumanasa upajighrantéà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
99
divija-manuja-mano-nayanähläda-dughair
gati-vihära-vréòä-vinayävaloka-susvaräkñarävayavair manasi nåëäà
kusumäyudhasya vidadhatéà vivaraà
nija-mukha-vigalitämåtäsava-sahäsa-bhäñaëämoda-madändha-madhukara-nik
aroparodhena druta-pada-vinyäsena
valgu-spandana-stana-kalaça-kabara-bhära-raçanäà devéà tad-avalokanena
vivåtävasarasya bhagavato makara-dhvajasya vaçam upanéto jaòavad iti hoväca.
SYNONYMS
täm—to her; eva—indeed; avidüre—nearby; madhukarém iva—like a
honeybee; sumanasaù—beautiful flowers; upajighrantém—smelling; divi-ja—of
those born in the heavenly planets; manu-ja—of those born in human society;
manaù—mind; nayana—for the eyes; ähläda—pleasure; dughaiù—producing;
gati—by her movement; vihära—by pastimes; vréòä—by shyness; vinaya—by
humility; avaloka—by glancing; su-svara-akñara—by her sweet voice;
avayavaiù—and by the limbs of the body; manasi—in the mind; nåëäm—of
men; kusuma-äyudhasya—of Cupid, who has a flower arrow in his hand;
vidadhatém—making; vivaram—aural reception; nija-mukha—from her own
mouth; vigalita—pouring out; amåta-äsava—nectar like honey; sa-häsa—in
her smiling; bhäñaëa—and talking; ämoda—by the pleasure;
mada-andha—blinded by intoxication; madhukara—of bees; nikara—by
groups; uparodhena—because of being surrounded; druta—hasty; pada—of
feet; vinyäsena—by stylish stepping; valgu—a little; spandana—moving;
stana—breasts; kalaça—like waterpots; kabara—of her braids of hair;
bhära—weight; raçanäm—the belt upon the hips; devém—the goddess;
tat-avalokanena—simply by seeing her; vivåta-avasarasya—taking the
opportunity of; bhagavataù—of the greatly powerful; makara-dhvajasya—of
Cupid; vaçam—under the control; upanétaù—being brought in; jaòa-vat—as if
stunned; iti—thus; ha—certainly; uväca—he said.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
100
TRANSLATION
Like a honeybee, the Apsarä smelled the beautiful and attractive flowers.
She could attract the minds and vision of both humans and demigods by her
playful movements, her shyness and humility, her glances, the very pleasing
sounds that poured from her mouth as she spoke, and the motion of her limbs.
By all these qualities, she opened for Cupid, who bears an arrow of flowers, a
path of aural reception into the minds of men. When she spoke, nectar seemed
to flow from her mouth. As she breathed, the bees, mad for the taste of her
breath, tried to hover about her beautiful lotuslike eyes. Disturbed by the bees,
she tried to move hastily, but as she raised her feet to walk quickly, her hair,
the belt on her hips, and her breasts, which were like water jugs, also moved in
a way that made her extremely beautiful and attractive. Indeed, she seemed to
be making a path for the entrance of Cupid, who is most powerful. Therefore
the prince, completely subdued by seeing her, spoke to her as follows.
PURPORT
How a beautiful woman's movements and gestures, her hair and the
structure of her breasts, hips and other bodily features attract the minds not
only of men but of demigods also is very finely described in this statement. The
words divija and manuja specifically emphasize that the attraction of feminine
gestures is powerful everywhere within this material world, both on this planet
and in the higher planetary systems. It is said that the standard of living in the
higher planetary systems is thousands and thousands of times higher than the
standard of living on this planet. Therefore the beautiful bodily features of the
women there are also thousands and thousands of times more attractive than
the features of the women on earth. The creator has constructed women in
such a way that their beautiful voices and movements and the beautiful
features of their hips, their breasts, and the other parts of their bodies attract
the members of the opposite sex, both on earth and on other planets, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
101
awaken their lusty desires. When one is controlled by Cupid or the beauty of
women, he becomes stunned like matter such as stone. Captivated by the
material movements of women, he wants to remain in this material world.
Thus one's promotion to the spiritual world is checked simply by seeing the
beautiful bodily structure and movements of women. Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu has therefore warned all devotees to beware of the attraction of
beautiful women and materialistic civilization. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu even
refused to see Pratäparudra Mahäräja because he was a very opulent person in
the material world. Lord Caitanya said in this connection, niñkiïcanasya
bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya: those who are engaged in the devotional service
of the Lord because they are very serious about going back home, back to
Godhead, should be very careful to avoid seeing the beautiful gestures of
women and should also avoid seeing persons who are very rich.
niñkiïcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya
päraà paraà jigamiñor bhava-sägarasya
sandarçanaà viñayiëäm atha yoñitäà ca
hä hanta hanta viña-bhakñaëato 'py asädhu
"Alas, for a person who is seriously desiring to cross the material ocean and
engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord without material
motives, seeing a materialist engaged in sense gratification or seeing a woman
who is similarly interested is more abominable than drinking poison willingly."
(Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya 11.8) One who is serious about going back home,
back to Godhead, should not contemplate the attractive features of women
and the opulence of rich men. Such contemplation will check one's
advancement in spiritual life. Once a devotee is fixed in Kåñëa consciousness,
however, these attractions will not agitate his mind.
TEXT 7
k-a Tv& ick-IzRiSa c ik&- MauiNavYaR XaEle/
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
102
MaaYaaiSa k-aiPa >aGavTPardevTaaYaa" )
ivJYae ib>aizR DaNauzq SauôdaTMaNaae_QaeR
ik&- va Ma*GaaNMa*GaYaSae iviPaNae Pa[MataaNa( )) 7 ))
kä tvaà cikérñasi ca kià muni-varya çaile
mäyäsi käpi bhagavat-para-devatäyäù
vijye bibharñi dhanuñé suhåd-ätmano 'rthe
kià vä mågän mågayase vipine pramattän
SYNONYMS
kä—who; tvam—are you; cikérñasi—are you trying to do; ca—also; kim—what;
muni-varya—O best of munis; çaile—on this hill; mäyä—illusory potency;
asi—are you; käpi—some; bhagavat—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
para-devatäyäù—of the transcendental Lord; vijye—without strings;
bibharñi—you are carrying; dhanuñé—two bows; suhåt—of a friend;
ätmanaù—of yourself; arthe—for the sake; kim vä—or; mågän—forest animals;
mågayase—are you trying to hunt; vipine—in this forest; pramattän—who are
materially maddened.
TRANSLATION
The Prince mistakenly addressed the Apsarä: O best of saintly persons, who
are you? Why are you on this hill, and what do you want to do? Are you one of
the illusory potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? You seem to be
carrying two bows without strings, What is the reason you carry these bows? Is
it for some purpose of your own or for the sake of a friend? Perhaps you carry
them to kill the mad animals in this forest.
PURPORT
While undergoing severe penances in the forest, Ägnédhra was captivated
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
103
by the movements of Pürvacitti, the girl sent by Lord Brahmä. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä, kämais tais tair håta jïänäù: [Bg. 7.20] when one becomes lusty,
he loses his intelligence. Therefore Ägnédhra, having lost his intelligence,
could not distinguish whether Pürvacitti was male or female. He mistook her
for a muni-putra, the son of a saintly person in the forest, and addressed her as
muni-varya. Because of her personal beauty, however, he could not believe her
to be a boy. He therefore began studying her features. First he saw her two
eyebrows, which were so expressive that he wondered whether he or she might
be the mäyä of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The words used in this
connection are bhagavat-para-devatäyäù. Devatäù, the demigods, all belong to
this material world, whereas Bhagavän, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa, is always beyond this material world and is therefore known as
para-devatä. The material world is certainly created by mäyä, but it is created
under the direction of para-devatä, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram [Bg.
9.10]), mäyä is not the ultimate authority for the creation of this material
world. Mäyä acts on behalf of Kåñëa.
Pürvacitti's eyebrows were so beautiful that Ägnédhra compared them to
bows without strings. He therefore asked her whether they were to be used for
her own purposes or for the sake of someone else. Her eyebrows were like bows
meant to kill animals in the forest. This material world is like a great forest,
and its inhabitants are like forest animals such as deer and tigers meant to be
killed. The killers are the eyebrows of beautiful women. Captivated by the
beauty of the fair sex, all the men of the world are killed by bows without
strings, but cannot see how they are killed by mäyä. It is a fact, however, that
they are being killed (bhütvä bhütvä praléyate)[Bg. 8.19]. By dint of his tapasya,
Ägnédhra could understand how mäyä acts under the direction of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
The word pramattän is also significant. pramatta refers to one who cannot
control his senses. The entire material world is being exploited by people who
are pramatta, or vimüòha. Prahläda Mahäräja therefore said:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
104
çoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyärthamäyä-
sukhäya bharam udvahato vimüòhän
"They are rotting in material activities for transient material pleasure and
spoiling their lives toiling all day and night simply for sense gratification, with
no attachment for love of Godhead. I am simply lamenting for them and
devising various plans to deliver them from the clutches of mäyä." (SB 7.9.43)
Karmés who act very seriously for sense gratification are always referred to in
the çästras by such terms as pramatta, vimukha and vimüòha. They are killed by
mäyä. However, one who is apramatta, a sane, sober person, a dhéra, knows very
well that a human being's primary duty is to render service to the Supreme
Person. Mäyä is always ready to kill those who are pramatta with her invisible
bows and arrows. Ägnédhra questioned Pürvacitti about this.
TEXT 8
ba<aaivMaaE >aGavTa" XaTaPa}aPa}aaE
XaaNTaavPau«åicraviTaiTaGMadNTaaE )
k-SMaE YauYau¿iSa vNae ivcrà ivÚ"
+aeMaaYa Naae Ja@iDaYaa& Tav iv§-Maae_STau )) 8 ))
bäëäv imau bhagavataù çata-patra-patrau
çäntäv apuìkha-ruciräv ati-tigma-dantau
kasmai yuyuìkñasi vane vicaran na vidmaù
kñemäya no jaòa-dhiyäà tava vikramo 'stu
SYNONYMS
bäëau—two arrows; imau—these; bhagavataù—of you, the most powerful;
çata-patra-patrau—having feathers like the petals of a lotus flower;
çäntau—peaceful; apuìkha—without a shaft; rucirau—very beautiful;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
105
ati-tigma-dantau—having a very sharp point; kasmai—whom;
yuyuìkñasi—you want to pierce; vane—in the forest; vicaran—loitering; na
vidmaù—we cannot understand; kñemäya—for welfare; naù—of us;
jaòa-dhiyäm—who are dull-headed; tava—your; vikramaù—prowess;
astu—may be.
TRANSLATION
Then Ägnédhra observed the glancing eyes of Pürvacitti and said: My dear
friend, you have two very powerful arrows, namely your glancing eyes. Those
arrows have feathers like the petals of a lotus flower. Although they have no
shafts, they are very beautiful, and they have very sharp, piercing points. They
appear very peaceful, and thus it seems that they will not be shot at anyone.
You must be loitering in this forest to shoot those arrows at someone, but I
cannot understand whom. My intelligence is dull, and I cannot combat you.
Indeed, no one can equal you in prowess, and therefore I pray that your
prowess will be for my good fortune.
PURPORT
Ägnédhra thus began appreciating Pürvacitti's powerful glance upon him.
He compared her glancing eyes to very sharp arrows. Although her eyes were
as beautiful as lotuses, they were simultaneously like shaftless arrows, and
Ägnédhra was therefore afraid of them. He hoped that her glances upon him
would be favorable because he was already captivated, and the more captivated
he became, the more impossible it would be for him to remain without her.
Ägnédhra therefore prayed to Pürvacitti that her glances at him would be
auspicious, not futile. In other words, he prayed that she would become his
wife.
TEXT 9
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
106
iXaZYaa wMae >aGavTa" PairTa" Pa#=iNTa
GaaYaiNTa SaaMa SarhSYaMaJaóMaqXaMa( )
YauZMaiC^%aivlu/il/Taa" SauMaNaae_i>av*íq"
SaveR >aJaNTYa*izGa<aa wv vedXaa%a" )) 9 ))
çiñyä ime bhagavataù paritaù paöhanti
gäyanti säma sarahasyam ajasram éçam
yuñmac-chikhä-vilulitäù sumano 'bhivåñöéù
sarve bhajanty åñi-gaëä iva veda-çäkhäù
SYNONYMS
çiñyäù—disciples, followers; ime—these; bhagavataù—of your worshipable self;
paritaù—surrounding; paöhanti—are reciting; gäyanti—are singing; säma—the
Säma Veda; sa-rahasyam—with the confidential portion;
ajasram—incessantly; éçam—unto the Lord; yuñmat—your; çikhä—from
bunches of hair; vilulitäù—fallen; sumanaù—of flowers; abhivåñöéù—showers;
sarve—all; bhajanti—enjoy, resort to; åñi-gaëäù—sages; iva—like;
veda-çäkhäù—branches of Vedic literature.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the bumblebees following Pürvacitti, Mahäräja Ägnédhra said: My
dear Lord, the bumblebees surrounding your body are like disciples surrounding
your worshipable self. They are incessantly chanting the mantras of the Säma
Veda and the Upaniñads, thus offering prayers to you. Just as great sages resort
to the branches of Vedic literatures, the bumblebees are enjoying the showers of
flowers falling from your hair.
TEXT 10
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
107
vac& Par& cr<aPaÅriTaitarq<aa&
b]øàæPaMau%ra& é*<avaMa Tau>YaMa( )
l/BDaa k-dMbåicrªiv$=ªibMbe
YaSYaaMal/aTaPairiDa" Kv c vLk-l&/ Tae )) 10 ))
väcaà paraà caraëa-païjara-tittiréëäà
brahmann arüpa-mukharäà çåëaväma tubhyam
labdhä kadamba-rucir aìka-viöaìka-bimbe
yasyäm aläta-paridhiù kva ca valkalaà te
SYNONYMS
väcam—the resounding vibration; param—only; caraëa-païjara—of the ankle
bells; tittiréëäm—of the tittiri birds; brahman—O brähmaëa; arüpa—without
form; mukharäm—able to be very distinctly heard; çåëaväma—I hear;
tubhyam—your; labdhä—gotten; kadamba—like the kadamba flower;
ruciù—lovely color; aìka-viöaìka-bimbe—on the beautiful circular hips;
yasyäm—on which; aläta-paridhiù—encirclement of burning cinders;
kva—where; ca—also; valkalam—covering cloth; te—your.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëa, I can simply hear the tinkling of your ankle bells. Within those
bells, tittiri birds seem to be chirping among themselves. Although I do not see
their forms, I can hear how they are chirping. When I look at your beautiful
circular hips, I see they are the lovely color of kadamba flowers, and your waist
is encircled by a belt of burning cinders. Indeed, you seem to have forgotten to
dress yourself.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
108
With lusty desires to see Pürvacitti, Ägnédhra especially gazed upon the
girl's attractive hips and waist. When a man looks upon a woman with such
lusty desires, he is captivated by her face, her breasts and her waist, for a
woman first attracts a man to fulfill his sexual desires by the beautiful features
of her face, by the beautiful slope of her breasts and also by her waist.
Pürvacitti was dressed in fine yellow silk, and therefore her hips looked like
kadamba flowers. Because of her belt, her waist seemed to be encircled by
burning cinders. She was fully dressed, but Ägnédhra had become so lusty that
he asked, "Why have you come naked?"
TEXT 11
ik&- SaM>a*Ta& åicrYaaeiÜRJa é*(r)YaaeSTae
MaDYae k*-Xaae vhiSa Ya}a d*iXa" ié[Taa Mae )
Paªae_å<a" Sauri>araTMaivza<a wRd*Ga(
YaeNaaé[Ma& Sau>aGa Mae Saur>aqk-raeiz )) 11 ))
kià sambhåtaà rucirayor dvija çåìgayos te
madhye kåço vahasi yatra dåçiù çritä me
paìko 'ruëaù surabhér ätma-viñäëa édåg
yenäçramaà subhaga me surabhé-karoñi
SYNONYMS
kim—what; sambhåtam—filled; rucirayoù—very beautiful; dvija—O
brähmaëa; çåìgayoù—within two horns; te—your; madhye—in the middle;
kåçaù—thin; vahasi—you are carrying; yatra—wherein; dåçiù—eyes;
çritä—attached; me—my; paìkaù—powder; aruëaù—red; surabhiù—fragrant;
ätma-viñäëe—on the two horns; édåk—such; yena—by which; äçramam—place
of residence; su-bhaga—O most fortunate one; me—my; surabhé-karoñi—you
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
109
are perfuming.
TRANSLATION
Ägnédhra then praised Pürvacitti's raised breasts. He said: My dear
brähmaëa your waist is very thin, yet with great difficulty you are carefully
carrying two horns, to which my eyes have become attracted. What is filling
those two beautiful horns? You seem to have spread fragrant red powder upon
them, powder that is like the rising morning sun. O most fortunate one, I beg to
inquire where you have gotten this fragrant powder that is perfuming my
äçrama, my place of residence.
PURPORT
Ägnédhra appreciated Pürvacitti's raised breasts. After seeing the girl's
breasts, he became almost mad. Nevertheless, he could not recognize whether
Pürvacitti was a boy or a girl, for as a result of his austerity, he saw no
distinction between the two. He therefore addressed her with the word dvija,
"O brähmaëa." Yet why should a dvija, a brähmaëa boy, have horns on his
chest? Because the boy's waist was thin, Ägnédhra thought, he was carrying the
horns with great difficulty. and therefore they must be filled with something
very valuable. Otherwise why would he carry them? When a woman's waist is
thin and her breasts are full, she looks very attractive. Ägnédhra, his eyes
attracted, contemplated the heavy breasts on the girl's thin body and imagined
how her back must sustain them. Ägnédhra imagined that her raised breasts
were two horns she had covered with cloth so that others would not see the
valuables within them. Ägnédhra, however, was very anxious to see them.
Therefore he requested, "Please uncover them so that I can see what you are
carrying. Rest assured that I shall not take it away. If you feel an
inconvenience in removing the covering, I can help you; I myself can uncover
them to see what valuable things those raised horns contain." He was also
surprised to see the red dust of perfumed kuìkuma spread over her breasts.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
110
Nevertheless, still considering Pürvacitti a boy, Ägnédhra addressed her as
subhaga, most fortunate muni. The boy must have been fortunate; otherwise
how simply by standing there could he perfume Ägnédhra's entire äçrama?
TEXT 12
l/aek&- Pa[dXaRYa SauôtaMa Taavk&- Mae
Ya}aTYa wTQaMaurSaavYavavPaUvaOE )
ASMaiÜDaSYa MaNaoàYaNaaE ib>aiTaR
bûd(>auTa& SarSaraSaSauDaaid v£e- )) 12 ))
lokaà pradarçaya suhåttama tävakaà me
yatratya ittham urasävayaväv apürvau
asmad-vidhasya mana-unnayanau bibharti
bahv adbhutaà sarasa-räsa-sudhädi vaktre
SYNONYMS
lokam—residential place; pradarçaya—please show; suhåt-tama—O best of
friends; tävakam—your; me—unto me; yatratyaù—a person born wherein;
ittham—like this; urasä—by the chest; avayavau—two limbs (breasts);
apürvau—wonderful; asmat-vidhasya—of a person like me;
manaù-unnayanau—very agitating to the mind; bibharti—sustains;
bahu—many; adbhutam—wonderful; sarasa—sweet words; räsa—amorous
gestures like smiling; sudhä-ädi—such as nectar; vaktre—in the mouth.
TRANSLATION
O best friend, will you kindly show me the place where you reside? I cannot
imagine how the residents of that place have gotten such wonderful bodily
features as your raised breasts, which agitate the mind and eyes of a person like
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
111
me who sees them. Judging by the sweet speech and kind smiles of those
residents, I think that their mouths must contain nectar.
PURPORT
Still bewildered, Ägnédhra wanted to see the place from which the
brähmaëa boy had come, where the men had such raised breasts. Such
attractive features, he thought, must be due to the severe austerities performed
there. Ägnédhra addressed the girl as suhåttama, the best friend, so that she
would not refuse to take him there. Not only was Ägnédhra captivated by the
girl's raised breasts; he was also attracted by her sweet speech. Nectar seemed
to emanate from her mouth, and therefore he was increasingly surprised.
TEXT 13
k-a vaTMav*itardNaaÖivr(r) vaiTa
ivZ<aae" k-l/aSYaiNaiMazaeNMak-raE c k-<aaOE )
oiÜGanMaqNaYauGal&/ iÜJaPai»Xaaeic‚
raSaà>a*(r)iNak-r& Sar wNMau%& Tae )) 13 ))
kä vätma-våttir adanäd dhavir aìga väti
viñëoù kaläsy animiñonmakarau ca karëau
udvigna-ména-yugalaà dvija-paìkti-çocir
äsanna-bhåìga-nikaraà sara in mukhaà te
SYNONYMS
kä—what; vä—and; ätma-våttiù—food for maintenance of the body;
adanät—by the chewing (of betel); haviù—pure sacrificial ingredients;
aìga—my dear friend; väti—emanate; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu;
kalä—expansion of the body; asi—you are; animiña—without blinking;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
112
unmakarau—two brilliant sharks; ca—also; karëau—two ears;
udvigna—restless; ména-yugalam—possessing two fish; dvija-paìkti—of lines of
teeth; çociù—beauty; äsanna—nearby; bhåìga-nikaram—possessing swarms of
bumblebees; saraù it—like a lake; mukham—face; te—your.
TRANSLATION
My dear friend, what do you eat to maintain your body? Because you are
chewing betel, a pleasing scent is emanating from your mouth. This proves that
you always eat the remnants of food offered to Viñëu. Indeed, you must also be
an expansion of Lord Viñëu's body. Your face is as beautiful as a pleasing lake.
Your jeweled earrings resemble two brilliant sharks with unblinking eyes like
those of Viñëu, and your own eyes resemble two restless fish. Simultaneously,
therefore, two sharks and two restless fish are swimming in the lake of your
face. Besides them, the white rows of your teeth seem like rows of very
beautiful swans in the water, and your scattered hair resembles swarms of
bumblebees following the beauty of your face.
PURPORT
The devotees of Lord Viñëu are also His expansions. They are called
vibhinnäàça. Lord Viñëu is offered all kinds of sacrificial ingredients, and
because devotees always eat prasäda, the remnants of His food, the scent of
sacrificial ingredients emanates not only from Viñëu but also from the
devotees who eat the remnants of His food or the food of His devotees.
Ägnédhra considered Pürvacitti an expansion of Lord Viñëu because of the
pleasing scent of her body. Aside from that, because of her jeweled earrings,
shaped like sharks, because of her scattered hair, resembling bumblebees mad
after the scent of her body, and because of the white rows of her teeth, which
resembled swans, Ägnédhra compared Pürvacitti's face to a beautiful lake
decorated with lotus flowers, fish, swans and bumblebees.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
113
TEXT 14
Yaae_SaaE TvYaa k-rSaraeJahTa" PaTa(r)ae
id+au >a]MaNa( >a]MaTa WJaYaTae_i+a<aq Mae )
Mau¢&- Na Tae SMariSa v§-Ja$=avæQa&
k-íae_iNal/ae hriTa l/MPa$= Wz NaqvqMa( )) 14 ))
yo 'sau tvayä kara-saroja-hataù pataìgo
dikñu bhraman bhramata ejayate 'kñiëé me
muktaà na te smarasi vakra-jaöä-varüthaà
kañöo 'nilo harati lampaöa eña névém
SYNONYMS
yaù—which; asau—that; tvayä—by you; kara-saroja—with the lotus palm;
hataù—struck; pataìgaù—the ball; dikñu—in all directions;
bhraman—moving; bhramataù—restless; ejayate—disturbs; akñiëé—eyes;
me—of me; muktam—scattered; na—not; te—your; smarasi—are you mindful
of; vakra—curling; jaöä—of hair; varütham—bunches; kañöaù—giving trouble;
anilaù—wind; harati—takes away; lampaöaù—like a man attached to women;
eñaù—this; névém—lower garment.
TRANSLATION
My mind is already restless, and by playing with a ball, moving it all about
with your lotuslike palm, you are also agitating my eyes. Your curling black hair
is now scattered, but you are not attentive to arranging it. Are you not going to
arrange it? Like a man attached to women, the most cunning wind is trying to
take off your lower garment. Are you not mindful of it?
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
114
PURPORT
The girl Pürvacitti was playing with a ball in her hand, and the ball seemed
like nothing but another lotus flower captured by her lotuslike palm. Because
of her movements, her hair was loose, and the belt holding her cloth was giving
way, as if the cunning wind were trying to make her naked. Yet she paid no
attention to arranging her hair or fixing her dress. As Ägnédhra tried to see
the girl's naked beauty, his eyes were very agitated by her movements.
TEXT 15
æPa& TaPaaeDaNa TaPaêrTaa& TaPaaegan&
ùeTatau ke-Na TaPaSaa >avTaaePal/BDaMa( )
cTau| TaPaae_hRiSa MaYaa Sah iMa}a Maù&
ik&- va Pa[SaqdiTa Sa vE >av>aavNaae Mae )) 15 ))
rüpaà tapodhana tapaç caratäà tapoghnaà
hy etat tu kena tapasä bhavatopalabdham
cartuà tapo 'rhasi mayä saha mitra mahyaà
kià vä prasédati sa vai bhava-bhävano me
SYNONYMS
rüpam—beauty; tapaù-dhana—O best of the sages performing austerity; tapaù
caratäm—of persons engaged in executing austerities and penances;
tapaù-ghnam—which dismantles the austerities; hi—certainly; etat—this;
tu—indeed; kena—by what; tapasä—austerity; bhavatä—by you;
upalabdham—achieved; cartum—to execute; tapaù—austerity; arhasi—you
ought; mayä saha—with me; mitra—my dear friend; mahyam—unto me; kim
vä—or maybe; prasédati—is pleased; saù—he; vai—certainly;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
115
bhava-bhävanaù—the creator of this universe; me—with me.
TRANSLATION
O best among those performing austerities, where did you get this wonderful
beauty that dismantles the austerities performed by others? Where have you
learned this art? What austerity have you undergone to achieve this beauty, my
dear friend? I desire that you join me to perform austerity and penance, for it
may be that the creator of the universe, Lord Brahmä, being pleased with me,
has sent you to become my wife.
PURPORT
Ägnédhra appreciated the wonderful beauty of Pürvacitti. Indeed, he was
surprised to see such exceptional beauty, which must have been the result of
past austerities and penances. He therefore asked the girl whether she had
achieved such beauty just to break the penances and austerities of others. He
thought that Lord Brahmä, the creator of the universe, might have been
pleased with him and might therefore have sent her to become his wife. He
requested Pürvacitti to become his wife so that together they could perform
austerities and penances in family life. In other words, a suitable wife helps her
husband perform penances and austerities in household life if both of them are
on the same elevated platform of spiritual understanding. Without spiritual
understanding, husband and wife cannot be equally situated. Lord Brahmä, the
creator of the universe, is interested in good progeny. Therefore unless he is
pleased, one cannot get a suitable wife. In fact, Lord Brahmä is worshiped in
marriage ceremonies. In India even today, wedding invitations are still issued
with a picture of Lord Brahmä on the face of the card.
TEXT 16
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
116
Na Tva& TYaJaaiMa diYaTa& iÜJadevdta&
YaiSMaNMaNaae d*GaiPa Naae Na ivYaaiTa l/GanMa( )
Maa& caåé*(r)yhRiSa NaeTauMaNauv]Ta& Tae
icta& YaTa" Pa[iTaSarNTau iXava" SaicVYa" )) 16 ))
na tväà tyajämi dayitaà dvija-deva-dattaà
yasmin mano dåg api no na viyäti lagnam
mäà cäru-çåìgy arhasi netum anuvrataà te
cittaà yataù pratisarantu çiväù sacivyaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; tväm—you; tyajämi—I shall give up; dayitam—very dear;
dvija-deva—by Lord Brahmä, the demigod worshiped by the brähmaëas;
dattam—given; yasmin—unto whom; manaù—mind; dåk—eyes; api—also;
naù—my; na viyäti—do not go away; lagnam—tightly attached; mäm—me;
cäru-çåìgi—O woman with beautiful raised breasts; arhasi—you ought;
netum—to lead; anuvratam—follower; te—your; cittam—desire;
yataù—wherever; pratisarantu—may follow; çiväù—favorable;
sacivyaù—friends.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, who is worshiped by the brähmaëas, has very mercifully given
you to me, and that is why I have met you. I do not want to give up your
company, for my mind and eyes are fixed upon you and cannot be drawn away.
O woman with beautiful raised breasts, I am your follower. You may take me
wherever you like, and your friends may also follow me.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
117
Now Ägnédhra frankly admits his weakness. He was attracted to Pürvacitti,
and therefore before she could say, "But I have no business with you," he
expressed his desire to be united with her. He was so attracted that he was
ready to go anywhere, hell or heaven, in her company. When one is absorbed
in lust and the influence of sex, one surrenders to the feet of a woman without
reservations. Çréla Madhväcärya remarks in this connection that when one
engages in joking and talking like a crazy person, one may say anything and
everything, but his words will be meaningless.
TEXT 17
é[qXauk- ovac
wiTa l/l/NaaNauNaYaaiTaivXaardae Ga]aMYavEdGDYaYaa Pair>aazYaa Taa& ivbuDavDaU&
ivbuDaMaiTariDaSa>aaJaYaaMaaSa )) 17 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti lalanänunayäti-viçärado grämya-vaidagdhyayä paribhäñayä täà
vibudha-vadhüà vibudha-matir adhisabhäjayäm äsa.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; lalanä—women;
anunaya—in winning over; ati-viçäradaù—very expert;
grämya-vaidagdhyayä—expert in fulfilling one's material desires;
paribhäñayä—by selected words; täm—her; vibudha-vadhüm—the celestial girl;
vibudha-matiù—Ägnédhra, who possessed intelligence like that of the
demigods; adhisabhäjayäm äsa—gained the favor of.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Mahäräja Ägnédhra, whose intelligence was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
118
like that of a demigod, knew the art of flattering women to win them to his side.
He therefore pleased that celestial girl with his lusty words and gained her
favor.
PURPORT
Since King Ägnédhra was a devotee, he actually had no attraction for
material enjoyment, but because he wanted a wife for progeny and Lord
Brahmä had sent Pürvacitti for this purpose, he expertly pleased her with
flattering words. Women are attracted by a man's flattering words. One who is
expert in this art of flattery is called vidagdha.
TEXT 18
Saa c TaTaSTaSYa vqrYaUQaPaTaebuRiÖXaql/æPavYa"ié[YaaEdaYaeR<a Parai+aáMaNaaSTaeNa
SahaYauTaaYauTaPairvTSaraePal/+a<a& k-al&/ JaMbUÜqPaPaiTaNaa >aaEMaSvGaR>aaeGaaNa( bu>auJae
)) 18 ))
sä ca tatas tasya véra-yütha-pater buddhi-çéla-rüpa-vayaù-çriyaudäryeëa
paräkñipta-manäs tena sahäyutäyuta-parivatsaropalakñaëaà kälaà
jambüdvépa-patinä bhauma-svarga-bhogän bubhuje.
SYNONYMS
sä—she; ca—also; tataù—thereafter; tasya—of him; véra-yütha-pateù—the
master of heroes; buddhi—by the intelligence; çéla—behavior; rüpa—beauty;
vayaù—youth; çriyä—opulence; audäryeëa—and by the magnanimity;
paräkñipta—attracted; manäù—her mind; tena saha—with him; ayuta—ten
thousand; ayuta—ten thousand; parivatsara—years; upalakñaëam—extending;
kälam—time; jambüdvépa-patinä—with the King of Jambüdvépa;
bhauma—earthly; svarga—heavenly; bhogän—pleasures; bubhuje—enjoyed.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
119
TRANSLATION
Attracted by the intelligence, learning, youth, beauty, behavior, opulence
and magnanimity of Ägnédhra, the King of Jambüdvépa and master of all heroes,
Pürvacitti lived with him for many thousands of years and luxuriously enjoyed
both worldly and heavenly happiness.
PURPORT
By the grace of Lord Brahmä, King Ägnédhra and the heavenly girl.
Pürvacitti, found their union quite suitable. Thus they enjoyed worldly and
heavenly happiness for many thousands of years.
TEXT 19
TaSYaaMau h va AaTMaJaaNa( Sa raJavr AaGanqDa]ae Naai>aik-MPauåzhirvzeRl/av*Ta‚
rMYak-ihr<MaYaku-å>ad]aìke-TauMaal/Sa&jaàv Pau}aaNaJaNaYaTa( )) 19 ))
tasyäm u ha vä ätmajän sa räja-vara ägnédhro
näbhi-kimpuruña-harivarñelävåta-ramyaka-hiraëmaya-kuru-bhadräçva-ketumä
la-saàjïän nava puträn ajanayat.
SYNONYMS
tasyäm—in her; u ha vä—certainly; ätma-jän—sons; saù—he; räja-varaù—the
best of kings; ägnédhraù—Ägnédhra; näbhi—Näbhi; kiàpuruña—Kiàpuruña;
hari-varña—Harivarña; ilävåta—Ilävåta; ramyaka—Ramyaka;
hiraëmaya—Hiraëmaya; kuru—Kuru; bhadräçva—Bhadräçva;
ketu-mäla—Ketumäla; saàjïän—named; nava—nine; puträn—sons;
ajanayat—begot.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
120
TRANSLATION
In the womb of Pürvacitti, Mahäräja Ägnédhra, the best of kings, begot nine
sons, named Näbhi, Kiàpuruña, Harivarña, Ilävåta, Ramyaka, Hiraëmaya,
Kuru, Bhadräçva and Ketumäla.
TEXT 20
Saa SaUTvaQa SauTaaàvaNauvTSar& Ga*h WvaPahaYa PaUvRicita>aURYa WvaJa& dev‚
MauPaTaSQae )) 20 ))
sä sütvätha sutän navänuvatsaraà gåha eväpahäya pürvacittir bhüya eväjaà
devam upatasthe.
SYNONYMS
sä—she; sütvä—after giving birth to; atha—thereafter; sutän—sons;
nava—nine; anuvatsaram—year after year; gåhe—at home; eva—certainly;
apahäya—leaving; pürvacittiù—Pürvacitti; bhüyaù—again; eva—certainly;
ajam—Lord Brahmä; devam—the demigod; upatasthe—approached.
TRANSLATION
Pürvacitti gave birth to these nine sons, one each year, but after they grew
up, she left them at home and again approached Lord Brahmä to worship him.
PURPORT
There are many instances in which Apsaräs, heavenly angels, have
descended to this earth by the order of a superior demigod like Lord Brahmä or
Lord Indra, have followed the demigod's order by marrying someone and giving
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
121
birth to children, and have then returned to their celestial homes. For
example, after Menakä, the celestial woman who had come to delude
Viçvämitra Muni, gave birth to the child Çakuntalä, she left both the child and
her husband and returned to the heavenly planets. Pürvacitti did not remain
permanently with Mahäräja Ägnédhra. After cooperating in his household
affairs, she left Mahäräja Ägnédhra and all nine sons and returned to Brahmä
to worship him.
TEXT 21
AaGanqDa]SauTaaSTae MaaTaurNauGa]hadaETPaitake-NaEv Sa&hNaNabl/aePaeTaa" iPa}aa iv>a¢-a
AaTMaTauLYaNaaMaaiNa YaQaa>aaGa& JaMbUÜqPavzaRi<a bu>auJau" )) 21 ))
ägnédhra-sutäs te mätur anugrahäd autpattikenaiva saàhanana-balopetäù piträ
vibhaktä ätma-tulya-nämäni yathä-bhägaà jambüdvépa-varñäëi bubhujuù.
SYNONYMS
ägnédhra-sutäù—the sons of Mahäräja Ägnédhra; te—they; mätuù—of the
mother; anugrahät—by the mercy or by drinking the breast milk;
autpattikena—naturally; eva—certainly; saàhanana—well-built body;
bala—strength; upetäù—obtained; piträ—by the father; vibhaktäù—divided;
ätma-tulya—following their own; nämäni—possessing names;
yathä-bhägam—divided properly; jambüdvépa-varñäëi—different parts of
Jambüdvépa (probably Asia and Europe combined together); bubhujuù—ruled.
TRANSLATION
Because of drinking the breast milk of their mother, the nine sons of
Ägnédhra naturally had strong, well-built bodies. Their father gave them each a
kingdom in a different part of Jambüdvépa. The kingdoms were named
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
122
according to the names of the sons. Thus the sons of Ägnédhra ruled the
kingdoms they received from their father.
PURPORT
The äcäryas specifically mention that in this verse the words mätuù
anugrahät ("by the mercy of their mother") refer to the breast milk of their
mother. In India it is a common belief that if a baby is fed his mother's milk for
at least six months, his body will be very strong. Besides that, it is mentioned
herein that all the sons of Ägnédhra were endowed with the nature of their
mother. Bhagavad-gétä (1.40) also declares, stréñu duñöäsu värñëeya jäyate
varëa-saìkaraù: when women are polluted, varëa-saìkara, unqualified
children, are generated, and when the varëa-saìkara population increases, the
entire world becomes hellish. Therefore, according to Manu-saàhitä, a woman
needs a great deal of protection in order to remain pure and chaste so that her
children can be fully engaged for the benefit of human society.
TEXT 22
AaGanqDa]ae raJaaTa*á" k-aMaaNaaMaPSarSaMaevaNauidNaMaiDaMaNYaMaaNaSTaSYaa" Sal/aek-Taa&
é[uiTai>arvaåNDa Ya}a iPaTarae MaadYaNTae )) 22 ))
ägnédhro räjätåptaù kämänäm apsarasam evänudinam adhi-manyamänas
tasyäù salokatäà çrutibhir avärundha yatra pitaro mädayante.
SYNONYMS
ägnédhraù—Ägnédhra; räjä—the King; atåptaù—not satisfied;
kämänäm—with sense gratification; apsarasam—the celestial woman
(Pürvacitti); eva—certainly; anudinam—day after day; adhi—exceedingly;
manyamänaù—thinking of; tasyäù—of her; sa-lokatäm—promotion to the
same planet; çrutibhiù—by the Vedas; avärundha—got; yatra—where;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
123
pitaraù—the forefathers; mädayante—take pleasure.
TRANSLATION
After Pürvacitti's departure, King Ägnédhra, his lusty desires not at all
satisfied, always thought of her. Therefore, in accordance with the Vedic
injunctions, the King, after his death, was promoted to the same planet as his
celestial wife. That planet, which is called Pitåloka, is where the pitäs, the
forefathers, live in great delight.
PURPORT
If one always thinks of something, he certainly gets a related body after
death. Mahäräja Ägnédhra was always thinking of Pitåloka, the place where his
wife had returned. Therefore after his death he achieved that same planet,
probably to live with her again. Bhagavad-gétä also says:
yaà yaà väpi smaran bhävaà
tyajaty ante kalevaram
taà tam evaiti kaunteya
sadä tad-bhäva-bhävitaù
"Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he
will attain without fail." (Bg. 8.6) We can naturally conclude that if we always
think of Kåñëa or become fully Kåñëa conscious, we can be promoted to the
planet of Goloka Våndävana, where Kåñëa eternally lives.
TEXT 23
SaMPareTae iPaTair Nav >a]aTarae MaeåduihTa›MaeRådevq& Pa[iTaæPaaMauGa]d&í\q& l/Taa& rMYaa&
XYaaMaa& Naarq& >ad]a& devvqiTaiMaiTaSa&ja NavaedvhNa( )) 23 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
124
samparete pitari nava bhrätaro meru-duhitèr merudevéà pratirüpäm
ugradaàñöréà latäà ramyäà çyämäà näréà bhadräà devavétim iti saàjïä
navodavahan.
SYNONYMS
samparete pitari—after the departure of their father; nava—nine;
bhrätaraù—brothers; meru-duhitèù—the daughters of Meru;
merudevém—Merudevé; prati-rüpäm—Pratirüpä; ugra-daàñörém—Ugradaàñöré;
latäm—Latä; ramyäm—Ramyä; çyämäm—Çyämä; närém—Näré;
bhadräm—Bhadrä; deva-vétim—Devavéti; iti—thus; saàjïäù—the names;
nava—nine; udavahan—married.
TRANSLATION
After the departure of their father, the nine brothers married the nine
daughters of Meru named Merudevé, Pratirüpä, Ugradaàñöré, Latä, Ramyä,
Çyämä, Näré, Bhadrä and Devavéti.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Second Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Activities of Mahäräja Ägnédhra."
3. Åñabhadeva's Appearance in the Womb of Merudevé, the
Wife of King Näbhi
In this chapter the spotless character of King Näbhi, the oldest son of
Ägnédhra, is described. Wanting to have sons, Mahäräja Näbhi underwent
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
125
severe austerities and penances. He performed many sacrifices along with his
wife and worshiped Lord Viñëu, master of all sacrifices. Being very kind to His
devotees, the Supreme Personality of Godhead was very pleased with the
austerities of Mahäräja Näbhi. He personally appeared before the King in His
four-handed feature, and the priests, who were performing the sacrifices,
began to offer their prayers unto Him. They prayed for a son like the Lord, and
Lord Viñëu agreed to take birth in the womb of Merudevé, the wife of King
Näbhi, and incarnate as King Åñabhadeva.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
Naai>arPaTYak-aMaae_Pa[JaYaa MaeådeVYaa >aGavNTa& YajPauåzMavihTaaTMaaYaJaTa )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
näbhir apatya-kämo 'prajayä merudevyä bhagavantaà yajïa-puruñam
avahitätmäyajata.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; näbhiù—the son of Mahäräja
Ägnédhra; apatya-kämaù—desiring to have sons; aprajayä—who had not given
birth to any children; merudevyä—with Merudevé; bhagavantam—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajïa-puruñam—Lord Viñëu, the master and
enjoyer of all performances of sacrifice; avahita-ätmä—with great attention;
ayajata—offered prayers and worshiped.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued to speak: Mahäräja Näbhi, the son of
Ägnédhra, wished to have sons, and therefore he attentively began to offer
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
126
prayers and worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu, the
master and enjoyer of all sacrifices. Mahäräja Näbhi's wife, Merudevé, who had
not given birth to any children at that time, also worshiped Lord Viñëu along
with her husband.
TEXT 2
TaSYa h vav é[ÖYaa ivXauÖ>aaveNa YaJaTa" Pa[vGYaeRzu Pa[crTSau d]VYadeXak-al/‚
MaN}aiTvRGdi+a<aaivDaaNaYaaeGaaePaPatYaa duriDaGaMaae_iPa >aGavaNa( >aaGavTavaTSa‚
LYaTaYaa SauPa[Taqk- AaTMaaNaMaParaiJaTa& iNaJaJaNaai>aPa[eTaaQaRiviDaTSaYaa Ga*hqTaôdYaae
ôdYa(r)Ma& MaNaaeNaYaNaaNaNdNaavYavai>araMaMaaivêk-ar )) 2 ))
tasya ha väva çraddhayä viçuddha-bhävena yajataù pravargyeñu pracaratsu
dravya-deça-käla-mantrartvig-dakñiëä-vidhäna-yogopapattyä duradhigamo 'pi
bhagavän bhägavata-vätsalyatayä supratéka ätmänam aparäjitaà
nija-janäbhipretärtha-vidhitsayä gåhéta-hådayo hådayaìgamaà
mano-nayanänandanävayaväbhirämam äviçcakära.
SYNONYMS
tasya—when he (Näbhi); ha väva—certainly; çraddhayä—with great faith and
devotion; viçuddha-bhävena—with a pure, uncontaminated mind;
yajataù—was worshiping; pravargyeñu—while the fruitive activities called
pravargya; pracaratsu—were being performed; dravya—the ingredients;
deça—place; käla—time; mantra—hymns; åtvik—priests conducting the
ceremony; dakñiëä—gifts to the priests; vidhäna—regulative principles;
yoga—and of the means; upapattyä—by the performance; duradhigamaù—not
obtainable; api—although; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
bhägavata-vätsalyatayä—because of His being very affectionate to His devotee;
su-pratékaù—possessing a very beautiful form; ätmänam—Himself;
aparäjitam—not to be conquered by anyone; nija-jana—of His devotee;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
127
abhipreta-artha—the desire; vidhitsayä—to fulfill; gåhéta-hådayaù—His heart
being attracted; hådayaìgamam—captivating;
manaù-nayana-änandana—pleasing to the mind and eyes; avayava—by the
limbs; abhirämam—beautiful; äviçcakära—manifested.
TRANSLATION
In the performance of a sacrifice, there are seven transcendental means to
obtain the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: (1) by sacrificing
valuable things or eatables, (2) by acting in terms of place, (3) by acting in
terms of time, (4) by offering hymns, (5) by going through the priest, (6) by
offering gifts to the priests and (7) by observing the regulative principles.
However, one cannot always obtain the Supreme Lord through this
paraphernalia. Nonetheless, the Lord is affectionate to His devotee; therefore
when Mahäräja Näbhi, who was a devotee, worshiped and offered prayers to the
Lord with great faith and devotion and with a pure uncontaminated mind,
superficially performing some yajïa in the line of pravargya, the kind Supreme
Personality of Godhead, due to His affection for His devotees, appeared before
King Näbhi in His unconquerable and captivating form with four hands. In this
way, to fulfill the desire of His devotee, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
manifested Himself in His beautiful body before His devotee. This body pleases
the mind and eyes of the devotees.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä it is clearly said:
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä
viçate tad-anantaram
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
128
"One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional
service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by such
devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God." (Bg. 18.55)
One can understand and see the Supreme Personality of Godhead through
the process of devotional service, and not in any other way. Although
Mahäräja Näbhi performed prescribed duties and sacrifices, it should still be
considered that the Lord appeared before him not due to his sacrifices but
because of his devotional service. It was for this reason that the Lord agreed to
appear before him in His beautiful bodily features. As stated in
Brahma-saàhitä (5.30), the Supreme Lord in His original nature is very
beautiful. Veëuà kvaëantam aravinda-daläyatäkñaà barhävataàsam
asitämbuda-sundaräìgam: the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although
blackish, is very, very beautiful.
TEXT 3
AQa h TaMaaivZk*-Ta>auJaYauGal/ÜYa& ihr<MaYa& PauåzivXaez& k-iPaXak-aEXaeYaaMbrDa‚
rMauriSa ivl/SaC^\qvTSal/l/aMa& drvrvNaåhvNaMaal/aC^UYaRMa*TaMai<aGadaidi>ar(
oPal/i+aTa& Sfu-$=ik-r<aPa[vrMauku-$=ku-<@l/k-$=k-k-i$=SaU}aharke-YaUrNaUPauraÛ(r)>aUz<a‚
iv>aUizTaMa*iTvk(„„„SadSYaGa*hPaTaYaae_DaNaa wvaetaMaDaNaMauPal/>Ya SabhuMaaNaMahR<aeNaa‚
vNaTaXaqzaR<a oPaTaSQau" )) 3 ))
atha ha tam äviñkåta-bhuja-yugala-dvayaà hiraëmayaà puruña-viçeñaà
kapiça-kauçeyämbara-dharam urasi vilasac-chrévatsa-lalämaà
daravara-vanaruha-vana-mäläcchüry-amåta-maëi-gadädibhir upalakñitaà
sphuöa-kiraëa-pravara-mukuöa-kuëòala-kaöaka-kaöi-sütra-hära-keyüra-nüpur
ädy-aìga-bhüñaëa-vibhüñitam åtvik-sadasya-gåha-patayo 'dhanä
ivottama-dhanam upalabhya sabahu-mänam arhaëenävanata-çérñäëa
upatasthuù.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
129
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; ha—certainly; tam—Him;
äviñkåta-bhuja-yugala-dvayam—who manifested Himself with four arms;
hiraëmayam—very bright; puruña-viçeñam—the topmost of all living beings,
Puruñottama; kapiça-kauçeya-ambara-dharam—wearing a yellow silk garment;
urasi—on the chest; vilasat—beautiful; çrévatsa—called Çrévatsa;
lalämam—possessing the mark; dara-vara—by a conchshell; vana-ruha—lotus
flower; vana-mälä—garland of forest flowers; acchüri—disc; amåta-maëi—the
Kaustubha gem; gadä-ädibhiù—and by a club and other symbols;
upalakñitam—symptomized; sphuöa-kiraëa—radiant; pravara—excellent;
mukuöa—helmet; kuëòala—earrings; kaöaka—bracelets; kaöi-sütra—girdle;
hära—necklace; keyüra—armlets; nüpura—ankle bells; ädi—and so on;
aìga—of the body; bhüñaëa—with ornaments; vibhüñitam—decorated;
åtvik—the priests; sadasya—associates; gåha-patayaù—and King Näbhi;
adhanäù—poor persons; iva—like; uttama-dhanam—a great treasure;
upalabhya—having achieved; sa-bahu-mänam—with great regard;
arhaëena—with ingredients for worship; avanata—bent; çérñäëaù—their
heads; upatasthuù—worshiped.
TRANSLATION
Lord Viñëu appeared before King Näbhi with four arms. He was very bright,
and He appeared to be the best of all personalities. Around the lower portion of
His body, He wore a yellow silken garment. On His chest was the mark of
Çrévatsa, which always displays beauty. He carried a conchshell, lotus flower,
disc and club, and He wore a garland of forest flowers and the Kaustubha gem.
He was beautifully decorated with a helmet, earrings, bangles, belt, pearl
necklace, armlets, ankle bells and other bodily ornaments bedecked with radiant
jewels. Seeing the Lord present before them, King Näbhi and his priests and
associates felt just like poor people who have suddenly attained great riches.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
130
They received the Lord and respectfully bent their heads and offered Him
things in worship.
PURPORT
It is distinctly mentioned here that the Supreme Personality of Godhead
did not appear as an ordinary human being. He appeared before King Näbhi
and his associates as the best of all personalities (Puruñottama). As stated in
the Vedas: Nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm (Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13). The
Supreme Personality of Godhead is also a living being, but He is the supreme
living being. In Bhagavad-gétä (7.7), Lord Kåñëa Himself says. mattaù parataraà
nänyat kiïcid asti dhanaïjaya: "O conqueror of wealth [Arjuna], there is no
truth superior to Me." No one is more attractive or more authoritative than
Lord Kåñëa. That is one of the differences between God and an ordinary living
being. According to this description of the transcendental body of Lord Viñëu,
the Lord can easily be distinguished from all other living beings. Consequently
Mahäräja Näbhi and his priests and associates all offered the Lord obeisances
and began to worship Him with various things. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(6.22), yaà labdhvä cäparaà läbhaà manyate nädhikaà tataù. That is, "Upon
gaining this, one thinks that there is no greater gain." When one realizes God
and sees the Lord face to face, one certainly thinks that he has gained the best
of all things. Raso 'py asya paraà dåñövä nivartate: [Bg. 9.59] when one
experiences a higher taste, his consciousness is fixed. After seeing the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, one ceases to be attracted by anything material. One
then remains steady in his worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT
‰iTvJa Ocu"
AhRiSa MauhurhRtaMaahR<aMaSMaak-MaNauPaQaaNaa& NaMaae NaMa wTYaeTaavTSaduPaiXai+aTa&
k-ae_hRiTa PauMaaNa( Pa[k*-iTaGau<aVYaiTak-rMaiTarNaqXa wRìrSYa ParSYa Pa[k*-iTaPauåzYaae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
131
rvaR¢-Naai>aNaaRMaæPaak*-iTa>aq æPaiNaæPa<aMa( )) 4 )) Sak-l/JaNaiNak-aYav*iJaNa‚
iNarSaNaiXavTaMaPa[vrGau<aGa<aEk-deXak-QaNaad*Tae )) 5 ))
åtvija ücuù
arhasi muhur arhattamärhaëam asmäkam anupathänäà namo nama ity etävat
sad-upaçikñitaà ko 'rhati pumän prakåti-guëa-vyatikara-matir anéça éçvarasya
parasya prakåti-puruñayor arväktanäbhir näma-rüpäkåtibhé rüpa-nirüpaëam;
sakala-jana-nikäya-våjina-nirasana-çivatama-pravara-guëa-gaëaika-deça-kath
anäd åte.
SYNONYMS
åtvijaù ücuù—the priests said; arhasi—please (accept); muhuù—again and
again; arhat-tama—O most exalted, worshipable person; arhaëam—offering of
worship; asmäkam—of us; anupathänäm—who are Your servants;
namaù—respectful obeisances; namaù—respectful obeisances; iti—thus;
etävat—so far; sat—by exalted personalities; upaçikñitam—instructed;
kaù—what; arhati—is able (to make); pumän—man; prakåti—of material
nature; guëa—of the modes; vyatikara—in the transformations; matiù—whose
mind (is absorbed); anéçaù—who is most incapable; éçvarasya—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; parasya—beyond; prakåti-puruñayoù—the jurisdiction
of the three modes of material nature; arväktanäbhiù—which do not reach up
to, or which are of this material world; näma-rüpa-äkåtibhiù—by names, forms
and qualities; rüpa—of Your nature or position; nirüpaëam—ascertainment,
perception; sakala—all; jana-nikäya—of mankind; våjina—sinful actions;
nirasana—which wipe out; çivatama—most auspicious; pravara—excellent;
guëa-gaëa—of the transcendental qualities; eka-deça—one part; kathanät—by
speaking; åte—except.
TRANSLATION
The priests began to offer prayers to the Lord, saying: O most worshipable
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
132
one, we are simply Your servants. Although You are full in Yourself, please, out
of Your causeless mercy, accept a little service from us, Your eternal servants.
We are not actually aware of Your transcendental form, but we can simply offer
our respectful obeisances again and again, as instructed by the Vedic literatures
and authorized äcäryas. Materialistic living entities are very much attracted to
the modes of material nature, and therefore they are never perfect, but You are
above the jurisdiction of all material conceptions. Your name, form and qualities
are all transcendental and beyond the conception of experimental knowledge.
Indeed, who can conceive of You? In the material world we can perceive only
material names and qualities. We have no other power than to offer our
respectful obeisances and prayers unto You, the transcendental person. The
chanting of Your auspicious transcendental qualities will wipe out the sins of all
mankind. That is the most auspicious activity for us, and we can thus partially
understand Your supernatural position.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has nothing to do with material
perception. Even the impersonalist Çaìkaräcärya says. näräyaëaù paro
'vyaktät: "Näräyaëa. the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is beyond the
material conception." We cannot concoct the form and attributes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. We must simply accept the description given
in Vedic literatures about the Lord's form and activities. As stated in
Brahma-saàhitä (5.29):
cintämaëi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-våkñalakñävåteñu
surabhér abhipälayantam
lakñmé-sahasra-çata-sambhrama-sevyamänaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor, who is tending the
cows, yielding all desires, in abodes built with spiritual gems and surrounded by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
133
millions of purpose trees. He is always served with great reverence and
affection by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune." We can have
some conception of the Absolute Truth, His form and His attributes simply by
reading the descriptions given in Vedic literatures and authoritative
statements given by exalted personalities like Brahmä, Närada, Çukadeva
Gosvämé and others. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé says, ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi na bhaved
grähyam indriyaiù: [Cc. Madhya 17.136] "We cannot conceive the name, form
and qualities of Çré Kåñëa through our material senses." Because of this, other
names for the Lord are adhokñaja and apräkåta, which indicate that He is
beyond any material senses. Out of His causeless mercy upon His devotees, the
Lord appeared before Mahäräja Näbhi. Similarly, when we are engaged in the
Lord's devotional service, the Lord reveals Himself to us. Sevonmukhe hi
jihvädau svayam eva sphuraty adaù. This is the only way to understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, bhaktyä
mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù: [Bg. 18.55] one can understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead through devotional service. There is no other
way. We have to hear from the authorities and from the çästras and consider
the Supreme Lord in terms of their statements. We cannot imagine or concoct
forms and attributes of the Lord.
TEXT 6
PairJaNaaNauraGaivricTaXabl/Sa&XaBdSail/l/iSaTaik-Sal/YaTaul/iSak-adUvaRx(ku==rEriPa
SaM>a*TaYaa SaPaYaRYaa ik-l/ ParMa PairTauZYaiSa )) 6 ))
parijanänuräga-viracita-çabala-saàçabda-salila-sita-kisalaya-tulasikä-dürväìk
urair api sambhåtayä saparyayä kila parama parituñyasi.
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
134
parijana—by Your servants; anuräga—in great ecstasy; viracita—executed;
çabala—with a faltering voice; saàçabda—with prayers; salila—water;
sita-kisalaya—twigs bearing new leaves; tulasikä—tulasé leaves;
dürvä-aìkuraiù—and with newly grown grass; api—also;
sambhåtayä—performed; saparyayä—by worship; kila—indeed; parama—O
Supreme Lord; parituñyasi—You become satisfied.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Lord, You are full in every respect. You are certainly very
satisfied when Your devotees offer You prayers with faltering voices and in
ecstasy bring You tulasé leaves, water, twigs bearing new leaves, and newly
grown grass. This surely makes You satisfied.
PURPORT
One does not need great wealth, education or opulence to satisfy the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one is fully absorbed in love and ecstasy,
he need offer only a flower and a little water. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä,
patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà yo me bhaktyä prayacchati: "If one offers Me with
love and devotion a leaf, a flower. fruit or water, I will accept it." (Bg. 9.26)
The Supreme Lord can be pleased only by devotional service: therefore it is
said here that the Lord is surely satisfied by devotion and nothing else.
Quoting from the Gautaméya-tantra, the Hari-bhakti-viläsa states:
tulasé-dala-mätreëa
jalasya culukena vä
vikréëéte svam ätmänaà
bhaktebhyo bhakta-vatsalaù
"Çré Kåñëa, who is very affectionate toward His devotees, sells Himself to a
devotee who offers merely a tulasé leaf and a palmful of water." The Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
135
Lord is causelessly merciful upon His devotee, so much so that even the poorest
of men can offer Him a little water and a flower in devotion and thus please
Him. This is due to His affectionate dealings with His devotees.
TEXT 7
AQaaNaYaaiPa Na >avTa wJYaYaaeå>aar>arYaa SaMauicTaMaQaRiMahaePal/>aaMahe )) 7 ))
athänayäpi na bhavata ijyayoru-bhära-bharayä samucitam artham
ihopalabhämahe.
SYNONYMS
atha—otherwise; anayä—this; api—even; na—not; bhavataù—of Your exalted
personality; ijyayä—by performance of sacrifice;
urubhära-bharayä—encumbered by much paraphernalia;
samucitam—required; artham—use; iha—here; upalabhämahe—we can see.
TRANSLATION
We have engaged in Your worship with many things and have offered
sacrifices unto You, but we think that there is no need for so many
arrangements to please Your Lordship.
PURPORT
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé says that if one is offered varied foods but has no
appetite, the offering has no value. In a big sacrificial ceremony there may be
many things accumulated to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but if
there is no devotion, attachment or love for the Lord, the arrangement is
useless. The Lord is complete in Himself, and He does not need anything from
us. However, if we offer Him a little water, a flower and a tulasi leaf, He will
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
136
accept them. Bhakti, devotional service, is the main way to satisfy the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. It is not a question of arranging huge sacrifices. The
priests were regretful, thinking that they were not on the path of devotional
service and that their sacrifice was not pleasing to the Lord.
TEXT 8
AaTMaNa WvaNauSavNaMaÅSaaVYaiTareke-<a bae>aUYaMaaNaaXaezPauåzaQaRSvæPaSYa ik-NTau
NaaQaaiXaz AaXaaSaaNaaNaaMaeTadi>aSa&raDaNaMaa}a& >aivTauMahRiTa )) 8 ))
ätmana evänusavanam aïjasävyatirekeëa
bobhüyamänäçeña-puruñärtha-svarüpasya kintu näthäçiña äçäsänänäm etad
abhisaàrädhana-mätraà bhavitum arhati.
SYNONYMS
ätmanaù—self-sufficiently; eva—certainly; anusavanam—at every moment;
aïjasä—directly; avyatirekeëa—without stopping; bobhüyamäna—increasing;
açeña—unlimitedly; puruña-artha—the goals of life; sva-rüpasya—Your actual
identity; kintu—but; nätha—O Lord; äçiñaù—benedictions for material
enjoyment; äçäsänänäm—of us, who are always desiring; etat—this;
abhisaàrädhana—for getting Your mercy; mätram—only; bhavitum
arhati—can be.
TRANSLATION
All of life's goals and opulences are directly, self-sufficiently, unceasingly
and unlimitedly increasing in You at every moment. Indeed, You are unlimited
enjoyment and blissful existence itself. As far as we are concerned, O Lord, we
are always after material enjoyment. You do not need all these sacrificial
arrangements, but they are meant for us so that we may be benedicted by Your
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
137
Lordship. All these sacrifices are performed for our fruitive results, and they
are not actually needed by You.
PURPORT
Being self-sufficient, the Supreme Lord does not need huge sacrifices.
Fruitive activity for a more opulent life is for those who desire such material
opulence for their interest. Yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra loko 'yaà
karma-bandhanaù: [Bg. 3.9]) if we do not act to satisfy the Supreme Lord. we
engage in mäyä's activities. We may construct a gorgeous temple and spend
thousands of dollars, but such a temple is not required by the Lord. The Lord
has many millions of temples for His residence. and He does not need our
attempt. He does not require opulent activity at all. Such engagement is meant
for our benefit. If we engage our money in constructing a gorgeous temple, we
are freed from the reactions of our endeavors. This is for our benefit. In
addition, if we attempt to do something nice for the Supreme Lord, He is
pleased with us and gives us His benediction. In conclusion, the gorgeous
arrangements are not for the Lord's sake but for our own. If we somehow or
other receive blessings and benedictions from the Lord, our consciousness can
be purified and we can become eligible to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 9
TaÛQaa bail/XaaNaa& SvYaMaaTMaNa" é[eYa" ParMaivduza& ParMaParMaPauåz Pa[k-zR‚
k-å<aYaa SvMaihMaaNa& caPavGaaR:YaMauPak-LPaiYaZYaNa( SvYa& NaaPaicTa WveTar‚
vidhaePal/i+aTa" )) 9 ))
tad yathä bäliçänäà svayam ätmanaù çreyaù param aviduñäà
parama-parama-puruña prakarña-karuëayä sva-mahimänaà cäpavargäkhyam
upakalpayiñyan svayaà näpacita evetaravad ihopalakñitaù.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
138
SYNONYMS
tat—that; yathä—as; bäliçänäm—of the fools; svayam—by Yourself;
ätmanaù—own; çreyaù—welfare; param—ultimate; aviduñäm—of persons who
do not know; parama-parama-puruña—O Lord of lords;
prakarña-karuëayä—by abundant causeless mercy; sva-mahimänam—Your
personal glory; ca—and; apavarga-äkhyam—called apavarga (liberation);
upakalpayiñyan—desiring to give; svayam—personally; na apacitaù—not
properly worshiped; eva—although; itara-vat—like an ordinary person;
iha—here; upalakñitaù—(You are) present and seen (by us).
TRANSLATION
O Lord of lords, we are completely ignorant of the execution of dharma,
artha, käma and mokña, the process of liberation, because we do not actually
know the goal of life. You have appeared personally before us like a person
soliciting worship, but actually You are present here just so we can see You.
You have come out of Your abundant and causeless mercy in order to serve our
purpose, our interest, and give us the benefit of Your personal glory called
apavarga, liberation. You have come, although You are not properly worshiped
by us due to our ignorance.
PURPORT
Lord Viñëu was personally present at the sacrificial arena, but this does not
mean that He had any interest in His own personal benefit. Similarly, the
arcä-vigraha, the Deity in the temple, is present for the same purpose. Out of
His causeless mercy, the Supreme Personality of Godhead presents Himself
before us so that we can see Him. Since we have no transcendental vision, we
cannot see the spiritual sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1] of the Lord; therefore,
out of His causeless mercy He comes in a form we can see. We can only see
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
139
material things like stone and wood, and therefore He accepts a form of stone
and wood and thus accepts our service in the temple. This is an exhibition of
the Lord's causeless mercy. Although He has no interest in such things, in
order to receive our loving service, He agrees to act as He does. We cannot
actually offer suitable paraphernalia for the Lord's worship because we are
completely ignorant. It was out of His causeless mercy that the Lord appeared
in the sacrificial arena of Mahäräja Näbhi.
TEXT 10
AQaaYaMaev vrae ùhRtaMa YaihR bihRiz raJazeRvRrdzR>aae >avaiàJaPauåze+a<aivzYa
AaSaqTa( )) 10 ))
athäyam eva varo hy arhattama yarhi barhiñi räjarñer varadarñabho bhavän
nija-puruñekñaëa-viñaya äsét.
SYNONYMS
atha—then; ayam—this; eva—certainly; varaù—benediction; hi—indeed;
arhat-tama—O most worshipable of the worshipable; yarhi—because;
barhiñi—in the sacrifice; räja-åñeù—of King Näbhi; varada-åñabhaù—the best
of the benefactors; bhavän—Your Lordship; nija-puruña—of Your devotees;
ékñaëa-viñayaù—the object of the sight; äsét—has become.
TRANSLATION
O most worshipable of all, You are the best of all benefactors, and Your
appearance at saintly King Näbhi's sacrificial arena is meant for our
benediction. Because You have been seen by us, You have bestowed upon us the
most valuable benediction.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
140
PURPORT
Nija-puruña-ékñaëa-viñaya. In Bhagavad-gétä (9.29) Kåñëa says, samo 'haà
sarva-bhüteñu: "I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But
whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am
also a friend to him."
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is equal to everyone. In that sense,
He has no enemies and no friends. Everyone is enjoying the fruitive reactions
of his own work, and the Lord, within everyone's heart, is observing and giving
everyone the desired result. However, just as the devotees are always anxious
to see the Supreme Lord satisfied in every way, similarly the Supreme Lord is
very anxious to present Himself before His devotees. Çré Kåñëa says in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.8):
pariträëäya sädhünäà
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm
dharma-saàsthäpanärthäya
sambhavämi yuge yuge
"To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish
the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after millennium."
Thus Kåñëa's appearance is for the deliverance and satisfaction of His
devotees. Actually He does not advent Himself simply to kill the demons, for
that can be done by His agents. Lord Viñëu's appearance at the sacrificial
arena of Mahäräja Näbhi was just to please the King and his assistants.
Otherwise there was no reason for His being present there.
TEXT 11
ASa(r)iNaiXaTajaNaaNal/ivDaUTaaXaezMal/aNaa& >avTa(Sv>aavaNaaMaaTMaaraMaa<aa& MauNaq‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
141
NaaMaNavrTaPairGaui<aTaGau<aGa<a ParMaMa(r)l/aYaNaGau<aGa<ak-QaNaae_iSa )) 11 ))
asaìga-niçita-jïänänala-vidhütäçeña-malänäà bhavat-svabhävänäm
ätmärämäëäà munénäm anavarata-pariguëita-guëa-gaëa
parama-maìgaläyana-guëa-gaëa-kathano 'si.
SYNONYMS
asaìga—by detachment; niçita—strengthened; jïäna—of knowledge;
anala—by the fire; vidhüta—removed; açeña—unlimited; malänäm—whose
dirty things; bhavat-svabhävänäm—who have attained Your qualities;
ätma-ärämäëäm—who are self-satisfied; munénäm—of great sages;
anavarata—incessantly; pariguëita—recounted; guëa-gaëa—O Lord, whose
spiritual qualities; parama-maìgala—supreme bliss; äyana—produces;
guëa-gaëa-kathanaù—He, the chanting of whose attributes; asi—You are.
TRANSLATION
Dear Lord, all the great sages who are thoughtful and saintly persons
incessantly recount Your spiritual qualities. These sages have already burned up
all the unlimited dirty things and, by the fire of knowledge, strengthened their
detachment from the material world. Thus they have attained Your qualities
and are self-satisfied. Yet even for those who feel spiritual bliss in chanting
Your attributes, Your personal presence is very rare.
PURPORT
The priests in Mahäräja Näbhi's sacrificial arena appreciated the personal
presence of the Supreme Lord Viñëu, and they considered themselves very
much obliged. The Lord's appearance is rare even for great saintly persons who
have become completely detached from this material world and whose hearts
are clean due to constantly chanting the glories of the Lord. Such people are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
142
satisfied by chanting the transcendental qualities of the Lord. The Lord's
personal presence is not actually required. The priests are pointing out that
the Lord's personal presence is very rare even for such elevated sages but that
He was so kind to them that now He was personally present. Therefore the
priests were very much obliged.
TEXT 12
AQa k-QaiÄTS%l/Na+auTPaTaNaJa*M>a<adurvSQaaNaaidzu ivvXaaNaa& Na" SMar<aaYa
JvrMar<adXaaYaaMaiPa Sak-l/k-XMal/iNarSaNaaiNa Tav Gau<ak*-TaNaaMaDaeYaaiNa vcNa‚
Gaaecrai<a >avNTau )) 12 ))
atha kathaïcit skhalana-kñut-patana-jåmbhaëa-duravasthänädiñu vivaçänäà
naù smaraëäya jvara-maraëa-daçäyäm api sakala-kaçmala-nirasanäni tava
guëa-kåta-nämadheyäni vacana-gocaräëi bhavantu.
SYNONYMS
atha—still; kathaïcit—somehow or other; skhalana—stumbling; kñut—hunger;
patana—falling down; jåmbhaëa—yawning; duravasthäna—because of being
placed in an undesirable position; ädiñu—and so on; vivaçänäm—unable;
naù—of ourselves; smaraëäya—to remember; jvara-maraëa-daçäyäm—in the
case of having a high fever at the time of death; api—also; sakala—all;
kaçmala—sins; nirasanäni—which can dispel; tava—Your; guëa—attributes;
kåta—activities; nämadheyäni—names; vacana-gocaräëi—possible to be
uttered; bhavantu—let them become.
TRANSLATION
Dear Lord, we may not be able to remember Your name, form and qualities
due to stumbling, hunger, falling down, yawning or being in a miserable
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
143
diseased condition at the time of death when there is a high fever. We therefore
pray unto You, O Lord, for You are very affectionate to Your devotees. Please
help us remember You and utter Your holy names, attributes and activities,
which can dispel all the reactions of our sinful lives.
PURPORT
The real success in life is ante näräyaëa-småti—remembering the holy
name, attributes, activities and form of the Lord at the time of death.
Although we may be engaged in the Lord's devotional service in the temple,
material conditions are so tough and inevitable that we may forget the Lord at
the time of death due to a diseased condition or mental derangement.
Therefore we should pray to the Lord to be able to remember His lotus feet
without fail at the time of death, when we are in such a precarious condition.
In this regard, one may also see Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.2.9-10 and 14-15).
TEXT 13
ik-ÄaYa& raJaizRrPaTYak-aMa" Pa[Jaa& >avad*XaqMaaXaaSaaNa wRìrMaaiXaza&
SvGaaRPavGaRYaaeriPa >avNTaMauPaDaaviTa Pa[JaaYaaMaQaRPa[TYaYaae DaNadiMavaDaNa"
f-l/Ik-r<aMa( )) 13 ))
kiïcäyaà räjarñir apatya-kämaù prajäà bhavädåçém äçäsäna éçvaram äçiñäà
svargäpavargayor api bhavantam upadhävati prajäyäm artha-pratyayo
dhanadam ivädhanaù phalékaraëam.
SYNONYMS
kiïca—moreover; ayam—this; räja-åñiù—pious King (Näbhi);
apatya-kämaù—desiring offspring; prajäm—a son; bhavädåçém—exactly like
You; äçäsänaù—hoping for; éçvaram—the supreme controller; äçiñäm—of
benedictions; svarga-apavargayoù—of the heavenly planets and liberation;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
144
api—although; bhavantam—You; upadhävati—worships; prajäyäm—children;
artha-pratyayaù—regarding as the ultimate goal of life; dhana-dam—unto a
person who can give immense wealth as charity; iva—like; adhanaù—a poor
man; phalékaraëam—a little husk.
TRANSLATION
Dear Lord, here is the great King Näbhi, whose ultimate goal in life is to
have a son like You. Your Lordship, his position is like that of a person
approaching a very rich man and begging for a little grain. Mahäräja Näbhi is so
desirous of having a son that he is worshiping You for a son, although You can
offer him any exalted position, including elevation to the heavenly planets or
liberation back to Godhead.
PURPORT
The priests were a little ashamed that King Näbhi was performing a great
sacrifice just to ask the Lord's benediction for a son. The Lord could offer him
promotion to the heavenly planets or the Vaikuëöha planets. Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu has taught us how to approach the Supreme Lord and ask Him for
the ultimate benediction. He said: na dhanaà na janaà na sundaréà kavitäà
vä jagad-éça kämaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4]. He did not want to ask the
Supreme Lord for anything material. Material opulence means riches, a nice
family, a good wife and many followers, but an intelligent devotee doesn't ask
the Supreme Lord for anything material. His only prayer is: mama janmani
janmanéçvare bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi. He wants to be engaged
perpetually in the loving service of the Lord. He does not want promotion to
the heavenly planets or mukti, liberation from material bondage. If this were
the case, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu would not have said, mama janmani
janmani. It doesn't matter to a devotee whether or not he takes birth life after
life, as long as he remains a devotee. Actually eternal liberty means returning
home, back to Godhead. A devotee is never concerned about anything
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
145
material. Although Näbhi Mahäräja wanted a son like Viñëu, wanting a son
like God is also a form of sense gratification. A pure devotee wants only to
engage in the Lord's loving service.
TEXT 14
k-ae va wh Tae_ParaiJaTaae_ParaiJaTaYaa MaaYaYaaNaviSaTaPadVYaaNaav*TaMaiTaivRzYa‚
ivzrYaaNaav*TaPa[k*-iTarNauPaaiSaTaMahÀr<a" )) 14 ))
ko vä iha te 'paräjito 'paräjitayä mäyayänavasita-padavyänävåta-matir
viñaya-viña-rayänävåta-prakåtir anupäsita-mahac-caraëaù.
SYNONYMS
kaù vä—who is that person; iha—within this material world; te—of Your
Lordship; aparäjitaù—not conquered; aparäjitayä—by the unconquerable;
mäyayä—illusory energy; anavasita-padavya—whose path cannot be
ascertained; anävåta-matiù—whose intelligence is not bewildered;
viñaya-viña—of material enjoyment, which is like poison; raya—by the course;
anävåta—not covered; prakåtiù—whose nature; anupäsita—without
worshiping; mahat-caraëaù—the lotus feet of great devotees.
TRANSLATION
Dear Lord, unless one worships the lotus feet of great devotees, one will be
conquered by the illusory energy, and his intelligence will be bewildered.
Indeed, who has not been carried away by the waves of material enjoyment,
which are like poison? Your illusory energy is unconquerable. No one can see
the path of this material energy or tell how it is working.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
146
Mahäräja Näbhi was inclined to performing great sacrifices for begetting a
son. The son might be as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but
such a material desire—be it great or insignificant—is brought about by the
influence of mäyä. A devotee does not at all desire anything for sense
gratification. Devotion is therefore explained as devoid of material desires
(anyäbhiläñitä-çünya). Everyone is subjected to the influence of mäyä and
entangled in all kinds of material desire, and Mahäräja Näbhi was no
exception. Freedom from mäyä's influence is possible when one engages in the
service of the great devotees (mahac-caraëa-sevä). Without worshiping the
lotus feet of a great devotee, one cannot be freed from mäyä's influence. Çréla
Narottama däsa Öhäkura therefore says, chäòiyä vaiñëava-sevä nistära päyeche
kebä: "Who has been freed from mäyä's clutches without serving the lotus feet
of a Vaiñëava?" Mäyä is aparäjita, and her influence is also aparäjita. As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14):
daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé
mama mäyä duratyayä
"This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature,
is difficult to overcome."
Only a devotee can surpass mäyä's great influence. It was no fault on
Mahäräja Näbhi's part that he wanted a son. He wanted a son like the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the best of all sons. By the association
of the Lord's devotee, one no longer desires material opulence. This is
confirmed in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 22.54):
"sädhu-saìga", "sädhu-saìga" sarva-çästre kaya
lava-mätra sädhu-saìge sarva-siddhi haya
and [Cc. Madhya 22.51]:
mahat-kåpä vinä kona karme 'bhakti' naya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
147
kåñëa-bhakti düre rahu, saàsära nahe kñaya
If one is serious about escaping mäyä's influence and returning home, back to
Godhead, one must associate with a sädhu (devotee). That is the verdict of all
scriptures. By the slight association of a devotee, one can be freed from the
clutches of mäyä. Without the mercy of the pure devotee, one cannot get
freedom by any means. Certainly a pure devotee's association is necessary in
order to obtain the loving service of the Lord. One cannot be freed from
mäyä's clutches without sädhu-saìga [Cc. Madhya 22.83], the benediction of a
great devotee. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (7.5.32) Prahläda Mahäräja says:
naiñäà matis tävad urukramäìghrià
spåçaty anarthäpagamo yad arthaù
mahéyasäà päda-rajo-'bhiñekaà
niñkiïcanänäà na våëéta yävat
One cannot become the Lord's pure devotee without taking the dust of a great
devotee on his head (päda-rajo-'bhiñekam). A pure devotee is niñkiïcana; he
has no material desire to enjoy the material world. One has to take shelter of
such a pure devotee in order to attain his qualities. The pure devotee is always
free from the clutches of mäyä and her influence.
TEXT 15
Yadu h vav Tav PauNard>a]k-TaRirh SaMaahUTaSTa}aaQaRiDaYaa& MaNdaNaa& NaSTaÛ‚
Õevhel/Na& devdevahRiSa SaaMYaeNa SavaRNa( Pa[iTavae!uMaivduzaMa( )) 15 ))
yad u ha väva tava punar adabhra-kartar iha samähütas taträrtha-dhiyäà
mandänäà nas tad yad deva-helanaà deva-devärhasi sämyena sarvän
prativoòhum aviduñäm.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
148
SYNONYMS
yat—because; u ha väva—indeed; tava—Your; punaù—again;
adabhra-kartaù—O Lord, who performs many activities; iha—here, in this
arena of sacrifice; samähütaù—invited; tatra—therefore; artha-dhiyäm—who
aspire to fulfill material desires; mandänäm—not very intelligent; naù—of us;
tat—that; yat—which; deva-helanam—disrespect of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; deva-deva—Lord of lords; arhasi—please; sämyena—because of
Your equipoised position; sarvän—everything; prativoòhum—tolerate;
aviduñäm—of us, who are all ignorant.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You perform many wonderful activities. Our only aim was to
acquire a son by performing this great sacrifice; therefore our intelligence is not
very sharp. We are not experienced in ascertaining life's goal. By inviting You
to this negligible sacrifice for some material motive, we have certainly
committed a great offense at Your lotus feet. Therefore, O Lord of lords, please
excuse our offense because of Your causeless mercy and equal mind.
PURPORT
The priests were certainly unhappy to have called the Supreme Lord from
Vaikuëöha for such an insignificant reason. A pure devotee never wants to see
the Lord unnecessarily. The Lord is engaged in various activities, and the pure
devotee does not want to see Him whimsically, for his own sense gratification.
The pure devotee simply depends on the Lord's mercy, and when the Lord is
pleased, he can see Him face to face. The Lord is unseen even by demigods like
Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva. By calling on the Supreme Lord, the priests of
Näbhi Mahäräja proved themselves unintelligent; nonetheless, the Lord came
out of His causeless mercy. All of them therefore wanted to be excused by the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
149
Lord.
Worship of the Supreme Lord for material gain is not approved by
authorities. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.16):
catur-vidhä bhajante mäà
janäù sukåtino 'rjuna
ärto jijïäsur arthärthé
jïäné ca bharatarñabha
"O best among the Bharatas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render
devotional service unto Me—the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the
inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute."
Initiation into bhakti begins when one is in a distressed condition or in
want of money, or when one is inquisitive to understand the Absolute Truth.
Nonetheless, people who approach the Supreme Lord in this way are not
actually devotees. They are accepted as pious (sukåtinaù) due to their inquiring
about the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Not knowing
the various activities and engagements of the Lord, such people unnecessarily
disturb the Lord for material gain. However, the Lord is so kind that even
though disturbed, He fulfills the desires of such beggars. The pure devotee is
anyäbhiläñitä-çünya; he has no motive behind his worship. He is not conducted
by the influence of mäyä in the form of karma or jïäna. The pure devotee is
always prepared to execute the order of the Lord without personal
consideration. The åtvijaù, the priests at the sacrifice, knew very well the
distinction between karma and bhakti, and because they considered themselves
under the influence of karma, fruitive activity, they begged the Lord's pardon.
They knew that the Lord had been invited to come for some paltry reason.
TEXT 16
é[qXauk- ovac
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
150
wiTa iNaGadeNaai>aíUYaMaaNaae >aGavaNaiNaiMazzR>aae vzRDarai>avaidTaai>aviNdTa‚
cr<a" SadYaiMadMaah )) 16 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti nigadenäbhiñöüyamäno bhagavän animiñarñabho
varña-dharäbhiväditäbhivandita-caraëaù sadayam idam äha.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; nigadena—by prayers
in prose; abhiñöüyamänaù—being worshiped; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; animiña-åñabhaù—the chief of all the demigods;
varña-dhara—by King Näbhi, the Emperor of Bhärata-varña;
abhivädita—worshiped; abhivandita—were bowed down to; caraëaù—whose
feet; sadayam—kindly; idam—this; äha—said.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: The priests, who were even worshiped by King
Näbhi, the Emperor of Bhärata-varña, offered prayers in prose [generally they
were in poetry] and bowed down at the Lord's lotus feet. The Lord of lords, the
ruler of the demigods, was very pleased with them, and He began to speak as
follows.
TEXT 17
é[q>aGavaNauvac
Ahae bTaahMa*zYaae >aviÙrivTaQaGaqi>aRvRrMaSaul/>aMai>aYaaicTaae YadMauZYaaTMaJaae
MaYaa Sad*Xaae >aUYaaidiTa MaMaahMaevai>aæPa" kE-vLYaadQaaiPa b]øvadae Na Ma*za
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
151
>aivTauMahRiTa MaMaEv ih Mau%& Yad( iÜJadevku-l/Ma( )) 17 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
aho batäham åñayo bhavadbhir avitatha-gérbhir varam asulabham abhiyäcito
yad amuñyätmajo mayä sadåço bhüyäd iti mamäham eväbhirüpaù kaivalyäd
athäpi brahma-vädo na måñä bhavitum arhati mamaiva hi mukhaà yad
dvija-deva-kulam.
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; aho—alas;
bata—certainly I am pleased; aham—I; åñayaù—O great sages; bhavadbhiù—by
you; avitatha-gérbhiù—whose words are all true; varam—for a benediction;
asulabham—very difficult to achieve; abhiyäcitaù—have been requested;
yat—that; amuñya—of King Näbhi; ätma-jaù—a son; mayä sadåçaù—like Me;
bhüyät—there may be; iti—thus; mama—My; aham—I; eva—only;
abhirüpaù—equal; kaivalyät—because of being without a second;
athäpi—nevertheless; brahma-vädaù—the words spoken by exalted brähmaëas;
na—not; måñä—false; bhavitum—to become; arhati—ought; mama—My;
eva—certainly; hi—because; mukham—mouth; yat—that;
dvija-deva-kulam—the class of pure brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead replied: O great sages, I am certainly
very pleased with your prayers. You are all truthful. You have prayed for the
benediction of a son like Me for King Näbhi, but this is very difficult to obtain.
Since I am the Supreme Person without a second and since no one is equal to
Me, another personality like Me is not possible to find. In any case, because you
are all qualified brähmaëas, your vibrations should not prove untrue. I consider
the brähmaëas who are well qualified with brahminical qualities to be as good as
My own mouth.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
152
PURPORT
The word avitatha-gérbhiù means "they whose spoken vibrations cannot be
nullified." The brähmaëas (dvija, the twice-born), are given a chance by the
çästric regulations to become almost as powerful as the Supreme Lord.
Whatever a brähmaëa speaks cannot be nullified or changed in any
circumstance. According to the Vedic injunctions, a brähmaëa is the mouth of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore in all rituals a brähmaëa is
offered food (brähmaëa-bhojana) because when a brähmaëa eats, it is
considered that the Supreme Lord Himself eats. Similarly, whatever a
brähmaëa speaks cannot be changed. It must act. The learned sages who were
priests at Mahäräja Näbhi's sacrifice were not only brähmaëas but were so
qualified that they were like devas, demigods, or God Himself. If this were not
the case, how could they invite Lord Viñëu to come to the sacrificial arena?
God is one, and God does not belong to this or that religion. In Kali-yuga,
different religious sects consider their God to be different from the God of
others, but that is not possible. God is one, and He is appreciated according to
different angles of vision. In this verse the word kaivalyät means that God has
no competitor. There is only one God. In the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (6.8) it is
said, na tat-samaç cäbhyadhikaç ca dåçyate: "No one is found to be equal to Him
or greater than Him." That is the definition of God.
TEXT 18
TaTa AaGanqDa]qYae_&Xak-l/YaavTairZYaaMYaaTMaTauLYaMaNauPal/>aMaaNa" )) 18 ))
tata ägnédhréye 'àça-kalayävatariñyämy ätma-tulyam anupalabhamänaù.
SYNONYMS
tataù—therefore; ägnédhréye—in the wife of Näbhi, the son of Ägnédhra;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
153
aàça-kalayä—by an expansion of My personal form; avatariñyämi—I shall
advent Myself; ätma-tulyam—My equal; anupalabhamänaù—not finding.
TRANSLATION
Since I cannot find anyone equal to Me, I shall personally expand Myself
into a plenary portion and thus advent Myself in the womb of Merudevé, the
wife of Mahäräja Näbhi, the son of Ägnédhra.
PURPORT
This is an example of the omnipotence of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Although He is one without a second, He expands Himself by
sväàça, His personal expansion, and sometimes by vibhinnäàça, or His
separated expansion. Lord Viñëu herein agrees to send His personal expansion
as the son of Merudevé, the wife of Mahäräja Näbhi, who is the son of
Ägnédhra. The åtvijaù, the priests, knew that God is one, yet they prayed for
the Supreme Lord to become the son of Mahäräja Näbhi to let the world know
that the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is one without
a second. When He incarnates, He expands Himself in different potencies.
TEXT 19
é[qXauk- ovac
wiTa iNaXaaMaYaNTYaa MaeådeVYaa" PaiTaMai>aDaaYaaNTadRDae >aGavaNa( )) 19 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti niçämayantyä merudevyäù patim abhidhäyäntardadhe bhagavän.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; niçämayantyäù—who
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
154
was listening; merudevyäù—in the presence of Merudevé; patim—unto her
husband; abhidhäya—having spoken; antardadhe—disappeared;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After saying this, the Lord disappeared. The
wife of King Näbhi, Queen Merudevé, was sitting by the side of her husband,
and consequently she could hear everything the Supreme Lord had spoken.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic injunctions, one should perform sacrifices in the
company of one's own wife. Sapatnéko dharmam äcaret: religious rituals should
be performed with one's wife; therefore Mahäräja Näbhi conducted his great
sacrifice with his wife by his side.
TEXT 20
bihRiz TaiSMaàev ivZ<audta >aGavaNa( ParMaizRi>a" Pa[SaaidTaae Naa>ae" iPa[Yaick-I‚
zRYaa TadvraeDaaYaNae MaeådeVYaa& DaMaaRNdXaRiYaTauk-aMaae vaTarXaNaaNaa& é[Ma<aaNaaMa*‚
zq<aaMaUßRMaiNQaNaa& Xau(c)-Yaa TaNauvavTaTaar )) 20 ))
barhiñi tasminn eva viñëudatta bhagavän paramarñibhiù prasädito näbheù
priya-cikérñayä tad-avarodhäyane merudevyäà dharmän darçayitu-kämo
väta-raçanänäà çramaëänäm åñéëäm ürdhva-manthinäà çuklayä
tanuvävatatära.
SYNONYMS
barhiñi—in the arena of sacrifice; tasmin—that; eva—in this way;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
155
viñëu-datta—O Mahäräja Parékñit; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; parama-åñibhiù—by the great åñis; prasäditaù—being pleased; näbheù
priya-cikérñayä—to please King Näbhi; tat-avarodhäyane—in his wife;
merudevyäm—Merudevé; dharmän—the principles of religion;
darçayitu-kämaù—desiring to exhibit how to perform; väta-raçanänäm—of the
sannyäsés (who have almost no cloth); çramaëänäm—of the vänaprasthas;
åñéëäm—of the great sages; ürdhva-manthinäm—of the brahmacärés; çuklayä
tanuvä—in His original spiritual form, which is above the modes of material
nature; avatatära—appeared as an incarnation.
TRANSLATION
O Viñëudatta, Parékñit Mahäräja, the Supreme Personality of Godhead was
pleased by the great sages at that sacrifice. Consequently the Lord decided to
personally exhibit the method of executing religious principles [as observed by
brahmacärés, sannyäsés, vänaprasthas and gåhasthas engaged in rituals] and also
satisfy Mahäräja Näbhi's desire. Consequently He appeared as the son of
Merudevé in His original spiritual form, which is above the modes of material
nature.
PURPORT
When the Supreme Lord appears or descends as an incarnation within this
material world, He does not accept a body made of the three modes of material
nature (sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa). Mäyävädé philosophers say that
the impersonal God appears in this material world by accepting a body in the
sattva-guëa. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté states that the word çukla means
"consisting of çuddha-sattva." Lord Viñëu descends in His çuddha-sattva form.
Çuddha-sattva refers to the sattva-guëa which is never contaminated. In this
material world, even the mode of goodness (sattva-guëa) is contaminated by
tinges of rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa. When sattva-guëa is never contaminated
by rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa, it is called çuddha-sattva. Sattvaà viçuddhaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
156
vasudeva-çabditam (SB 4.3.23). That is the platform of vasudeva, whereby the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, can be experienced. In
Bhagavad-gétä (4.7) Çré Kåñëa Himself says:
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend
Myself."
Unlike ordinary living entities, the Supreme Lord is not forced by the
modes of material nature to appear. He appears dharmän darçayitu-käma—to
show how to execute the functions of a human being. The word dharma is
meant for human beings and is never used in connection with beings inferior
to human beings, such as animals. Unfortunately, without being guided by the
Supreme Lord, human beings sometimes manufacture a process of dharma by
concoction. Actually dharma cannot be made by man. Dharmaà tu säkñäd
bhagavat-praëétam. (SB 6.3.19) Dharma is given by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, just as the law is given by the state government. Man-made dharma
has no meaning. Çrémad-Bhägavatam refers to man-made dharma as
kaitava-dharma, cheating religion. The Supreme Lord sends an avatära
(incarnation) to teach human society the proper way to execute religious
principles. Such religious principles are bhakti-märga. As the Supreme Lord
Himself says in Bhagavad-gétä: sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà
vraja [Bg. 18.66]. The son of Mahäräja Näbhi, Åñabhadeva, appeared on this
earth to preach the principles of religion. That will be explained in the Fifth
Chapter of this Fifth Canto.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Third Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Åñabhadeva's Appearance in the Womb of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
157
Merudevé, the wife of King Näbhi."
4. The Characteristics of Åñabhadeva, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead
In this chapter, Åñabhadeva, the son of Mahäräja Näbhi, begot a hundred
sons, and during the reign of those sons the world was very happy in all
respects. When Åñabhadeva appeared as the son of Mahäräja Näbhi, He was
appreciated by the people as the most exalted and beautiful personality of that
age. His poise, influence, strength, enthusiasm, bodily luster and other
transcendental qualities were beyond compare. The word åñabha refers to the
best, or the supreme. Due to the superexcellent attributes of the son of
Mahäräja Näbhi, the King named his son Åñabha, or "the best." His influence
was incomparable. Although there was a scarcity of rain, Åñabhadeva did not
care for Indra, the King of heaven, who is in charge of supplying rain. Through
His own potency, Åñabhadeva sumptuously covered Ajanäbha with ample rain.
Upon receiving Åñabhadeva, who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as
his son, King Näbhi began to raise Him very carefully. After that, he entrusted
the ruling power to Him and, retiring from family life, lived at Badarikäçrama
completely engaged in the worship of Väsudeva, the Supreme Lord. To follow
social customs, Lord Åñabhadeva for a while became a student in the gurukula,
and after returning, He followed the orders of His guru and accepted a wife
named Jayanté, who had been given to Him by the King of heaven, Indra. He
begot a hundred sons in the womb of Jayanté. Of these hundred sons, the eldest
was known as Bharata. Since the reign of Mahäräja Bharata, this planet has
been called Bhärata-varña. Åñabhadeva's other sons were headed by Kuçävarta,
Ilävarta, Brahmävarta, Malaya, Ketu, Bhadrasena, Indraspåk, Vidarbha and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
158
Kékaöa. There were also other sons named Kavi, Havi, Antarikña, Prabuddha,
Pippaläyana, Avirhotra, Drumila, Camasa and Karabhäjana. Instead of ruling
the kingdom, these nine became mendicant preachers of Kåñëa consciousness,
following the religious precepts of the Bhägavatam. Their characteristics and
activities are described in the Eleventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam during
the talks between Vasudeva and Närada at Kurukñetra. To teach the general
populace, King Åñabhadeva performed many sacrifices and taught His sons
how to rule the citizens.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
AQa h TaMauTPatYaEvai>aVYaJYaMaaNa>aGavç+a<a& SaaMYaaePaXaMavEraGYaEìYaRMaha‚
iv>aUiTai>arNauidNaMaeDa MaaNaaNau>aav& Pa[k*-TaYa" Pa[Jaa b]aø<aa devTaaêaviNaTal/‚
SaMavNaaYaaiTaTara& JaGa*Dau" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
atha ha tam utpattyaiväbhivyajyamäna-bhagaval-lakñaëaà
sämyopaçama-vairägyaiçvarya-mahä-vibhütibhir anudinam
edhamänänubhävaà prakåtayaù prajä brähmaëä devatäç
cävani-tala-samavanäyätitaräà jagådhuù.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atha ha—thus (after the
Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared); tam—Him; utpattyä—from the
beginning of His appearance; eva—even; abhivyajyamäna—distinctly
manifested; bhagavat-lakñaëam—possessing the symptoms of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; sämya—equal to everyone; upaçama—completely
peaceful, in control of the senses and mind; vairägya—renunciation;
aiçvarya—opulences; mahä-vibhütibhiù—with great attributes; anudinam—day
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
159
after day; edhamäna—increasing; anubhävam—His power; prakåtayaù—the
ministers; prajäù—the citizens; brähmaëäù—the learned scholars in full
knowledge of Brahman; devatäù—the demigods; ca—and; avani-tala—the
surface of the globe; samavanäya—to rule; atitaräm—greatly;
jagådhuù—desired.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: As soon as the Lord was born as the son of
Mahäräja Näbhi, He manifested symptoms of the Supreme Lord, such as marks
on the bottoms of His feet [the flag, thunderbolt, etc.]. This son was equal to
everyone and very peaceful. He could control His senses and His mind, and,
possessing all opulence, He did not hanker for material enjoyment. Endowed
with all these attributes, the son of Mahäräja Näbhi became more powerful day
after day. Due to this, the citizens, learned brähmaëas, demigods and ministers
wanted Åñabhadeva to be appointed ruler of the earth.
PURPORT
In these days of cheap incarnations, it is very interesting to note the bodily
symptoms found in an incarnation. From the very beginning of His birth, it
was observed that Åñabhadeva's feet were marked with the transcendental
signs (a flag, thunderbolt, lotus flower, etc.). In addition to this, as the Lord
began to grow, He became very prominent. He was equal to everyone. He did
not favor one person and neglect another. An incarnation of God must have
the six opulences—wealth. strength, knowledge, beauty, fame and
renunciation. It is said that although Åñabhadeva was endowed with all
opulences, He was not at all attached to material enjoyment. He was
self-controlled and therefore liked by everyone. Due to His superexcellent
qualities, everyone wanted Him to rule the earth. An incarnation of God has
to be accepted by experienced people and by the symptoms described in the
çästras. An incarnation is not accepted simply by the adulation of foolish
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
160
people.
TEXT 2
TaSYa h va wTQa& vZMaR<aa vrqYaSaa b*hC^(l/aeke-Na caEJaSaa ble/Na ié[Yaa
YaXaSaa vqYaRXaaEYaaR>Yaa& c iPaTaa ‰z>a wTaqd& NaaMa ck-ar )) 2 ))
tasya ha vä itthaà varñmaëä varéyasä båhac-chlokena caujasä balena çriyä
yaçasä vérya-çauryäbhyäà ca pitä åñabha itédaà näma cakära.
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Him; ha vä—certainly; ittham—thus; varñmaëä—by the bodily
features; varéyasä—most exalted; båhat-çlokena—decorated with all the high
qualities described by poets; ca—also; ojasä—by prowess; balena—by strength;
çriyä—by beauty; yaçasä—by fame; vérya-çauryäbhyäm—by influence and
heroism; ca—and; pitä—the father (Mahäräja Näbhi); åñabhaù—the best;
iti—thus; idam—this; näma—name; cakära—gave.
TRANSLATION
When the son of Mahäräja Näbhi became visible, He evinced all good
qualities described by the great poets—namely, a well-built body with all the
symptoms of the Godhead, prowess, strength, beauty, name, fame, influence
and enthusiasm. When the father, Mahäräja Näbhi, saw all these qualities, he
thought his son to be the best of human beings or the supreme being. Therefore
he gave Him the name Åñabha.
PURPORT
To accept someone as God or an incarnation of God, one must observe the
symptoms of God in his body. All the symptoms were found in the body of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
161
Mahäräja Näbhi's extraordinarily powerful son. His body was well structured,
and He displayed all the transcendental qualities. He showed great influence,
and He could control His mind and senses. Consequently He was named
Åñabha, which indicates that He was the supreme living being.
TEXT 3
YaSYa hqNd]" SPaDaRMaaNaae >aGavaNa( vzeR Na vvzR TadvDaaYaR >aGavaNa*z>adevae
YaaeGaeìr" Pa[hSYaaTMaYaaeGaMaaYaYaa SvvzRMaJaNaa>a& NaaMaa>YavzRTa( )) 3 ))
yasya héndraù spardhamäno bhagavän varñe na vavarña tad avadhärya
bhagavän åñabhadevo yogeçvaraù prahasyätma-yogamäyayä sva-varñam
ajanäbhaà nämäbhyavarñat.
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; hi—indeed; indraù—King Indra of heaven;
spardhamänaù—being envious; bhagavän—very opulent; varñe—on
Bhärata-varña; na vavarña—did not pour water; tat—that;
avadhärya—knowing; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
åñabhadevaù—Åñabhadeva; yoga-éçvaraù—the master of all mystic power;
prahasya—smiling; ätma-yoga-mäyayä—by His own spiritual potency;
sva-varñam—on His place; ajanäbham—Ajanäbha; näma—named;
abhyavarñat—He poured water.
TRANSLATION
Indra, the King of heaven, who is very materially opulent, became envious of
King Åñabhadeva. Consequently he stopped pouring water on the planet known
as Bhärata-varña. At that time the Supreme Lord, Åñabhadeva, the master of all
mystic power, understood King Indra's purpose and smiled a little. Then, by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
162
His own prowess, through yogamäyä [His internal potency], He profusely
poured water upon His own place, which was known as Ajanäbha.
PURPORT
We find the word bhagavän used twice in this verse. Both King Indra and
Åñabhadeva, the incarnation of the Supreme Lord, are described as bhagavän.
Sometimes Närada and Lord Brahmä are also addressed as bhagavän. The word
bhagavän means that one is a very opulent and powerful person like Lord
Brahmä, Lord Çiva, Närada or Indra. They are all addressed as bhagavän due to
their extraordinary opulence. King Åñabhadeva is an incarnation of the
Supreme Lord, and therefore He was the original Bhagavän. Consequently He
is described herein as yogeçvara, which indicates that He has the most powerful
spiritual potency. He is not dependent on King Indra for water. He can supply
water Himself, and He did so in this case. In Bhagavad-gétä, it is stated: yajïäd
bhavati parjanyaù [Bg. 3.14]. Due to the performance of yajïa, clouds of water
are manifest in the sky. Clouds and rainfall are under the management of
Indra, the heavenly King, but when Indra is neglectful, the Supreme Lord
Himself, who is also known as yajïa or yajïa-pati, takes the task upon Himself.
Consequently there was sufficient rainfall in the place named Ajanäbha.
When yajïa-pati wants to, He can do anything without the help of any
subordinate. Therefore the Supreme Lord is known as almighty. In the present
age of Kali there will eventually be a great scarcity of water (anävåñöi), for the
general populace, due to ignorance and the scarcity of yajïic ingredients, will
neglect to perform yajïas. Çrémad-Bhägavatam therefore advises: yajïaiù
saìkértana-präyaiù yajanti hi sumedhasaù. After all, yajïa is meant to satisfy the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this age of Kali. there is great scarcity and
ignorance; nonetheless, everyone can perform saìkértana-yajïa. Every family
in every society can conduct saìkértana-yajïa at least every evening. In this
way there will be no disturbance or scarcity of rain. It is essential for the
people in this age to perform the saìkértana-yajïa in order to be materially
happy and to advance spiritually.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
163
TEXT 4
Naai>aSTau YaQaai>al/izTa& SauPa[JaSTvMavåDYaaiTaPa[Maaed>arivûl/ae GaÓda+arYaa
iGara SvEr& Ga*hqTa Narl/aek-SaDaMa| >aGavNTa& Paura<aPauåz& MaaYaaivl/iSaTaMaiTavRTSa
TaaTaeiTa SaaNauraGaMauPal/al/YaNa( Para& iNav*RiTaMauPaGaTa" )) 4 ))
näbhis tu yathäbhilañitaà suprajastvam avarudhyäti-pramoda-bhara-vihvalo
gadgadäkñarayä girä svairaà gåhéta-naraloka-sadharmaà bhagavantaà
puräëa-puruñaà mäyä-vilasita-matir vatsa täteti sänurägam upalälayan paräà
nirvåtim upagataù.
SYNONYMS
näbhiù—King Näbhi; tu—certainly; yathä-abhilañitam—according to his
desire; su-prajastvam—the most beautiful son; avarudhya—getting;
ati-pramoda—of great jubilation; bhara—by an excess; vihvalaù—being
overwhelmed; gadgada-akñarayä—faltering in ecstasy; girä—with a voice;
svairam—by His independent will; gåhéta—accepted;
nara-loka-sadharmam—acting as if a human being; bhagavantam—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; puräëa-puruñam—the oldest among living
beings; mäyä—by yogamäyä; vilasita—bewildered; matiù—his mentality;
vatsa—my dear son; täta—my darling; iti—thus; sa-anurägam—with great
affection; upalälayan—raising; paräm—transcendental; nirvåtim—bliss;
upagataù—achieved.
TRANSLATION
Due to getting a perfect son according to his desire, King Näbhi was always
overwhelmed with transcendental bliss and was very affectionate to his son. It
was with ecstasy and a faltering voice that he addressed Him, "My dear son, my
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
164
darling." This mentality was brought about by yogamäyä, whereby he accepted
the Supreme Lord, the supreme father, as his own son. Out of His supreme
good will, the Lord became his son and dealt with everyone as if He were an
ordinary human being. Thus King Näbhi began to raise his transcendental son
with great affection, and he was overwhelmed with transcendental bliss, joy and
devotion.
PURPORT
The word mäyä is used in the sense of illusion. Considering the Supreme
Personality of Godhead to be his own son, Mahäräja Näbhi was certainly in
illusion, but this was transcendental illusion. This illusion is required;
otherwise how can one accept the supreme father as his own son? The
Supreme Lord appears as the son of one of His devotees, just as Lord Kåñëa
appeared as the son of Yaçodä and Nanda Mahäräja. These devotees could
never think of their son as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for such
appreciation would hamper their relationship of paternal love.
TEXT 5
ividTaaNauraGaMaaPaaErPa[k*-iTa JaNaPadae raJaa Naai>araTMaJa& SaMaYaSaeTau‚
r+aaYaaMai>aizCYa b]aø<aezUPaiNaDaaYa Sah MaeådeVYaa ivXaal/aYaa& Pa[SaàiNaPau<aeNa
TaPaSaa SaMaaiDaYaaeGaeNa NarNaaraYa<aa:Ya& >aGavNTa& vaSaudevMauPaaSaqNa" k-ale/Na
TaNMaihMaaNaMavaPa )) 5 ))
viditänurägam äpaura-prakåti jana-pado räjä näbhir ätmajaà
samaya-setu-rakñäyäm abhiñicya brähmaëeñüpanidhäya saha merudevyä
viçäläyäà prasanna-nipuëena tapasä samädhi-yogena nara-näräyaëäkhyaà
bhagavantaà väsudevam upäsénaù kälena tan-mahimänam aväpa.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
165
SYNONYMS
vidita—known very well; anurägam—popularity; äpaura-prakåti—among all
the citizens and government officers; jana-padaù—desiring to serve the people
in general; räjä—the King; näbhiù—Näbhi; ätmajam—his son;
samaya-setu-rakñäyäm—to protect the people strictly according to the Vedic
principles of religious life; abhiñicya—enthroning; brähmaëeñu—to the learned
brähmaëas; upanidhäya—entrusting; saha—with; merudevyä—his wife.
Merudevé; viçäläyäm—in Badarikäçrama; prasanna-nipuëena—performed with
great satisfaction and expertise; tapasä—by austerities and penances;
samädhi-yogena—by full samädhi; nara-näräyaëa-äkhyam—named
Nara-Näräyaëa; bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
väsudevam—Kåñëa; upäsénaù—worshiping; kälena—in due course of time;
tat-mahimänam—His glorious abode, the spiritual world, Vaikuëöha;
aväpa—achieved.
TRANSLATION
King Näbhi understood that his son, Åñabhadeva, was very popular among
the citizens and among government officers and ministers. Understanding the
popularity of his son, Mahäräja Näbhi enthroned Him as the emperor of the
world to give protection to the general populace in terms of the Vedic religious
system. To do this, he entrusted Him into the hands of learned brähmaëas, who
would guide Him in administrating the government. Then Mahäräja Näbhi and
his wife, Merudevé, went to Badarikäçrama in the Himalaya Mountains, where
the King engaged Himself very expertly in austerities and penances with great
jubilation. In full samädhi he worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Nara-Näräyaëa, who is Kåñëa in His plenary expansion. By doing so, in course
of time Mahäräja Näbhi was elevated to the spiritual world known as
Vaikuëöha.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
166
PURPORT
When Mahäräja Näbhi saw that his son Åñabhadeva was popular with the
general populace and the governmental servants, he chose to install Him on
the imperial throne. In addition, he wanted to entrust his son into the hands
of the learned brähmaëas. This means that a monarch was supposed to govern
strictly according to Vedic principles under the guidance of learned
brähmaëas, who could advise Him according to the standard Vedic scriptures
like Manu-småti and similar çästras. It is the duty of the king to rule the
citizens according to Vedic principles. According to Vedic principles, society is
divided into four categories—brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra.
Cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù [Bg. 4.13]. After dividing
society in this way, it is the king's duty to see that everyone executes Vedic
principles according to his caste. A brähmaëa must perform the duty of a
brähmaëa without cheating the public. It is not that one attains the name of a
brähmaëa without the qualifications. It is the king's duty to see that everyone
engages in his occupational duty according to Vedic principles. In addition,
retirement at the end of life is compulsory. Mahäräja Näbhi, although still a
king. retired from family life and went with his wife to a place called
Badarikäçrama in the Himalayas, where the Deity Nara-Näräyaëa is
worshiped. The words prasanna-nipuëena tapasä indicate that the King
accepted all kinds of austerity very expertly and jubilantly. He did not at all
mind leaving his comfortable life at home, although he was the emperor.
Despite undergoing severe austerities and penances, he felt very pleased at
Badarikäçrama, and he did everything there expertly. In this way, being fully
absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness (samädhi-yoga). always thinking of Kåñëa,
Väsudeva, Mahäräja Näbhi attained success at the end of his life and was
promoted to the spiritual world, Vaikuëöhaloka.
This is the way of Vedic life. One must stop the process of repeated birth
and death and return home, back to Godhead. The words tan-mahimänam
aväpa are significant in this regard. Çréla Çrédhara Svämé says that mahimä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
167
means liberation in this life. We should act in such a way in this life that after
giving up this body, we will become liberated from the bondage of repeated
birth and death. This is called jévan-mukti. Çréla Véraräghava Äcärya states
that in the Chändogya Upaniñad there are eight symptoms of a jévan-mukta, a
person who is already liberated even when living in this body. The first
symptom of one so liberated is that he is freed from all sinful activity
(apahata-päpa). As long as one is under the clutches of mäyä in the material
energy, one has to engage in sinful activity. Bhagavad-gétä describes such
people as duñkåtinaù, which indicates that they are always engaged in sinful
activity. One who is liberated in this life does not commit any sinful activities.
Sinful activity involves illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling.
Another symptom of a liberated person is vijara, which indicates that he is not
subjected to the miseries of old age. Another symptom is vimåtyu. A liberated
person prepares himself in such a way that he does not take on any more
material bodies, which are destined to die. In other words. he does not fall
down again to repeat birth and death. Another symptom is viçoka, which
indicates that he is callous to material distress and happiness. Another is
vijighatsa, which indicates that he no longer desires material enjoyment.
Another symptom is apipätä, which means that he has no desire other than to
engage in the devotional service of Kåñëa, his dearmost pursuable Lord. A
further symptom is satya-käma, which indicates that all his desires are directed
to the Supreme Truth, Kåñëa. He does not want anything else. He is
satya-saìkalpa. Whatever he desires is fulfilled by the grace of Kåñëa. First of
all, he does not desire anything for his material benefit, and secondly if he
desires anything at all, he simply desires to serve the Supreme Lord. That
desire is fulfilled by the Lord's grace. That is called satya-saìkalpa. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté points out that the word mahimä means returning to
the spiritual world, back home, back to Vaikuëöha. Çré Çukadeva says that the
word mahimä means that the devotee attains the qualities of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This is called sadharma, or "the same quality." Just as
Kåñëa is never born and never dies, His devotees who return to Godhead
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
168
never die and never take birth within the material world.
TEXT 6
YaSYa h Paa<@veYa ëaek-avudahriNTaƒƒ
k-ae Nau TaTk-MaR raJazeRNaaR>aerNvacreTPauMaaNa( )
APaTYaTaaMaGaaÛSYa hir" XauÖeNa k-MaR<aa )) 6 ))
yasya ha päëòaveya çlokäv udäharanti—
ko nu tat karma räjarñer
näbher anv äcaret pumän
apatyatäm agäd yasya
hariù çuddhena karmaëä
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; ha—indeed; päëòaveya—O Mahäräja Parékñit; çlokau—two
verses; udäharanti—recite; kaù—who; nu—then; tat—that; karma—work;
räja-åñeù—of the pious King; näbheù—Näbhi; anu—following; äcaret—could
execute; pumän—a man; apatyatäm—sonhood; agät—accepted; yasya—whose;
hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; çuddhena—pure, executed in
devotional service; karmaëä—by activities.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, to glorify Mahäräja Näbhi, the old sages composed two
verses. One of them is this: "Who can attain the perfection of Mahäräja Näbhi?
Who can attain his activities? Because of his devotional service, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead agreed to become his son."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
169
PURPORT
The words çuddhena karmaëä are significant in this verse. If work is not
carried out in devotional service, it is contaminated by the modes of material
nature. That is explained in Bhagavad-gétä: yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra loko
'yaà karma-bandhanaù [Bg. 3.9]). Activities performed only for the satisfaction
of the Supreme Lord are pure and are not contaminated by the modes of
material nature. All other activities are contaminated by the modes of
ignorance and passion, as well as goodness. All material activities meant for
satisfying the senses are contaminated, and Mahäräja Näbhi did not perform
anything contaminated. He simply executed his transcendental activities even
when performing yajïa. Consequently he obtained the Supreme Lord as his
son.
TEXT 7
b]ø<Yaae_NYa" ku-Taae Naa>aeivRPa[a Ma(r)l/PaUiJaTaa" )
YaSYa bihRiz YajeXa& dXaRYaaMaaSauraeJaSaa )) 7 ))
brahmaëyo 'nyaù kuto näbher
viprä maìgala-püjitäù
yasya barhiñi yajïeçaà
darçayäm äsur ojasä
SYNONYMS
brahmaëyaù—a devotee of the brähmaëas; anyaù—any. other; kutaù—where
is; näbheù—besides Mahäräja Näbhi; vipräù—the brähmaëas;
maìgala-püjitäù—well worshiped and satisfied; yasya—of whom; barhiñi—in
the sacrificial arena; yajïa-éçam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
enjoyer of all sacrificial ceremonies; darçayäm äsuù—showed; ojasä—by their
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
170
brahminical prowess.
TRANSLATION
[The second prayer is this.] "Who is a better worshiper of brähmaëas than
Mahäräja Näbhi? Because he worshiped the qualified brähmaëas to their full
satisfaction, the brähmaëas, by their brahminical prowess, showed Mahäräja
Näbhi the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, in person."
PURPORT
The brähmaëas engaged as priests in the sacrificial ceremony were not
ordinary brähmaëas. They were so powerful that they could bring forth the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by their prayers. Thus Mahäräja Näbhi was
able to see the Lord face to face. Unless one is a Vaiñëava, he cannot call forth
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord does not accept an invitation
unless one is a Vaiñëava. Therefore it is said in Padma Puräëa:
ñaö-karma-nipuëo vipro
mantra-tantra-viçäradaù
avaiñëavo gurur na syäd
vaiñëavaù çva-paco guruù
"A scholarly brähmaëa expert in all subjects of Vedic knowledge is unfit to
become a spiritual master without being a Vaiñëava, but a person born in a
family of a lower caste can become a spiritual master if he is a Vaiñëava." These
brähmaëas were certainly very expert in chanting the Vedic mantras. They
were competent in the performance of the Vedic rituals, and over and above
this they were Vaiñëavas. Therefore by their spiritual powers they could call
on the Supreme Personality of Godhead and enable their disciple, Mahäräja
Näbhi, to see the Lord face to face. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
comments that the word ojasä means "by dint of devotional service."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
171
TEXT 8
AQa h >aGavaNa*z>adev" Svvz| k-MaR+ae}aMaNauMaNYaMaaNa" Pa[diXaRTaGauåku-l/vaSaae
l/BDavrEGauRåi>arNaujaTaae Ga*hMaeiDaNaa& DaMaaRNaNauiXa+aMaa<aae JaYaNTYaaiMaNd]dtaaYaa‚
Mau>aYal/+a<a& k-MaR SaMaaMNaaYaaMNaaTaMai>aYauÅàaTMaJaaNaaMaaTMaSaMaaNaaNaa& XaTa& JaNa‚
YaaMaaSa )) 8 ))
atha ha bhagavän åñabhadevaù sva-varñaà karma-kñetram anumanyamänaù
pradarçita-gurukula-väso labdha-varair gurubhir anujïäto gåhamedhinäà
dharmän anuçikñamäëo jayantyäm indra-dattäyäm ubhaya-lakñaëaà karma
samämnäyämnätam abhiyuïjann ätmajänäm ätma-samänänäà çataà
janayäm äsa.
SYNONYMS
atha—thereupon (after the departure of his father); ha—indeed;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; åñabha-devaù—Åñabhadeva;
sva—His own; varñam—kingdom; karma-kñetram—the field of activities;
anumanyamänaù—accepting as; pradarçita—shown as an example;
guru-kula-väsaù—lived at the gurukula; labdha—having achieved;
varaiù—gifts; gurubhiù—by the spiritual masters; anujïätaù—being ordered;
gåha-medhinäm—of the householders; dharmän—duties;
anuçikñamäëaù—teaching by example; jayantyäm—in His wife, Jayanté;
indra-dattäyäm—offered by Lord Indra; ubhaya-lakñaëam—of both types;
karma—activities; samämnäyämnätam—mentioned in the scriptures;
abhiyuïjan—performing; ätmajänäm—sons; ätma-samänänäm—exactly like
Himself; çatam—one hundred; janayäm äsa—begot.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
172
After Näbhi Mahäräja departed for Badarikäçrama, the Supreme Lord,
Åñabhadeva, understood that His kingdom was His field of activities. He
therefore showed Himself as an example and taught the duties of a householder
by first accepting brahmacarya under the direction of spiritual masters. He also
went to live at the spiritual masters' place, gurukula. After His education was
finished, He gave gifts (guru-dakñiëä) to His spiritual masters and then
accepted the life of a householder. He took a wife named Jayanté and begot one
hundred sons who were as powerful and qualified as He Himself. His wife
Jayanté had been offered to Him by Indra, the King of heaven. Åñabhadeva and
Jayanté performed householder life in an exemplary way, carrying out ritualistic
activities ordained by the çruti and småti çästra.
PURPORT
Being an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Åñabhadeva
had nothing to do with material affairs. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, pariträëäya
sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm: [Bg. 4.8] the purpose of an incarnation is to
liberate His devotees and to stop the demoniac activities of nondevotees.
These are the two functions of the Supreme Lord when He incarnates. Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu has said that in order to preach, one must live a
practical life and show people how to do things. Äpani äcari' bhakti çikhäimu
sabäre. One cannot teach others unless he behaves the same way himself.
Åñabhadeva was an ideal king, and He took His education in the gurukula,
although He was already educated because the Supreme Lord is omniscient.
Although Åñabhadeva had nothing to learn from gurukula, He went there just
to teach the people in general how to take an education from the right source,
from Vedic teachers. He then entered householder life and lived according to
the principles of Vedic knowledge—çruti and småti. In his
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.2.101) Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, quoting the Skanda
Puräëa, states:
çruti-småti-puräëädicopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
173
païcarätra-vidhià vinä
aikäntiké harer bhaktir
utpätäyaiva kalpate
[Brs. 1.2.101(2)]
Human society must follow the instructions received from çruti and småti,
Vedic literature. Practically applied in life this is worship of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead according to the päïcarätrika-vidhi. Every human
being must advance his spiritual life and at the end return home, back to
Godhead. Mahäräja Åñabhadeva strictly followed all these principles. He
remained an ideal gåhastha and taught His sons how to become perfect in
spiritual life. These are some examples of how He ruled the earth and
completed His mission as an incarnation.
TEXT 9
Yaeza& %lu/ MahaYaaeGaq >arTaae JYaeï" é[eïGau<a AaSaqÛeNaed& vz| >aarTaiMaiTa
VYaPaidXaiNTa )) 9 ))
yeñäà khalu mahä-yogé bharato jyeñöhaù çreñöha-guëa äséd yenedaà varñaà
bhäratam iti vyapadiçanti.
SYNONYMS
yeñäm—of whom; khalu—indeed; mahä-yogé—a very highly exalted devotee of
the Lord; bharataù—Bharata; jyeñöhaù—the eldest; çreñöha-guëaù—qualified
with the best attributes; äsét—was; yena—by whom; idam—this;
varñam—planet; bhäratam—Bhärata; iti—thus; vyapadiçanti—people call.
TRANSLATION
Of Åñabhadeva's one hundred sons, the eldest, named Bharata, was a great,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
174
exalted devotee qualified with the best attributes. In his honor, this planet has
become known as Bhärata-varña.
PURPORT
This planet known as Bhärata-varña is also called puëya-bhümi, the pious
land. At the present moment Bhärata-bhümi, or Bhärata-varña, is a small piece
of land extending from the Himalaya Mountains to Cape Comorin. Sometimes
this peninsula is called puëya-bhümi. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has given
special importance to the people of this land.
bhärata-bhümite haila manuñya-janma yära
janma särthaka kari' kara para-upakära
"One who has taken his birth as a human being in the land of India
(Bhärata-varña) should make his life successful and work for the benefit of all
other people." (Cc. Ädi 9.41) The inhabitants of this piece of land are very
fortunate. They can purify their existence by accepting this Kåñëa
consciousness movement and go outside Bhärata-bhümi (India) and preach
this cult to benefit the whole world.
TEXT 10
TaMaNau ku-XaavTaR wl/avTaaeR b]øavTaaeR Mal/Ya" ke-Tau>aRd]SaeNa wNd]SPa*iGvd>aR"
k-Ik-$= wiTa Nav NaviTa Pa[DaaNaa" )) 10 ))
tam anu kuçävarta ilävarto brahmävarto malayaù ketur bhadrasena indraspåg
vidarbhaù kékaöa iti nava navati pradhänäù.
SYNONYMS
tam—him; anu—following; kuçävarta—Kuçävarta; ilävartaù—Ilävarta;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
175
brahmävartaù—Brahmävarta; malayaù—Malaya; ketuù—Ketu;
bhadra-senaù—Bhadrasena; indra-spåk—Indraspåk; vidarbhaù—Vidarbha;
kékaöaù—Kékaöa; iti—thus; nava—nine; navati—ninety; pradhänäù—older
than.
TRANSLATION
Following Bharata, there were ninety-nine other sons. Among these were
nine elderly sons, named Kuçävarta, Ilävarta, Brahmävarta, Malaya, Ketu,
Bhadrasena, Indraspåk, Vidarbha and Kékaöa.
TEXTS 11-12
k-ivhRivrNTair+a" Pa[buÖ" iPaPPal/aYaNa" )
AaivhaeR}aae_Qa d]uiMal/êMaSa" k-r>aaJaNa" )) 11 ))
wiTa >aaGavTaDaMaRdXaRNaa Nav Maha>aaGavTaaSTaeza& SaucirTa& >aGavNMaihMaae‚
Pab*&ihTa& vSaudevNaardSa&vadMauPaXaMaaYaNaMauPairíaÜ<aRiYaZYaaMa" )) 12 ))
kavir havir antarikñaù
prabuddhaù pippaläyanaù
ävirhotro 'tha drumilaç
camasaù karabhäjanaùupaçamäyanam upariñöäd varëayiñyämaù.
SYNONYMS
kaviù—Kavi; haviù—Havi; antarikñaù—Antarikña; prabuddhaù—Prabuddha;
pippaläyanaù—Pippaläyana; ävirhotraù—Avirhotra; atha—also;
drumilaù—Drumila; camasaù—Camasa; karabhäjanaù—Karabhäjana;
iti—thus; bhägavata-dharma-darçanäù—authorized preachers of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam; nava—nine; mahä-bhägavatäù—highly advanced
devotees; teñäm—of them; sucaritam—good characteristics;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
176
bhagavat-mahimä-upabåàhitam—accompanied by the glories of the Supreme
Lord; vasudeva-närada-saàvädam—within the conversation between
Vasudeva and Närada; upaçamäyanam—which gives full satisfaction to the
mind; upariñöät—hereafter (in the Eleventh Canto); varëayiñyämaù—I shall
vividly explain.
TRANSLATION
In addition to these sons were Kavi, Havi, Antarikña, Prabuddha,
Pippaläyana, Avirhotra, Drumila, Camasa and Karabhäjana. These were all very
exalted, advanced devotees and authorized preachers of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
These devotees were glorified due to their strong devotion to Väsudeva, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore they were very exalted. To satisfy
the mind perfectly, I [Çukadeva Gosvämé] shall hereafter describe the
characteristics of these nine devotees when I discuss the conversation between
Närada and Vasudeva.
TEXT 13
YavqYaa&Sa Wk-aXaqiTaJaaRYaNTaeYaa" iPaTauradeXak-ra MahaXaal/INaa Mahaé[aei}aYaa
YajXaql/a" k-MaRivXauÖa b]aø<aa b>aUvu" )) 13 ))
yavéyäàsa ekäçétir jäyanteyäù pitur ädeçakarä mahä-çälénä mahä-çrotriyä
yajïa-çéläù karma-viçuddhä brähmaëä babhüvuù.
SYNONYMS
yavéyäàsaù—younger; ekäçétiù—numbering eighty-one; jäyanteyäù—the sons
of Jayanté, the wife of Åñabhadeva; pituù—of their father;
ädeçakaräù—following the order; mahä-çälénäù—well behaved. well cultured;
mahä-çrotriyäù—extremely learned in Vedic knowledge; yajïa-çéläù—expert
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
177
in performing ritualistic ceremonies; karma-viçuddhäù—very pure in their
activities; brähmaëäù—qualified brähmaëas; babhüvuù—became.
TRANSLATION
In addition to these nineteen sons mentioned above, there were eighty-one
younger ones, all born of Åñabhadeva and Jayanté. According to the order of
their father, they became well cultured, well behaved, very pure in their
activities and expert in Vedic knowledge and the performance of Vedic rituals.
Thus they all became perfectly qualified brähmaëas.
PURPORT
From this verse we have good information of how the castes are qualified
according to quality and work. Åñabhadeva, a king, was certainly a kñatriya. He
had a hundred sons, and out of these, ten were engaged as kñatriyas and ruled
the planet. Nine sons became good preachers of Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(mahä-bhägavatas), and this indicates that they were above the position of
brähmaëas. The other eighty-one sons became highly qualified brähmaëas.
These are some practical examples of how one can become fit for a certain
type of activity by qualification, not by birth. All the sons of Mahäräja
Åñabhadeva were kñatriyas by birth, but by quality some of them became
kñatriyas, and some became brähmaëas. Nine became preachers of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (bhägavata-dharma-darçanäù), which means that they
were above the categories of kñatriya and brähmaëa.
TEXT 14
>aGavaNa*z>aSa&j AaTMaTaN}a" SvYa& iNaTYaiNav*taaNaQaRParMPar" ke-vl/aNaNdaNau>av
wRìr Wv ivParqTavTk-MaaR<Yaar>aMaa<a" k-ale/NaaNauGaTa& DaMaRMaacr<aeNaae PaiXa+a‚
YaàTaiÜda& SaMa oPaXaaNTaae MaE}a" k-aåi<ak-ae DaMaaRQaRYaXa"Pa[JaaNaNdaMa*TaavraeDaeNa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
178
Ga*hezu l/aek&- iNaYaMaYaTa( )) 14 ))
bhagavän åñabha-saàjïa ätma-tantraù svayaà
nitya-nivåttänartha-paramparaù kevalänandänubhava éçvara eva viparétavat
karmäëy ärabhamäëaù kälenänugataà dharmam äcaraëenopaçikñayann
atad-vidäà sama upaçänto maitraù käruëiko
dharmärtha-yaçaù-prajänandämåtävarodhena gåheñu lokaà niyamayat.
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; åñabha—Åñabha;
saàjïaù—named; ätma-tantraù—fully independent; svayam—personally;
nitya—eternally; nivåtta—free from; anartha—of things not wanted (birth, old
age, disease and death); paramparaù—the continual succession, one after
another; kevala—only; änanda-anubhavaù—full of transcendental bliss;
éçvaraù—the Supreme Lord, the controller; eva—indeed; viparéta-vat—just
like the opposite; karmäëi—material activities; ärabhamäëaù—performing;
kälena—in course of time; anugatam—neglected; dharmam—the
varëäçrama-dharma; äcaraëena—by executing; upaçikñayan—teaching;
a-tat-vidäm—persons who are in ignorance; samaù—equipoised;
upaçäntaù—undisturbed by the material senses; maitraù—very friendly to
everyone; käruëikaù—very merciful to all; dharma—religious principles;
artha—economic development; yaçaù—reputation; prajä—sons and daughters;
änanda—material pleasure; amåta—eternal life; avarodhena—for achieving;
gåheñu—in household life; lokam—the people in general; niyamayat—He
regulated.
TRANSLATION
Being an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Åñabhadeva was fully independent because His form was spiritual, eternal and
full of transcendental bliss. He eternally had nothing to do with the four
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
179
principles of material misery [birth, death, old age and disease]. Nor was He
materially attached. He was always equipoised, and He saw everyone on the
same level. He was unhappy to see others unhappy, and He was the well-wisher
of all living entities. Although He was a perfect personality, the Supreme Lord
and controller of all, He nonetheless acted as if He were an ordinary
conditioned soul. Therefore He strictly followed the principles of
varëäçrama-dharma and acted accordingly. In due course of time, the principles
of varëäçrama-dharma had become neglected; therefore through His personal
characteristics and behavior, He taught the ignorant public how to perform
duties within the varëäçrama-dharma. In this way He regulated the general
populace in householder life, enabling them to develop religion and economic
well-being and to attain reputations, sons and daughters, material pleasure and
finally eternal life. By His instructions, He showed how people could remain
householders and at the same time become perfect by following the principles of
varëäçrama-dharma.
PURPORT
The varëäçrama-dharma is meant for imperfect, conditioned souls. It trains
them to become spiritually advanced in order to return home, back to
Godhead. A civilization that does not know the highest aim of life is no better
than an animal society. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam: na te viduù
svärtha-gatià hi viñëum [SB 7.5.31]. A human society is meant for elevation to
spiritual knowledge so that all of the people can be freed from the clutches of
birth, death, old age and disease. The varëäçrama-dharma enables human
society to become perfectly fit for getting out of the clutches of mäyä, and by
following the regulative principles of varëäçrama-dharma, one can become
successful. In this regard, see Bhagavad-gétä (3.21-24).
TEXT 15
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
180
YaÛC^qzR<YaacirTa& TatadNauvTaRTae l/aek-" )) 15 ))
yad yac chérñaëyäcaritaà tat tad anuvartate lokaù.
SYNONYMS
yat yat—whatever; çérñaëya—by the leading personalities;
äcaritam—performed; tat tat—that; anuvartate—follow; lokaù—the people in
general.
TRANSLATION
Whatever action is performed by a great man, common men follow.
PURPORT
A similar verse is also found in Bhagavad-gétä (3.21). It is essential for
human society to have a section of men perfectly trained as qualified
brähmaëas according to the instructions of Vedic knowledge. Those below the
brahminical qualification—administrators, merchants and workers—should
take instructions from those ideal people who are considered to be
intellectuals. In this way, everyone can be elevated to the highest
transcendental position and be freed from material attachment. The material
world is described by Lord Kåñëa Himself as duùkhälayam açäçvatam [Bg. 8.15],
a temporary place of misery. No one can stay here, even if he makes a
compromise with misery. One has to give up this body and accept another,
which may not even be a human body. As soon as one gets a material body, he
becomes deha-bhåt, or dehé. In other words, he is subjected to all the material
conditions. The leaders of society must be so ideal that by following them one
can be relieved from the clutches of material existence.
TEXT 16
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
181
YaÛiPa SvividTa& Sak-l/DaMa| b]aø& Gauù& b]aø<aEdRiXaRTaMaaGaeR<a SaaMaaidi>a‚
åPaaYaEJaRNaTaaMaNauXaXaaSa )) 16 ))
yadyapi sva-viditaà sakala-dharmaà brähmaà guhyaà brähmaëair
darçita-märgeëa sämädibhir upäyair janatäm anuçaçäsa.
SYNONYMS
yadyapi—although; sva-viditam—known by Him; sakala-dharmam—which
includes all different types of occupational duties; brähmam—Vedic
instruction; guhyam—very confidential; brähmaëaiù—by the brähmaëas;
darçita-märgeëa—by the path showed; säma-ädibhiù—säma, dama, titikñä
(controlling the mind. controlling the senses, practicing tolerance) and so on;
upäyaiù—by the means; janatäm—the people in general; anuçaçäsa—he ruled
over.
TRANSLATION
Although Lord Åñabhadeva knew everything about confidential Vedic
knowledge, which includes information about all types of occupational duties,
He still maintained Himself as a kñatriya and followed the instructions of the
brähmaëas as they related to mind control, sense control, tolerance and so forth.
Thus He ruled the people according to the system of varëäçrama-dharma, which
enjoins that the brähmaëas instruct the kñatriyas and the kñatriyas administer
to the state through the vaiçyas and çüdras.
PURPORT
Although Åñabhadeva knew all the Vedic instructions perfectly well, He
nonetheless followed the instructions of the brähmaëas in order to perfectly
maintain the social order. The brähmaëas would give advice according to the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
182
çästras, and all the other castes would follow. The word brahma means "perfect
knowledge of all activities," and this knowledge is very confidentially described
in the Vedic literatures. Men trained perfectly as brähmaëas should know all
Vedic literature, and the benefit derived from this literature should be
distributed to the general populace. The general populace should follow the
perfect brähmaëa. In this way, one can learn how to control the mind and
senses and thus gradually advance to spiritual perfection.
TEXT 17
d]VYadeXak-al/vYa"é[ÖiTvRiGvivDaaeÕeXaaePaicTaE" SavOEriPa §-Taui>aYaRQaaePadeXa&
XaTak*-Tv wYaaJa )) 17 ))
dravya-deça-käla-vayaù-çraddhartvig-vividhoddeçopacitaiù sarvair api
kratubhir yathopadeçaà çata-kåtva iyäja.
SYNONYMS
dravya—the ingredients for performing yajïa; deça—the particular place, a
holy place or a temple; käla—the suitable time, such as springtime; vayaù—the
age, especially youth; çraddhä—faith in goodness, not in passion and
ignorance; åtvik—the priests; vividha-uddeça—worshiping different demigods
for different purposes; upacitaiù—enriched by; sarvaiù—all kinds of;
api—certainly; kratubhiù—by sacrificial ceremonies;
yathä-upadeçam—according to the instruction; çata-kåtvaù—one hundred
times; iyäja—He worshiped.
TRANSLATION
Lord Åñabhadeva performed all kinds of sacrifices one hundred times
according to the instructions of the Vedic literatures. Thus He satisfied Lord
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
183
Viñëu in every respect. All the rituals were enriched by first-class ingredients.
They were executed in holy places according to the proper time by priests who
were all young and faithful. In this way Lord Viñëu was worshiped, and the
prasäda was offered to all the demigods. Thus the functions and festivals were
all successful.
PURPORT
It is said, kaumära äcaret präjïo dharmän bhägavatän iha (SB 7.6.1). A ritual
should be performed by young men, even boys, at a tender age in order for the
ritual to be performed successfully. From childhood, people should be trained
in Vedic culture, especially in devotional service. In this way, one can perfect
one's life. A Vaiñëava does not disrespect the demigods, but on the other hand
he is not so foolish that he accepts each and every demigod as the Supreme
Lord. The Supreme Lord is master of all demigods; therefore the demigods are
His servants. The Vaiñëava accepts them as servants of the Supreme Lord, and
he worships them directly. In the Brahma-saàhitä, the important
demigods—Lord Çiva, Lord Brahmä and even the incarnations and expansions
of Lord Kåñëa like Mahä-Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and all the other
viñëu-tattvas, as well as the çakti-tattvas like Durgädevé—are all worshiped by
the process of worshiping Govinda with the words govindam ädi-puruñaà tam
ahaà bhajämi **. A Vaiñëava worships the demigods in relation to Govinda,
not independently. Vaiñëavas are not so foolish that they consider the
demigods independent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is
confirmed in Caitanya-caritämåta. Ekale éçvara kåñëa, ära saba bhåtya: [Cc. Ädi
5.142] the supreme master is Kåñëa, and all others are His servants.
TEXT 18
>aGavTazR>ae<a Pairr+YaMaa<a WTaiSMaNa( vzeR Na k-êNa Pauåzae vaH^„TYa‚
ivÛMaaNaiMavaTMaNaae_NYaSMaaTk-QaÄNa ik-MaiPa k-ihRicdve+aTae >aTaRYaRNauSavNa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
184
ivJa*iM>aTaòehaiTaXaYaMaNTare<a )) 18 ))
bhagavatarñabheëa parirakñyamäëa etasmin varñe na kaçcana puruño väïchaty
avidyamänam ivätmano 'nyasmät kathaïcana kimapi karhicid avekñate
bhartary anusavanaà vijåmbhita-snehätiçayam antareëa.
SYNONYMS
bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; åñabheëa—King Åñabha;
parirakñyamäëe—being protected; etasmin—on this; varñe—planet; na—not;
kaçcana—anyone; puruñaù—even a common man; väïchati—desires;
avidyamänam—not existing in reality; iva—as if; ätmanaù—for himself;
anyasmät—from anyone else; kathaïcana—by any means; kimapi—anything;
karhicit—at any time; avekñate—does care to see; bhartari—toward the master;
anusavanam—always; vijåmbhita—expanding; sneha-atiçayam—very great
affection; antareëa—within one's self.
TRANSLATION
No one likes to possess anything that is like a will-o'-the-wisp or a flower in
the sky, for everyone knows very well that such things do not exist. When Lord
Åñabhadeva ruled this planet of Bhäratavarña, even common men did not want
to ask for anything, at any time or by any means. No one ever asks for a
will-o'-the-wisp. In other words, everyone was completely satisfied, and
therefore there was no chance of anyone's asking for anything. The people were
absorbed in great affection for the King. Since this affection was always
expanding, they were not inclined to ask for anything.
PURPORT
In Bengal the word ghoòä-òimba is used, which means "the egg of a horse."
Since a horse never lays an egg, the word ghoòä-òimba actually has no
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
185
meaning. In Sanskrit there is a word kha-puñpa, which means "the flower in
the sky." No flower grows in the sky; therefore no one is interested in asking
for kha-puñpa or ghoòä-òimba. During the reign of Mahäräja Åñabhadeva,
people were so well equipped that they did not want to ask for anything. They
were immensely supplied with all necessities for life due to King Åñabhadeva's
good government. Consequently everyone felt full satisfaction and did not
want anything. This is the perfection of government. If the citizens are
unhappy due to bad government, the heads of government are condemned.
During these democratic days, monarchy is disliked by the people, but here is
an example of how an emperor of the whole world kept all the citizens fully
satisfied by supplying the necessities of life and following the Vedic principles.
Thus everyone was happy during the reign of Mahäräja Åñabhadeva, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 19
Sa k-daicd$=MaaNaae >aGavaNa*z>aae b]øavTaRGaTaae b]øizRPa[vrSa>aaYaa& Pa[JaaNaa&
iNaXaaMaYaNTaqNaaMaaTMaJaaNavihTaaTMaNa" Pa[é[YaPa[<aYa>arSauYaiN}aTaaNaPYauPaiXa+aYaiàiTa
haevac )) 19 ))
sa kadäcid aöamäno bhagavän åñabho brahmävarta-gato
brahmarñi-pravara-sabhäyäà prajänäà niçämayanténäm ätmajän
avahitätmanaù praçraya-praëaya-bhara-suyantritän apy upaçikñayann iti
hoväca.
SYNONYMS
saù—He; kadäcit—once; aöamänaù—while on tour; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; åñabhaù—Lord Åñabha; brahmävarta-gataù—when He
reached the place known as Brahmävarta (identified by some as Burma and by
others as a place near Kanpura, Uttar Pradesh);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
186
brahma-åñi-pravara-sabhäyäm—in a meeting of first-class brähmaëas;
prajänäm—while the citizens; niçämayanténäm—were hearing; ätmajän—His
sons; avahita-ätmanaù—attentive; praçraya—of good behavior; praëaya—of
devotion; bhara—by an abundance; su-yantritän—well controlled;
api—although; upaçikñayan—teaching; iti—thus; ha—certainly; uväca—said.
TRANSLATION
Once while touring the world, Lord Åñabhadeva, the Supreme Lord, reached
a place known as Brahmävarta. There was a great conference of learned
brähmaëas at that place, and all the King's sons attentively heard the
instructions of the brähmaëas there. At that assembly, within the hearing of the
citizens, Åñabhadeva instructed His sons, although they were already very well
behaved, devoted and qualified. He instructed them so that in the future they
could rule the world very perfectly. Thus he spoke as follows.
PURPORT
The instructions of Lord Åñabhadeva to His sons are very valuable if one
wants to live peacefully within this world, which is full of miseries. In the next
chapter, Lord Åñabhadeva gives His sons these valuable instructions.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Fourth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Characteristics of Åñabhadeva, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead."
5. Lord Åñabhadeva's Teachings to His Sons
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
187
In this chapter there is a description of bhägavata-dharma, religious
principles in devotional service that transcend religious principles for
liberation and the mitigation of material misery. It is stated in this chapter
that a human being should not work hard like dogs and hogs for sense
gratification. The human life is especially meant for the revival of our
relationship with the Supreme Lord, and to this end all kinds of austerities and
penances should be accepted. By austere activities, one's heart can be cleansed
of material contamination, and as a result one can be situated on the spiritual
platform. To attain this perfection, one has to take shelter of a devotee and
serve him. Then the door of liberation will be open. Those who are materially
attached to women and sense gratification gradually become entangled in
material consciousness and suffer the miseries of birth, old age, disease and
death. Those who are engaged in the general welfare of all and who are not
attached to children and family are called mahätmäs. Those who are engaged
in sense gratification. who act piously or impiously, cannot understand the
purpose of the soul. Therefore they should approach a highly elevated devotee
and accept him as a spiritual master. By his association, one will be able to
understand the purpose of life. Under the instructions of such a spiritual
master, one can attain devotional service to the Lord, detachment from
material things, and tolerance of material misery and distress. One can then
see all living entities equally, and one becomes very eager to know about
transcendental subject matters. Endeavoring persistently for the satisfaction of
Kåñëa, one becomes detached from wife, children and home. He is not
interested in wasting time. In this way one becomes self-realized. A person
advanced in spiritual knowledge does not engage anyone in material activity.
And one who cannot deliver another person by instructing him in devotional
service should not become a spiritual master, father, mother, demigod or
husband. Instructing His one hundred sons, Lord Åñabhadeva advised them to
accept their eldest brother, Bharata, as their guide and lord, and thereby serve
him. Of all living entities, the brähmaëas are the best, and above the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
188
brähmaëas the Vaiñëavas are situated in an even better position. Serving a
Vaiñëava means serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus Çukadeva
Gosvämé describes the characteristics of Bharata Mahäräja and the sacrificial
performance executed by Lord Åñabhadeva for the instruction of the general
populace.
TEXT 1
‰z>a ovac
NaaYa& dehae deh>aaJaa& Na*l/aekek-
íaNa( k-aMaaNahRTae iv@(>auJaa& Yae )
TaPaae idVYa& Pau}ak-a YaeNa Satv&
XauÖyeÛSMaad( b[øSaaE:Ya& TvNaNTaMa( )) 1 ))
åñabha uväca
näyaà deho deha-bhäjäà nåloke
kañöän kämän arhate viò-bhujäà ye
tapo divyaà putrakä yena sattvaà
çuddhyed yasmäd brahma-saukhyaà tv anantam
SYNONYMS
åñabhaù uväca—Lord Åñabhadeva said; na—not; ayam—this; dehaù—body;
deha-bhäjäm—of all living entities who have accepted material bodies;
nå-loke—in this world; kañöän—troublesome; kämän—sense gratification;
arhate—deserves; viö-bhujäm—of stool-eaters; ye—which; tapaù—austerities
and penances; divyam—divine; putrakäù—My dear sons; yena—by which;
sattvam—the heart; çuddhyet—becomes purified; yasmät—from which;
brahma-saukhyam—spiritual happiness; tu—certainly; anantam—unending.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
189
TRANSLATION
Lord Åñabhadeva told His sons: My dear boys, of all the living entities who
have accepted material bodies in this world, one who has been awarded this
human form should not work hard day and night simply for sense gratification,
which is available even for dogs and hogs that eat stool. One should engage in
penance and austerity to attain the divine position of devotional service. By
such activity, one's heart is purified, and when one attains this position, he
attains eternal, blissful life, which is transcendental to material happiness and
which continues forever.
PURPORT
In this verse Lord Åñabhadeva tells His sons about the importance of
human life. The word deha-bhäk refers to anyone who accepts a material body,
but the living entity who is awarded the human form must act differently from
animals. Animals like dogs and hogs enjoy sense gratification by eating stool.
After undergoing severe hardships all day, human beings are trying to enjoy
themselves at night by eating, drinking, having sex and sleeping. At the same
time, they have to properly defend themselves. However, this is not human
civilization. Human life means voluntarily practicing suffering for the
advancement of spiritual life. There is, of course, suffering in the lives of
animals and plants, which are suffering due to their past misdeeds. However,
human beings should voluntarily accept suffering in the form of austerities and
penances in order to attain the divine life. After attaining the divine life, one
can enjoy happiness eternally. After all, every living entity is trying to enjoy
happiness, but as long as one is encaged in the material body, he has to suffer
different kinds of misery. A higher sense is present in the human form. We
should act according to superior advice in order to attain eternal happiness
and go back to Godhead.
It is significant in this verse that the government and the natural guardian,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
190
the father, should educate subordinates and raise them to Kåñëa consciousness.
Devoid of Kåñëa consciousness, every living being suffers in this cycle of birth
and death perpetually. To relieve them from this bondage and enable them to
become blissful and happy, bhakti-yoga should be taught. A foolish civilization
neglects to teach people how to rise to the platform of bhakti-yoga. Without
Kåñëa consciousness a person is no better than a hog or dog. The instructions
of Åñabhadeva are very essential at the present moment. People are being
educated and trained to work very hard for sense gratification, and there is no
sublime aim in life. A man travels to earn his livelihood, leaving home early in
the morning, catching a local train and being packed in a compartment. He
has to stand for an hour or two in order to reach his place of business. Then
again he takes a bus to get to the office. At the office he works hard from nine
to five; then he takes two or three hours to return home. After eating, he has
sex and goes to sleep. For all this hardship, his only happiness is a little sex.
Yan maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukhaà hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. Åñabhadeva clearly
states that human life is not meant for this kind of existence, which is enjoyed
even by dogs and hogs. Indeed, dogs and hogs do not have to work so hard for
sex. A human being should try to live in a different way and should not try to
imitate dogs and hogs. The alternative is mentioned. Human life is meant for
tapasya, austerity and penance. By tapasya, one can get out of the material
clutches. When one is situated in Kåñëa consciousness, devotional service, his
happiness is guaranteed eternally. By taking to bhakti-yoga, devotional service,
one's existence is purified. The living entity is seeking happiness life after life,
but he can make a solution to all his problems simply by practicing bhakti-yoga.
Then he immediately becomes eligible to return home, back to Godhead. As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
191
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."
TEXT 2
MahTSaeva& ÜarMaahuivRMau¢e-‚
STaMaaeÜar& YaaeizTaa& Sai(r)Sa(r)Ma( )
MahaNTaSTae SaMaictaa" Pa[XaaNTaa
ivMaNYav" Sauôd" SaaDavae Yae )) 2 ))
mahat-seväà dväram ähur vimuktes
tamo-dväraà yoñitäà saìgi-saìgam
mahäntas te sama-cittäù praçäntä
vimanyavaù suhådaù sädhavo ye
SYNONYMS
mahat-seväm—service to the spiritually advanced persons called mahätmäs;
dväram—the way; ähuù—they say; vimukteù—of liberation;
tamaù-dväram—the way to the dungeon of a dark, hellish condition of life;
yoñitäm—of women; saìgi—of associates; saìgam—association;
mahäntaù—highly advanced in spiritual understanding; te—they;
sama-cittäù—persons who see everyone in a spiritual identity; praçäntäù—very
peaceful, situated in Brahman or Bhagavän; vimanyavaù—without anger (one
must distribute Kåñëa consciousness to persons who are hostile without
becoming angry at them); suhådaù—well-wishers of everyone;
sädhavaù—qualified devotees, without abominable behavior; ye—they who.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
192
One can attain the path of liberation from material bondage only by
rendering service to highly advanced spiritual personalities. These personalities
are impersonalists and devotees. Whether one wants to merge into the Lord's
existence or wants to associate with the Personality of Godhead, one should
render service to the mahätmäs. For those who are not interested in such
activities, who associate with people fond of women and sex, the path to hell is
wide open. The mahätmäs are equipoised. They do not see any difference
between one living entity and another. They are very peaceful and are fully
engaged in devotional service. They are devoid of anger, and they work for the
benefit of everyone. They do not behave in any abominable way. Such people
are known as mahätmäs.
PURPORT
The human body is like a junction. One may either take the path of
liberation or the path leading to a hellish condition. How one can take these
paths is described herein. On the path of liberation, one associates with
mahätmäs, and on the path of bondage one associates with those attached to
sense gratification and women. There are two types of mahätmäs—the
impersonalist and the devotee. Although their ultimate goal is different, the
process of emancipation is almost the same. Both want eternal happiness. One
seeks happiness in impersonal Brahman, and the other seeks happiness in the
association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As described in the first
verse: brahma-saukhyam. Brahman means spiritual or eternal; both the
impersonalist and the devotee seek eternal blissful life. In any case, it is
advised that one become perfect. In the words of Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya
22.87):
asat-saìga-tyäga,—ei vaiñëava-äcära
'stré-saìgé'—eka asädhu, 'kåñëäbhakta' ära
To remain unattached to the modes of material nature, one should avoid
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
193
associating with those who are asat, materialistic. There are two kinds of
materialists. One is attached to women and sense gratification, and the other
is simply a nondevotee. On the positive side is association with mahätmäs, and
on the negative side is the avoidance of nondevotees and women-hunters.
TEXT 3
Yae va MaYaqXae k*-TaSaaEôdaQaaR
JaNaezu dehM>arvaiTaRke-zu )
Ga*hezu JaaYaaTMaJaraiTaMaTSau
Na Pa[qiTaYau¢-a YaavdQaaRê l/aeke- )) 3 ))
ye vä mayéçe kåta-sauhådärthä
janeñu dehambhara-värtikeñu
gåheñu jäyätmaja-rätimatsu
na préti-yuktä yävad-arthäç ca loke
SYNONYMS
ye—those who; vä—or; mayi—unto Me; éçe—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; kåta-sauhåda-arthäù—very eager to develop love (in a relationship
of däsya, sakhya, vätsalya or mädhurya); janeñu—to people;
dehambhara-värtikeñu—who are interested only in maintaining the body, not
in spiritual salvation; gåheñu—to the home; jäyä—wife; ätma-ja—children;
räti—wealth or friends; matsu—consisting of; na—not; préti-yuktäù—very
attached; yävat-arthäù—who live by collecting only as much as required;
ca—and; loke—in the material world.
TRANSLATION
Those who are interested in reviving Kåñëa consciousness and increasing
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
194
their love of Godhead do not like to do anything that is not related to Kåñëa.
They are not interested in mingling with people who are busy maintaining their
bodies, eating, sleeping, mating and defending. They are not attached to their
homes, although they may be householders. Nor are they attached to wives,
children, friends or wealth. At the same time, they are not indifferent to the
execution of their duties. Such people are interested in collecting only enough
money to keep the body and soul together.
PURPORT
Whether he is an impersonalist or a devotee, one who is actually interested
in advancing spiritually should not mingle with those who are simply
interested in maintaining the body by means of the so-called advancement of
civilization. Those who are interested in spiritual life should not be attached to
homely comforts in the company of wife, children, friends and so forth. Even
if one is a gåhastha and has to earn his livelihood, he should be satisfied by
collecting only enough money to maintain body and soul together. One should
not have more than that nor less than that. As indicated herein, a householder
should endeavor to earn money for the execution of bhakti-yoga-çravaëaà
kértanaà viñëoù smaraëaà päda-sevanam/ arcanaà vandanaà däsyaà sakhyam
ätma-nivedanam [SB 7.5.23]. A householder should lead such a life that he gets
full opportunity to hear and chant. He should worship the Deity at home,
observe festivals, invite friends in and give them prasäda. A householder
should earn money for this purpose, not for sense gratification.
TEXT 4
NaUNa& Pa[Mata" ku-åTae ivk-MaR
YaidiNd]YaPa[qTaYa AaPa*<aaeiTa )
Na SaaDau MaNYae YaTa AaTMaNaae_Ya‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
195
MaSaàiPa (c)e-Xad AaSa deh" )) 4 ))
nünaà pramattaù kurute vikarma
yad indriya-prétaya äpåëoti
na sädhu manye yata ätmano 'yam
asann api kleçada äsa dehaù
SYNONYMS
nünam—indeed; pramattaù—mad; kurute—performs; vikarma—sinful
activities forbidden in the scriptures; yat—when; indriya-prétaye—for sense
gratification; äpåëoti—engages; na—not; sädhu—befitting; manye—I think;
yataù—by which; ätmanaù—of the soul; ayam—this; asan—being temporary;
api—although; kleça-daù—giving misery; äsa—became possible; dehaù—the
body.
TRANSLATION
When a person considers sense gratification the aim of life, he certainly
becomes mad after materialistic living and engages in all kinds of sinful activity.
He does not know that due to his past misdeeds he has already received a body
which, although temporary, is the cause of his misery. Actually the living entity
should not have taken on a material body, but he has been awarded the material
body for sense gratification. Therefore I think it not befitting an intelligent man
to involve himself again in the activities of sense gratification by which he
perpetually gets material bodies one after another.
PURPORT
Begging, borrowing and stealing to live for sense gratification is condemned
in this verse because such consciousness leads one to a dark, hellish condition.
The four sinful activities are illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
196
gambling. These are the means by which one gets another material body that is
full of miseries. In the Vedas it is said: asaìgo hy ayaà puruñaù. The living
entity is not really connected with this material world, but due to his tendency
to enjoy the material senses. he is put into the material condition. One should
perfect his life by associating with devotees. He should not become further
implicated in the material body.
TEXT 5
Para>avSTaavdbaeDaJaaTaae
Yaavà iJajaSaTa AaTMaTatvMa( )
YaaviT§-YaaSTaavidd& MaNaae vE
k-MaaRTMak&- YaeNa XarqrbNDa" )) 5 ))
paräbhavas tävad abodha-jäto
yävan na jijïäsata ätma-tattvam
yävat kriyäs tävad idaà mano vai
karmätmakaà yena çaréra-bandhaù
SYNONYMS
paräbhavaù—defeat, misery; tävat—so long; abodha-jätaù—produced from
ignorance; yävat—as long as; na—not; jijïäsate—inquires about;
ätma-tattvam—the truth of the self; yävat—as long as; kriyäù—fruitive
activities; tävat—so long; idam—this; manaù—mind; vai—indeed;
karma-ätmakam—absorbed in material activities; yena—by which;
çaréra-bandhaù—bondage in this material body.
TRANSLATION
As long as one does not inquire about the spiritual values of life, one is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
197
defeated and subjected to miseries arising from ignorance. Be it sinful or pious,
karma has its resultant actions. If a person is engaged in any kind of karma, his
mind is called karmätmaka, colored with fruitive activity. As long as the mind is
impure, consciousness is unclear, and as long as one is absorbed in fruitive
activity, he has to accept a material body.
PURPORT
Generally people think that one should act very piously in order to be
relieved from misery, but this is not a fact. Even though one engages in pious
activity and speculation, he is nonetheless defeated. His only aim should be
emancipation from the clutches of mäyä and all material activities. Speculative
knowledge and pious activity do not solve the problems of material life. One
should be inquisitive to understand his spiritual position. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.37):
yathaidhäàsi samiddho 'gnir
bhasmasät kurute 'rjuna
jïänägniù sarva-karmäëi
bhasmasät kurute tathä
"As a blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, O Arjuna, so does the fire of
knowledge burn to ashes all reactions to material activities."
Unless one understands the self and its activities, one has to be considered
in material bondage. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.2.32) it is also said: ye 'nye
'ravindäkña vimukta-mäninas tvayy asta-bhäväd aviçuddha-buddhayaù. A person
who doesn't have knowledge of devotional service may think himself liberated,
but actually he is not. Äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù patanty adho
'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù: [SB 10.2.32] such people may approach the
impersonal Brahman effulgence, but they fall down again into material
enjoyment because they have no knowledge of devotional service. As long as
one is interested in karma and jïäna, he continues enduring the miseries of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
198
material life—birth, old age, disease and death. Karmés certainly take on one
body after another. As far as jïänés are concerned, unless they are promoted to
the topmost understanding, they must return to the material world. As
explained in Bhagavad-gétä (7.19): bahünäà janmanäm ante jïänavän mäà
prapadyate. The point is to know Kåñëa, Väsudeva, as everything and surrender
unto Him. Karmés do not know this, but a devotee who is one hundred percent
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord knows fully what is karma and
jïäna; therefore a pure devotee is no longer interested in karma or jïäna.
Anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. The real
bhakta is untouched by any tinge of karma and jïäna. His only purpose in life
is to serve the Lord.
TEXT 6
Wv& MaNa" k-MaRvXa& Pa[Yau»e
AivÛYaaTMaNYauPaDaqYaMaaNae
Pa[qiTaNaR YaavNMaiYa vaSaudeve
Na MauCYaTae dehYaaeGaeNa TaavTa( )) 6 ))
evaà manaù karma-vaçaà prayuìkte
avidyayätmany upadhéyamäne
prétir na yävan mayi väsudeve
na mucyate deha-yogena tävat
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; manaù—the mind; karma-vaçam—subjugated by fruitive
activities; prayuìkte—acts; avidyayä—by ignorance; ätmani—when the living
entity; upadhéyamäne—is covered; prétiù—love; na—not; yävat—as long as;
mayi—unto Me; väsudeve—Väsudeva, Kåñëa; na—not; mucyate—is delivered;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
199
deha-yogena—from contact with the material body; tävat—so long.
TRANSLATION
When the living entity is covered by the mode of ignorance, he does not
understand the individual living being and the supreme living being, and his
mind is subjugated to fruitive activity. Therefore, until one has love for Lord
Väsudeva, who is none other than Myself, he is certainly not delivered from
having to accept a material body again and again.
PURPORT
When the mind is polluted by fruitive activity, the living entity wants to be
elevated from one material position to another. Generally everyone is involved
in working hard day and night to improve his economic condition. Even when
one understands the Vedic rituals, he becomes interested in promotion to
heavenly planets, not knowing that one's real interest lies in returning home,
back to Godhead. By acting on the platform of fruitive activity, one wanders
throughout the universe in different species and forms. Unless he comes in
contact with a devotee of the Lord, a guru, he does not become attached to the
service of Lord Väsudeva. Knowledge of Väsudeva requires many births to
understand. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (7.19): väsudevaù sarvam iti sa
mahätmä sudurlabhaù. After struggling for existence for many births one may
take shelter at the lotus feet of Väsudeva, Kåñëa. When this happens. one
actually becomes wise and surrenders unto Him. That is the only way to stop
the repetition of birth and death. This is confirmed in Caitanya-caritämåta
(Madhya 19.151) in the instructions given by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu to Çréla
Rüpa Gosvämé at Daçäçvamedha-ghäöa.
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
200
The living entity wanders throughout different planets in different forms and
bodies, but if by chance he comes in contact with a bona fide spiritual master,
by the grace of the spiritual master he receives Lord Kåñëa's shelter, and his
devotional life begins.
TEXT 7
Yada Na PaXYaTYaYaQaa Gau<aeha&
SvaQaeR Pa[Mata" SahSaa ivPaiêTa( )
GaTaSMa*iTaivRNdiTa Ta}a TaaPaa‚
NaaSaaÛ MaEQauNYaMaGaarMaj" )) 7 ))
yadä na paçyaty ayathä guëehäà
svärthe pramattaù sahasä vipaçcit
gata-småtir vindati tatra täpän
äsädya maithunyam agäram ajïaù
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; na—not; paçyati—sees; ayathä—unnecessary;
guëa-éhäm—endeavor to satisfy the senses; sva-arthe—in self-interest;
pramattaù—mad; sahasä—very soon; vipaçcit—even one advanced in
knowledge; gata-småtiù—being forgetful; vindati—gets; tatra—there;
täpän—material miseries; äsädya—getting; maithunyam—based on sexual
intercourse; agäram—a home; ajïaù—being foolish.
TRANSLATION
Even though one may be very learned and wise, he is mad if he does not
understand that the endeavor for sense gratification is a useless waste of time.
Being forgetful of his own interest, he tries to be happy in the material world,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
201
centering his interests around his home, which is based on sexual intercourse
and which brings him all kinds of material miseries. In this way one is no better
than a foolish animal.
PURPORT
In the lowest stage of devotional life, one is not an unalloyed devotee.
Anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam: [Cc. Madhya 19.167] to be an
unalloyed devotee, one must be freed from all material desires and untouched
by fruitive activity and speculative knowledge. On the lower platform, one
may sometimes be interested in philosophical speculation with a tinge of
devotion. However, at that stage one is still interested in sense gratification
and is contaminated by the modes of material nature. The influence of mäyä is
so strong that even a person advanced in knowledge actually forgets that he is
Kåñëa's eternal servant. Therefore he remains satisfied in his householder life,
which is centered around sexual intercourse. Conceding to a life of sex, he
agrees to suffer all kinds of material miseries. Due to ignorance, one is thus
bound by the chain of material laws.
TEXT 8
Pau&Sa" iñYaa iMaQauNaq>aavMaeTa&
TaYaaeiMaRQaae ôdYaGa]iNQaMaahu" )
ATaae Ga*h+ae}aSauTaaáivtaE‚
JaRNaSYa Maaehae_YaMah& MaMaeiTa )) 8 ))
puàsaù striyä mithuné-bhävam etaà
tayor mitho hådaya-granthim ähuù
ato gåha-kñetra-sutäpta-vittair
janasya moho 'yam ahaà mameti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
202
SYNONYMS
puàsaù—of a male; striyäù—of a female; mithuné-bhävam—attraction for
sexual life; etam—this; tayoù—of both of them; mithaù—between one another;
hådaya-granthim—the knot of the hearts; ähuù—they call; ataù—thereafter;
gåha—by home; kñetra—field; suta—children; äpta—relatives; vittaiù—and by
wealth; janasya—of the living being; mohaù—illusion; ayam—this; aham—I;
mama—mine; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
The attraction between male and female is the basic principle of material
existence. On the basis of this misconception, which ties together the hearts of
the male and female, one becomes attracted to his body, home, property,
children, relatives and wealth. In this way one increases life's illusions and
thinks in terms of "I and mine."
PURPORT
Sex serves as the natural attraction between man and woman, and when
they are married, their relationship becomes more involved. Due to the
entangling relationship between man and woman, there is a sense of illusion
whereby one thinks, "This man is my husband," or "This woman is my wife."
This is called hådaya-granthi, "the hard knot in the heart." This knot is very
difficult to undo, even though a man and woman separate either for the
principles of varëäçrama or simply to get a divorce. In any case, the man
always thinks of the woman, and the woman always thinks of the man. Thus a
person becomes materially attached to family, property and children, although
all of these are temporary. The possessor unfortunately identifies with his
property and wealth. Sometimes, even after renunciation, one becomes
attached to a temple or to the few things that constitute the property of a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
203
sannyäsé, but such attachment is not as strong as family attachment. The
attachment to the family is the strongest illusion. In the Satya-saàhitä, it is
stated:
brahmädyä yäjïavalkädyä
mucyante stré-sahäyinaù
bodhyante kecanaiteñäà
viçeñam ca vido viduù
Sometimes it is found among exalted personalities like Lord Brahmä that the
wife and children are not a cause of bondage. On the contrary, the wife
actually helps further spiritual life and liberation. Nonetheless, most people
are bound by the knots of the marital relationship, and consequently they
forget their relationship with Kåñëa.
TEXT 9
Yada MaNaaeôdYaGa]iNQarSYa
k-MaaRNaubÖae d*! AaëQaeTa )
Tada JaNa" SaMPairvTaRTae_SMaad(
Mau¢-" Par& YaaTYaiTahaYa heTauMa( )) 9 ))
yadä mano-hådaya-granthir asya
karmänubaddho dåòha äçlatheta
tadä janaù samparivartate 'smäd
muktaù paraà yäty atihäya hetum
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; manaù—the mind; hådaya-granthiù—the knot in the heart;
asya—of this person; karma-anubaddhaù—bound by the results of his past
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
204
deeds; dåòhaù—very strong; äçlatheta—becomes slackened; tadä—at that time;
janaù—the conditioned soul; samparivartate—turns away; asmät—from this
attachment for sex life; muktaù—liberated; param—to the transcendental
world; yäti—goes; atihäya—giving up; hetum—the original cause.
TRANSLATION
When the strong knot in the heart of a person implicated in material life due
to the results of past action is slackened, one turns away from his attachment to
home, wife and children. In this way, one gives up the basic principle of illusion
[I and mine] and becomes liberated. Thus one goes to the transcendental world.
PURPORT
When, by associating with sädhus and engaging in devotional service, one is
gradually freed from the material conception due to knowledge, practice and
detachment, the knot of attachment in the heart is slackened. Thus one can
get freed from conditional life and become eligible to return home, back to
Godhead.
TEXTS 10-13
h&Sae GauraE MaiYa >a¢-yaNauv*TYaa
ivTa*Z<aYaa ÜNÜiTaiTa+aYaa c )
SavR}a JaNTaaeVYaRSaNaavGaTYaa
iJajaSaYaa TaPaSaehaiNav*tYaa )) 10 ))
MaTk-MaRi>aMaRTk-QaYaa c iNaTYa&
MaÕevSa(r)ad( Gau<ak-ITaRNaaNMae )
iNavOErSaaMYaaePaXaMaeNa Pau}aa
iJahaSaYaa dehGaehaTMabuÖe" )) 11 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
205
ADYaaTMaYaaeGaeNa iviv¢-SaevYaa
Pa[a<aeiNd]YaaTMaai>aJaYaeNa SaD]Yak( )
SaC^\ÖYaa b]øcYaeR<a Xaìd(
ASaMPa[MaadeNa YaMaeNa vacaMa( )) 12 ))
SavR}a MaÙavivc+a<aeNa
jaNaeNa ivjaNaivraiJaTaeNa )
YaaeGaeNa Da*TYauÛMaSatvYau¢-ae
il/(r)& VYaPaaeheTku-Xal/ae_hMaa:YaMa( )) 13 ))
haàse gurau mayi bhaktyänuvåtyä
vitåñëayä dvandva-titikñayä ca
sarvatra jantor vyasanävagatyä
jijïäsayä tapasehä-nivåttyä
mat-karmabhir mat-kathayä ca nityaà
mad-deva-saìgäd guëa-kértanän me
nirvaira-sämyopaçamena puträ
jihäsayä deha-gehätma-buddheù
adhyätma-yogena vivikta-sevayä
präëendriyätmäbhijayena sadhryak
sac-chraddhayä brahmacaryeëa çaçvad
asampramädena yamena väcäm
sarvatra mad-bhäva-vicakñaëena
jïänena vijïäna-viräjitena
yogena dhåty-udyama-sattva-yukto
liìgaà vyapohet kuçalo 'ham-äkhyam
SYNONYMS
haàse—who is a paramahaàsa, or the most exalted. spiritually advanced
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
206
person; gurau—to the spiritual master; mayi—unto Me, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; bhaktyä—by devotional service; anuvåtyä—by
following; vitåñëayä—by detachment from sense gratification; dvandva—of the
dualities of the material world; titikñayä—by tolerance; ca—also;
sarvatra—everywhere; jantoù—of the living entity; vyasana—the miserable
condition of life; avagatyä—by realizing; jijïäsayä—by inquiring about the
truth; tapasä—by practicing austerities and penances; éhä-nivåttyä—by giving
up the endeavor for sense enjoyment; mat-karmabhiù—by working for Me;
mat-kathayä—by hearing topics about Me; ca—also; nityam—always;
mat-deva-saìgät—by association with My devotees; guëa-kértanät me—by
chanting and glorifying My transcendental qualities; nirvaira—being without
enmity; sämya—seeing everyone equally by spiritual understanding;
upaçamena—by subduing anger, lamentation and so on; puträù—O sons;
jihäsayä—by desiring to give up; deha—with the body; geha—with the home;
ätma-buddheù—identification of the self; adhyätma-yogena—by study of the
revealed scriptures; vivikta-sevayä—by living in a solitary place; präëa—the
life air; indriya—the senses; ätma—the mind; abhijayena—by controlling;
sadhryak—completely; sat-çraddhayä—by developing faith in the scriptures;
brahmacaryeëa—by observing celibacy; çaçvat—always; asampramädena—by
not being bewildered; yamena—by restraint; väcäm—of words;
sarvatra—everywhere; mat-bhäva—thinking of Me; vicakñaëena—by
observing; jïänena—by development of knowledge; vijïäna—by practical
application of knowledge; viräjitena—illumined; yogena—by practice of
bhakti-yoga; dhåti—patience; udyama—enthusiasm; sattva—discretion;
yuktaù—endowed with; liìgam—the cause of material bondage;
vyapohet—one can give up; kuçalaù—in full auspiciousness;
aham-äkhyam—false ego, false identification with the material world.
TRANSLATION
O My sons, you should accept a highly elevated paramahaàsa, a spiritually
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
207
advanced spiritual master. In this way, you should place your faith and love in
Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You should detest sense gratification
and tolerate the duality of pleasure and pain, which are like the seasonal
changes of summer and winter. Try to realize the miserable condition of living
entities, who are miserable even in the higher planetary systems.
Philosophically inquire about the truth. Then undergo all kinds of austerities
and penances for the sake of devotional service. Give up the endeavor for sense
enjoyment and engage in the service of the Lord. Listen to discussions about the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and always associate with devotees. Chant
about and glorify the Supreme Lord, and look upon everyone equally on the
spiritual platform. Give up enmity and subdue anger and lamentation. Abandon
identifying the self with the body and the home, and practice reading the
revealed scriptures. Live in a secluded place and practice the process by which
you can completely control your life air, mind and senses. Have full faith in the
revealed scriptures, the Vedic literatures, and always observe celibacy. Perform
your prescribed duties and avoid unnecessary talks. Always thinking of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, acquire knowledge from the right source.
Thus practicing bhakti-yoga, you will patiently and enthusiastically be elevated
in knowledge and will be able to give up the false ego.
PURPORT
In these four verses, Åñabhadeva tells His sons how they can be freed from
the false identification arising from false ego and material conditional life.
One gradually becomes liberated by practicing as mentioned above. All these
prescribed methods enable one to give up the material body (liìgaà vyapohet)
and be situated in his original spiritual body. First of all one has to accept a
bona fide spiritual master. This is advocated by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé in his
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu: çré-guru-pädäçrayaù. To be freed from the
entanglement of the material world, one has to approach a spiritual master.
Tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum eväbhigacchet [MU 1.2.12(3)]. By questioning the
spiritual master and by serving him, one can advance in spiritual life. When
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
208
one engages in devotional service, naturally the attraction for personal
comfort—for eating, sleeping and dressing—is reduced. By associating with
the devotee, a spiritual standard is maintained. The word mad-deva-saìgät is
very important. There are many so-called religions devoted to the worship of
various demigods, but here good association means association with one who
simply accepts Kåñëa as his worshipable Deity.
Another important item is dvandva-titikñä. As long as one is situated in the
material world, there must be pleasure and pain arising from the material body.
As Kåñëa advises in Bhagavad-gétä, täàs titikñasva bhärata. One has to learn
how to tolerate the temporary pains and pleasures of this material world. One
must also be detached from his family and practice celibacy. Sex with one's
wife according to the scriptural injunctions is also accepted as brahmacarya
(celibacy), but illicit sex is opposed to religious principles, and it hampers
advancement in spiritual consciousness. Another important word is
vijïäna-viräjita. Everything should be done very scientifically and consciously.
One should be a realized soul. In this way, one can give up the entanglement of
material bondage.
As Çré Madhväcärya points out, the sum and substance of these four çlokas
is that one should refrain from acting out of a desire for sense gratification and
should instead always engage in the Lord's loving service. In other words,
bhakti-yoga is the acknowledged path of liberation. Çréla Madhväcärya quotes
from the Adhyätma:
ätmano 'vihitaà karma
varjayitvänya-karmaëaù
kämasya ca parityägo
niréhety ähur uttamäù
One should perform activities only for the benefit of the soul; any other
activity should be given up. When a person is situated in this way, he is said to
be desireless. Actually a living entity cannot be totally desireless, but when he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
209
desires the benefit of the soul and nothing else, he is said to be desireless.
Spiritual knowledge is jïäna-vijïäna-samanvitam. When one is fully
equipped with jïäna and vijïäna, he is perfect. Jïäna means that one
understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, to be the Supreme
Being. Vijïäna refers to the activities that liberate one from the ignorance of
material existence. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.9.31): jïänaà
parama-guhyaà me yad vijïäna-samanvitam. Knowledge of the Supreme Lord
is very confidential, and the supreme knowledge by which one understands
Him furthers the liberation of all living entities. This knowledge is vijïäna. As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."
TEXT 14
k-MaaRXaYa& ôdYaGa]iNQabNDa‚
MaivÛYaaSaaidTaMaPa[Mata" )
ANaeNa YaaeGaeNa YaQaaePadeXa&
SaMYaGVYaPaaeùaeParMaeTa YaaeGaaTa( )) 14 ))
karmäçayaà hådaya-granthi-bandham
avidyayäsäditam apramattaù
anena yogena yathopadeçaà
samyag vyapohyoparameta yogät
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
210
SYNONYMS
karma-äçayam—the desire for fruitive activities; hådaya-granthi—the knot in
the heart; bandham—bondage; avidyayä—because of ignorance;
äsäditam—brought about; apramattaù—not being covered by ignorance or
illusion, very careful; anena—by this; yogena—practice of yoga;
yathä-upadeçam—as advised; samyak—completely; vyapohya—becoming free
from; uparameta—one should desist; yogät—from the practice of yoga, the
means of liberation.
TRANSLATION
As I have advised you, My dear sons, you should act accordingly. Be very
careful. By these means you will be freed from the ignorance of the desire for
fruitive activity, and the knot of bondage in the heart will be completely
severed. For further advancement, you should also give up the means. That is,
you should not become attached to the process of liberation itself.
PURPORT
The process of liberation is brahma jijïäsä, the search for the Absolute
Truth. Generally brahma jijïäsä is called neti neti, the process by which one
analyzes existence to search out the Absolute Truth. This method continues as
long as one is not situated in his spiritual life. Spiritual life is brahma-bhüta [SB
4.30.20], the self-realized state. In the words of Bhagavad-gétä (18.54):
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
"One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
211
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have
anything; he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state, he attains
pure devotional service unto Me."
The idea is to enter into the parä bhakti, the transcendental devotional
service of the Supreme Lord. To attain this, one must analyze ones existence,
but when one is actually engaged in devotional service, he should not bother
seeking out knowledge. By simply engaging in devotional service
undeviatingly, one will always remain in the liberated condition.
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
(Bg. 14.26)
The unflinching execution of devotional service is in itself brahma-bhüta [SB
4.30.20]. Another important feature in this connection is anena yogena
yathopadeçam. The instructions received from the spiritual master must be
followed immediately. One should not deviate from or surpass the instructions
of the spiritual master. One should not be simply intent on consulting books
but should simultaneously execute the spiritual master's order (yathopadeçam).
Mystic power should be achieved to enable one to give up the material
conception, but when one actually engages in devotional service, one does not
need to practice the mystic yoga system. The point is that one can give up the
practice of yoga, but devotional service cannot be given up. As stated in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.7.10):
ätmärämäç ca munayo
nirgranthä apy urukrame
kurvanty ahaitukéà bhaktim
ittham-bhüta-guëo hariù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
212
Even those who are liberated (ätmäräma) must always engage in devotional
service. One may give up the practice of yoga when one is self-realized, but at
no stage can one give up devotional service. All other activities for
self-realization, including yoga and philosophical speculation, may be given up,
but devotional service must be retained at all times.
TEXT 15
Pau}aa&ê iXaZYaa&ê Na*Paae GauåvaR
Maçaek-k-aMaae MadNauGa]haQaR" )
wTQa& ivMaNYaurNauiXaZYaadTaJjaNa(
Na YaaeJaYaeTk-MaRSau k-MaRMaU!aNa( )
k&- YaaeJaYaNMaNauJaae_Qa| l/>aeTa
iNaPaaTaYaàíd*Xa& ih GaTaeR )) 15 ))
puträàç ca çiñyäàç ca nåpo gurur vä
mal-loka-kämo mad-anugrahärthaù
itthaà vimanyur anuçiñyäd ataj-jïän
na yojayet karmasu karma-müòhän
kaà yojayan manujo 'rthaà labheta
nipätayan nañöa-dåçaà hi garte
SYNONYMS
puträn—the sons; ca—and; çiñyän—the disciples; ca—and; nåpaù—the king;
guruù—the spiritual master; vä—or; mat-loka-kämaù—desiring to go to My
abode; mat-anugraha-arthaù—thinking that to achieve My mercy is the aim of
life; ittham—in this manner; vimanyuù—free from anger; anuçiñyät—should
instruct; a-tat-jïän—bereft of spiritual knowledge; na—not; yojayet—should
engage; karmasu—in fruitive activities; karma-müòhän—simply engaged in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
213
pious or impious activities; kam—what; yojayan—engaging; manu-jaù—a man;
artham—benefit; labheta—can achieve; nipätayan—causing to fall;
nañöa-dåçam—one who is already bereft of his transcendental sight;
hi—indeed; garte—in the hole.
TRANSLATION
If one is serious about going back home, back to Godhead, he must consider
the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead the summum bonum and
chief aim of life. If he is a father instructing his sons, a spiritual master
instructing his disciples, or a king instructing his citizens, he must instruct
them as I have advised. Without being angry, he should continue giving
instructions, even if his disciple, son or citizen is sometimes unable to follow his
order. Ignorant people who engage in pious and impious activities should be
engaged in devotional service by all means. They should always avoid fruitive
activity. If one puts into the bondage of karmic activity his disciple, son or
citizen who is bereft of transcendental vision, how will one profit? It is like
leading a blind man to a dark well and causing him to fall in.
PURPORT
It is stated in Bhagavad-gétä (3.26):
na buddhi-bhedaà janayed
ajïänäà karma-saìginäm
joñayet sarva-karmäëi
vidvän yuktaù samäcaran
"Let not the wise disrupt the minds of the ignorant who are attached to
fruitive action. They should be encouraged not to refrain from work, but to
work in the spirit of devotion."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
214
TEXT 16
l/aek-" SvYa& é[eYaiSa Naíd*ií‚
YaaeR_QaaRNa( SaMaqheTa iNak-aMak-aMa" )
ANYaaeNYavEr" Sau%le/XaheTaae‚
rNaNTadu"%& c Na ved MaU!" )) 16 ))
lokaù svayaà çreyasi nañöa-dåñöir
yo 'rthän saméheta nikäma-kämaù
anyonya-vairaù sukha-leça-hetor
ananta-duùkhaà ca na veda müòhaù
SYNONYMS
lokaù—people; svayam—personally; çreyasi—of the path of auspiciousness;
nañöa-dåñöiù—who have lost sight; yaù—who; arthän—things meant for sense
gratification; saméheta—desire; nikäma-kämaù—having too many lusty desires
for sense enjoyment; anyonya-vairaù—being envious of one another;
sukha-leça-hetoù—simply for temporary material happiness;
ananta-duùkham—unlimited sufferings; ca—also; na—do not; veda—know;
müòhaù—foolish.
TRANSLATION
Due to ignorance, the materialistic person does not know anything about his
real self-interest, the auspicious path in life. He is simply bound to material
enjoyment by lusty desires, and all his plans are made for this purpose. For
temporary sense gratification, such a person creates a society of envy, and due
to this mentality, he plunges into the ocean of suffering. Such a foolish person
does not even know about this.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
215
PURPORT
The word nañöa-dåñöiù, meaning "one who has no eyes to see the future," is
very significant in this verse. Life goes on from one body to another, and the
activities performed in this life are enjoyed or suffered in the next life, if not
later in this life. One who is unintelligent, who has no eyes to see the future,
simply creates enmity and fights with others for sense gratification. As a result,
one suffers in the next life, but due to being like a blind man, he continues to
act in such a way that he suffers unlimitedly. Such a person is a müòha, one
who simply wastes his time and does not understand the Lord's devotional
service. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.25):
nähaà prakäçaù sarvasya
yogamäyä-samävåtaù
müòho 'yaà näbhijänäti
loko mäm ajam avyayam
"I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am covered
by My eternal creative potency [yogamäyä]; and so the deluded world knows
Me not, who am unborn and infallible."
In the Kaöha Upaniñad it is also said: avidyäyäm antare vartamänäù svayaà
dhéräù paëòitaà manyamänäù. Although ignorant, people still go to other
blind men for leadership. As a result, both are subjected to miserable
conditions. The blind lead the blind into the ditch.
TEXT 17
k-STa& SvYa& Tadi>ajae ivPaiêd(
AivÛaYaaMaNTare vTaRMaaNaMa( )
d*îa PauNaSTa& Saga*<a" ku-buiÖ&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
216
Pa[YaaeJaYaeduTPaQaGa& YaQaaNDaMa( )) 17 ))
kas taà svayaà tad-abhijïo vipaçcid
avidyäyäm antare vartamänam
dåñövä punas taà saghåëaù kubuddhià
prayojayed utpathagaà yathändham
SYNONYMS
kaù—who is that person; tam—him; svayam—personally;
tat-abhijïaù—knowing spiritual knowledge; vipaçcit—a learned scholar;
avidyäyäm antare—in ignorance; vartamänam—existing; dåñövä—seeing;
punaù—again; tam—him; sa-ghåëaù—very merciful; ku-buddhim—who is
addicted to the path of saàsära; prayojayet—would engage; utpatha-gam—who
is proceeding on the wrong path; yathä—like; andham—a blind man.
TRANSLATION
If someone is ignorant and addicted to the path of saàsära, how can one who
is actually learned, merciful and advanced in spiritual knowledge engage him in
fruitive activity and thus further entangle him in material existence? If a blind
man is walking down the wrong path, how can a gentleman allow him to
continue on his way to danger? How can he approve this method? No wise or
kind man can allow this.
TEXT 18
GauåNaR Sa SYaaTSvJaNaae Na Sa SYaaTa(
iPaTaa Na Sa SYaaÂNaNaq Na Saa SYaaTa( )
dEv& Na TaTSYaaà PaiTaê Sa SYaa‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
217
à MaaecYaeÛ" SaMauPaeTaMa*TYauMa( )) 18 ))
gurur na sa syät sva-jano na sa syät
pitä na sa syäj janané na sä syät
daivaà na tat syän na patiç ca sa syän
na mocayed yaù samupeta-måtyum
SYNONYMS
guruù—a spiritual master; na—not; saù—he; syät—should become;
sva-janaù—a relative; na—not; saù—such a person; syät—should become;
pitä—a father; na—not; saù—he; syät—should become; janané—a mother;
na—not; sä—she; syät—should become; daivam—the worshipable deity;
na—not; tat—that; syät—should become; na—not; patiù—a husband;
ca—also; saù—he; syät—should become; na—not; mocayet—can deliver;
yaù—who; samupeta-måtyum—one who is on the path of repeated birth and
death.
TRANSLATION
"One who cannot deliver his dependents from the path of repeated birth and
death should never become a spiritual master, a father, a husband, a mother or a
worshipable demigod.
PURPORT
There are many spiritual masters, but Åñabhadeva advises that one should
not become a spiritual master if he is unable to save his disciple from the path
of birth and death. Unless one is a pure devotee of Kåñëa, he cannot save
himself from the path of repeated birth and death. Tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]. One can stop birth and death only by returning
home, back to Godhead. However, who can go back to Godhead unless he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
218
understands the Supreme Lord in truth? Janma karma ca me divyam evaà yo
vetti tattvataù [Bg. 4.9].
We have many instances in history illustrating Åñabhadeva's instructions.
Çukräcärya was rejected by Bali Mahäräja due to his inability to save Bali
Mahäräja from the path of repeated birth and death. Çukräcärya was not a
pure devotee, he was more or less inclined to fruitive activity, and he objected
when Bali Mahäräja promised to give everything to Lord Viñëu. Actually one
is supposed to give everything to the Lord because everything belongs to the
Lord. Consequently, the Supreme Lord advises in Bhagavad-gétä (9.27):
yat karoñi yad açnäsi
yaj juhoñi dadäsi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kuruñva mad-arpaëam
"O son of Kunté, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give
away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done as an
offering unto Me." This is bhakti. Unless one is devoted, he cannot give
everything to the Supreme Lord. Unless one can do so, he cannot become a
spiritual master, husband, father or mother. Similarly, the wives of the
brähmaëas who were performing sacrifices gave up their relatives just to satisfy
Kåñëa. This is an example of a wife rejecting a husband who cannot deliver her
from the impending dangers of birth and death. Similarly, Prahläda Mahäräja
rejected his father, and Bharata Mahäräja rejected his mother (janané na sä
syät). The word daivam indicates a demigod or one who accepts worship from a
dependent. Ordinarily, the spiritual master, husband, father, mother or
superior relative accepts worship from an inferior relative, but here
Åñabhadeva forbids this. First the father, spiritual master or husband must be
able to release the dependent from repeated birth and death. If he cannot do
this, he plunges himself into the ocean of reproachment for his unlawful
activities. Everyone should be very responsible and take charge of his
dependents just as a spiritual master takes charge of his disciple or a father
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
219
takes charge of his son. All these responsibilities cannot be discharged
honestly unless one can save the dependent from repeated birth and death.
TEXT 19
wd& Xarqr& MaMa duivR>aaVYa&
Satv& ih Mae ôdYa& Ya}a DaMaR" )
Pa*ïe k*-Taae Mae YadDaMaR Aarad(
ATaae ih MaaMa*z>a& Pa[ahuraYaaR" )) 19 ))
idaà çaréraà mama durvibhävyaà
sattvaà hi me hådayaà yatra dharmaù
påñöhe kåto me yad adharma äräd
ato hi mäm åñabhaà prähur äryäù
SYNONYMS
idam—this; çaréram—transcendental body, sac-cid-änanda-vigraha;
mama—My; durvibhävyam—inconceivable; sattvam—with no tinge of the
material modes of nature; hi—indeed; me—My; hådayam—heart;
yatra—wherein; dharmaù—the real platform of religion, bhakti-yoga;
påñöhe—on the back; kåtaù—made; me—by Me; yat—because;
adharmaù—irreligion; ärät—far away; ataù—therefore; hi—indeed;
mäm—Me; åñabham—the best of the living beings; prähuù—call; äryäù—those
who are advanced in spiritual life, or the respectable superiors.
TRANSLATION
My transcendental body [sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]] looks exactly like
a human form, but it is not a material human body. It is inconceivable. I am not
forced by nature to accept a particular type of body; I take on a body by My
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
220
own sweet will. My heart is also spiritual, and I always think of the welfare of
My devotees. Therefore within My heart can be found the process of devotional
service, which is meant for the devotees. Far from My heart have I abandoned
irreligion [adharma] and nondevotional activities. They do not appeal to Me.
Due to all these transcendental qualities, people generally pray to Me as
Åñabhadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the best of all living entities.
PURPORT
In this verse the words idaà çaréraà mama durvibhävyam are very
significant. Generally we experience two energies—material energy and
spiritual energy. We have some experience of the material energy (earth.
water, air, fire, ether, mind, intelligence and ego) because in the material
world everyone's body is composed of these elements. Within the material
body is the spirit soul, but we cannot see it with the material eyes. When we
see a body full of spiritual energy, it is very difficult for us to understand how
the spiritual energy can have a body. It is said that Lord Åñabhadeva's body is
completely spiritual; therefore for a materialistic person, it is very difficult to
understand. For a materialistic person, the completely spiritual body is
inconceivable. We have to accept the version of the Vedas when our
experimental perception cannot understand a subject. As stated in
Brahma-saàhitä: éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù [Bs. 5.1]. The
Supreme Lord has a body with form, but that body is not composed of material
elements. It is made of spiritual bliss, eternity and living force. By the
inconceivable energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord can
appear before us in His original spiritual body, but because we have no
experience of the spiritual body, we are sometimes bewildered and see the form
of the Lord as material. The Mäyävädé philosophers are completely unable to
conceive of a spiritual body. They say that the spirit is always impersonal, and
whenever they see something personal, they take it for granted that it is
material. In Bhagavad-gétä (9.11) it is said:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
221
avajänanti mäà müòhä
mänuñéà tanum äçritam
paraà bhävam ajänanto
mama bhüta-maheçvaram
"Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My
transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be."
Unintelligent people think that the Supreme Lord accepts a body composed
of the material energy. We can easily understand the material body, but we
cannot understand the spiritual body. Therefore Åñabhadeva says: idaà
çaréraà mama durvibhävyam. In the spiritual world, everyone has a spiritual
body. There is no conception of material existence there. In the spiritual world
there is only service and the receiving of service. There is only sevya, sevä, and
sevaka—the person served, the process of service and the servant. These three
items are completely spiritual, and therefore the spiritual world is called
absolute. There is no tinge of material contamination there. Being completely
transcendental to the material conception, Lord Åñabhadeva states that His
heart is composed of dharma. Dharma is explained in Bhagavad-gétä (18.66):
sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja. In the spiritual world,
every living entity is surrendered to the Supreme Lord and is completely on
the spiritual platform. Although there are servitors, the served and service, all
are spiritual and variegated. At the present moment, due to our material
conception. everything is durvibhävya, inconceivable. Being the Supreme, the
Lord is called Åñabha, the best. In terms of the Vedic language, nityo nityänäm.
We are also spiritual. but we are subordinate. Kåñëa, the Supreme Lord, is the
foremost living entity. The word åñabha means "the chief," or "the supreme,"
and indicates the Supreme Being, or God Himself.
TEXT 20
TaSMaaÙvNTaae ôdYaeNa JaaTaa"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
222
SaveR MahqYaa&SaMaMau& SaNaa>aMa( )
Ai(c)-íbuÖya >arTa& >aJaß&
Xaué[Uz<a& TaÙr<a& Pa[JaaNaaMa( )) 20 ))
tasmäd bhavanto hådayena jätäù
sarve mahéyäàsam amuà sanäbham
akliñöa-buddhyä bharataà bhajadhvaà
çuçrüñaëaà tad bharaëaà prajänäm
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore (because I am the Supreme); bhavantaù—you;
hådayena—from My heart; jätäù—born; sarve—all; mahéyäàsam—the best;
amum—that; sa-näbham—brother; akliñöa-buddhyä—with your intelligence,
without material contamination; bharatam—Bharata; bhajadhvam—just try to
serve; çuçrüñaëam—service; tat—that; bharaëam prajänäm—ruling over the
citizens.
TRANSLATION
My dear boys, you are all born of My heart, which is the seat of all spiritual
qualities. Therefore you should not be like materialistic and envious men. You
should accept your eldest brother, Bharata, who is exalted in devotional service.
If you engage yourselves in Bharata's service, your service to him will include
My service, and you will rule the citizens automatically.
PURPORT
In this verse the word hådaya indicates the heart, which is also called uraù,
the chest. The heart is situated within the chest, and although instrumentally
the son is born with the aid of the genitals, he is actually born from within the
heart. According to the heart's situation. the semen takes the form of a body.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
223
Therefore according to the Vedic system, when one begets a child his heart
should be purified through the ritualistic ceremony known as garbhädhäna.
Åñabhadeva's heart was always uncontaminated and spiritual. Consequently all
the sons born from the heart of Åñabhadeva were spiritually inclined.
Nonetheless. Åñabhadeva suggested that His eldest son was superior, and He
advised the others to serve him. All the brothers of Bharata Mahäräja were
advised by Åñabhadeva to adhere to Bharata's service. The question may be
asked why one should be attached to family members, for in the beginning it
was advised that one should not be attached to home and family. However, it is
also advised, mahéyasäm päda-rajo-'bhiñeka—one has to serve the mahéyän, one
who is very spiritually advanced. Mahat-seväà dväram ähur vimukteù: [SB
5.5.2] by serving the mahat, the exalted devotee, one's path for liberation is
open. The family of Åñabhadeva should not be compared to an ordinary
materialistic family. Bharata Mahäräja, Åñabhadeva's eldest son, was
specifically very exalted. For this reason the other sons were advised to serve
him for his pleasure. That was to be their duty.
The Supreme Lord was advising Bharata Mahäräja to be the chief ruler of
the planet. This is the real plan of the Supreme Lord. In the Battle of
Kurukñetra, we find that Lord Kåñëa wanted Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira to be the
supreme emperor of this planet. He never wanted Duryodhana to take the
post. As stated in the previous verse, Lord Åñabhadeva's heart is hådayaà yatra
dharmaù. The characteristic dharma is also explained in Bhagavad-gétä:
surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To protect dharma
(pariträëäya sädhünäm [Bg. 4.8]), the Lord always wants the ruler of the earth
to be a devotee. Then everything goes on nicely for the benefit of everyone.
As soon as a demon rules the earth, everything becomes chaotic. At the
present moment, the world is inclined toward the democratic process, but the
people in general are all contaminated by the modes of passion and ignorance.
Consequently they cannot select the right person to head the government.
The president is selected by the votes of ignorant çüdras; therefore another
çüdra is elected, and immediately the entire government becomes polluted. If
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
224
people strictly followed the principles of Bhagavad-gétä, they would elect a
person who is the Lord's devotee. Then automatically there would be good
government. Åñabhadeva therefore recommended Bharata Mahäräja as the
emperor of this planet. Serving a devotee means serving the Supreme Lord, for
a devotee always represents the Lord. When a devotee is in charge, the
government is always congenial and beneficial for everyone.
TEXTS 21-22
>aUTaezu vqåÙy odutaMaa Yae
SarqSa*PaaSTaezu SabaeDaiNaïa" )
TaTaae MaNauZYaa" Pa[MaQaaSTaTaae_iPa
GaNDavRiSaÖa ivbuDaaNauGaa Yae )) 21 ))
devaSaure>Yaae MagavTPa[DaaNaa
d+aadYaae b]øSauTaaSTau TaezaMa( )
>av" Par" Saae_Qa ivirÄvqYaR"
Sa MaTParae_h& iÜJadevdev" )) 22 ))
bhüteñu vérudbhya uduttamä ye
sarésåpäs teñu sabodha-niñöhäù
tato manuñyäù pramathäs tato 'pi
gandharva-siddhä vibudhänugä ye
deväsurebhyo maghavat-pradhänä
dakñädayo brahma-sutäs tu teñäm
bhavaù paraù so 'tha viriïca-véryaù
sa mat-paro 'haà dvija-deva-devaù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
225
bhüteñu—among things generated (with and without symptoms of life);
vérudbhyaù—than the plants; uduttamäù—far superior; ye—those who;
sarésåpäù—moving entities like worms and snakes; teñu—of them;
sa-bodha-niñöhäù—those who have developed intelligence; tataù—than them;
manuñyäù—the human beings; pramathäù—the ghostly spirits; tataù
api—better than them; gandharva—the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka
(appointed singers in the planets of the demigods); siddhäù—the inhabitants
of Siddhaloka, who have all mystic powers; vibudha-anugäù—the Kinnaras;
ye—those who; deva—the demigods; asurebhyaù—than the asuras;
maghavat-pradhänäù—headed by Indra; dakña-ädayaù—beginning with Dakña;
brahma-sutäù—the direct sons of Brahmä; tu—then; teñäm—of them;
bhavaù—Lord Çiva; paraù—the best; saù—he (Lord Çiva); atha—moreover;
viriïca-véryaù—producing from Lord Brahmä; saù—he (Brahmä);
mat-paraù—My devotee; aham—I; dvija-deva-devaù—a worshiper of the
brähmaëas, or the Lord of the brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
Of the two energies manifest [spirit and dull matter], beings possessing living
force [vegetables, grass, trees and plants] are superior to dull matter [stone,
earth, etc.]. Superior to nonmoving plants and vegetables are worms and snakes,
which can move. Superior to worms and snakes are animals that have developed
intelligence. Superior to animals are human beings, and superior to human
beings are ghosts because they have no material bodies. Superior to ghosts are
the Gandharvas, and superior to them are the Siddhas. Superior to the Siddhas
are the Kinnaras, and superior to them are the asuras. Superior to the asuras are
the demigods, and of the demigods, Indra, the King of heaven, is supreme.
Superior to Indra are the direct sons of Lord Brahmä, sons like King Dakña, and
supreme among Brahmä's sons is Lord Çiva. Since Lord Çiva is the son of Lord
Brahmä, Brahmä is considered superior, but Brahmä is also subordinate to Me,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because I am inclined to the brähmaëas,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
226
the brähmaëas are best of all.
PURPORT
In this verse the brähmaëas are given a position superior to that of the
Supreme Lord. The idea is that the government should be conducted under
the guidance of the brähmaëas. Although Åñabhadeva recommended His
eldest son, Bharata, as emperor of the earth, he still had to follow the
instructions of the brähmaëas in order to govern the world perfectly. The Lord
is worshiped as brahmaëya-deva. The Lord is very fond of devotees, or
brähmaëas. This does not refer to so-called caste brähmaëas, but to qualified
brähmaëas. A brähmaëa should be qualified with the eight qualities mentioned
in text 24, such as çama, dama, satya and titikñä. The brähmaëas should always
be worshiped. and under their guidance the ruler should discharge his duty and
rule the citizens. Unfortunately, in this age of Kali, the executive is not
selected by very intelligent people, nor is he guided by qualified brähmaëas.
Consequently, chaos results. The mass of people should be educated in Kåñëa
consciousness so that according to the democratic process they can select a
first-class devotee like Bharata Mahäräja to head the government. If the head
of the state is headed by qualified brähmaëas, everything is completely perfect.
In this verse, the evolutionary process is indirectly mentioned. The modern
theory that life evolves from matter is to some extent supported in this verse
because it is stated, bhüteñu vérudbhyaù. That is, the living entities evolve from
vegetables, grass, plants and trees, which are superior to dull matter. In other
words, matter also has the potency to manifest living entities in the form of
vegetables. In this sense, life comes out of matter, but matter also comes out of
life. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (10.8), ahaà sarvasya prabhavo mattaù
sarvaà pravartate: "I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds.
Everything emanates from Me."
There are two energies—material and spiritual—and both originally come
from Kåñëa. Kåñëa is the supreme living being. Although it may be said that in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
227
the material world a living force is generated from matter, it must be admitted
that originally matter is generated from the supreme living being. Nityo
nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm (Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13). The conclusion is that
everything, both material and spiritual, is generated from the Supreme Being.
From the evolutionary point of view, perfection is reached when the living
entity attains the platform of a brähmaëa. A brähmaëa is a worshiper of the
Supreme Brahman, and the Supreme Brahman worships the brähmaëa. In
other words, the devotee is subordinate to the Supreme Lord, and the Lord is
inclined to see to the satisfaction of His devotee. A brähmaëa is called
dvija-deva, and the Lord is called dvija-deva-deva. He is the Lord of brähmaëas.
The evolutionary process is also explained in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya,
Chapter Nineteen), wherein it is said that there are two types of living
entities—moving and nonmoving. Among moving entities. there are birds,
beasts. aquatics, human beings and so on. Of these. the human beings are
supposed to be the best, but they are few. Of these small numbers of human
beings, there are many low-class human beings like mlecchas, Pulindas,
bauddhas and çabaras. The human being elevated enough to accept the Vedic
principles is superior. Among those who accept the Vedic principles generally
known as varëäçrama (presently known as the Hindu system), few actually
follow these principles. Of those who actually follow the Vedic principles, most
perform fruitive activity or pious activity for elevation to a high position.
Manuñyäëäà sahasreñu kaçcid yatati siddhaye: [Bg. 7.3] out of many attached to
fruitive activity, one may be a jïäné—that is, one philosophically inclined and
superior to the karmés. Yatatäm api siddhänäà kaçcin mäà vetti tattvataù: [Bg.
7.3] out of many jïänés, one may be liberated from material bondage, and out of
many millions of liberated jïänés, one may become a devotee of Kåñëa.
TEXT 23
Na b]aø<aESTaul/Yae >aUTaMaNYaTa(
PaXYaaiMa ivPa[a" ik-MaTa" Par& Tau )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
228
YaiSMaà*i>a" Pa[huTa& é[ÖYaah‚
MaénaiMa k-aMa& Na TaQaaiGanhae}ae )) 23 ))
na brähmaëais tulaye bhütam anyat
paçyämi vipräù kim ataù paraà tu
yasmin nåbhiù prahutaà çraddhayäham
açnämi kämaà na tathägni-hotre
SYNONYMS
na—not; brähmaëaiù—with the brähmaëas; tulaye—I count as equal;
bhütam—entity; anyat—other; paçyämi—I can see; vipräù—O assembled
brähmaëas; kim—anything; ataù—to the brähmaëas; param—superior;
tu—certainly; yasmin—through whom; nåbhiù—by people; prahutam—food
offered after ritualistic ceremonies are properly performed; çraddhayä—with
faith and love; aham—I; açnämi—eat; kämam—with full satisfaction;
na—not; tathä—in that way; agni-hotre—in the fire sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
O respectful brähmaëas, as far as I am concerned, no one is equal or superior
to the brähmaëas in this world. I do not find anyone comparable to them. When
people know My motive after performing rituals according to the Vedic
principles, they offer food to Me with faith and love through the mouth of a
brähmaëa. When food is thus offered unto Me, I eat it with full satisfaction.
Indeed, I derive more pleasure from food offered in that way than from the food
offered in the sacrificial fire.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic system, after the sacrificial ceremony the
brähmaëas are invited to eat the remnants of the offered food. When the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
229
brähmaëas eat the food, it is to be considered directly eaten by the Supreme
Lord. Thus no one can be compared to qualified brähmaëas. The perfection of
evolution is to be situated on the brahminical platform. Any civilization not
based on brahminical culture or guided by brähmaëas is certainly a condemned
civilization. Presently human civilization is based on sense gratification, and
consequently more and more people are becoming addicted to different types
of things. No one respects brahminical culture. Demoniac civilization is
attached to ugra-karma, horrible activities, and big industries are created to
satisfy unfathomable lusty desires. Consequently the people are greatly
harassed by governmental taxation. The people are irreligious and do not
perform the sacrifices recommended in Bhagavad-gétä. Yajïäd bhavati
parjanyaù: [Bg. 3.14] by the performance of sacrifice, clouds form and rain falls.
Due to sufficient rainfall, there is sufficient production of food. Guided by the
brähmaëas, society should follow the principles of Bhagavad-gétä. Then people
will become very happy. Annäd bhavanti bhütäni: when animals and man are
sufficiently fed with grains, they become stronger, their hearts become tranquil
and their brains peaceful. They can then advance in spiritual life, life's
ultimate destination.
TEXT 24
Da*Taa TaNaUåXaTaq Mae Paura<aq
YaeNaeh Satv& ParMa& Paiv}aMa( )
XaMaae dMa" SaTYaMaNauGa[hê
TaPaiSTaiTa+aaNau>avê Ya}a )) 24 ))
dhåtä tanür uçaté me puräëé
yeneha sattvaà paramaà pavitram
çamo damaù satyam anugrahaç ca
tapas titikñänubhavaç ca yatra
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
230
SYNONYMS
dhåtä—maintained by transcendental education; tanüù—body; uçaté—free
from material contamination; me—My; puräëé—eternal; yena—by whom;
iha—in this material world; sattvam—the mode of goodness;
paramam—supreme; pavitram—purified; çamaù—control of the mind;
damaù—control of the senses; satyam—truthfulness; anugrahaù—mercy;
ca—and; tapaù—austerity; titikñä—tolerance; anubhavaù—realization of God
and the living entity; ca—and; yatra—wherein.
TRANSLATION
The Vedas are My eternal transcendental sound incarnation. Therefore the
Vedas are çabda-brahma. In this world, the brähmaëas thoroughly study all the
Vedas, and because they assimilate the Vedic conclusions, they are also to be
considered the Vedas personified. The brähmaëas are situated in the supreme
transcendental mode of nature-sattva-guëa. Because of this, they are fixed in
mind control [çama], sense control [dama], and truthfulness [satya]. They
describe the Vedas in their original sense, and out of mercy [anugraha] they
preach the purpose of the Vedas to all conditioned souls. They practice penance
[tapasya] and tolerance [titikñä], and they realize the position of the living
entity and the Supreme Lord [anubhava]. These are the eight qualifications of
the brähmaëas. Therefore among all living entities, no one is superior to the
brähmaëas.
PURPORT
This is a true description of a brähmaëa. A brähmaëa is one who has
assimilated the Vedic conclusions by practicing mind and sense control. He
speaks the true version of all the Vedas. As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä
(15.15): vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù. By studying all the Vedas, one should
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
231
come to understand the transcendental position of Lord Çré Kåñëa. One who
actually assimilated the essence of the Vedas can preach the truth. He is
compassionate to conditioned souls who are suffering the threefold miseries of
this conditional world due to their not being Kåñëa conscious. A brähmaëa
should take pity on the people and preach Kåñëa consciousness in order to
elevate them. Çré Kåñëa Himself, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
personally descends into this universe from the spiritual kingdom to teach
conditioned souls about the values of spiritual life. He tries to induce them to
surrender unto Him. Similarly, the brähmaëas do the same thing. After
assimilating the Vedic instructions, they assist the Supreme Lord in His
endeavor to deliver conditioned souls. The brähmaëas are very dear to the
Supreme Lord due to their high sattva-guëa qualities, and they also engage in
welfare activities for all conditioned souls in the material world.
TEXT 25
Mataae_PYaNaNTaaTParTa" ParSMaaTa(
SvGaaRPavGaaRiDaPaTaeNaR ik-iÄTa( )
Yaeza& ik-Mau SYaaidTare<a Taeza‚
Maik-ÄNaaNaa& MaiYa >ai¢->aaJaaMa( )) 25 ))
matto 'py anantät parataù parasmät
svargäpavargädhipater na kiïcit
yeñäà kim u syäd itareëa teñäm
akiïcanänäà mayi bhakti-bhäjäm
SYNONYMS
mattaù—from Me; api—even; anantät—unlimited in strength and opulence;
parataù parasmät—higher than the highest; svarga-apavarga-adhipateù—able
to bestow happiness obtainable by living in the heavenly kingdom. by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
232
liberation, or by enjoyment of material comfort and then liberation; na—not;
kiïcit—anything; yeñäm—of whom; kim—what need; u—oh; syät—can there
be; itareëa—with any other; teñäm—of them; akiïcanänäm—without needs or
without possessions; mayi—unto Me; bhakti-bhäjäm—executing devotional
service.
TRANSLATION
I am fully opulent, almighty and superior to Lord Brahmä and Indra, the
King of the heavenly planets. I am also the bestower of all happiness obtained in
the heavenly kingdom and by liberation. Nonetheless, the brähmaëas do not
seek material comforts from Me. They are very pure and do not want to possess
anything. They simply engage in My devotional service. What is the need of
their asking for material benefits from anyone else?
PURPORT
The perfect brahminical qualification is stated herein: akiïcanänäà mayi
bhakti-bhäjäm. The brähmaëas are always engaged in the devotional service of
the Lord: consequently they have no material wants, nor do they possess
material things. In Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 11.8), Caitanya Mahäprabhu
explains the position of pure Vaiñëavas who are anxious to return home, back
to Godhead. Niñkiïcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya. Those who actually
want to return back to Godhead are niñkiïcana—that is, they have no desire
for material comfort. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu advises, sandarçanaà
viñayinäm atha yoñitäà ca hä hanta hanta visa-bhakñaëato 'py asädhu: material
opulence and sense gratification through the association of women are more
dangerous than poison. Brähmaëas who are pure Vaiñëavas always engage in
the Lord's service and are devoid of any desire for material gain. The
brähmaëas do not worship demigods like Lord Brahmä, Indra or Lord Çiva for
any material comfort. They do not even ask the Supreme Lord for material
profit; therefore it is concluded that the brähmaëas are the supreme living
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
233
entities of this world. Çré Kapiladeva also confirms this in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(3.29.33):
tasmän mayy arpitäçeñakriyärthätmä
nirantaraù
mayy arpitätmanaù puàso
mayi sannyasta-karmaëaù
na paçyämi paraà bhütam
akartuù sama-darçanät
The brähmaëas are always dedicated to the Lord's service with their bodies,
words and mind. There is no better person than a brähmaëa who thus engages
himself and dedicates himself to the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 26
SavaRi<a MaiÖZ<YaTaYaa >aviÙ‚
êrai<a >aUTaaiNa SauTaa Da]uvai<a )
SaM>aaivTaVYaaiNa Pade Pade vae
iviv¢-d*iG>aSTadu hahR<a& Mae )) 26 ))
sarväëi mad-dhiñëyatayä bhavadbhiç
caräëi bhütäni sutä dhruväëi
sambhävitavyäni pade pade vo
vivikta-dågbhis tad u härhaëaà me
SYNONYMS
sarväëi—all; mat-dhiñëyatayä—because of being My sitting place;
bhavadbhiù—by you; caräëi—that move; bhütäni—living entities; sutäù—My
dear sons; dhruväëi—that do not move; sambhävitavyäni—to be respected;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
234
pade pade—at every moment; vaù—by you; vivikta-dågbhiù—possessing clear
vision and understanding (that the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His
Paramätmä feature is situated everywhere); tat u—that indirectly;
ha—certainly; arhaëam—offering respect; me—unto Me.
TRANSLATION
My dear sons, you should not envy any living entity—be he moving or
nonmoving. Knowing that I am situated in them, you should offer respect to all
of them at every moment. In this way, you offer respect to Me.
PURPORT
In this verse the word vivikta-dågbhiù, meaning without envy, is used. All
living entities are the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His
Paramätmä feature. As confirmed in Brahma-saàhitä: aëòäntara-sthaà
paramäëu-cayäntara-stham. The Lord is situated in this universe as
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. He is also situated within
every atom. According to the Vedic statement: éçäväsyam idaà sarvam [Éço
mantra 1]. The Supreme Lord is situated everywhere, and wherever He is
situated is His temple. We even offer respects to a temple from a distant place,
and all living entities should similarly be offered respect. This is different from
the theory of pantheism, which holds that everything is God. Everything has a
relationship with God because God is situated everywhere. We should not
make any particular distinction between the poor and the rich like the foolish
worshipers of daridra-näräyaëa. Näräyaëa is present in the rich as well as the
poor. One should not simply think Näräyaëa is situated among the poor. He is
everywhere. An advanced devotee will offer respects to everyone—even to
cats and dogs.
vidyä-vinaya-sampanne
brähmaëe gavi hastini
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
235
çuni caiva çva-päke ca
paëòitäù sama-darçinaù
"The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a learned
and gentle brähmaëa, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater [outcaste]."
(Bg. 5.18) This sama-darçinaù, equal vision, should not be mistaken to mean
that the individual is the same as the Supreme Lord. They are always distinct.
Every individual person is different from the Supreme Lord. It is a mistake to
equate the individual living entity with the Supreme Lord on the plea of
vivikta-dåk, sama-dåk. The Lord is always in an exalted position, even though
He agrees to live everywhere. Çréla Madhväcärya, quoting Padma Puräëa,
states: vivikta-dåñöi jévänäà dhiñëyatayä parameçvarasya bheda-dåñöiù. "One who
has clear vision and who is devoid of envy can see that the Supreme Lord is
separate from all living entities, although He is situated in every living entity."
Madhväcärya further quotes from Padma Puräëa:
upapädayet parätmänaà
jévebhyo yaù pade pade
bhedenaiva na caitasmät
priyo viñëos tu kaçcana
"One who sees the living entity and the Supreme Lord as always distinct is
very dear to the Lord." Padma Puräëa also states, yo hareç caiva jévänäà
bheda-vaktä hareù priyaù: "One who preaches that the living entities are
separate from the Supreme Lord is very dear to Lord Viñëu."
TEXT 27
MaNaaevcaed*¡-r<aeihTaSYa
Saa+aaTk*-Ta& Mae PairbhR<a& ih )
ivNaa PauMaaNa( YaeNa MahaivMaaehaTa(
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
236
k*-TaaNTaPaaXaaà ivMaae¢u-MaqXaeTa( )) 27 ))
mano-vaco-dåk-karaëehitasya
säkñät-kåtaà me paribarhaëaà hi
vinä pumän yena mahä-vimohät
kåtänta-päçän na vimoktum éçet
SYNONYMS
manaù—mind; vacaù—words; dåk—sight; karaëa—of the senses; éhitasya—of
all activities (for maintenance of body, society, friendship and so on);
säkñät-kåtam—directly offered; me—of Me; paribarhaëam—worship;
hi—because; vinä—without; pumän—any person; yena—which;
mahä-vimohät—from the great illusion; kåtänta-päçät—exactly like the
stringent rope of Yamaräja; na—not; vimoktum—to become free;
éçet—becomes able.
TRANSLATION
The true activity of the sense organs—mind, sight, words and all the
knowledge-gathering and working senses—is to engage fully in My service.
Unless his senses are thus engaged, a living entity cannot think of getting out of
the great entanglement of material existence, which is exactly like Yamaräja's
stringent rope.
PURPORT
As stated in the Närada-païcarätra:
sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà
tat-paratvena nirmalam
håñékeëa håñékeçacopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
237
sevanaà bhaktir ucyate
[Cc. Madhya 19.170]
This is the conclusion of bhakti. All the time, Lord Åñabhadeva has been
stressing devotional service, and now He is concluding by saying that all the
senses should be engaged in the Lord's service. There are five senses by which
we gather knowledge and five senses with which we work. These ten senses
and the mind should be fully engaged in the Lord's service. Without engaging
them in this way, one cannot get out of the clutches of mäyä.
TEXT 28
é[qXauk- ovac
WvMaNauXaaSYaaTMaJaaNa( SvYaMaNauiXaíaNaiPa l/aek-aNauXaaSaNaaQa| MahaNau>aav"
ParMaSauôÙGavaNa*z>aaPadeXa oPaXaMaXaql/aNaaMauParTak-MaR<aa& MahaMauNaqNaa& >ai¢-ja‚
NavEraGYal/+a<a& PaarMah&SYaDaMaRMauPaiXa+aMaa<a" SvTaNaYaXaTaJYaeï& ParMa>aaGavTa&
>aGavÂNaParaYa<a& >arTa& Dari<aPaal/NaaYaai>aizCYa SvYa& >avNa WvaevRirTa‚
XarqrMaa}aPairGa]h oNMata wv GaGaNaPairDaaNa" Pa[k-I<aRke-Xa AaTMaNYaaraeiPa‚
TaahvNaqYaae b]øavTaaRTPa[vv]aJa )) 28 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evam anuçäsyätmajän svayam anuçiñöän api lokänuçäsanärthaà
mahänubhävaù parama-suhåd bhagavän åñabhäpadeça upaçama-çélänäm
uparata-karmaëäà mahä-munénäà bhakti-jïäna-vairägya-lakñaëaà
päramahaàsya-dharmam upaçikñamäëaù sva-tanaya-çata-jyeñöhaà
parama-bhägavataà bhagavaj-jana-paräyaëaà bharataà
dharaëi-pälanäyäbhiñicya svayaà bhavana evorvarita-çaréra-mätra-parigraha
unmatta iva gagana-paridhänaù prakérëa-keça ätmany äropitähavanéyo
brahmävartät pravavräja.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
238
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—in this way;
anuçäsya—after instructing; ätma-jän—His sons; svayam—personally;
anuçiñöän—highly educated in culture; api—although;
loka-anuçäsana-artham—just to instruct the people; mahä-anubhävaù—the
great personality; parama-suhåt—everyone's sublime well-wisher;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; åñabha-apadeçaù—who is
celebrated and known as Åñabhadeva; upaçama-çélänäm—of persons who have
no desire for material enjoyment; uparata-karmaëäm—who are no longer
interested in fruitive activities; mahä-munénäm—who are sannyäsés;
bhakti—devotional service; jïäna—perfect knowledge; vairägya—detachment;
lakñaëam—characterized by; päramahaàsya—of the best of human beings;
dharmam—the duties; upaçikñamäëaù—instructing; sva-tanaya—of His sons;
çata—hundred; jyeñöham—the eldest; parama-bhägavatam—a topmost devotee
of the Lord; bhagavat-jana-paräyaëam—a follower of the devotees of the Lord,
brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas; bharatam—Bharata Mahäräja;
dharaëi-pälanäya—with a view to ruling the world; abhiñicya—placing on the
throne; svayam—personally; bhavane—at home; eva—although;
urvarita—remaining; çaréra-mätra—the body only; parigrahaù—accepting;
unmattaù—a madman; iva—exactly like; gagana-paridhänaù—taking the sky
as His dress; prakérëa-keçaù—having scattered hair; ätmani—in Himself;
äropita—keeping; ähavanéyaù—the Vedic fire; brahmävartät—from the place
known as Brahmävarta; pravavräja—began to travel all over the world.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus the great well-wisher of everyone, the
Supreme Lord Åñabhadeva, instructed His own sons. Although they were
perfectly educated and cultured, He instructed them just to set an example of
how a father should instruct his sons before retiring from family life. Sannyäsés,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
239
who are no longer bound by fruitive activity and who have taken to devotional
service after all their material desires have been vanquished, also learn by these
instructions. Lord Åñabhadeva instructed His one hundred sons, of whom the
eldest, Bharata, was a very advanced devotee and a follower of Vaiñëavas. In
order to rule the whole world, the Lord enthroned His eldest son on the royal
seat. Thereafter, although still at home, Lord Åñabhadeva lived like a madman,
naked and with disheveled hair. Then the Lord took the sacrificial fire within
Himself, and He left Brahmävarta to tour the whole world.
PURPORT
Actually the instructions given to Lord Åñabhadeva's sons were not exactly
meant for His sons because they were already educated and highly advanced in
knowledge. Rather, these instructions were meant for sannyäsés who intend to
become advanced devotees. Sannyäsés must abide by Lord Åñabhadeva's
instructions while on the path of devotional service. Lord Åñabhadeva retired
from family life and lived like a naked madman even while still with His
family.
TEXT 29
Ja@aNDaMaUk-biDariPaXaacaeNMaadk-vdvDaUTavezae_i>a>aaZYaMaa<aae_iPa JaNaaNaa& Ga*hq‚
TaMaaENav]TaSTaUZ<aq& b>aUv )) 29 ))
jaòändha-müka-badhira-piçäconmädakavad-avadhüta-veño 'bhibhäñyamäëo 'pi
janänäà gåhéta-mauna-vratas tüñëéà babhüva.
SYNONYMS
jaòa—idle; andha—blind; müka—dumb; badhira—deaf; piçäca—ghost;
unmädaka—a madman; vat—like; avadhüta-veñaù—appearing like an avadhüta
(having no concern with the material world); abhibhäñyamäëaù—being thus
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
240
addressed (as deaf, dumb and blind); api—although; janänäm—by the people;
gåhéta—took; mauna—of silence; vrataù—the vow; tüñëém babhüva—He
remained silent.
TRANSLATION
After accepting the feature of avadhüta, a great saintly person without
material cares, Lord Åñabhadeva passed through human society like a blind, deaf
and dumb man, an idle stone, a ghost or a madman. Although people called Him
such names, He remained silent and did not speak to anyone.
PURPORT
The word avadhüta refers to one who does not care for social conventions,
particularly the varëäçrama-dharma. However, such a person may be situated
fully within himself and be satisfied with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
on whom he meditates. In other words, one who has surpassed the rules and
regulations of varëäçrama-dharma is called avadhüta. Such a person has
already surpassed the clutches of mäyä, and he lives completely separate and
independent.
TEXT 30
Ta}a Ta}a PaurGa]aMaak-r%e$=va$=%vR$=iXaibrv]JagaaezSaaQaRiGairvNaaé[MaaidZvNauPa‚
QaMaviNacraPaSadE" Pair>aUYaMaaNaae Mai+ak-ai>airv vNaGaJaSTaJaRNaTaa@NaavMaehNa‚
ïqvNaGa]avXak*-d]Ja"Pa[+aePaPaUiTavaTaduå¢E-STadivGa<aYaàevaSaTSa&SQaaNa WTaiSMaNa(
dehaePal/+a<ae SadPadeXa o>aYaaNau>avSvæPae<a SvMaihMaavSQaaNaeNaaSaMaaraeiPaTaah&‚
MaMaai>aMaaNaTvadiv%i<@TaMaNaa" Pa*iQavqMaek/cr" Pairb>a]aMa )) 30 ))
tatra tatra
pura-grämäkara-kheöa-väöa-kharvaöa-çibira-vraja-ghoña-särtha-giri-vanäçramä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
241
diñv anupatham avanicaräpasadaiù paribhüyamäno makñikäbhir iva vana-gajas
tarjana-täòanävamehana-ñöhévana-gräva-çakåd-rajaù-prakñepa-püti-väta-duru
ktais tad avigaëayann eväsat-saàsthäna etasmin dehopalakñaëe sad-apadeça
ubhayänubhava-svarüpeëa
sva-mahimävasthänenäsamäropitähaà-mamäbhimänatväd avikhaëòita-manäù
påthivém eka-caraù paribabhräma.
SYNONYMS
tatra tatra—here and there; pura—cities; gräma—villages; äkara—mines;
kheöa—agricultural places; väöa—gardens; kharvaöa—villages in valleys;
çibira—military encampments; vraja—cow pens; ghoña—residential places of
cowherd men; särtha—resting places for pilgrims; giri—hills; vana—forests;
äçrama—in the residential places of hermits; ädiñu—and so on;
anupatham—as He passed through; avanicara-apasadaiù—by undesirable
elements, wicked persons; paribhüyamänaù—being surrounded;
makñikäbhiù—by flies; iva—like; vana-gajaù—an elephant coming from the
forest; tarjana—by threats; täòana—beating; avamehana—passing urine on
the body; ñöhévana—spitting on the body; gräva-çakåt—stones and stool;
rajaù—dust; prakñepa—throwing; püti-väta—passing air over the body;
duruktaiù—and by bad words; tat—that; avigaëayan—without caring about;
eva—thus; asat-saàsthäne—habitat not fit for a gentleman; etasmin—in this;
deha-upalakñaëe—in the shape of the material body; sat-apadeçe—called real;
ubhaya-anubhava-svarüpeëa—by understanding the proper situation of the
body and the soul; sva-mahima—in His personal glory; avasthänena—by being
situated; asamäropita-aham-mama-abhimänatvät—from not accepting the
misconception of "I and mine"; avikhaëòita-manäù—undisturbed in mind;
påthivém—all over the world; eka-caraù—alone; paribabhräma—He wandered.
TRANSLATION
Åñabhadeva began to tour through cities, villages, mines, countrysides,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
242
valleys, gardens, military camps, cow pens, the homes of cowherd men,
transient hotels, hills, forests and hermitages. Wherever He traveled, all bad
elements surrounded Him, just as flies surround the body of an elephant coming
from a forest. He was always being threatened, beaten, urinated upon and spat
upon. Sometimes people threw stones, stool and dust at Him, and sometimes
people passed foul air before Him. Thus people called Him many bad names and
gave Him a great deal of trouble, but He did not care about this, for He
understood that the body is simply meant for such an end. He was situated on
the spiritual platform, and, being in His spiritual glory, He did not care for all
these material insults. In other words, He completely understood that matter
and spirit are separate, and He had no bodily conception. Thus, without being
angry at anyone, He walked through the whole world alone.
PURPORT
Narottama däsa Öhäkura says: deha-småti nähi yära, saàsära bandhana
kähäì tära. When a person fully realizes that the material body and world are
temporary, he is not concerned with pain and pleasures of the body. As Çré
Kåñëa advises in Bhagavad-gétä (2.14):
mäträ-sparçäs tu kaunteya
çétoñëa-sukha-duùkha-däù
ägamäpäyino 'nityäs
täàs titikñasva bhärata
"O son of Kunté, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and
their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance
of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of
Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed."
As far as Åñabhadeva is concerned, it has already been explained: idaà
çaréraà mama durvibhävyam. He did not at all possess a material body; and
therefore He was tolerant of all the trouble offered to Him by the bad elements
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
243
in society. Consequently He could tolerate people's throwing stool and dust
upon Him and beating Him. His body was transcendental and consequently
did not at all suffer pain. He was always situated in His spiritual bliss. As stated
in Bhagavad-gétä (18.61):
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna. and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of
the material energy."
Since the Lord is situated in everyone's heart, He is in the heart of hogs and
dogs also. If hogs and dogs in their material bodies live in filthy places, one
should not think that the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His Paramätmä
feature also lives in a filthy place. Although Lord Åñabhadeva was maltreated
by the bad elements of the world. He was not at all affected. Therefore it is
stated here. sva-mahima-avasthänena: "He was situated in His own glory." He
was never saddened due to being insulted in the many ways described above.
TEXT 31
AiTaSauku-Maark-rcr<aaer"SQal/ivPaul/baû&SaGal/vdNaaÛvYavivNYaaSa" Pa[k*-iTaSau‚
NdrSv>aavhaSaSauMau%ae NavNail/Nadl/aYaMaaNaiXaiXarTaaraå<aaYaTaNaYaNaåicr" Sad*‚
XaSau>aGak-Paael/k-<aRk-<#=NaaSaae ivGaU!iSMaTavdNaMahaeTSaveNa PaurviNaTaaNaa& MaNaiSa
ku-SauMaXaraSaNaMauPadDaaNa" ParaGavl/MbMaaNaku-i$=l/Jai$=l/k-iPaXake-Xa>aUir>aarae_vDaU‚
TaMail/NaiNaJaXarqre<a Ga]hGa*hqTa wvad*XYaTa )) 31 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
244
ati-sukumära-kara-caraëoraù-sthala-vipula-bähv-aàsa-gala-vadanädy-avayav
a-vinyäsaù prakåti-sundara-svabhäva-häsa-sumukho
nava-nalina-daläyamäna-çiçira-täräruëäyata-nayana-ruciraù
sadåça-subhaga-kapola-karëa-kaëöha-näso
vigüòha-smita-vadana-mahotsavena pura-vanitänäà manasi
kusuma-çaräsanam upadadhänaù
paräg-avalambamäna-kuöila-jaöila-kapiça-keça-bhüri-bhäro
'vadhüta-malina-nija-çaréreëa graha-gåhéta ivädåçyata.
SYNONYMS
ati-su-kumära—very delicate; kara—hands; caraëa—feet; uraù-sthala—chest;
vipula—long; bähu—arms; aàsa—shoulders; gala—neck; vadana—face;
ädi—and so on; avayava—limbs; vinyäsaù—properly situated; prakåti—by
nature; sundara—lovely; sva-bhäva—natural; häsa—with smiling;
su-mukhaù—His beautiful mouth; nava-nalina-daläyamäna—appearing like
the petals of a new lotus flower; çiçira—taking away all miseries; tära—the
irises; aruëa—reddish; äyata—spread wide; nayana—with eyes;
ruciraù—lovely; sadåça—such; subhaga—beauty; kapola—forehead;
karëa—ears; kaëöha—neck; näsaù—His nose; vigüòha-smita—by deep smiling;
vadana—by His face; mahä-utsavena—appearing like a festival;
pura-vanitänäm—of women within household life; manasi—in the heart;
kusuma-çaräsanam—Cupid; upadadhänaù—awakening; paräk—all around;
avalambamäna—spread; kuöila—curly; jaöila—matted; kapiça—brown;
keça—of hair; bhüri-bhäraù—possessing a great abundance;
avadhüta—neglected; malina—dirty; nija-çaréreëa—by His body;
graha-gåhétaù—haunted by a ghost; iva—as if; adåçyata—He appeared.
TRANSLATION
Lord Åñabhadeva's hands, feet and chest were very long. His shoulders, face
and limbs were all very delicate and symmetrically proportioned. His mouth was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
245
beautifully decorated with His natural smile, and He appeared all the more
lovely with His reddish eyes spread wide like the petals of a newly grown lotus
flower covered with dew in the early morning. The irises of His eyes were so
pleasing that they removed all the troubles of everyone who saw Him. His
forehead, ears, neck, nose and all His other features were very beautiful. His
gentle smile always made His face beautiful, so much so that He even attracted
the hearts of married women. It was as though they had been pierced by arrows
of Cupid. About His head was an abundance of curly, matted brown hair. His
hair was disheveled because His body was dirty and not taken care of. He
appeared as if He were haunted by a ghost.
PURPORT
Although Lord Åñabhadeva's body was very much neglected, His
transcendental features were so attractive that even married women were
attracted to Him. His beauty and dirtiness combined to make His beautiful
body appear as though it were haunted by a ghost.
TEXT 32
YaihR vav Sa >aGavaNa( l/aek-iMaMa& YaaeGaSYaaÖa Pa[TaqPaiMavac+aa<aSTaTPa[iTa‚
i§-Yaak-MaR bq>aiTSaTaiMaiTa v]TaMaaJaGarMaaiSQaTa" XaYaaNa WvaénaiTa iPabiTa
%adTYavMaehiTa hdiTa SMa ceíMaaNa oÀirTa AaidGDaaeÕeXa" )) 32 ))
yarhi väva sa bhagavän lokam imaà yogasyäddhä pratépam iväcakñäëas
tat-pratikriyä-karma bébhatsitam iti vratam äjagaram-ästhitaù çayäna eväçnäti
pibati khädaty avamehati hadati sma ceñöamäna uccarita ädigdhoddeçaù.
SYNONYMS
yarhi väva—when; saù—He; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
246
lokam—the people in general; imam—this; yogasya—to the performance of
yoga; addhä—directly; pratépam—antagonistic; iva—like;
äcakñäëaù—observed; tat—of that; pratikriyä—for counteraction;
karma—activity; bébhatsitam—abominable; iti—thus; vratam—the behavior;
äjagaram—of a python (to stay in one place); ästhitaù—accepting;
çayänaù—lying down; eva—indeed; açnäti—eats; pibati—drinks;
khädati—chews; avamehati—passes urine; hadati—passes stool; sma—thus;
ceñöamänaù—rolling; uccarite—i n the stool and urine; ädigdha-uddeçaù—His
body thus smeared.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Åñabhadeva saw that the general populace was very antagonistic
to His execution of mystic yoga, He accepted the behavior of a python in order
to counteract their opposition. Thus He stayed in one place and lay down.
While lying down, He ate and drank, and He passed stool and urine and rolled
in it. Indeed, He smeared His whole body with His own stool and urine so that
opposing elements might not come and disturb Him.
PURPORT
According to one's destiny, one enjoys allotted happiness and distress, even
though one keeps himself in one place. This is the injunction of the çästras.
When one is spiritually situated, he may stay in one place, and all his
necessities will be supplied by the arrangement of the supreme controller.
Unless one is a preacher, there is no need to travel all over the world. A
person can stay in one place and execute devotional service suitably according
to time and circumstance. When Åñabhadeva saw that He was simply being
disturbed by traveling throughout the world, He decided to lie down in one
place like a python. Thus He ate, drank, and He passed stool and urine and
smeared His body with them so that people would not disturb Him.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
247
TEXT 33
TaSYa h Ya" PaurqzSauri>aSaaEGaNDYavaYauSTa& deXa& dXaYaaeJaNa& SaMaNTaaTa( Sauri>a&
ck-ar )) 33 ))
tasya ha yaù puréña-surabhi-saugandhya-väyus taà deçaà daça-yojanaà
samantät surabhià cakära.
SYNONYMS
tasya—His; ha—indeed; yaù—which; puréña—of the stool; surabhi—by the
aroma; saugandhya—possessing a good fragrance; väyuù—the air; tam—that;
deçam—country; daça—up to ten; yojanam—yojanas (one yojana equals eight
miles); samantät—all around; surabhim—aromatic; cakära—made.
TRANSLATION
Because Lord Åñabhadeva remained in that condition, the public did not
disturb Him, but no bad aroma emanated from His stool and urine. Quite the
contrary, His stool and urine were so aromatic that they filled eighty miles of
the countryside with a pleasant fragrance.
PURPORT
From this we can certainly assume that Lord Åñabhadeva was
transcendentally blissful. His stool and urine were so completely different from
material stool and urine that they were aromatic. Even in the material world,
cow dung is accepted as purified and antiseptic. A person can keep stacks of
cow dung in one place, and it will not create a bad odor to disturb anyone. We
can take it for granted that in the spiritual world, stool and urine are also
pleasantly scented. Indeed, the entire atmosphere became very pleasant due to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
248
Lord Åñabhadeva's stool and urine.
TEXT 34
Wv& GaaeMa*Gak-ak-cYaRYaa v]Ja&iSTaïàaSaqNa" XaYaaNa" k-ak-Ma*GaGaaecirTa" iPabiTa
%adTYavMaehiTa SMa )) 34 ))
evaà go-måga-käka-caryayä vrajaàs tiñöhann äsénaù çayänaù
käka-måga-go-caritaù pibati khädaty avamehati sma.
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; go—of cows; måga—deer; käka—crows; caryayä—by the
activities; vrajan—moving; tiñöhan—standing; äsénaù—sitting; çayänaù—lying
down; käka-måga-go-caritaù—behaving exactly like the crows, deer and cows;
pibati—drinks; khädati—eats; avamehati—passes urine; sma—He did so.
TRANSLATION
In this way Lord Åñabhadeva followed the behavior of cows, deer and crows.
Sometimes He moved or walked, and sometimes He sat down in one place.
Sometimes He lay down, behaving exactly like cows, deer and crows. In that
way, He ate, drank, passed stool and urine and cheated the people in this way.
PURPORT
Being the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Åñabhadeva possessed a
transcendental, spiritual body. Since the general public could not appreciate
His behavior and mystic yoga practice, they began to disturb Him. To cheat
them, He behaved like crows, cows and deer.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
249
TEXT 35
wiTa NaaNaaYaaeGacYaaRcr<aae >aGavaNa( kE-vLYaPaiTa‰Rz>aae_ivrTaParMaMahaNaNdaNau>av
AaTMaiNa SaveRza& >aUTaaNaaMaaTMa>aUTae >aGaviTa vaSaudev AaTMaNaae_VYavDaaNaaNaNTarae‚
dr>aaveNa iSaÖSaMaSTaaQaRPairPaU<aaeR YaaeGaEìYaaRi<a vEhaYaSaMaNaaeJavaNTaDaaRNaPark-aYaPa[‚
veXadUrGa]h<aadqiNa Yad*C^YaaePaGaTaaiNa NaaÅSaa Na*Pa ôdYaeNaa>YaNaNdTa( )) 35 ))
iti nänä-yoga-caryäcaraëo bhagavän kaivalya-patir åñabho
'virata-parama-mahänandänubhava ätmani sarveñäà bhütänäm ätma-bhüte
bhagavati väsudeva ätmano 'vyavadhänänanta-rodara-bhävena
siddha-samastärtha-paripürëo yogaiçvaryäëi
vaihäyasa-mano-javäntardhäna-parakäya-praveça-düra-grahaëädéni
yadåcchayopagatäni näïjasä nåpa hådayenäbhyanandat.
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; nänä—various; yoga—of mystic yoga; caryä—performances;
äcaraëaù—practicing; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
kaivalya-patiù—the master of kaivalya, oneness, or the giver of säyujya-mukti;
åñabhaù—Lord Åñabha; avirata—incessantly; parama—supreme; mahä—great;
änanda-anubhavaù—feeling transcendental bliss; ätmani—in the Supreme
Soul; sarveñäm—of all; bhütänäm—living entities; ätma-bhüte—situated in the
heart; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
väsudeve—Kåñëa, the son of Vasudeva; ätmanaù—of Himself;
avyavadhäna—by the nondifference of constitution; ananta—unlimited;
rodara—like crying, laughing and shivering; bhävena—by the symptoms of
love; siddha—completely perfect; samasta—all; artha—with desirable
opulences; paripürëaù—full; yoga-aiçvaryäëi—the mystic powers;
vaihäyasa—flying in the sky; manaù-java—traveling at the speed of mind;
antardhäna—the ability to disappear; parakäya-praveça—the ability to enter
another's body; düra-grahaëa—the ability to perceive things far, far away;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
250
ädéni—and others; yadåcchayä—without difficulty, automatically;
upagatäni—achieved; na—not; aïjasä—directly; nåpa—O King Parékñit;
hådayena—within the heart; abhyanandat—accepted.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, just to show all the yogés the mystic process, Lord
Åñabhadeva, the partial expansion of Lord Kåñëa, performed wonderful
activities. Actually He was the master of liberation and was fully absorbed in
transcendental bliss, which increased a thousandfold. Lord Kåñëa, Väsudeva,
the son of Vasudeva, is the original source of Lord Åñabhadeva. There is no
difference in Their constitution, and consequently Lord Åñabhadeva awakened
the loving symptoms of crying, laughing and shivering. He was always absorbed
in transcendental love. Due to this, all mystic powers automatically approached
Him, such as the ability to travel in outer space at the speed of mind, to appear
and disappear, to enter the bodies of others, and to see things far, far away.
Although He could do all this, He did not exercise these powers.
PURPORT
In the Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 19.149) it is said:
kåñëa-bhakta—niñkäma, ataeva 'çänta'
bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kämé—sakali 'açänta'
The word çänta means completely peaceful. Unless all one's desires are
fulfilled, one cannot be peaceful. Everyone is trying to fulfill his aspirations
and desires, be they material or spiritual. Those in the material world are
açänta (without peace) because they have so many desires to fulfill. The pure
devotee, however, is without desire. Anyäbhiläñitä-çünya: a pure devotee is
completely free from all kinds of material desire. Karmés, on the other hand,
are simply full of desires because they try to enjoy sense gratification. They are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
251
not peaceful in this life, nor the next, during the past, present or future.
Similarly, jïänés are always aspiring after liberation and trying to become one
with the Supreme. Yogés are aspiring after many siddhis (powers)—aëimä,
laghimä, präpti, etc. However, a devotee is not at all interested in these things
because he is fully dependent on the mercy of Kåñëa. Kåñëa is yogeçvara, the
possessor of all mystic powers (siddhis), and He is ätmäräma, fully self-satisfied.
The yoga-siddhis are described in this verse. One can fly in outer space without
the aid of a machine, and he can travel at the speed of mind. This means that
as soon as a yogé desires to go somewhere within this universe or even beyond
this universe, he can do so immediately. One cannot estimate the speed of
mind, for within a second the mind can go many millions of miles. Sometimes
yogés enter into the bodies of other people and act as they desire when their
bodies are not working properly. When the body becomes old, a perfect yogé
can find a young, able body. Giving up his old body, the yogé can enter into the
young body and act as he pleases. Being a plenary expansion of Lord Väsudeva,
Lord Åñabhadeva possessed all these mystic yoga powers, but He was satisfied
with His devotional love of Kåñëa, which was evinced by the ecstatic
symptoms, such as crying, laughing and shivering.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Fifth Chapter of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam entitled "Lord Åñabhadeva's Teachings to His Sons."
6. The Activities of Lord Åñabhadeva
This chapter tells how Lord Åñabhadeva left His body. He was not attached
to His body even when it was being burned up in a forest fire. When the seed
of fruitive activity is burned by the fire of knowledge, the spiritual properties
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
252
and mystic powers are automatically manifest, yet bhakti-yoga is not affected
by these mystic powers. An ordinary yogé is captivated by mystic powers and
his progress checked; therefore a perfect yogé does not welcome them. Because
the mind is restless and undependable, it must remain always under control.
Even the mind of the advanced yogé Saubhari created such a disturbance that
he lost his yogic mystic powers. Due to a restless mind, even a very advanced
yogé can fall down. The mind is so restless that it induces even a perfect yogé to
be controlled by the senses. Therefore Lord Åñabhadeva, for the instruction of
all yogés, showed the process of quitting the body. While traveling in South
India, through the provinces of Karëäöa, Koìka, Veìka and Kuöaka, Lord
Åñabhadeva arrived in the neighborhood of Kuöakäcala. Suddenly there was a
forest fire that burned the forest and Lord Åñabhadeva's body to ashes. The
pastimes of Lord Åñabhadeva as a liberated soul were known by the King of
Koìka, Veìka and Kuöaka. This King's name was Arhat. He later became
captivated by the illusory energy, and in this condition he set forth the basic
principles of Jainism. Lord Åñabhadeva set forth the principles of religion that
can free one from material bondage, and He put an end to all kinds of atheistic
activities. On this earth, the place known as Bhärata-varña was a very pious
land because the Supreme Lord appeared there when He wanted to incarnate.
Lord Åñabhadeva neglected all the mystic powers for which the so-called yogés
hanker. Because of the beauty of devotional service, devotees are not at all
interested in so-called mystic power. The master of all yogic power, Lord
Kåñëa, can exhibit all powers on behalf of His devotee. Devotional service is
more valuable than yogic mystic powers. Devotees who are sometimes misled
aspire for liberation and mystic powers. The Supreme Lord gives these
devotees whatever they desire, but they cannot attain the most important
function of devotional service. Devotional service to the Lord is guaranteed
for those who do not desire liberation and mystic power.
TEXT 1
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
253
raJaaevac
Na NaUNa& >aGav AaTMaaraMaa<aa& YaaeGaSaMaqirTajaNaav>aiJaRTak-MaRbqJaaNaaMaE‚
ìYaaRi<a PauNa" (c)e-XadaiNa >aivTauMahRiNTa Yad*C^YaaePaGaTaaiNa )) 1 ))
räjoväca
na nünaà bhagava ätmärämäëäà
yoga-samérita-jïänävabharjita-karma-béjänäm aiçvaryäëi punaù kleçadäni
bhavitum arhanti yadåc-chayopagatäni.
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—King Parékñit inquired; na—not; nünam—indeed; bhagavaù—O
most powerful Çukadeva Gosvämé; ätmärämäëäm—of pure devotees simply
engaged in devotional service; yoga-samérita—achieved by practice of yoga;
jïäna—by knowledge; avabharjita—burned; karma-béjänäm—of those whose
seeds of fruitive activities; aiçvaryäëi—the mystic powers; punaù—again;
kleçadäni—sources of distress; bhavitum—to become; arhanti—are able;
yadåcchayä—automatically; upagatäni—achieved.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit asked Çukadeva Gosvämé: My dear Lord, for those who are
completely pure in heart, knowledge is attained by the practice of bhakti-yoga,
and attachment for fruitive activity is completely burned to ashes. For such
people, the powers of mystic yoga automatically arise. They do not cause
distress. Why, then, did Åñabhadeva neglect them?
PURPORT
A pure devotee is constantly engaged in the service of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Whatever is necessary for the discharge of devotional
service is automatically attained, though it may appear to be the result of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
254
mystic yoga power. Sometimes a yogé displays a little yogic power by
manufacturing gold. A little quantity of gold captivates foolish people, and
thus the yogé gets many followers, who are willing to accept such a tiny person
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such a yogé may also advertise himself
as Bhagavän. However, a devotee does not have to exhibit such magical
wonders. Without practicing the mystic yogic process, he achieves even greater
opulence all over the world. Under the circumstances, Lord Åñabhadeva
refused to manifest mystic yogic perfections, and Mahäräja Parékñit asked why
He did not accept them, since, for a devotee, they are not at all disturbing. A
devotee is never distressed or satisfied by material opulence. His concern is
how to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If, by the grace of the
Supreme Lord, a devotee achieves extraordinary opulence, he utilizes the
opportunity for the Lord's service. He is not disturbed by the opulence.
TEXT 2
‰izåvac
SaTYaMau¢&- ik-iNTvh va Wke- Na MaNaSaae_Öa ivé[M>aMaNavSQaaNaSYa
Xa#=ik-raTa wv Sa(r)C^NTae )) 2 ))
åñir uväca
satyam uktaà kintv iha vä eke na manaso 'ddhä viçrambham anavasthänasya
çaöha-kiräta iva saìgacchante.
SYNONYMS
åñiù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; satyam—the correct thing; uktam—have
said; kintu—but; iha—in this material world; vä—either; eke—some; na—not;
manasaù—of the mind; addhä—directly; viçrambham—faithful;
anavasthänasya—being unsteady; çaöha—very cunning; kirätaù—a hunter;
iva—like; saìgacchante—become.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
255
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé replied: My dear King, you have spoken correctly.
However, after capturing animals, a cunning hunter does not put faith in them,
for they might run away. Similarly, those who are advanced in spiritual life do
not put faith in the mind. Indeed, they always remain vigilant and watch the
mind's action.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (18.5) Lord Kåñëa says:
yajïa-däna-tapaù-karma
na tyäjyaà käryam eva tat
yajïo dänaà tapaç caiva
pävanäni manéñiëäm
"Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up but should be
performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify even the great souls."
Even one who has renounced the world and has taken sannyäsa should not
renounce chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra. Renunciation does not mean
that one has to renounce saìkértana-yajïa. Similarly, one should not renounce
charity or tapasya. The yoga system for control of the mind and senses must be
strictly followed. Lord Åñabhadeva showed how severe types of tapasya could
be performed, and He set an example for all others.
TEXT 3
TaQaa cae¢-Ma(ƒƒ
Na ku-YaaRTk-ihRicTSa:Ya& MaNaiSa ùNaviSQaTae )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
256
YaiÜé[M>aaiÀraÀq<a| cSk-Nd TaPa WeìrMa( )) 3 ))
tathä coktam—
na kuryät karhicit sakhyaà
manasi hy anavasthite
yad-viçrambhäc ciräc cérëaà
caskanda tapa aiçvaram
SYNONYMS
tathä—so; ca—and; uktam—it is said; na—never; kuryät—should do;
karhicit—at any time or with anyone; sakhyam—friendship; manasi—in the
mind; hi—certainly; anavasthite—which is very restless; yat—in which;
viçrambhät—from placing too much faith; cirät—for a long time;
cérëam—practiced; caskanda—became disturbed; tapaù—the austerity;
aiçvaram—of great personalities like Lord Çiva and the great sage Saubhari.
TRANSLATION
All the learned scholars have given their opinion. The mind is by nature
very restless, and one should not make friends with it. If we place full
confidence in the mind, it may cheat us at any moment. Even Lord Çiva became
agitated upon seeing the Mohiné form of Lord Kåñëa, and Saubhari Muni also
fell down from the mature stage of yogic perfection.
PURPORT
The first business of one trying to advance in spiritual life is to control the
mind and senses. As Çré Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (15.7):
mamaiväàço jéva-loke
jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
257
manaù ñañöhänéndriyäëi
prakåti-sthäni karñati
Although the living entities are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord and are
therefore in a transcendental position, they are still suffering in this material
world and struggling for existence due to the mind and the senses. To get out
of this false struggle for existence and become happy in the material world, one
has to control the mind and senses and be detached from material conditions.
One should never neglect austerities and penances; one should always perform
them. Lord Åñabhadeva personally showed us how to do this. In the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (9.19.17) it is specifically stated:
mäträ svasrä duhiträ vä
näviviktäsano bhavet
balavän indriya-grämo
vidväàsam api karñati
A gåhastha, vänaprastha, sannyäsé and brahmacäré should be very careful when
associating with women. One is forbidden to sit down in a solitary place even
with one's mother, sister or daughter. In our Kåñëa consciousness movement it
has been very difficult to disassociate ourselves from women in our society,
especially in Western countries. We are therefore sometimes criticized, but
nonetheless we are trying to give everyone a chance to chant the Hare Kåñëa
mahä-mantra and thus advance spiritually. If we stick to the principle of
chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra offenselessly, then, by the grace of Çréla
Haridäsa Öhäkura, we may be saved from the allurement of women. However,
if we are not very strict in chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra, we may at
any time fall victim to women.
TEXT 4
iNaTYa& ddaiTa k-aMaSYaiC^d]& TaMaNau Yae_rYa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
258
YaaeiGaNa" k*-TaMaE}aSYa PaTYauJaaRYaev Pau&êl/I )) 4 ))
nityaà dadäti kämasya
cchidraà tam anu ye 'rayaù
yoginaù kåta-maitrasya
patyur jäyeva puàçcalé
SYNONYMS
nityam—always; dadäti—gives; kämasya—of lust; chidram—facility;
tam—that (lust); anu—following; ye—those; arayaù—enemies; yoginaù—of
the yogés or persons trying to advance in spiritual life; kåta-maitrasya—having
put faith in the mind; patyuù—of the husband; jäyä iva—like the wife;
puàçcalé—who is unchaste or easily carried away by other men.
TRANSLATION
An unchaste woman is very easily carried away by paramours, and it
sometimes happens that her husband is violently killed by her paramours. If the
yogé gives his mind a chance and does not restrain it, his mind will give facility
to enemies like lust, anger and greed, and they will doubtlessly kill the yogé.
PURPORT
In this verse the word puàçcalé refers to a woman who is easily carried away
by men. Such a woman is never to be trusted. Unfortunately, in the present
age, women are never controlled. According to the directions of the çästras,
women are never to be given freedom. When a child, a woman must be strictly
controlled by her father. When she is young, she must be strictly controlled by
her husband, and when she is old, she must be controlled by her elderly sons. If
she is given independence and allowed to mingle unrestrictedly with men, she
will be spoiled. A spoiled woman, being manipulated by paramours, might even
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
259
kill her husband. This example is given here because a yogé desiring to get free
from material conditions must always keep his mind under control. Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura used to say that in the morning our first
business should be to beat the mind with shoes a hundred times. and, before
going to bed, to beat the mind a hundred times with a broomstick. In this way
one's mind can be kept under control. An uncontrolled mind and an unchaste
wife are the same. An unchaste wife can kill her husband at any time, and an
uncontrolled mind, followed by lust, anger, greed, madness, envy and illusion,
can certainly kill the yogé. When the yogé is controlled by the mind, he falls
down into the material condition. One should be very careful of the mind, just
as a husband should be careful of an unchaste wife.
TEXT 5
k-aMaae MaNYauMaRdae l/ae>a" Xaaek-Maaeh>aYaadYa" )
k-MaRbNDaê YaNMaUl/" Svqku-YaaRTk-ae Nau Tad( buDa" )) 5 ))
kämo manyur mado lobhaù
çoka-moha-bhayädayaù
karma-bandhaç ca yan-mülaù
svékuryät ko nu tad budhaù
SYNONYMS
kämaù—lust; manyuù—anger; madaù—pride; lobhaù—greed;
çoka—lamentation; moha—illusion; bhaya—fear; ädayaù—all these together;
karma-bandhaù—bondage to fruitive activities; ca—and; yat-mülaù—the
origin of which; svékuryät—would accept; kaù—who; nu—indeed; tat—that
mind; budhaù—if one is learned.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
260
TRANSLATION
The mind is the root cause of lust, anger, pride, greed, lamentation, illusion
and fear. Combined, these constitute bondage to fruitive activity. What learned
man would put faith in the mind?
PURPORT
The mind is the original cause of material bondage. It is followed by many
enemies, such as anger, pride, greed, lamentation, illusion and fear. The best
way to control the mind is to engage it always in Kåñëa consciousness (sa vai
manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]). Since the followers of the mind bring
about material bondage, we should be very careful not to trust the mind.
TEXT 6
AQaEvMai%l/l/aek-Paal/l/l/aMaae_iPa ivl/+a<aEJaR@vdvDaUTavez>aazacirTaEr‚
ivl/i+aTa>aGavTPa[>aavae YaaeiGaNaa& SaaMParaYaiviDaMaNauiXa+aYaNa( Svk-le/vr& iJahaSaura‚
TMaNYaaTMaaNaMaSa&VYavihTaMaNaQaaRNTar>aaveNaaNvq+aMaa<a oParTaaNauv*itaåParraMa )) 6 ))
athaivam akhila-loka-päla-lalämo 'pi vilakñaëair jaòavad
avadhüta-veña-bhäñä-caritair avilakñita-bhagavat-prabhävo yoginäà
sämparäya-vidhim anuçikñayan sva-kalevaraà jihäsur ätmany ätmänam
asaàvyavahitam anarthäntara-bhävenänvékñamäëa uparatänuvåttir
upararäma.
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; evam—in this way; akhila-loka-päla-lalämaù—the head of
all kings and monarchs of the universe; api—although; vilakñaëaiù—various;
jaòa-vat—as if stupid; avadhüta-veña-bhäñä-caritaiù—by the dress, language
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
261
and characteristics of an avadhüta; avilakñita-bhagavat-prabhävaù—hiding the
opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (keeping Himself like an
ordinary human being); yoginäm—of the yogés; sämparäya-vidhim—the
method of giving up this material body; anuçikñayan—teaching;
sva-kalevaram—His own personal body, which is not at all material;
jihäsuù—desiring to give up like an ordinary human being; ätmani—unto
Väsudeva, the original person; ätmänam—Himself, Lord Åñabhadeva, being an
äveça-avatära of Lord Viñëu; asaàvyavahitam—without intervention by the
illusory energy; anartha-antara-bhävena—Himself in the status of Viñëu;
anvékñamäëaù—always seeing; uparata-anuvåttiù—who was acting as if giving
up His material body; upararäma—ceased His pastimes as the King of this
planet.
TRANSLATION
Lord Åñabhadeva was the head of all kings and emperors within this
universe, but assuming the dress and language of an avadhüta, He acted as if
dull and materially bound. Consequently no one could observe His divine
opulence. He adopted this behavior just to teach yogés how to give up the body.
Nonetheless, He maintained His original position as a plenary expansion of
Lord Väsudeva, Kåñëa. Remaining always in that state, He gave up His
pastimes as Lord Åñabhadeva within the material world. If, following in the
footsteps of Lord Åñabhadeva, one can give up his subtle body, there is no
chance that one will accept a material body again.
PURPORT
As Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
262
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."
This is possible simply by keeping oneself an eternal servant of the Supreme
Lord. One must understand his constitutional position and the constitutional
position of the Supreme Lord as well. Both have the same spiritual identity.
Maintaining oneself as a servant of the Supreme Lord, one should avoid
rebirth in this material world. If one keeps himself spiritually fit and thinks of
himself as an eternal servant of the Supreme Lord, he will be successful at the
time he has to give up the material body.
TEXT 7
TaSYa h va Wv& Mau¢-il/(r)SYa >aGavTa ‰z>aSYa YaaeGaMaaYaavaSaNaYaa deh wMaa&
JaGaTaqMai>aMaaNaa>aaSaeNa S&ak[-MaMaa<a" k-aeªveªku-$=k-aNdi+a<ak-<aaR$=k-aNdeXaaNa(
Yad*C^YaaePaGaTa" ku-$=k-acl/aePavNa AaSYak*-TaaXMak-vl/ oNMaad wv Mau¢-‚
MaUDaRJaae_Sa&vqTa Wv ivccar )) 7 ))
tasya ha vä evaà mukta-liìgasya bhagavata åñabhasya yogamäyä-väsanayä
deha imäà jagatém abhimänäbhäsena saìkramamäëaù koìka-veìka-kuöakän
dakñiëa-karëäöakän deçän yadåcchayopagataù kuöakäcalopavana äsya
kåtäçma-kavala unmäda iva mukta-mürdhajo 'saàvéta eva vicacära.
tasya—of Him (Lord Åñabhadeva); ha vä—as it were; evam—thus;
mukta-liìgasya—who had no identification with the gross and subtle body;
bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; åñabhasya—of Lord
Åñabhadeva; yoga-mäyä-väsanayä—by the accomplishment of yogamäyä for
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
263
the purpose of the Lord's pastimes; dehaù—body; imäm—this; jagatém—earth;
abhimäna-äbhäsena—with the apparent conception of having a body of
material elements; saìkramamäëaù—traveling; koìka-veìka-kuöakän—Koìka,
Veìka and Kuöaka; dakñiëa—in South India; karëäöakän—in the province of
Karëäöa; deçän—all the countries; yadåcchayä—of His own accord;
upagataù—reached; kuöakäcala-upavane—a forest near Kuöakäcala;
äsya—within the mouth; kåta-açma-kavalaù—having put a mouthful of stone;
unmädaù iva—just like a madman; mukta-mürdhajaù—having scattered hair;
asaàvétaù—naked; eva—just; vicacära—traveled.
TRANSLATION
Actually Lord Åñabhadeva had no material body, but due to yogamäyä, He
considered His body material, and therefore, because He played like an ordinary
human being, He gave up the mentality of identifying with it. Following this
principle, He began to wander all over the world. While traveling, He came to
the province of Karëäöa in South India and passed through Koìka, Veìka and
Kuöaka. He had no plan to travel this way, but He arrived near Kuöakäcala and
entered a forest there. He placed stones within His mouth and began to wander
through the forest, naked and with His hair disheveled like a madman.
TEXT 8
AQa SaMaqrveGaivDaUTave<auivk-zR<aJaaTaaeGa]davaNal/STaÜNaMaale/il/haNa" Sah TaeNa
ddah )) 8 ))
atha saméra-vega-vidhüta-veëu-vikarñaëa-jätogra-dävänalas tad vanam
älelihänaù saha tena dadäha.
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
264
atha—thereafter; saméra-vega—by the force of the wind; vidhüta—tossed
about; veëu—of bamboos; vikarñaëa—by the rubbing; jäta—produced;
ugra—fierce; däva-analaù—a forest fire; tat—that; vanam—forest near
Kuöakäcala; älelihänaù—devouring all around; saha—with; tena—that body;
dadäha—burned to ashes.
TRANSLATION
While He was wandering about, a wild forest fire began. This fire was
caused by the friction of bamboos, which were being blown by the wind. In that
fire, the entire forest near Kuöakäcala and the body of Lord Åñabhadeva were
burnt to ashes.
PURPORT
Such a forest fire can burn the external bodies of animals, but Lord
Åñabhadeva was not burned, although He apparently seemed so. Lord
Åñabhadeva is the Supersoul of all living entities within the forest, and His
soul is never burned by fire. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, adähyo 'yam—the soul
is never burned by fire. Due to Lord Åñabhadeva's presence, all the animals in
the forest were also liberated from material encagement.
TEXT 9
YaSYa ik-l/aNaucirTaMauPaak-<YaR k-aeªveªku-$=k-aNaa& raJaahRàaMaaePaiXa+Ya
k-l/avDaMaR oTk*-ZYaMaa<ae >aivTaVYaeNa ivMaaeihTa" SvDaMaRPaQaMaku-Taae>aYaMaPahaYa
ku-PaQaPaa%<@MaSaMaÅSa& iNaJaMaNaqzYaa MaNd" SaMPa[vTaRiYaZYaTae )) 9 ))
yasya kilänucaritam upäkarëya koìka-veìka-kuöakänäà
räjärhan-nämopaçikñya kaläv adharma utkåñyamäëe bhavitavyena vimohitaù
sva-dharma-patham akuto-bhayam apahäya kupatha-päkhaëòam asamaïjasaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
265
nija-manéñayä mandaù sampravartayiñyate.
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom (Lord Åñabhadeva); kila anucaritam—pastimes as a
paramahaàsa, above all regulative varëäçrama principles; upäkarëya—hearing;
koìka-veìka-kuöakänäm—of Koìka, Veìka and Kuöaka; räjä—the King;
arhat-näma—whose name was Arhat (now known as the Jain);
upaçikñya—imitating the activities of Lord Åñabhadeva in His paramahaàsa
feature; kalau—in this age of Kali; adharme utkåñyamäëe—because of
increasing irreligious life; bhavitavyena—by that which was about to happen;
vimohitaù—bewildered; sva-dharma-patham—the path of religion;
akutaù-bhayam—which is free from all kinds of fearful danger;
apahäya—giving up (such practices as cleanliness, truthfulness, control of the
senses and mind, simplicity, the principles of religion, and practical
application of knowledge); ku-patha-päkhaëòam—the wrong path of atheism;
asamaïjasam—improper or against the Vedic literature; nija-manéñayä—by his
own fertile brain; mandaù—most foolish; sampravartayiñyate—will introduce.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued speaking to Mahäräja Parékñit: My dear King,
the King of Koìka, Veìka and Kuöaka whose name was Arhat, heard of the
activities of Åñabhadeva and, imitating Åñabhadeva's principles, introduced a
new system of religion. Taking advantage of Kali-yuga, the age of sinful
activity, King Arhat, being bewildered, gave up the Vedic principles, which are
free from risk, and concocted a new system of religion opposed to the Vedas.
That was the beginning of the Jain dharma. Many other so-called religions
followed this atheistic system.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
266
When Lord Çré Kåñëa was present on this planet, a person named
Pauëòraka imitated the four-handed Näräyaëa and declared himself the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He desired to compete with Kåñëa. Similarly,
during the time of Lord Åñabhadeva, the King of Koìka and Veìka acted like
a paramahaàsa and imitated Lord Åñabhadeva. He introduced a system of
religion and took advantage of the fallen condition of the people in this age of
Kali. It is said in Vedic literatures that people in this age will be more inclined
to accept anyone as the Supreme Lord and accept any religious system opposed
to Vedic principles. The people in this age are described as mandäù
sumanda-matayaù. Generally they have no spiritual culture, and therefore they
are very fallen. Due to this, they will accept any religious system. Due to their
misfortune. they forget the Vedic principles. Following non-Vedic principles
in this age, they think themselves the Supreme Lord and thus spread the cult
of atheism all over the world.
TEXT 10
YaeNa h vav k-l/aE MaNauJaaPaSada devMaaYaaMaaeihTaa" SviviDaiNaYaaeGaXaaEc‚
cair}aivhqNaa devhel/NaaNYaPav]TaaiNa iNaJaiNaJaeC^Yaa Ga*õaNaa AòaNaaNaa‚
cMaNaaXaaEcke-XaaeçuÄNaadqiNa k-il/NaaDaMaRbhule/NaaePahTaiDaYaae b]øb]aø<aYaj‚
Pauåzl/aek-ivdUzk-a" Pa[aYae<a >aivZYaiNTa )) 10 ))
yena ha väva kalau manujäpasadä deva-mäyä-mohitäù
sva-vidhi-niyoga-çauca-cäritra-vihénä deva-helanäny apavratäni
nija-nijecchayä gåhëänä asnänänäcamanäçauca-keçolluïcanädéni
kalinädharma-bahulenopahata-dhiyo
brahma-brähmaëa-yajïa-puruña-loka-vidüñakäù präyeëa bhaviñyanti.
SYNONYMS
yena—by which pseudo religious system; ha väva—certainly; kalau—in this
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
267
age of Kali; manuja-apasadäù—the most condemned men;
deva-mäyä-mohitäù—bewildered by the external energy, or illusory energy, of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sva-vidhi-niyoga-çauca-cäritra-vihénäù—without character, cleanliness, and the
rules and regulations given according to one's own duty in life;
deva-helanäni—negligent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
apavratäni—impious vows; nija-nija-icchayä—by their own desires;
gåhëänäù—accepting;
asnäna-anäcamana-açauca-keça-ulluïcana-ädéni—concocted religious
principles such as no bathing, no washing of the mouth, being unclean and
plucking out the hair; kalinä—by the age of Kali; adharma-bahulena—with an
abundance of irreligion; upahata-dhiyaù—whose pure consciousness is
destroyed; brahma-brähmaëa-yajïa-puruña-loka-vidüñakäù—blasphemous
toward the Vedas, the strict brähmaëas, ritualistic ceremonies such as sacrifice,
and toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the devotees;
präyeëa—almost entirely; bhaviñyanti—will become.
TRANSLATION
People who are lowest among men and bewildered by the illusory energy of
the Supreme Lord will give up the original varëäçrama-dharma and its rules and
regulations. They will abandon bathing three times daily and worshiping the
Lord. Abandoning cleanliness and neglecting the Supreme Lord, they will
accept nonsensical principles. Not regularly bathing or washing their mouths
regularly, they will always remain unclean, and they will pluck out their hair.
Following a concocted religion, they will flourish. During this age of Kali,
people are more inclined to irreligious systems. Consequently these people will
naturally deride Vedic authority, the followers of Vedic authority, the
brähmaëas, the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the devotees.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
268
Presently the hippies in the Western countries fit this description. They are
irresponsible and unregulated. They do not bathe, and they deride standard
Vedic knowledge. They concoct new life-styles and religions. There are many
hippie groups at the present moment, but they all originated from King Arhat,
who imitated the activities of Lord Åñabhadeva, who was situated on the
paramahaàsa stage. King Arhat did not care for the fact that although Lord
Åñabhadeva acted like a madman, His stool and urine were nonetheless
aromatic, so much so that they nicely scented the countryside for miles
around. The followers of King Arhat went under the name Jains, and they
were later followed by many others, particularly by the hippies, who are more
or less offshoots of Mäyäväda philosophy because they think themselves the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such people do not respect the real followers
of Vedic principles, the ideal brähmaëas. Nor do they have respect for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supreme Brahman. Due to the influence
of this age of Kali, they are apt to concoct false religious systems.
TEXT 11
Tae c ùvaR¢-NaYaa iNaJal/aek-Yaa}aYaaNDaParMParYaaìSTaaSTaMaSYaNDae SvYaMaev
Pa[PaiTaZYaiNTa )) 11 ))
te ca hy arväktanayä nija-loka-yätrayändha-paramparayäçvastäs tamasy andhe
svayam eva prapatiñyanti.
SYNONYMS
te—those people not following the Vedic principles; ca—and; hi—certainly;
arväktanayä—deviating from the eternal principles of Vedic religion;
nija-loka-yätrayä—by a practice arrived at by their own mental concoction;
andha-paramparayä—by a disciplic succession of blind. ignorant people;
äçvastäù—being encouraged; tamasi—into the darkness of ignorance;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
269
andhe—blindness; svayam eva—themselves; prapatiñyanti—will fall down.
TRANSLATION
Low-class people, due to their gross ignorance, introduce a system of religion
that deviates from the Vedic principles. Following their own mental
concoctions, they automatically fall down into the darkest regions of existence.
PURPORT
In this connection, one may see Bhagavad-gétä, Chapter Sixteen. where
there is a description of the downfall of the asuras (16.16 and 16.23).
TEXT 12
AYaMavTaarae rJaSaaePaPlu/TakE-vLYaaePaiXa+a<aaQaR" )) 12 ))
ayam avatäro rajasopapluta-kaivalyopaçikñaëärthaù.
SYNONYMS
ayam avatäraù—this incarnation (Lord Åñabhadeva); rajasä—by the mode of
passion; upapluta—overwhelmed; kaivalya-upaçikñaëa-arthaù—to teach people
the path of liberation.
TRANSLATION
In this age of Kali, people are overwhelmed by the modes of passion and
ignorance. Lord Åñabhadeva incarnated Himself to deliver them from the
clutches of mäyä.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
270
PURPORT
The symptoms of Kali-yuga are predicted in the Twelfth Canto, Third
Chapter, of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Lävaëyaà keça-dhäraëam. It is predicted how
fallen souls will behave. They will keep their hair long and consider themselves
very beautiful, or they will pluck out their hair as the Jains do. They will keep
themselves unclean and will not wash their mouths. Jains refer to Lord
Åñabhadeva as their original preceptor. If such people are serious followers of
Åñabhadeva, they must also take His instructions. In the Fifth Chapter of this
canto, Åñabhadeva gave His one hundred sons instructions whereby they could
become free from the clutches of mäyä. If one actually follows Åñabhadeva, he
will certainly be delivered from the clutches of mäyä and return home, back to
Godhead. If one strictly follows the instructions of Åñabhadeva given in the
Fifth Chapter, he will certainly be liberated. Lord Åñabhadeva incarnated
specifically to deliver these fallen souls.
TEXT 13
TaSYaaNauGau<aaNa( ëaek-aNa( GaaYaiNTaƒƒ
Ahae >auv" SaáSaMaud]vTYaa
ÜqPaezu vzeRZviDaPau<YaMaeTaTa( )
GaaYaiNTa Ya}aTYaJaNaa Maurare"
k-MaaRi<a >ad]a<YavTaarviNTa )) 13 ))
tasyänuguëän çlokän gäyanti—
aho bhuvaù sapta-samudravatyä
dvépeñu varñeñv adhipuëyam etat
gäyanti yatratya-janä muräreù
karmäëi bhadräëy avatäravanti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
271
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Him (Lord Åñabhadeva); anuguëän—conforming to the instructions
for liberation; çlokän—verses; gäyanti—chant; aho—oh; bhuvaù—of this
earthly planet; sapta-samudra-vatyäù—possessing seven seas; dvépeñu—among
the islands; varñeñu—among the lands; adhipuëyam—more pious than any
other island; etat—this (Bhärata-varña); gäyanti—sing about;
yatratya-janäù—the people of this tract of land; muräreù—of Muräri, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; karmäëi—the activities;
bhadräëi—all-auspicious; avatäravanti—in many incarnations such as Lord
Åñabhadeva.
TRANSLATION
Learned scholars chant about the transcendental qualities of Lord
Åñabhadeva in this way: "Oh, this earthly planet contains seven seas and many
islands and lands, of which Bhärata-varña is considered the most pious. People
of Bhärata-varña are accustomed to glorifying the activities of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in His incarnations as Lord Åñabhadeva and others. All
these activities are very auspicious for the welfare of humanity.
PURPORT
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu said:
bhärata-bhümite haila manuñya-janma yära
janma särthaka kari' kara para-upakära
[Cc. Ädi 9.41]
As stated in this verse, Bhärata-varña is a most pious land. The followers of
Vedic literature understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His
different incarnations, and they are privileged to glorify the Lord by following
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
272
the directions of Vedic literature. After realizing the glories of human life.
such people should take up the mission to spread the importance of human life
throughout the whole world. This is the mission of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
The word adhipuëyam indicates that there are certainly many other pious men
throughout the world, but the people of Bhärata-varña are even more pious.
Therefore they are fit to spread Kåñëa Consciousness throughout the world for
the benefit of all human society. Çréla Madhväcärya also recognizes the land of
Bhärata-varña: viçeñäd bhärate puëyam. Throughout the world, there is no
question of bhagavad-bhakti or devotional service, but the people of
Bhärata-varña can easily understand the devotional service of the Lord. Thus
every inhabitant of Bhärata-varña can perfect his life by discharging
bhagavad-bhakti and then preaching this cult throughout the world for the
benefit of everyone.
TEXT 14
Ahae Nau v&Xaae YaXaSaavdaTa"
Pa[EYav]Taae Ya}a PauMaaNa( Paura<a" )
k*-TaavTaar" Pauåz" Sa AaÛ‚
êcar DaMa| Yadk-MaRheTauMa( )) 14 ))
aho nu vaàço yaçasävadätaù
praiyavrato yatra pumän puräëaù
kåtävatäraù puruñaù sa ädyaç
cacära dharmaà yad akarma-hetum
SYNONYMS
aho—oh; nu—indeed; vaàçaù—the dynasty; yaçasä—with widespread fame;
avadätaù—fully pure; praiyavrataù—related to King Priyavrata;
yatra—wherein; pumän—the Supreme Person; puräëaù—the original;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
273
kåta-avatäraù—descended as an incarnation; puruñaù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; saù—He; ädyaù—the original person;
cacära—executed; dharmam—religious principles; yat—from which;
akarma-hetum—the cause of the end of fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
"Oh, what shall I say of the dynasty of Priyavrata, which is pure and very
much celebrated. In that dynasty, the Supreme Person, the original Personality
of Godhead, descended as an incarnation and executed religious principles that
could free one from the results of fruitive activity.
PURPORT
There are many dynasties in human society wherein the Supreme Lord
descends as an incarnation. Lord Kåñëa appeared in the Yadu dynasty, and
Lord Rämacandra appeared in the Ikñväku, or Raghu, dynasty. Similarly, Lord
Åñabhadeva appeared in the dynasty of King Priyavrata. All these dynasties
are very famous, and of them the dynasty of Priyavrata is most famous.
TEXT 15
k-ae NvSYa k-aïaMaParae_NauGaC^e=‚
NMaNaaerQaeNaaPYa>avSYa YaaeGaq )
Yaae YaaeGaMaaYaa" SPa*hYaTYaudSTaa
ùSataYaa YaeNa k*-TaPa[YaÒa" )) 15 ))
ko nv asya käñöhäm aparo 'nugacchen
mano-rathenäpy abhavasya yogé
yo yoga-mäyäù spåhayaty udastä
hy asattayä yena kåta-prayatnäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
274
SYNONYMS
kaù—who; nu—indeed; asya—of Lord Åñabhadeva; käñöhäm—the example;
aparaù—else; anugacchet—can follow; manaù-rathena—by the mind;
api—even; abhavasya—of the unborn; yogé—the mystic; yaù—who;
yoga-mäyäù—the mystic perfections of yoga; spåhayati—desires;
udastäù—rejected by Åñabhadeva; hi—certainly; asattayä—by the quality of
being insubstantial; yena—by whom, Åñabhadeva; kåta-prayatnäù—although
eager to serve.
TRANSLATION
"Who is that mystic yogé who can follow the examples of Lord Åñabhadeva
even with his mind? Lord Åñabhadeva rejected all kinds of yogic perfection,
which other yogés hanker to attain. Who is that yogé who can compare to Lord
Åñabhadeva?"
PURPORT
Generally yogés desire the yogic perfections of aëimä, laghimä, mahimä,
präkämya, präpti, éçitva, vaçitva and kämävasäyitä. Lord Åñabhadeva, however,
never aspired for all these material things. Such siddhis (perfections) are
presented by the illusory energy of the Lord. The real purpose of the yoga
system is to achieve the favor and shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but this purpose is covered by the illusory energy of
yogamäyä. So-called yogés are therefore allured by the superficial material
perfections of aëimä, laghimä, präpti and so forth. Consequently ordinary yogés
cannot compare to Lord Åñabhadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 16
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
275
wiTa h SMa Sak-l/vedl/aek-devb]aø<aGava& ParMaGaurae>aRGavTa ‰z>aa:YaSYa
ivXauÖacirTaMaqirTa& Pau&Saa& SaMaSTaduêirTaai>ahr<a& ParMaMahaMa(r)l/aYaNaiMadMa‚
Naué[ÖYaaePaicTaYaaNaué*<aaeTYaaé[avYaiTa vavihTaae >aGaviTa TaiSMaNa( vaSaudev
Wk-aNTaTaae >ai¢-rNaYaaeriPa SaMaNauvTaRTae )) 16 ))
iti ha sma sakala-veda-loka-deva-brähmaëa-gaväà parama-guror bhagavata
åñabhäkhyasya viçuddhäcaritam éritaà puàsäà samasta-duçcaritäbhiharaëaà
parama-mahä-maìgaläyanam idam anuçraddhayopacitayänuçåëoty äçrävayati
vävahito bhagavati tasmin väsudeva ekäntato bhaktir anayor api
samanuvartate.
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; ha sma—indeed; sakala—all; veda—of knowledge; loka—of people
in general; deva—of the demigods; brähmaëa—of the brähmaëas; gaväm—of
the cows; parama—the supreme; guroù—master; bhagavataù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; åñabha-äkhyasya—whose name was Lord Åñabhadeva;
viçuddha—pure; äcaritam—activities; éritam—now explained; puàsäm—of
every living entity; samasta—all; duçcarita—sinful activities;
abhiharaëam—destroying; parama—foremost; mahä—great; maìgala—of
auspiciousness; ayanam—the shelter; idam—this; anuçraddhayä—with faith;
upacitayä—increasing; anuçåëoti—hears from the authority;
äçrävayati—speaks to others; vä—or; avahitaù—being attentive;
bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tasmin—unto Him;
väsudeve—to Lord Väsudeva, Lord Kåñëa; eka-antataù—unflinching;
bhaktiù—devotion; anayoù—of both groups, the listeners and the speakers;
api—certainly; samanuvartate—factually begins.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Lord Åñabhadeva is the master of all Vedic
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
276
knowledge, human beings, demigods, cows and brähmaëas. I have already
explained His pure, transcendental activities, which will vanquish the sinful
activities of all living entities. This narration of Lord Åñabhadeva's pastimes is
the reservoir of all auspicious things. Whoever attentively hears or speaks of
them, following in the footsteps of the äcäryas, will certainly attain unalloyed
devotional service at the lotus feet of Lord Väsudeva, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
PURPORT
The teachings of Lord Åñabhadeva are for the people of all
yugas-Satya-yuga, Tretä-yuga, Dväpara-yuga and especially Kali-yuga. These
instructions are so powerful that even in this age of Kali, one can attain
perfection simply by explaining the instructions, following in the footsteps of
the äcäryas or listening to the instructions with great attention. If one does so,
one can attain the platform of pure devotional service to Lord Väsudeva. The
pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotees are
recorded in Çrémad-Bhägavatam so that those who recite these pastimes and
listen to them will become purified. Nityaà bhägavata-sevayä [SB 1.2.18]. As a
matter of principle, devotees should read, speak and hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam
persistently, twenty-four hours daily if possible. That is the recommendation of
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Kértanéyaù sadä hariù [Cc. Ädi 17.31]. One should
either chant the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra or read Çrémad-Bhägavatam and
thereby try to understand the characteristics and instructions of the Supreme
Lord, who appeared as Lord Åñabhadeva, Lord Kapila and Lord Kåñëa. In this
way one can become fully aware of the transcendental nature of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, one who knows the
transcendental nature of the Lord's birth and activities attains liberation from
material bondage and returns to Godhead.
TEXT 17
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
277
YaSYaaMaev k-vYa AaTMaaNaMaivrTa& ivivDav*iJaNaSa&SaarPairTaaPaaePaTaPYaMaaNaMaNau‚
SavNa& òaPaYaNTaSTaYaEv ParYaa iNav*RTYaa ùPavGaRMaaTYaiNTak&- ParMaPauåzaQaRMaiPa
SvYaMaaSaaidTa& Naae Wvaid]YaNTae >aGavdqYaTveNaEv Pair SaMaaáSavaRQaaR" )) 17 ))
yasyäm eva kavaya ätmänam avirataà
vividha-våjina-saàsära-paritäpopatapyamänam anusavanaà snäpayantas
tayaiva parayä nirvåtyä hy apavargam ätyantikaà parama-puruñärtham api
svayam äsäditaà no evädriyante bhagavadéyatvenaiva parisamäpta-sarvärthäù.
SYNONYMS
yasyäm eva—in which (Kåñëa consciousness or the nectar of devotional
service); kavayaù—the advancement of learned scholars or philosophers in
spiritual life; ätmänam—the self; aviratam—constantly; vividha—various;
våjina—full of sins; saàsära—in material existence; paritäpa—from miserable
conditions; upatapyamänam—suffering; anusavanam—without stopping;
snäpayantaù—bathing; tayä—by that; eva—certainly; parayä—great;
nirvåtyä—with happiness; hi—certainly; apavargam—liberation;
ätyantikam—uninterrupted; parama-puruña-artham—the best of all human
achievements; api—although; svayam—itself; äsäditam—obtained; no—not;
eva—certainly; ädriyante—endeavor to achieve; bhagavadéyatvena
eva—because of a relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
parisamäpta-sarva-arthäù—those who have ended all kinds of material desires.
TRANSLATION
Devotees always bathe themselves in devotional service in order to be
relieved from the various tribulations of material existence. By doing this, the
devotees enjoy supreme bliss, and liberation personified comes to serve them.
Nonetheless, they do not accept that service, even if it is offered by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. For the devotees, liberation [mukti]
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
278
is very unimportant because, having attained the Lord's transcendental loving
service, they have attained everything desirable and have transcended all
material desires.
PURPORT
Devotional service unto the Lord is the highest attainment for anyone
desiring liberation from the tribulations of material existence. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (6.22), yaà labdhvä cäparaà läbhaà manyate nädhikaà tataù:
"Gaining this, one thinks there is no greater gain." When one attains the
service of the Lord, which is non-different from the Lord, one does not desire
anything material. Mukti means relief from material existence. Bilvamaìgala
Öhäkura says: muktiù mukulitäïjaliù sevate 'smän. For a devotee, mukti is not a
very great achievement. Mukti means being situated in one's constitutional
position. The constitutional position of every living being is that of the Lord's
servant; therefore when a living entity is engaged in the Lord's loving service,
he has already attained mukti. Consequently a devotee does not aspire for
mukti, even if it is offered by the Supreme Lord Himself.
TEXT 18
raJaNa( PaiTaGauRårl&/ >avTaa& YadUNaa&
dEv& iPa[Ya" ku-l/PaiTa" Kv c ik-ªrae v" )
ASTvevMa(r) >aGavaNa( >aJaTaa& Mauku-Ndae
Maui¢&- ddaiTa k-ihRicTSMa Na >ai¢-YaaeGaMa( )) 18 ))
räjan patir gurur alaà bhavatäà yadünäà
daivaà priyaù kula-patiù kva ca kiìkaro vaù
astv evam aìga bhagavän bhajatäà mukundo
muktià dadäti karhicit sma na bhakti-yogam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
279
SYNONYMS
räjan—O my dear King; patiù—maintainer; guruù—spiritual master;
alam—certainly; bhavatäm—of you; yadünäm—the Yadu dynasty;
daivam—the worshipable Deity; priyaù—very dear friend; kula-patiù—the
master of the dynasty; kva ca—sometimes even; kiìkaraù—servant; vaù—of
you (the Päëòavas); astu—to be sure; evam—thus; aìga—O King;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhajatäm—of those devotees
engaged in service; mukundaù—the Lord, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; muktim—liberation; dadäti—delivers; karhicit—at any time;
sma—indeed; na—not; bhakti-yogam—loving devotional service.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, the Supreme Person,
Mukunda, is actually the maintainer of all the members of the Päëòava and
Yadu dynasties. He is your spiritual master, worshipable Deity, friend, and the
director of your activities. To say nothing of this, He sometimes serves your
family as a messenger or servant. This means He worked just as ordinary
servants do. Those engaged in getting the Lord's favor attain liberation from the
Lord very easily, but He does not very easily give the opportunity to render
direct service unto Him.
PURPORT
While instructing Mahäräja Parékñit, Çukadeva Gosvämé thought it wise to
encourage the King because the King might be thinking of the glorious
position of various royal dynasties. Especially glorious is the dynasty of
Priyavrata, in which the Supreme Lord Åñabhadeva incarnated. Similarly, the
family of Uttänapäda Mahäräja, the father of Mahäräja Dhruva, is also
glorious due to King Påthu's taking birth in it. The dynasty of Mahäräja Raghu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
280
is glorified because Lord Rämacandra appeared in that family. As far as the
Yadu and Kuru dynasties are concerned, they existed simultaneously, but of
the two, the Yadu dynasty was more glorious due to the appearance of Lord
Kåñëa. Mahäräja Parékñit might have been thinking that the Kuru dynasty was
not as fortunate as the others because the Supreme Lord did not appear in that
family, neither as Kåñëa, Lord Rämacandra, Lord Åñabhadeva or Mahäräja
Påthu. Therefore Parékñit Mahäräja was encouraged by Çukadeva Gosvämé in
this particular verse.
The Kuru dynasty may be considered more glorious due to the presence of
devotees like the five Päëòavas, who rendered unalloyed devotional service.
Although Lord Kåñëa did not appear in the Kuru dynasty. He was so obligated
to the Päëòavas' devotional service that He acted as a maintainer of the family
and spiritual master of the Päëòavas. Although He took birth in the Yadu
dynasty, Lord Kåñëa was more affectionate to the Päëòavas. By His actions,
Lord Kåñëa proved that He was more inclined to the Kuru dynasty than the
Yadu dynasty. Indeed, Lord Kåñëa, indebted to the Päëòavas' devotional
service, sometimes acted as their messenger, and He guided them through
many dangerous situations. Therefore Mahäräja Parékñit should not have been
saddened because Lord Kåñëa did not appear in his family. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is always inclined toward His pure devotees, and by
His action it is clear that liberation is not very important for the devotees.
Lord Kåñëa easily gives one liberation, but He does not so easily give one the
facility to become a devotee. Muktià dadäti karhicit sma na bhakti-yogam.
Directly or indirectly, it is proved that bhakti-yoga is the basis for the supreme
relationship with the Supreme Lord. It is far superior to liberation. For a pure
devotee of the Lord, mukti is automatically attained.
TEXT 19
iNaTYaaNau>aUTaiNaJal/a>aiNav*taTa*Z<a"
é[eYaSYaTad]cNaYaa icrSauábuÖe" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
281
l/aek-SYa Ya" k-å<aYaa>aYaMaaTMal/aek-‚
Maa:YaaàMaae >aGavTae ‰z>aaYa TaSMaE )) 19 ))
nityänubhüta-nija-läbha-nivåtta-tåñëaù
çreyasy atad-racanayä cira-supta-buddheù
lokasya yaù karuëayäbhayam ätma-lokam
äkhyän namo bhagavate åñabhäya tasmai
SYNONYMS
nitya-anubhüta—due to being always conscious of His real identity;
nija-läbha-nivåtta-tåñëaù—who was complete in Himself and had no other
desire to fulfill; çreyasi—in life's genuine welfare; a-tat-racanayä—by
expanding activities in the material field, mistaking the body for the self;
cira—for a long time; supta—sleeping; buddheù—whose intelligence;
lokasya—of men; yaù—who (Lord Åñabhadeva); karuëayä—by His causeless
mercy; abhayam—fearlessness; ätma-lokam—the real identity of the self;
äkhyät—instructed; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; åñabhäya—unto Lord Åñabhadeva;
tasmai—unto Him.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Åñabhadeva, was fully aware of
His true identity; therefore He was self-sufficient, and He did not desire
external gratification. There was no need for Him to aspire for success, since
He was complete in Himself. Those who unnecessarily engage in bodily
conceptions and create an atmosphere of materialism are always ignorant of
their real self-interest. Out of His causeless mercy, Lord Åñabhadeva taught the
self's real identity and the goal of life. We therefore offer our respectful
obeisances unto the Lord, who appeared as Lord Åñabhadeva.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
282
PURPORT
This is the summary of this chapter, in which the activities of Lord
Åñabhadeva are described. Being the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Himself, Lord Åñabhadeva is complete in Himself. We living entities, as parts
and parcels of the Supreme Lord, should follow the instructions of Lord
Åñabhadeva and become self-sufficient. We should not create unnecessary
demands due to the bodily conception. When one is self-realized, he is
sufficiently satisfied due to being situated in his original spiritual position. As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (18.54): Brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä na çocati na
käìkñati. This is the goal of all living entities. Even though one may be situated
within this material world, he can become fully satisfied and devoid of
hankering and lamentation simply by following the instructions of the Lord as
set forth in Bhagavad-gétä or Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Satisfaction through
self-realization is called svarüpänanda. The conditioned soul, eternally sleeping
in darkness, does not understand his self-interest. He simply tries to become
happy by making material adjustments, but this is impossible. It is therefore
said in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum: [SB 7.5.31] due
to gross ignorance, the conditioned soul does not know that his real
self-interest is to take shelter at the lotus feet of Lord Viñëu. To try to become
happy by adjusting the material atmosphere is a useless endeavor. Indeed, it is
impossible. By His personal behavior and instructions, Lord Åñabhadeva
enlightened the conditioned soul and showed him how to become
self-sufficient in his spiritual identity.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Activities of Lord Åñabhadeva."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
283
7. The Activities of King Bharata
In this chapter, the activities of King Bharata Mahäräja, the emperor of the
whole world, are described. Bharata Mahäräja performed various ritualistic
ceremonies (Vedic yajïas) and satisfied the Supreme Lord by his different
modes of worship. In due course of time, he left home and resided in Hardwar
and passed his days in devotional activities. Being ordered by his father, Lord
Åñabhadeva, Bharata Mahäräja married Païcajané, the daughter of Viçvarüpa.
After this, he ruled the whole world peacefully. Formerly this planet was
known as Ajanäbha, and after the reign of Bharata Mahäräja it became known
as Bhärata-varña. Bharata Mahäräja begot five sons in the womb of Païcajané,
and he named the sons Sumati, Räñörabhåta, Sudarçana, Ävaraëa and
Dhümraketu. Bharata Mahäräja was very rigid in executing religious principles
and following in the footsteps of his father. He therefore ruled the citizens
very successfully. Because he performed various yajïas to satisfy the Supreme
Lord, he was personally very satisfied. Being of undisturbed mind, he increased
his devotional activities unto Lord Väsudeva. Bharata Mahäräja was
competent in understanding the principles of saintly persons like Närada, and
he followed in the footsteps of the sages. He also kept Lord Väsudeva
constantly within his heart. After finishing his kingly duties, he divided his
kingdom among his five sons. He then left home and went to the place of
Pulaha known as Pulahäçrama. There he ate forest vegetables and fruits, and
worshiped Lord Väsudeva with everything available. Thus he increased his
devotion toward Väsudeva, and he automatically began to realize further his
transcendental, blissful life. Due to his highly advanced spiritual position,
there were sometimes visible in his body the añöa-sättvika transformations,
such as ecstatic crying and bodily trembling, which are symptoms of love of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
284
Godhead. It is understood that Mahäräja Bharata worshiped the Supreme Lord
with the mantras mentioned in the Åg Veda, generally known as Gäyatré
mantra, which aim at the Supreme Näräyaëa situated within the sun.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
>arTaSTau Maha>aaGavTaae Yada >aGavTaaviNaTal/PairPaal/NaaYa SaiÄiNTaTaSTa‚
dNauXaaSaNaPar" PaÄJaNaq& ivìæPaduihTarMauPaYaeMae )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
bharatas tu mahä-bhägavato yadä bhagavatävani-tala-paripälanäya saïcintitas
tad-anuçäsana-paraù païcajanéà viçvarüpa-duhitaram upayeme.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; bharataù—Mahäräja Bharata;
tu—but; mahä-bhägavataù—a mahä-bhägavata, most exalted devotee of the
Lord; yadä—when; bhagavatä—by the order of his father, Lord Åñabhadeva;
avani-tala—the surface of the globe; paripälanäya—for ruling over;
saïcintitaù—made up his mind; tat-anuçäsana-paraù—engaged in governing
the globe; païcajaném—Païcajané; viçvarüpa-duhitaram—the daughter of
Viçvarüpa; upayeme—married.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued speaking to Mahäräja Parékñit: My dear King,
Bharata Mahäräja was a topmost devotee. Following the orders of his father,
who had already decided to install him on the throne, he began to rule the earth
accordingly. When Bharata Mahäräja ruled the entire globe, he followed the
orders of his father and married Païcajané, the daughter of Viçvarüpa.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
285
TEXT 2
TaSYaaMau h va AaTMaJaaNa( k-aTSNYaeRNaaNauæPaaNaaTMaNa" PaÄ JaNaYaaMaaSa >aUTaa‚
idirv >aUTaSaU+Maai<a SauMaiTa& raí\>a*Ta& SaudXaRNaMaavr<a& DaUMa]ke-TauiMaiTa )) 2 ))
tasyäm u ha vä ätmajän kärtsnyenänurüpän ätmanaù païca janayäm äsa
bhütädir iva bhüta-sükñmäëi sumatià räñörabhåtaà sudarçanam ävaraëaà
dhümraketum iti.
SYNONYMS
tasyäm—in her womb; u ha vä—indeed; ätma-jän—sons;
kärtsnyena—entirely; anurüpän—exactly like; ätmanaù—himself;
païca—five; janayäm äsa—begot; bhüta-ädiù iva—like the false ego;
bhüta-sükñmäëi—the five subtle objects of sense perception;
su-matim—Sumatim; räñöra-bhåtam—Räñörabhåta; su-darçanam—Sudarçana;
ävaraëam—Ävaraëa; dhümra-ketum—Dhümraketu; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Just as the false ego creates the subtle sense objects, Mahäräja Bharata
created five sons in the womb of Païcajané, his wife. These sons were named
Sumati, Räñörabhåta, Sudarçana, Ävaraëa and Dhümraketu.
TEXT 3
AJaNaa>a& NaaMaETaÜz| >aarTaiMaiTa YaTa Aar>Ya VYaPaidXaiNTa )) 3 ))
ajanäbhaà nämaitad varñaà bhäratam iti yata ärabhya vyapadiçanti.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
286
SYNONYMS
ajanäbham—Ajanäbha; näma—by the name; etat—this; varñam—island;
bhäratam—Bhärata; iti—thus; yataù—from whom; ärabhya—beginning;
vyapadiçanti—they celebrate.
TRANSLATION
Formerly this planet was known as Ajanäbha-varña, but since Mahäräja
Bharata's reign, it has become known as Bhärata-varña.
PURPORT
This planet was formerly known as Ajanäbha because of the reign of King
Näbhi. After Bharata Mahäräja ruled the planet, it became celebrated as
Bhärata-varña.
TEXT 4
Sa bhuivNMahqPaiTa" iPaTa*iPaTaaMahvduåvTSal/TaYaa Sve Sve k-MaRi<a vTaRMaaNaa"
Pa[Jaa" SvDaMaRMaNauvTaRMaaNa" PaYaRPaal/YaTa( )) 4 ))
sa bahuvin mahé-patiù pitå-pitämahavad uru-vatsalatayä sve sve karmaëi
vartamänäù prajäù sva-dharmam anuvartamänaù paryapälayat.
SYNONYMS
saù—that King (Mahäräja Bharata); bahu-vit—being very advanced in
knowledge; mahé-patiù—the ruler of the earth; pitå—father;
pitämaha—grandfather; vat—exactly like; uru-vatsalatayä—with the quality of
being very affectionate to the citizens; sve sve—in their own respective;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
287
karmaëi—duties; vartamänäù—remaining; prajäù—the citizens; sva-dharmam
anuvartamänaù—being perfectly situated in his own occupational duty;
paryapälayat—ruled.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Bharata was a very learned and experienced king on this earth. He
perfectly ruled the citizens, being himself engaged in his own respective duties.
Mahäräja Bharata was as affectionate to the citizens as his father and
grandfather had been. Keeping them engaged in their occupational duties, he
ruled the earth.
PURPORT
It is most important that the chief executive rule the citizens by keeping
them fully engaged in their respective occupational duties. Some of the
citizens were brähmaëas, some were kñatriyas, and some were vaiçyas and
çüdras. It is the duty of the government to see that the citizens act according to
these material divisions for their spiritual advancement. No one should remain
unemployed or unoccupied in any way. One must work as a brähmaëa,
kñatriya, vaiçya or çüdra on the material path. and on the spiritual path,
everyone should act as a brahmacäré, gåhastha, vänaprastha or sannyäsé.
Although formerly the government was a monarchy, all the kings were very
affectionate toward the citizens, and they strictly kept them engaged in their
respective duties. Therefore society was very smoothly conducted.
TEXT 5
wRJae c >aGavNTa& Yaj§-TauæPa& §-Taui>aåÀavcE" é[ÖYaaôTaaiGanhae}adXaRPaU<aRMaa‚
SacaTauMaaRSYaPaXauSaaeMaaNaa& Pa[k*-iTaivk*-iTai>arNauSavNa& caTauhaeR}aiviDaNaa )) 5 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
288
éje ca bhagavantaà yajïa-kratu-rüpaà kratubhir uccävacaiù
çraddhayähåtägnihotra-darça-pürëamäsa-cäturmäsya-paçu-somänäà
prakåti-vikåtibhir anusavanaà cäturhotra-vidhinä.
SYNONYMS
éje—worshiped; ca—also; bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
yajïa-kratu-rüpam—having the form of sacrifices without animals and
sacrifices with animals; kratubhiù—by such sacrifices; uccävacaiù—very great
and very small; çraddhayä—with faith; ähåta—being performed;
agni-hotra—of the agnihotra-yajïa; darça—of the darça-yajïa; pürëamäsa—of
the pürëamäsa-yajïa; cäturmäsya—of the cäturmäsya-yajïa;
paçu-somänäm—of the yajïa with animals and the yajïa with soma-rasa;
prakåti—by full performances; vikåtibhiù—and by partial performances;
anusavanam—almost always; cätuù-hotra-vidhinä—by the regulative principles
of sacrifice directed by four kinds of priests.
TRANSLATION
With great faith King Bharata performed various kinds of sacrifice. He
performed the sacrifices known as agni-hotra, darça, pürëamäsa, cäturmäsya,
paçu-yajïa [wherein a horse is sacrificed] and soma-yajïa [wherein a kind of
beverage is offered]. Sometimes these sacrifices were performed completely and
sometimes partially. In any case, in all the sacrifices the regulations of
cäturhotra were strictly followed. In this way Bharata Mahäräja worshiped the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Animals like hogs and cows were offered in sacrifice to test the proper
execution of the sacrifice. Otherwise, there was no purpose in killing the
animal. Actually the animal was offered in the sacrificial fire to get a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
289
rejuvenated life. Generally an old animal was sacrificed in the fire. and it
would come out again in a youthful body. Some of the rituals however, did not
require animal sacrifice. In the present age, animal sacrifices are forbidden. As
stated by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu:
açvamedhaà gavälambhaà
sannyäsaà pala-paitåkam
devareëa sutotpattià
kalau païca vivarjayet
"In this age of Kali, five acts are forbidden: the offering of a horse in sacrifice,
the offering of a cow in sacrifice, the acceptance of the order of sannyäsa, the
offering of oblations of flesh to the forefathers, and a man's begetting children
in his brother's wife." (Cc. Ädi 17.164) Such sacrifices are impossible in this age
due to the scarcity of expert brähmaëas or åtvijaù who are able to take the
responsibility. In the absence of these, the saìkértana-yajïa is recommended.
Yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair yajanti hi sumedhasaù (SB 11.5.32). After all,
sacrifices are executed to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Yajïärtha-karma: such activities should be carried out for the Supreme Lord's
pleasure. In this age of Kali, the Supreme Lord in His incarnation of Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu should be worshiped with His associates by performance
of saìkértana-yajïa, the congregational chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mantra.
This process is accepted by intelligent men. Yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair yajanti
hi sumedhasaù. The word sumedhasaù refers to intelligent men who possess
very good brain substance.
TEXT 6
SaMPa[crTSau NaaNaaYaaGaezu ivricTaa(r)i§-YaeZvPaUv| YataiT§-Yaaf-l&/ DaMaaR:Ya&
Pare b]øi<a YajPauåze SavRdevTaail/(r)aNaa& MaN}aa<aaMaQaRiNaYaaMak-TaYaa Saa+aaTk-‚
TaRir PardevTaaYaa& >aGaviTa vaSaudev Wv >aavYaMaaNa AaTMaNaEPau<YaMa*idTak-zaYaae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
290
hiv"ZvßYauRi>aGa*RùMaa<aezu Sa YaJaMaaNaae Yaj>aaJaae deva&STaaNa( PauåzavYa‚
veZv>YaDYaaYaTa( )) 6 ))
sampracaratsu nänä-yägeñu viracitäìga-kriyeñv apürvaà yat tat kriyä-phalaà
dharmäkhyaà pare brahmaëi yajïa-puruñe sarva-devatä-liìgänäà manträëäm
artha-niyäma-katayä säkñät-kartari para-devatäyäà bhagavati väsudeva eva
bhävayamäna ätma-naipuëya-mådita-kañäyo haviùñv adhvaryubhir
gåhyamäëeñu sa yajamäno yajïa-bhäjo deväàs tän puruñävayaveñv
abhyadhyäyat.
SYNONYMS
sampracaratsu—when beginning to perform; nänä-yägeñu—various kinds of
sacrifice; viracita-aìga-kriyeñu—in which the supplementary rites were
performed; apürvam—remote; yat—whatever; tat—that; kriyä-phalam—the
result of such sacrifice; dharma-äkhyam—by the name of religion; pare—unto
the transcendence; brahmaëi—the Supreme Lord; yajïa-puruñe—the enjoyer
of all sacrifices; sarva-devatä-liìgänäm—which manifest all the demigods;
manträëäm—of the Vedic hymns; artha-niyäma-katayä—due to being the
controller of the objects; säkñät-kartari—directly the performer;
para-devatäyäm—the origin of all demigods; bhagavati—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; väsudeve—unto Kåñëa; eva—certainly;
bhävayamänaù—always thinking; ätma-naipuëya-mådita-kañäyaù—freed from
all lust and anger by his expertise in such thinking; haviùñu—the ingredients
to be offered in the sacrifice; adhvaryubhiù—when the priests expert in the
sacrifices mentioned in the Atharva Veda; gåhyamäëeñu—taking;
saù—Mahäräja Bharata; yajamänaù—the sacrificer; yajïa-bhäjaù—the
recipients of the results of sacrifice; devän—all the demigods; tän—them;
puruña-avayaveñu—as different parts and limbs of the body of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Govinda; abhyadhyäyat—he thought.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
291
TRANSLATION
After performing the preliminaries of various sacrifices, Mahäräja Bharata
offered the results in the name of religion to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Väsudeva. In other words, he performed all the yajïas for the
satisfaction of Lord Väsudeva, Kåñëa. Mahäräja Bharata thought that since the
demigods were different parts of Väsudeva's body, He controls those who are
explained in the Vedic mantras. By thinking in this way, Mahäräja Bharata was
freed from all material contamination, such as attachment, lust and greed.
When the priests were about to offer the sacrificial ingredients into the fire,
Mahäräja Bharata expertly understood how the offering made to different
demigods was simply an offering to the different limbs of the Lord. For
instance, Indra is the arm of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Sürya
[the sun] is His eye. Thus Mahäräja Bharata considered that the oblations
offered to different demigods were actually offered unto the different limbs of
Lord Väsudeva.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead says that as long as one does not
develop the pure devotional service of çravaëaà kértanam [SB 7.5.23], hearing
and chanting, one must carry out his prescribed duties. Since Bharata
Mahäräja was a great devotee, one may ask why he performed so many
sacrifices that are actually meant for karmés. The fact is that he was simply
following the orders of Väsudeva. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä, sarva
dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja: "Abandon all varieties of
religion and just surrender unto Me." (Bg. 18.66) Whatever we do, we should
constantly remember Väsudeva. People are generally addicted to offering
obeisances to various demigods, but Bharata Mahäräja simply wanted to please
Lord Väsudeva. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä: bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram (Bg. 5.29). A yajïa may be carried out to satisfy a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
292
particular demigod, but when the yajïa is offered to the yajïa-puruña,
Näräyaëa, the demigods are satisfied. The purpose of performing different
yajïas is to satisfy the Supreme Lord. One may perform them in the name of
different demigods or directly. If we directly offer oblations to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the demigods are automatically satisfied. If we water
the root of a tree, the branches, twigs, fruits and flowers are automatically
satisfied. When one offers sacrifices to different demigods, one should
remember that the demigods are simply parts of the body of the Supreme. If we
worship the hand of a person, we intend to satisfy the person himself. If we
massage a person's legs, we do not really serve the legs but the person who
possesses the legs. All the demigods are different parts of the Lord, and if we
offer service to them, we actually serve the Lord Himself. Demigod worship is
mentioned in Brahma-saàhitä, but actually the çlokas advocate worship of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda. For instance, worship of the
goddess Durgä is mentioned this way in Brahma-saàhitä (5.44):
såñöi-sthiti-pralaya-sädhana-çaktir ekä
chäyeva yasya bhuvanäni vibharti durgä
icchänurüpam api yasya ca ceñöate sä
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
Following the orders of Çré Kåñëa, the goddess Durgä creates, maintains and
annihilates. Çré Kåñëa also confirms this statement in Bhagavad-gétä.
Mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram: "This material nature is working
under My direction, O son of Kunté, and it is producing all moving and
unmoving beings." (Bg. 9.10)
We should worship the demigods in that spirit. Because the goddess Durgä
satisfies Kåñëa, we should therefore offer respects to goddess Durgä. Because
Lord Çiva is nothing but Kåñëa's functional body, we should therefore offer
respects to Lord Çiva. Similarly, we should offer respects to Brahmä, Agni and
Sürya. There are many offerings to different demigods, and one should always
remember that these offerings are usually meant to satisfy the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
293
Personality of Godhead. Bharata Mahäräja did not aspire to receive some
benediction from demigods. His aim was to please the Supreme Lord. In the
Mahäbhärata, among the thousand names of Viñëu, it is said yajïa-bhug
yajïa-kåd yajïaù. The enjoyer of yajïa, the performer of yajïa and yajïa itself
are the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord is the performer of everything, but
out of ignorance the living entity thinks that he is the actor. As long as we
think we are the actors, we bring about karma-bandha (bondage to activity). If
we act for yajïa, for Kåñëa. there is no karma-bandha. Yajïärthät karmaëo
'nyatra loko 'yaà karma-bandhanaù: [Bg. 3.9]) "Work done as a sacrifice for
Viñëu has to be performed. otherwise work binds one to this material world."
(Bg. 3.9)
Following the instructions of Bharata Mahäräja, we should act not for our
personal satisfaction but for the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. In Bhagavad-gétä (17.28) it is also stated:
açraddhayä hutaà dattaà
tapas taptaà kåtaà ca yat
asad ity ucyate pärtha
na ca tat pretya no iha
Sacrifices, austerities and charities performed without faith in the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are nonpermanent. Regardless of whatever rituals are
performed, they are called asat, nonpermanent. They are therefore useless
both in this life and the next.
Kings like Mahäräja Ambaréña and many other räjarñis who were pure
devotees of the Lord simply passed their time in the service of the Supreme
Lord. When a pure devotee executes some service through the agency of
another person, he should not be criticized, for his activities are meant for the
satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. A devotee may have a priest perform some
karma-käëòa, and the priest may not be a pure Vaiñëava, but because the
devotee wants to please the Supreme Lord, he should not be criticized. The
word apürva is very significant. The resultant actions of karma are called
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
294
apürva. When we act piously or impiously, immediate results do not ensue. We
therefore wait for the results, which are called apürva. The results are manifest
in the future. Even the smärtas accept this apürva. Pure devotees simply act for
the pleasure of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore the results of
their activities are spiritual, or permanent. They are not like those of the
karmés, which are nonpermanent. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (4.23):
gata-saìgasya muktasya
jïänävasthita-cetasaù
yajïäyäcarataù karma
samagraà praviléyate
"The work of a man who is unattached to the modes of material nature and
who is fully situated in transcendental knowledge merges entirely into
transcendence."
A devotee is always free from material contamination. He is fully situated
in knowledge, and therefore his sacrifices are intended for the satisfaction of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 7
Wv& k-MaRivXauÖya ivXauÖSatvSYaaNTaôRdYaak-aXaXarqre b]øi<a >aGaviTa vaSaudeve
MahaPauåzæPaaePal/+a<ae é[qvTSak-aESTau>avNaMaal/airdrGadaidi>aåPal/i+aTae iNaJaPau‚
åzôiçi%TaeNaaTMaiNa PauåzæPae<a ivraecMaaNa oÀESTara& >ai¢-rNauidNaMaeDa‚
MaaNarYaaJaaYaTa )) 7 ))
evaà karma-viçuddhyä viçuddha-sattvasyäntar-hådayäkäça-çarére brahmaëi
bhagavati väsudeve mahä-puruña-rüpopalakñaëe
çrévatsa-kaustubha-vana-mäläri-dara-gadädibhir upalakñite
nija-puruña-hål-likhitenätmani puruña-rüpeëa virocamäna uccaistaräà bhaktir
anudinam edhamäna-rayäjäyata.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
295
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; karma-viçuddhyä—by offering everything for the service of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and not desiring any results of his pious
activities; viçuddha-sattvasya—of Bharata Mahäräja, whose existence was
completely purified; antaù-hådaya-äkäça-çarére—the Supersoul within the
heart, as meditated on by yogés; brahmaëi—into impersonal Brahman, which is
worshiped by impersonalist jïänés; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; väsudeve—the son of Vasudeva, Lord Kåñëa; mahä-puruña—of the
Supreme Person; rüpa—of the form; upalakñaëe—having the symptoms;
çrévatsa—the mark on the chest of the Lord; kaustubha—the Kaustubha gem
used by the Lord; vana-mälä—flower garland; ari-dara—by the disc and
conchshell; gadä-ädibhiù—by the club and other symbols; upalakñite—being
recognized; nija-puruña-håt-likhitena—which is situated in the heart of His
own devotee like an engraved picture; ätmani—in his own mind;
puruña-rüpeëa—by His personal form; virocamäne—shining; uccaistaräm—on
a very high level; bhaktiù—devotional service; anudinam—day after day;
edhamäna—increasing; rayä—possessing force; ajäyata—appeared.
TRANSLATION
In this way, being purified by ritualistic sacrifices, the heart of Mahäräja
Bharata was completely uncontaminated. His devotional service unto Väsudeva,
Lord Kåñëa, increased day after day. Lord Kåñëa, the son of Vasudeva, is the
original Personality of Godhead manifest as the Supersoul [Paramätmä] as well
as the impersonal Brahman. Yogés meditate upon the localized Paramätmä
situated in the heart, jïänés worship the impersonal Brahman as the Supreme
Absolute Truth, and devotees worship Väsudeva, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, whose transcendental body is described in the çästras. His body is
decorated with the Çrévatsa, the Kaustubha jewel and a flower garland, and His
hands hold a conchshell, disc, club and lotus flower. Devotees like Närada
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
296
always think of Him within their hearts.
PURPORT
Lord Väsudeva, or Çré Kåñëa, the son of Vasudeva, is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He is manifest within the hearts of yogés in His
Paramätmä feature, and He is worshiped as impersonal Brahman by jïänés. The
Paramätmä feature is described in the çästras as having four hands, holding
disc, conchshell, lotus flower and club. As confirmed in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.2.8):
kecit sva-dehäntar-hådayävakäçe
prädeça-mätraà puruñaà vasantam
catur-bhujaà kaïja-rathäìga-çaìkhagadä-
dharaà dhäraëayä smaranti
Paramätmä is situated in the hearts of all living beings. He has four hands,
which hold four symbolic weapons. All devotees who think of the Paramätmä
within the heart worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the temple
Deity. They also understand the impersonal features of the Lord and His
bodily rays, the Brahman effulgence.
TEXT 8
Wv& vzaRYauTaSahóPaYaRNTaaviSaTak-MaRiNavaR<aavSarae_iDa>auJYaMaaNa& SvTaNaYae>Yaae
irKQa& iPaTa*PaETaaMah& YaQaadaYa& iv>aJYa SvYa& Sak-l/SaMPaiàke-TaaTa(
SviNake-TaaTPaul/haé[Ma& Pa[vv]aJa )) 8 ))
evaà varñäyuta-sahasra-paryantävasita-karma-nirväëävasaro
'dhibhujyamänaà sva-tanayebhyo rikthaà pitå-paitämahaà yathä-däyaà
vibhajya svayaà sakala-sampan-niketät sva-niketät pulahäçramaà pravavräja.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
297
SYNONYMS
evam—thus being always engaged; varña-ayuta-sahasra—one thousand times
ten thousand years; paryanta—until then;
avasita-karma-nirväëa-avasaraù—Mahäräja Bharata who ascertained the
moment of the end of his royal opulence; adhibhujyamänam—being enjoyed in
this way for that duration; sva-tanayebhyaù—unto his own sons; riktham—the
wealth; pitå-paitämaham—which he received from his father and forefathers;
yathä-däyam—according to the däya-bhäk laws of Manu; vibhajya—dividing;
svayam—personally; sakala-sampat—of all kinds of opulence; niketät—the
abode; sva-niketät—from his paternal home; pulaha-äçramam pravavräja—he
went to the äçrama of Pulaha in Hardwar (where the çälagräma-çiläs are
obtainable).
TRANSLATION
Destiny fixed the time for Mahäräja Bharata's enjoyment of material
opulence at one thousand times ten thousand years. When that period was
finished, he retired from family life and divided the wealth he had received
from his forefathers among his sons. He left his paternal home, the reservoir of
all opulence, and started for Pulahäçrama, which is situated in Hardwar. The
çälagräma-çiläs are obtainable there.
PURPORT
According to the law of däya-bhäk, when one inherits an estate, he must
hand it over to the next generation. Bharata Mahäräja did this properly. First
he enjoyed his paternal property for one thousand times ten thousand years.
At the time of his retirement, he divided this property among his sons and left
for Pulaha-äçrama.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
298
TEXT 9
Ya}a h vav >aGavaNa( hirrÛaiPa Ta}aTYaaNaa& iNaJaJaNaaNaa& vaTSaLYaeNa SaiàDaa‚
PYaTa wC^aæPae<a )) 9 ))
yatra ha väva bhagavän harir adyäpi tatratyänäà nija-janänäà vätsalyena
sannidhäpyata icchä-rüpeëa.
SYNONYMS
yatra—where; ha väva—certainly; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; hariù—the Lord; adya-api—even today; tatratyänäm-residing in
that place; nija-janänäm—for His own devotees; vätsalyena—by His
transcendental affection; sannidhäpyate—becomes visible;
icchä-rüpeëa—according to the desire of the devotee.
TRANSLATION
At Pulaha-äçrama, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, out of His
transcendental affection for His devotee, becomes visible to His devotee,
satisfying His devotee's desires.
PURPORT
The Lord always exists in different transcendental forms. As stated in
Brahma-saàhitä (5.39):
rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena tiñöhan
nänävatäram akarod bhuvaneñu kintu
kåñëaù svayaà samabhavat paramaù pumän yo
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
The Lord is situated as Himself, Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
299
Godhead, and He is accompanied by His expansions like Lord Räma, Baladeva,
Saìkarñaëa, Näräyaëa, Mahä-Viñëu and so forth. The devotees worship all
these forms according to their liking, and the Lord, out of His affection,
presents Himself as arcä-vigraha. He sometimes presents Himself personally
before the devotee out of reciprocation or affection. A devotee is always fully
surrendered to the loving service of the Lord, and the Lord is visible to the
devotee according to the devotee's desires. He may be present in the form of
Lord Räma, Lord Kåñëa, Lord Nåsiàhadeva and so on. Such is the exchange of
love between the Lord and His devotees.
TEXT 10
Ya}aaé[MaPadaNYau>aYaTaaeNaai>ai>ad*RzÀ§E-ê§-Nadq NaaMa SairTPa[vra SavRTa" Paiv}aq‚
k-raeiTa )) 10 ))
yaträçrama-padäny ubhayato näbhibhir dåñac-cakraiç cakra-nadé näma
sarit-pravarä sarvataù pavitré-karoti.
SYNONYMS
yatra—where; äçrama-padäni—all hermitages; ubhayataù—both on top and
below; näbhibhiù—like the symbolic mark of a navel; dåñat—visible;
cakraiù—with the circles; cakra-nadé—the Cakra-nadé River (generally known
as the Gaëòaké); näma—of the name; sarit-pravarä—the most important river
of all; sarvataù—everywhere; pavitré-karoti—sanctifies.
TRANSLATION
In Pulaha-äçrama is the Gaëòaké River, which is the best of all rivers. The
çälagräma-çilä, the marble pebbles, purify all those places. On each and every
marble pebble, up and down, circles like navels are visible.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
300
PURPORT
Çälagräma-çilä refers to pebbles that appear like stones with circle; marked
up and down. These are available in the river known as Gaëòaké-nadé.
Wherever the waters of this river flow, the place becomes immediately
sanctified.
TEXT 11
TaiSMaNa( vav ik-l/ Sa Wk-l/" Paul/haé[MaaePavNae ivivDaku-SauMaik-Sal/Ya‚
Taul/iSak-aMbui>a" k-NdMaUl/f-l/aePaharEê SaMaqhMaaNaae >aGavTa AaraDaNa&
iviv¢- oParTaivzYaai>al/az oPa>a*TaaePaXaMa" Para& iNav*RiTaMavaPa )) 11 ))
tasmin väva kila sa ekalaù pulahäçramopavane
vividha-kusuma-kisalaya-tulasikämbubhiù kanda-müla-phalopahäraiç ca
saméhamäno bhagavata ärädhanaà vivikta uparata-viñayäbhiläña
upabhåtopaçamaù paräà nirvåtim aväpa.
SYNONYMS
tasmin—in that äçrama; väva kila—indeed; saù—Bharata Mahäräja;
ekalaù—alone, only; pulaha-äçrama-upavane—in the gardens situated i n
Pulaha-äçrama; vividha-kusuma-kisalaya-tulasikä-ambubhiù—with varieties of
flowers, twigs and tulasé leaves, as well as with water;
kanda-müla-phala-upahäraiù—by offerings of roots, bulbs and fruits; ca—and;
saméhamänaù—performing; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; ärädhanam—worshiping; viviktaù—purified; uparata—being freed
from; viñaya-abhiläñaù—desire for material sense enjoyment;
upabhåta—increased; upaçamaù—tranquillity; paräm—transcendental;
nirvåtim—satisfaction; aväpa—he obtained.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
301
TRANSLATION
In the gardens of Pulaha-äçrama, Mahäräja Bharata lived alone and collected
a variety of flowers, twigs and tulasé leaves. He also collected the water of the
Gaëòaké River, as well as various roots, fruits and bulbs. With these he offered
food to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, and, worshiping Him,
he remained satisfied. In this way his heart was completely uncontaminated,
and he did not have the least desire for material enjoyment. All material desires
vanished. In this steady position, he felt full satisfaction and was situated in
devotional service.
PURPORT
Everyone is searching after peace of mind. This is obtainable only when one
is completely freed from the desire for material sense gratification and is
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä:
patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà yo me bhaktyä prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. Worship of
the Lord is not at all expensive. One can offer the Lord a leaf, a flower, a little
fruit and some water. The Supreme Lord accepts these offerings when they are
offered with love and devotion. In this way, one can become freed from
material desires. As long as one maintains material desires, he cannot be
happy. As soon as one engages in the devotional service of the Lord, his mind
is purified of all material desires. Then one becomes fully satisfied.
sa vai puàsäà paro dharmo
yato bhaktir adhokñaje
ahaituky apratihatä
yayätmä suprasédati
väsudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogaù prayojitaù
janayaty äçu vairägyaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
302
jïänaà ca yad ahaitukam
"The supreme occupation [dharma] for all humanity is that by which men can
attain to loving devotional service unto the transcendent Lord. Such
devotional service must be unmotivated and uninterrupted in order to
completely satisfy the self. By rendering devotional service unto the
Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, one immediately acquires causeless
knowledge and detachment from the world." (SB 1.2.6-7)
These are the instructions given in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the supreme Vedic
literature. One may not be able to go to Pulaha-äçrama, but wherever one is
one can happily render devotional service to the Lord by adopting the
processes mentioned above.
TEXT 12
TaYaeTQaMaivrTaPauåzPaircYaRYaa >aGaviTa Pa[vDaRMaaNaaNauraGa>ard]uTaôdYaXaEiQaLYa"
Pa[hzRveGaeNaaTMaNYauiÙÛMaaNaraeMaPaul/k-ku-l/k- AaETk-<#yPa[v*taPa[<aYabaZPaiNaåÖa‚
vl/aek-NaYaNa Wv& iNaJarMa<aaå<acr<aarivNdaNauDYaaNaPairicTa>ai¢-YaaeGaeNa
PairPlu„„TaP arMaaúadGaM>aqrôdYahdavGaa!iDaz<aSTaaMaiPa i§-YaMaa<aa& >aGavTSa‚
PaYaa| Na SaSMaar )) 12 ))
tayettham avirata-puruña-paricaryayä bhagavati
pravardhamänä-nuräga-bhara-druta-hådaya-çaithilyaù praharña-vegenätmany
udbhidyamäna-roma-pulaka-kulaka
autkaëöhya-pravåtta-praëaya-bäñpa-niruddhävaloka-nayana evaà
nija-ramaëäruëa-caraëäravindänudhyäna-paricita-bhakti-yogena
paripluta-paramähläda-gambhéra-hådaya-hradävagäòha-dhiñaëas täm api
kriyamäëäà bhagavat-saparyäà na sasmära.
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
303
tayä—by that; ittham—in this manner; avirata—constant; puruña—of the
Supreme Lord; paricaryayä—by service; bhagavati—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; pravardhamäna—constantly increasing; anuräga—of
attachment; bhara—by the load; druta—melted; hådaya—heart;
çaithilyaù—laxity; praharña-vegena—by the force of transcendental ecstasy;
ätmani—in his body; udbhidyamäna-roma-pulaka-kulakaù—standing of the
hair on end; autkaëöhya—because of intense longing; pravåtta—produced;
praëaya-bäñpa-niruddha-avaloka-nayanaù—awakening of tears of love in the
eyes, obstructing the vision; evam—thus;
nija-ramaëa-aruëa-caraëa-aravinda—on the Lord's reddish lotus feet;
anudhyäna—by meditating; paricita—i n creased; bhakti-yogena—by dint of
devotional service; paripluta—spreading everywhere; parama—highest;
ähläda—of spiritual bliss; gambhéra—very deep; hådaya-hrada—in the heart,
which is compared to a lake; avagäòha—immersed; dhiñaëaù—whose
intelligence; täm—that; api—although; kriyamäëäm—executing;
bhagavat—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; saparyäm—the worship;
na—not; sasmära—remembered.
TRANSLATION
That most exalted devotee, Mahäräja Bharata, in this way engaged
constantly in the devotional service of the Lord. Naturally his love for
Väsudeva, Kåñëa, increased more and more and melted his heart. Consequently
he gradually lost all attachment for regulative duties. The hairs of his body
stood on end, and all the ecstatic bodily symptoms were manifest. Tears flowed
from his eyes, so much so that he could not see anything. Thus he constantly
meditated on the reddish lotus feet of the Lord. At that time, his heart, which
was like a lake, was filled with the water of ecstatic love. When his mind was
immersed in that lake, he even forgot the regulative service to the Lord.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
304
When one is actually advanced in ecstatic love for Kåñëa, eight
transcendental, blissful symptoms are manifest in the body. Those are the
symptoms of perfection arising from loving service to the Supreme Personality,
of Godhead. Since Mahäräja Bharata was constantly, engaged in devotional
service, all the symptoms of ecstatic love were manifest in his body.
TEXT 13
wTQa& Da*Ta>aGavd(v[Ta We<aeYaaiJaNavaSaSaaNauSavNaai>azek-ad]Rk-iPaXaku-i$=l/Ja‚
$=ak-l/aPaeNa c ivraecMaaNa" SaUYaRcaR >aGavNTa& ihr<MaYa& PauåzMauiÂhaNae
SaUYaRMa<@le/_>YauPaiTaïàeTadu haevac==ƒƒ==)) 13 ))
itthaà dhåta-bhagavad-vrata
aiëeyäjina-väsasänusavanäbhiñekärdra-kapiça-kuöila-jaöä-kaläpena ca
virocamänaù süryarcä bhagavantaà hiraëmayaà puruñam ujjihäne
sürya-maëòale 'bhyupatiñöhann etad u hoväca.
SYNONYMS
ittham—in this way; dhåta-bhagavat-vrataù—having accepted the vow to serve
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aiëeya-ajina-väsasa—with a dress of a
deerskin; anusavana—three times in a day; abhiñeka—by a bath; ardra—wet;
kapiça—tawny; kuöila-jaöä—of curling and matted hair; kaläpena—by masses;
ca—and; virocamänaù—being very beautifully decorated; süryarcä—by the
Vedic hymns worshiping the expansion of Näräyaëa within the sun;
bhagavantam—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hiraëmayam—the
Lord, whose bodily hue is just like gold; puruñam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; ujjihäne—when rising; sürya-maëòale—the sun globe;
abhyupatiñöhan—worshiping; etat—this; u ha—certainly; uväca—he recited.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
305
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Bharata appeared very beautiful. He had a wealth of curly hair on
his head, which was wet from bathing three times daily. He dressed in a
deerskin. He worshiped Lord Näräyaëa, whose body was composed of golden
effulgence and who resided within the sun. Mahäräja Bharata worshiped Lord
Näräyaëa by chanting the hymns given in the Åg Veda, and he recited the
following verse as the sun rose.
PURPORT
The predominating Deity within the sun is Hiraëmaya. Lord Näräyaëa. He
is worshiped by the Gäyatré mantra: oà bhür bhuvaù svaù tat savitur vareëyaà
bhargo devasya dhémahi. He is also worshiped by other hymns mentioned in the
Åg Veda, for instance: dhyeyaù sadä savitå-maëòala-madhya-varté. Within the
sun, Lord Näräyaëa is situated, and He has a golden hue.
TEXT 14
ParaerJa" SaivTauJaaRTavedae
devSYa >aGaaeR MaNaSaed& JaJaaNa )
SaureTaSaad" PauNaraivXYa cíe
h&Sa& Ga*Da]a<a& Na*zid]i(r)raiMaMa" )) 14 ))
paro-rajaù savitur jäta-vedo
devasya bhargo manasedaà jajäna
suretasädaù punar äviçya cañöe
haàsaà gådhräëaà nåñad-riìgiräm imaù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
306
paraù-rajaù—beyond the mode of passion (situated in the pure mode of
goodness); savituù—of the one who illuminates the whole universe;
jäta-vedaù—from which all the devotee's desires are fulfilled; devasya—of the
Lord; bhargaù—the self-effulgence; manasä—simply by contemplating;
idam—this universe; jajäna—created; su-retasä—by spiritual potency;
adaù—this created world; punaù—again; äviçya—entering; cañöe—sees or
maintains; haàsam—the living entity; gådhräëam—desiring for material
enjoyment; nåñat—to the intelligence; riìgiräm—to one who gives motion;
imaù—let me offer my obeisances.
TRANSLATION
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated in pure goodness. He
illuminates the entire universe and bestows all benedictions upon His devotees.
The Lord has created this universe from His own spiritual potency. According
to His desire, the Lord entered this universe as the Supersoul, and by virtue of
His different potencies, He is maintaining all living entities desiring material
enjoyment. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who is the
giver of intelligence."
PURPORT
The predominating Deity of the sun is another expansion of Näräyaëa, who
is illuminating the entire universe. The Lord enters the hearts of all living
entities as the Supersoul, and He gives them intelligence and fulfills their
material desires. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä. Sarvasya cähaà hådi
sanniviñöaù. "I am sitting in everyone's heart." (Bg. 15.15)
As the Supersoul, the Lord enters the hearts of all living entities. As stated
in Brahma-saàhitä (5.35), aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham: "He
enters the universe and the atom as well." In the Åg Veda, the predominating
Deity of the sun is worshiped by, this mantra: dhyeyaù sadä
savitå-maëòala-madhya-varti näräyaëaù sarasijäsana-sanniviñöaù. Näräyaëa sits
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
307
on His lotus flower within the sun. By reciting this mantra, every living entity
should take shelter of Näräyaëa just as the sun rises. According to modern
scientists, the material world rests on the sun's effulgence. Due to the
sunshine, all planets are rotating and vegetables are growing. We also have
information that the moonshine helps vegetables and herbs grow. Actually
Näräyaëa within the sun is maintaining the entire universe; therefore
Näräyaëa should be worshiped by the Gäyatré mantra or the Åg mantra.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Seventh Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The activities of King Bharata."
8. A Description of the Character of Bharata Mahäräja
Although Bharata Mahäräja was very elevated, he fell down due to his
attachment to a young deer. One day after Bharata Mahäräja had taken his
bath as usual in the River Gaëòaké and was chanting his mantra, he saw a
pregnant deer come to the river to drink water. Suddenly there could be heard
the thundering roar of a lion, and the deer was so frightened that it
immediately gave birth to its calf. It then crossed the river, but died
immediately thereafter. Mahäräja Bharata took compassion upon the
motherless calf, rescued it from the water, took it to his äçrama and cared for it
affectionately. He gradually became attached to this young deer and always
thought of it affectionately. As it grew up, it became Mahäräja Bharata's
constant companion, and he always took care of it. Gradually he became so
absorbed in thinking of this deer that his mind became agitated. As he became
more attached to the deer, his devotional service slackened. Although he was
able to give up his opulent kingdom, he became attached to the deer. Thus he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
308
fell down from his mystic yoga practice. Once when the deer was absent,
Mahäräja Bharata was so disturbed that he began to search for it. While
searching and lamenting the deer's absence, Mahäräja Bharata fell down and
died. Because his mind was fully absorbed thinking of the deer, he naturally
took his next birth from the womb of a deer. However, because he was
considerably advanced spiritually, he did not forget his past activities, even
though he was in the body of a deer. He could understand how he had fallen
down from his exalted position, and remembering this, he left his mother deer
and again went to Pulaha-äçrama. He finally ended his fruitive activities in the
form of a deer, and when he died he was released from the deer's body.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
Wk-da Tau MahaNaÛa& k*-Taai>azek-NaEYaiMak-avXYak-ae b]øa+arMai>aGa*<aaNaae
MauhUTaR}aYaMaudk-aNTa oPaivveXa )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ekadä tu mahä-nadyäà kåtäbhiñeka-naiyamikävaçyako brahmäkñaram
abhigåëäno muhürta-trayam udakänta upaviveça.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; ekadä—once upon a time;
tu—but; mahä-nadyäm—in the great river known as Gaëòaké;
kåta-abhiñeka-naiyamika-avaçyakaù—having taken a bath after finishing the
daily external duties such as passing stool and urine and brushing the teeth;
brahma-akñaram—the praëava-mantra (oà); abhigåëänaù—chanting;
muhürta-trayam—for three minutes; udaka-ante—on the bank of the river;
upaviveça—he sat down.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
309
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, one day, after finishing his
morning duties—evacuating, urinating and bathing—Mahäräja Bharata sat
down on the bank of the River Gaëòaké for a few minutes and began chanting
his mantra, beginning with oàkära.
TEXT 2
Ta}a Tada raJaNa( hir<aq iPaPaaSaYaa Jal/aXaYaa>YaaXaMaekE-vaePaJaGaaMa )) 2 ))
tatra tadä räjan hariëé pipäsayä jaläçayäbhyäçam ekaivopajagäma.
SYNONYMS
tatra—on the bank of the river; tadä—at the time; räjan—O King; hariëé—a
doe; pipäsayä—because of thirst; jaläçaya-abhyäçam—near the river;
eka—one; eva—certainly; upajagäma—arrived.
TRANSLATION
O King, while Bharata Mahäräja was sitting on the bank of that river, a doe,
being very thirsty, came there to drink.
TEXT 3
TaYaa PaePaqYaMaaNa odke- TaavdevaivdUre<a NadTaae Ma*GaPaTaeåàadae l/aek->aYaªr
odPaTaTa( )) 3 ))
tayä pepéyamäna udake tävad evävidüreëa nadato måga-pater unnädo
loka-bhayaìkara udapatat.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
310
SYNONYMS
tayä—by the doe; pepéyamäne—being drunk with great satisfaction;
udake—the water; tävat eva—exactly at that time; avidüreëa—very near;
nadataù—roaring; måga-pateù—of one lion; unnädaù—the tumultuous sound;
loka-bhayam-kara—very fearful to all living entities; udapatat—arose.
TRANSLATION
While the doe was drinking with great satisfaction, a lion, which was very
close, roared very loudly. This was frightful to every living entity, and it was
heard by the doe.
TEXT 4
TaMauPaé[uTYa Saa Ma*GavDaU" Pa[k*-iTa iv(c)-va cik-TaiNarq+a<aa SauTaraMaiPa hir‚
>aYaai>aiNaveXaVYaGa]ôdYaa Paairâvd*iírGaTaTa*za >aYaaTa( SahSaEvaeÀ§-aMa )) 4 ))
tam upaçrutya sä måga-vadhüù prakåti-viklavä cakita-nirékñaëä sutaräm api
hari-bhayäbhiniveça-vyagra-hådayä päriplava-dåñöir agata-tåñä bhayät
sahasaivoccakräma.
SYNONYMS
tam upaçrutya—hearing that tumultuous sound; sä—that; måga-vadhüù—wife
of a deer; prakåti-viklavä—by nature always afraid of being killed by others;
cakita-nirékñaëä—having wandering eyes; sutaräm api—almost immediately;
hari—of the lion; bhaya—of fear; abhiniveça—by the entrance;
vyagra-hådayä—whose mind was agitated; päriplava-dåñöiù—whose eyes were
moving to and fro; agata-tåñä—without fully satisfying the thirst; bhayät—out
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
311
of fear; sahasä—suddenly; eva—certainly; uccakräma—crossed the river.
TRANSLATION
By nature the doe was always afraid of being killed by others, and it was
always looking about suspiciously. When it heard the lion's tumultuous roar, it
became very agitated. Looking here and there with disturbed eyes, the doe,
although it had not fully satisfied itself by drinking water, suddenly leaped
across the river.
TEXT 5
TaSYaa oTPaTaNTYaa ANTavRTNYaa oå>aYaavGail/Taae YaaeiNaiNaGaRTaae Ga>aR"
óaeTaiSa iNaPaPaaTa )) 5 ))
tasyä utpatantyä antarvatnyä uru-bhayävagalito yoni-nirgato garbhaù srotasi
nipapäta.
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—of it; utpatantyäù—forcefully jumping up; antarvatnyäù—having a full
womb; uru-bhaya—due to great fear; avagalitaù—having slipped out;
yoni-nirgataù—coming out of the womb; garbhaù—the offspring; srotasi—in
the flowing water; nipapäta—fell down.
TRANSLATION
The doe was pregnant, and when it jumped out of fear, the baby deer fell
from its womb into the flowing waters of the river.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
312
There is every chance of a woman's having a miscarriage if she experiences
some ecstatic emotion or is frightened. Pregnant women should therefore be
spared all these external influences.
TEXT 6
TaTPa[SavaeTSaPaR<a>aYa%edaTaura SvGa<aeNa ivYauJYaMaaNaa k-SYaaiÄÕYaa| k*-Z<a‚
SaarSaTaq iNaPaPaaTaaQa c MaMaar )) 6 ))
tat-prasavotsarpaëa-bhaya-khedäturä sva-gaëena viyujyamänä kasyäïcid
daryäà kåñëa-särasaté nipapätätha ca mamära.
SYNONYMS
tat-prasava—from untimely discharge of that (baby deer); utsarpaëa—from
jumping across the river; bhaya—and from fear; kheda—by exhaustion;
äturä—afflicted; sva-gaëena—from the flock of deer; viyujyamänä—being
separated; kasyäïcit—in some; daryäm—cave of a mountain;
kåñëa-särasaté—the black doe; nipapäta—fell down; atha—therefore; ca—and;
mamära—died.
TRANSLATION
Being separated from its flock and distressed by its miscarriage, the black
doe, having crossed the river, was very much distressed. Indeed, it fell down in
a cave and died immediately.
TEXT 7
Ta& Tve<aku-<ak&- k*-Pa<a& óaeTaSaaNaUùMaaNaMai>avq+YaaPaivÖ& bNDauirva‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
313
Nauk-MPaYaa raJaizR>aRrTa AadaYa Ma*TaMaaTariMaTYaaé[MaPadMaNaYaTa( )) 7 ))
taà tv eëa-kuëakaà kåpaëaà srotasänühyamänam abhivékñyäpaviddhaà
bandhur ivänukampayä räjarñir bharata ädäya måta-mätaram ity
äçrama-padam anayat.
SYNONYMS
tam—that; tu—but; eëa-kuëakam—the deer calf; kåpaëam—helpless;
srotasä—by the waves; anühyamänam—floating; abhivékñya—seeing;
apaviddham—removed from its own kind; bandhuù iva—just like a friend;
anukampayä—with compassion; räja-åñiù bharataù—the great, saintly King
Bharata; ädäya—taking; måta-mätaram—who lost its mother; iti—thus
thinking; äçrama-padam—to the äçrama; anayat—brought.
TRANSLATION
The great King Bharata, while sitting on the bank of the river, saw the small
deer, bereft of its mother, floating down the river. Seeing this, he felt great
compassion. Like a sincere friend, he lifted the infant deer from the waves, and,
knowing it to be motherless, brought it to his äçrama.
PURPORT
The laws of nature work in subtle ways unknown to us. Mahäräja Bharata
was a great king very advanced in devotional service. He had almost reached
the point of loving service to the Supreme Lord, but even from that platform
he could fall down onto the material platform. In Bhagavad-gétä we are
therefore warned:
yaà hi na vyathayanty ete
puruñaà puruñarñabha
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
314
sama-duùkha-sukhaà dhéraà
so 'måtatväya kalpate
"O best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happiness and
distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for liberation." (Bg. 2.15)
Spiritual salvation and liberation from material bondage must be worked
out with great caution, otherwise a little discrepancy will cause one to fall
down again into material existence. By studying the activities of Mahäräja
Bharata, we can learn the art of becoming completely freed from all material
attachment. As it will be revealed in later verses, Bharata Mahäräja had to
accept the body of a deer due to being overly compassionate for this infant
deer. We should be compassionate by raising one from the material platform to
the spiritual platform; otherwise at any moment our spiritual advancement
may be spoiled, and we may fall down onto the material platform. Mahäräja
Bharata's compassion for the deer was the beginning of his falldown into the
material world.
TEXT 8
TaSYa h va W<aku-<ak- oÀEreTaiSMaNa( k*-TaiNaJaai>aMaaNaSYaahrhSTaTPaaez<aPaa‚
l/Nal/al/NaPa[q<aNaaNauDYaaNaeNaaTMaiNaYaMaa" SahYaMaa" PauåzPaircYaaRdYa WkE-k-Xa"
k-iTaPaYaeNaahGaR<aeNa ivYauJYaMaaNaa" ik-l/ SavR WvaedvSaNa( )) 8 ))
tasya ha vä eëa-kuëaka uccair etasmin kåta-nijäbhimänasyähar-ahas
tat-poñaëa-pälana-lälana-préëanänudhyänenätma-niyamäù saha-yamäù
puruña-paricaryädaya ekaikaçaù katipayenähar-gaëena viyujyamänäù kila
sarva evodavasan.
SYNONYMS
tasya—of that King; ha vä—indeed; eëa-kuëake—in the deer calf;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
315
uccaiù—greatly; etasmin—in this; kåta-nija-abhimänasya—who accepted the
calf as his own son; ahaù-ahaù—every day; tat-poñaëa—maintaining that calf;
pälana—protecting from dangers; lälana—raising it or showing love to it by
kissing and so on; préëana—petting it in love; anudhyänena—by such
attachment; ätma-niyamäù—his personal activities for taking care of his body;
saha-yamäù—with his spiritual duties, such as nonviolence, tolerance and
simplicity; puruña-paricaryä-ädayaù—worshiping the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and performing other duties; eka-ekaçaù—every day;
katipayena—with only a few; ahaù-gaëena—days of time;
viyujyamänäù—being given up; kila—indeed; sarve—all; eva—certainly;
udavasan—became destroyed.
TRANSLATION
Gradually Mahäräja Bharata became very affectionate toward the deer. He
began to raise it and maintain it by giving it grass. He was always careful to
protect it from the attacks of tigers and other animals. When it itched, he
petted it, and in this way he always tried to keep it in a comfortable condition.
He sometimes kissed it out of love. Being attached to raising the deer, Mahäräja
Bharata forgot the rules and regulations for the advancement of spiritual life,
and he gradually forgot to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. After a
few days, he forgot everything about his spiritual advancement.
PURPORT
From this we can understand how we have to be very cautious in executing
our spiritual duties by observing the rules and regulations and regularly
chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra. If we neglect doing this, we will
eventually fall down. We must rise early in the morning, bathe, attend
maìgala-ärati, worship the Deities, chant the Hare Kåñëa mantra, study the
Vedic literatures and follow all the rules prescribed by the äcäryas and the
spiritual master. If we deviate from this process, we may fall down, even
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
316
though we may be very highly advanced. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (18.5):
yajïa-däna-tapaù-karma
na tyäjyaà käryam eva tat
yajïo dänaà tapaç caiva
pävanäni manéñiëäm
"Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up but should be
performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify even the great soul."
Even if one is in the renounced order, he should never give up the regulative
principles. He should worship the Deity and give his time and life to the
service of Kåñëa. He should also continue following the rules and regulations
of austerity and penance. These things cannot be given up. One should not
think oneself very advanced simply because one has accepted the sannyäsa
order. The activities of Bharata Mahäräja should be carefully studied for one's
spiritual advancement.
TEXT 9
Ahae bTaaYa& hir<aku-<ak-" k*-Pa<a wRìrrQacr<aPair>a]Ma<arYae<a SvGa<aSauô‚
ØNDau>Ya" PairviJaRTa" Xar<a& c MaaePaSaaidTaae MaaMaev MaaTaaiPaTaraE >a]aTa*jaTaqNa(
YaaEiQak-a&êEvaePaeYaaYa NaaNYa& k-ÄNa ved MaYYaiTaivóBDaêaTa Wv MaYaa MaTPara‚
Ya<aSYa Paaez<aPaal/NaPa[q<aNal/al/NaMaNaSaUYauNaaNauïeYa& Xar<YaaePae+aadaezivduza )) 9 ))
aho batäyaà hariëa-kuëakaù kåpaëa
éçvara-ratha-caraëa-paribhramaëa-rayeëa sva-gaëa-suhåd-bandhubhyaù
parivarjitaù çaraëaà ca mopasädito mäm eva mätä-pitarau bhrätå-jïätén
yauthikäàç caivopeyäya nänyaà kaïcana veda mayy ati-visrabdhaç cäta eva
mayä mat-paräyaëasya poñaëa-pälana-préëana-lälanam anasüyunänuñöheyaà
çaraëyopekñä-doña-viduñä.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
317
SYNONYMS
aho bata—alas; ayam—this; hariëa-kuëakaù—the deer calf;
kåpaëaù—helpless; éçvara-ratha-caraëa-paribhramaëa-rayeëa—by the force of
the rotation of the time agent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, which
is compared to the wheel of His chariot; sva-gaëa—own kinsmen; suhåt—and
friends; bandhubhyaù—relatives; parivarjitaù—deprived of; çaraëam—as
shelter; ca—and; mä—me; upasäditaù—having obtained; mäm—me;
eva—alone; mätä-pitarau—father and mother; bhrätå-jïätén—brothers and
kinsmen; yauthikän—belonging to the herd; ca—also; eva—certainly;
upeyäya—having gotten; na—not; anyam—anyone else; kaïcana—some
person; veda—it knows; mayi—in me; ati—very great; visrabdhaù—having
faith; ca—and; ataù eva—therefore; mayä—by me; mat-paräyaëasya—of one
who is so dependent upon me; poñaëa-pälana-préëana-lälanam—raising,
maintaining, petting and protecting; anasüyunä—who am without any grudge;
anuñöheyam—to be executed; çaraëya—the one who has taken shelter;
upekñä—of neglecting; doña-viduñä—who knows the fault.
TRANSLATION
The great King Mahäräja Bharata began to think: Alas, this helpless young
deer, by the force of time, an agent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has
now lost its relatives and friends and has taken shelter of me. It does not know
anyone but me, as I have become its father, mother, brother and relatives. This
deer is thinking in this way, and it has full faith in me. It does not know anyone
but me; therefore I should not be envious and think that for the deer my own
welfare will be destroyed. I should certainly raise, protect, gratify and fondle it.
When it has taken shelter with me, how can I neglect it? Even though the deer
is disturbing my spiritual life, I realize that a helpless person who has taken
shelter cannot be neglected. That would be a great fault.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
318
PURPORT
When a person is advanced in spiritual consciousness or Kåñëa
consciousness, he naturally becomes very sympathetic toward all living entities
suffering in the material world. Naturally such an advanced person thinks of
the suffering of the people in general. However, if one does not know of the
material sufferings of fallen souls and becomes sympathetic because of bodily
comforts, as in the case of Bharata Mahäräja, such sympathy or compassion is
the cause of one's downfall. If one is actually sympathetic to fallen, suffering
humanity, he should try to elevate people from material consciousness to
spiritual consciousness. As far as the deer was concerned, Bharata Mahäräja
became very sympathetic, but he forgot that it was impossible for him to
elevate a deer to spiritual consciousness, because, after all, a deer is but an
animal. It was very dangerous for Bharata Mahäräja to sacrifice all his
regulative principles simply to take care of an animal. The principles
enunciated in Bhagavad-gétä should be followed. Yaà hi na vyathayanty ete
puruñaà puruñarñabha [Bg. 2.15]. As far as the material body is concerned, we
cannot do anything for anyone. However, by the grace of Kåñëa, we may raise
a person to spiritual consciousness if we ourselves follow the rules and
regulations. If we give up our own spiritual activities and simply become
concerned with the bodily comforts of others, we will fall into a dangerous
position.
TEXT 10
NaUNa& ùaYaaR" SaaDav oPaXaMaXaql/a" k*-Pa<aSauôd Wv&ivDaaQaeR SvaQaaRNaiPa
GauåTaraNauPae+aNTae )) 10 ))
nünaà hy äryäù sädhava upaçama-çéläù kåpaëa-suhåda evaà-vidhärthe
svärthän api gurutarän upekñante.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
319
SYNONYMS
nünam—indeed; hi—certainly; äryäù—those who are advanced in civilization;
sädhavaù—saintly persons; upaçama-çéläù—even though completely in the
renounced order of life; kåpaëa-suhådaù—the friends of the helpless;
evaà-vidha-arthe—to execute such principles; sva-arthän api—even their own
personal interests; guru-tarän—very important; upekñante—neglect.
TRANSLATION
Even though one is in the renounced order, one who is advanced certainly
feels compassion for suffering living entities. One should certainly neglect his
own personal interests, although they may be very important, to protect one
who has surrendered.
PURPORT
Mäyä is very strong. In the name of philanthropy, altruism and
communism, people are feeling compassion for suffering humanity throughout
the world. Philanthropists and altruists do not realize that it is impossible to
improve people's material conditions. Material conditions are already
established by the superior administration according to one's karma. They
cannot be changed. The only benefit we can render to suffering beings is to try
to raise them to spiritual consciousness. Material comforts cannot be increased
or decreased. It is therefore said in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.18), tal labhyate
duùkhavad anyataù sukham: "As far as material happiness is concerned, that
comes without effort, just as tribulations come without effort." Material
happiness and pain can be attained without endeavor. One should not bother
for material activities. If one is at all sympathetic or able to do good to others,
he should endeavor to raise people to Kåñëa consciousness. In this way
everyone advances spiritually by the grace of the Lord. For our instruction,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
320
Bharata Mahäräja acted in such a way. We should be very careful not to be
misled by so-called welfare activities conducted in bodily terms. One should
not give up his interest in attaining the favor of Lord Viñëu at any cost.
Generally people do not know this, or they forget it. Consequently they
sacrifice their original interest, the attainment of Viñëu's favor, and engage in
philanthropic activities for bodily comfort.
TEXT 11
wiTa k*-TaaNauz(r) AaSaNaXaYaNaa$=NaòaNaaXaNaaidzu Sah Ma*GaJahuNaa
òehaNaubÖôdYa AaSaqTa( )) 11 ))
iti kåtänuñaìga äsana-çayanäöana-snänäçanädiñu saha måga-jahunä
snehänubaddha-hådaya äsét.
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; kåta-anuñaìgaù—having developed attachment; äsana—sitting;
çayana—lying down; aöana—walking; snäna—bathing; äçana-ädiñu—while
eating and so on; saha måga-jahunä—with the deer calf;
sneha-anubaddha—captivated by affection; hådayaù—his heart; äsét—became.
TRANSLATION
Due to attachment for the deer, Mahäräja Bharata lay down with it, walked
about with it, bathed with it and even ate with it. Thus his heart became bound
to the deer in affection.
TEXT 12
ku-Xaku-SauMaSaiMaTPal/aXaf-l/MaUl/aedk-aNYaahirZYaMaa<aae v*k-Saal/av*k-aid>Yaae >aYa‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
321
MaaXa&SaMaaNaae Yada Sah hir<aku-<ake-Na vNa& SaMaaivXaiTa )) 12 ))
kuça-kusuma-samit-paläça-phala-mülodakäny ähariñyamäëo
våkasälä-våkädibhyo bhayam äçaàsamäno yadä saha hariëa-kuëakena vanaà
samäviçati.
SYNONYMS
kuça—a kind of grass required for ritualistic ceremonies; kusuma—flowers;
samit—firewood; paläça—leaves; phala-müla—fruits and roots; udakäni—and
water; ähariñyamäëaù—desiring to collect; våkasälä-våka—from wolves and
dogs; ädibhyaù—and other animals, such as tigers; bhayam—fear;
äçaàsamänaù—doubting; yadä—when; saha—with; hariëa-kuëakena—the
deer calf; vanam—the forest; samäviçati—enters.
TRANSLATION
When Mahäräja Bharata wanted to enter the forest to collect kuça grass,
flowers, wood, leaves, fruits, roots and water, he would fear that dogs, jackals,
tigers and other ferocious animals might kill the deer. He would therefore
always take the deer with him when entering the forest.
PURPORT
How Mahäräja Bharata increased his affection for the deer is described
herein. Even such an exalted personality as Bharata Mahäräja, who had
attained loving affection for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, fell down
from his position due to his affection for some animal. Consequently, as will be
seen, he had to accept the body of a deer in his next life. Since this was the
case with Bharata Mahäräja, what can we say of those who are not advanced in
spiritual life but who become attached to cats and dogs? Due to their affection
for their cats and dogs, they have to take the same bodily forms in the next life
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
322
unless they clearly increase their affection and love for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Unless we increase our faith in the Supreme Lord, we
shall be attracted to many other things. That is the cause of our material
bondage.
TEXT 13
PaiQazu c MauGDa>aaveNa Ta}a Ta}a ivz¢-MaiTaPa[<aYa>arôdYa" k-aPaR<YaaTSk-‚
NDaeNaaeÜhiTa WvMauTSa(r) oriSa caDaaYaaePal/al/YaNMaud& ParMaaMavaPa )) 13 ))
pathiñu ca mugdha-bhävena tatra tatra viñakta-mati-praëaya-bhara-hådayaù
kärpaëyät skandhenodvahati evam utsaìga urasi cädhäyopalälayan mudaà
paramäm aväpa.
SYNONYMS
pathiñu—on the forest paths; ca—also; mugdha-bhävena—by the childish
behavior of the deer; tatra tatra—here and there; viñakta-mati—whose mind
was too much attracted; praëaya—with love; bhara—loaded; hådayaù—whose
heart; kärpaëyät—because of affection and love; skandhena—by the shoulder;
udvahati—carries; evam—in this way; utsaìge—sometimes on the lap;
urasi—on the chest while sleeping; ca—also; ädhäya—keeping;
upalälayan—fondling; mudam—pleasure; paramäm—very great; aväpa—he
felt.
TRANSLATION
When entering the forest, the animal would appear very attractive to
Mahäräja Bharata due to its childish behavior. Mahäräja Bharata would even
take the deer on his shoulders and carry it due to affection. His heart was so
filled with great love for the deer that he would sometimes keep it on his lap or,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
323
when sleeping, on his chest. In this way he felt great pleasure in fondling the
animal.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Bharata left his home, wife, children, kingdom and everything
else to advance his spiritual life in the forest, but again he fell victim to
material affection due to his attachment to an insignificant pet deer. What,
then, was the use of his renouncing his family? One who is serious in
advancing his spiritual life should be very cautious not to become attached to
anything but Kåñëa. Sometimes, in order to preach, we have to accept many
material activities, but we should remember that everything is for Kåñëa. If we
remember this, there is no chance of our being victimized by material
activities.
TEXT 14
i§-YaaYaa& iNavRTYaRMaaNaaYaaMaNTarale/_PYauTQaaYaaeTQaaYa YadENaMai>ac+aqTa TaihR vav
Sa vzRPaiTa" Pa[k*-iTaSQaeNa MaNaSaa TaSMaa AaiXaz AaXaaSTae SviSTa STaaÜTSa Tae
SavRTa wiTa )) 14 ))
kriyäyäà nirvartyamänäyäm antaräle 'py utthäyotthäya yadainam abhicakñéta
tarhi väva sa varña-patiù prakåti-sthena manasä tasmä äçiña äçäste svasti städ
vatsa te sarvata iti.
SYNONYMS
kriyäyäm—the activities of worshiping the Lord or performing ritualistic
ceremonies; nirvartyamänäyäm—even without finishing; antaräle—at
intervals in the middle; api—although; utthäya utthäya—repeatedly getting up;
yadä—when; enam—the deer calf; abhicakñéta—would see; tarhi väva—at that
time; saù—he; varña-patiù—Mahäräja Bharata; prakåti-sthena—happy;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
324
manasä—within his mind; tasmai—unto it; äçiñaù äçäste—bestows
benedictions; svasti—all auspiciousness; stät—let there be; vatsa—O my dear
calf; te—unto you; sarvataù—in all respects; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
When Mahäräja Bharata was actually worshiping the Lord or was engaged in
some ritualistic ceremony, although his activities were unfinished, he would
still, at intervals, get up and see where the deer was. In this way he would look
for it, and when he could see that the deer was comfortably situated, his mind
and heart would be very satisfied, and he would bestow his blessings upon the
deer, saying, "My dear calf, may you be happy in all respects."
PURPORT
Because his attraction for the deer was so intense, Bharata Mahäräja could
not concentrate upon worshiping the Lord or performing his ritualistic
ceremonies. Even though he was engaged in worshiping the Deity, his mind
was restless due to his inordinate affection. While trying to meditate, he would
simply think of the deer, wondering where it had gone. In other words, if one's
mind is distracted from worship, a mere show of worship will not be of any
benefit. The fact that Bharata Mahäräja had to get up at intervals to look for
the deer was simply a sign that he had fallen down from the spiritual platform.
TEXT 15
ANYada >a*XaMauiÜGanMaNaa Naíd]iv<a wv k*-Pa<a" Sak-å<aMaiTaTazeR<a
hir<aku-<ak- ivrhivûl/ôdYaSaNTaaPaSTaMaevaNauXaaecNa( ik-l/ k-XMal&/ Mahd‚
i>ariM>aTa wiTa haevac )) 15 ))
anyadä bhåçam udvigna-manä nañöa-draviëa iva kåpaëaù sakaruëam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
325
ati-tarñeëa hariëa-kuëaka-viraha-vihvala-hådaya-santäpas tam evänuçocan
kila kaçmalaà mahad abhirambhita iti hoväca.
SYNONYMS
anyadä—sometimes (not seeing the calf); bhåçam—very much;
udvigna-manäù—his mind full of anxiety; nañöa-draviëaù—who has lost his
riches; iva—like; kåpaëaù—a miserly man; sa-karuëam—piteously;
ati-tarñeëa—with great anxiety; hariëa-kuëaka—from the calf of the deer;
viraha—by separation; vihvala—agitated; hådaya—in mind or heart;
santäpaù—whose affliction; tam—that calf; eva—only;
anuçocan—continuously thinking of; kila—certainly; kaçmalam—illusion;
mahat—very great; abhirambhitaù—obtained; iti—thus; ha—certainly;
uväca—said.
TRANSLATION
If Bharata Mahäräja sometimes could not see the deer, his mind would be
very agitated. He would become like a miser, who, having obtained some riches,
had lost them and had then become very unhappy. When the deer was gone, he
would be filled with anxiety and would lament due to separation. Thus he
would become illusioned and speak as follows.
PURPORT
If a poor man loses some money or gold, he at once becomes very agitated.
Similarly, the mind of Mahäräja Bharata would become agitated when he did
not see the deer. This is an example of how our attachment can be transferred.
If our attachment is transferred to the Lord's service, we progress. Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé prayed to the Lord that he would be as naturally attracted to the
Lord's service as young men and young women are naturally attracted to each
other. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu exhibited such attachment to the Lord when
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
326
He jumped into the ocean or cried at night in separation. However, if our
attachment is diverted to material things instead of to the Lord, we will fall
down from the spiritual platform.
TEXT 16
AiPa bTa Sa vE k*-Pa<a W<abal/k-ae Ma*Tahir<aqSauTaae_hae MaMaaNaaYaRSYa Xa#=ik-‚
raTaMaTaerk*-TaSauk*-TaSYa k*-TaivóM>a AaTMaPa[TYaYaeNa TadivGa<aYaNa( SauJaNa
wvaGaiMaZYaiTa )) 16 ))
api bata sa vai kåpaëa eëa-bälako måta-hariëé-suto 'ho mamänäryasya
çaöha-kiräta-mater akåta-sukåtasya kåta-visrambha ätma-pratyayena tad
avigaëayan sujana ivägamiñyati.
SYNONYMS
api—indeed; bata—alas; saù—that calf; vai—certainly; kåpaëaù—aggrieved;
eëa-bälakaù—the deer child; måta-hariëé-sutaù—the calf of the dead doe;
aho—oh; mama—of me; anäryasya—the most ill-behaved; çaöha—of a
cheater; kiräta—or of an uncivilized aborigine; mateù—whose mind is that;
akåta-sukåtasya—who has no pious activities; kåta-visrambhaù—putting all
faith; ätma-pratyayena—by assuming me to be like himself; tat
avigaëayan—without thinking of all these things; su-janaù iva—like a perfect
gentle person; agamiñyati—will he again return.
TRANSLATION
Bharata Mahäräja would think: Alas, the deer is now helpless. I am now
very unfortunate, and my mind is like a cunning hunter, for it is always filled
with cheating propensities and cruelty. The deer has put its faith in me, just as
a good man who has a natural interest in good behavior forgets the misbehavior
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
327
of a cunning friend and puts his faith in him. Although I have proved faithless,
will this deer return and place its faith in me?
PURPORT
Bharata Mahäräja was very noble and exalted, and therefore when the deer
was absent from him he thought himself unworthy to give it protection. Due to
his attachment for the animal, he thought that the animal was as noble and
exalted as he himself was. According to the logic of ätmavan manyate jagat,
everyone thinks of others according to his own position. Therefore Mahäräja
Bharata felt that the deer had left him due to his negligence and that due to
the animal's noble heart, it would again return.
TEXT 17
AiPa +aeMae<aaiSMaàaé[MaaePavNae XaZPaai<a crNTa& devGauá& d]+YaaiMa )) 17 ))
api kñemeëäsminn äçramopavane çañpäëi carantaà deva-guptaà drak-ñyämi.
SYNONYMS
api—it may be; kñemeëa—with fearlessness because of the absence of tigers
and other animals; asmin—in this; äçrama-upavane—garden of the hermitage;
çañpäëi carantam—walking and eating the soft grasses; deva-guptam—being
protected by the demigods; drakñyämi—shall I see.
TRANSLATION
Alas, is it possible that I shall again see this animal protected by the Lord
and fearless of tigers and other animals? Shall I again see him wandering in the
garden eating soft grass?
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
328
PURPORT
Mahäräja Bharata thought that the animal was disappointed in his
protection and had left him for the protection of a demigod. Regardless, he
ardently desired to see the animal again within his äçrama eating the soft grass
and not fearing tigers and other animals. Mahäräja Bharata could think only
of the deer and how the animal could be protected from all kinds of
inauspicious things. From the materialistic point of view such kind thoughts
may be very laudable, but from the spiritual point of view the King was
actually falling from his exalted spiritual position and unnecessarily becoming
attached to an animal. Thus degrading himself, he would have to accept an
animal body.
TEXT 18
AiPa c Na v*k-" Saal/av*k-ae_NYaTaMaae va NaEk/cr Wk/crae va >a+aYaiTa )) 18 ))
api ca na våkaù sälä-våko 'nyatamo vä naika-cara eka-caro vä bhak-ñayati.
SYNONYMS
api ca—or; na—not; våkaù—a wolf; sälä-våkaù—a dog; anyatamaù—any one
of many; vä—or; na-eka-caraù—the hogs that flock together; eka-caraù—the
tiger that wanders alone; vä—or; bhakñayati—is eating (the poor creature).
TRANSLATION
I do not know, but the deer might have been eaten by a wolf or a dog or by
the boars that flock together or the tiger who travels alone.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
329
Tigers never wander in the forest in flocks. Each tiger wanders alone, but
forest boars keep together. Similarly, hogs, wolves and dogs also do the same.
Thus Mahäräja Bharata thought that the deer had been killed by some of the
many ferocious animals within the forest.
TEXT 19
iNaãaeciTa h >aGavaNa( Sak-l/JaGaT+aeMaaedYañYYaaTMaaÛaiPa MaMa Na Ma*Gav‚
DaUNYaaSa AaGaC^iTa )) 19 ))
nimlocati ha bhagavän sakala-jagat-kñemodayas trayy-ätmädyäpi mama na
måga-vadhü-nyäsa ägacchati.
SYNONYMS
nimlocati—sets; ha—alas; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
represented as the sun; sakala-jagat—of all the universe; kñema-udayaù—who
increases the auspiciousness; trayé-ätmä—who consists of the three Vedas;
adya api—until now; mama—my; na—not; måga-vadhü-nyäsaù—this baby
deer entrusted to me by its mother; ägacchati—has come back.
TRANSLATION
Alas, when the sun rises, all auspicious things begin. Unfortunately, they
have not begun for me. The sun-god is the Vedas personified, but I am bereft of
all Vedic principles. That sun-god is now setting, yet the poor animal who
trusted in me since its mother died has not returned.
PURPORT
In the Brahma-saàhitä (5.52), the sun is described as the eye of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
330
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
yac-cakñur eña savitä sakala-grahäëäà
räjä samasta-sura-mürtir açeña-tejäù
yasyäjïayä bhramati sambhåta-käla-cakro
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
As the sun arises, one should chant the Vedic mantra beginning with the
Gäyatré. The sun is the symbolic representation of the eyes of the Supreme
Lord. Mahäräja Bharata lamented that although the sun was going to set, due
to the poor animal's absence, he could not find anything auspicious. Bharata
Mahäräja considered himself most unfortunate, for due to the animal's
absence, there was nothing auspicious for him in the presence of the sun.
TEXT 20
AiPaiSvdk*-TaSauk*-TaMaaGaTYa Maa& Sau%iYaZYaiTa hir<araJaku-Maarae ivivDaå‚
icrdXaRNaqYaiNaJaMa*Gadark-ivNaaedErSaNTaaez& SvaNaaMaPaNaudNa( )) 20 ))
api svid akåta-sukåtam ägatya mäà sukhayiñyati hariëa-räja-kumäro
vividha-rucira-darçanéya-nija-måga-däraka-vinodair asantoñaà svänäm
apanudan.
SYNONYMS
api svit—whether it will; akåta-sukåtam—who has never executed any pious
activities; ägatya—coming back; mäm—to me; sukhayiñyati—give pleasure;
hariëa-räja-kumäraù—the deer, who was just like a prince because of my
taking care of it exactly like a son; vividha—various; rucira—very pleasing;
darçanéya—to be seen; nija—own; måga-däraka—befitting the calf of the deer;
vinodaiù—by pleasing activities; asantoñam—the unhappiness; svänäm—of his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
331
own kind; apanudan—driving away.
TRANSLATION
That deer is exactly like a prince. When will it return? When will it again
display its personal activities, which are so pleasing? When will it again pacify a
wounded heart like mine? I certainly must have no pious assets, otherwise the
deer would have returned by now.
PURPORT
Out of strong affection, the King accepted the small deer as if it were a
prince. This is called moha. Due to his anxiety over the deer's absence, the
King addressed the animal as though it were his son. Out of affection, anyone
can be addressed as anything.
TEXT 21
+veil/k-aYaa& Maa& Ma*zaSaMaaiDaNaaMaqil/Tad*Xa& Pa[eMaSa&rM>ae<a cik-Tacik-Ta
AaGaTYa Pa*zdPaåzivza<aaGa]e<a lu/#=iTa )) 21 ))
kñvelikäyäà mäà måñä-samädhinämélita-dåçaà prema-saàrambheëa
cakita-cakita ägatya påñad-aparuña-viñäëägreëa luöhati.
SYNONYMS
kñvelikäyäm—while playing; mäm—unto me; måñä—feigning; samädhinä—by
a meditational trance; ämélita-dåçam—with closed eyes;
prema-saàrambheëa—because of anger due to love; cakita-cakitaù—with fear;
ägatya—coming; påñat—like drops of water; aparuña—very soft; viñäëa—of
the horns; agreëa—by the point; luöhati—touches my body.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
332
TRANSLATION
Alas, the small deer, while playing with me and seeing me feigning
meditation with closed eyes, would circumambulate me due to anger arising
from love, and it would fearfully touch me with the points of its soft horns,
which felt like drops of water.
PURPORT
Now King Bharata considers his meditation false. While engaged in
meditation, he was actually thinking of his deer, and he would feel great
pleasure when the animal pricked him with the points of its horns. Feigning
meditation, the King would actually think of the animal, and this was but a
sign of his downfall.
TEXT 22
AaSaaidTahiviz bihRiz dUizTae MaYaaePaal/BDaae >aqTa>aqTa" SaPaÛuParTaraSa
‰izku-MaarvdvihTak-r<ak-l/aPa AaSTae )) 22 ))
äsädita-haviñi barhiñi düñite mayopälabdho bhéta-bhétaù sapady uparata-räsa
åñi-kumäravad avahita-karaëa-kaläpa äste.
SYNONYMS
äsädita—placed; haviñi—all the ingredients to be offered in the sacrifice;
barhiñi—on the kuça grass; düñite—when polluted; mayä upälabdhaù—being
scolded by me; bhéta-bhétaù—in great fear; sapadi—immediately;
uparata-räsaù—stopped its playing; åñi-kumäravat—exactly like the son or
disciple of a saintly person; avahita—completely restrained;
karaëa-kaläpaù—all the senses; äste—sits.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
333
TRANSLATION
When I placed all the sacrificial ingredients on the kuça grass, the deer,
when playing, would touch the grass with its teeth and thus pollute it. When I
chastised the deer by pushing it away, it would immediately become fearful and
sit down motionless, exactly like the son of a saintly person. Thus it would stop
its play.
PURPORT
Bharata Mahäräja was constantly thinking of the activities of the deer,
forgetting that such meditation and diversion of attention was killing his
progress in spiritual achievement.
TEXT 23
ik&- va Are AacirTa& TaPaSTaPaiSvNYaaNaYaa YaidYaMaviNa" SaivNaYak*-Z<a‚
SaarTaNaYaTaNauTarSau>aGaiXavTaMaa%r%urPadPai»i>ad]Riv<aivDauraTaurSYa k*-Pa<aSYa
MaMa d]iv<aPadvq& SaUcYaNTYaaTMaaNa& c SavRTa" k*-Tak-aETauk&- iÜJaaNaa&
SvGaaRPavGaRk-aMaaNaa& devYaJaNa& k-raeiTa )) 23 ))
kià vä are äcaritaà tapas tapasvinyänayä yad iyam avaniù
savinaya-kåñëa-sära-tanaya-tanutara-subhaga-çivatamäkhara-khura-pada-paì
ktibhir draviëa-vidhuräturasya kåpaëasya mama draviëa-padavéà sücayanty
ätmänaà ca sarvataù kåta-kautukaà dvijänäà svargäpavarga-kämänäà
deva-yajanaà karoti.
SYNONYMS
kim vä—what; are—oh; äcaritam—practiced; tapaù—penance; tapasvinyä—by
the most fortunate; anayä—this planet earth; yat—since; iyam—this;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
334
avaniù—earth; sa-vinaya—very mild and well-behaved; kåñëa-sära-tanaya—of
the calf of the black deer; tanutara—small; subhaga—beautiful;
çiva-tama—most auspicious; akhara—soft; khura—of the hooves;
pada-paìktibhiù—by the series of the marks; draviëa-vidhura-äturasya—who is
very aggrieved because of loss of wealth; kåpaëasya—a most unhappy creature;
mama—for me; draviëa-padavém—the way to achieve that wealth;
sücayanti—indicating; ätmänam—her own personal body; ca—and;
sarvataù—on all sides; kåta-kautukam—ornamented; dvijänäm—of the
brähmaëas; svarga-apavarga-kämänäm—who are desirous of achieving
heavenly planets or liberation; deva-yajanam—a place of sacrifice to the
demigods; karoti—it makes.
TRANSLATION
After speaking like a madman in this way, Mahäräja Bharata got up and
went outside. Seeing the footprints of the deer on the ground, he praised the
footprints out of love, saying: O unfortunate Bharata, your austerities and
penances are very insignificant compared to the penance and austerity
undergone by this earth planet. Due to the earth's severe penances, the
footprints of this deer, which are small, beautiful, most auspicious and soft, are
imprinted on the surface of this fortunate planet. This series of footprints show
a person like me, who am bereaved due to loss of the deer, how the animal has
passed through the forest and how I can regain my lost wealth. By these
footprints, this land has become a proper place for brähmaëas who desire
heavenly planets or liberation to execute sacrifices to the demigods.
PURPORT
It is said that when a person becomes overly involved in loving affairs, he
forgets himself as well as others, and he forgets how to act and how to speak. It
is said that once when a man's son was blind since birth, the father, out of
staunch affection for the child, named him Padmalocana, or "lotus-eyed." This
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
335
is the situation arising from blind love. Bharata Mahäräja gradually fell into
this condition due to his material love for the deer. It is said in the
småti-çästra:
yasmin deçe mågaù kåñëas
tasmin dharmänn ivodhata
"That tract of land wherein the footprints of a black deer can be seen is to be
understood as a suitable place to execute religious rituals."
TEXT 24
AiPaiSvdSaaE >aGavaNau@uPaiTareNa& Ma*GaPaiTa>aYaaNMa*TaMaaTar& Ma*Gabal/k&- Svaé[Ma‚
Pair>a]íMaNauk-MPaYaa k*-Pa<aJaNavTSal/" PairPaaiTa )) 24 ))
api svid asau bhagavän uòu-patir enaà måga-pati-bhayän måta-mätaraà
måga-bälakaà sväçrama-paribhrañöam anukampayä kåpaëa-jana-vatsalaù
paripäti.
SYNONYMS
api svit—can it be; asau—that; bhagavän—most powerful; uòu-patiù—the
moon; enam—this; måga-pati-bhayät—because of fear of the lion;
måta-mätaram—who lost its mother; måga-bälakam—the son of a deer;
sva-äçrama-paribhrañöam—who strayed from its äçrama; anukampayä—out of
compassion; kåpaëa-jana-vatsalaù—(the moon) who is very kind to the
unhappy men; paripäti—now is protecting it.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Bharata continued to speak like a madman. Seeing above his head
the dark marks on the rising moon, which resembled a deer, he said: Can it be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
336
that the moon, who is so kind to an unhappy man, might also be kind upon my
deer, knowing that it has strayed from home and has become motherless? This
moon has given the deer shelter near itself just to protect it from the fearful
attacks of a lion.
TEXT 25
ik&- vaTMaJaivëezJvrdvdhNaiXa%ai>aåPaTaPYaMaaNaôdYaSQal/Nail/Naqk&- MaaMau‚
PaSa*TaMa*GaqTaNaYa& iXaiXarXaaNTaaNauraGaGaui<aTaiNaJavdNaSail/l/aMa*TaMaYaGa>aiSTai>a"
SvDaYaTaqiTa c )) 25 ))
kià vätmaja-viçleña-jvara-dava-dahana-çikhäbhir
upatapyamäna-hådaya-sthala-nalinékaà mäm upasåta-mågé-tanayaà
çiçira-çäntänuräga-guëita-nija-vadana-salilämåtamaya-gabhastibhiù
svadhayatéti ca.
SYNONYMS
kim vä—or it may be; ätma-ja—from the son; viçleña—because of separation;
jvara—the heat; dava-dahana—of the forest fire; çikhäbhiù—by the flames;
upatapyamäna—being burned; hådaya—the heart;
sthala-nalinékam—compared to a red lotus flower; mäm—unto me;
upasåta-mågé-tanayam—to whom the son of the deer was so submissive;
çiçira-çänta—which is so peaceful and cool; anuräga—out of love;
guëita—flowing; nija-vadana-salila—the water from its mouth;
amåta-maya—as good as nectar; gabhastibhiù—by the rays of the moon;
svadhayati—is giving me pleasure; iti—thus; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
After perceiving the moonshine, Mahäräja Bharata continued speaking like a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
337
crazy person. He said: The deer's son was so submissive and dear to me that due
to its separation I am feeling separation from my own son. Due to the burning
fever of this separation, I am suffering as if inflamed by a forest fire. My heart,
which is like the lily of the land, is now burning. Seeing me so distressed, the
moon is certainly splashing its shining nectar upon me—just as a friend throws
water on another friend who has a high fever. In this way, the moon is bringing
me happiness.
PURPORT
According to Äyur-vedic treatment, it is said that if one has a high fever,
someone should splash him with water after gargling this water. In this way the
fever subsides. Although Bharata Mahäräja was very aggrieved due to the
separation of his so-called son, the deer, he thought that the moon was
splashing gargled water on him from its mouth and that this water would
subdue his high fever, which was raging due to separation from the deer.
TEXT 26
WvMaga$=MaaNaMaNaaerQaaku-l/ôdYaae Ma*Gadark-a>aaSaeNa SvarBDak-MaR<aa
YaaeGaarM>a<aTaae iv>a]&iXaTa" Sa YaaeGaTaaPaSaae >aGavdaraDaNal/+a<aaÀ k-QaiMaTarQaa
JaaTYaNTar W<aku-<ak- AaSa(r)" Saa+aaià"é[eYaSaPa[iTaPa+aTaYaa Pa[aKPairTYa¢-du‚
STYaJaôdYaai>aJaaTaSYa TaSYaEvMaNTaraYaivhTa YaaeGaarM>a<aSYa raJazeR>aRrTaSYa
TaavNMa*Gaa>aRk-Paaez<aPaal/NaPa[q<aNal/al/NaaNauz(r)e<aaivGa<aYaTa AaTMaaNaMaihirva%u‚
ibl&/ duriTa§-Ma" k-al/" k-ral/r>aSa AaPaÛTa )) 26 ))
evam aghaöamäna-manorathäkula-hådayo måga-därakäbhäsena
svärabdha-karmaëä yogärambhaëato vibhraàçitaù sa yoga-täpaso
bhagavad-ärädhana-lakñaëäc ca katham itarathä jäty-antara eëa-kuëaka
äsaìgaù säkñän niùçreyasa-pratipakñatayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
338
präk-parityakta-dustyaja-hådayäbhijätasya tasyaivam
antaräya-vihata-yogärambhaëasya räjarñer bharatasya tävan
mågärbhaka-poñaëa-pälana-préëana-lälanänuñaìgeëävigaëayata ätmänam
ahir iväkhu-bilaà duratikramaù kälaù karäla-rabhasa äpadyata.
SYNONYMS
evam—in that way; aghaöamäna—impossible to be achieved; manaù-ratha—by
desires, which are like mental chariots; äkula—aggrieved; hådayaù—whose
heart; måga-däraka-äbhäsena—resembling the son of a deer;
sva-ärabdha-karmaëä—by the bad results of his unseen fruitive actions;
yoga-ärambhaëataù—from the activities of yoga performances;
vibhraàçitaù—fallen down; saù—he (Mahäräja Bharata);
yoga-täpasaù—executing the activities of mystic yoga and austerities;
bhagavat-ärädhana-lakñaëät—from the activities of devotional service
rendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca—and; katham—how;
itarathä—else; jäti-antare—belonging to a different species of life;
eëa-kuëake—to the body of a deer calf; äsaìgaù—so much affectionate
attachment; säkñät—directly; niùçreyasa—to achieve the ultimate goal of life;
pratipakñatayä—with the quality of being an obstacle; präk—who previously;
parityakta—given up; dustyaja—although very difficult to give up;
hådaya-abhijätasya—his sons, born of his own heart; tasya—of him;
evam—thus; antaräya—by that obstacle; vihata—obstructed;
yoga-ärambhaëasya—whose path of executing the mystic yoga practices;
räja-åñeù—of the great saintly King; bharatasya—of Mahäräja Bharata;
tävat—in that way; måga-arbhaka—the son of a deer; poñaëa—i n
maintaining; pälana—in protecting; préëana—in making happy; lälana—in
fondling; anuñaìgeëa—by constant absorption; avigaëayataù—neglecting;
ätmänam—his own soul; ahiù iva—like a serpent; äkhu-bilam—the hole of a
mouse; duratikramaù—unsurpassable; kälaù—ultimate death; karäla—terrible;
rabhasaù—having speed; äpadyata—arrived.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
339
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, in this way Bharata Mahäräja
was overwhelmed by an uncontrollable desire which was manifest in the form of
the deer. Due to the fruitive results of his past deeds, he fell down from mystic
yoga, austerity and worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If it were
not due to his past fruitive activity, how could he have been attracted to the
deer after giving up the association of his own son and family, considering them
stumbling blocks on the path of spiritual life? How could he show such
uncontrollable affection for a deer? This was definitely due to his past karma.
The King was so engrossed in petting and maintaining the deer that he fell
down from his spiritual activities. In due course of time, insurmountable death,
which is compared to a venomous snake that enters the hole created by a
mouse, situated itself before him.
PURPORT
As will be seen in later verses, Bharata Mahäräja, at the time of death,
would be forced to accept the body of a deer due to his attraction for the deer.
In this regard, a question may be raised. How can a devotee be affected by his
past misconduct and vicious activities? In Brahma-saàhitä (5.54) it is said,
karmäëi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhäjäm: "For those engaged in devotional
service, bhakti-bhajana, the results of past deeds are indemnified." According
to this, Bharata Mahäräja could not be punished for his past misdeeds. The
conclusion must be that Mahäräja Bharata purposefully became over-addicted
to the deer and neglected his spiritual advancement. To immediately rectify
his mistake, for a short time he was awarded the body of a deer. This was just
to increase his desire for mature devotional service. Although Bharata
Mahäräja was awarded the body of an animal, he did not forget what had
previously happened due to his purposeful mistake. He was very anxious to get
out of his deer body, and this indicates that his affection for devotional service
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
340
was intensified, so much so that he was quickly to attain perfection in a
brähmaëa body in the next life. It is with this conviction that we declare in
our Back to Godhead magazine that devotees like the gosvämés living in
Våndävana who purposely commit some sinful activity are born in the bodies
of dogs, monkeys and tortoises in that holy land. Thus they take on these lower
life forms for a short while, and after they give up those animal bodies, they are
again promoted to the spiritual world. Such punishment is only for a short
period, and it is not due to past karma. It may appear to be due to past karma,
but it is offered to rectify the devotee and bring him to pure devotional
service.
TEXT 27
TadaNaqMaiPa PaaìRviTaRNaMaaTMaJaiMavaNauXaaecNTaMai>avq+aMaa<aae Ma*GaWvai>aiNaveiXa‚
TaMaNaa ivSa*JYa l/aek-iMaMa& Sah Ma*Gae<a k-le/vr& Ma*TaMaNau Na Ma*TaJaNMaa‚
NauSMa*iTairTarvNMa*GaXarqrMavaPa )) 27 ))
tadäném api pärçva-vartinam ätmajam ivänuçocantam abhivékñamäëo måga
eväbhiniveçita-manä visåjya lokam imaà saha mågeëa kalevaraà måtam anu
na måta-janmänusmåtir itaravan måga-çaréram aväpa.
SYNONYMS
tadäném—at that time; api—indeed; pärçva-vartinam—by the side of his
deathbed; ätma-jam—his own son; iva—like; anuçocantam—lamenting;
abhivékñamäëaù—seeing; måge—in the deer; eva—certainly;
abhiniveçita-manäù—his mind was absorbed; visåjya—giving up; lokam—world;
imam—this; saha—with; mågeëa—the deer; kalevaram—his body;
måtam—died; anu—thereafter; na—not; måta—destroyed;
janma-anusmåtiù—remembrance of the incident before his death;
itara-vat—like others; måga-çaréram—the body of a deer; aväpa—got.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
341
TRANSLATION
At the time of death, the King saw that the deer was sitting by his side,
exactly like his own son, and was lamenting his death. Actually the mind of the
King was absorbed in the body of the deer, and consequently—like those bereft
of Kåñëa consciousness—he left the world, the deer, and his material body and
acquired the body of a deer. However, there was one advantage. Although he
lost his human body and received the body of a deer, he did not forget the
incidents of his past life.
PURPORT
There was a difference between Bharata Mahäräja's acquiring a deer body
and others' acquiring different bodies according to their mental condition at
the time of death. After death, others forget everything that has happened in
their past lives, but Bharata Mahäräja did not forget. According to
Bhagavad-gétä:
yaà yaà väpi smaran bhävaà
tyajaty ante kalevaram
taà tam evaiti kaunteya
sadä tad-bhäva-bhävitaù
"Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he
will attain without fail." (Bg. 8.6)
After quitting his body, a person gets another body according to his mental
condition at the time of death. At death, a person always think; of that subject
matter in which he has been engrossed during his life. According to this law,
because Bharata Mahäräja was always thinking of the deer and forgetting his
worship of the Supreme Lord, he acquired the body of a deer. However, due to
his having been elevated to the topmost platform of devotional service, he did
not forget the incidents of his past life. This special benediction saved him
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
342
from further deterioration. Due to his past activities in devotional service, he
became determined to finish his devotional service even in the body of a deer.
It is therefore said in this verse, måtam, although he had died, anu, afterwards,
na måta janmänusmåtir itaravat, he did not forget the incidents of his past life
as others forget them. As stated in Brahma-saàhitä: karmäëi nirdahati kintu ca
bhakti-bhäjäm (Bs. 5.54). It is proved herein that due to the grace of the
Supreme Lord, a devotee is never vanquished. Due to his willful neglect of
devotional service, a devotee may be punished for a short time, but he again
revives his devotional service and returns home. back to Godhead.
TEXT 28
Ta}aaiPa h va AaTMaNaae Ma*GaTvk-ar<a& >aGavdaraDaNaSaMaqhaNau>aaveNaaNauSMa*TYa
>a*XaMaNauTaPYaMaaNa Aah )) 28 ))
taträpi ha vä ätmano mågatva-käraëaà
bhagavad-ärädhana-saméhänubhävenänusmåtya bhåçam anutapyamäna äha.
SYNONYMS
tatra api—in that birth; ha vä—indeed; ätmanaù—of himself;
mågatva-käraëam—the cause of accepting the body of a deer;
bhagavat-ärädhana-saméhä—of past activities in devotional service;
anubhävena—by consequence; anusmåtya—remembering; bhåçam—always;
anutapya-mänaù—repenting; äha—said.
TRANSLATION
Although in the body of a deer, Bharata Mahäräja, due to his rigid
devotional service in his past life, could understand the cause of his birth in
that body. Considering his past and present life, he constantly repented his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
343
activities, speaking in the following way.
PURPORT
This is a special concession for a devotee. Even if he attains a body that is
nonhuman, by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead he advances
further in devotional service, whether by remembering his past life or by
natural causes. It is not easy for a common man to remember the activities of
his past life, but Bharata Mahäräja could remember his past activities due to
his great sacrifices and engagement in devotional service.
TEXT 29
Ahae k-í& >a]íae_hMaaTMavTaaMaNauPaQaaÛiÜMau¢-SaMaSTaSa(r)SYa iviv¢-Pau<Yaar<Ya‚
Xar<aSYaaTMavTa AaTMaiNa SaveRzaMaaTMaNaa& >aGaviTa vaSaudeve TadNaué[v<aMa‚
NaNaSaªqTaRNaaraDaNaaNauSMar<aai>aYaaeGaeNaaXaUNYaSak-l/YaaMaeNa k-ale/Na SaMaaveiXaTa&
SaMaaihTa& k-aTSNYaeRNa MaNaSTatau PauNaMaRMaabuDaSYaaraNMa*GaSauTaMaNau PairSauóav )) 29 ))
aho kañöaà bhrañöo 'ham ätmavatäm anupathäd
yad-vimukta-samasta-saìgasya vivikta-puëyäraëya-çaraëasyätmavata ätmani
sarveñäm ätmanäà bhagavati väsudeve
tad-anuçravaëa-manana-saìkértanärädhanänusmaraëäbhiyogenäçünya-sakala
-yämena kälena samäveçitaà samähitaà kärtsnyena manas tat tu punar
mamäbudhasyärän måga-sutam anu parisusräva.
SYNONYMS
aho kañöam—alas, what a miserable condition of life; bhrañöaù—fallen;
aham—I (am); ätma-vatäm—of great devotees who have achieved perfection;
anupathät—from the way of life; yat—from which;
vimukta-samasta-saìgasya—although having given up the association of my
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
344
real sons and home; vivikta—solitary; puëya-araëya—of a sacred forest;
çaraëasya—who had taken shelter; ätma-vataù—of one who had become
perfectly situated on the transcendental platform; ätmani—in the Supersoul;
sarveñäm—of all; ätmanäm—living entities; bhagavati—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; väsudeve—Lord Väsudeva; tat—of Him;
anuçravaëa—constantly hearing; manana—thinking; saìkértana—chanting;
ärädhana—worshiping; anusmaraëa—constantly remembering;
abhiyogena—by absorption in; açünya—filled; sakala-yämena—in which all
the hours; kälena—by time; samäveçitam—fully established;
samähitam—fixed; kärtsnyena—totally; manaù—the mind in such a situation;
tat—that mind; tu—but; punaù—again; mama—of me; abudhasya—a great
fool; ärät—from a great distance; måga-sutam—the son of a deer; anu—being
affected by; parisusräva—fell down.
TRANSLATION
In the body of a deer, Bharata Mahäräja began to lament: What misfortune!
I have fallen from the path of the self-realized. I gave up my real sons, wife and
home to advance in spiritual life, and I took shelter in a solitary holy place in
the forest. I became self-controlled and self-realized, and I engaged constantly in
devotional service, hearing, thinking, chanting, worshiping and remembering
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva. I was successful in my attempt,
so much so that my mind was always absorbed in devotional service. However,
due to my personal foolishness, my mind again became attached—this time to a
deer. Now I have obtained the body of a deer and have fallen far from my
devotional practices.
PURPORT
Due to his stringent execution of devotional service, Mahäräja Bharata
could remember the activities of his past life and how he was raised to the
spiritual platform. Due to his foolishness, he became attached to an
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
345
insignificant deer and thus fell down and had to accept the body of a deer.
This is significant for every devotee. If we misuse our position and think that
we are fully engaged in devotional service and can do whatever we like, we
have to suffer like Bharata Mahäräja and be condemned to accept the type of
body that impairs our devotional service. Only the human form is able to
execute devotional service, but if we voluntarily give this up for sense
gratification, we certainly have to be punished. This punishment is not exactly
like that endured by an ordinary materialistic person. By the grace of the
Supreme Lord, a devotee is punished in such a way that his eagerness to attain
the lotus feet of Lord Väsudeva is increased. By his intense desire, he returns
home in the next lifetime. Devotional service is very completely described
here: tad-anuçravaëa-manana-saìkértanärädhanänusmaranäbhiyogena. The
constant hearing and chanting of the glories of the Lord is recommended in
Bhagavad-gétä: satataà kértayanto mäà yatantaç ca dåòha-vratäù [Bg. 9.14].
Those who have taken to Kåñëa consciousness should be very careful that not
a single moment is wasted and that not a single moment is spent without
chanting and remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His
activities. By His own actions and by the actions of His devotees, Kåñëa
teaches us how to become cautious in devotional service. Through the medium
of Bharata Mahäräja, Kåñëa teaches us that we must be careful in the discharge
of devotional service. If we want to keep our minds completely fixed without
deviation, we must engage them in devotional service full time. As far as the
members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness are
concerned, they have sacrificed everything to push on this Kåñëa
consciousness movement. Yet they must take a lesson from the life of Bharata
Mahäräja to be very cautious and to see that not a single moment is wasted in
frivolous talk, sleep or voracious eating. Eating is not prohibited, but if we eat
voraciously we shall certainly sleep more than required. Sense gratification
ensues, and we may be degraded to a lower life form. In that way our spiritual
progress may be checked at least for the time being. The best course is to take
the advice of Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé: avyartha-kälatvam [Cc. Madhya 23.18-19].
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
346
We should see that every moment of our lives is utilized for the rendering of
devotional service and nothing else. This is the secure position for one
wanting to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 30
wTYaev& iNaGaU!iNaveRdae ivSa*JYa Ma*Gaq& MaaTar& PauNa>aRGavT+ae}aMauPaXaMaXaq‚
l/MauiNaGa<adiYaTa& Xaal/Ga]aMa& Paul/STYaPaul/haé[Ma& k-al/ÅraTPa[TYaaJaGaaMa )) 30 ))
ity evaà nigüòha-nirvedo visåjya mågéà mätaraà punar bhagavat-kñetram
upaçama-çéla-muni-gaëa-dayitaà çälagrämaà pulastya-pulahäçramaà
kälaïjarät pratyäjagäma.
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; evam—in this way; nigüòha—hidden; nirvedaù—completely
unattached to material activities; visåjya—giving up; mågém—the deer;
mätaram—its mother; punaù—again; bhagavat-kñetram—the place where the
Supreme Lord is worshiped; upaçama-çéla—completely detached from all
material attachments; muni-gaëa-dayitam—which is dear to the great saintly
residents; çälagrämam—the village known as Çälagräma;
pulastya-pulaha-äçramam—to the äçrama conducted by such great sages as
Pulastya and Pulaha; kälaïjarät—from the Kälaïjara Mountain, where he had
taken his birth in the womb of a deer; pratyäjagäma—he came back.
TRANSLATION
Although Bharata Mahäräja received the body of a deer, by constant
repentance he became completely detached from all material things. He did not
disclose these things to anyone, but he left his mother deer in a place known as
Kälaïjara Mountain, where he was born. He again went to the forest of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
347
Çälagräma and to the äçrama of Pulastya and Pulaha.
PURPORT
It is significant that Mahäräja Bharata, by the grace of Väsudeva,
remembered his past life. He did not waste a moment; he returned to
Pulaha-äçrama to the village known as Çälagräma. Association is very
meaningful; therefore ISKCON tries to perfect one who enters the society.
The members of this society should always remember that the society is not
like a free hotel. All the members should be very careful to execute their
spiritual duties so that whoever comes will automatically become a devotee and
will be able to return back to Godhead in this very life. Although Bharata
Mahäräja acquired the body of a deer, he again left his hearth and home, in
this case the Mountain Kälaïjara. No one should be captivated by his
birthplace and family; one should take shelter of the association of devotees
and cultivate Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 31
TaiSMaàiPa k-al&/ Pa[Taq+aMaa<a" Sa(r)aÀ >a*XaMauiÜGan AaTMaSahcr" XauZk-Pa<aR‚
Ta*<avqåDaa vTaRMaaNaae Ma*GaTviNaiMataavSaaNaMaev Ga<aYaNMa*GaXarqr& TaqQaaeRd‚
k-i(c)-àMauTSaSaJaR )) 31 ))
tasminn api kälaà pratékñamäëaù saìgäc ca bhåçam udvigna ätma-sahacaraù
çuñka-parëa-tåëa-vérudhä vartamäno mågatva-nimittävasänam eva gaëayan
måga-çaréraà térthodaka-klinnam ut-sasarja.
SYNONYMS
tasmin api—in that äçrama (Pulaha-äçrama); kälam—the end of the duration
of life in the deer body; pratékñamäëaù—always waiting for; saìgät—from
association; ca—and; bhåçam—constantly; udvignaù—full of anxiety;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
348
ätma-sahacaraù—having the Supersoul as the only constant companion (no
one should think of being alone); çuñka-parëa-tåëa-vérudhä—by eating only
the dry leaves and herbs; vartamänaù—existing; mågatva-nimitta—of the cause
of a deer's body; avasänam—the end; eva—only; gaëayan—considering;
måga-çaréram—the body of a deer; tértha-udaka-klinnam—bathing in the water
of that holy place; utsasarja—gave up.
TRANSLATION
Remaining in that äçrama, the great King Bharata Mahäräja was now very
careful not to fall victim to bad association. Without disclosing his past to
anyone, he remained in that äçrama and ate dry leaves only. He was not exactly
alone, for he had the association of the Supersoul. In this way he waited for
death in the body of a deer. Bathing in that holy place, he finally gave up that
body.
PURPORT
Holy places like Våndävana, Hardwar, Prayäga and Jagannätha Puré are
especially meant for the execution of devotional service. Våndävana
specifically is the most exalted and preferred holy place for Vaiñëava devotees
of Lord Kåñëa who are aspiring to return back to Godhead, the Vaikuëöha
planets. There are many devotees in Våndävana who regularly bathe in the
Yamunä, and this cleanses all the contamination of the material world. By
constantly chanting and hearing the holy names and pastimes of the Supreme
Lord, one certainly becomes purified and becomes a fit candidate for
liberation. However, if one purposefully falls victim to sense gratification, he
has to be punished, at least for one lifetime, like Bharata Mahäräja.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Eighth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "A Description of the Character of Bharata
Mahäräja."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
349
9. The Supreme Character of Jaòa Bharata
In this chapter Bharata Mahäräja's attainment of the body of a brähmaëa is
described. In this body he remained like one dull, deaf and dumb, so much so
that when he was brought before the goddess Kälé to be killed as a sacrifice, he
never protested but remained silent. After having given up the body of a deer,
he took birth in the womb of the youngest wife of a brähmaëa. In this life he
could also remember the activities of his past life, and in order to avoid the
influence of society, he remained like a deaf and dumb person. He was very
careful not to fall down again. He did not mix with anyone who was not a
devotee. This process should be adopted by every devotee. As advised by Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu: asat-saìga-tyäga-ei vaiñëava-äcära [Cc. Madhya 22.87].
One should strictly avoid the company of nondevotees, even though they may
be family members. When Bharata Mahäräja was in the body of a brähmaëa,
the people in the neighborhood thought of him as a crazy, dull fellow, but
within he was always chanting and remembering Väsudeva, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Although his father wanted to give him an education
and purify him as a brähmaëa by offering him the sacred thread, he remained
in such a way that his father and mother could understand that he was crazy
and not interested in the reformatory method. Nonetheless, he remained fully
Kåñëa conscious, even without undergoing such official ceremonies. Due to his
silence, some people who were no better than animals began to tease him in
many ways, but he tolerated this. After the death of his father and mother, his
stepmother and stepbrothers began to treat him very poorly. They would give
him the most condemned food, but still he did not mind; he remained
completely absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness. He was ordered by his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
350
stepbrothers and mother to guard a paddy field one night, and at that time the
leader of a dacoit party took him away and tried to kill him by offering him as
a sacrifice before Bhadra Kälé. When the dacoits brought Bharata Mahäräja
before the goddess Kälé and raised a chopper to kill him, the goddess Kälé
became immediately alarmed due to the mistreatment of a devotee. She came
out of the deity and, taking the chopper in her own hands, killed all the
dacoits there. Thus a pure devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead can
remain silent despite the mistreatment of nondevotees. Rogues and dacoits
who misbehave toward a devotee are punished at last by the arrangement of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXTS 1-2
é[qXauk- ovac
AQa k-SYaicd( iÜJavrSYaai(r)r"Pa[vrSYaXaMadMaTaPa"SvaDYaaYaaDYaYaNaTYaaGa‚
SaNTaaeziTaiTa+aaPa[é[YaivÛaNaSaUYaaTMajaNaaNaNdYau¢-SYaaTMaSad*Xaé[uTaXaql/acaræPaaEda‚
YaRGau<aa Nav SaaedYaaR A(r)Jaa b>aUvuiMaRQauNa& c YavqYaSYaa& >aaYaaRYaaMa( )) 1 ))
YaSTau Ta}a PauMaa&STa& ParMa>aaGavTa& raJaizRPa[vr& >arTaMauTSa*íMa*GaXarqr& crMa‚
Xarqre<a ivPa[Tv& GaTaMaahu" )) 2 ))
çré-çuka uväca
atha kasyacid dvija-varasyäìgiraù-pravarasya
çama-dama-tapaù-svädhyäyädhyayana-tyäga-santoña-titikñä-praçraya-vidyäna
süyätma-jïänänanda-yuktasyätma-sadåça-çruta-çéläcära-rüpaudärya-guëä
nava sodaryä aìgajä babhüvur mithunaà ca yavéyasyäà bhäryäyäm yas tu
tatra pumäàs taà parama-bhägavataà räjarñi-pravaraà bharatam
utsåñöa-måga-çaréraà carama-çaréreëa vipratvaà gatam ähuù.
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
351
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé continued to speak; atha—thereafter;
kasyacit—of some; dvija-varasya—brähmaëa; aìgiraù-pravarasya—who came
in the dynasty of the great saint Aìgirä; çama—control of the mind;
dama—control of the senses; tapaù—practice of austerities and penances;
svädhyäya—recitation of the Vedic literatures; adhyayana—studying;
tyäga—renunciation; santoña—satisfaction; titikñä—tolerance; praçraya—very
gentle; vidyä—knowledge; anasüya—without envy;
ätma-jïäna-änanda—satisfied in self-realization; yuktasya—who was qualified
with; ätma-sadåça—and exactly like himself; çruta—in education; çéla—in
character; äcära—in behavior; rüpa—in beauty; audärya—in magnanimity;
guëäù—possessing all these qualities; nava sa-udaryäù—nine brothers born of
the same womb; aìga-jäù—sons; babhüvuù—were born; mithunam—a twin
brother and sister; ca—and; yavéyasyäm—in the youngest; bhäryäyäm—wife;
yaù—who; tu—but; tatra—there; pumän—the male child; tam—him;
parama-bhägavatam—the most exalted devotee; räja-åñi—of saintly kings;
pravaram—most honored; bharatam—Bharata Mahäräja; utsåñöa—having
given up; måga-çaréram—the body of a deer; carama-çaréreëa—with the last
body; vipratvam—being a brähmaëa; gatam—obtained; ähuù—they said.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, after giving up the body
of a deer, Bharata Mahäräja took birth in a very pure brähmaëa family. There
was a brähmaëa who belonged to the dynasty of Aìgirä. He was fully qualified
with brahminical qualifications. He could control his mind and senses, and he
had studied the Vedic literatures and other subsidiary literatures. He was expert
in giving charity, and he was always satisfied, tolerant, very gentle, learned and
nonenvious. He was self-realized and engaged in the devotional service of the
Lord. He remained always in a trance. He had nine equally qualified sons by his
first wife, and by his second wife he begot twins—a brother and a sister, of
which the male child was said to be the topmost devotee and foremost of saintly
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
352
kings—Bharata Mahäräja. This, then, is the story of the birth he took after
giving up the body of a deer.
PURPORT
Bharata Mahäräja was a great devotee, but he did not attain success in one
life. In Bhagavad-gétä it is said that a devotee who does not fulfill his
devotional duties in one life is given the chance to be born in a fully qualified
brähmaëa family or a rich kñatriya or vaiçya family. Çucénäà çrématäà gehe (Bg.
6.41). Bharata Mahäräja was the firstborn son of Mahäräja Åñabha in a rich
kñatriya family, but due to his willful negligence of his spiritual duties and his
excessive attachment to an insignificant deer, he was obliged to take birth as
the son of a deer. However, due to his strong position as a devotee, he was
gifted with the remembrance of his past life. Being repentant, he remained in a
solitary forest and always thought of Kåñëa. Then he was given the chance to
take birth in a very good brähmaëa family.
TEXT 3
Ta}aaiPa SvJaNaSa(r)aÀ >a*XaMauiÜJaMaaNaae >aGavTa" k-MaRbNDaivß&SaNaé[v<aSMa‚
r<aGau<aivvr<acr<aarivNdYauGal&/ MaNaSaa ivdDadaTMaNa" Pa[iTagaaTaMaaXaªMaaNaae
>aGavdNauGa]he<aaNauSMa*TaSvPaUvRJaNMaavil/raTMaaNaMauNMataJa@aNDabiDarSvæPae<a dXaR‚
YaaMaaSa l/aek-SYa )) 3 ))
taträpi svajana-saìgäc ca bhåçam udvijamäno bhagavataù
karma-bandha-vidhvaàsana-çravaëa-smaraëa-guëa-vivaraëa-caraëäravindayugalaà
manasä vidadhad ätmanaù pratighätam äçaìkamäno
bhagavad-anugraheëänusmåta-sva-pürva-janmävalir ätmänam
unmatta-jaòändha-badhira-svarüpeëa darçayäm äsa lokasya.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
353
SYNONYMS
tatra api—in that brähmaëa birth also; sva-jana-saìgät—from association with
relatives and friends; ca—and; bhåçam—greatly; udvijamänaù—being always
afraid that he would fall down again; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; karma-bandha—the bondage of the reactions of fruitive
activities; vidhvaàsana—which vanquishes; çravaëa—hearing;
smaraëa—remembering; guëa-vivaraëa—hearing descriptions of the qualities
of the Lord; caraëa-aravinda—lotus feet; yugalam—the two; manasä—with
the mind; vidadhat—always thinking of; ätmanaù—of his soul;
pratighätam—obstruction on the path of devotional service;
äçaìkamänaù—always fearing; bhagavat-anugraheëa—by the special mercy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anusmåta—remembered; sva-pürva—his
own previous; janma-ävaliù—string of births; ätmänam—himself;
unmatta—mad; jaòa—dull; andha—blind; badhira—and deaf;
svarüpeëa—with these features; darçayäm äsa—he exhibited; lokasya—to
people in general.
TRANSLATION
Due to his being especially gifted with the Lord's mercy, Bharata Mahäräja
could remember the incidents of his past life. Although he received the body of
a brähmaëa, he was still very much afraid of his relatives and friends who were
not devotees. He was always very cautious of such association because he feared
that he would again fall down. Consequently he manifested himself before the
public eye as a madman—dull, blind and deaf—so that others would not try to
talk to him. In this way he saved himself from bad association. Within he was
always thinking of the lotus feet of the Lord and chanting the Lord's glories,
which save one from the bondage of fruitive action. In this way he saved
himself from the onslaught of nondevotee associates.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
354
PURPORT
Every living entity is bound by different activities due to association with
the modes of nature. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, käraëaà guëa-saìgo 'sya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu: "This is due to his association with that material
nature. Thus he meets with good and evil among various species." (Bg. 13.22)
We get different types of bodies among 8,400,000 species according to our
karma. Karmaëä daiva-netreëa: [SB 3.31.1] we work under the influence of
material nature contaminated by the three modes, and thus we get a certain
type of body according to superior order. This is called karma-bandha. To get
out of this karma-bandha, one must engage himself in devotional service. Then
one will not be affected by the modes of material nature.
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman." (Bg. 14.26) To remain immune from the material
qualities, one must engage himself in devotional service—çravaëaà kértanaà
viñëoù [SB 7.5.23]. That is the perfection of life. When Mahäräja Bharata took
birth as a brähmaëa, he was not very interested in the duties of a brähmaëa,
but within he remained a pure Vaiñëava, always thinking of the lotus feet of
the Lord. As advised in Bhagavad-gétä: man-manä bhava mad-bhakto mad-yäjé
mäà namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. This is the only process by which one can be saved
from the danger of repeated birth and death.
TEXT 4
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
355
TaSYaaiPa h va AaTMaJaSYa ivPa[" Pau}aòehaNaubÖMaNaa AaSaMaavTaRNaaTSa&Sk-araNa(
YaQaaePadeXa& ivdDaaNa oPaNaqTaSYa c PauNa" XaaEcacMaNaadqNa( k-MaRiNaYaMaaNa‚
Nai>aPa[eTaaNaiPa SaMaiXa+aYadNauiXaíeNa ih >aaVYa& iPaTau" Pau}ae<aeiTa )) 4 ))
tasyäpi ha vä ätmajasya vipraù putra-snehänubaddha-manä äsamävartanät
saàskärän yathopadeçaà vidadhäna upanétasya ca punaù çaucäcamanädén
karma-niyamän anabhipretän api samaçikñayad anuçiñöena hi bhävyaà pituù
putreëeti.
SYNONYMS
tasya—of him; api ha vä—certainly; ätma-jasya—of his son; vipraù—the
brähmaëa father of Jaòa Bharata (mad, crazy Bharata);
putra-sneha-anubaddha-manäù—who was obliged by affection for his son;
ä-sama-ävartanät—until the end of the brahmacarya-äçrama; saàskärän—the
purificatory processes; yathä-upadeçam—as prescribed in the çästras;
vidadhänaù—performing; upanétasya—of one who has a sacred thread;
ca—also; punaù—again; çauca-äcamana-ädén—practice of cleanliness,
washing of the mouth, legs and hands, etc.; karma-niyamän—the regulative
principles of fruitive activities; anabhipretän api—although not wanted by Jaòa
Bharata; samaçikñayat—taught; anuçiñöena—taught to follow the regulative
principles; hi—indeed; bhävyam—should be; pituù—from the father;
putreëa—the son; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëa father's mind was always filled with affection for his son,
Jaòa Bharata [Bharata Mahäräja]. Therefore he was always attached to Jaòa
Bharata. Because Jaòa Bharata was unfit to enter the gåhastha-äçrama, he
simply executed the purificatory process up to the end of the
brahmacarya-äçrama. Although Jaòa Bharata was unwilling to accept his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
356
father's instructions, the brähmaëa nonetheless instructed him in how to keep
clean and how to wash, thinking that the son should be taught by the father.
PURPORT
Jaòa Bharata was Bharata Mahäräja in the body of a brähmaëa, and he
outwardly conducted himself as if he were dull, deaf, dumb and blind. Actually
he was quite alert within. He knew perfectly well of the results of fruitive
activity and the results of devotional service. In the body of a brähmaëa,
Mahäräja Bharata was completely absorbed in devotional service within;
therefore it was not at all necessary for him to execute the regulative
principles of fruitive activity. As confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam:
svanuñöhitasya dharmasya saàsiddhir hari-toñaëam (SB 1.2.13). One has to
satisfy Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the perfection of the
regulative principles of fruitive activity. Besides that, it is stated in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam:
dharmaù svanuñöhitaù puàsäà
viñvaksena-kathäsu yaù
notpädayed yadi ratià
çrama eva hi kevalam
"Duties [dharma] executed by men, regardless of occupation, are only so much
useless labor if they do not provoke attraction for the message of the Supreme
Lord." (SB 1.2.8) These karma-käëòa activities are required as long as one has
not developed Kåñëa consciousness. If one is developed in Kåñëa
consciousness, there is no need to execute the prior regulative principles of
karma-käëòa. Çréla Mädhavendra Puré said, "O regulative principles of
karma-käëòa, please excuse me. I cannot follow all these regulative principles,
for I am fully engaged in devotional service." He expressed the desire to sit
somewhere beneath a tree and continue chanting the Hare Kåñëa
mahä-mantra. Consequently he did not execute all the regulative principles.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
357
Similarly, Haridäsa Öhäkura was born in a Mohammedan family. From the
very beginning of his life he was never trained in the karma-käëòa system, but
because he was always chanting the holy name of the Lord, Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu accepted him as nämäcärya, the authority in chanting the holy
name. As Jaòa Bharata, Bharata Mahäräja was always engaged in devotional
service within his mind. Since he had executed the regulative principles
continuously for three lives, he was not interested in continuing to execute
them, although his brähmaëa father wanted him to do so.
TEXT 5
Sa caiPa Tadu h iPaTa*SaiàDaavevaSaDa]qcqNaiMav SMa k-raeiTa ^Nda&SYa‚
DYaaPaiYaZYaNa( Sah VYaaôiTai>a" SaPa[<aviXariñPadq& Saaiv}aq& Ga]EZMavaSaiNTak-aNMaa‚
SaaNaDaqYaaNaMaPYaSaMaveTaæPa& Ga]ahYaaMaaSa )) 5 ))
sa cäpi tad u ha pitå-sannidhäv eväsadhrécénam iva sma karoti chandäàsy
adhyäpayiñyan saha vyähåtibhiù sapraëava-çiras tripadéà sävitréà
graiñma-väsantikän mäsän adhéyänam apy asamaveta-rüpaà grähayäm äsa.
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Jaòa Bharata); ca—also; api—indeed; tat u ha—that which was
instructed by his father; pitå-sannidhau—in the presence of his father;
eva—even; asadhrécénam iva—not correct, as if he could not understand
anything; sma karoti—used to perform; chandäàsi adhyäpayiñyan—desiring to
teach him Vedic mantras during the months beginning with Çrävaëa or during
the period of Cäturmäsya; saha—along with; vyähåtibhiù—the utterance of the
names of the heavenly planets (bhüù, bhuvaù, svaù); sa-praëava-çiraù—headed
by oàkära; tri-padém—three-footed; sävitrém—the Gäyatré mantra;
graiñma-väsantikän—for four months, beginning with Caitra, on the fifteenth
of May; mäsän—the months; adhéyänam api—although fully studying;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
358
asamaveta-rüpam—in an incomplete form; grähayäm äsa—he made him learn.
TRANSLATION
Jaòa Bharata behaved before his father like a fool, despite his father's
adequately instructing him in Vedic knowledge. He behaved in that way so that
his father would know that he was unfit for instruction and would abandon the
attempt to instruct him further. He would behave in a completely opposite way.
Although instructed to wash his hands after evacuating, he would wash them
before. Nonetheless, his father wanted to give him Vedic instructions during
the spring and summer. He tried to teach him the Gäyatré mantra along with
oàkära and vyähåti, but after four months, his father still was not successful in
instructing him.
TEXT 6
Wv& SvTaNauJa AaTMaNYaNauraGaaveiXaTaicta" XaaEcaDYaYaNav]TaiNaYaMaGauvRNal/‚
Xaué[Uz<aaÛaEPaku-vaR<ak-k-MaaR<YaNai>aYau¢-aNYaiPa SaMaNauiXaíeNa >aaVYaiMaTYaSadaGa]h"
Pau}aMaNauXaaSYa SvYa& Taavd( ANaiDaGaTaMaNaaerQa" k-ale/NaaPa[MataeNa SvYa& Ga*h
Wv Pa[Mata oPaSa&ôTa" )) 6 ))
evaà sva-tanuja ätmany anurägäveçita-cittaù
çaucädhyayana-vrata-niyama-gurv-anala-çuçrüñaëädy-aupakurväëaka-karmä
ëy anabhiyuktäny api samanuçiñöena bhävyam ity asad-ägrahaù putram
anuçäsya svayaà tävad anadhigata-manorathaù kälenäpramattena svayaà
gåha eva pramatta upasaàhåtaù.
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; sva—own; tanu-je—in his son, Jaòa Bharata; ätmani—whom he
considered to be himself; anuräga-äveçita-cittaù—the brähmaëa who was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
359
absorbed in love for his son; çauca—cleanliness; adhyayana—study of Vedic
literature; vrata—accepting all the vows; niyama—regulative principles;
guru—of the spiritual master; anala—of the fire; çuçrüñaëa-ädi—the service,
etc.; aupakurväëaka—of the brahmacarya-äçrama; karmäëi—all the activities;
anabhiyuktäni api—although not liked by his son; samanuçiñöena—fully
instructed; bhävyam—should be; iti—thus; asat-ägrahaù—having unsuitable
obstinacy; putram—his son; anuçäsya—instructing; svayam—himself;
tävat—in that way; anadhigata-manorathaù—not having fulfilled his desires;
kälena—by the influence of time; apramattena—which is not forgetful;
svayam—he himself; gåhe—to his home; eva—certainly; pramattaù—being
madly attached; upasaàhåtaù—died.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëa father of Jaòa Bharata considered his son his heart and soul,
and therefore he was very much attached to him. He thought it wise to educate
his son properly, and being absorbed in this unsuccessful endeavor, he tried to
teach his son the rules and regulations of brahmacarya—including the
execution of the Vedic vows, cleanliness, study of the Vedas, the regulative
methods, service to the spiritual master and the method of offering a fire
sacrifice. He tried his best to teach his son in this way, but all his endeavors
failed. In his heart he hoped that his son would be a learned scholar, but all his
attempts were unsuccessful. Like everyone, this brähmaëa was attached to his
home, and he had forgotten that someday he would die. Death, however, was
not forgetful. At the proper time, death appeared and took him away.
PURPORT
Those too attached to family life, who forget that death comes in the future
to take them away, become attached and unable to finish their duty as human
beings. The duty of human life is to solve all the problems of life, but instead
people remain attached to family affairs and duties. Although they forget
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
360
death, death will not forget them. Suddenly they will be kicked off the
platform of a peaceful family life. One may forget that he has to die, but death
never forgets. Death comes always at the right time. The brähmaëa father of
Jaòa Bharata wanted to teach his son the process of brahmacarya, but he was
unsuccessful due to his son's unwillingness to undergo the process of Vedic
advancement. Jaòa Bharata was simply concerned with returning home, back
to Godhead, by executing devotional service through çravaëaà kértanaà
viñëoù [SB 7.5.23]. He did not care for the Vedic instructions of his father.
When one is fully interested in the service of the Lord, he does not need to
follow all the regulative principles enunciated in the Vedas. Of course, for an
ordinary man, the Vedic principles are imperative. No one can avoid them.
But when one has attained the perfection of devotional service, it is not very
important to follow the Vedic principles. Lord Kåñëa advised Arjuna to ascend
to the platform of nistraiguëya, the transcendental position above the Vedic
principles.
traiguëya-viñayä vedä
nistraiguëyo bhavärjuna
nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
niryoga-kñema ätmavän
"The Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material nature.
Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all of them. Be free
from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and safety, and be established
in the Self." (Bg. 2.45)
TEXT 7
AQa YavqYaSaq iÜJaSaTaq SvGa>aRJaaTa& iMaQauNa& SaPaTNYaa oPaNYaSYa SvYa‚
MaNauSa&SQaYaa PaiTal/aek-MaGaaTa( )) 7 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
361
atha yavéyasé dvija-saté sva-garbha-jätaà mithunaà sapatnyä upanyasya
svayam anusaàsthayä patilokam agät.
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; yavéyasé—the youngest; dvija-saté—wife of the brähmaëa;
sva-garbha-jätam—born of her womb; mithunam—the twins; sapatnyai—unto
the co-wife; upanyasya—entrusting; svayam—personally; anusaàsthayä—by
following her husband; pati-lokam—the planet named Patiloka; agät—went to.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the brähmaëa's younger wife, after entrusting her twin
children—the boy and girl—to the elder wife, departed for Patiloka, voluntarily
dying with her husband.
TEXT 8
iPaTaYauRParTae >a]aTar WNaMaTaTPa[>aavivdñYYaa& ivÛaYaaMaev PaYaRviSaTaMaTaYaae Na
ParivÛaYaa& Ja@MaiTairiTa >a]aTaurNauXaaSaNaiNabRNDaaNNYav*TSaNTa )) 8 ))
pitary uparate bhrätara enam atat-prabhäva-vidas trayyäà vidyäyäm eva
paryavasita-matayo na para-vidyäyäà jaòa-matir iti bhrätur
anuçäsana-nirbandhän nyavåtsanta.
SYNONYMS
pitari uparate—after the death of the father; bhrätaraù—the stepbrothers;
enam—unto this Bharata (Jaòa Bharata); a-tat-prabhäva-vidaù—without
understanding his exalted position; trayyäm—of the three Vedas;
vidyäyäm—in the matter of material ritualistic knowledge; eva—indeed;
paryavasita—settled; matayaù—whose minds; na—not; para-vidyäyäm—in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
362
transcendental knowledge of spiritual life (devotional service);
jaòa-matiù—most dull intelligence; iti—thus; bhrätuù—their brother (Jaòa
Bharata); anuçäsana-nirbandhät—from the endeavor to teach;
nyavåtsanta—stopped.
TRANSLATION
After the father died, the nine stepbrothers of Jaòa Bharata, who considered
Jaòa Bharata dull and brainless, abandoned the father's attempt to give Jaòa
Bharata a complete education. The stepbrothers of Jaòa Bharata were learned in
the three Vedas—the Åg Veda, Säma Veda and Yajur Veda—which very much
encourage fruitive activity. The nine brothers were not at all spiritually
enlightened in devotional service to the Lord. Consequently they could not
understand the highly exalted position of Jaòa Bharata.
TEXTS 9-10
Sa c Pa[ak*-TaEiÜRPadPaXaui>aåNMataJa@biDarMaUke-TYai>a>aaZYaMaa<aae Yada TadNauæ‚
Paai<a Pa[>aazTae k-MaaRi<a c k-aYaRMaa<a" PareC^Yaa k-raeiTa iviíTaae veTaNaTaae
va YaaÁYaa Yad*C^Yaa vaePaSaaidTaMaLPa& bhu Ma*í& k-dà& va>YavhriTa
Par& NaeiNd]YaPa[qiTaiNaiMataMa( ) iNaTYaiNav*taiNaiMataSviSaÖivXauÖaNau>avaNaNdSvaTMa‚
l/a>aaiDaGaMa" Sau%du"%YaaeÜRNÜiNaiMataYaaerSaM>aaivTadehai>aMaaNa" )) 9 ))
XaqTaaeZ<avaTavzeRzu v*z wvaNaav*Taa(r)" PaqNa" Sa&hNaNaa(r)" SQai<@l/Sa&veXaNaaNau‚
NMadRNaaMaÂNarJaSaa MahaMai<airvaNai>aVYa¢-b]øvcRSa" ku-Pa$=av*Tak-i$=åPavqTaeNaae‚
åMaiz<aa iÜJaaiTairiTa b]øbNDauiriTa Sa&jYaaTaJjJaNaavMaTaae ivccar )) 10 ))
sa ca präkåtair dvipada-paçubhir unmatta-jaòa-badhira-mükety
abhibhäñyamäëo yadä tad-anurüpäëi prabhäñate karmäëi ca käryamäëaù
parecchayä karoti viñöito vetanato vä yäcïayä yadåcchayä vopasäditam alpaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
363
bahu måñöaà kadannaà väbhyavaharati paraà nendriya-préti-nimittam.
nitya-nivåtta-nimitta-sva-siddha-viçuddhänubhavänanda-svätma-läbhädhigam
aù sukha-duùkhayor dvandva-nimittayor asambhävita-dehäbhimänaù.
çétoñëa-väta-varñeñu våña ivänävåtäìgaù pénaù saàhananäìgaù
sthaëòila-saàveçanänunmardanämajjana-rajasä mahämaëir
ivänabhivyakta-brahma-varcasaù kupaöävåta-kaöir upavétenoru-mañiëä dvijätir
iti brahma-bandhur iti saàjïayätaj-jïajanävamato vicacära.
SYNONYMS
saù ca—he also; präkåtaiù—by common persons who have no access to
spiritual knowledge; dvi-pada-paçubhiù—who are nothing but animals with two
legs; unmatta—mad; jaòa—dull; badhira—deaf; müka—dumb; iti—thus;
abhibhäñyamäëaù—being addressed; yadä—when; tat-anurüpäëi—words
suitable to reply to theirs; prabhäñate—he used to speak; karmäëi—activities;
ca—also; käryamäëaù—being caused to execute; para-icchayä—by the order of
others; karoti—he used to act; viñöitaù—by force; vetanataù—or by some wages;
vä—either; yäcïayä—by begging; yadåcchayä—by its own accord; vä—or;
upasäditam—gotten; alpam—a very small quantity; bahu—a large quantity;
måñöam—very palatable; kat-annam—stale, tasteless foods; vä—or;
abhyavaharati—he used to eat; param—only; na—not;
indriya-préti-nimittam—for the satisfaction of the senses; nitya—eternally;
nivåtta—stopped; nimitta—fruitive activity; sva-siddha—by self-accomplished;
viçuddha—transcendental; anubhava-änanda—blissful perception;
sva-ätma-läbha-adhigamaù—who has achieved knowledge of the self;
sukha-duùkhayoù—in happiness and distress; dvandva-nimittayoù—in the
causes of duality; asambhävita-deha-abhimänaù—not identified with the body;
çéta—in the winter; uñëa—in the summer; väta—in the wind; varñeñu—in the
rainfall; våñaù—a bull; iva—like; anävåta-aìgaù—uncovered body;
pénaù—very strong; saàhanana-aìgaù—whose limbs were firm;
sthaëòila-saàveçana—from lying down on the ground;
anunmardana—without any massage; amajjana—without bathing; rajasä—by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
364
dirt; mahä-maëiù—highly valuable gem; iva—like;
anabhivyakta—unmanifested; brahma-varcasaù—spiritual splendor;
ku-paöa-ävåta—covered by a dirty cloth; kaöiù—whose loins; upavétena—with a
sacred thread; uru-mañiëä—which was highly blackish due to dirt;
dvi-jätiù—born in a brähmaëa family; iti—thus (saying out of contempt);
brahma-bandhuù—a friend of a brähmaëa; iti—thus; saàjïayä—by such
names; a-tat-jïa-jana—by persons not knowing his real position;
avamataù—being disrespected; vicacära—he wandered.
TRANSLATION
Degraded men are actually no better than animals. The only difference is
that animals have four legs and such men have only two. These two-legged,
animalistic men used to call Jaòa Bharata mad, dull, deaf and dumb. They
mistreated him, and Jaòa Bharata behaved for them like a madman who was
deaf, blind or dull. He did not protest or try to convince them that he was not
so. If others wanted him to do something, he acted according to their desires.
Whatever food he could acquire by begging or by wages, and whatever came of
its own accord—be it a small quantity, palatable, stale or tasteless—he would
accept and eat. He never ate anything for sense gratification because he was
already liberated from the bodily conception, which induces one to accept
palatable or unpalatable food. He was full in the transcendental consciousness of
devotional service, and therefore he was unaffected by the dualities arising from
the bodily conception. Actually his body was as strong as a bull's, and his limbs
were very muscular. He didn't care for winter or summer, wind or rain, and he
never covered his body at any time. He lay on the ground, and never smeared
oil on his body or took a bath. Because his body was dirty, his spiritual
effulgence and knowledge were covered, just as the splendor of a valuable gem is
covered by dirt. He only wore a dirty loincloth and his sacred thread, which was
blackish. Understanding that he was born in a brähmaëa family, people would
call him a brahma-bandhu and other names. Being thus insulted and neglected
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
365
by materialistic people, he wandered here and there.
PURPORT
Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura has sung: deha-småti nähi yära,
saàsära-bandhana kähäì tära. One who has no desire to maintain the body or
who is not anxious to keep the body in order and who is satisfied in any
condition must be either mad or liberated. Actually Bharata Mahäräja in his
birth as Jaòa Bharata was completely liberated from material dualities. He was
a paramahaàsa and therefore did not care for bodily comfort.
TEXT 11
Yada Tau ParTa Aahar& k-MaRveTaNaTa wRhMaaNa" Sv>a]aTa*i>ariPa ke-dark-MaRi<a
iNaæiPaTaSTadiPa k-raeiTa ik-NTau Na SaMa& ivzMa& NYaUNaMaiDak-iMaiTa ved
k-<aiPa<Yaak-f-l/Ik-r<aku-LMaazSQaal/IPaurqzadqNYaPYaMa*Tavd>YavhriTa )) 11 ))
yadä tu parata ähäraà karma-vetanata éhamänaù sva-bhrätåbhir api
kedära-karmaëi nirüpitas tad api karoti kintu na samaà viñamaà nyünam
adhikam iti veda kaëa-piëyäka-phalé-karaëa-kulmäña-sthälépuréñädény apy
amåtavad abhyavaharati.
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; tu—but; parataù—from others; ähäram—food;
karma-vetanataù—in exchange for wages from working; éhamänaù—looking
for; sva-bhrätåbhiù api—even by his own stepbrothers; kedära-karmaëi—in
working in the field and adjusting the agricultural work; nirüpitaù—engaged;
tat api—at that time also; karoti—he used to do; kintu—but; na—not;
samam—level; viñamam—uneven; nyünam—deficient; adhikam—more raised;
iti—thus; veda—he knew; kaëa—broken rice; piëyäka—oil cakes;
phalé-karaëa—the chaff of rice; kulmäña—worm-eaten grains;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
366
sthälé-puréña-ädéni—burned rice stuck to the pot and so on; api—even;
amåta-vat—like nectar; abhyavaharati—used to eat.
TRANSLATION
Jaòa Bharata used to work only for food. His stepbrothers took advantage of
this and engaged him in agricultural field work in exchange for some food, but
actually he did not know how to work very well in the field. He did not know
where to spread dirt or where to make the ground level or uneven. His brothers
used to give him broken rice, oil cakes, the chaff of rice, worm-eaten grains and
burned grains that had stuck to the pot, but he gladly accepted all this as if it
were nectar. He did not hold any grudges and ate all this very gladly.
PURPORT
The platform of paramahaàsa is described in Bhagavad-gétä (2.15):
sama-duùkha-sukhaà dhéraà so 'måtatväya kalpate. When one is callous to all
duality, the happiness and distress of this material world, one is fit for
amåtatva, eternal life. Bharata Mahäräja was determined to finish his business
in this material world, and he did not at all care for the world of duality. He
was complete in Kåñëa consciousness and was oblivious to good and evil,
happiness and distress. As stated in Caitanya-caritämåta (Cc. Antya 4.176):
'dvaite' bhadräbhadra-jïäna, saba-'manodharma'
'ei bhäla, ei manda',—saba 'bhrama'
"In the material world, conceptions of good and bad are all mental
speculations. Therefore, saying, 'This is good and this is bad,' is all a mistake."
One has to understand that in the material world of duality, to think that this
is good or that this is bad is simply a mental concoction. However, one should
not imitate this consciousness; one should actually be situated on the spiritual
platform of neutrality.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
367
TEXT 12
AQa k-daicTk-iêd( v*zl/PaiTa>aRd]k-aLYaE PauåzPaXauMaal/>aTaaPaTYak-aMa" )) 12 ))
atha kadäcit kaçcid våñala-patir bhadra-kälyai puruña-paçum
älabhatäpatya-kämaù.
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; kadäcit—at some time; kaçcit—some; våñala-patiù—the
leader of çüdras engaged in plundering the property of others;
bhadra-kälyai—unto the goddess known as Bhadra Kälé; puruña-paçum—an
animal in the shape of a man; älabhata—started to sacrifice;
apatya-kämaù—desiring a son.
TRANSLATION
At this time, being desirous of obtaining a son, a leader of dacoits who came
from a çüdra family wanted to worship the goddess Bhadra Kälé by offering her
in sacrifice a dull man, who is considered no better than an animal.
PURPORT
Low-class men such as çüdras worship demigods like goddess Kälé, or Bhadra
Kälé, for the fulfillment of material desires. To this end, they sometimes kill a
human being before the deity. They generally choose a person who is not very
intelligent—in other words, an animal in the shape of a man.
TEXT 13
TaSYa h dEvMau¢-SYa PaXaae" Padvq& TadNaucra" PairDaavNTaae iNaiXa iNaXaqQaSaMaYae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
368
TaMaSaav*TaaYaaMaNaiDaGaTaPaXav Aak-iSMake-Na iviDaNaa ke-daraNa( vqraSaNaeNa
Ma*Gavrahaid>Ya" Sa&r+aMaa<aMai(r)r"Pa[vrSauTaMaPaXYaNa( )) 13 ))
tasya ha daiva-muktasya paçoù padavéà tad-anucaräù paridhävanto niçi
niçétha-samaye tamasävåtäyäm anadhigata-paçava äkasmikena vidhinä kedärän
véräsanena måga-varähädibhyaù saàrakñamäëam aìgiraù-pravara-sutam
apaçyan.
SYNONYMS
tasya—of the leader of the dacoits; ha—certainly; daiva-muktasya—by chance
having escaped; paçoù—of the human animal; padavém—the path;
tat-anucaräù—his followers or assistants; paridhävantaù—searching here and
there to find; niçi—at night; niçétha-samaye—at midnight; tamasä
ävåtäyäm—being covered by darkness; anadhigata-paçavaù—not catching the
man-animal; äkasmikena vidhinä—by the unexpected law of providence;
kedärän—the fields; véra-äsanena—by a seat on a raised place;
måga-varäha-ädibhyaù—from the deer, wild pigs and so on;
saàrakñamäëam—protecting; aìgiraù-pravara-sutam—the son of the
brähmaëa descending from the Äìgirä family; apaçyan—they found.
TRANSLATION
The leader of the dacoits captured a man-animal for sacrifice, but he escaped,
and the leader ordered his followers to find him. They ran in different
directions but could not find him. Wandering here and there in the middle of
the night, covered by dense darkness, they came to a paddy field where they
saw the exalted son of the Äìgirä family [Jaòa Bharata], who was sitting in an
elevated place guarding the field against the attacks of deer and wild pigs.
TEXT 14
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
369
AQa Ta WNaMaNavÛl/+a<aMavMa*XYa >aTa*Rk-MaRiNaZPaita& MaNYaMaaNaa bd(ßa rXaNaYaa
ci<@k-aGa*hMauPaiNaNYauMauRda ivk-iSaTavdNaa" )) 14 ))
atha ta enam anavadya-lakñaëam avamåçya bhartå-karma-niñpattià
manyamänä baddhvä raçanayä caëòikä-gåham upaninyur mudä
vikasita-vadanäù.
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; te—they (the servants of the leader of the dacoits);
enam—this (Jaòa Bharata); anavadya-lakñaëam—as bearing the characteristics
of a dull animal because of a fat body like a bull's and because of being deaf and
dumb; avamåçya—recognizing; bhartå-karma-niñpattim—the accomplishment
of their master's work; manyamänäù—understanding; baddhvä—binding
tightly; raçanayä—with ropes; caëòikä-gåham—to the temple of goddess Kälé;
upaninyuù—brought; mudä—with great happiness; vikasita-vadanäù—with
bright faces.
TRANSLATION
The followers and servants of the dacoit chief considered Jaòa Bharata to
possess qualities quite suitable for a man-animal, and they decided that he was a
perfect choice for sacrifice. Their faces bright with happiness, they bound him
with ropes and brought him to the temple of the goddess Kälé.
PURPORT
In some parts of India, animalistic men are still sacrificed before the goddess
Kälé. However, such a sacrifice is only performed by çüdras and dacoits. Their
business is to plunder the wealthy, and to become successful they offer an
animalistic man before the goddess Kälé. It should be noted that they never
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
370
sacrifice an intelligent man before the goddess. In the body of a brähmaëa,
Bharata Mahäräja appeared deaf and dumb, yet he was the most intelligent
man in the world. Nonetheless, being completely surrendered unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he remained in that condition and did not
protest being brought before the deity for slaughter. As we have learned from
the previous verses, he was very strong and could have very easily avoided
being bound with ropes, but he did not do anything. He simply depended on
the Supreme Personality of Godhead for his protection. Çréla Bhaktivinoda
Öhäkura describes surrender unto the Supreme Lord in this way:
märabi räkhabi—yo icchä tohärä
nitya-däsa-prati tuyä adhikärä
"My Lord, I am now surrendered unto You. I am Your eternal servant, and if
You like You can kill me, or, if You like, You can protect me. In any case, I am
fully surrendered unto You."
TEXT 15
AQa Pa<aYaSTa& SviviDaNaai>aizCYaahTaeNa vaSaSaaC^aÛ >aUz<aale/Paók(-iTal/‚
k-aidi>aåPaSk*-Ta& >au¢-vNTa& DaUPadqPaMaaLYal/aJaik-Sal/Yaax(ku-rf-l/aePaharaePaeTaYaa
vEXaSaSa&SQaYaa MahTaa GaqTaSTauiTaMa*d(r)Pa<avgaaeze<a c PauåzPaXau& >ad]k-aLYaa"
PaurTa oPaveXaYaaMaaSau" )) 15 ))
atha paëayas taà sva-vidhinäbhiñicyähatena väsasäcchädya
bhüñaëälepa-srak-tilakädibhir upaskåtaà bhuktavantaà
dhüpa-dépa-mälya-läja-kisalayäìkura-phalopahäropetayä vaiçasa-saàsthayä
mahatä géta-stuti-mådaìga-paëava-ghoñeëa ca puruña-paçuà bhadra-kälyäù
purata upaveçayäm äsuù.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
371
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; paëayaù—all the followers of the dacoit; tam—him (Jaòa
Bharata); sva-vidhinä—according to their own ritualistic principles;
abhiñicya—bathing; ahatena—with new; väsasä—garments;
äcchädya—covering; bhüñaëa—ornaments; älepa—smearing the body with
sandalwood pulp; srak—a flower garland; tilaka-ädibhiù—with markings on
the body and so on; upaskåtam—completely decorated; bhuktavantam—having
eaten; dhüpa—with incense; dépa—lamps; mälya—garlands; läja—parched
grain; kisalaya-aìkura—twigs and sprouts; phala—fruits; upahära—other
paraphernalia; upetayä—fully equipped; vaiçasa-saàsthayä—with complete
arrangements for sacrifice; mahatä—great; géta-stuti—of songs and prayers;
mådaìga—of the drums; paëava—of the bugles; ghoñeëa—by vibration;
ca—also; puruña-paçum—the man-animal; bhadra-kälyäù—of the goddess Kälé;
purataù—just in front; upaveçayäm äsuù—made him sit down.
TRANSLATION
After this, all the thieves, according to their imaginative ritual for killing
animalistic men, bathed Jaòa Bharata, dressed him in new clothes, decorated
him with ornaments befitting an animal, smeared his body with scented oils and
decorated him with tilaka, sandalwood pulp and garlands. They fed him
sumptuously and then brought him before the goddess Kälé, offering her
incense, lamps, garlands, parched grain, newly grown twigs, sprouts, fruits and
flowers. In this way they worshiped the deity before killing the man-animal,
and they vibrated songs and prayers and played drums and bugles. Jaòa Bharata
was then made to sit down before the deity.
PURPORT
In this verse the word sva-vidhinä (according to their own ritualistic
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
372
principles) is very significant. According to the Vedic çästras, everything must
be done according to regulative principles, but here it is stated that the thieves
and rogues devised their own process for killing an animalistic man. The
tamasic çästras give instructions for the sacrifice of an animal like a goat or
buffalo before the goddess Kälé, but there is no mention of killing a man,
however dull he may be. This process was manufactured by the dacoits
themselves; therefore the word sva-vidhinä is used. Even at this time there are
many sacrifices being conducted without reference to the Vedic scriptures. For
instance, in Calcutta recently a slaughterhouse was being advertised as a
temple of the goddess Kälé. Meat-eaters foolishly purchase meat from such
shops, thinking it different from ordinary meat and taking it to be the prasäda
of goddess Kälé. The sacrifice of a goat or a similar animal before the goddess
Kälé is mentioned in çästras just to keep people from eating slaughterhouse
meat and becoming responsible for the killing of animals. The conditioned soul
has a natural tendency toward sex and meat-eating; consequently the çästras
grant them some concessions. Actually the çästras aim at putting an end to
these abominable activities, but they impart some regulative principles so that
gradually meat-eaters and sex hunters will be rectified.
TEXT 16
AQa v*zl/raJaPai<a" PauåzPaXaaerSa*GaaSaveNa devq& >ad]k-al/I& Ya+YaMaa<a‚
STadi>aMaiN}aTaMaiSaMaiTak-ral/iNaiXaTaMauPaadde )) 16 ))
atha våñala-räja-paëiù puruña-paçor asåg-äsavena devéà bhadra-käléà
yakñyamäëas tad-abhimantritam asim ati-karäla-niçitam upädade.
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; våñala-räja-paëiù—the so-called priest of the leader of the
dacoits (one of the thieves); puruña-paçoù—of the animalistic man for being
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
373
sacrificed (Bharata Mahäräja); asåk-äsavena—with the liquor of blood;
devém—to the deity; bhadra-kälém—the goddess Kälé; yakñyamäëaù—desiring
to offer; tat-abhimantritam—consecrated by the mantra of Bhadra Kälé;
asim—the sword; ati-karäla—very fearful; niçitam—finely sharpened;
upädade—he took up.
TRANSLATION
At this time, one of the thieves, acting as the chief priest, was ready to offer
the blood of Jaòa Bharata, whom they imagined to be an animal-man, to the
goddess Kälé to drink as a liquor. He therefore took up a very fearsome sword,
which was very sharp and, consecrating it by the mantra of Bhadra Kälé, raised
it to kill Jaòa Bharata.
TEXT 17
wiTa Taeza& v*zl/aNaa& rJaSTaMa"Pa[k*-TaqNaa& DaNaMadrJaoiTSa¢-MaNaSaa&
>aGavTk-l/avqrku-l&/ k-dQask*-TYaaeTPaQaeNa SvEr& ivhrTaa& ih&Saaivhara<aa&
k-MaaRiTadaå<a& Yad(b[ø>aUTaSYa Saa+aad(b]øizRSauTaSYa iNavOErSYa SavR>aUTaSauôd"
SaUNaaYaaMaPYaNaNauMaTaMaal/M>aNa& TaduPal/>Ya b]øTaeJaSaaiTaduivRzhe<a dNdùMaaNaeNa
vPauza SahSaaeÀca$= SaEv devq >ad]k-al/I )) 17 ))
iti teñäà våñalänäà rajas-tamaù-prakåténäà
dhana-mada-raja-utsikta-manasäà bhagavat-kalä-véra-kulaà
kadarthé-kåtyotpathena svairaà viharatäà hiàsä-vihäräëäà karmäti-däruëaà
yad brahma-bhütasya säkñäd brahmarñi-sutasya nirvairasya
sarva-bhüta-suhådaù sünäyäm apy ananumatam älambhanaà tad upalabhya
brahma-tejasäti-durviñaheëa dandahyamänena vapuñä sahasoccacäöa saiva devé
bhadra-kälé.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
374
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; teñäm—of them; våñalänäm—the çüdras, by whom all religious
principles are destroyed; rajaù—in passion; tamaù—in ignorance;
prakåténäm—having natures; dhana-mada—in the form of infatuation by
material wealth; rajaù—by passion; utsikta—puffed up; manasäm—whose
minds; bhagavat-kalä—an expansion of the plenary expansion of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; véra-kulam—the group of elevated personalities (the
brähmaëas); kat-arthé-kåtya—disrespecting; utpathena—by a wrong path;
svairam—independently; viharatäm—who are proceeding;
hiàsä-vihäräëäm—whose business is to commit violence against others;
karma—the activity; ati-däruëam—very fearful; yat—that which;
brahma-bhütasya—of a self-realized person born in a brähmaëa family;
säkñät—directly; brahma-åñi-sutasya—of the son born of a brähmaëa exalted
in spiritual consciousness; nirvairasya—who had no enemies;
sarva-bhüta-suhådaù—a well-wisher to all others; sünäyäm—at the last
moment; api—even though; ananumatam—not being sanctioned by law;
älambhanam—against the desire of the Lord; tat—that;
upalabhya—perceiving; brahma-tejasä—with the effulgence of spiritual bliss;
ati-durviñaheëa—being too bright and unbearable;
dandahyamänena—burning; vapuñä—with a physical body; sahasä—suddenly;
uccacäöa—fractured (the deity); sä—she; eva—indeed; devé—the goddess;
bhadra-kälé—Bhadra Kälé.
TRANSLATION
All the rogues and thieves who had made arrangements for the worship of
goddess Kälé were low minded and bound to the modes of passion and ignorance.
They were overpowered by the desire to become very rich; therefore they had
the audacity to disobey the injunctions of the Vedas, so much so that they were
prepared to kill Jaòa Bharata, a self-realized soul born in a brähmaëa family.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
375
Due to their envy, these dacoits brought him before the goddess Kälé for
sacrifice. Such people are always addicted to envious activities, and therefore
they dared to try to kill Jaòa Bharata. Jaòa Bharata was the best friend of all
living entities. He was no one's enemy, and he was always absorbed in
meditation on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He was born of a good
brähmaëa father, and killing him was forbidden, even though he might have
been an enemy or aggressive person. In any case, there was no reason to kill
Jaòa Bharata, and the goddess Kälé could not bear this. She could immediately
understand that these sinful dacoits were about to kill a great devotee of the
Lord. Suddenly the deity's body burst asunder, and the goddess Kälé personally
emerged from it in a body burning with an intense and intolerable effulgence.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic injunctions, only an aggressor can be killed. If a
person comes with an intent to kill, one can immediately take action and kill
in self-defense. It is also stated that one can be killed if he comes to set fire to
the home or to pollute or kidnap one's wife. Lord Rämacandra killed the entire
family of Rävaëa because Rävaëa kidnapped His wife, Sétädevé. However,
killing is not sanctioned in the çästras for other purposes. The killing of
animals in sacrifice to the demigods, who are expansions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is sanctioned for those who eat meat. This is a kind of
restriction for meat-eating. In other words, the slaughter of animals is also
restricted by certain rules and regulations in the Vedas. Considering these
points, there was no reason to kill Jaòa Bharata, who was born in a respectable,
highly exalted brähmaëa family. He was a God-realized soul and a well-wisher
to all living entities. The Vedas did not at all sanction the killing of Jaòa
Bharata by rogues and thieves. Consequently the goddess Bhadra Kälé emerged
from the deity to give protection to the Lord's devotee. Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that due to the Brahman effulgence of such a
devotee as Jaòa Bharata, the deity was fractured. Only thieves and rogues in
the modes of passion and ignorance and maddened by material opulence offer
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
376
a man in sacrifice before the goddess Kälé. This is not sanctioned by the Vedic
instructions. Presently there are many hundreds and thousands of
slaughterhouses throughout the world that are maintained by a puffed-up
population mad for material opulence. Such activities are never supported by
the Bhägavata school.
TEXT 18
>a*XaMaMazRraezaveXar>aSaivl/iSaTa>a]uku-i$=iv$Paku-i$=l/d&í\aå<ae+a<aa$=aePaaiTa>aYaaNak-‚
vdNaa hNTauk-aMaeved& MahaÆhaSaMaiTaSa&rM>ae<a ivMauÄNTaq TaTa oTPaTYa PaaPaqYaSaa&
duíaNaa& TaeNaEvaiSaNaa ivv*K<aXaqZ<aa| Gal/aTóvNTaMaSa*GaaSavMaTYauZ<a& Sah Ga<aeNa
iNaPaqYaaiTaPaaNaMadivûl/aeÀESTara& SvPaazRdE" Sah JaGaaE NaNaTaR c ivJahar c
iXar"k-Nduk-l/Il/Yaa )) 18 ))
bhåçam
amarña-roñäveça-rabhasa-vilasita-bhru-kuöi-viöapa-kuöila-daàñöräruëekñaëäöo
päti-bhayänaka-vadanä hantu-kämevedaà mahäööa-häsam ati-saàrambheëa
vimuïcanté tata utpatya päpéyasäà duñöänäà tenaiväsinä vivåkëa-çérñëäà
galät sravantam asåg-äsavam atyuñëaà saha gaëena
nipéyäti-päna-mada-vihvaloccaistaräà sva-pärñadaiù saha jagau nanarta ca
vijahära ca çiraù-kanduka-lélayä.
SYNONYMS
bhåçam—very highly; amarña—in intolerance of the offenses; roña—in anger;
äveça—of her absorption; rabhasa-vilasita—expanded by the force;
bhru-kuöi—of her eyebrows; viöapa—the branches; kuöila—curved;
daàñöra—teeth; aruëa-ékñaëa—of reddish eyes; äöopa—by the agitation;
ati—very much; bhayänaka—fearful; vadanä—having a face;
hantu-kämä—desirous to destroy; iva—as if; idam—this universe;
mahä-aööa-häsam—a greatly fearful laugh; ati—great; saàrambheëa—because
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
377
of anger; vimuïcanté—releasing; tataù—from that altar; utpatya—coming
forth; päpéyasäm—of all the sinful; duñöänäm—great offenders; tena eva
asinä—by that same chopper; vivåkëa—separated; çérñëäm—whose heads;
galät—from the neck; sravantam—oozing out; asåk-äsavam—the blood,
compared to an intoxicating beverage; ati-uñëam—very hot; saha—with;
gaëena—her associates; nipéya—drinking; ati-päna—from drinking so much;
mada—by intoxication; vihvalä—overwhelmed; uccaiù-taräm—very loudly;
sva-pärñadaiù—her own associates; saha—with; jagau—sang;
nanarta—danced; ca—also; vijahära—played; ca—also; çiraù-kanduka—using
the heads as balls; lélayä—by sports.
TRANSLATION
Intolerant of the offenses committed, the infuriated goddess Kälé flashed her
eyes and displayed her fierce, curved teeth. Her reddish eyes glowed, and she
displayed her fearsome features. She assumed a frightening body, as if she were
prepared to destroy the entire creation. Leaping violently from the altar, she
immediately decapitated all the rogues and thieves with the very sword with
which they had intended to kill Jaòa Bharata. She then began to drink the hot
blood that flowed from the necks of the beheaded rogues and thieves, as if this
blood were liquor. Indeed, she drank this intoxicant with her associates, who
were witches and female demons. Becoming intoxicated with this blood, they all
began to sing very loudly and dance as though prepared to annihilate the entire
universe. At the same time, they began to play with the heads of the rogues and
thieves, tossing them about as if they were balls.
PURPORT
It is evident from this verse that the devotees of goddess Kälé are not at all
favored by her. It is goddess Kälé's work to kill and punish the demons. Goddess
Kälé (Durgä) engages in decapitating many demons, dacoits and other
unwanted elements in society. Neglecting Kåñëa consciousness, foolish people
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
378
try to satisfy the goddess by offering her many abominable things, but
ultimately when there is a little discrepancy in this worship, the goddess
punishes the worshiper by taking his life. Demoniac people worship goddess
Kälé to obtain some material benefit, but they are not excused of the sins
performed in the name of worship. To sacrifice a man or animal before the
deity is specifically forbidden.
TEXT 19
WvMaev %lu/ Mahdi>acaraiTa§-Ma" k-aTSNYaeRNaaTMaNae f-l/iTa )) 19 ))
evam eva khalu mahad-abhicäräti-kramaù kärtsnyenätmane phalati.
SYNONYMS
evam eva—in this way; khalu—indeed; mahat—to great personalities;
abhicära—in the form of envy; ati-kramaù—the limit of offense;
kärtsnyena—always; ätmane—unto oneself; phalati—gives the result.
TRANSLATION
When an envious person commits an offense before a great personality, he is
always punished in the way mentioned above.
TEXT 20
Na va WTaiÜZ<audta Mahdd(>auTa& YadSaM>a]Ma" SviXarX^edNa AaPaiTaTae_iPa
ivMau¢-dehaÛaTMa>aavSaud*!ôdYaGa]NQaqNaa& SavRSatvSauôdaTMaNaa& iNavOEra<aa& Saa+aa‚
ÙGavTaaiNaiMazairvraYauDaeNaaPa[MataeNa TaESTaE>aaRvE" Pairr+YaMaa<aaNaa& TaTPaadMaUl/Ma‚
ku-TaiêÙYaMauPaSa*TaaNaa& >aaGavTaParMah&SaaNaaMa( )) 20 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
379
na vä etad viñëudatta mahad-adbhutaà yad asambhramaù sva-çiraç-chedana
äpatite 'pi vimukta-dehädy-ätma-bhäva-sudåòha-hådaya-granthénäà
sarva-sattva-suhåd-ätmanäà nirvairäëäà säkñäd
bhagavatänimiñäri-varäyudhenäpramattena tais tair bhävaiù
parirakñyamäëänäà tat-päda-mülam akutaçcid-bhayam upasåtänäà
bhägavata-paramahaàsänäm.
SYNONYMS
na—not; vä—or; etat—this; viñëu-datta—O Mahäräja Parékñit, who was
protected by Lord Viñëu; mahat—a great; adbhutam—wonder; yat—which;
asambhramaù—lack of perplexity; sva-çiraù-chedane—when the chopping off
of the head; äpatite—was about to happen; api—even though;
vimukta—completely liberated from; deha-ädi-ätma-bhäva—the false bodily
concept of life; su-dåòha—very strong and tight; hådaya-granthénäm—of those
whose knots within the heart; sarva-sattva-suhåt-ätmanäm—of persons who in
their hearts always wish well to all living entities; nirvairäëäm—who do not
find anyone as their enemy; säkñät—directly; bhagavatä—by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; animiña—invincible time; ari-vara—and the best of
weapons, the Sudarçana cakra; äyudhena—by Him who possesses the weapons;
apramattena—not agitated at any time; taiù taiù—by those respective;
bhävaiù—moods of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
parirakñyamäëänäm—of persons who are protected; tat-päda-mülam—at the
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; akutaçcit—from nowhere;
bhayam—fear; upasåtänäm—of those who have taken complete shelter;
bhägavata—of devotees of the Lord; parama-haàsänäm—of the most liberated
persons.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé then said to Mahäräja Parékñit: O Viñëudatta, those who
already know that the soul is separate from the body, who are liberated from the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
380
invincible knot in the heart, who are always engaged in welfare activities for all
living entities and who never contemplate harming anyone are always protected
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who carries His disc [the Sudarçana
cakra] and acts as supreme time to kill the demons and protect His devotees.
The devotees always take shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord. Therefore at all
times, even if threatened by decapitation, they remain unagitated. For them,
this is not at all wonderful.
PURPORT
These are some of the great qualities of a pure devotee of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. First, a devotee is firmly convinced of his spiritual
identity. He never identifies with the body; he is firmly convinced that the
spirit soul is different from the body. Consequently he fears nothing. Even
though his life may be threatened, he is not at all afraid. He does not even
treat an enemy like an enemy. Such are the qualifications of devotees.
Devotees are always fully dependent on the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and the Lord is always eager to give them all protection in all circumstances.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Ninth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Supreme Character of Jaòa Bharata."
10. The Discussion Between Jaòa Bharata and Mahäräja
Rahügaëa
In this chapter Bharata Mahäräja, now Jaòa Bharata, was successfully
accepted by King Rahügaëa, ruler of the states known as Sindhu and Sauvéra.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
381
The King forced Jaòa Bharata to carry his palanquin and chastised him
because he did not carry it properly. A carrier of King Rahügaëa's palanquin
was needed, and to fulfill this need the chief carriers found Jaòa Bharata as the
most likely person to do the work. He was therefore forced to carry the
palanquin. Jaòa Bharata, however, did not protest this proud order, but humbly
accepted the job and carried the palanquin. While carrying it, however, he was
very careful to see that he did not step on an ant, and whenever he saw one, he
would stop until the ant had passed. Because of this, he could not keep pace
with the other carriers. The King within the palanquin became very disturbed
and chastised Jaòa Bharata with filthy language, but Jaòa Bharata, being
completely freed from the bodily conception, did not protest; he proceeded
carrying the palanquin. When he continued as before, the King threatened
him with punishment, and being threatened by the King, Jaòa Bharata began
to talk. He protested against the filthy language used by the King when the
King chastised him, and the King, hearing the instructions of Jaòa Bharata,
was awakened to his real knowledge. When he came to his consciousness, he
understood that he had offended a great, learned and saintly person. At that
time he very humbly and respectfully prayed to Jaòa Bharata. He now wanted
to understand the deep meaning of the philosophical words used by Jaòa
Bharata, and with great sincerity, he begged his pardon. He admitted that if
one offends the lotus feet of a pure devotee, he is certainly punished by the
trident of Lord Çiva.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
AQa iSaNDauSaaEvqrPaTae rhUGa<aSYa v]JaTa w+auMaTYaaSTa$e= TaTku-l/PaiTaNaa
iXaibk-avahPauåzaNvez<aSaMaYae dEveNaaePaSaaidTa" Sa iÜJavr oPal/BDa Wz
Paqva Yauva Sa&hNaNaa(r)ae Gaae%rvd(Daur& vae!uMal/iMaiTa PaUvRiviíGa*hqTaE" Sah
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
382
Ga*hqTa" Pa[Sa>aMaTadhR ovah iXaibk-a& Sa MahaNau>aav" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
atha sindhu-sauvéra-pate rahügaëasya vrajata ikñumatyäs taöe tat-kula-patinä
çibikä-väha-puruñänveñaëa-samaye daivenopasäditaù sa dvija-vara upalabdha
eña pévä yuvä saàhananäìgo go-kharavad dhuraà voòhum alam iti
pürva-viñöi-gåhétaiù saha gåhétaù prasabham atad-arha uväha çibikäà sa
mahänubhävaù.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé continued to speak; atha—thus;
sindhu-sauvéra-pateù—of the ruler of the states known as Sindhu and Sauvéra;
rahü-gaëasya—the King known as Rahügaëa; vrajataù—while going (to the
äçrama of Kapila); ikñu-matyäù taöe—on the bank of the river known as
Ikñumaté; tat-kula-patinä—by the leader of the palanquin carriers;
çibikä-väha—to become a carrier of the palanquin;
puruña-anveñaëa-samaye—at the time of searching for a man; daivena—by
chance; upasäditaù—led near; saù—that; dvija-varaù—Jaòa Bharata, the son
of a brähmaëa; upalabdhaù—obtained; eñaù—this man; pévä—very strong and
stout; yuvä—young; saàhanana-aìgaù—having very firm limbs;
go-khara-vat—like a cow or an ass; dhuram—a load; voòhum—to carry;
alam—able; iti—thus thinking; pürva-viñöi-gåhétaiù—others who were formerly
forced to do the task; saha—with; gåhétaù—being taken; prasabham—by force;
a-tat-arhaù—although not fit for carrying the palanquin; uväha—carried;
çibikäm—the palanquin; saù—he; mahä-anubhävaù—a great soul.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, after this, King Rahügaëa,
ruler of the states known as Sindhu and Sauvéra, was going to Kapiläçrama.
When the King's chief palanquin carriers reached the banks of the River
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
383
Ikñumaté, they needed another carrier. Therefore they began searching for
someone, and by chance they came upon Jaòa Bharata. They considered the fact
that Jaòa Bharata was very young and strong and had firm limbs. Like cows and
asses, he was quite fit to carry loads. Thinking in this way, although the great
soul Jaòa Bharata was unfit for such work, they nonetheless unhesitatingly
forced him to carry the palanquin.
TEXT 2
Yada ih iÜJavrSYaezuMaa}aavl/aek-aNauGaTaeNaR SaMaaihTaa PauåzGaiTaSTada
ivzMaGaTaa& SviXaibk-a& rhUGa<a oPaDaaYaR PauåzaNaiDavhTa Aah he vae!ar"
SaaßiTa§-MaTa ik-iMaiTa ivzMaMauùTae YaaNaiMaiTa )) 2 ))
yadä hi dvija-varasyeñu-mäträvalokänugater na samähitä puruña-gatis tadä
viñama-gatäà sva-çibikäà rahügaëa upadhärya puruñän adhivahata äha he
voòhäraù sädhv atikramata kim iti viñamam uhyate yänam iti.
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; hi—certainly; dvija-varasya—of Jaòa Bharata; iñu-mätra—the
measurement of an arrow (three feet) ahead; avaloka-anugateù—from moving
only after glancing; na samähitä—not united; puruña-gatiù—the movement of
the carriers; tadä—at that time; viñama-gatäm—becoming uneven;
sva-çibikäm—his own palanquin; rahügaëaù—King Rahügaëa;
upadhärya—understanding; puruñän—unto the men; adhivahataù—who were
carrying the palanquin; äha—said; he—oh; voòhäraù—carriers of the
palanquin; sädhu atikramata—please walk evenly so that there will not be
bouncing; kim iti—for what reason; viñamam—uneven; uhyate—is being
carried; yänam—the palanquin; iti—thus.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
384
TRANSLATION
The palanquin, however, was very erratically carried by Jaòa Bharata due to
his sense of nonviolence. As he stepped forward, he checked before him every
three feet to see whether he was about to step on ants. Consequently he could
not keep pace with the other carriers. Due to this, the palanquin was shaking,
and King Rahügaëa immediately asked the carriers, "Why are you carrying this
palanquin unevenly? Better carry it properly."
PURPORT
Although Jaòa Bharata was forced to carry the palanquin, he did not give
up his sympathetic feelings toward the poor ants passing on the road. A
devotee of the Lord does not forget his devotional service and other favorable
activities, even when he is in a most distressful condition. Jaòa Bharata was a
qualified brähmaëa, highly elevated in spiritual knowledge, yet he was forced
to carry the palanquin. He did not mind this, but while walking on the road,
he could not forget his duty to avoid killing even an ant. A Vaiñëava is never
envious or unnecessarily violent. There were many ants on the path, but Jaòa
Bharata took care by looking ahead three feet. When the ants were no longer
in his way, he would place his foot on the ground. A Vaiñëava is always very
kind at heart to all living entities. In His säìkhya-yoga, Lord Kapiladeva
explains: suhådaù sarva-dehinäm [SB 3.25.21]. Living entities assume different
bodily forms. Those who are not Vaiñëavas consider only human society
worthy of their sympathy, but Kåñëa claims to be the supreme father of all life
forms. Consequently the Vaiñëava takes care not to annihilate untimely or
unnecessarily any life form. All living entities have to fulfill a certain duration
for being encaged in a particular type of material body. They have to finish the
duration allotted a particular body before being promoted or evolved to
another body. Killing an animal or any other living being simply places an
impediment in the way of his completing his term of imprisonment in a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
385
certain body. One should therefore not kill bodies for one's sense gratification,
for this will implicate one in sinful activity.
TEXT 3
AQa Ta wRìrvc" SaaePaal/M>aMauPaak-<YaaeRPaaYaTaurqYaaC^iªTaMaNaSaSTa& ivja‚
PaYaa&b>aUvu" )) 3 ))
atha ta éçvara-vacaù sopälambham upäkarëyopäya-turéyäc chaìkita-manasas
taà vijïäpayäà babhüvuù.
SYNONYMS
atha—thus; te—they (the carriers of the palanquin); éçvara-vacaù—the words
of the master, King Rahügaëa; sa-upälambham—with reproach;
upäkarëya—hearing; upäya—the means; turéyät—from the fourth one;
çaìkita-manasaù—whose minds were afraid; tam—him (the King); vijïäpayäm
babhüvuù—informed.
TRANSLATION
When the palanquin carriers heard the threatening words of Mahäräja
Rahügaëa, they became very afraid of his punishment and began to speak to
him as follows.
PURPORT
According to political science, a king sometimes tries to pacify his
subordinates, sometimes chastises them, sometimes derides them and
sometimes rewards them. In this way the king rules his subordinates. The
bearers of the palanquin could understand that the King was angry and that he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
386
would chastise them.
TEXT 4
Na vYa& Nardev Pa[Mataa >aviàYaMaaNauPaQaa" Saaßev vhaMa" ) AYaMaDauNaEv
iNaYau¢-ae_iPa Na d]uTa& v]JaiTa NaaNaeNa Sah vae!uMau h vYa& PaarYaaMa wiTa )) 4 ))
na vayaà nara-deva pramattä bhavan-niyamänupathäù sädhv eva vahämaù.
ayam adhunaiva niyukto 'pi na drutaà vrajati nänena saha voòhum u ha
vayaà pärayäma iti.
SYNONYMS
na—not; vayam—we; nara-deva—O lord among human beings (the king is
supposed to be the representative of deva, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead); pramattäù—neglectful in our duties;
bhavat-niyama-anupathäù—who are always obedient to your order;
sädhu—properly; eva—certainly; vahämaù—we are carrying; ayam—this man;
adhunä—just recently; eva—indeed; niyuktaù—being engaged to work with us;
api—although; na—not; drutam—very quickly; vrajati—works; na—not;
anena—him; saha—with; voòhum—to carry; u ha—oh; vayam—we;
pärayämaù—are able; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
O lord, please note that we are not at all negligent in discharging our duties.
We have been faithfully carrying this palanquin according to your desire, but
this man who has been recently engaged to work with us cannot walk very
swiftly. Therefore we are not able to carry the palanquin with him.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
387
The other palanquin carriers were çüdras, whereas Jaòa Bharata was not
only a high-caste brähmaëa but also a great devotee. Çüdras do not sympathize
with other living beings, but a Vaiñëava cannot act like a çüdra. Whenever a
çüdra and a brähmaëa Vaiñëava are combined, there will certainly be
imbalance in the execution of duties. The çüdras were walking with the
palanquin without at all caring for the ants on the ground, but Jaòa Bharata
could not act like a çüdra, and therefore difficulty arose.
TEXT 5
Saa&SaiGaRk-ae daez Wv NaUNaMaek-SYaaiPa SaveRza& Saa&SaiGaRk-a<aa& >aivTauMahRTaqiTa
iNaiêTYa iNaXaMYa k*-Pa<avcae raJaa rhUGa<a oPaaiSaTav*Öae_iPa iNaSaGaeR<a
bl/aTk*-Ta wRzduiTQaTaMaNYaurivSPaíb]øTaeJaSa& JaaTavedSaiMav rJaSaav*TaMaiTarah ))
5 ))
säàsargiko doña eva nünam ekasyäpi sarveñäà säàsargikäëäà bhavitum
arhatéti niçcitya niçamya kåpaëa-vaco räjä rahügaëa upäsita-våddho 'pi
nisargeëa balät kåta éñad-utthita-manyur avispañöa-brahma-tejasaà
jäta-vedasam iva rajasävåta-matir äha.
SYNONYMS
säàsargikaù—resulting from intimate association; doñaù—a fault;
eva—indeed; nünam—certainly; ekasya—of one; api—although; sarveñäm—of
all other; säàsargikäëäm—persons associated with him; bhavitum—to become;
arhati—is able; iti—thus; niçcitya—ascertaining; niçamya—by hearing;
kåpaëa-vacaù—the words of the poor servants, who were very afraid of being
punished; räjä—the King; rahügaëaù—Rahügaëa; upäsita-våddhaù—having
served and heard from many elderly sages; api—in spite of; nisargeëa—by his
personal nature, which was that of a kñatriya; balät—by force; kåtaù—done;
éñat—slightly; utthita—awakened; manyuù—whose anger; avispañöa—not
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
388
being distinctly visible; brahma-tejasam—his (Jaòa Bharata's) spiritual
effulgence; jäta-vedasam—a fire covered by ashes in Vedic ritualistic
ceremonies; iva—like; rajasä ävåta—covered by the mode of passion;
matiù—whose mind; äha—said.
TRANSLATION
King Rahügaëa could understand the speeches given by the carriers, who
were afraid of being punished. He could also understand that simply due to the
fault of one person, the palanquin was not being carried properly. Knowing this
perfectly well and hearing their appeal, he became a little angry, although he
was very advanced in political science and was very experienced. His anger
arose due to his inborn nature as a king. Actually King Rahügaëa's mind was
covered by the mode of passion, and he therefore spoke as follows to Jaòa
Bharata, whose Brahman effulgence was not clearly visible, being covered like a
fire covered by ashes.
PURPORT
The distinction between rajo-guëa and sattva-guëa is explained in this
verse. Although the King was very upright and advanced in political science
and governmental management, he was nonetheless in the mode of passion,
and therefore, due to a slight agitation, he became angry. Jaòa Bharata, despite
all kinds of injustice endured because of his deaf and dumb display, remained
silent by the strength of his spiritual advancement. Nonetheless his
brahma-tejaù, his Brahman effulgence, was indistinctly visible in his person.
TEXT 6
Ahae k-í& >a]aTaVYaR¢-MauåPairé[aNTaae dqgaRMaßaNaMaek- Wv OihvaNa( Sauicr&
NaaiTaPaqva Na Sa&hNaNaa(r)ae JarSaa caePad]uTaae >avaNa( Sa%e Naae WvaPar WTae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
389
SaºiÆNa wiTa bhuivPa[l/BDaae_PYaivÛYaa ricTad]VYaGau<ak-MaaRXaYaSvcrMak-le/vre
_vSTauiNa Sa&SQaaNaivXaeze_h& MaMaeTYaNaDYaaraeiPaTaiMaQYaaPa[TYaYaae b]ø>aUTaSTaUZ<aq&
iXaibk-a& PaUvRvduvah )) 6 ))
aho kañöaà bhrätar vyaktam uru-pariçränto dérgham adhvänam eka eva ühivän
suciraà näti-pévä na saàhananäìgo jarasä copadruto bhavän sakhe no eväpara
ete saìghaööina iti bahu-vipralabdho 'py avidyayä
racita-dravya-guëa-karmäçaya-sva-carama-kalevare 'vastuni saàsthäna-viçeñe
'haà mamety anadhyäropita-mithyä-pratyayo brahma-bhütas tüñëéà çibikäà
pürvavad uväha.
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; kañöam—how troublesome it is; bhrätaù—my dear brother;
vyaktam—clearly; uru—very much; pariçräntaù—fatigued; dérgham—a long;
adhvänam—path; ekaù—alone; eva—certainly; ühivän—you have carried;
su-ciram—for a long time; na—not; ati-pévä—very strong and stout; na—nor;
saàhanana-aìgaù—having a firm, tolerant body; jarasä—by old age; ca—also;
upadrutaù—disturbed; bhavän—yourself; sakhe—my friend; no eva—not
certainly; apare—the other; ete—all these; saìghaööinaù—co-workers;
iti—thus; bahu—very much; vipralabdhaù—sarcastically criticized;
api—although; avidyayä—by nescience; racita—manufactured;
dravya-guëa-karma-äçaya—in a combination of material elements, material
qualities, and the results of past activities and desires; sva-carama-kalevare—in
the body, which is moved by the subtle elements (mind, intelligence and ego);
avastuni—in such physical things; saàsthäna-viçeñe—having a particular
disposition; aham mama—I and mine; iti—in this way; anadhyäropita—not
interposed; mithyä—false; pratyayaù—belief; brahma-bhütaù—who was
self-realized, standing on the Brahman platform; tüñëém—being silent;
çibikäm—the palanquin; pürva-vat—as before; uväha—carried.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
390
TRANSLATION
King Rahügaëa told Jaòa Bharata: How troublesome this is, my dear brother.
You certainly appear very fatigued because you have carried this palanquin
alone without assistance for a long time and for a long distance. Besides that,
due to your old age you have become greatly troubled. My dear friend, I see that
you are not very firm, nor very strong and stout. Aren't your fellow carriers
cooperating with you?
In this way the King criticized Jaòa Bharata with sarcastic words, yet despite
being criticized in this way, Jaòa Bharata had no bodily conception of the
situation. He knew that he was not the body, for he had attained his spiritual
identity. He was neither fat, lean nor thin, nor had he anything to do with a
lump of matter, a combination of the five gross and three subtle elements. He
had nothing to do with the material body and its two hands and legs. In other
words, he had completely realized his spiritual identity [ahaà brahmäsmi]. He
was therefore unaffected by this sarcastic criticism from the King. Without
saying anything, he continued carrying the palanquin as before.
PURPORT
Jaòa Bharata was completely liberated. He did not even care when the
dacoits attempted to kill his body; he knew that he certainly was not the body.
Even if the body were killed, he would not have cared, for he was thoroughly
convinced of the proposition found in Bhagavad-gétä (2.20): na hanyate
hanyamäne çarére. He knew that he could not be killed even if his body were
killed. Although he did not protest, the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
His agent could not tolerate the injustice of the dacoits; therefore he was saved
by the mercy of Kåñëa, and the dacoits were killed. In this case, while carrying
the palanquin, he also knew that he was not the body. This body was very
strong and stout, in sound condition and quite competent to carry the
palanquin. Due to his being freed from the bodily conception, the sarcastic
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
391
words of the King did not at all affect him. The body is created according to
one's karma, and material nature supplies the ingredients for the development
of a certain type of body. The soul the body covers is different from the bodily
construction; therefore anything favorable or mischievous done to the body
does not affect the spirit soul. The Vedic injunction is asaìgo hy ayaà
puruñaù: the spirit soul is always unaffected by material arrangements.
TEXT 7
AQa PauNa" SviXaibk-aYaa& ivzMaGaTaaYaa& Pa[ku-iPaTa ovac rhUGa<a"
ik-iMadMare Tv& JaqvNMa*Taae Maa& k-dQask*-TYa >aTa*RXaaSaNaMaiTacriSa Pa[MataSYa
c Tae k-raeiMa icik-TSaa& d<@Paai<airv JaNaTaaYaa YaQaa Pa[k*-iTa& Sva&
>aiJaZYaSa wiTa )) 7 ))
atha punaù sva-çibikäyäà viñama-gatäyäà prakupita uväca rahügaëaù kim
idam are tvaà jévan-måto mäà kadarthé-kåtya bhartå-çäsanam aticarasi
pramattasya ca te karomi cikitsäà daëòa-päëir iva janatäyä yathä prakåtià
sväà bhajiñyasa iti.
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; punaù—again; sva-çibikäyäm—in his own palanquin;
viñama-gatäyäm—being unevenly carried because of Jaòa Bharata's not
walking properly; prakupitaù—becoming very angry; uväca—said;
rahügaëaù—King Rahügaëa; kim idam—what is this nonsense; are—O fool;
tvam—you; jévat—living; måtaù—dead; mäm—me;
kat-arthé-kåtya—neglecting; bhartå-çäsanam—chastisement by the master;
aticarasi—you are overstepping; pramattasya—who are almost crazy; ca—also;
te—your; karomi—I shall do; cikitsäm—proper treatment; daëòa-päëiù
iva—like Yamaräja; janatäyäù—of the people in general; yathä—so that;
prakåtim—natural position; sväm—your own; bhajiñyase—you will take to;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
392
iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, when the King saw that his palanquin was still being shaken by
the carriers, he became very angry and said: You rascal, what are you doing?
Are you dead despite the life within your body? Do you not know that I am
your master? You are disregarding me and are not carrying out my order. For
this disobedience I shall now punish you just as Yamaräja, the superintendent
of death, punishes sinful people. I shall give you proper treatment so that you
will come to your senses and do the correct thing.
TEXT 8
Wv& bûbÖMaiPa >aazMaa<a& Nardevai>aMaaNa& rJaSaa TaMaSaaNauivÖeNa
MadeNa iTarSk*-TaaXaez>aGaviTPa[YaiNake-Ta& Pai<@TaMaaiNaNa& Sa >aGavaNa( b]aø<aae
b]ø>aUTa" SavR>aUTaSauôdaTMaa YaaeGaeìrcYaaRYaa& NaaiTaVYauTPaàMaiTa& SMaYaMaaNa wv
ivGaTaSMaYa wdMaah )) 8 ))
evaà bahv abaddham api bhäñamäëaà nara-deväbhimänaà rajasä
tamasänuviddhena madena tiraskåtäçeña-bhagavat-priya-niketaà
paëòita-mäninaà sa bhagavän brähmaëo
brahma-bhüta-sarva-bhüta-suhåd-ätmä yogeçvara-caryäyäà
näti-vyutpanna-matià smayamäna iva vigata-smaya idam äha.
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; bahu—much; abaddham—nonsensical; api—although;
bhäñamäëam—talking; nara-deva-abhimänam—King Rahügaëa, who thought
himself the ruler; rajasä—by the material mode of passion; tamasä—as well as
by the mode of ignorance; anuviddhena—being increased; madena—by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
393
madness; tiraskåta—who rebuked; açeña—innumerable;
bhagavat-priya-niketam—devotees of the Lord; paëòita-mäninam—considering
himself a very learned scholar; saù—that; bhagavän—spiritually most powerful
(Jaòa Bharata); brähmaëaù—a fully qualified brähmaëa; brahma-bhüta—fully
self-realized; sarva-bhüta-suhåt-ätmä—who was thus the friend of all living
entities; yoga-éçvara—of the most advanced mystic yogés; caryäyäm—in the
behavior; na ati-vyutpanna-matim—unto King Rahügaëa, who was not actually
experienced; smayamänaù—slightly smiling; iva—like; vigata-smayaù—who
was relieved from all material pride; idam—this; äha—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Thinking himself a king, King Rahügaëa was in the bodily conception and
was influenced by material nature's modes of passion and ignorance. Due to
madness, he chastised Jaòa Bharata with uncalled-for and contradictory words.
Jaòa Bharata was a topmost devotee and the dear abode of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Although considering himself very learned, the King
did not know about the position of an advanced devotee situated in devotional
service, nor did he know his characteristics. Jaòa Bharata was the residence of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; he always carried the form of the Lord
within his heart. He was the dear friend of all living beings, and he did not
entertain any bodily conception. He therefore smiled and spoke the following
words.
PURPORT
The distinction between a person in the bodily conception and a person
beyond the bodily conception is presented in this verse. In the bodily
conception, King Rahügaëa considered himself a king and chastised Jaòa
Bharata in so many unwanted ways. Being self-realized, Jaòa Bharata, who was
fully situated on the transcendental platform, did not at all become angry;
instead, he smiled and began to deliver his teachings to King Rahügaëa. A
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
394
highly advanced Vaiñëava devotee is a friend to all living entities, and
consequently he is a friend to his enemies also. In fact, he does not consider
anyone to be his enemy. Suhådaù sarva-dehinäm [SB 3.25.21]. Sometimes a
Vaiñëava becomes superficially angry at a nondevotee, but this is good for the
nondevotee. We have several examples of this in Vedic literature. Once
Närada became angry with the two sons of Kuvera, Nalaküvara and Maëigréva,
and he chastised them by turning them into trees. The result was that later
they were liberated by Lord Çré Kåñëa. The devotee is situated on the absolute
platform, and when he is angry or pleased, there is no difference, for in either
case he bestows his benediction.
TEXT 9
b]aø<a ovac
TvYaaeidTa& VYa¢-MaivPa[l/BDa&
>aTauR" Sa Mae SYaaÛid vqr >aar" )
GaNTauYaRid SYaadiDaGaMYaMaßa
PaqveiTa raXaaE Na ivda& Pa[vad" )) 9 ))
brähmaëa uväca
tvayoditaà vyaktam avipralabdhaà
bhartuù sa me syäd yadi véra bhäraù
gantur yadi syäd adhigamyam adhvä
péveti räçau na vidäà pravädaù
SYNONYMS
brähmaëaù uväca—the learned brähmaëa (Jaòa Bharata) spoke; tvayä—by
you; uditam—explained; vyaktam—very clearly; avipralabdham—without
contradictions; bhartuù—of the bearer, the body; saù—that; me—mine;
syät—it would have been; yadi—if; véra—O great hero (Mahäräja Rahügaëa);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
395
bhäraù—a load; gantuù—of the mover, also the body; yadi—if; syät—it had
been; adhigamyam—the object to be obtained; adhvä—the path; pévä—very
stout and strong; iti—thus; räçau—in the body; na—not; vidäm—of the
self-realized persons; pravädaù—subject matter for discussion.
TRANSLATION
The great brähmaëa Jaòa Bharata said: My dear King and hero, whatever
you have spoken sarcastically is certainly true. Actually these are not simply
words of chastisement, for the body is the carrier. The load carried by the body
does not belong to me, for I am the spirit soul. There is no contradiction in your
statements because I am different from the body. I am not the carrier of the
palanquin; the body is the carrier. Certainly, as you have hinted, I have not
labored carrying the palanquin, for I am detached from the body. You have said
that I am not stout and strong, and these words are befitting a person who does
not know the distinction between the body and the soul. The body may be fat
or thin, but no learned man would say such things of the spirit soul. As far as
the spirit soul is concerned, I am neither fat nor skinny; therefore you are
correct when you say that I am not very stout. Also, if the object of this
journey and the path leading there were mine, there would be many troubles for
me, but because they relate not to me but to my body, there is no trouble at all.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä it is stated that one who is advanced in spiritual
knowledge is not disturbed by the pains and pleasures of the material body.
The material body is completely separate from the spirit soul, and the pains
and pleasures of the body are superfluous. The practice of austerity and
penance is meant for understanding the distinction between the body and the
soul and how the soul can be unaffected by the pleasures and pains of the body.
Jaòa Bharata was actually situated on the platform of self-realization. He was
completely aloof from the bodily conception; therefore he immediately took
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
396
this position and convinced the King that whatever contradictory things the
King had said about his body did not actually apply to him as a spirit soul.
TEXT 10
SQaaELYa& k-aXYa| VYaaDaYa AaDaYaê
+auta*@( >aYa& k-il/irC^a Jara c )
iNad]a riTaMaRNYaurh&Mad" Xaucae
deheNa JaaTaSYa ih Mae Na SaiNTa )) 10 ))
sthaulyaà kärçyaà vyädhaya ädhayaç ca
kñut tåò bhayaà kalir icchä jarä ca
nidrä ratir manyur ahaà madaù çuco
dehena jätasya hi me na santi
SYNONYMS
sthaulyam—being very stout and strong; kärçyam—being skinny and weak;
vyädhayaù—the pains of the body, such as disease; ädhayaù—the pains of the
mind; ca—and; kñut tåö bhayam—hunger, thirst and fear; kaliù—quarrels
between two persons; icchä—desires; jarä—old age; ca—and; nidrä—sleep;
ratiù—attachment for sense gratification; manyuù—anger; aham—false
identification (in the bodily concept of life); madaù—illusion;
çucaù—lamentation; dehena—with this body; jätasya—of one who has taken
birth; hi—certainly; me—of me; na—not; santi—exist.
TRANSLATION
Fatness, thinness, bodily and mental distress, thirst, hunger, fear,
disagreement, desires for material happiness, old age, sleep, attachment for
material possessions, anger, lamentation, illusion and identification of the body
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
397
with the self are all transformations of the material covering of the spirit soul.
A person absorbed in the material bodily conception is affected by these things,
but I am free from all bodily conceptions. Consequently I am neither fat nor
skinny nor anything else you have mentioned.
PURPORT
Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura has sung: deha-småti nähi yära,
saàsära-bandhana kähäì tära. One who is spiritually advanced has no
connection with the body or with the bodily actions and reactions. When one
comes to understand that he is not the body and therefore is neither fat nor
skinny, one attains the topmost form of spiritual realization. When one is not
spiritually realized, the bodily conception entangles one in the material world.
At the present moment all human society is laboring under the bodily
conception; therefore in the çästras people in this age are referred to as
dvipada-paçu, two-legged animals. No one can be happy in a civilization
conducted by such animals. Our Kåñëa consciousness movement is trying to
raise fallen human society to the status of spiritual understanding. It is not
possible for everyone to become immediately self-realized like Jaòa Bharata.
However, as stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.18): nañöa-präyeñv abhadreñu
nityaà bhägavata-sevayä. By spreading the Bhägavata principles, we can raise
human society to the platform of perfection. When one is not affected by the
bodily conceptions, one can advance to the Lord's devotional service.
nañöa-präyeñv abhadreñu
nityaà bhägavata-sevayä
bhagavaty uttamaçloke
bhaktir bhavati naiñöhiké
[SB 1.2.18]
The more we advance our freedom from the bodily conception, the more we
are fixed in devotional service, and the more we are happy and peaceful. In
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
398
this regard, Çréla Madhväcärya says that those who are too materially affected
continue the bodily conception. Such persons are concerned with different
bodily symptoms, whereas one freed from bodily conceptions lives without the
body even in the material condition.
TEXT 11
JaqvNMa*TaTv& iNaYaMaeNa raJaNa(
AaÛNTavÛiÜk*-TaSYa d*íMa( )
SvSvaMYa>aavae Da]uv wR@y Ya}a
TaùuRCYaTae_SaaE iviDak*-TYaYaaeGa" )) 11 ))
jévan-måtatvaà niyamena räjan
ädyantavad yad vikåtasya dåñöam
sva-svämya-bhävo dhruva éòya yatra
tarhy ucyate 'sau vidhikåtya-yogaù
SYNONYMS
jévat-måtatvam—the quality of being dead while living; niyamena—by the laws
of nature; räjan—O King; ädi-anta-vat—everything material has a beginning
and an end; yat—because; vikåtasya—of things that are transformed, such as
the body; dåñöam—is seen; sva-svämya-bhävaù—the condition of servanthood
and mastership; dhruvaù—unchangeable; éòya—O you who are worshiped;
yatra—wherein; tarhi—then; ucyate—it is said; asau—that;
vidhi-kåtya-yogaù—fitness of order and duty.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, you have unnecessarily accused me of being dead though
alive. In this regard, I can only say that this is the case everywhere because
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
399
everything material has its beginning and end. As far as your thinking that you
are the king and master and are thus trying to order me, this is also incorrect
because these positions are temporary. Today you are a king and I am your
servant, but tomorrow the position may be changed, and you may be my servant
and I your master. These are temporary circumstances created by providence.
PURPORT
The bodily conception is the basic principle of suffering in material
existence. In Kali-yuga especially, people are so uneducated that they cannot
even understand that the body is changing at every moment and that the
ultimate change is called death. In this life one may be a king, and in the next
life one may be a dog, according to karma. The spirit soul is in a deep slumber
caused by the force of material nature. He is put in one type of condition and
again changed into another type. Without self-realization and knowledge,
conditional life continues, and one falsely claims himself a king, a servant, a
cat or a dog. These are simply different transformations brought about by the
supreme arrangement. One should not be misled by such temporary bodily
conceptions. Actually no one is master within the material world, for everyone
is under the control of material nature, which is under the control of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa, is the ultimate master. As explained in Caitanya-caritämåta,
ekale éçvara kåñëa, ära saba bhåtya: [Cc. Ädi 5.142] the only master is Kåñëa, and
everyone else is His servant. Forgetfulness of our relationship with the
Supreme Lord brings about our suffering in the material world.
TEXT 12
ivXaezbuÖeivRvr& MaNaak( c
PaXYaaMa Yaà VYavharTaae_NYaTa( )
k- wRìrSTa}a ik-MaqiXaTaVYa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
400
TaQaaiPa raJaNa( k-rvaMa ik&- Tae )) 12 ))
viçeña-buddher vivaraà manäk ca
paçyäma yan na vyavahärato 'nyat
ka éçvaras tatra kim éçitavyaà
tathäpi räjan karaväma kià te
SYNONYMS
viçeña-buddheù—of the conception of the distinction between master and
servant; vivaram—the scope; manäk—a little; ca—also; paçyämaù—I see;
yat—which; na—not; vyavahärataù—than the temporary usage or convention;
anyat—other; kaù—who; éçvaraù—the master; tatra—in this; kim—who;
éçitavyam—is to be controlled; tathäpi—nevertheless; räjan—O King (if you
still think that you are master and I am servant); karaväma—I may do;
kim—what; te—for you.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, if you still think that you are the King and that I am your
servant, you should order me, and I should follow your order. I can then say
that this differentiation is temporary, and it expands only from usage or
convention. I do not see any other cause. In that case, who is the master, and
who is the servant? Everyone is being forced by the laws of material nature;
therefore no one is master, and no one is servant. Nonetheless, if you think that
you are the master and that I am the servant, I shall accept this. Please order
me. What can I do for you?
PURPORT
It is said in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, ahaà mameti: [SB 5.5.8] One thinks, "I am
this body, and in this bodily relationship he is my master, he is my servant, she
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
401
is my wife, and he is my son." All these conceptions are temporary due to the
inevitable change of body and the arrangement of material nature. We are
gathered together like straws floating in the waves of an ocean, straws that are
inevitably separated by the laws of the waves. In this material world, everyone
is floating on the waves of the ocean of nescience. As described by
Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura:
(miche) mäyära vaçe, yäccha bhese',
khäccha häbuòubu, bhäi
(jéva) kåñëa-däsa, ei viçväsa,
karle ta' ära duùkha näi
Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura states that all men and women are floating like
straws on the waves of material nature. If they come to the understanding that
they are the eternal servants of Kåñëa, they will put an end to this floating
condition. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (3.37): käma eña krodha eña
rajo-guëa-samudbhavaù. Due to the mode of passion, we desire many things,
and according to our desire or anxiety and according to the order of the
Supreme Lord, material nature gives us a certain type of body. For some time
we play as master or servant, as actors play on the stage under someone else's
direction. While we are in the human form, we should put an end to this
nonsensical stage performance. We should come to our original constitutional
position, known as Kåñëa consciousness. At the present moment, the real
master is material nature. Daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé mama mäyä duratyayä (Bg.
7.14). Under the spell of material nature, we are becoming servants and
masters, but if we agree to be controlled by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and His eternal servants, this temporary condition ceases to exist.
TEXT 13
oNMataMataJa@vTSvSa&SQaa&
GaTaSYa Mae vqr icik-iTSaTaeNa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
402
AQaR" ik-YaaNa( >avTaa iXai+aTaeNa
STaBDaPa[MataSYa c iPaíPaez" )) 13 ))
unmatta-matta-jaòavat sva-saàsthäà
gatasya me véra cikitsitena
arthaù kiyän bhavatä çikñitena
stabdha-pramattasya ca piñöapeñaù
SYNONYMS
unmatta—madness; matta—a drunkard; jaòa-vat—like a dunce;
sva-saàsthäm—situation in my original constitutional position; gatasya—of
one who has obtained; me—of me; véra—O King; cikitsitena—by your
chastisement; arthaù—the meaning or purpose; kiyän—what; bhavatä—by
you; çikñitena—by being instructed; stabdha—dull; pramattasya—of a crazy
man; ca—also; piñöa-peñaù—like grinding flour.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, you have said, "You rascal, you dull, crazy fellow! I am going
to chastise you, and then you will come to your senses." In this regard, let me
say that although I live like a dull, deaf and dumb man, I am actually a
self-realized person. What will you gain by punishing me? If your calculation is
true and I am a madman, then your punishment will be like beating a dead
horse. There will be no effect. When a madman is punished, he is not cured of
his madness.
PURPORT
Everyone in this material world is working like a madman under certain
impressions falsely acquired in the material condition. For example, a thief
who knows that stealing is not good and who knows that it is followed with
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
403
punishment by a king or by God, who has seen that thieves are arrested and
punished by the police, nonetheless steals again and again. He is obsessed with
the idea that by stealing he will be happy. This is a sign of madness. Despite
repeated punishment, the thief cannot give up his stealing habit; therefore the
punishment is useless.
TEXT 14
é[qXauk- ovac
WTaavdNauvadPair>aazYaa Pa[TYaudqYaR MauiNavr oPaXaMaXaql oParTaaNaa‚
TMYaiNaiMata oPa>aaeGaeNa k-MaaRrBDa& VYaPaNaYaNa( raJaYaaNaMaiPa TaQaaevah )) 14 ))
çré-çuka uväca
etävad anuväda-paribhäñayä pratyudérya muni-vara upaçama-çéla
uparatänätmya-nimitta upabhogena karmärabdhaà vyapanayan räja-yänam
api tathoväha.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé continued to speak; etävat—so much;
anuväda-paribhäñayä—by explanatory repetition of words spoken previously
by the King; pratyudérya—giving replies one after another; muni-varaù—great
sage Jaòa Bharata; upaçama-çélaù—who was calm and peaceful in character;
uparata—ceased; anätmya—things not related to the soul; nimittaù—whose
cause (ignorance) for identification with things not related to the soul;
upabhogena—by accepting the consequences of his karma;
karma-ärabdham—the resultant action now attained; vyapanayan—finishing;
räja-yänam—the palanquin of the King; api—again; tathä—as before;
uväha—continued to carry.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
404
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O Mahäräja Parékñit, when King Rahügaëa
chastised the exalted devotee Jaòa Bharata with harsh words, that peaceful,
saintly person tolerated it all and replied properly. Nescience is due to the
bodily conception, and Jaòa Bharata was not affected by this false conception.
Out of his natural humility, he never considered himself a great devotee, and he
agreed to suffer the results of his past karma. Like an ordinary man, he thought
that by carrying the palanquin, he was destroying the reactions of his past
misdeeds. Thinking in this way, he began to carry the palanquin as before.
PURPORT
An exalted devotee of the Lord never thinks that he is a paramahaàsa or a
liberated person. He always remains a humble servant of the Lord. In all
reverse conditions, he agrees to suffer the results of his past life. He never
accuses the Lord of putting him into a distressed condition. These are the signs
of an exalted devotee. Tat te 'nukampäà susamékñyamäëaù. When suffering
reversed conditions, the devotee always considers that the reverse conditions
are the Lord's concessions. He is never angry with his master; he is always
satisfied with the position his master offers. In any case, he continues
performing his duty in devotional service. Such a person is guaranteed
promotion back home, back to Godhead. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(10.14.8):
tat te 'nukampäà susamékñamäëo
bhuïjäna evätma-kåtaà vipäkam
håd-väg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te
jéveta yo mukti-pade sa däya-bhäk
"My dear Lord, one who constantly waits for Your causeless mercy to be
bestowed upon him and who goes on suffering the reactions of his past
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
405
misdeeds, offering You respectful obeisances from the core of his heart, is
surely eligible for liberation, for it has become his rightful claim."
TEXT 15
Sa caiPa Paa<@veYa iSaNDauSaaEvqrPaiTaSTatviJajaSaaYaa& SaMYak(-é[ÖYaaiDa‚
k*-TaaiDak-arSTad(Da*dYaGa]iNQaMaaecNa& iÜJavc Aaé[uTYa bhuYaaeGaGa]NQaSaMMaTa&
TvrYaavåù iXarSaa PaadMaUl/MauPaSa*Ta" +aMaaPaYaNa( ivGaTaNa*PadevSMaYa
ovac )) 15 ))
sa cäpi päëòaveya sindhu-sauvéra-patis tattva-jijïäsäyäà
samyak-çraddhayädhikåtädhikäras tad dhådaya-granthi-mocanaà dvija-vaca
äçrutya bahu-yoga-grantha-sammataà tvarayävaruhya çirasä päda-mülam
upasåtaù kñamäpayan vigata-nåpa-deva-smaya uväca.
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Mahäräja Rahügaëa); ca—also; api—indeed; päëòaveya—O best of
the Päëòu dynasty (Mahäräja Parékñit); sindhu-sauvéra-patiù—the King of the
states known as Sindhu and Sauvéra; tattva-jijïäsäyäm—in the matter of
inquiring about the Absolute Truth; samyak-çraddhayä—by faith consisting of
complete control of the senses and the mind; adhikåta-adhikäraù—who
attained the proper qualification; tat—that; hådaya-granthi—the knot of false
conceptions within the heart; mocanam—which eradicates; dvija-vacaù—the
words of the brähmaëa (Jaòa Bharata); äçrutya—hearing;
bahu-yoga-grantha-sammatam—approved by all yogic processes and their
scriptures; tvarayä—very hastily; avaruhya—getting down (from the
palanquin); çirasä—by his head; päda-mülam—at the lotus feet;
upasåtaù—falling down flat to offer obeisances; kñamäpayan—obtaining
pardon for his offense; vigata-nåpa-deva-smayaù—giving up the false pride of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
406
being the King and therefore being worshipable; uväca—said.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: O best of the Päëòu dynasty [Mahäräja
Parékñit], the King of the Sindhu and Sauvéra states [Mahäräja Rahügaëa] had
great faith in discussions of the Absolute Truth. Being thus qualified, he heard
from Jaòa Bharata that philosophical presentation which is approved by all
scriptures on the mystic yoga process and which slackens the knot in the heart.
His material conception of himself as a king was thus destroyed. He
immediately descended from his palanquin and fell flat on the ground with his
head at the lotus feet of Jaòa Bharata in such a way that he might be excused
for his insulting words against the great brähmaëa. He then prayed as follows.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (4.2) Lord Kåñëa says:
evaà paramparä-präptam
imaà räjarñayo viduù
sa käleneha mahatä
yogo nañöaù parantapa
"This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way. But in course of
time the succession was broken, and therefore the science as it is appears to be
lost."
Through the disciplic succession the royal order was on the same platform
as great saintly persons (räja-åñis). Formerly they could understand the
philosophy of life and knew how to train the citizens to come to the same
standard. In other words, they knew how to deliver the citizens from the
entanglement of birth and death. When Mahäräja Daçaratha ruled Ayodhyä,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
407
the great sage Viçvämitra once came to him to take away Lord Rämacandra
and Lakñmaëa to the forest to kill a demon. When the saintly person
Viçvämitra came to the court of Mahäräja Daçaratha, the King, in order to
receive the saintly person, asked him, aihiñöaà yat tat punar janma jayäya. He
asked the sage whether everything was going on well in his endeavor to
conquer the repetition of birth and death. The whole process of Vedic
civilization is based on this point. We must know how to conquer the
repetition of birth and death. Mahäräja Rahügaëa also knew the purpose of
life; therefore when Jaòa Bharata put the philosophy of life before him, he
immediately appreciated it. This is the foundation of Vedic society. Learned
scholars, brähmaëas, saintly persons and sages who were fully aware of the
Vedic purpose advised the royal order how to benefit the general masses, and
by their cooperation, the general masses were benefited. Therefore everything
was successful. Mahäräja Rahügaëa attained this perfection of understanding
the value of human life; therefore he regretted his insulting words to Jaòa
Bharata, and he immediately descended from his palanquin and fell down at
the lotus feet of Jaòa Bharata in order to be excused and to hear from him
further about the values of life known as brahma jijïäsä (inquiry into the
Absolute Truth). At the present moment, high government officials are
ignorant of the values of life, and when saintly persons endeavor to broadcast
the Vedic knowledge, the so-called executives do not offer their respectful
obeisances but try to obstruct the spiritual propaganda. Thus one can say that
the former kingly government was like heaven and that the present
government is like hell.
TEXT 16
k-STv& iNaGaU!êriSa iÜJaaNaa&
ib>aizR SaU}a& k-TaMaae_vDaUTa" )
k-SYaaiSa ku-}aTYa whaiPa k-SMaaTa(
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
408
+aeMaaYa NaêediSa NaaeTa Xau(c)-" )) 16 ))
kas tvaà nigüòhaç carasi dvijänäà
bibharñi sütraà katamo 'vadhütaù
kasyäsi kutratya ihäpi kasmät
kñemäya naç ced asi nota çuklaù
SYNONYMS
kaù tvam—who are you; nigüòhaù—very much covered; carasi—you move
within this world; dvijänäm—among the brähmaëas or saintly persons;
bibharñi—you also wear; sütram—the sacred thread belonging to the first-class
brähmaëas; katamaù—which; avadhütaù—highly elevated person; kasya
asi—whose are you (whose disciple or son are you); kutratyaù—from where;
iha api—here in this place; kasmät—for what purpose; kñemäya—for the
benefit; naù—of us; cet—if; asi—you are; na uta—or not; çuklaù—the
personality of the pure mode of goodness (Kapiladeva).
TRANSLATION
King Rahügaëa said: O brähmaëa, you appear to be moving in this world
very much covered and unknown to others. Who are you? Are you a learned
brähmaëa and saintly person? I see that you are wearing a sacred thread. Are
you one of those exalted, liberated saints such as Dattätreya and other highly
advanced, learned scholars? May I ask whose disciple you are? Where do you
live? Why have you come to this place? Is your mission in coming here to do
good for us? Please let me know who you are.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Rahügaëa was very anxious to receive further enlightenment in
Vedic knowledge because he could understand that Jaòa Bharata belonged to a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
409
brähmaëa family either by disciplic succession or by birth in a brähmaëa
dynasty. As stated in the Vedas: tad vijïänärthaà sa gurum eväbhigacchet [MU
1.2.12(4)]. Rahügaëa was accepting Jaòa Bharata as a guru, but a guru must
prove his position not only by wearing a sacred thread but by advancing
knowledge in spiritual life. It is also significant that Rahügaëa asked Jaòa
Bharata which family he belonged to. There are two types of families—one
according to dynasty and the other according to disciplic succession. In either
way, one can be enlightened. The word çuklaù refers to a person in the mode
of goodness. If one wants to receive spiritual knowledge, he must approach a
bona fide brähmaëa-guru, either in the disciplic succession or in a family of
learned brähmaëas.
TEXT 17
Naah& ivXaªe SaurraJavJa]a‚
à }Ya+aXaUl/aà YaMaSYa d<@aTa( )
NaaGNYak-RSaaeMaaiNal/ivtaPaaña‚
C^ªe >a*Xa& b]øku-l/avMaaNaaTa( )) 17 ))
nähaà viçaìke sura-räja-vajrän
na tryakña-çülän na yamasya daëòät
nägny-arka-somänila-vittapästräc
chaìke bhåçaà brahma-kulävamänät
SYNONYMS
na—not; aham—I; viçaìke—am afraid; sura-räja-vajrät—from the
thunderbolt of the King of heaven, Indra; na—nor; tryakña-çülät—from the
piercing trident of Lord Çiva; na—nor; yamasya—of the superintendent of
death, Yamaräja; daëòät—from the punishment; na—nor; agni—of fire;
arka—of the scorching heat of the sun; soma—of the moon; anila—of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
410
wind; vitta-pa—of the owner of riches, Kuvera, the treasurer of the heavenly
planets; asträt—from the weapons; çaìke—I am afraid; bhåçam—very much;
brahma-kula—the group of the brähmaëas; avamänät—from offending.
TRANSLATION
My dear sir, I am not at all afraid of the thunderbolt of King Indra, nor am I
afraid of the serpentine, piercing trident of Lord Çiva. I do not care about the
punishment of Yamaräja, the superintendent of death, nor am I afraid of fire,
scorching sun, moon, wind, nor the weapons of Kuvera. Yet I am afraid of
offending a brähmaëa. I am very much afraid of this.
PURPORT
When Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu was instructing Rüpa Gosvämé at the
Daçäçvamedha-ghäöa in Prayäga, He pointed out very clearly the seriousness of
offending a Vaiñëava. He compared the vaiñëava-aparädha to häté mätä, a mad
elephant. When a mad elephant enters a garden, it spoils all the fruits and
flowers. Similarly, if one offends a Vaiñëava, he spoils all his spiritual assets.
Offending a brähmaëa is very dangerous, and this was known to Mahäräja
Rahügaëa. He therefore frankly admitted his fault. There are many dangerous
things—thunderbolts, fire, Yamaräja's punishment, the punishment of Lord
Çiva's trident, and so forth—but none is considered as serious as offending a
brähmaëa like Jaòa Bharata. Therefore Mahäräja Rahügaëa immediately
descended from his palanquin and fell flat before the lotus feet of the
brähmaëa Jaòa Bharata just to be excused.
TEXT 18
Tad( b]UùSa(r)ae Ja@viàGaU!‚
ivjaNavqYaaeR ivcrSYaPaar" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
411
vca&iSa YaaeGaGa]iQaTaaiNa SaaDaae
Na Na" +aMaNTae MaNaSaaiPa >aetauMa( )) 18 ))
tad brühy asaìgo jaòavan nigüòhavijïäna-
véryo vicarasy apäraù
vacäàsi yoga-grathitäni sädho
na naù kñamante manasäpi bhettum
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; brühi—please speak; asaìgaù—who have no association with
the material world; jaòa-vat—appearing like a deaf and dumb man;
nigüòha—completely hidden; vijïäna-véryaù—who have full knowledge of the
spiritual science and are thus very powerful; vicarasi—you are moving;
apäraù—who possess unlimited spiritual glories; vacäàsi—the words uttered
by you; yoga-grathitäni—bearing the complete meaning of mystic yoga;
sädho—O great, saintly person; na—not; naù—of us; kñamante—are able;
manasä api—even by the mind; bhettum—to understand by analytical study.
TRANSLATION
My dear sir, it appears that the influence of your great spiritual knowledge is
hidden. Factually you are bereft of all material association and fully absorbed in
the thought of the Supreme. Consequently you are unlimitedly advanced in
spiritual knowledge. Please tell me why you are wandering around like a
dullard. O great, saintly person, you have spoken words approved by the yogic
process, but it is not possible for us to understand what you have said.
Therefore kindly explain it.
PURPORT
Saintly people like Jaòa Bharata do not speak ordinary words. Whatever
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
412
they say is approved by great yogés and those advanced in spiritual life. That is
the difference between ordinary people and saintly people. The listener must
also be advanced to understand the words of such exalted, spiritually advanced
people as Jaòa Bharata. Bhagavad-gétä was spoken to Arjuna, not to others.
Lord Kåñëa especially selected Arjuna for instruction in spiritual knowledge
because Arjuna happened to be a great devotee and confidential friend.
Similarly, great personalities also speak to the advanced, not to çüdras, vaiçyas,
women or unintelligent men. Sometimes it is very risky to give great
philosophical instructions to ordinary people, but Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu,
for the benefit of the fallen souls of Kali-yuga, has given us a very nice
instrument, the chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mantra. The general mass of
people, although çüdras and less, can be purified by chanting this Hare Kåñëa
mantra. Then they can understand the exalted philosophical statements of
Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Our Kåñëa consciousness movement
has therefore adopted the chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra for the
general masses. When people gradually become purified, they are instructed in
the lessons of Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Materialistic people like
stré, çüdra and dvija-bandhu cannot understand words of spiritual
advancement, yet one can take to the shelter of a Vaiñëava, for he knows the
art of enlightening even çüdras in the highly elevated subject matter spoken in
Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 19
Ah& c YaaeGaeìrMaaTMaTatv‚
ivda& MauNaqNaa& ParMa& Gauå& vE )
Pa[íu& Pa[v*ta" ik-iMahar<a& TaTa(
Saa+aaÖir„& jaNak-l/avTaq<aRMa( )) 19 ))
ahaà ca yogeçvaram ätma-tattvacopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
413
vidäà munénäà paramaà guruà vai
prañöuà pravåttaù kim ihäraëaà tat
säkñäd dharià jïäna-kalävatérëam
SYNONYMS
aham—I; ca—and; yoga-éçvaram—the master of all mystic power;
ätma-tattva-vidäm—of the learned scholars who are aware of the spiritual
science; munénäm—of such saintly persons; paramam—the best; gurum—the
preceptor; vai—indeed; prañöum—to inquire; pravåttaù—engaged; kim—what;
iha—in this world; araëam—the most secure shelter; tat—that which; säkñät
harim—directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
jïäna-kalä-avatérëam—who has descended as the incarnation of complete
knowledge in His plenary portion known as Kapiladeva.
TRANSLATION
I consider your good self the most exalted master of mystic power. You know
the spiritual science perfectly well. You are the most exalted of all learned sages,
and you have descended for the benefit of all human society. You have come to
give spiritual knowledge, and you are a direct representative of Kapiladeva, the
incarnation of God and the plenary portion of knowledge. I am therefore asking
you, O spiritual master, what is the most secure shelter in this world?
PURPORT
As Kåñëa confirms in Bhagavad-gétä:
yoginäm api sarveñäà
mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
414
"Of all yogés, he who abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is
the highest of all." (Bg. 6.47)
Jaòa Bharata was a perfect yogé. He was formerly the emperor Bharata
Mahäräja, and he was now the most exalted personality among learned sages
and the master of all mystic powers. Although Jaòa Bharata was an ordinary
living entity, he had inherited all the knowledge given by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kapiladeva. He could therefore be taken directly as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed by Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura in his stanzas to the spiritual master: säkñäd-dharitvena
samasta-çästraiù**(5). An exalted personality like Jaòa Bharata is as good as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead because he fully represents the Lord by
giving knowledge to others. Jaòa Bharata is herein accepted as the direct
representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead because he was
imparting knowledge on behalf of the Supreme Lord. Therefore Mahäräja
Rahügaëa concluded that it was appropriate to ask him about ätma-tattva, the
spiritual science. Tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum eväbhigacchet [MU 1.2.12(6)]. This
Vedic injunction is also confirmed herein. If anyone is at all interested in
knowing the spiritual science (brahma jijïäsä), he must approach a guru like
Jaòa Bharata.
TEXT 20
Sa vE >avamçaek-iNarq+a<aaQaR‚
MaVYa¢-il/(r)ae ivcrTYaiPaiSvTa( )
YaaeGaeìra<aa& GaiTaMaNDabuiÖ"
k-Qa& ivc+aqTa Ga*haNaubNDa" )) 20 ))
sa vai bhaväû loka-nirékñaëärtham
avyakta-liìgo vicaraty api svit
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
415
yogeçvaräëäà gatim andha-buddhiù
kathaà vicakñéta gåhänubandhaù
SYNONYMS
saù—that Supreme Personality of Godhead or His incarnation Kapiladeva;
vai—indeed; bhavän—your good self; loka-nirékñaëa-artham—just to study the
characteristics of the people of this world; avyakta-liìgaù—without
manifesting your real identity; vicarati—are traveling in this world; api
svit—whether; yoga-éçvaräëäm—of all the advanced yogés; gatim—the
characteristics or actual behavior; andha-buddhiù—who are illusioned and
have become blind to spiritual knowledge; katham—how; vicakñéta—may
know; gåha-anubandhaù—I who am bound by attachment to family life, or
worldly life.
TRANSLATION
Is it not a fact that your good self is the direct representative of Kapiladeva,
the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? To examine people and
see who is actually a human being and who is not, you have presented yourself
to be a deaf and dumb person. Are you not moving this way upon the surface of
the world? I am very attached to family life and worldly activities, and I am
blind to spiritual knowledge. Nonetheless, I am now present before you and am
seeking enlightenment from you. How can I advance in spiritual life?
PURPORT
Although Mahäräja Rahügaëa was playing the part of a king, he had been
informed by Jaòa Bharata that be was not a king nor was Jaòa Bharata deaf and
dumb. Such designations were simply coverings of the spirit soul. Everyone
must come to this knowledge. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (2.13): dehino
'smin yathä dehe. Everyone is encased within the body. Since the body is never
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
416
identical with the soul, the bodily activities are simply illusory. In the
association of such a sädhu as Jaòa Bharata, Mahäräja Rahügaëa came to the
awareness that his activities as a royal authority were simply illusory
phenomena. He therefore agreed to receive knowledge from Jaòa Bharata, and
that was the beginning of his perfection. Tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum
eväbhigacchet [MU 1.2.12(7)]. A person like Mahäräja Rahügaëa, who was very
inquisitive to know the value of life and the spiritual science, must approach a
personality like Jaòa Bharata. Tasmäd guruà prapadyeta jijïäsuù çreya uttamam
(SB 11.3.21). One must approach a guru like Jaòa Bharata, a representative of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, to inquire about the goal of human life.
TEXT 21
d*í" é[Ma" k-MaRTa AaTMaNaae vE
>aTauRGaRNTau>aRvTaêaNauMaNYae )
YaQaaSaTaaedaNaYaNaaÛ>aavaTa(
SaMaUl/ wíae VYavharMaaGaR" )) 21 ))
dåñöaù çramaù karmata ätmano vai
bhartur gantur bhavataç cänumanye
yathäsatodänayanädy-abhävät
samüla iñöo vyavahära-märgaù
SYNONYMS
dåñöaù—it is experienced by everyone; çramaù—fatigue; karmataù—from
acting in some way; ätmanaù—of the soul; vai—indeed; bhartuù—of one who
is carrying the palanquin; gantuù—of one who is moving; bhavataù—of
yourself; ca—and; anumanye—I guess like that; yathä—as much as;
asatä—with something that is not an actual fact; uda—of water;
änayana-ädi—of the bringing and other such tasks; abhävät—from the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
417
absence; sa-mülaù—based on evidence; iñöaù—respected;
vyavahära-märgaù—phenomenon.
TRANSLATION
You have said, "I am not fatigued from labor." Although the soul is different
from the body, there is fatigue because of bodily labor, and it appears to be the
fatigue of the soul. When you are carrying the palanquin, there is certainly
labor for the soul. This is my conjecture. You have also said that the external
behavior exhibited between the master and the servant is not factual, but
although in the phenomenal world it is not factual, the products of the
phenomenal world can actually affect things. That is visible and experienced. As
such, even though material activities are impermanent, they cannot be said to
be untrue.
PURPORT
This is a discussion on impersonal Mäyäväda philosophy and the practical
philosophy of Vaiñëavas. The Mäyäväda philosophy explains this phenomenal
world to be false, but Vaiñëava philosophers do not agree. They know that the
phenomenal world is a temporary manifestation, but it is not false. A dream
that we see at night is certainly false, but a horrible dream certainly affects the
person seeing it. The soul's fatigue is not factual, but as long as one is immersed
in the illusory bodily conception, one is affected by such false dreams. When
dreaming, it is not possible to avoid the actual facts, and the conditioned soul
is forced to suffer due to his dream. A waterpot is made of earth and is
temporary. Actually there is no waterpot; there is simply earth. However, as
long as the waterpot can contain water, we can use it in that way. It cannot be
said to be absolutely false.
TEXT 22
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
418
SQaaLYaiGanTaaPaaTPaYaSaae_i>aTaaPa‚
STataaPaTaSTa<@ul/Ga>aRriNDa" )
deheiNd]YaaSvaXaYaSaiàk-zaRTa(
TaTSa&Sa*iTa" PauåzSYaaNauraeDaaTa( )) 22 ))
sthäly-agni-täpät payaso 'bhitäpas
tat-täpatas taëòula-garbha-randhiù
dehendriyäsväçaya-sannikarñät
tat-saàsåtiù puruñasyänurodhät
SYNONYMS
sthäli—on the cooking pot; agni-täpät—because of the heat of fire;
payasaù—the milk put into the pot; abhitäpaù—becomes hot;
tat-täpataù—because of the milk's becoming hot; taëòula-garbha-randhiù—the
center of the rice within the milk becomes cooked; deha-indriya-asväçaya—the
bodily senses; sannikarñät—from having connections with; tat-saàsåtiù—the
experience of fatigue and other miseries; puruñasya—of the soul;
anurodhät—from compliance due to being grossly attached to the body, senses
and mind.
TRANSLATION
King Rahügaëa continued: My dear sir, you have said that designations like
bodily fatness and thinness are not characteristics of the soul. That is incorrect
because designations like pain and pleasure are certainly felt by the soul. You
may put a pot of milk and rice within fire, and the milk and rice are
automatically heated one after the other. Similarly, due to bodily pains and
pleasures, the senses, mind and soul are affected. The soul cannot be completely
detached from this conditioning.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
419
PURPORT
This argument put forward by Mahäräja Rahügaëa is correct from the
practical point of view, but it arises from an attachment to the bodily
conception. It can be said that a person sitting in his car is certainly different
from his car, but if there is damage to the car, the owner of the car, being
overly attached to the car, feels pain. Actually, the damage done to the car has
nothing to do with the car's proprietor, but because the proprietor has
identified himself with the interest of the car, he feels pleasure and pain
connected with it. This conditional state can be avoided if attachment is
withdrawn from the car. Then the proprietor would not feel pleasure or pain if
the car is damaged or whatever. Similarly, the soul has nothing to do with the
body and the senses, but due to ignorance, he identifies himself with the body,
and he feels pleasure and pain due to bodily pleasure and pain.
TEXT 23
XaaSTaai>aGaaeáa Na*PaiTa" Pa[JaaNaa&
Ya" ik-ªrae vE Na iPaNaií iPaíMa( )
SvDaMaRMaaraDaNaMaCYauTaSYa
YadqhMaaNaae ivJahaTYagaaEgaMa( )) 23 ))
çästäbhigoptä nåpatiù prajänäà
yaù kiìkaro vai na pinañöi piñöam
sva-dharmam ärädhanam acyutasya
yad éhamäno vijahäty aghaugham
SYNONYMS
çästä—the governor; abhigoptä—a well-wisher of the citizens as a father is the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
420
well-wisher of his children; nå-patiù—the king; prajänäm—of the citizens;
yaù—one who; kiìkaraù—order carrier; vai—indeed; na—not; pinañöi
piñöam—grinds what is already ground; sva-dharmam—one's own occupational
duty; ärädhanam—worshiping; acyutasya—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; yat—which; éhamänaù—performing; vijahäti—they are released
from; agha-ogham—all kinds of sinful activity and faulty action.
TRANSLATION
My dear sir, you have said that the relationship between the king and the
subject or between the master and the servant are not eternal, but although
such relationships are temporary, when a person takes the position of a king, his
duty is to rule the citizens and punish those who are disobedient to the laws. By
punishing them, he teaches the citizens to obey the laws of the state. Again, you
have said that punishing a person who is deaf and dumb is like chewing the
chewed or grinding the pulp; that is to say, there is no benefit in it. However, if
one is engaged in his own occupational duty as ordered by the Supreme Lord,
his sinful activities are certainly diminished. Therefore if one is engaged in his
occupational duty by force, he benefits because he can vanquish all his sinful
activities in that way.
PURPORT
This argument offered by Mahäräja Rahügaëa is certainly very effective. In
his Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.2.4), Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé says, tasmät kenäpy
upäyena manaù kåñëe niveçayet: [SB 7.1.32] somehow or other, one should
engage in Kåñëa consciousness. Actually every living being is an eternal
servant of Kåñëa, but due to forgetfulness, a living entity engages himself as an
eternal servant of mäyä. As long as one is engaged in mäyä's service, he cannot
be happy. Our Kåñëa consciousness movement aims at engaging people in Lord
Kåñëa's service. That will help them become freed from all material
contamination and sinful activity. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (4.10):
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
421
véta-räga-bhaya-krodhäù. By becoming detached from material activities, we
will be freed from fear and anger. By austerity, one becomes purified and
eligible to return home, back to Godhead. The duty of the king is to rule his
citizens in such a way that they can become Kåñëa conscious. This would be
very beneficial for everyone. Unfortunately the king or president engages
people in sense gratification instead of the Lord's service, and such activities
are certainly not beneficial for anyone. King Rahügaëa tried to engage Jaòa
Bharata in carrying the palanquin, which is a form of sense gratification for
the King. However, if one is engaged as a palanquin carrier in the Lord's
service, that is certainly beneficial. In this godless civilization, if a president
engages people somehow or other in devotional service or the awakening of
Kåñëa consciousness, he renders the very best service to the citizens.
TEXT 24
TaNMae >avaàrdevai>aMaaNa‚
MadeNa TauC^qk*-TaSataMaSYa )
k*-zqí MaE}aqd*XaMaaTaRbNDaae
YaQaa Tare SadvDYaaNaMa&h" )) 24 ))
tan me bhavän nara-deväbhimänamadena
tucchékåta-sattamasya
kåñéñöa maitré-dåçam ärta-bandho
yathä tare sad-avadhyänam aàhaù
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; me—unto me; bhavän—your good self;
nara-deva-abhimäna-madena—by madness due to having the body of a king
and thus being proud of it; tucchékåta—who has insulted; sat-tamasya—you
who are the best among human beings; kåñéñöa—kindly show;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
422
maitré-dåçam—your causeless mercy upon me like a friend; ärta-bandho—O
friend of all distressed persons; yathä—so; tare—I can get relief from;
sat-avadhyänam—neglecting a great personality like you; aàhaù—the sin.
TRANSLATION
Whatever you have spoken appears to me to be contradictory. O best friend
of the distressed, I have committed a great offense by insulting you. I was
puffed up with false prestige due to possessing the body of a king. For this I
have certainly become an offender. Therefore I pray that you kindly glance at
me with your causeless mercy. If you do so, I can be relieved from sinful
activities brought about by insulting you.
PURPORT
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has said that by offending a Vaiñëava, one
finishes all his spiritual activities. Offending a Vaiñëava is considered the mad
elephant offense. A mad elephant can destroy an entire garden which has
been developed with great labor. One may attain the topmost platform of
devotional service, but somehow or other if he offends a Vaiñëava, the whole
structure collapses. Unconsciously, King Rahügaëa offended Jaòa Bharata, but
due to his good sense, he asked to be excused. This is the process by which one
can be relieved from a vaiñëava-aparädha. Kåñëa is always very simple and by
nature merciful. When one commits an offense at the feet of a Vaiñëava, one
must immediately apologize to such a personality so that his spiritual
advancement may not be hampered.
TEXT 25
Na ivi§-Yaa ivìSauôTSa%SYa
SaaMYaeNa vqTaai>aMaTaeSTavaiPa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
423
MahiÜMaaNaaTa( Svk*-TaaiÖ Maad*x(
Na&+YaTYadUradiPa XaUl/Paai<a" )) 25 ))
na vikriyä viçva-suhåt-sakhasya
sämyena vétäbhimates taväpi
mahad-vimänät sva-kåtäd dhi mädåì
naìkñyaty adüräd api çülapäëiù
SYNONYMS
na—not; vikriyä—material transformation; viçva-suhåt—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is a friend to everyone; sakhasya—of you, the
friend; sämyena—because of your mental equilibrium; véta-abhimateù—who
has completely forsaken the bodily concept of life; tava—your; api—indeed;
mahat-vimänät—of insulting a great devotee; sva-kåtät—from my own activity;
hi—certainly; mädåk—a person like me; naìkñyati—will be destroyed;
adürät—very soon; api—certainly; çüla-päëiù—even though as powerful as
Lord Çiva (Çülapäëi).
TRANSLATION
O my dear lord, you are the friend of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is the friend of all living entities. You are therefore equal to everyone, and
you are free from the bodily conception. Although I have committed an offense
by insulting you, I know that there is no loss or gain for you due to my insult.
You are fixed in your determination, but I have committed an offense. Because
of this, even though I may be as strong as Lord Çiva, I shall be vanquished
without delay due to my offense at the lotus feet of a Vaiñëava.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Rahügaëa was very intelligent and conscious of the inauspicious
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
424
effects arising from insulting a Vaiñëava. He was therefore very anxious to be
excused by Jaòa Bharata. Following in the footsteps of Mahäräja Rahügaëa,
everyone should be very cautious not to commit an offense at the lotus feet of
a Vaiñëava. Çréla Våndävana däsa Öhäkura in the Caitanya-bhägavata (Madhya
13) says:
çülapäëi-sama yadi bhakta-nindä kare
bhägavata pramäëa—tathäpi çéghra mare
hena vaiñëavere ninde sarvajïa ha-i
se janera adhaù-päta sarva-çästre ka-i
"Even if one is as strong as Lord Çiva, who carries a trident in his hand, one
will nonetheless fall down from his spiritual position if he tries to insult a
Vaiñëava. That is the verdict of all Vedic scriptures." He also says this in
Caitanya-bhägavata (Madhya 22):
vaiñëavera nindä karibeka yära gaëa
tära rakñä sämarthya nähika kona jana
çülapäëi-sama yadi vaiñëavere ninde
tathäpiha näça yäya—kahe çästra-vånde
ihä nä mäniyä ye sujana nindä kare
janme janme se päpiñöha daiva-doñe mare
"One who blasphemes a Vaiñëava cannot be protected by anyone. Even if a
person is as strong as Lord Çiva, if he blasphemes a Vaiñëava, he is sure to be
destroyed. This is the verdict of all çästras. If one does not care for the verdict
of the çästras and dares blaspheme a Vaiñëava, he suffers life after life because
of this."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
425
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Tenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled, "The Discussion Between Jaòa Bharata and
Mahäräja Rahügaëa."
11. Jaòa Bharata Instructs King Rahügaëa
In this chapter the brähmaëa Jaòa Bharata instructs Mahäräja Rahügaëa in
detail. He tells the King: "You are not very experienced, yet you pose yourself
as a learned person because you are very proud of your knowledge. Actually a
person who is on the transcendental platform does not care for social behavior
that sacrifices spiritual advancement. Social behavior comes within the
jurisdiction of karma-käëòa, material benefit. No one can spiritually advance
by such activities. The conditioned soul is always overpowered by the modes of
material nature, and consequently he is simply concerned with material
benefits and auspicious and inauspicious material things. In other words, the
mind, which is the leader of the senses, is absorbed in material activities life
after life. Thus he continuously gets different types of bodies and suffers
miserable material conditions. On the basis of mental concoction, social
behavior has been formulated. If one's mind is absorbed in these activities, he
certainly remains conditioned within the material world. According to
different opinions, there are eleven or twelve mental activities, which can be
transformed into hundreds and thousands. A person who is not Kåñëa
conscious is subjected to all these mental concoctions and is thus governed by
the material energy. The living entity who is free from mental concoctions
attains the platform of pure spirit soul, devoid of material contamination.
There are two types of living entities-jévätmä and Paramätmä, the individual
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
426
soul and the Supreme Soul. That Supreme Soul in His ultimate realization is
Lord Väsudeva, Kåñëa. He enters into everyone's heart and controls the living
entity in his different activities. He is therefore the supreme shelter of all
living entities. One can understand the Supreme Soul and one's position in
relationship with Him when one is completely freed from the unwanted
association of ordinary men. In this way one can become fit to cross the ocean
of nescience. The cause of conditional Life is attachment to the external
energy. One has to conquer these mental concoctions: unless one does so, he
will never be freed from material anxieties. Although mental concoctions have
no value, their influence is still very formidable. No one should neglect to
control the mind. If one does, the mind becomes so powerful that one
immediately forgets his real position. Forgetting that he is an eternal servant
of Kåñëa and that service to Kåñëa is his only business, one is doomed by
material nature to serve the objects of the senses. One should kill mental
concoctions by the sword of service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and His devotee (guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja [Cc. Madhya 19.151])"
TEXT 1
b]aø<a ovac
Ak-aeivd" k-aeivdvadvadaNa(
vdSYaQaae NaaiTaivda& virï" )
Na SaUrYaae ih VYavharMaeNa&
TatvavMaXaeRNa SahaMaNaiNTa )) 1 ))
brähmaëa uväca
akovidaù kovida-väda-vädän
vadasy atho näti-vidäà variñöhaù
na sürayo hi vyavahäram enaà
tattvävamarçena sahämananti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
427
SYNONYMS
brähmaëaù uväca—the brähmaëa said; akovidaù—without having experience;
kovida-väda-vädän—words used by experienced persons; vadasi—you are
speaking; atho—therefore; na—not; ati-vidäm—of those who are very
experienced; variñöhaù—the most important; na—not; sürayaù—such
intelligent persons; hi—indeed; vyavahäram—mundane and social behavior;
enam—this; tattva—of the truth; avamarçena—fine judgment by intelligence;
saha—with; ämananti—discuss.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëa Jaòa Bharata said: My dear King, although you are not at all
experienced, you are trying to speak like a very experienced man. Consequently
you cannot be considered an experienced person. An experienced person does
not speak the way you are speaking about the relationship between a master and
a servant or about material pains and pleasures. These are simply external
activities. Any advanced, experienced man, considering the Absolute Truth,
does not talk in this way.
PURPORT
Kåñëa similarly chastised Arjuna. Açocyän anvaçocas tvaà prajïä-vädäàç ca
bhäñase: "While speaking learned words, you are lamenting for what is not
worthy of grief." (Bg. 2.11) Similarly, among people in general, 99.9 percent try
to talk like experienced advisers, but they are actually devoid of spiritual
knowledge and are therefore like inexperienced children speaking
nonsensically. Consequently their words cannot be given any importance. One
has to learn from Kåñëa or His devotee. If one speaks on the basis of this
experience-that is, on the basis of spiritual knowledge—one's words are
valuable. At the present moment, the entire world is full of foolish people.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
428
Bhagavad-gétä describes these people as müòhas. They are trying to rule human
society, but because they are devoid of spiritual knowledge, the entire world is
in a chaotic condition. To be released from these miserable conditions, one has
to become Kåñëa conscious and take lessons from an exalted personality like
Jaòa Bharata, Lord Kåñëa and Kapiladeva. That is the only way to solve the
problems of material life.
TEXT 2
TaQaEv raJaàuåGaahRMaeDa‚
ivTaaNaivÛaeåivJa*iM>aTaezu )
Na vedvadezu ih Tatvvad"
Pa[aYae<a XauÖae Nau ck-aiSTa SaaDau" )) 2 ))
tathaiva räjann uru-gärhamedhavitäna-
vidyoru-vijåmbhiteñu
na veda-vädeñu hi tattva-vädaù
präyeëa çuddho nu cakästi sädhuù
SYNONYMS
tathä—therefore; eva—indeed; räjan—O King; uru-gärha-medha—rituals
related to material household life; vitäna-vidyä—in knowledge that expands;
uru—very greatly; vijåmbhiteñu—among those interested; na—not;
veda-vädeñu—who speak the version of the Vedas; hi—indeed;
tattva-vädaù—the spiritual science; präyeëa—almost always; çuddhaù—free
from all contaminated activities; nu—indeed; cakästi—appear; sädhuù—a
person who is advanced in devotional service.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
429
My dear King, talks of the relationship between the master and the servant,
the king and the subject and so forth are simply talks about material activities.
People interested in material activities, which are expounded in the Vedas, are
intent on performing material sacrifices and placing faith in their material
activities. For such people, spiritual advancement is definitely not manifest.
PURPORT
In this verse, two words are significant—veda-väda and tattva-väda.
According to Bhagavad-gétä, those who are simply attached to the Vedas and
who do not understand the purpose of the Vedas or the Vedänta-sütra are
called veda-väda-ratäù.
yäm imäà puñpitäà väcaà
pravadanty avipaçcitaù
veda-väda-ratäù pärtha
nänyad astéti vädinaù
kämätmänaù svarga-parä
janma-karma-phala-pradäm
kriyä-viçeña-bahuläà
bhogaiçvarya-gatià prati
"Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of the
Vedas, which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation to heavenly
planets, resultant good birth, power and so forth. Being desirous of sense
gratification and opulent life, they say there is nothing more than this." (Bg.
2.42-43)
The veda-väda followers of the Vedas are generally inclined to
karma-käëòa, the performance of sacrifice according to the Vedic injunctions.
They are thereby promoted to higher planetary systems. They generally
practice the Cäturmäsya system. Akñayyaà ha vai cäturmäsya-yäjinaù sukåtaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
430
bhavati: one who performs the cäturmäsya-yajïa becomes pious. By becoming
pious, one may be promoted to the higher planetary systems (ürdhvaà
gacchanti sattva-sthäù [Bg. 14.18]). Some of the followers of the Vedas are
attached to karma-käëòa, the fruitive activities of the Vedas, in order to be
promoted to a higher standard of life. Others argue that this is not the purpose
of the Vedas. Tad yathaiveha karma jitaù lokaù kñéyate evam evam utra puëya
jitaù lokaù kñéyate. In this world someone may become very highly elevated by
taking birth in an aristocratic family, by being well educated, beautiful or very
rich. These are the gifts for pious activities enacted in the past life. However,
these will be finished when the stock of pious activity is finished. If we become
attached to pious activities, we may get these various worldly facilities in the
next life and may take birth in the heavenly planets. But all this will
eventually be finished. Kñéëe puëye martya-lokaà viçanti (Bg. 9.21): when the
stock of pious activity is finished, one again has to come to this martya-loka.
According to the Vedic injunctions, the performance of pious activity is not
really the objective of the Vedas. The objective of the Vedas is explained in
Bhagavad-gétä. Vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù: [Bg. 15.15] the objective of
the Vedas is to understand Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Those
who are veda-vädés are not actually advanced in knowledge, and those who are
followers of jïäna-käëòa (Brahman understanding) are also not perfect.
However, when one comes to the platform of upäsanä and accepts the worship
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he becomes perfect (ärädhanänäà
sarveñäà viñëor ärädhanaà param **(8)). In the Vedas the worship of different
demigods and the performance of sacrifice are certainly, mentioned, but such
worship is inferior because the worshipers do not know that the ultimate goal
is Viñëu (na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum [SB 7.5.31]). When one comes to
the platform of viñëor ärädhanam, or bhakti-yoga, one has attained the
perfection of life. Otherwise, as indicated in Bhagavad-gétä, one is not a
tattva-vädé but a veda-vädé, a blind follower of the Vedic injunctions. A
veda-vädé cannot be purified from material contamination unless he becomes a
tattva-vädé, that is, one who knows tattva, the Absolute Truth. Tattva is also
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
431
experienced in three features-brahmeti paramätmeti bhagavän iti çabdyate [SB
1.2.11]. Even after coming to the platform of understanding tattva, one must
worship Bhagavän, Viñëu and His expansions, or one is not yet perfect.
Bahünäà janmanäm ante jïänavän mäà prapadyate: [Bg. 7.19] after many
births, one who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Kåñëa. The
conclusion is that unintelligent men with a poor fund of knowledge cannot
understand Bhagavän, Brahman or Paramätmä, but after studying the Vedas
and attaining the understanding of the Absolute Truth, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, one is supposed to be on the platform of perfect
knowledge.
TEXT 3
Na TaSYa TatvGa]h<aaYa Saa+aad(
vrqYaSaqriPa vac" SaMaaSaNa( )
SvPane iNaå¢-ya Ga*hMaeiDaSaaE:Ya&
Na YaSYa heYaaNauiMaTa& SvYa& SYaaTa( )) 3 ))
na tasya tattva-grahaëäya säkñäd
varéyasér api väcaù samäsan
svapne niruktyä gåhamedhi-saukhyaà
na yasya heyänumitaà svayaà syät
SYNONYMS
na—not; tasya—of him (a student studying the Vedas); tattva-grahaëäya—for
accepting the real purpose of Vedic knowledge; säkñät—directly;
varéyaséù—very exalted; api—although; väcaù—words of the Vedas;
samäsan—sufficiently became; svapne—in a dream; niruktyä—by example;
gåha-medhi-saukhyam—happiness within this material world; na—not;
yasya—of him who; heya-anumitam—concluded to be inferior;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
432
svayam—automatically; syät—become.
TRANSLATION
A dream becomes automatically known to a person as false and immaterial,
and similarly one eventually realizes that material happiness in this life or the
next, on this planet or a higher planet, is insignificant. When one realizes this,
the Vedas, although an excellent source, are insufficient to bring about direct
knowledge of the truth.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (2.45), Kåñëa advised Arjuna to become transcendental to
the material activities impelled by the three material modes of nature
(traiguëya-viñayä vedä nistraiguëyo bhavärjuna). The purpose of Vedic study is
to transcend the activities of the three modes of material nature. Of course in
the material world the mode of goodness is accepted as the best, and one can
be promoted to the higher planetary systems by being on the sattva-guëa
platform. However, that is not perfection. One must come to the conclusion
that even the sattva-guëa platform is also not good. One may dream that he
has become a king with a good family, wife and children, but immediately at
the end of that dream he comes to the conclusion that it is false. Similarly, all
kinds of material happiness are undesirable for a person who wants spiritual
salvation. If a person does not come to the conclusion that he has nothing to
do with any kind of material happiness, he cannot come to the platform of
understanding the Absolute Truth, or tattva jïäna. Karmés, jïänés and yogés are
after some material elevation. The karmés work hard day and night for some
bodily comfort, and the jïänés simply speculate about how to get out of the
entanglement of karma and merge into the Brahman effulgence. The yogés are
very much addicted to the acquisition of material perfection and magical
powers. All of them are trying to be materially perfect, but a devotee very
easily comes to the platform of nirguëa in devotional service, and consequently
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
433
for the devotee the results of karma, jïäna and yoga become very insignificant.
Therefore only the devotee is on the platform of tattva jïäna, not the others.
Of course the jïäné's position is better than that of the karmé but that position
is also insufficient. The jïäné must actually become liberated, and after
liberation he may be situated in devotional service (mad-bhaktià labhate
paräm [Bg. 18.54]).
TEXT 4
YaavNMaNaae rJaSaa PaUåzSYa
SatveNa va TaMaSaa vaNauåÖMa( )
ceTaaei>arakU-iTai>araTaNaaeiTa
iNarx(ku-Xa& ku-Xal&/ ceTar& va )) 4 ))
yävan mano rajasä püruñasya
sattvena vä tamasä vänuruddham
cetobhir äkütibhir ätanoti
niraìkuçaà kuçalaà cetaraà vä
SYNONYMS
yävat—as long as; manaù—the mind; rajasä—by the mode of passion;
püruñasya—of the living entity; sattvena—by the mode of goodness; vä—or;
tamasä—by the mode of darkness; vä—or; anuruddham—controlled;
cetobhiù—by the knowledge-acquiring senses; äkütibhiù—by the senses of
action; ätanoti—expands; niraìkuçam—independent like an elephant not
controlled by a trident; kuçalam—auspiciousness; ca—also; itaram—other
than auspiciousness, sinful activities; vä—or.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
434
As long as the mind of the living entity is contaminated by the three modes
of material nature (goodness, passion and ignorance), his mind is exactly like an
independent, uncontrolled elephant. It simply expands its jurisdiction of pious
and impious activities by using the senses. The result is that the living entity
remains in the material world to enjoy and suffer pleasures and pains due to
material activity.
PURPORT
In Caitanya-caritämåta it is said that material pious and impious activities
are both opposed to the principle of devotional service. Devotional service
means mukti, freedom from material entanglement, but pious and impious
activities result in entanglement within this material world. If the mind is
captivated by the pious and impious activities mentioned in the Vedas, one
remains eternally in darkness; one cannot attain the absolute platform. To
change the consciousness from ignorance to passion or from passion to
goodness does not really solve the problem. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (14.26),
sa guëän samatétyaitän brahma-bhüyäya kalpate. One must come to the
transcendental platform; otherwise life's mission is never fulfilled.
TEXT 5
Sa vaSaNaaTMaa ivzYaaePar¢-ae
Gau<aPa[vahae ivk*-Ta" zae@XaaTMaa )
ib>a]TPa*Qax(NaaMai>a æPa>aed‚
MaNTabRihî& c PaurESTaNaaeiTa )) 5 ))
sa väsanätmä viñayoparakto
guëa-praväho vikåtaù ñoòaçätmä
bibhrat påthaì-nämabhi rüpa-bhedam
antar-bahiñövaà ca purais tanoti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
435
SYNONYMS
saù—that; väsanä—endowed with many desires; ätmä—the mind;
viñaya-uparaktaù—attached to material happiness, sense gratification;
guëa-pravähaù—driven by the force of either sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa or
tamo-guëa; vikåtaù—transformed by lust and so on; ñoòaça-ätmä—the chief of
the sixteen material elements (the five gross elements, the ten senses and the
mind); bibhrat—wandering; påthak-nämabhiù—with separate names;
rüpa-bhedam—assuming different forms; antaù-bahiñövam—the quality of
being first-class or last-class; ca—and; puraiù—with different bodily forms;
tanoti—manifests.
TRANSLATION
Because the mind is absorbed in desires for pious and impious activities, it is
naturally subjected to the transformations of lust and anger. In this way, it
becomes attracted to material sense enjoyment. In other words, the mind is
conducted by the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. There are eleven
senses and five material elements, and out of these sixteen items, the mind is
the chief. Therefore the mind brings about birth in different types of bodies
among demigods, human beings, animals and birds. When the mind is situated
in a higher or lower position, it accepts a higher or lower material body.
PURPORT
Transmigration among the 8,400,000 species is due to the mind's being
polluted by certain material qualities. Due to the mind, the soul is subjected to
pious and impious activities. The continuation of material existence is like the
waves of material nature. In this regard. Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura says,
mäyära vaçe, yäccha bhese', khäccha häbuòubu, bhäi: "My dear brother, the
spirit soul is completely under the control of mäyä, and you are being carried
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
436
away by its waves." This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä:
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself the doer of activities, which are in actuality carried out
by nature." (Bg. 3.27)
Material existence means being fully controlled by material nature. The
mind is the center for accepting the dictations of material nature. In this way
the living entity is carried away in different types of bodies continuously,
millennium after millennium.
kåñëa bhuli' sei jéva anädi-bahirmukha
ataeva mäyä täre deya saàsära-duùkha
(Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya 20.117)
Due to the living entity's forgetfulness of Kåñëa, one is bound by the laws of
material nature.
TEXT 6
du"%& Sau%& VYaiTair¢&- c Taqv]&
k-al/aePaPaà& f-l/MaaVYaNai¢- )
Aail/&GYa MaaYaaricTaaNTaraTMaa
SvdeihNa& Sa&Sa*iTac§-kU-$=" )) 6 ))
duùkhaà sukhaà vyatiriktaà ca tévraà
kälopapannaà phalam ävyanakti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
437
äliìgya mäyä-racitäntarätmä
sva-dehinaà saàsåti-cakra-küöaù
SYNONYMS
duùkham—unhappiness due to impious activities; sukham—happiness due to
pious activities; vyatiriktam—illusion; ca—also; tévram—very severe;
käla-upapannam—obtained in the course of time; phalam—the resultant
action; ävyanakti—creates; äliìgya—embracing; mäyä-racita—created by
material nature; antaù-ätmä—the mind; sva-dehinam—the living being
himself; saàsåti—of the actions and reactions of material existence;
cakra-küöaù—which deceives the living entity into the wheel.
TRANSLATION
The materialistic mind covering the living entity's soul carries it to different
species of life. This is called continued material existence. Due to the mind, the
living entity suffers or enjoys material distress and happiness. Being thus
illusioned, the mind further creates pious and impious activities and their
karma, and thus the soul becomes conditioned.
PURPORT
Mental activities under the influence of material nature cause happiness
and distress within the material world. Being covered by illusion, the living
entity eternally continues conditioned life under different designations. Such
living entities are known as nitya-baddha, eternally' conditioned. On the
whole, the mind is the cause of conditioned life; therefore the entire yogic
process is meant to control the mind and the senses. If the mind is controlled,
the senses are automatically controlled, and therefore the soul is saved from
the reactions of pious and impious activity. If the mind is engaged at the lotus
feet of Lord Kåñëa (sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]), the senses
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
438
are automatically engaged in the Lord's service. When the mind and senses are
engaged in devotional service, the living entity naturally becomes Kåñëa
conscious. As soon as one always thinks of Kåñëa, he becomes a perfect yogé, as
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (yoginäm api sarveñäà mad-gatenäntarätmanä [Bg.
6.47]). This antarätmä, the mind, is conditioned by material nature. As stated
here, mäyä-racitäntarätmä sva-dehinaà saàsåti-cakra-küöaù: the mind, being
most powerful, covers the living entity and puts him in the waves of material
existence.
TEXT 7
TaavaNaYa& VYavhar" Sadaiv"
+ae}ajSaa+Yaae >aviTa SQaUl/SaU+Ma" )
TaSMaaNMaNaae il/(r)Madae vdiNTa
Gau<aaGau<aTvSYa ParavrSYa )) 7 ))
tävän ayaà vyavahäraù sadäviù
kñetrajïa-säkñyo bhavati sthüla-sükñmaù
tasmän mano liìgam ado vadanti
guëäguëatvasya parävarasya
SYNONYMS
tävän—until that time; ayam—this; vyavahäraù—the artificial designations
(being fat or skinny, or belonging to the demigods or human beings);
sadä—always; äviù—manifesting; kñetra-jïa—of the Living entity;
säkñyaù—testimony; bhavati—is; sthüla-sükñmaù—fat and skinny;
tasmät—therefore; manaù—the mind; liìgam—the cause; adaù—this;
vadanti—they say; guëa-aguëatvasya—of being absorbed in material qualities
or devoid of material qualities; para-avarasya—and of lower and higher
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
439
conditions of life.
TRANSLATION
The mind makes the living entity within this material world wander through
different species of life, and thus the living entity experiences mundane affairs
in different forms as a human being, demigod, fat person, skinny person and so
forth. Learned scholars say that bodily appearance, bondage and liberation are
caused by the mind.
PURPORT
Just as the mind is the cause of bondage, it can also be the cause of
liberation. The mind is described here as para-avara, para means
transcendental, and avara means material. When the mind is engaged in the
Lord's service (sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]), it is called para,
transcendental. When the mind is engaged in material sense gratification, it is
called avara, or material. At the present moment, in our conditioned state, our
mind is fully absorbed in material sense gratification, but it can be purified and
brought to its original Kåñëa consciousness by the process of devotional
service. We have often given the example of Ambaréña Mahäräja. Sa vai manaù
kåñëa-padäravindayor vacäàsi vaikuëöha-guëänuvarëane. The mind must be
controlled in Kåñëa consciousness. The tongue can be utilized to spread the
message of Kåñëa and glorify the Lord or take prasäda, the remnants of food
offered to Kåñëa. Sevonmukhe hi jihvädau: [Brs. 1.2.234(9)] when one utilizes
the tongue in the service of the Lord, the other senses can become purified. As
stated in the Närada-païcarätra, sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà tat-paratvena
nirmalam: [Cc. Madhya 19.170] when the mind and senses are purified, one's
total existence is purified, and one's designations are also purified. One no
longer considers himself a human being, a demigod, cat, dog, Hindu, Muslim
and so forth. When the senses and mind are purified and one is fully engaged
in Kåñëa's service, one can be liberated and return home, back to Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
440
TEXT 8
Gau<aaNaur¢&- VYaSaNaaYa JaNTaae"
+aeMaaYa NaEGauR<YaMaQaae MaNa" SYaaTa( )
YaQaa Pa[dqPaae ga*TaviTaRMaénNa(
iXa%a" SaDaUMaa >aJaiTa ùNYada SvMa( )
Pad& TaQaa Gau<ak-MaaRNaubÖ&
v*taqMaRNa" é[YaTae_NYa}a TatvMa( )) 8 ))
guëänuraktaà vyasanäya jantoù
kñemäya nairguëyam atho manaù syät
yathä pradépo ghåta-vartim açnan
çikhäù sadhümä bhajati hy anyadä svam
padaà tathä guëa-karmänubaddhaà
våttér manaù çrayate 'nyatra tattvam
SYNONYMS
guëa-anuraktam—being attached to the material modes of nature;
vyasanäya—for the conditioning in material existence; jantoù—of the living
entity; kñemäya—for the ultimate welfare; nairguëyam—being unaffected by
the material modes of nature; atho—thus; manaù—the mind; syät—becomes;
yathä—as much as; pradépaù—a lamp; ghåta-vartim—a wick within clarified
butter; açnan—burning; çikhäù—the flame; sadhümäù—with smoke;
bhajati—enjoys; hi—certainly; anyadä—otherwise; svam—its own original;
padam—position; tathä—so; guëa-karma-anubaddham—bound by the modes
of nature and the reactions of material activities; våttéù—various engagements;
manaù—the mind; çrayate—takes shelter of; anyatra—otherwise; tattvam—its
original condition.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
441
TRANSLATION
When the living entity's mind becomes absorbed in the sense gratification of
the material world, it brings about his conditioned life and suffering within the
material situation. However, when the mind becomes unattached to material
enjoyment, it becomes the cause of liberation. When the flame in a lamp burns
the wick improperly, the lamp is blackened, but when the lamp is filled with
ghee and is burning properly, there is bright illumination. Similarly, when the
mind is absorbed in material sense gratification, it causes suffering, and when
detached from material sense gratification, it brings about the original
brightness of Kåñëa consciousness.
PURPORT
It is therefore concluded that the mind is the cause of material existence
and liberation also. Everyone is suffering in this material world because of the
mind; it is therefore proper to train the mind or to cleanse the mind from
material attachment and engage it fully in the Lord's service. This is called
spiritual engagement. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä:
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman." (Bg. 14.26)
We should engage the mind fully in Kåñëa conscious activities. Then it will
be the cause of our liberation, for our returning home, back to Godhead.
However, if we keep the mind engaged in material activities for sense
gratification, it will cause continuous bondage and will make us remain in this
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
442
material world in different bodies, suffering the consequences of our different
actions.
TEXT 9
Wk-adXaaSaNMaNaSaae ih v*taYa
AakU-TaYa" PaÄ iDaYaae_i>aMaaNa" )
Maa}aai<a k-MaaRi<a Paur& c TaaSaa&
vdiNTa hEk-adXa vqr >aUMaq" )) 9 ))
ekädaçäsan manaso hi våttaya
äkütayaù païca dhiyo 'bhimänaù
mäträëi karmäëi puraà ca täsäà
vadanti haikädaça véra bhüméù
SYNONYMS
ekädaça—eleven; äsan—there are; manasaù—of the mind; hi—certainly;
våttayaù—activities; äkütayaù—senses of action; païca—five; dhiyaù—senses
for gathering knowledge; abhimänaù—the false ego; mäträëi—different sense
objects; karmäëi—different material activities; puram ca—and the body,
society, nation, family or place of nativity; täsäm—of those functions;
vadanti—they say; ha—oh; ekädaça—eleven; véra—O hero; bhüméù—fields of
activity.
TRANSLATION
There are five working senses and five knowledge-acquiring senses. There is
also the false ego. In this way, there are eleven items for the mind's functions.
O hero, the objects of the senses [such as sound and touch], the organic
activities [such as evacuation] and the different types of bodies, society,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
443
friendship and personality are considered by learned scholars the fields of
activity for the functions of the mind.
PURPORT
The mind is the controller of the five knowledge-acquiring senses and the
five working senses. Each sense has its particular field of activity. In all cases,
the mind is the controller or owner. By the false ego one thinks oneself the
body and thinks in terms of "my body, my house, my family, my society, my
nation" and so on. These false identifications are due to the expansions of the
false ego. Thus one thinks that he is this or that. Thus the living entity
becomes entangled in material existence.
TEXT 10
GaNDaak*-iTaSPaXaRrSaé[va&iSa
ivSaGaRrTYaTYaRi>aJaLPaiXaLPaa" )
Wk-adXa& Svqk-r<a& MaMaeiTa
XaYYaaMah& ÜadXaMaek- Aahu" )) 10 ))
gandhäkåti-sparça-rasa-çraväàsi
visarga-raty-arty-abhijalpa-çilpäù
ekädaçaà svékaraëaà mameti
çayyäm ahaà dvädaçam eka ähuù
SYNONYMS
gandha—smell; äkåti—form; sparça—touch; rasa—taste; çraväàsi—and
sound; visarga—evacuating; rati—sexual intercourse; arti—movement;
abhijalpa—speaking; çilpäù—grasping or releasing; ekädaçam—eleventh;
svékaraëam—accepting as; mama—mine; iti—thus; çayyäm—this body;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
444
aham—I; dvädaçam—twelfth; eke—some; ähuù—have said.
TRANSLATION
Sound, touch, form, taste and smell are the objects of the five
knowledge-acquiring senses. Speech, touch, movement, evacuation and sexual
intercourse are the objects of the working senses. Besides this, there is another
conception by which one thinks, "This is my body, this is my society, this is my
family, this is my nation," and so forth. This eleventh function, that of the
mind, is called the false ego. According to some philosophers, this is the twelfth
function, and its field of activity is the body.
PURPORT
There are different objects for the eleven items. Through the nose we can
smell, by the eyes we can see, by the ears we can hear, and in this way we
gather knowledge. Similarly, there are the karmendriyas, the working
senses—the hands, legs, genitals, rectum, mouth and so forth. When the false
ego expands, it makes one think. "This is my body, family, society, country,"
etc.
TEXT 11
d]VYaSv>aavaXaYak-MaRk-alE/‚
rek-adXaaMaq MaNaSaae ivk-ara" )
SahóXa" XaTaXa" k-aei$=Xaê
+ae}ajTaae Na iMaQaae Na SvTa" SYau" )) 11 ))
dravya-svabhäväçaya-karma-kälair
ekädaçämé manaso vikäräù
sahasraçaù çataçaù koöiçaç ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
445
kñetrajïato na mitho na svataù syuù
SYNONYMS
dravya—by physical objects; sva-bhäva—by nature as the cause of
development; äçaya—by culture; karma—by predestined resultant actions;
kälaiù—by time; ekädaça—eleven; amé—all these; manasaù—of the mind;
vikäräù—transformations; sahasraçaù—in thousands; çataçaù—in hundreds;
koöiçaù ca—and in millions; kñetra-jïataù—from the original Supreme
Personality of Godhead; na—not; mithaù—one another; na—nor;
svataù—from themselves; syuù—are.
TRANSLATION
The physical elements, nature, the original cause, culture, destiny and the
time element are all material causes. Agitated by these material causes, the
eleven functions transform into hundreds of functions and then into thousands
and then into millions. But all these transformations do not take place
automatically by mutual combination. Rather, they are under the direction of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
One should not think that all the interactions of the physical elements,
gross and subtle, that cause the transformation of mind and consciousness are
working independently. They are under the direction of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), Kåñëa says that the Lord is
situated in everyone's heart (sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo mattaù småtir
jïänam apohanaà ca). As mentioned herein, Supersoul (kñetrajïa) is directing
everything. The living entity is also kñetrajïa, but the supreme kñetrajïa is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the witness and order giver. Under His
direction, everything takes place. The different inclinations of the living
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
446
entity are created by his own nature or his expectations, and he is trained by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead through the agency of material nature.
The body, nature and the physical elements are under the direction of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. They do not function automatically. Nature
is neither independent nor automatic. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is behind nature.
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunté, and it is
producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is
created and annihilated again and again." (Bg. 9.10)
TEXT 12
+ae}aj WTaa MaNaSaae iv>aUTaq‚
JasvSYa MaaYaaricTaSYa iNaTYaa" )
AaivihRTaa" KvaiPa iTaraeihTaaê
XauÖae ivcíe ùivXauÖk-TauR" )) 12 ))
kñetrajïa etä manaso vibhütér
jévasya mäyä-racitasya nityäù
ävirhitäù kväpi tirohitäç ca
çuddho vicañöe hy aviçuddha-kartuù
SYNONYMS
kñetra-jïaù—the individual soul; etäù—all these; manasaù—of the mind;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
447
vibhütéù—different activities; jévasya—of the living entity;
mäyä-racitasya—created by the external, material energy; nityäù—from time
immemorial; ävirhitäù—sometimes manifested; kväpi—somewhere; tirohitäù
ca—and not manifested; çuddhaù—purified; vicañöe—sees this; hi—certainly;
aviçuddha—unpurified; kartuù—of the doer.
TRANSLATION
The individual soul bereft of Kåñëa consciousness has many ideas and
activities created in the mind by the external energy. They have been existing
from time immemorial. Sometimes they are manifest in the wakening state and
in the dream state, but during deep sleep [unconsciousness] or trance, they
disappear. A person who is liberated in this life [jévan-mukta] can see all these
things vividly.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (13.3), kñetra-jïaà cäpi mäà viddhi sarva-kñetreñu
bhärata. There are two kinds of kñetrajïa, or living beings. One is the
individual living being, and the other is the supreme living being. The
ordinary living being knows about his body to some extent, but the Supreme,
Paramätmä, knows the condition of all bodies. The individual living being is
localized, and the Supreme, Paramätmä, is all-pervading. In this çloka the word
kñetrajïa refers to an ordinary living being, not the supreme living being. This
ordinary living being is of two kinds—nitya-baddha or nitya-mukta. One is
eternally conditioned and the other eternally liberated. The eternally liberated
living beings are in the Vaikuëöha jagat, the spiritual world, and they never
fall into the material world. Those in the material world are conditioned souls,
nitya-baddha. The nitya-baddhas can become liberated by controlling the mind
because the cause of conditioned life is the mind. When the mind is trained
and the soul is not under the mind's control, the soul can be liberated even in
this material world. When it is liberated, one is called jévan-mukta. A
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
448
jévan-mukta knows how he has become conditioned; therefore he tries to purify
himself and return home, back to Godhead. The eternally conditioned soul is
eternally conditioned because he is controlled by the mind. The conditioned
state and liberated state are compared to the sleeping, unconscious state and
the awakened state. Those who are sleeping and unconscious are eternally
conditioned, but those who are awake understand that they are eternally part
and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Therefore even in
this material world, they engage in Kåñëa's service. As confirmed by Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé: éhä yasya harer däsye. If one takes to Kåñëa's service, he is liberated,
even though he appears to be a conditioned soul within the material world.
Jévan-muktaù sa ucyate. In any condition, one is to be considered liberated if
his only business is to serve Kåñëa.
TEXTS 13-14
+ae}aj AaTMaa Pauåz" Paura<a"
Saa+aaTSvYa&JYaaeiTarJa" PareXa" )
NaaraYa<aae >aGavaNa( vaSaudev"
SvMaaYaYaaTMaNYavDaqYaMaaNa" )) 13 ))
YaQaaiNal/" SQaavrJa(r)MaaNaa‚
MaaTMaSvæPae<a iNaiví wRXaeTa( )
Wv& Parae >aGavaNa( vaSaudev"
+ae}aj AaTMaedMaNauPa[iví" )) 14 ))
kñetrajïa ätmä puruñaù puräëaù
säkñät svayaà jyotir ajaù pareçaù
näräyaëo bhagavän väsudevaù
sva-mäyayätmany avadhéyamänaù
yathänilaù sthävara-jaìgamänäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
449
ätma-svarüpeëa niviñöa éçet
evaà paro bhagavän väsudevaù
kñetrajïa ätmedam anupraviñöaù
SYNONYMS
kñetra-jïaù(10)-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ätmä—all-pervading,
present everywhere; puruñaù—the unrestricted controller, who has unlimited
power; puräëaù—the original; säkñät—perceivable by hearing from the
authorities and by direct perception; svayam—personal; jyotiù—manifesting
His bodily rays (the Brahman effulgence); ajaù—never born; pareçaù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; näräyaëaù—the resting place of all living
entities; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead with six full opulences;
väsudevaù—the shelter of everything, manifested and nonmanifest;
sva-mäyayä—by His own potency; ätmani—in His own self, or in the ordinary
living entities; avadhéyamänaù—existing as the controller; yathä—as much as;
anilaù—the air; sthävara—of nonmoving living entities; jaìgamänäm—and of
the moving living entities; ätma-svarüpeëa—by His expansion as the
Supersoul; niviñöaù—entered; éçet—controls; evam—thus;
paraù—transcendental; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
väsudevaù—the shelter of everything; kñetra-jïaù—known as kñetrajïa;
ätmä—the vital force; idam—this material world; anupraviñöaù—entered
within.
TRANSLATION
There are two kinds of kñetrajïa—the living entity, as explained above, and
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is explained as follows. He is the
all-pervading cause of creation. He is full in Himself and is not dependent on
others. He is perceived by hearing and direct perception. He is self-effulgent
and does not experience birth, death, old age or disease. He is the controller of
all the demigods, beginning with Lord Brahmä. He is called Näräyaëa, and He
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
450
is the shelter of living entities after the annihilation of this material world. He
is full of all opulences, and He is the resting place of everything material. He is
therefore known as Väsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By His
own potency, He is present within the hearts of all living entities, just as the air
or vital force is within the bodies of all beings, moving and nonmoving. In this
way He controls the body. In His partial feature, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead enters all bodies and controls them.
PURPORT
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15). Sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo
mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca. Every living being is controlled by the
supreme living being, Paramätmä, who resides within everyone's heart. He is
the puruña, the puruña-avatära, who creates this material world. The first
puruña-avatära is Mahä-Viñëu, and that Mahä-Viñëu is the plenary portion of
the plenary portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Kåñëa's
first expansion is Baladeva, and His next expansions are Väsudeva,
Saìkarñaëa, Aniruddha and Pradyumna. Väsudeva is the original cause of the
brahmajyoti, and the brahmajyoti is the expansion of the rays of the body of
Väsudeva.
yasya prabhä prabhavato jagad-aëòa-koöikoöiñv
açeña-vasudhädi-vibhüti-bhinnam
tad brahma niñkalam anantam açeña-bhütaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is endowed with great power. The
glowing effulgence of His transcendental form is the impersonal Brahman,
which is absolute, complete and unlimited and which displays the varieties of
countless planets, with their different opulences, in millions and millions of
universes." (Bs. 5.40) The Supreme Personality of Godhead is thus described in
Bhagavad-gétä:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
451
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings
are in Me, but I am not in them." (Bg. 9.4)
This is the position of the plenary expansions of Kåñëa as the all-pervading
Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha.
TEXT 15
Na YaavdeTaa& TaNau>a*àreNd]
ivDaUYa MaaYaa& vYauNaaedYaeNa )
ivMau¢-Sa(r)ae iJaTaz$(„SaPaÒae
vedaTMaTatv& >a]MaTaqh TaavTa( )) 15 ))
na yävad etäà tanu-bhån narendra
vidhüya mäyäà vayunodayena
vimukta-saìgo jita-ñaö-sapatno
vedätma-tattvaà bhramatéha tävat
SYNONYMS
na—not; yävat—as long as; etäm—this; tanu-bhåt—one who has accepted a
material body; narendra—O King; vidhüya mäyäm—washing away the
infection accumulated because of contamination by the material world; vayunä
udayena—by awakening of transcendental knowledge due to good association
and study of the Vedic literatures; vimukta-saìgaù—free from all material
association; jita-ñaö-sapatnaù—conquering the six enemies (the five
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
452
knowledge-acquiring senses and the mind); veda—knows;
ätma-tattvam—spiritual truth; bhramati—he wanders; iha—in this material
world; tävat—until that time.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Rahügaëa, as long as the conditioned soul accepts the material
body and is not freed from the contamination of material enjoyment, and as long
as he does not conquer his six enemies and come to the platform of
self-realization by awakening his spiritual knowledge, he has to wander among
different places and different species of life in this material world.
PURPORT
When one's mind is absorbed in the material conception, he thinks that he
belongs to a particular nation, family, country or creed. These are all called
upädhis, designations, and one has to become freed from them
(sarvopädhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]). As long as one is not freed, he
has to continue conditioned life in material existence. The human form of life
is meant for cleansing away these misconceptions. If this is not done, one has
to repeat the cycle of birth and death and thus suffer all material conditions.
TEXT 16
Na YaavdeTaNMaNa AaTMail/(r)&
Sa&SaarTaaPaavPaNa& JaNaSYa )
YaC^aek-MaaehaMaYaraGal/ae>a‚
vEraNaubNDa& MaMaTaa& ivDatae )) 16 ))
na yävad etan mana ätma-liìgaà
saàsära-täpävapanaà janasya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
453
yac choka-mohämaya-räga-lobhavairänubandhaà
mamatäà vidhatte
SYNONYMS
na—not; yävat—as long as; etat—this; manaù—mind; ätma-liìgam—existing
as the false designation of the soul; saàsära-täpa—of the miseries of this
material world; ävapanam—the growing ground; janasya—of the living being;
yat—which; çoka—of lamentation; moha—of illusion; ämaya—of disease;
räga—of attachment; lobha—of greed; vaira—of enmity; anubandham—the
consequence; mamatäm—the sense of ownership; vidhatte—gives.
TRANSLATION
The soul's designation, the mind, is the cause of all tribulations in the
material world. As long as this fact is unknown to the conditioned living entity,
he has to accept the miserable condition of the material body and wander within
this universe in different positions. Because the mind is affected by disease,
lamentation, illusion, attachment, greed and enmity, it creates bondage and a
false sense of intimacy within this material world.
PURPORT
The mind is the cause of both material bondage and liberation. The impure
mind thinks, "I am this body." The pure mind knows that he is not the material
body; therefore the mind is considered to be the root of all material
designations. Until the living entity is aloof from the association and
contaminations of this material world, the mind will be absorbed in such
material things as birth, death, disease, illusion, attachment, greed and enmity.
In this way the living entity is conditioned, and he suffers material miseries.
TEXT 17
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
454
>a]aTa*VYaMaeNa& Tadd>a]vqYaR‚
MauPae+aYaaDYaeiDaTaMaPa[Mata" )
GauraehR„reêr<aaePaaSaNaañae
Jaih VYal/Ik&- SvYaMaaTMaMaaezMa( )) 17 ))
bhrätåvyam enaà tad adabhra-véryam
upekñayädhyedhitam apramattaù
guror hareç caraëopäsanästro
jahi vyalékaà svayam ätma-moñam
SYNONYMS
bhrätåvyam—the formidable enemy; enam—this mind; tat—that;
adabhra-véryam—very, very powerful; upekñayä—by neglecting;
adhyedhitam—unnecessarily increased in power; apramattaù—one who is
without illusion; guroù—of the spiritual master; hareù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; caraëa—of the lotus feet; upäsanä-astraù—applying
the weapon of worshiping; jahi—conquer; vyalékam—false;
svayam—personally; ätma-moñam—which covers the constitutional position
of the living entity.
TRANSLATION
This uncontrolled mind is the greatest enemy of the living entity. If one
neglects it or gives it a chance, it will grow more and more powerful and will
become victorious. Although it is not factual, it is very strong. It covers the
constitutional position of the soul. O King, please try to conquer this mind by
the weapon of service to the lotus feet of the spiritual master and of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Do this with great care.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
455
PURPORT
There is one easy weapon with which the mind can be conquered—neglect.
The mind is always telling us to do this or that; therefore we should be very
expert in disobeying the mind's orders. Gradually the mind should be trained
to obey the orders of the soul. It is not that one should obey the orders of the
mind. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura used to say that to control the
mind one should beat it with shoes many times just after awakening and again
before going to sleep. In this way one can control the mind. This is the
instruction of all the çästras. If one does not do so, one is doomed to follow the
dictations of the mind. Another bona fide process is to abide strictly by the
orders of the spiritual master and engage in the Lord's service. Then the mind
will be automatically controlled. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has instructed Çréla
Rüpa Gosvämé:
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
[Cc. Madhya 19.151]
When one receives the seed of devotional service by the mercy of the guru and
Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one's real life begins. If one
abides by the orders of the spiritual master, by the grace of Kåñëa he is freed
from service to the mind.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Eleventh Chapter of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Jaòa Bharata Instructs King Rahügaëa."
12. Conversation Between Mahäräja Rahügaëa and Jaòa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
456
Bharata
Because Mahäräja Rahügaëa was still doubtful about his enlightenment, he
asked the brähmaëa Jaòa Bharata to repeat his instructions and clarify ideas he
could not understand. In this chapter, Mahäräja Rahügaëa offers his respectful
obeisances to Jaòa Bharata, who was concealing his real position. The King
could understand by his speech how exalted and advanced he was in spiritual
knowledge. He very much regretted his offense against him. Mahäräja
Rahügaëa was bitten by the serpent of ignorance, but was cured by the
nectarean words of Jaòa Bharata. Later, because he was doubtful about the
subjects discussed, he made further inquiries, one question after another. First
he wanted to be released from the offense he had committed at the lotus feet
of Jaòa Bharata.
Mahäräja Rahügaëa was somewhat unhappy at not being able to grasp Jaòa
Bharata's instructions, which were full of meaning that could not be
understood by a materialistic person. Therefore Jaòa Bharata repeated his
instructions more clearly. He said that on the surface of the globe all living
entities, moving and unmoving, were but transformations of the earth in
different ways. The King was very proud of his king's body, but that body was
simply another transformation of the earth. Out of his false prestige, the King
was misbehaving toward the palanquin carrier, as a master toward a servant,
and he was actually very unkind to other living entities. Consequently King
Rahügaëa was unfit to give protection to the citizens, and because he was
ignorant, he was unfit to be counted among advanced philosophers.
Everything in the material world is but a transformation of the earth, although
things have different names according to their transformations. Actually the
varieties are one and the same, and ultimately all these varieties are
vanquished into atoms. Nothing is permanent in this material world. The
variety of things and their distinctions are simply mental concoctions. The
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
457
Absolute Truth is beyond illusion and is manifest in three features-impersonal
Brahman, localized Paramätmä and the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Ultimate realization of the Absolute Truth is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, called Väsudeva by His devotees. Unless one is blessed with the dust
from the feet of a pure devotee on his head, one cannot possibly become a
devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Jaòa Bharata also told about his own previous birth and informed the King
that by the grace of the Lord he still remembered all the incidents of his past
life. Due to the activities of his past life, Jaòa Bharata was being very cautious
and was therefore assuming the characteristics of a deaf and dumb man to
avoid mingling with the material world. Association with the material modes
of nature is very powerful. The bad association of materialistic men can be
avoided only in the association of devotees. In the association of devotees, one
is given an opportunity to render devotional service in nine different
ways-çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù smaraëaà päda-sevanam arcanaà vandanaà
däsyaà sakhyam ätma-nivedanam [SB 7.5.23]. In this way, in the association of
devotees, one can pass over material association, cross over the ocean of
nescience and return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 1
rhUGa<a ovac
NaMaae NaMa" k-ar<aivGa]haYa
SvæPaTauC^qk*-TaivGa]haYa )
NaMaae_vDaUTa iÜJabNDauil/(r)‚
iNaGaU!iNaTYaaNau>avaYa Tau>YaMa( )) 1 ))
rahügaëa uväca
namo namaù käraëa-vigrahäya
svarüpa-tucchékåta-vigrahäya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
458
namo 'vadhüta dvija-bandhu-liìganigüòha-
nityänubhaväya tubhyam
SYNONYMS
rahügaëaù uväca—King Rahügaëa said; namaù—my respectful obeisances;
namaù—obeisances; käraëa-vigrahäya—to one whose body emanates from the
Supreme Person, the cause of all causes; svarüpa-tucchékåta-vigrahäya—who
has completely removed all the contradictions of the scriptures by manifesting
his true self; namaù—respectful obeisances; avadhüta—O master of all mystic
power; dvija-bandhu-liìga—by the characteristics of a person born in a
brähmaëa family but not executing the duties of a brähmaëa;
nigüòha—covered; nitya-anubhaväya—to him whose eternal self-realization;
tubhyam—to you.
TRANSLATION
King Rahügaëa said: O most exalted personality, you are not different from
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By the influence of your true self, all
kinds of contradiction in the çästras have been removed. In the dress of a friend
of a brähmaëa, you are hiding your transcendental blissful position. I offer my
respectful obeisances unto you.
PURPORT
From the Brahma-saàhitä we understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the cause of all causes (sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1]).
Åñabhadeva was the direct incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the cause of all causes. His son, Bharata Mahäräja, who was now
acting as the brähmaëa Jaòa Bharata, had received his body from the cause of
all causes. Therefore he is addressed as käraëa-vigrahäya.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
459
TEXT 2
JvraMaYaaTaRSYa YaQaaGad& SaTa(
iNadagadGDaSYa YaQaa ihMaaM>a" )
ku-dehMaaNaaihivdíd*íe"
b]øNa( vcSTae_Ma*TaMaaEzDa& Mae )) 2 ))
jvarämayärtasya yathägadaà sat
nidägha-dagdhasya yathä himämbhaù
kudeha-mänähi-vidañöa-dåñöeù
brahman vacas te 'måtam auñadhaà me
SYNONYMS
jvara—of a fever; ämaya—by the disease; ärtasya—of a distressed person;
yathä—just as; agadam—the medicine; sat—right; nidägha-dagdhasya—of one
scorched by the heat of the sun; yathä—just as; hima-ambhaù—very cold
water; ku-deha—in this body made of matter and full of dirty things such as
stool and urine; mäna—of pride; ahi—by the serpent; vidañöa—bitten;
dåñöeù—of one whose vision; brahman—O best of the brähmaëas;
vacaù—words; te—your; amåtam—nectar; auñadham—medicine; me—for me.
TRANSLATION
O best of the brähmaëas, my body is filled with dirty things, and my vision
has been bitten by the serpent of pride. Due to my material conceptions, I am
diseased. Your nectarean instructions are the proper medicine for one suffering
from such a fever, and they are cooling waters for one scorched by the heat.
PURPORT
The conditioned soul has a body full of dirty things—bones, blood, urine,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
460
stool and so forth. Nonetheless, the most intelligent men in this material world
think they are these combinations of blood, bone, urine and stool. If this is so,
why can't other intelligent men be made with these ingredients, which are so
readily available? The entire world is going on under the bodily conception
and creating a hellish condition unfit for any gentleman's living. The
instructions given to King Rahügaëa by Jaòa Bharata are very valuable. They
are like the medicine that can save one from a snakebite. The Vedic
instructions are like nectar and cool water for one suffering from scorching
heat.
TEXT 3
TaSMaaÙvNTa& MaMa Sa&XaYaaQa|
Pa[+YaaiMa PaêadDauNaa SaubaeDaMa( )
ADYaaTMaYaaeGaGa]iQaTa& Tavae¢-‚
Maa:Yaaih k-aETaUhl/ceTaSaae Mae )) 3 ))
tasmäd bhavantaà mama saàçayärthaà
prakñyämi paçcäd adhunä subodham
adhyätma-yoga-grathitaà tavoktam
äkhyähi kautühala-cetaso me
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; bhavantam—to you; mama—of me; saàçaya-artham—the
subject matter that is not clear to me; prakñyämi—I shall submit;
paçcät—afterwards; adhunä—now; su-bodham—so that it can be clearly
understood; adhyätma-yoga—of mystic instruction for self-realization;
grathitam—as composed; tava—your; uktam—speech; äkhyähi—please explain
again; kautühala-cetasaù—whose mind is very inquisitive to understand the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
461
mystery of such statements; me—to me.
TRANSLATION
Whatever doubts I have about a particular subject matter I shall ask you
about later. For the time being, these mysterious yoga instructions you have
given me for self-realization appear very difficult to understand. Please repeat
them in a simple way so that I can understand them. My mind is very
inquisitive, and I want to understand this clearly.
PURPORT
The Vedic literature instructs: tasmäd guruà prapadyeta jijïäsuù çreya
uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. An intelligent man must be very inquisitive to know the
transcendental science deeply. Therefore one must approach a guru, a spiritual
master. Although Jaòa Bharata explained everything to Mahäräja Rahügaëa, it
appears that his intelligence was not perfect enough to understand clearly. He
therefore requested a further explanation. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.34):
tad viddhi praëipätena paripraçnena sevayä. The student must approach a
spiritual master and surrender unto him fully (praëipätena). He must also
question him in order to understand his instructions (paripraçnena). One
should not only surrender to the spiritual master but also render loving service
unto him (sevayä) so that the spiritual master will be pleased with the student
and explain the transcendental subject matter more clearly. A challenging
spirit before the spiritual master should be avoided if one is at all interested in
learning the Vedic instructions in depth.
TEXT 4
Yadah YaaeGaeìr d*XYaMaaNa&
i§-Yaaf-l&/ Sad(VYavharMaUl/Ma( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
462
Na ùÅSaa TatvivMaXaRNaaYa
>avaNaMauiZMaNa( >a]MaTae MaNaae Mae )) 4 ))
yad äha yogeçvara dåçyamänaà
kriyä-phalaà sad-vyavahära-mülam
na hy aïjasä tattva-vimarçanäya
bhavän amuñmin bhramate mano me
SYNONYMS
yat—that which; äha—have said; yoga-éçvara—O master of mystic power;
dåçyamänam—being clearly seen; kriyä-phalam—the results of moving the
body here and there, such as feeling fatigue; sat—existing;
vyavahära-mülam—whose basis is etiquette alone; na—not; hi—certainly;
aïjasä—on the whole, or in fact; tattva-vimarçanäya—for understanding the
truth by consultation; bhavän—your good self; amuñmin—in that explanation;
bhramate—is bewildered; manaù—mind; me—my.
TRANSLATION
O master of yogic power, you said that fatigue resulting from moving the
body here and there is appreciated by direct perception, but actually there is no
fatigue. It simply exists as a matter of formality. By such inquiries and answers,
no one can come to the conclusion of the Absolute Truth. Because of your
presentation of this statement, my mind is a little disturbed.
PURPORT
Formal inquiries and answers about the bodily conception do not constitute
knowledge of the Absolute Truth. Knowledge of the Absolute Truth is quite
different from the formal understanding of bodily pains and pleasures. In
Bhagavad-gétä Lord Kåñëa informs Arjuna that the pains and pleasures
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
463
experienced in relation to the body are temporary; they come and go. One
should not be disturbed by them but should tolerate them and continue with
spiritual realization [Bg. 2.14].
TEXTS 5-6
b]aø<a ovac
AYa& JaNaae NaaMa cl/Na( Pa*iQaVYaa&
Ya" PaaiQaRv" PaaiQaRv k-SYa heTaae" )
TaSYaaiPa cax(g]YaaeriDa GauLf-Jaºa‚
JaaNaUåMaDYaaeriXaraeDara&Saa" )) 5 ))
A&Sae_iDa davs iXaibk-a c YaSYaa&
SaaEvqrraJaeTYaPadeXa AaSTae )
YaiSMaNa( >avaNa( æ!iNaJaai>aMaaNaae
raJaaiSMa iSaNDauiZviTa duMaRdaNDa" )) 6 ))
brähmaëa uväca
ayaà jano näma calan påthivyäà
yaù pärthivaù pärthiva kasya hetoù
tasyäpi cäìghryor adhi gulpha-jaìghäjänüru-
madhyora-çirodharäàsäù
aàse 'dhi därvé çibikä ca yasyäà
sauvéra-räjety apadeça äste
yasmin bhavän rüòha-nijäbhimäno
räjäsmi sindhuñv iti durmadändhaù
SYNONYMS
brähmaëaù uväca—the brähmaëa said; ayam—this; janaù—person;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
464
näma—celebrated as such; calan—moving; påthivyäm—on the earth;
yaù—who; pärthivaù—a transformation of the earth; pärthiva—O King, who
possesses a similar earthly body; kasya—for what; hetoù—reason; tasya api—of
him also; ca—and; aìghryoù—feet; adhi—above; gulpha—ankles;
jaìghä—calves; jänu—knees; uru—thighs; madhyora—waist;
çiraù-dhara—neck; aàsäù—shoulders; aàse—shoulder; adhi—upon;
därvé—made of wood; çibikä—palanquin; ca—and; yasyäm—on which;
sauvéra-räjä—the King of Sauvéra; iti—thus; apadeçaù—known as; äste—there
is; yasmin—in which; bhavän—Your Lordship; rüòha—imposed upon;
nija-abhimänaù—having a conception of false prestige; räjä asmi—I am the
King; sindhuñu—in the state of Sindhu; iti—thus;
durmada-andhaù—captivated by false prestige.
TRANSLATION
The self-realized brähmaëa Jaòa Bharata said: Among the various material
combinations and permutations, there are various forms and earthly
transformations. For some reason, these move on the surface of the earth and
are called palanquin carriers. Those material transformations which do not
move are gross material objects like stones. In any case, the material body is
made of earth and stone in the form of feet, ankles, calves, knees, thighs, torso,
throat and head. Upon the shoulders is the wooden palanquin, and within the
palanquin is the so-called King of Sauvéra. The body of the King is simply
another transformation of earth, but within that body Your Lordship is situated
and falsely thinking that you are the King of the state of Sauvéra.
PURPORT
After analyzing the material bodies of the palanquin carrier and the
palanquin passenger, Jaòa Bharata concludes that the real living force is the
living entity. The living entity is the offshoot or offspring of Lord Viñëu;
therefore within this material world, among moving and nonmoving things,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
465
the real principle is Lord Viñëu. Due to His presence, everything is working,
and there are actions and reactions. One who understands Lord Viñëu as the
original cause of everything is to be understood to be perfectly situated in
knowledge. Although he was falsely proud of being a king, King Rahügaëa was
not really situated in knowledge. Therefore he was rebuking the palanquin
carriers, including the self-realized brähmaëa, Jaòa Bharata. This is the first
accusation Jaòa Bharata made against the King, who was daring to talk to a
learned brähmaëa from the flimsy ground of ignorance, identifying everything
with matter. King Rahügaëa argued that the living entity is within the body
and that when the body is fatigued the living entity within must therefore be
suffering. It is clearly explained in the following verses that the living entity
does not suffer due to the body's fatigue. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté gives an
example of a child heavily decorated with ornaments; although the child's
body is very delicate, he does not feel fatigue, nor do the parents think that his
ornaments should be taken away. The living entity has nothing to do with
bodily pains and pleasures. These are simply mental concoctions. An
intelligent man will find the original cause of everything. Material
combinations and permutations may be a matter of fact in worldly dealings,
but actually the living force, the soul, has nothing to do with them. Those who
are materially upset take care of the body and manufacture daridra-näräyaëa
(poor Näräyaëa). However, it is not a fact that the soul or Supersoul becomes
poor simply because the body is poor. These are the statements of ignorant
people. The soul and Supersoul are always apart from bodily pleasure and pain.
TEXT 7
XaaeCYaaiNaMaa&STvMaiDak-ídqNaaNa(
ivíya iNaGa*õiàrNauGa]hae_iSa )
JaNaSYa GaaeáaiSMa ivk-TQaMaaNaae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
466
Na Xaae>aSae v*ÖSa>aaSau Da*í" )) 7 ))
çocyän imäàs tvam adhikañöa-dénän
viñöyä nigåhëan niranugraho 'si
janasya goptäsmi vikatthamäno
na çobhase våddha-sabhäsu dhåñöaù
SYNONYMS
çocyän—lamentable; imän—all these; tvam—you; adhi-kañöa-dénän—poor
persons suffering more pains because of their poverty-stricken position;
viñöyä—by force; nigåhëan—seizing; niranugrahaù asi—you have no mercy in
your heart; janasya—of the people in general; goptä asmi—I am the protector
(king); vikatthamänaù—bragging; na çobhase—you do not look very good;
våddha-sabhäsu—in the society of learned persons; dhåñöaù—simply impudent.
TRANSLATION
It is a fact, however, that these innocent people carrying your palanquin
without payment are certainly suffering due to this injustice. Their condition is
very lamentable because you have forcibly engaged them in carrying your
palanquin. This proves that you are cruel and unkind, yet due to false prestige
you were thinking that you were protecting the citizens. This is ludicrous. You
were such a fool that you could not have been adored as a great man in an
assembly of persons advanced in knowledge.
PURPORT
King Rahügaëa was proud of being king, and he felt he had the right to
control the citizens as he liked, but actually he was engaging men in carrying
his palanquin without payment, and therefore he was causing them trouble
without reason. Nonetheless, the King was thinking that he was the protector
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
467
of the citizens. Actually the king should be the representative of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. For this reason he is called nara-devatä, the Lord
among human beings. However, when a king thinks that because he is the
head of the state, he can utilize the citizens for his sense gratification, he is in
error. Such an attitude is not appreciated by learned scholars. According to
the Vedic principles, the king should be advised by learned sages, brähmaëas
and scholars, who advise him according to the injunctions given in the
dharma-çästra. The duty of the king is to follow these instructions. Learned
circles do not appreciate the king's utilizing public endeavor for his own
benefit. His duty is to give protection to the citizens instead. The king should
not become such a rogue that he exploits the citizens for his own benefit.
It is stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam that in Kali-yuga the heads of
government will be plunderers and thieves. These thieves and plunderers take
the money and property of the public by force or connivance. Therefore it is
said in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, räjanyair nirghåëair dasyu-dharmabhiù. As
Kali-yuga advances, we can see that these characteristics are already visible.
We can certainly imagine how deteriorated human civilization will be by the
end of Kali-yuga. Indeed, there will no longer be a sane man capable of
understanding God and our relationship with Him. In other words, human
beings will be just like animals. At that time, in order to reform human society,
Lord Kåñëa will come in the form of the Kalki avatära. His business will be to
kill all the atheists because ultimately the real protector is Viñëu, or Kåñëa.
The Lord incarnates and sets things in order when things are mismanaged
by so-called kings and heads of government. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä,
yadä yadä hi dharmasya glänir bhavati bhärata [Bg. 4.7]. Of course this takes
many years, but the principle is there. When the king or governmental head
does not follow the proper principles, nature deals out the punishments in the
forms of war, famine and so forth. Therefore if the governmental head is not
aware of life's goal, he should not take charge of ruling the people. Actually the
supreme proprietor of everything is Lord Viñëu. He is the maintainer of
everyone. The king, the father, and the guardian are simply representatives of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
468
Lord Viñëu, empowered by Him to look after the management and maintain
things. It is therefore the duty of the head of the state to maintain the general
populace in such a way that people will ultimately know the goal of life. Na te
viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum [SB 7.5.31]. Unfortunately the foolish
governmental head and the general populace do not know that the ultimate
goal of life is to understand and approach Lord Viñëu. Without this
knowledge, everyone is in ignorance, and all society is crowded with cheaters
and cheated.
TEXT 8
Yada i+aTaavev cracrSYa
ivdaMa iNaïa& Pa[>av& c iNaTYaMa( )
TaàaMaTaae_NYad( VYavharMaUl&/
iNaæPYaTaa& SaTa(i§-YaYaaNauMaeYaMa( )) 8 ))
yadä kñitäv eva caräcarasya
vidäma niñöhäà prabhavaà ca nityam
tan nämato 'nyad vyavahära-mülaà
nirüpyatäà sat-kriyayänumeyam
SYNONYMS
yadä—therefore; kñitau—in the earth; eva—certainly; cara-acarasya—of
different bodies, some moving and some not moving; vidäma—we know;
niñöhäm—annihilation; prabhavam—appearance; ca—and; nityam—regularly
by the principles of nature; tat—that; nämataù—than simply by name;
anyat—other; vyavahära-mülam—cause of material activities; nirüpyatäm—let
it be ascertained; sat-kriyayä—by actual employment; anumeyam—to be
inferred.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
469
TRANSLATION
All of us on the surface of the globe are living entities in different forms.
Some of us are moving and some not moving. All of us come into existence,
remain for some time and are annihilated when the body is again mingled with
the earth. We are all simply different transformations of the earth. Different
bodies and capacities are simply transformations of the earth that exist in name
only, for everything grows out of the earth and when everything is annihilated
it again mingles with the earth. In other words, we are but dust, and we shall
but be dust. Everyone can consider this point.
PURPORT
In the Brahma-sütra it is said: tad-ananyatvam ärabhambhaëa-çabdädibhyaù
(2.1.14). This cosmic manifestation is a mixture of matter and spirit, but the
cause is the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.20) it is said: idaà hi viçvaà bhagavän
ivetaraù. The entire cosmic manifestation is but a transformation of the energy
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but because of illusion, no one can
appreciate that God is nondifferent from the material world. Actually He is
not different, but this material world is simply a transformation of His
different energies; paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport].
There are also other versions of this in the Vedas: sarvaà khalv idaà brahma.
Matter and spirit are all nondifferent from the Supreme Brahman, Bhagavän.
Lord Çré Kåñëa confirms this statement in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.4): me bhinnä
prakåtir añöadhä. The material energy is Kåñëa's energy, but it is separated from
Him. The spiritual energy is also His energy, but it is not separated from Him.
When the material energy is engaged in the service of the Supreme Spirit,
so-called material energy is also transformed into spiritual energy, just as an
iron rod becomes fire when placed in contact with fire. When we can
understand by an analytical study that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
470
the cause of all causes, our knowledge is perfect. Simply understanding the
transformations of different energies is partial knowledge. We must come to
the ultimate cause. Na te viduù svärtha gatià hi viñëum [SB 7.5.31]. The
knowledge of those who are not interested in knowing the original cause of all
emanations is never perfect knowledge. There is nothing in the phenomenal
world that is not produced by the supreme energy of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Aromas from the earth are different scents manufactured and
used for different purposes, but the original cause is the earth, nothing else. A
waterpot made of earth can be used to carry water for some time, but
ultimately the pot is nothing but earth. Therefore there is no difference
between the pot and its original ingredient, earth. It is simply a different
transformation of the energy. Originally the cause or primary ingredient is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the varieties are only by-products. In
the Chändogya Upaniñad it is stated: yathä saumy ekena måt-piëòena sarvaà
månmayaà vijïätaà syäd väcärambhaëaà vikäro nämadheyaà måttikety eva
satyam. If one studies the earth, he naturally understands the by-products of
the earth. The Vedas therefore enjoin, yasmin vijïäte sarvam evaà vijïätaà
bhavati (Muëòaka Upaniñad 1.3): if one simply understands the original cause,
Kåñëa, the cause of all causes, then naturally everything else is understood,
although it may be presented in different varieties. By understanding the
original cause of different varieties, one can understand everything. If we
understand Kåñëa, the original cause of everything, we do not need to
separately study the subsidiary varieties. Therefore from the very beginning it
is said: satyaà paraà dhémahi [SB 1.1.1]. One has to concentrate one's
understanding on the Supreme Truth, Kåñëa or Väsudeva. The word Väsudeva
indicates the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the cause of all causes.
Mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni na cähaà teñv avasthitaù [Bg. 9.4]. This is a summary
of phenomenal and noumenal philosophy. The phenomenal world depends on
the noumenal existence; similarly, everything exists by virtue of the potency of
the Supreme Lord, although due to our ignorance the Supreme Lord is not
perceived in everything.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
471
TEXT 9
Wv& iNaå¢&- i+aiTaXaBdv*ta‚
MaSaiàDaaNaaTParMaa<avae Yae )
AivÛYaa MaNaSaa k-iLPaTaaSTae
Yaeza& SaMaUheNa k*-Taae ivXaez" )) 9 ))
evaà niruktaà kñiti-çabda-våttam
asan nidhänät paramäëavo ye
avidyayä manasä kalpitäs te
yeñäà samühena kåto viçeñaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; niruktam—falsely described; kñiti-çabda—of the word "earth";
våttam—the existence; asat—not real; nidhänät—from the dissolution;
parama-aëavaù—atomic particles; ye—all of which; avidyayä—because of less
intelligence; manasä—in the mind; kalpitäù—imagined; te—they; yeñäm—of
which; samühena—by the aggregate; kåtaù—made; viçeñaù—the particulars.
TRANSLATION
One may say that varieties arise from the planet earth itself. However,
although the universe may temporarily appear to be the truth, it ultimately has
no real existence. The earth was originally created by a combination of atomic
particles, but these particles are impermanent. Actually the atom is not the
cause of the universe, although some philosophers think so. It is not a fact that
the varieties found in this material world simply result from atomic
juxtaposition or combination.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
472
PURPORT
Those who follow the atomic theory think that the protons and electrons of
atoms combine in such a way as to bring all material existence into being.
However, the scientists fail to discover the cause of atomic existence itself.
Under these circumstances, we cannot accept that the atom is the cause of the
universe. Such theories are advanced by unintelligent people. According to
real intelligence, the real cause of the cosmic manifestation is the Supreme
Lord. Janmädy asya yataù: [SB 1.1.1] He is the original cause of all creation. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä (10.8): ahaà sarvasya prabhavo mattaù sarvaà
pravartate. Kåñëa is the original cause. Sarva-käraëa-käraëam: [Bs. 5.1] He is
the cause of all causes. Kåñëa is the cause of atoms, the material energy.
bhümir äpo 'nalo väyuù
khaà mano buddhir eva ca
ahaìkära itéyaà me
bhinnä prakåtir añöadhä
(Bg. 7.4)
The ultimate cause is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and only those in
ignorance try to find out other causes by posing different theories.
TEXT 10
Wv& k*-Xa& SQaUl/Ma<aub*RhÛd(
ASaÀ SaÂqvMaJaqvMaNYaTa( )
d]VYaSv>aavaXaYak-al/k-MaR‚
NaaMNaaJaYaaveih k*-Ta& iÜTaqYaMa( )) 10 ))
evaà kåçaà sthülam aëur båhad yad
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
473
asac ca saj jévam ajévam anyat
dravya-svabhäväçaya-käla-karmanämnäjayävehi
kåtaà dvitéyam
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; kåçam—skinny or short; sthülam—fat; aëuù—tiny; båhat—big;
yat—which; asat—impermanent; ca—and; sat—existing; jévam—the living
entities; ajévam—inanimate, lifeless matter; anyat—other causes;
dravya—phenomena; sva-bhäva—nature; äçaya—disposition; käla—time;
karma—activities; nämnä—only by such names; ajayä—by material nature;
avehi—you should understand; kåtam—done; dvitéyam—duality.
TRANSLATION
Since this universe has no real ultimate existence, the things within
it—shortness, differences, grossness, skinniness, smallness, bigness, result,
cause, living symptoms, and materials—are all imagined. They are all pots made
of the same substance, earth, but they are named differently. The differences
are characterized by the substance, nature, predisposition, time and activity.
You should know that all these are simply mechanical manifestations created by
material nature.
PURPORT
The temporary manifestations and varieties within this material world are
simply creations of material nature under various circumstances: prakåteù
kriyamäëa-ni guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù. The actions and reactions carried out
by the material nature are sometimes accepted as our scientific inventions;
therefore we want to take credit for them and defy the existence of God. This
is described in Bhagavad-gétä (3.27), ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä kartäham iti
manyate: due to being covered by the illusory external energy, the living entity
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
474
tries to take credit for the differentiated creations within the material world.
Actually all these are being created automatically by the material force set in
motion by the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the
ultimate cause is the Supreme Person. As stated in Brahma-saàhitä:
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
[Bs. 5.1]
He is the cause of all causes, the ultimate cause. In this regard Çréla
Madhväcärya says: evaà sarvaà tathä prakåtvayai kalpitaà viñëor anyat. evaà
prakåtyädhäraù svayam ananyädhäro viñëur eva ataù sarva-çabdäç ca tasminn
eva. Actually the original cause is Lord Viñëu, but out of ignorance people
think that matter is the cause of everything.
räjä goptäçrayo bhümiù
çaraëaà ceti laukikaù
vyavahäro na tat satyaà
tayor brahmäçrayo vibhuù
Things are contemplated on the ephemeral or external platform, but actually
this is not the truth. The actual protector and shelter of everyone is Brahman,
the Supreme, not the king.
goptré ca tasya prakåtis
tasyä viñëuù svayaà prabhuù
tava goptré tu påthivé
na tvaà goptä kñiteù småtaù
ataù sarväçrayaiç caiva
goptä ca harir éçvaraù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
475
sarva-çabdäbhidheyaç ca
çabda-våtter hi käraëam
sarväntaraù sarva-bahir
eka eva janärdanaù
The actual protectress is the material nature, but Viñëu is her Lord. He is the
Lord of everything. Lord Janärdana is the director both externally and
internally. He is the cause of the function of words and what is expressed in all
sound.
çirasodhäratä yadvad
gréväyäs tadvad eva tu
äçrayatvaà ca goptåtvam
anyeñäm upacärataù
Lord Viñëu is the resting place of the entire creation: brahmaëo hi
pratiñöhäham (Bg. 14.27). On Brahman, everything is resting. All the universes
are resting on the brahmajyoti, and all the planets are resting on the universal
atmosphere. In each and every planet there are oceans, hills, states and
kingdoms, and each planet is giving shelter to so many living entities. They are
all standing on the earth of feet and legs, torso and shoulders, but actually
everything is resting ultimately on the potencies of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Therefore He is known ultimately as sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1],
the cause of all causes.
TEXT 11
jaNa& ivXauÖ& ParMaaQaRMaek-‚
MaNaNTar& Tvbihb]Rø SaTYaMa( )
Pa[TYak( Pa[XaaNTa& >aGavC^BdSa&j&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
476
YaÜaSaudev& k-vYaae vdiNTa )) 11 ))
jïänaà viçuddhaà paramärtham ekam
anantaraà tv abahir brahma satyam
pratyak praçäntaà bhagavac-chabda-saàjïaà
yad väsudevaà kavayo vadanti
SYNONYMS
jïänam—the supreme knowledge; viçuddham—without contamination;
parama-artham—giving the ultimate goal of life; ekam—unified;
anantaram—without interior, unbroken; tu—also; abahiù—without exterior;
brahma—the Supreme; satyam—Absolute Truth; pratyak—inner;
praçäntam—the calm and peaceful Supreme Lord, worshiped by the yogés;
bhagavat-çabda-saàjïam—known in the higher sense as Bhagavän, or full of
all opulences; yat—that; väsudevam—Lord Kåñëa, the son of Vasudeva;
kavayaù—the learned scholars; vadanti—say.
TRANSLATION
What, then, is the ultimate truth? The answer is that nondual knowledge is
the ultimate truth. It is devoid of the contamination of material qualities. It
gives us liberation. It is the one without a second, all-pervading and beyond
imagination. The first realization of that knowledge is Brahman. Then
Paramätmä, the Supersoul, is realized by the yogés who try to see Him without
grievance. This is the second stage of realization. Finally, full realization of the
same supreme knowledge is realized in the Supreme Person. All learned scholars
describe the Supreme Person as Väsudeva, the cause of Brahman, Paramätmä
and others.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
477
In Caitanya-caritämåta it is said: yad advaitaà brahmopaniñadi tad apy asya
tanu-bhä. The impersonal Brahman effulgence of the Absolute Truth consists
of the bodily rays of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Ya ätmäntaryämé
puruña iti so 'syäàça-vibhavaù. What is known as ätmä and antaryämé, the
Supersoul, is but an expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Sad-aiçvaryaiù pürëo ya iha bhagavän sa svayam ayam [Cc. Ädi 1.3]. What is
described as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, complete with all six
opulences, is Väsudeva, and Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is nondifferent from
Him. Great learned scholars and philosophers accept this after many, many
births. Väsudevaù sarvam iti sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù (Bg. 7.19). The wise man
can understand that ultimately Väsudeva, Kåñëa, is the cause of Brahman, and
Paramätmä, the Supersoul. Thus Väsudeva is sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1],
the cause of all causes. This is confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The real
tattva, Absolute Truth, is Bhagavän, but due to incomplete realization of the
Absolute Truth, people sometimes describe the same Viñëu as impersonal
Brahman or localized Paramätmä.
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvaà yaj jïänam advayam
brahmeti paramätmeti
bhagavän iti çabdyate
(SB 1.2.11)
From the very beginning, Çrémad-Bhägavatam says, satyaà paraà dhémahi: [SB
1.1.1] we meditate on the supreme truth. The supreme truth is explained here as
jïänaà viçuddhaà satyam. The Absolute Truth is devoid of material
contamination and is transcendental to the material qualities. It gives all
spiritual success and liberation from this material world. That Supreme
Absolute Truth is Kåñëa, Väsudeva. There is no difference between Kåñëa's
inner self and outward body. Kåñëa is pürëa, the complete whole. There is no
distinction between His body and soul as there is between ours. Sometimes
so-called scholars, not knowing the constitutional position of Kåñëa, mislead
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
478
people by saying that the Kåñëa within is different from the Kåñëa without.
When Kåñëa says, man-manä bhava mad-bhakto mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru [Bg.
18.65], so-called scholars advise the reader that it is not the person Kåñëa to
whom we must surrender but the Kåñëa within. So-called scholars, Mäyävädés,
cannot understand Kåñëa with their poor fund of knowledge. One should
therefore approach an authorized person to understand Kåñëa. The spiritual
master has actually seen Kåñëa; therefore he can explain Him properly.
tad viddhi praëipätena
paripraçnena sevayä
upadekñyanti te jïänaà
jïäninas tattva-darçinaù
(Bg. 4.34)
Without approaching an authorized person, one cannot understand Kåñëa.
TEXT 12
rhUGa<aETataPaSaa Na YaaiTa
Na ceJYaYaa iNavRPa<aad( Ga*haÜa )
NaC^NdSaa NaEv Jal/aiGanSaUYaOE‚
ivRNaa MahTPaadrJaae_i>azek-Ma( )) 12 ))
rahügaëaitat tapasä na yäti
na cejyayä nirvapaëäd gåhäd vä
na cchandasä naiva jalägni-süryair
vinä mahat-päda-rajo-'bhiñekam
SYNONYMS
rahügaëa—O King Rahügaëa; etat—this knowledge; tapasä—by severe
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
479
austerities and penances; na yäti—does not become revealed; na—not;
ca—also; ijyayä—by a great arrangement for worshiping the Deity;
nirvapaëät—or from finishing all material duties and accepting sannyäsa;
gåhät—from ideal householder life; vä—or; na—nor; chandasä—by observing
celibacy or studying Vedic literature; na eva—nor; jala-agni-süryaiù—by
severe austerities such as keeping oneself in water, in a burning fire or in the
scorching sun; vinä—without; mahat—of the great devotees; päda-rajaù—the
dust of the lotus feet; abhiñekam—smearing all over the body.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Rahügaëa, unless one has the opportunity to smear his entire
body with the dust of the lotus feet of great devotees, one cannot realize the
Absolute Truth. One cannot realize the Absolute Truth simply by observing
celibacy [brahmacarya], strictly following the rules and regulations of
householder life, leaving home as a vänaprastha, accepting sannyäsa, or
undergoing severe penances in winter by keeping oneself submerged in water or
surrounding oneself in summer by fire and the scorching heat of the sun. There
are many other processes to understand the Absolute Truth, but the Absolute
Truth is only revealed to one who has attained the mercy of a great devotee.
PURPORT
Actual knowledge of transcendental bliss can be bestowed upon anyone by
a pure devotee. Vedeñu durlabham adurlabham ätma-bhaktau [Bs. 5.33]. One
cannot attain the perfection of spiritual life simply by following the directions
of the Vedas. One has to approach a pure devotee: anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. By the grace of such a devotee,
one can understand the Absolute Truth, Kåñëa, and one's relationship with
Him. A materialistic person sometimes thinks that simply by executing pious
activities and remaining at home one can understand the Absolute Truth.
That is denied in this verse. Nor can one understand the Absolute Truth
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
480
simply by observing the rules and regulations of brahmacarya (celibacy). One
only has to serve the pure devotee. That will help one understand the
Absolute Truth without fail.
TEXT 13
Ya}aaetaMaëaek-Gau<aaNauvad"
Pa[STaUYaTae Ga]aMYak-QaaivgaaTa" )
iNazeVYaMaa<aae_NauidNa& MauMau+aae‚
MaRiTa& SaTaq& YaC^iTa vaSaudeve )) 13 ))
yatrottamaçloka-guëänuvädaù
prastüyate grämya-kathä-vighätaù
niñevyamäëo 'nudinaà mumukñor
matià satéà yacchati väsudeve
SYNONYMS
yatra—in which place (in the presence of exalted devotees);
uttama-çloka-guëa-anuvädaù—discussion of the pastimes and glories of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; prastüyate—is presented;
grämya-kathä-vighätaù—due to which there is no chance of talking of worldly
matters; niñevyamäëaù—being heard very seriously; anudinam—day after day;
mumukñoù—of persons who are very serious about getting out of material
entanglement; matim—meditation; satém—pure and simple; yacchati—is
turned; väsudeve—unto the lotus feet of Lord Väsudeva.
TRANSLATION
Who are the pure devotees mentioned here? In an assembly of pure devotees,
there is no question of discussing material subjects like politics and sociology. In
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
481
an assembly of pure devotees, there is discussion only of the qualities, forms and
pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is praised and worshiped
with full attention. In the association of pure devotees, by constantly hearing
such topics respectfully, even a person who wants to merge into the existence of
the Absolute Truth abandons this idea and gradually becomes attached to the
service of Väsudeva.
PURPORT
The symptoms of pure devotees are described in this verse. The pure
devotee is never interested in material topics. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has
strictly prohibited His devotees to talk about worldly matters. Grämya-värtä nä
kahibe: [Cc. Antya 6.236] one should not indulge in talking unnecessarily about
news of the material world. One should not waste time in this way. This is a
very important feature in the life of a devotee. A devotee has no other
ambition than to serve Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This
Kåñëa consciousness movement was started to engage people twenty-four hours
daily in the service of the Lord and in His glorification. The students in this
institution engage in the cultivation of Kåñëa consciousness from five in the
morning to ten at night. They actually have no opportunity to waste their time
unnecessarily by discussing politics, sociology and current events. These will go
their own way. A devotee is concerned only with serving Kåñëa positively and
seriously.
TEXT 14
Ah& Paura >arTaae NaaMa raJaa
ivMau¢-d*íé[uTaSa(r)bNDa" )
AaraDaNa& >aGavTa wRhMaaNaae
Ma*Gaae_>av& Ma*GaSa(r)aÖTaaQaR" )) 14 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
482
ahaà purä bharato näma räjä
vimukta-dåñöa-çruta-saìga-bandhaù
ärädhanaà bhagavata éhamäno
mågo 'bhavaà måga-saìgäd dhatärthaù
SYNONYMS
aham—I; purä—formerly (in my previous birth); bharataù näma räjä—a King
named Mahäräja Bharata; vimukta—liberated from; dåñöa-çruta—by
experiencing personally through direct association, or by getting knowledge
from the Vedas; saìga-bandhaù—bondage by association; ärädhanam—the
worship; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva;
éhamänaù—always performing; mågaù abhavam—I became a deer;
måga-saìgät—because of my intimate association with a deer;
hata-arthaù—having neglected the regulative principles in the discharge of
devotional service.
TRANSLATION
In a previous birth I was known as Mahäräja Bharata. I attained perfection
by becoming completely detached from material activities through direct
experience, and through indirect experience I received understanding from the
Vedas. I was fully engaged in the service of the Lord, but due to my misfortune,
I became very affectionate to a small deer, so much so that I neglected my
spiritual duties. Due to my deep affection for the deer, in my next life I had to
accept the body of a deer.
PURPORT
The incident herein described is very significant. In a previous verse it is
stated, vinä mahat-päda-rajo-'bhiñekam: one cannot attain perfection without
smearing the dust from the lotus feet of an exalted devotee on his head. If one
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
483
always follows the orders of the spiritual master, there is no question of falling
down. As soon as a foolish disciple tries to overtake his spiritual master and
becomes ambitious to occupy his post, he immediately falls down. Yasya
prasädäd bhagavat-prasädo yasyäprasädän na gatiù kuto 'pi **(11). If the
spiritual master is considered an ordinary man, the disciple surely loses his
chance to advance further. Despite a very rigid life in devotional service,
Bharata Mahäräja did not consult a spiritual master when he became overly
attached to a deer. Consequently he became strongly attached to the deer, and,
forgetting his spiritual routine, he fell down.
TEXT 15
Saa Maa& SMa*iTaMa*RGadehe_iPa vqr
k*-Z<aacRNaPa[>ava Naae JahaiTa )
AQaae Ah& JaNaSa(r)adSa(r)ae
ivXaªMaaNaae_ivv*TaêraiMa )) 15 ))
sä mäà småtir måga-dehe 'pi véra
kåñëärcana-prabhavä no jahäti
atho ahaà jana-saìgäd asaìgo
viçaìkamäno 'vivåtaç carämi
SYNONYMS
sä—that; mäm—me; småtiù—remembrance of the activities of my previous
life; måga-dehe—in the body of a deer; api—although; véra—O great hero;
kåñëa-arcana-prabhavä—which appeared because of the influence of sincere
service to Kåñëa; no jahäti—did not leave; atho—therefore; aham—I;
jana-saìgät—from the association of ordinary men; asaìgaù—completely
detached; viçaìkamänaù—being afraid; avivåtaù—unobserved by others;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
484
carämi—I go here and there.
TRANSLATION
My dear heroic King, due to my past sincere service to the Lord, I could
remember everything of my past life even while in the body of a deer. Because I
am aware of the falldown in my past life, I always keep myself separate from the
association of ordinary men. Being afraid of their bad, materialistic association,
I wander alone unnoticed by others.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä it is said: svalpam apy asya dharmasya (Bg. 2.40). It is
certainly a great fall to go from human life to animal life, but in the case of
Bharata Mahäräja or any devotee, devotional service to the Lord never goes in
vain. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (8.6): yaà yaà väpi smaran bhävaà tyajaty
ante kalevaram. At the time of death, by nature's law the mind is absorbed in a
certain type of thinking. This may lead one to animal life, yet for a devotee
there is no loss. Even though Bharata Mahäräja received the body of a deer, he
didn't forget his position. Consequently, in the body of a deer he was very
careful to remember the cause of his downfall. As a result, he was given a
chance to be born in a family of very pure brähmaëas. Thus his service to the
Lord never went in vain.
TEXT 16
TaSMaaàrae_Sa(r)SauSa(r)JaaTa‚
jaNaaiSaNaehEv ivv*K<aMaaeh" )
hir& Tadqhak-QaNaé[uTaa>Yaa&
l/BDaSMa*iTaYaaRTYaiTaPaarMaßNa" )) 16 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
485
tasmän naro 'saìga-susaìga-jätajïänäsinehaiva
vivåkëa-mohaù
harià tad-éhä-kathana-çrutäbhyäà
labdha-småtir yäty atipäram adhvanaù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—for this reason; naraù—every person; asaìga—by detachment from
the association of worldly people; su-saìga—by the association of devotees;
jäta—produced; jïäna-asinä—by the sword of knowledge; iha—in this
material world; eva—even; vivåkëa-mohaù—whose illusion is completely cut to
pieces; harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tad-éhä—of His
activities; kathana-çrutäbhyäm—by the two processes of hearing and chanting;
labdha-småtiù—the lost consciousness is regained; yäti—achieves;
atipäram—the ultimate end; adhvanaù—of the path back home, back to
Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Simply by associating with exalted devotees, anyone can attain perfection of
knowledge and with the sword of knowledge can cut to pieces the illusory
associations within this material world. Through the association of devotees,
one can engage in the service of the Lord by hearing and chanting [çravaëaà
kértanam]. Thus one can revive his dormant Kåñëa consciousness and, sticking
to the cultivation of Kåñëa consciousness, return home, back to Godhead, even
in this life.
PURPORT
To become liberated from material bondage, one must give up the
association of worldly people and accept the association of devotees, positive
and negative processes are mentioned in this regard. Through the association
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
486
of devotees, one develops Kåñëa consciousness, which is dormant within. This
Kåñëa consciousness movement is giving this chance to everyone. We are
giving shelter to everyone who is serious about progressing in Kåñëa
consciousness. We arrange for their lodging and board so that they can
peacefully cultivate Kåñëa consciousness and return home, back to Godhead,
even in this life.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twelfth Chapter of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled, "The Conversation Between Mahäräja Rahügaëa
and Jaòa Bharata."
13. Further Talks Between King Rahügaëa and Jaòa Bharata
The brähmaëa Jaòa Bharata became very kind to King Rahügaëa, and to
disassociate him from the material world, he spoke figuratively of the forest of
the material world. He explained that this material world is like a great forest
in which one becomes entangled due to association with material life. In this
forest there are plunderers (the six senses) as well as carnivorous animals like
jackals, wolves and lions (wife, children and other relatives) who are always
anxious to suck the blood from the head of the family. The forest plunderers
and the carnivorous blood-sucking animals combine to exploit the energy of a
man within this material world. In this forest there is also a black hole, covered
by grass, into which one may fall. Coming into the forest and being captivated
by so many material attractions, one identifies himself with this material
world, society, friendship, love and family. Having lost the path and not
knowing where to go, being harassed by animals and birds, one is also
victimized by many desires. Thus one works very hard within the forest and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
487
wanders here and there. He becomes captivated by temporary happiness and
becomes aggrieved by so-called distress. Actually one simply suffers in the
forest from so-called happiness and distress. Sometimes he is attacked by a
snake (deep sleep), and due to the snakebite he loses consciousness and
becomes puzzled and bewildered about discharging his duties. Sometimes he is
attracted by women other than his wife, and thus be thinks he enjoys
extramarital love with another woman. He is attacked by various diseases, by
lamentation and by summer and winter. Thus one within the forest of the
material world suffers the pains of material existence. Expecting to become
happy, the living entity changes his position from one place to another, but
actually a materialistic person within the material world is never happy. Being
constantly engaged in materialistic activities, he is always disturbed. He forgets
that one day he has to die. Although he suffers severely, being illusioned by
the material energy, he still hankers after material happiness. In this way he
completely forgets his relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
By hearing this from Jaòa Bharata, Mahäräja Rahügaëa revived his Kåñëa
consciousness and thus benefited from Jaòa Bharata's association. He could
understand that his illusion was over, and he begged pardon from Jaòa Bharata
for his misbehavior. All this was told to Mahäräja Parékñit by Çukadeva
Gosvämé.
TEXT 1
b]aø<a ovac
durTYaYae_ßNYaJaYaa iNaveiXaTaae
rJaSTaMa"Satviv>a¢-k-MaRd*k( )
Sa Wz SaaQaaeR_QaRPar" Pair>a]MaNa(
>ava$=vq& YaaiTa Na XaMaR ivNdiTa )) 1 ))
brähmaëa uväca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
488
duratyaye 'dhvany ajayä niveçito
rajas-tamaù-sattva-vibhakta-karmadåk
sa eña särtho 'rtha-paraù paribhraman
bhaväöavéà yäti na çarma vindati
SYNONYMS
brähmaëaù uväca—the brähmaëa Jaòa Bharata continued to speak;
duratyaye—which is very difficult to traverse; adhvani—on the path of fruitive
activities (performing actions in this life, creating a body in the next life by
those actions, and in this way continuously accepting birth and death);
ajayä—by mäyä, the external energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
niveçitaù—caused to enter; rajaù-tamaù-sattva-vibhakta-karma-dåk—a
conditioned soul who sees only immediately beneficial fruitive activities and
their results, which are divided into three groups by the modes of goodness,
passion and ignorance; saù—he; eñaù—this; sa-arthaù—the living entity
falsely seeking sense gratification; artha-paraù—intent upon gaining wealth;
paribhraman—wandering all over; bhava-aöavém—the forest known as bhava,
which means the repetition of birth and death; yäti—enters; na—not;
çarma—happiness; vindati—obtains.
TRANSLATION
Jaòa Bharata, who had fully realized Brahman, continued: My dear King
Rahügaëa, the living entity wanders on the path of the material world, which is
very difficult for him to traverse, and he accepts repeated birth and death.
Being captivated by the material world under the influence of the three modes
of material nature (sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa), the living entity can
see only the three fruits of activities under the spell of material nature. These
fruits are auspicious, inauspicious and mixed. He thus becomes attached to
religion, economic development, sense gratification and the monistic theory of
liberation (merging with the Supreme). He works very hard day and night
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
489
exactly like a merchant who enters a forest to acquire some articles to sell later
for profit. However, he cannot really achieve happiness within this material
world.
PURPORT
One can very easily understand how difficult and insurmountable the path
of sense gratification is. Not knowing what the path of sense gratification is,
one becomes implicated in the repetition of birth and accepts different types
of bodies again and again. Thus one suffers in material existence. In this life
one may think that he is very happy being an American, Indian, Englishman
or German, but in the next life one has to accept another body among
8,400,000 species. The next body has to be immediately accepted according to
karma. One will be forced to accept a certain type of body, and protesting will
not help. That is the stringent law of nature. Due to the living entity's
ignorance of his eternal blissful life, he becomes attracted to material activities
under the spell of mäyä. In this world, he can never experience happiness, yet
he works very hard to do so. This is called mäyä.
TEXT 2
YaSYaaiMaMae z<Nardev dSYav"
SaaQa| ivlu/MPaiNTa ku-NaaYak&- bl/aTa( )
GaaeMaaYavae Ya}a hriNTa SaaiQaRk&-
Pa[MataMaaivXYa YaQaaer<a& v*k-a" )) 2 ))
yasyäm ime ñaë nara-deva dasyavaù
särthaà vilumpanti kunäyakaà balät
gomäyavo yatra haranti särthikaà
pramattam äviçya yathoraëaà våkäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
490
SYNONYMS
yasyäm—in which (in the forest of material existence); ime—these; ñaö—six;
nara-deva—O King; dasyavaù—the plunderers; sa-artham—the conditioned
souls, who are interested in false ideas; vilumpanti—plunder, regularly taking
away all the possessions; ku-näyakam—who are always misguided by so-called
gurus, or spiritual masters; balät—by force; gomäyavaù—exactly like foxes;
yatra—in which forest; haranti—they take away; sa-arthikam—the
conditioned soul who is seeking material profits to maintain the body and soul;
pramattam—who is a crazy man not knowing his self-interest;
äviçya—entering the heart; yathä—just as; uraëam—nicely protected lambs;
våkäù—the tigers.
TRANSLATION
O King Rahügaëa, in this forest of material existence there are six very
powerful plunderers. When the conditioned soul enters the forest to acquire
some material gain, the six plunderers misguide him. Thus the conditioned
merchant does not know how to spend his money, and it is taken away by these
plunderers. Like tigers, jackals and other ferocious animals in a forest that are
ready to take away a lamb from the custody of its protector, the wife and
children enter the heart of the merchant and plunder him in so many ways.
PURPORT
In the forest there are many plunderers, dacoits, jackals and tigers. The
jackals are compared to one's wife and children. In the dead of night, jackals
cry very loudly, and similarly one's wife and children in this material world
also cry like jackals. The children say, "Father, this is wanted; give me this. I
am your dear son." Or the wife says, "I am your dear wife. Please give me this.
This is now needed." In this way one is plundered by the thieves in the forest.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
491
Not knowing the aim of human life, one is constantly being misguided. The
aim of life is Viñëu (na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum [SB 7.5.31]). Everyone
works very hard to earn money, but no one knows that his real self-interest is
in serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Instead of spending money for
advancing the Kåñëa consciousness movement, one spends his hard-earned
money on clubs, brothels, liquor, slaughterhouses and so forth. Due to sinful
activities, one becomes implicated in the process of transmigration and thus
has to accept one body after another. Being thus absorbed in a distressed
condition, one never attains happiness.
TEXT 3
Pa[>aUTavqåta*<aGauLMaGaûre
k-#=aerd&XaEMaRXakE-åPad]uTa" )
Kvictau GaNDavRPaur& Pa[PaXYaiTa
KvicTKvicÀaXaurYaaeLMauk-Ga]hMa( )) 3 ))
prabhüta-vérut-tåëa-gulma-gahvare
kaöhora-daàçair maçakair upadrutaù
kvacit tu gandharva-puraà prapaçyati
kvacit kvacic cäçu-rayolmuka-graham
SYNONYMS
prabhüta—a very large number; vérut—of creepers; tåëa—of varieties of grass;
gulma—of thickets; gahvare—in bowers; kaöhora—cruel; daàçaiù—by bites;
maçakaiù—by mosquitoes; upadrutaù—disturbed; kvacit—sometimes; tu—but;
gandharva-puram—a false palace created by the Gandharvas; prapaçyati—be
sees; kvacit—and sometimes; kvacit—sometimes; ca—and; äçu-raya—very
quickly; ulmuka—like a meteor; graham—a fiend.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
492
TRANSLATION
In this forest there are dense bowers composed of thickets of bushes, grass
and creepers. In these bowers the conditioned soul is always disturbed by
cruelly biting mosquitoes [envious people]. Sometimes he sees an imaginary
palace in the forest, and sometimes he is bewildered by seeing a fleeting fiend or
ghost, which appears like a meteor in the sky.
PURPORT
The material household is actually a hole of fruitive activity. To earn a
livelihood one engages in different industries and trades, and sometimes one
performs great sacrifices to go to higher planetary systems. Apart from this, at
least everyone is engaged in earning a livelihood in some profession or
occupation. In these dealings, one has to meet many undesirable people, and
their behavior is compared to the biting of mosquitoes. This creates very
undesirable conditions. Even in the midst of these disturbances, one imagines
that he is going to construct a grand house and live there permanently,
although he knows that he cannot. Gold is compared to a quickly fleeting
fiend, which appears like a meteor in the sky. It displays itself for a moment
and is then gone. Generally karmés are attracted to gold or money, but these
are compared herein to ghosts and witches.
TEXT 4
iNavaSaTaaeYad]iv<aaTMabuiÖ‚
STaTaSTaTaae DaaviTa >aae A$=VYaaMa( )
KvicÀ vaTYaaeiTQaTaPaa&SauDaUMa]a
idXaae Na JaaNaaiTa rJaSvl/a+a" )) 4 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
493
niväsa-toya-draviëätma-buddhis
tatas tato dhävati bho aöavyäm
kvacic ca vätyotthita-päàsu-dhümrä
diço na jänäti rajas-valäkñaù
SYNONYMS
niväsa—residential place; toya—water; draviëa—wealth; ätma-buddhiù—who
considers these material things the ätma, or self; tataù tataù—here and there;
dhävati—he runs; bhoù—O King; aöavyäm—on that forest path of material
existence; kvacit ca—and sometimes; vätyä—by the whirlwind; utthita—raised;
päàsu—by dust; dhümräù—appear smoke-colored; diçaù—the directions;
na—not; jänäti—knows; rajaù-vala-akñaù—whose eyes are covered by the dust
of the wind or who is captivated by his wife during her menstrual period.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the merchant on the forest path of the material world, his
intelligence victimized by home, wealth, relatives and so forth, runs from one
place to another in search of success. Sometimes his eyes are covered by the
dust of a whirlwind—that is to say, in his lust he is captivated by the beauty of
his wife, especially during her menstrual period. Thus his eyes are blinded, and
he cannot see where to go or what he is doing.
PURPORT
It is said that household attraction resides in the wife because sex is the
center of household life: yan maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukhaà hi tuccham [SB
7.9.45]. A materialistic person, making his wife the center of attraction, works
very hard day and night. His only enjoyment in material life is sexual
intercourse. Therefore karmés are attracted to women as friends or wives.
Indeed, they cannot work without sex. Under the circumstances the wife is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
494
compared to a whirlwind, especially during her menstrual period. Those who
strictly follow the rules and regulations of householder life engage in sex only
once a month, at the end of the menstrual period. As one looks forward to this
opportunity, his eyes are overwhelmed by the beauty of his wife. Thus it is said
that the whirlwind covers the eyes with dust. Such a lusty person does not
know that all his material activities are being observed by different demigods,
especially the sun-god, and are being recorded for the karma of one's next
body. Astrological calculations are called jyoti-çästra. Because the jyoti, or
effulgence, in the material world comes from the different stars and planets,
the science is called jyoti-çästra, the science of the luminaries. By the
calculations of jyoti, our future is indicated. In other words, all the
luminaries—the stars, sun and moon—witness the activities of the
conditioned soul. Thus he is awarded a particular type of body. A lusty, person
whose eyes are covered by the dust of the whirlwind or material existence does
not at all consider that his activities are being observed by different stars and
planets and are being recorded. Not knowing this, the conditioned soul
commits all kinds of sinful activities for the satisfaction of his lusty desires.
TEXT 5
Ad*XYai‡çISvNak-<aRXaUl/
olU/k-vaiG>aVYaRiQaTaaNTaraTMaa )
APau<Yav*+aaNa( é[YaTae +auDaaidRTaae
MarqicTaaeYaaNYai>aDaaviTa KvicTa( )) 5 ))
adåçya-jhillé-svana-karëa-çüla
ulüka-vägbhir vyathitäntarätmä
apuëya-våkñän çrayate kñudhärdito
maréci-toyäny abhidhävati kvacit
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
495
SYNONYMS
adåçya—invisible; jhillé—of crickets or a kind of bee; svana—by the sounds;
karëa-çüla—whose ears are disturbed; ulüka—of the owls; vägbhiù—by sound
vibrations; vyathita—very disturbed; antaù-ätmä—whose mind and heart;
apuëya-våkñän—impious trees that have no fruits or flowers; çrayate—he takes
shelter of; kñudha—from hunger; arditaù—suffering; maréci-toyäni—the
waters of a mirage in the desert; abhidhävati—he runs after;
kvacit—sometimes.
TRANSLATION
Wandering in the forest of the material world, the conditioned soul
sometimes hears an invisible cricket making harsh sounds, and his ears become
very much aggrieved. Sometimes his heart is pained by the sounds of owls,
which are just like the harsh words of his enemies. Sometimes he takes shelter
of a tree that has no fruits or flowers. He approaches such a tree due to his
strong appetite, and thus he suffers. He would like to acquire water, but he is
simply illusioned by a mirage, and he runs after it.
PURPORT
In Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is said that the Bhägavata philosophy is meant for
people who are completely free from envy (paramo nirmatsaräëäm [SB 1.1.2]).
The material world is full of envious people. Even within one's inner circle
there is much backbiting, and this is compared to the sound vibration of a
cricket in the forest. One cannot see the cricket, but one hears its sounds and
thus becomes aggrieved. When one takes to Kåñëa consciousness, one always
hears unpalatable words from relatives. This is the nature of the world; one
cannot avoid mental distress due to the backbiting of envious people. Being
very much aggrieved, sometimes one goes to a sinful person for help, but he has
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
496
no means to help because he has no intelligence. Thus the living entity is
disappointed. This is like running after a mirage in the desert in an effort to
find water. Such activities do not produce any tangible results. Due to being
directed by the illusory energy, a conditioned soul suffers in so many ways.
TEXT 6
KviciÜTaaeYaa" SairTaae_i>aYaaiTa
ParSPar& cal/zTae iNarNDa" )
AaSaaÛ dav& KvicdiGanTaáae
iNaivRÛTae Kv c Ya+aEôRTaaSau" )) 6 ))
kvacid vitoyäù sarito 'bhiyäti
parasparaà cälañate nirandhaù
äsädya dävaà kvacid agni-tapto
nirvidyate kva ca yakñair håtäsuù
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; vitoyäù—without depth to the water; saritaù—rivers;
abhiyäti—he goes to bathe or jumps into; parasparam—one another; ca—and;
älañate—desires; nirandhaù—being with no stock of food;
äsädya—experiencing; dävam—a forest fire in family life; kvacit—sometimes;
agni-taptaù—burned by fire; nirvidyate—is despondent; kva—somewhere;
ca—and; yakñaiù—by kings resembling rogues and thieves; håta—taken away;
asuù—wealth. which is as dear as one's life.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the conditioned soul jumps into a shallow river, or being short of
food grains, he goes to beg food from people who are not at all charitable.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
497
Sometimes he suffers from the burning heat of household life, which is like a
forest fire, and sometimes he becomes sad to have his wealth, which is as dear as
life, plundered by kings in the name of heavy income taxes.
PURPORT
When one is hot due to the scorching sun, one sometimes jumps into a river
to gain relief. However, if the river is almost dried up and the water is too
shallow, one may break his bones by jumping in. The conditioned soul is
always experiencing miserable conditions. Sometimes his efforts to get help
from friends are exactly like jumping into a dry river. By such actions, he does
not derive any benefit. He only breaks his bones. Sometimes, suffering from a
shortage of food, one may go to a person who is neither able to give charity nor
willing to do so. Sometimes one is stationed in household life, which is
compared to a forest fire (saàsära-dävänala-léòha-loka **(12)). When a man is
heavily taxed by the government, he becomes very sad. Heavy taxation obliges
one to hide his income, but despite this endeavor the government agents are
often so vigilant and strong that they take all the money anyway, and the
conditioned soul becomes very aggrieved.
Thus people are trying to become happy within the material world, but this
is like trying to be happy in a forest fire. No one need go to a forest to set it
ablaze: fire takes place automatically. Similarly, no one wants to be unhappy in
family life or worldly life, but by the laws of nature unhappiness and distress
are forced upon everyone. To become dependent on another's maintenance is
very degrading; therefore, according to the Vedic system, everyone should live
independently. Only the çüdras are unable to live independently. They are
obliged to serve someone for maintenance. It is said in the çästras: kalau
çüdra-sambhaväù. In this age of Kali, everyone is dependent on another's
mercy for the maintenance of the body; therefore everyone is classified as a
çüdra. In the Twelfth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is said that in Kali-yuga
the government will levy taxes without reciprocally benefiting the citizens.
Anävåñöyä vinaìkñyanti durbhikña-kara-péòitäù [SB 12.2.9]. In this age there will
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
498
also be a shortage of rain; therefore a scarcity of food will arise, and the
citizens will be very much harassed by government taxation. In this way the
citizens will abandon their attempts to lead a peaceful life and will leave their
homes and hearths and go to the forest in sheer disappointment.
TEXT 7
XaUrEôRTaSv" Kv c iNaivR<<aceTaa"
XaaecNa( ivMauùàuPaYaaiTa k-XMal/Ma( )
KvicÀ GaNDavRPaur& Pa[iví"
Pa[MaaedTae iNav*RTavNMauhUTaRMa( )) 7 ))
çürair håta-svaù kva ca nirviëëa-cetäù
çocan vimuhyann upayäti kaçmalam
kvacic ca gandharva-puraà praviñöaù
pramodate nirvåtavan muhürtam
SYNONYMS
çüraiù—by very powerful enemies; håta-svaù—all of whose possessions have
been stolen; kva ca—sometimes; nirviëëa-cetäù—very morose and aggrieved at
heart; çocan—deeply lamenting; vimuhyan—becoming bewildered;
upayäti—achieves; kaçmalam—unconsciousness; kvacit—sometimes; ca—also;
gandharva-puram—an imaginary city in the forest; praviñöaù—having entered;
pramodate—he enjoys; nirvåta-vat—exactly like a person who has achieved
success; muhürtam—for a moment only.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes, being defeated or plundered by a superior, powerful agent, a
living entity loses all his possessions. He then becomes very morose, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
499
lamenting their loss, he sometimes becomes unconscious. Sometimes he
imagines a great palatial city in which he desires to live happily with his family
members and riches. He thinks himself fully satisfied if this is possible, but
such so-called happiness continues only for a moment.
PURPORT
The word gandharva-puram is very significant in this verse. Sometimes in
the forest a very big castle appears, and this is called a castle in the air.
Actually this castle does not exist anywhere but in one's imagination. This is
called gandharva-pura. In the material forest, the conditioned soul sometimes
contemplates great castles and skyscrapers, and he wastes his energy for such
things, hoping to live in them very peacefully with his family forever.
However, the laws of nature do not allow this. When he enters such castles, he
temporarily thinks that he is very happy, even though his happiness is
impermanent. His happiness may last for a few years, but because the owner of
the castle has to leave the castle at the time of death, everything is eventually
lost. This is the way of worldly transactions. Such happiness is described by
Vidyäpati as the happiness one derives upon seeing a drop of water in the
desert. The desert is heated by scorching sunshine, and if we want to reduce
the desert temperature, we need huge amounts of water—millions and millions
of gallons. What effect will one drop have? Water certainly has value, but one
drop of water cannot reduce the heat of the desert. In this material world
everyone is ambitious, but the heat is very scorching. What will an imaginary
castle in the air do to help? Çréla Vidyäpati has therefore sung: täöala saikate,
väri-bindu-sama, suta-mita-ramaëi-samäje. The happiness of family life, friends
and society is compared to a drop of water in the scorching desert. The entire
material world is busy trying to attain happiness because happiness is the
prerogative of the living being. Unfortunately, due to falling in contact with
the material world, the living entity simply struggles for existence. Even if one
becomes happy for a while, a very powerful enemy may plunder everything.
There are many instances in which big businessmen suddenly become paupers
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
500
in the street. Yet the nature of material existence is such that foolish people
are attracted to these transactions and they forget the real business of
self-realization.
TEXT 8
cl/Na( KvicTk-<$=k-Xak-Rrax(ig]a‚
NaRGaaåå+auivRMaNaa wvaSTae )
Pade Pade_>YaNTarviöNaaidRTa"
k-aE$u=iMbk-" §u-DYaiTa vE JaNaaYa )) 8 ))
calan kvacit kaëöaka-çarkaräìghrir
nagärurukñur vimanä iväste
pade pade 'bhyantara-vahninärditaù
kauöumbikaù krudhyati vai janäya
SYNONYMS
calan—wandering; kvacit—sometimes; kaëöaka-çarkara—pierced by thorns
and small stones; aìghriù—whose feet; naga—the hills; ärurukñuù—one
desiring to climb; vimanäù—disappointed; iva—like; äste—becomes; pade
pade—step by step; abhyantara—within the abdomen; vahninä—by the strong
fire of appetite; arditaù—being fatigued and aggrieved; kauöumbikaù—a person
living with his family members; krudhyati—becomes angry; vai—certainly;
janäya—at the family members.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the merchant in the forest wants to climb the hills and
mountains, but due to insufficient footwear, his feet are pricked by small stone
fragments and by thorns on the mountain. Being pricked by them, he becomes
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
501
very aggrieved. Sometimes a person who is very attached to his family becomes
overwhelmed with hunger, and due to his miserable condition he becomes
furious with his family members.
PURPORT
The ambitious conditioned soul wants to be very happy in this material
world with his family, but he is compared to a traveler in the forest who desires
to climb a hill full of thorns and small stones. As stated in the previous verse,
the happiness derived from society, friendship and love is like a drop of water
in the scorching heat of the desert. One may want to become very great and
powerful in society, but this is like attempting to climb a hill full of thorns.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura compares one's family to high
mountains. Becoming happy in their association is like a hungry man's
endeavoring to climb a mountain full of thorns. Almost 99.9 percent of the
population is unhappy in family life, despite all the attempts being made to
satisfy the family members. In the Western countries, due to the dissatisfaction
of the family members, there is actually no family life. There are many cases of
divorce, and out of dissatisfaction, the children leave the protection of their
parents. Especially in this age of Kali, family life is being reduced. Everyone is
becoming self-centered because that is the law of nature. Even if one has
sufficient money to maintain a family, the situation is such that no one is
happy in family life. Consequently according to the varëäçrama institution,
one has to retire from family life in middle age: païcäçordhvaà vanaà vrajet.
One should voluntarily retire from family life at the age of fifty and go to
Våndävana or a forest. This is recommended by Çréla Prahläda Mahäräja (SB
7.5.5):
tat sädhu manye 'sura-varya dehinäà
sadä samudvigna-dhiyäm asad-grahät
hitvätma-pätaà gåham andha-küpaà
vanaà gato yad dharim äçrayeta
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
502
There is no benefit in transferring from one forest to another. One must go to
the Våndävana forest and take shelter of Govinda. That will make one happy.
The International Society for Krishna Consciousness is therefore constructing
a Kåñëa-Balaräma temple to invite its members as well as outsiders to come and
live peacefully in a spiritual atmosphere. That will help one become elevated
to the transcendental world and return home, back to Godhead. Another
sentence in this verse is very significant: kauöumbikaù krudhyati vai janäya.
When one's mind is disturbed in so many ways, he satisfies himself by
becoming angry with his poor wife and children. The wife and children are
naturally dependent on the father, but the father, being unable to maintain
the family properly, becomes mentally distressed and therefore chastises the
family members unnecessarily. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (12.2.9):
äcchinna-dära-draviëä yäsyanti giri-känanam. Being disgusted with family life,
one separates from the family by divorce or some other means. If one has to
separate, why not separate willingly? Systematic separation is better than
forced separation. Forced separation cannot make anyone happy, but by
mutual consent or by the Vedic arrangement one must separate from his
family affairs at a certain age and fully depend on Kåñëa. This makes one's life
successful.
TEXT 9
KviciàGaq<aaeR_JaGaraihNaa JaNaae
NaavEiTa ik-iÄiÜiPaNae_PaivÖ" )
dí" SMa XaeTae Kv c dNdXaUkE-‚
rNDaae_NDakU-Pae PaiTaTaSTaiMaóe )) 9 ))
kvacin nigérëo 'jagarähinä jano
nävaiti kiïcid vipine 'paviddhaù
dañöaù sma çete kva ca danda-çükair
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
503
andho 'ndha-küpe patitas tamisre
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; nigérëaù—being swallowed; ajagara-ahinä—by the great
snake known as the python; janaù—the conditioned soul; na—not;
avaiti—understands; kiïcit—anything; vipine—in the forest;
apaviddhaù—pierced by arrows of suffering; dañöaù—being bitten;
sma—indeed; çete—lies down; kva ca—sometimes; danda-çükaiù—by other
kinds of snakes; andhaù—blind; andha-küpe—in a blind well; patitaù—fallen;
tamisre—in a hellish condition of life.
TRANSLATION
The conditioned soul in the material forest is sometimes swallowed by a
python or crushed. At such a time he is left lying in the forest like a dead
person, devoid of consciousness and knowledge. Sometimes other poisonous
snakes bite him. Being blind to his consciousness, he falls down into a dark well
of hellish life with no hope of being rescued.
PURPORT
When one becomes unconscious due to being bitten by a snake, one cannot
understand what is taking place outside the body. This unconscious condition
is the condition of deep sleep. Similarly, the conditioned soul is actually
sleeping on the lap of the illusory energy. Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has sung, kota
nidrä yäo mäyä-piçäcéra kole: "O living entity, how long will you sleep in this
condition on the lap of the illusory energy?" People do not understand that
they are actually sleeping in this material world, being devoid of knowledge of
spiritual life. Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore says:
enechi auñadhi mäyä näçibära lägi'
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
504
hari-näma-mahä-mantra lao tumi mägi'
"I have brought medicine to awaken every living being from perpetual sleep.
Please receive the holy name of the Lord, the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra, and
awaken." The Kaöha Upaniñad (1.3.14) also says, uttiñöha jägrata präpya varän
nibodhata: "O living entity, you are sleeping in this material world. Please get
up and take advantage of your human form of life." The sleeping condition
means loss of all knowledge. In Bhagavad-gétä (2.69) it is also said, yä niçä
sarva-bhütänäà tasyäà jägarti saàyamé: "What is night for all beings is the
time of awakening for the self-controlled." Even in the higher planets,
everyone is under the spell of the illusory energy. No one is really interested in
the real values of life. The sleeping condition, called käla-sarpa (the time
factor), keeps the conditioned soul in a state of ignorance, and therefore pure
consciousness is lost. In the forest there are many blind wells, and if one falls
down in one there is no chance of being rescued. In a state of sleep, one
remains perpetually bitten by some animals, especially snakes.
TEXT 10
k-ihR SMa icT+aud]rSaaNa( ivicNv&‚
STaNMai+ak-ai>aVYaRiQaTaae ivMaaNa" )
Ta}aaiTak*-C^\aTPa[iTal/BDaMaaNaae
bl/aiÜlu/MPaNTYaQa Ta& TaTaae_NYae )) 10 ))
karhi sma cit kñudra-rasän vicinvaàs
tan-makñikäbhir vyathito vimänaù
taträti-kåcchrät pratilabdhamäno
baläd vilumpanty atha taà tato 'nye
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
505
karhi sma cit—sometimes; kñudra—very insignificant; rasän—sexual
enjoyment; vicinvan—searching for; tat—of those women; makñikäbhiù—by
honeybees, or the husbands or family members; vyathitaù—very much
aggrieved; vimänaù—insulted; tatra—in that; ati—very much; kåcchrät—with
difficulty because of spending money; pratilabdhamänaù—obtaining sexual
enjoyment; balät—by force; vilumpanti—kidnapped; atha—thereafter;
tam—the object of sense enjoyment (the woman); tataù—from him;
anye—another debauchee.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes, in order to have a little insignificant sex enjoyment, one searches
after debauched women. In this attempt, one is insulted and chastised by the
women's kinsmen. This is like going to take honey from a beehive and being
attacked by the bees. Sometimes, after spending lots of money, one may acquire
another woman for some extra sense enjoyment. Unfortunately, the object of
sense enjoyment, the woman, is taken away or kidnapped by another
debauchee.
PURPORT
In a great forest, honeycombs are very important. People often go there to
collect honey from the combs, and sometimes the bees attack and punish them.
In human society, those who are not Kåñëa conscious remain in the forest of
material life simply for the honey of sex life. Such debauchees are not at all
satisfied with one wife. They want many women. Day after day, with great
difficulty, they try to secure such women, and sometimes, while trying to taste
this kind of honey, one is attacked by a woman's kinsmen and chastised very
heavily. By bribing others, one may secure another woman for enjoyment, yet
another debauchee may kidnap her or offer her something better. This woman
hunting is going on in the forest of the material world, sometimes legally, and
sometimes illegally. Consequently in this Kåñëa consciousness movement the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
506
devotees are forbidden to have illicit sex. Thus they avoid so many difficulties.
One should remain satisfied with one woman, being duly married. One can
satisfy one's lusty desires with his wife without creating disturbances in society
and being punished for doing so.
TEXT 11
KvicÀ XaqTaaTaPavaTavzR‚
Pa[iTai§-Yaa& k-TauRMaNaqXa AaSTae )
KviciNMaQaae ivPa<aNa( YaÀ ik-iÄd(
ivÜezMa*C^TYauTa ivtaXaa#yaTa( )) 11 ))
kvacic ca çétätapa-väta-varñapratikriyäà
kartum anéça äste
kvacin mitho vipaëan yac ca kiïcid
vidveñam åcchaty uta vitta-çäöhyät
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; ca—also; çéta-ätapa-väta-varña—of freezing cold, scorching
heat, strong wind and excessive rainfall; pratikriyäm—counteraction;
kartum—to do; anéçaù—being unable; äste—remains in misery;
kvacit—sometimes; mithaù—one another; vipaëan—selling; yat ca—whatever;
kiïcit—a little bit; vidveñam—mutual enmity; åcchati—obtain; uta—it is so
said; vitta-çäöhyät—because of cheating one another merely for money.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the living entity is busy counteracting the natural disturbances of
freezing cold, scorching heat, strong wind, excessive rainfall and so forth. When
he is unable to do so, he becomes very unhappy. Sometimes he is cheated in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
507
business transactions one after another. In this way, by cheating, living entities
create enmity among themselves.
PURPORT
This is an example of the struggle for existence, the attempt to counteract
the onslaught of material nature. This creates enmity in society, and
consequently society is filled with envious people. One person is envious of
another, and this is the way of the material world. The Kåñëa consciousness
movement aims at creating an atmosphere of non-envy. Of course it is not
possible for everyone to become Kåñëa conscious, but the Kåñëa consciousness
movement can create an exemplary society wherein there is no envy.
TEXT 12
KvicTKvicT+aq<aDaNaSTau TaiSMaNa(
XaYYaaSaNaSQaaNaivharhqNa" )
YaacNa( ParadPa[iTal/BDak-aMa"
PaarKYad*iíl/R>aTae_vMaaNaMa( )) 12 ))
kvacit kvacit kñéëa-dhanas tu tasmin
çayyäsana-sthäna-vihära-hénaù
yäcan paräd apratilabdha-kämaù
pärakya-dåñöir labhate 'vamänam
SYNONYMS
kvacit kvacit—sometimes; kñéëa-dhanaù—becoming bereft of all riches;
tu—but; tasmin—in that forest; çayyä—of bedding for lying down; äsana—of
a sitting place; sthäna—of a residential house; vihära—of enjoyment with a
family; hénaù—being bereft; yäcan—begging; parät—from others (friends and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
508
relatives); apratilabdha-kämaù—not getting his desires fulfilled;
pärakya-dåñöiù—becomes greedy for the wealth of others; labhate—he obtains;
avamänam—dishonor.
TRANSLATION
On the forest path of material existence, sometimes a person is without
wealth and due to this does not have a proper home, bed or sitting place, nor
proper family enjoyment. He therefore goes to beg money from others, but
when his desires are not fulfilled by begging, he wants to borrow or steal the
property of others. Thus he is insulted in society.
PURPORT
The principles of beg, borrow or steal are very appropriate in this material
world. When one is in want, he begs, borrows or steals. If begging is
unsuccessful, he borrows. If he cannot pay, he steals, and when he is caught, he
is insulted. This is the law of material existence. No one can live here very
honestly; therefore by trickery, cheating, begging, borrowing or stealing, one
tries to satisfy his senses. Thus no one in this material world is living
peacefully.
TEXT 13
ANYaaeNYaivtaVYaiTaz(r)v*Ö‚
vEraNaubNDaae ivvhiNMaQaê )
AßNYaMauiZMaàuåk*-C^\ivta‚
baDaaePaSaGaOE„ivRhrNa( ivPaà" )) 13 ))
anyonya-vitta-vyatiñaìga-våddhavairänubandho
vivahan mithaç ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
509
adhvany amuñminn uru-kåcchra-vittabädhopasargair
viharan vipannaù
SYNONYMS
anyonya—with one another; vitta-vyatiñaìga—by monetary transactions;
våddha—increased; vaira-anubandhaù—one is encumbered by enmity;
vivahan—sometimes marrying; mithaù—one another; ca—and; adhvani—on
the path of material existence; amuñmin—that; uru-kåcchra—by great
difficulties; vitta-bädha—by scarcity of money; upasargaiù—by diseases;
viharan—wandering; vipannaù—one becomes fully embarrassed.
TRANSLATION
Due to monetary transactions, relationships become very strained and end in
enmity. Sometimes the husband and wife walk on the path of material progress,
and to maintain their relationship they work very hard. Sometimes due to
scarcity of money or due to diseased conditions, they are embarrassed and
almost die.
PURPORT
In this material world, there are many transactions between peoples and
societies as well as between nations, but gradually these end in enmity between
the two parties. Similarly, in the marriage relationship, monetary transactions
are sometimes overpowered by the dangerous conditions of material life. One
then becomes diseased or monetarily embarrassed. In the modern age most
countries have developed economically, but due to business exchanges,
relationships seem to be strained. Finally wars are declared between nations,
and as a result of these upheavals there is destruction all over the world, and
people suffer heavily.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
510
TEXT 14
Taa&STaaNa( ivPaàaNa( Sa ih Ta}a Ta}a
ivhaYa JaaTa& PairGa*ù SaaQaR" )
AavTaRTae_ÛaiPa Na k-iêd}a
vqraßNa" PaarMauPaEiTa YaaeGaMa( )) 14 ))
täàs tän vipannän sa hi tatra tatra
vihäya jätaà parigåhya särthaù
ävartate 'dyäpi na kaçcid atra
vérädhvanaù päram upaiti yogam
SYNONYMS
tän tän—all of them; vipannän—embarrassed in various ways; saù—the living
being; hi—certainly; tatra tatra—here and there; vihäya—giving up;
jätam—those who are newly born; parigåhya—taking; sa-arthaù—the living
being searching for his own interest; ävartate—wanders in this forest; adya
api—even until now; na—not; kaçcit—any of them; atra—here in this forest;
véra—O hero; adhvanaù—of the path of material life; päram—the ultimate
end; upaiti—gets; yogam—the process of devotional service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, on the forest path of material life, first a person is bereft of
his father and mother, and after their death he becomes attached to his newly
born children. In this way he wanders on the path of material progress and is
eventually embarrassed. Nonetheless, no one knows how to get out of this, even
up to the moment of death.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
511
PURPORT
In this material world, family life is an institution of sex. Yan
maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukham (SB 7.9.45). Through sex, the father and mother
beget children, and the children get married and go down the same path of
sexual life. After the death of the father and mother, the children get married
and beget their own children. Thus generation after generation these things go
on in the same way without anyone's attaining liberation from the
embarrassment of material life. No one accepts the spiritual processes of
knowledge and renunciation, which end in bhakti-yoga. Actually human life is
meant for jïäna and vairägya, knowledge and renunciation. Through these one
can attain the platform of devotional service. Unfortunately people in this age
avoid the association of liberated people (sädhu-saìga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]) and
continue in their stereotyped way of family life. Thus they are embarrassed by
the exchange of money and sex.
TEXT 15
MaNaiSvNaae iNaiJaRTaidGGaJaeNd]a
MaMaeiTa SaveR >auiv bÖvEra" )
Ma*Dae XaYaqrà Tau Tad(v]JaiNTa
YaNNYaSTad<@ae GaTavErae_i>aYaaiTa )) 15 ))
manasvino nirjita-dig-gajendrä
mameti sarve bhuvi baddha-vairäù
mådhe çayéran na tu tad vrajanti
yan nyasta-daëòo gata-vairo 'bhiyäti
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
512
manasvinaù—very great heroes (mental speculators);
nirjita-dik-gajendräù—who have conquered many other heroes as powerful as
elephants; mama—my (my land, my country, my family, my community, my
religion); iti—thus; sarve—all (great political, social and religious leaders);
bhuvi—in this world; baddha-vairäù—who have created enmity among
themselves; mådhe—in battle; çayéran—fall dead on the ground; na—not;
tu—but; tat—the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vrajanti—approach; yat—which; nyasta-daëòaù—a sannyäsé;
gata-vairaù—who has no enmity throughout the whole world;
abhiyäti—attains that perfection.
TRANSLATION
There were and are many political and social heroes who have conquered
enemies of equal power, yet due to their ignorance in believing that the land is
theirs, they fight one another and lay down their lives in battle. They are not
able to take up the spiritual path accepted by those in the renounced order.
Although they are big heroes and political leaders, they cannot take to the path
of spiritual realization.
PURPORT
Big political leaders might be able to conquer equally powerful political
enemies, but unfortunately they cannot subdue their strong senses, the
enemies that always accompany them. Not being able to conquer these nearby
enemies, they simply try to conquer other enemies, and ultimately they die in
the struggle for existence. They do not take to the path of spiritual realization
or become sannyäsés. Sometimes these big leaders take up the guise of a
sannyäsé and call themselves mahätmäs, but their only business is conquering
their political enemies. Because they spoil their lives with the illusion of "this
is my land and my family," they cannot progress spiritually and attain
liberation from the clutches of mäyä.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
513
TEXT 16
Pa[SaÂiTa KvaiPa l/Taa>auJaaé[Ya‚
STadaé[YaaVYa¢-PadiÜJaSPa*h" )
KvicTk-daicÖirc§-TañSaNa(
Sa:Ya& ivDatae bk-k-ªGa*Da]E" )) 16 ))
prasajjati kväpi latä-bhujäçrayas
tad-äçrayävyakta-pada-dvija-spåhaù
kvacit kadäcid dhari-cakratas trasan
sakhyaà vidhatte baka-kaìka-gådhraiù
SYNONYMS
prasajjati—becomes more and more attached; kväpi—sometimes;
latä-bhuja-äçrayaù—who takes shelter of the soft arms of his beautiful wife
which are like creepers; tat-äçraya—who are sheltered by such creepers;
avyakta-pada—who sing unclear songs; dvija-spåhaù—desiring to hear birds;
kvacit—sometimes; kadäcit—somewhere; hari-cakrataù trasan—being afraid of
the roaring sound of a lion; sakhyam—friendship; vidhatte—makes;
baka-kaìka-gådhraiù—with cranes, herons and vultures.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the living entity in the forest of material existence takes shelter
of creepers and desires to hear the chirping of the birds in those creepers. Being
afraid of roaring lions in the forest, he makes friends with cranes, herons and
vultures.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
514
PURPORT
In the forest of the material world there are many animals and birds, trees
and creepers. Sometimes the living entity wants to take shelter of the creepers;
in other words, he wants to be happy by being embraced by the creeperlike
arms of his wife. Within the creepers there are many chirping birds; this
indicates that he wants to satisfy himself by hearing the sweet voice of his
wife. In old age, however, he sometimes becomes afraid of imminent death,
which is compared to a roaring lion. To save himself from the lion's attack, he
takes shelter of some bogus svämés, yogés, incarnations, pretenders and
cheaters. Being misled by the illusory energy in this way, he spoils his life. It is
said, harià vinä måtià na taranti: no one can be saved from the imminent
danger of death without taking shelter of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The word hari indicates the lion as well as the Supreme Lord. To be
saved from the hands of Hari, the lion of death, one must take shelter of the
supreme Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. People with a poor fund
of knowledge take shelter of nondevotee cheaters and pretenders in order to
be saved from the clutches of death. In the forest of the material world, the
living entity first of all wants to be very happy by taking shelter of the
creeperlike arms of his wife and hearing her sweet voice. Later, he sometimes
takes shelter of so-called gurus and sädhus who are like crane, herons and
vultures. Thus he is cheated both ways by not taking shelter of the Supreme
Lord.
TEXT 17
TaEvRiÄTaae h&Saku-l&/ SaMaaivXa‚
àraecYaNa( Xaql/MauPaEiTa vaNaraNa( )
TaÂaiTaraSaeNa SauiNav*RTaeiNd]Ya"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
515
ParSParaeÜq+a<aivSMa*TaaviDa" )) 17 ))
tair vaïcito haàsa-kulaà samäviçann
arocayan çélam upaiti vänarän
taj-jäti-räsena sunirvåtendriyaù
parasparodvékñaëa-vismåtävadhiù
SYNONYMS
taiù—by them (the cheaters and pretenders, the so-called yogés, svämés,
incarnations and gurus); vaïcitaù—being cheated; haàsa-kulam—the
association of great paramahaàsas, or devotees; samäviçan—contacting;
arocayan—not being satisfied with; çélam—their behavior;
upaiti—approaches; vänarän—the monkeys, which are all debauchees with no
good character; tat-jäti-räsena—by sense gratification in the association of
such debauchees; sunirvåta-indriyaù—being very satisfied with getting the
opportunity of sense gratification; paraspara—of one another; udvékñaëa—by
seeing the faces; vismåta—who has forgotten; avadhiù—the end of life.
TRANSLATION
Being cheated by them, the living entity in the forest of the material world
tries to give up the association of these so-called yogés, svämés and incarnations
and come to the association of real devotees, but due to misfortune he cannot
follow the instructions of the spiritual master or advanced devotees; therefore
he gives up their company and again returns to the association of monkeys who
are simply interested in sense gratification and women. He derives satisfaction
by associating with sense gratifiers and enjoying sex and intoxication. In this
way he spoils his life simply by indulging in sex and intoxication. Looking into
the faces of other sense gratifiers, he becomes forgetful and thus approaches
death.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
516
PURPORT
Sometimes a foolish person becomes disgusted with bad association and
comes to the association of devotees and brähmaëas and takes initiation from a
spiritual master. As advised by the spiritual master, he tries to follow the
regulative principles, but due to misfortune he cannot follow the instructions
of the spiritual master. He therefore gives up the company of devotees and
goes to associate with simian people who are simply interested in sex and
intoxication. Those who are so-called spiritualists are compared to monkeys.
Outwardly, monkeys sometimes resemble sädhus because they live naked in the
forest and pick fruits, but their only desire is to keep many female monkeys
and enjoy sex life. Sometimes so-called spiritualists seeking a spiritual life come
to associate with Kåñëa conscious devotees, but they cannot execute the
regulative principles or follow the path of spiritual life. Consequently they
leave the association of devotees and go to associate with sense gratifiers, who
are compared to monkeys. Again they revive their sex and intoxication, and
looking at one another's faces, they are thus satisfied. In this way they pass
their lives up to the point of death.
TEXT 18
d]uMaezu r&SYaNa( SauTadarvTSal/ae
VYavaYadqNaae ivvXa" SvbNDaNae )
KvicTPa[MaadaiÓirk-Ndre PaTaNa(
vçI=& Ga*hqTva GaJa>aqTa AaiSQaTa" )) 18 ))
drumeñu raàsyan suta-dära-vatsalo
vyaväya-déno vivaçaù sva-bandhane
kvacit pramädäd giri-kandare patan
valléà gåhétvä gaja-bhéta ästhitaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
517
SYNONYMS
drumeñu—in the trees (or in houses standing like trees in which monkeys jump
from one branch to another); raàsyan—enjoying; suta-dära-vatsalaù—being
attached to the children and wife; vyaväya-dénaù—who is poor-hearted
because of acting on the platform of sex desire; vivaçaù—unable to give up;
sva-bandhane—in bondage to the reactions of one's own activities;
kvacit—sometimes; pramädät—from fear of imminent death; giri-kandare—in
a cave in a mountain; patan—falling down; vallém—the branches of a creeper;
gåhétvä—capturing; gaja-bhétaù—being afraid of the elephant of death;
ästhitaù—remains in that position.
TRANSLATION
When the living entity becomes exactly like a monkey jumping from one
branch to another, he remains in the tree of household life without any profit
but sex. Thus he is kicked by his wife just like the he-ass. Unable to gain
release, he remains helplessly in that position. Sometimes he falls victim to an
incurable disease, which is like falling into a mountain cave. He becomes afraid
of death, which is like the elephant in the back of that cave, and he remains
stranded, grasping at the twigs and branches of a creeper.
PURPORT
The precarious condition of a householder's life is described herein. A
householder's life is full of misery, and the only attraction is sex with the wife
who kicks him during sexual intercourse, just as the she-ass does her mate. Due
to continuous sex life, he falls victim to many incurable diseases. At that time,
being afraid of death, which is like an elephant, he remains hanging from the
twigs and branches of the tree, just like a monkey.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
518
TEXT 19
ATa" k-QaiÄTSa ivMau¢- AaPad"
PauNaê SaaQa| Pa[ivXaTYairNdMa )
AßNYaMauiZMaàJaYaa iNaveiXaTaae
>a]MaÅNaae_ÛaiPa Na ved k-êNa )) 19 ))
ataù kathaïcit sa vimukta äpadaù
punaç ca särthaà praviçaty arindama
adhvany amuñminn ajayä niveçito
bhramaï jano 'dyäpi na veda kaçcana
SYNONYMS
ataù—from this; kathaïcit—somehow; saù—he; vimuktaù—liberated;
äpadaù—from the danger; punaù ca—again; sa-artham—taking interest in
that life; praviçati—begins; arim-dama—O King, killer of the enemies;
adhvani—on the path of enjoyment; amuñmin—that; ajayä—by the influence
of the illusory energy; niveçitaù—being absorbed; bhraman—traveling;
janaù—the conditioned soul; adya api—even up to death; na veda—does not
understand; kaçcana—anything.
TRANSLATION
O killer of enemies, Mahäräja Rahügaëa, if the conditioned soul somehow or
other gets out of his dangerous position, he again returns to his home to enjoy
sex life, for that is the way of attachment. Thus, under the spell of the Lord's
material energy, he continues to loiter in the forest of material existence. He
does not discover his real interest even at the point of death.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
519
This is the way of material life. When one is captured by sexual attraction,
he becomes implicated in so many ways and cannot understand the real aim of
life. Therefore Çrémad-Bhägavatam (7.5.31) says, na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi
viñëum: generally people do not understand the ultimate goal of life. As stated
in the Vedas, oà tad viñëoù paramaà padaà sadä paçyanti sürayaù: those who
are spiritually advanced simply look to the lotus feet of Viñëu. The
conditioned soul, however, not being interested in reviving his relationship
with Viñëu, becomes captivated by material activities and remains in
everlasting bondage, being misled by so-called leaders.
TEXT 20
rhUGa<a TvMaiPa ùßNaae_SYa
Sa&NYaSTad<@" k*-Ta>aUTaMaE}a" )
ASaiÂTaaTMaa hirSaevYaa iXaTa&
jaNaaiSaMaadaYa TaraiTaPaarMa( )) 20 ))
rahügaëa tvam api hy adhvano 'sya
sannyasta-daëòaù kåta-bhüta-maitraù
asaj-jitätmä hari-sevayä çitaà
jïänäsim ädäya taräti-päram
SYNONYMS
rahügaëa—O King Rahügaëa; tvam—you; api—also; hi—certainly;
adhvanaù—of the path of material existence; asya—this;
sannyasta-daëòaù—having given up the king's rod for punishing criminals;
kåta-bhüta-maitraù—having become friendly to everyone;
asat-jita-ätmä—whose mind is not attracted to the material pleasure of life;
hari-sevayä—by the means of loving service to the Supreme Lord;
çitam—sharpened; jïäna-asim—the sword of knowledge; ädäya—taking i n
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
520
hand; tara—cross over; ati-päram—to the ultimate end of spiritual existence.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Rahügaëa, you are also a victim of the external energy, being
situated on the path of attraction to material pleasure. So that you may become
an equal friend to all living entities, I now advise you to give up your kingly
position and the rod by which you punish criminals. Give up attraction to the
sense objects and take up the sword of knowledge sharpened by devotional
service. Then you will be able to cut the hard knot of illusory energy and cross
to the other side of the ocean of nescience.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä Lord Kåñëa compares the material world to a tree of
illusion from which one must cut oneself free:
na rüpam asyeha tathopalabhyate
nänto na cädir na ca sampratiñöhä
açvattham enaà suvirüòha-mülam
asaìga-çastreëa dåòhena chittvä
tataù padaà tat parimärgitavyaà
yasmin gatä na nivartanti bhüyaù
tam eva cädyaà puruñaà prapadye
yataù pravåttiù prasåtä puräëé
"The real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No one can
understand where it ends, where it begins, or where its foundation is. But with
determination, one must cut down this tree with the weapon of detachment.
So doing, one must seek that place from which, having once gone, one never
returns, and there surrender to that Supreme Personality of Godhead from
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
521
whom everything has begun and in whom everything is abiding since time
immemorial." (Bg. 15.3-4)
TEXT 21
raJaaevac
Ahae Na*JaNMaai%l/JaNMaXaae>aNa&
ik&- JaNMai>aSTvParErPYaMauiZMaNa( )
Na Yad(Da*zqke-XaYaXa"k*-TaaTMaNaa&
MahaTMaNaa& v" Pa[cur" SaMaaGaMa" )) 21 ))
räjoväca
aho nå-janmäkhila-janma-çobhanaà
kià janmabhis tv aparair apy amuñmin
na yad dhåñékeça-yaçaù-kåtätmanäà
mahätmanäà vaù pracuraù samägamaù
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—King Rahügaëa said; aho—alas; nå-janma—you who have taken
birth as a human being; akhila-janma-çobhanam—the best of all species of life;
kim—what need; janmabhiù—with births in a higher species like the demigods
in the heavenly planets; tu—but; aparaiù—not superior; api—indeed;
amuñmin—in the next birth; na—not; yat—which; håñékeça-yaçaù—by the
glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Håñékeça, the master of all
senses; kåta-ätmanäm—of those whose hearts are purified;
mahä-ätmanäm—who are actually great souls; vaù—of us;
pracuraù—abundant; samägamaù—the association.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
522
King Rahügaëa said: This birth as a human being is the best of all. Even
birth among the demigods in the heavenly planets is not as glorious as birth as a
human being on this earth. What is the use of the exalted position of a demigod?
In the heavenly planets, due to profuse material comforts, there is no possibility
of associating with devotees.
PURPORT
Human birth is a great opportunity for self-realization. One may take birth
in a high planetary system among the demigods, but due to the profusion of
material comforts, one cannot gain release from material bondage. Even on
this earth those who are very opulent do not generally care to take to Kåñëa
consciousness. An intelligent person actually interested in getting freed from
the material clutches must associate with pure devotees. By such association,
one can gradually become detached from the material attraction of money and
women. Money and women are the basic principles of material attachment. Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore advised those who are actually serious about
returning back to Godhead to give up money and women in order to be fit to
enter the kingdom of God. Money and women can be fully utilized in the
service of the Lord, and one who can utilize them in this way can become freed
from material bondage. Satäà prasaìgän mama vérya-saàvido bhavanti
håt-karëa-rasäyanäù kathäù (SB 3.25.25). Only in the association of devotees
can one relish the glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Just
through a little association with a pure devotee, one can become successful in
his journey back to Godhead.
TEXT 22
Na ùd(>auTa& TvÀr<aaBJare<aui>a‚
hRTaa&hSaae >ai¢-rDaae+aJae_Mal/a )
MaaEhUiTaRk-aÛSYa SaMaaGaMaaÀ Mae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
523
duSTak-RMaUl/ae_PahTaae_ivvek-" )) 22 ))
na hy adbhutaà tvac-caraëäbja-reëubhir
hatäàhaso bhaktir adhokñaje 'malä
mauhürtikäd yasya samägamäc ca me
dustarka-mülo 'pahato 'vivekaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—certainly; adbhutam—wonderful; tvat-caraëa-abja-reëubhiù—by
the dust of your lotus feet; hata-aàhasaù—who am completely freed from the
reactions of sinful life; bhaktiù—love and devotion; adhokñaje—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond the capture of experimental
knowledge; amalä—completely freed from all material contamination;
mauhürtikät—momentary; yasya—of whom; samägamät—by the visit and
association; ca—also; me—my; dustarka—of false arguments; mülaù—the root;
apahataù—completely vanquished; avivekaù—not discriminating.
TRANSLATION
It is not at all wonderful that simply by being covered by the dust of your
lotus feet, one immediately attains the platform of pure devotional service to
Adhokñaja, which is not available even to great demigods like Brahmä. By
associating with you just for a moment, I am now freed from all argument, false
prestige and lack of discrimination, which are the roots of entanglement in the
material world. Now I am free from all these problems.
PURPORT
Association with pure devotees certainly frees one from the material
clutches. This is certainly true of King Rahügaëa's association with Jaòa
Bharata. King Rahügaëa was immediately freed from the misgivings of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
524
material association. The arguments offered by pure devotees to their disciples
are so convincing that even a dull-headed disciple is immediately enlightened
with spiritual knowledge.
TEXT 23
NaMaae MahÙyae_STau NaMa" iXaXau>Yaae
NaMaae Yauv>Yaae NaMa Aav$u=>Ya" )
Yae b]aø<aa GaaMavDaUTail/(r)a‚
êriNTa Tae>Ya" iXavMaSTau rajaMa( )) 23 ))
namo mahadbhyo 'stu namaù çiçubhyo
namo yuvabhyo nama ävaöubhyaù
ye brähmaëä gäm avadhüta-liìgäç
caranti tebhyaù çivam astu räjïäm
SYNONYMS
namaù—all obeisances; mahadbhyaù—unto the great personalities; astu—let
there be; namaù—my obeisances; çiçubhyaù—unto those great personalities
who appear as boys; namaù—respectful obeisances; yuvabhyaù—unto those
who appear as young men; namaù—respectful obeisances; ä-vaöubhyaù—unto
those who appear as children; ye—all those who; brähmaëäù—self-realized in
transcendental knowledge; gäm—the earth; avadhüta-liìgäù—who remain
hidden under different bodily guises; caranti—they traverse; tebhyaù—from
them; çivam astu—let there be all good fortune; räjïäm—unto the royal
dynasties or kings (who are always very puffed up).
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the great personalities, whether they
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
525
walk on the earth's surface as children, young boys, avadhütas or great
brähmaëas. Even if they are hidden under different guises, I offer my respects
to all of them. By their mercy, may there be good fortune in the royal dynasties
that are always offending them.
PURPORT
King Rahügaëa was very repentant because he had forced Jaòa Bharata to
carry his palanquin. He therefore began offering prayers to all kinds of
brähmaëas and self-realized persons, even though they might be playing like
children or hiding in some guises. The four Kumäras walked everywhere in the
guise of five-year-old boys, and similarly there are many brähmaëas, knowers of
Brahman, who traverse the globe either as young men, children or avadhütas.
Being puffed up due to their position, the royal dynasties generally offend
these great personalities. Therefore King Rahügaëa began to offer his
respectful obeisances unto them so that the offensive royal dynasties might not
glide down into a hellish condition. If one offends a great personality, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead does not excuse one, although the great
personalities themselves might not take offense. Mahäräja Ambaréña was
offended by Durväsä, who even approached Lord Viñëu for pardon. Lord
Viñëu would not grant him pardon; therefore he had to fall down at the lotus
feet of Mahäräja Ambaréña, even though Mahäräja Ambaréña was a
kñatriya-gåhastha. One should be very careful not to offend the lotus feet of
Vaiñëavas and brähmaëas.
TEXT 24
é[qXauk- ovac
wTYaevMautaraMaaTa" Sa vE b]øizRSauTa" iSaNDauPaTaYa AaTMaSaTatv& ivGa<aYaTa"
ParaNau>aav" ParMak-aåi<ak-TaYaaePaidXYa rhUGa<aeNa Sak-å<aMai>aviNdTa cr<a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
526
AaPaU<aaR<aRv wv iNa>a*Tak-r<aaeMYaaRXaYaae Dari<aiMaMaa& ivccar )) 24 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ity evam uttarä-mätaù sa vai brahmarñi-sutaù sindhu-pataya ätma-satattvaà
vigaëayataù paränubhävaù parama-käruëikatayopadiçya rahügaëena
sakaruëam abhivandita-caraëa äpürëärëava iva nibhåta-karaëormy-äçayo
dharaëim imäà vicacära.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti evam—in this way;
uttarä-mätaù—O Mahäräja Parékñit, son of mother Uttarä; saù—that
brähmaëa; vai—indeed; brahma-åñi-sutaù—Jaòa Bharata, the son of a highly
educated brähmaëa; sindhu-pataye—unto the king of the province of Sindhu;
ätma-sa-tattvam—the actual constitutional position of the soul;
vigaëayataù—although insulting Jaòa Bharata; para-anubhävaù—who was very
exalted in spiritual realization; parama-käruëikatayä—by his quality of being
very kind to the fallen souls; upadiçya—instructing; rahügaëena—by King
Rahügaëa; sa-karuëam—piteously; abhivandita-caraëaù—whose lotus feet
were worshiped; äpürëa-arëavaù iva—like the full ocean; nibhåta—completely
silenced; karaëa—of the senses; ürmi—the waves; äçayaù—possessing a heart
in which; dharaëim—the earth; imäm—this; vicacära—continued to roam.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, O son of mother Uttarä,
there were some waves of dissatisfaction in the mind of Jaòa Bharata due to his
being insulted by King Rahügaëa, who made him carry his palanquin, but Jaòa
Bharata neglected this, and his heart again became calm and quiet like an ocean.
Although King Rahügaëa had insulted him, he was a great paramahaàsa. Being
a Vaiñëava, he was naturally very kindhearted, and he therefore told the King
about the constitutional position of the soul. He then forgot the insult because
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
527
King Rahügaëa pitifully begged pardon at his lotus feet. After this, he began to
wander all over the earth, just as before.
PURPORT
In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.25.21), Kapiladeva describes the symptoms of
great personalities: titikñavaù käruëikäù suhådaù sarva-dehinäm. A saintly
devotee is certainly very tolerant. He is the friend of all living entities, and he
does not create enemies within the world. A pure devotee has all the qualities
of a sädhu. Jaòa Bharata is an example of this. Due to the material body, his
senses were certainly agitated when he was insulted by King Rahügaëa, but
later, due to the King's humble submission, Jaòa Bharata excused him. It is the
duty of everyone desiring to return to Godhead to become submissive like King
Rahügaëa and beg pardon of Vaiñëavas one may have offended. Vaiñëavas are
generally very kindhearted; therefore if one immediately submits himself at
the lotus feet of a Vaiñëava, one is immediately cleared of offensive reactions.
If one does not do so, the reactions will remain, and the results will not be very
palatable.
TEXT 25
SaaEvqrPaiTariPa SauJaNaSaMavGaTaParMaaTMaSaTatv AaTMaNYaivÛaDYaaraeiPaTaa& c
dehaTMaMaiTa& ivSaSaJaR ) Wv& ih Na*Pa >aGavdaié[Taaié[TaaNau>aav" )) 25 ))
sauvéra-patir api sujana-samavagata-paramätma-satattva ätmany
avidyädhyäropitäà ca dehätma-matià visasarja; evaà hi nåpa
bhagavad-äçritäçritänubhävaù.
SYNONYMS
sauvéra-patiù—the King of the state of Sauvéra; api—certainly; su-jana—from
an elevated person; samavagata—having completely understood;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
528
paramätma-sa-tattvaù—the truth of the constitutional position of the spirit
soul and the Supersoul; ätmani—in himself; avidyä—by nescience;
adhyäropitäm—erroneously attributed; ca—and; deha—in the body;
ätma-matim—the concept of the self; visasarja—completely gave up;
evam—thus; hi—certainly; nåpa—O King;
bhagavat-äçrita-äçrita-anubhävaù—the consequence of taking shelter of a
devotee who has similarly taken shelter of a spiritual master in the paramparä
system (one is sure to get out of the great nescience of the bodily concept of
life).
TRANSLATION
After receiving lessons from the great devotee Jaòa Bharata, King Rahügaëa
of the state of Sauvéra became completely aware of the constitutional position of
the soul. He thus gave up the bodily conception completely. My dear King,
whoever takes shelter of the servant of the servant of the Lord is certainly
glorified because he can without difficulty give up the bodily conception [Cc.
Madhya 13.80].
PURPORT
As stated in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 22.54):
"sädhu-saìga", "sädhu-saìga"—sarva-çästre kaya
lava-mätra sädhu-saìge sarva-siddhi haya
It is a fact that if one takes shelter of a pure devotee, one attains all perfection,
even if the association is a short one. A sädhu is a pure devotee of the Lord. It
has been our practical experience that the first instruction of our spiritual
master infused us with Kåñëa consciousness so that now we are at least on the
path of Kåñëa consciousness and can understand the philosophy. As a result,
there are many devotees engaged in this Kåñëa consciousness movement. The
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
529
whole world is revolving under the bodily conception; therefore there must be
devotees all over the world to deliver people from the false bodily conception
and fully engage them in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 26
raJaaevac
Yaae h va wh bhuivda Maha>aaGavTa TvYaai>aihTa" Parae+ae<a vcSaa
Jaqvl/aek->avaßa Sa ùaYaRMaNaqzYaa k-iLPaTaivzYaae NaaÅSaaVYauTPaàl/aek-SaMa‚
iDaGaMa" ) AQa TadevETaÕurvGaMa& SaMaveTaaNauk-LPaeNa iNaidRXYaTaaiMaiTa )) 26 ))
räjoväca
yo ha vä iha bahu-vidä mahä-bhägavata tvayäbhihitaù parokñeëa vacasä
jéva-loka-bhavädhvä sa hy ärya-manéñayä kalpita-viñayo
näïjasävyutpanna-loka-samadhigamaù; atha tad evaitad duravagamaà
samavetänukalpena nirdiçyatäm iti.
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—King Parékñit said; yaù—which; ha—certainly; vä—or; iha—in
this narration; bahu-vidä—who are aware of many incidents of transcendental
knowledge; mahä-bhägavata—O great devotee sage; tvayä—by you;
abhihitaù—described; parokñeëa—figuratively; vacasä—by words;
jéva-loka-bhava-adhvä—the path of material existence of the conditioned soul;
saù—that; hi—indeed; ärya-manéñayä—by the intelligence of advanced
devotees; kalpita-viñayaù—the subject matter is imagined; na—not;
aïjasä—directly; avyutpanna-loka—of persons who are not very experienced
or intelligent; samadhigamaù—the complete understanding; atha—therefore;
tat eva—because of that; etat—this matter; duravagamam—which is difficult
to understand; samaveta-anukalpena—by substituting the direct meaning of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
530
such incidents; nirdiçyatäm—let it be described; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit then told Çukadeva Gosvämé: My dear lord, O great devotee
sage, you are omniscient. You have very nicely described the position of the
conditioned soul, who is compared to a merchant in the forest. From these
instructions intelligent men can understand that the senses of a person in the
bodily conception are like rogues and thieves in that forest, and one's wife and
children are like jackals and other ferocious animals. However, it is not very
easy for the unintelligent to understand the purport of this story because it is
difficult to extricate the exact meaning from the allegory. I therefore request
Your Holiness to give the direct meaning.
PURPORT
There are many stories and incidents in Çrémad-Bhägavatam that are
described figuratively. Such allegorical descriptions may not be understood by
unintelligent men; therefore it is the duty of the student to approach a bona
fide spiritual master for the direct explanation.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Thirteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled, "Further Talks Between King Rahügaëa and
Jaòa Bharata."
14. The Material World as the Great Forest of Enjoyment
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
531
The direct meaning of the forest of material existence is given in this
chapter. Merchants sometimes enter the forest to collect many rare things and
sell them at a good profit in the city, but the forest path is always bedecked
with dangers. When the pure soul wants to give up the Lord's service to enjoy
the material world, Kåñëa certainly gives him a chance to enter the material
world. As stated in the Prema-vivarta: kåñëa-bahirmukha haïä bhoga väïchä
kare. This is the reason the pure spirit soul falls down to the material world.
Due to his activities under the influence of the three modes of material nature,
the living entity takes different positions in different species. Sometimes he is
a demigod in the heavenly planets and sometimes a most insignificant creature
in the lower planetary systems. In this regard, Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura
says, nänä yoni sadä phire: the living entity passes through various species.
Kardarya bhakñaëa kare: he is obliged to eat and enjoy abominable things.
Tära janma adhaù-päte yäya: in this way his whole life is spoiled. Without the
protection of an all-merciful Vaiñëava. the conditioned soul cannot get out of
the clutches of mäyä. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (manaù ñañöhänéndriyäëi
prakåti-sthäni karñati [Bg. 15.7]), the living entity begins material life with his
mind and the five knowledge-acquiring senses, and with these he struggles for
existence within the material world. These senses are compared to rogues and
thieves within the forest. They take away a man's knowledge and place him in
a network of nescience. Thus the senses are like rogues and thieves that
plunder his spiritual knowledge. Over and above this, there are family
members, wife and children. who are exactly like ferocious animals in the
forest. The business of such ferocious animals is to eat a man's flesh. The living
entity allows himself to be attacked by jackals and foxes (wife and children),
and thus his real spiritual life is finished. In the forest of material life,
everyone is envious like mosquitoes, and rats and mice are always creating
disturbances. Everyone in this material world is placed in many awkward
positions and surrounded by envious people and disturbing animals. The result
is that the living entity in the material world is always plundered and bitten by
many living entities. Nonetheless, despite these disturbances, he does not want
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
532
to give up his family life, and he continues his fruitive activities in an attempt
to become happy in the future. He thus becomes more and more entangled in
the results of karma, and thus he is forced to act impiously. His witnesses are
the sun during the day and the moon during the night. The demigods also
witness, but the conditioned soul thinks that his attempts at sense gratification
are not being witnessed by anyone. Sometimes, when he is detected, he
temporarily renounces everything, but due to his great attachment for the
body, his renunciation is given up before he can attain perfection.
In this material world there are many envious people. There is the
tax-exacting government, which is compared to an owl, and there are invisible
crickets that create unbearable sounds. The conditioned soul is certainly
greatly harassed by the agents of material nature, but his intelligence is lost
due to undesirable association. In an attempt to gain relief from the
disturbances of material existence, he falls victim to so-called yogés, sädhus and
incarnations who can display some magic but who do not understand
devotional service. Sometimes the conditioned soul is bereft of all money, and
consequently he becomes unkind to his family members. In this material world
there is not a pinch of actual happiness, for which the conditioned soul is
longing life after life. The government officials are like carnivorous Räkñasas
who exact heavy taxes for the maintenance of the government. The
hard-working conditioned soul is very saddened due to these heavy taxes.
The path of fruitive activities leads to difficult mountains, and sometimes
the conditioned soul wants to cross these mountains, but he is never successful,
and consequently he becomes more and more aggrieved and disappointed.
Becoming materially and financially embarrassed, the conditioned soul
unnecessarily chastises his family. In the material condition there are four
principal needs, out of which sleep is compared to a python. When asleep, the
conditioned soul completely forgets his real existence, and in sleep he does not
feel the tribulations of material life. Sometimes, being in need of money, the
conditioned soul steals and cheats, although he may apparently be associated
with devotees for spiritual advancement. His only business is getting out of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
533
clutches of mäyä, but due to improper guidance he becomes more and more
entangled in material dealings. This material world is simply an embarrassment
and is composed of tribulations presented as happiness, distress, attachment,
enmity and envy. On the whole it is simply full of tribulation and misery.
When a person loses his intelligence due to attachment to wife and sex, his
entire consciousness becomes polluted. He thus only thinks of the association
of women. The time factor, which is like a serpent, takes away everyone's life,
including that of Lord Brahmä and the insignificant ant. Sometimes the
conditioned soul tries to save himself from inexorable time and thus takes
shelter of some bogus savior. Unfortunately, the bogus savior cannot even save
himself. How, then, can he protect others? The bogus saviors do not care for
bona fide knowledge received from qualified brähmaëas and Vedic sources.
Their only business is indulging in sex and recommending sexual freedom even
for widows. Thus they are like monkeys in the forest. Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé
thus explains the material forest and its difficult path to Mahäräja Parékñit.
TEXT 1
Sa haevac
Ya Wz dehaTMaMaaiNaNaa& SatvaidGau<aivXaezivk-iLPaTaku-Xal/aku-Xal/SaMa‚
vhariviNaiMaRTaivivDadehavil/i>ar( ivYaaeGaSa&YaaeGaaÛNaaidSa&SaaraNau>avSYa Üar‚
>aUTaeNazi@iNd]YavGaeR<a TaiSMaNduGaaRßvdSauGaMae_ßNYaaPaiTaTa wRìrSYa >aGavTaae
ivZ<aaevRXaviTaRNYaa MaaYaYaa Jaqvl/aek-ae_Ya& YaQaa vi<aKSaaQaaeR_QaRPar"
SvdehiNaZPaaidTak-MaaRNau>av" XMaXaaNavdiXavTaMaaYaa& Sa&Saara$=VYaa& GaTaae NaaÛaiPa
ivf-l/bhuPa[iTaYaaeGaehSTataaPaaePaXaMaNaq& hirGauåcr<aarivNdMaDauk-raNauPadvqMav‚
åNDae )) 1 ))
sa hoväca
sa eña dehätma-mäninäà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
534
sattvädi-guëa-viçeña-vikalpita-kuçaläku-çala-samavahära-vinirmita-vividha-de
hävalibhir viyoga-saàyogädy-anädi-saàsäränubhavasya dvära-bhütena
ñaò-indriya-vargeëa tasmin durgädhvavad asugame 'dhvany äpatita éçvarasya
bhagavato viñëor vaça-vartinyä mäyayä jéva-loko 'yaà yathä vaëik-särtho
'rtha-paraù sva-deha-niñpädita-karmänubhavaù çmaçänavad açivatamäyäà
saàsäräöavyäà gato nädyäpi viphala-bahu-pratiyogehas tat-täpopaçamanéà
hari-guru-caraëäravinda-madhukaränupadavém avarundhe.
SYNONYMS
saù—the self-realized devotee (Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé); ha—indeed;
uväca—spoke; saù—he (the conditioned soul); eñaù—this one;
deha-ätma-mäninäm—of those who foolishly take the body to be the self;
sattva-ädi—of sattva, rajaù and tamaù; guëa—by the modes; viçeña—particular;
vikalpita—falsely constituted; kuçala—sometimes by favorable actions;
akuçala—sometimes by very unfavorable actions; samavahära—by a mixture
of both; vinirmita—obtained; vividha—various types; deha-ävalibhiù—by the
series of bodies; viyoga-saàyoga-ädi—symptomized by giving up one type of
body (viyoga) and accepting another (saàyoga);
anädi-saàsära-anubhavasya—of the perception of the beginningless process of
transmigration; dvära-bhütena—existing as the doorways;
ñaö-indriya-vargeëa—by these six senses (the mind and five
knowledge-acquiring senses, namely the eyes, ears, tongue, nose and skin);
tasmin—on that; durga-adhva-vat—like a path that is very difficult to traverse;
asugame—being difficult to pass through; adhvani—on a path in the forest;
äpatitaù—happened; éçvarasya—of the controller; bhagavataù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; vaça-vartinyä—acting under
the control; mäyayä—by the material energy; jéva-lokaù—the conditioned
living entity; ayam—this; yathä—exactly like; vaëik—a merchant;
sa-arthaù—having an object; artha-paraù—who is very attached to money;
sva-deha-niñpädita—performed by his own body; karma—the fruits of
activities; anubhavaù—who experiences; çmaçäna-vat açivatamäyäm—like an
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
535
inauspicious cemetery or place of burial; saàsära-aöavyäm—in the forest of
material life; gataù—having entered; na—not; adya api—until now;
viphala—unsuccessful; bahu-pratiyoga—full of great difficulties and varieties
of miserable conditions; éhaù—whose activities here in this material world;
tat-täpa-upaça-maném—which pacifies the miseries of the forest of material
life; hari-guru-caraëa-aravinda—to the lotus feet of the Lord and His devotee;
madhukara-anupadavém—the road followed in pursuance of devotees who are
attached like bumblebees; avarundhe—gain.
TRANSLATION
When King Parékñit asked Çukadeva Gosvämé about the direct meaning of
the material forest, Çukadeva Gosvämé replied as follows: My dear King, a man
belonging to the mercantile community [vaëik] is always interested in earning
money. Sometimes he enters the forest to acquire some cheap commodities like
wood and earth and sell them in the city at good prices. Similarly, the
conditioned soul, being greedy, enters this material world for some material
profit. Gradually he enters the deepest part of the forest, not really knowing
how to get out. Having entered the material world, the pure soul becomes
conditioned by the material atmosphere, which is created by the external energy
under the control of Lord Viñëu. Thus the living entity comes under the
control of the external energy, daivé mäyä. Living independently and bewildered
in the forest, he does not attain the association of devotees who are always
engaged in the service of the Lord. Once in the bodily conception, he gets
different types of bodies one after the other under the influence of material
energy and impelled by the modes of material nature [sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa
and tamo-guëa]. In this way the conditioned soul goes sometimes to the
heavenly planets, sometimes to the earthly planets and sometimes to the lower
planets and lower species. Thus he suffers continuously due to different types
of bodies. These sufferings and pains are sometimes mixed. Sometimes they are
very severe, and sometimes they are not. These bodily conditions are acquired
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
536
due to the conditioned soul's mental speculation. He uses his mind and five
senses to acquire knowledge, and these bring about the different bodies and
different conditions. Using the senses under the control of the external energy,
mäyä, the living entity suffers the miserable conditions of material existence.
He is actually searching for relief, but he is generally baffled, although
sometimes he is relieved after great difficulty. Struggling for existence in this
way, he cannot get the shelter of pure devotees, who are like bumblebees
engaged in loving service at the lotus feet of Lord Viñëu.
PURPORT
The most important information in this verse is
hari-guru-caraëa-aravinda-madhukara-anupadavém. In this material world the
conditioned souls are baffled by their activities, and sometimes they are
relieved after great difficulty. On the whole the conditioned soul is never
happy. He simply struggles for existence. Actually his only business is to accept
the spiritual master, the guru, and through him he must accept the lotus feet or
the Lord. This is explained by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu: guru-kåñëa-prasäde
päya bhakti-latä-béja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. people struggling for existence in the
forests or cities of the material world are not actually enjoying life. They are
simply suffering different pains and pleasures, generally pains that are always
inauspicious. They try to gain release from these pains, but they cannot due to
ignorance. For them it is stated in the Vedas: tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum
eväbhigacchet [MU 1.2.12(13)]. When the living entity is lost in the forest of the
material world, in the struggle for existence, his first business is to find a bona
fide guru who is always engaged at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Viñëu. After all, if he is at all eager to be relieved of the struggle for
existence, he must find a bona fide guru and take instructions at his lotus feet.
In this way he can get out of the struggle.
Since the material world is compared herein to a forest, it may be argued
that in Kali-yuga modern civilization is mainly situated in the cities. A great
city, however, is like a great forest. Actually city life is more dangerous than
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
537
life in the forest. If one enters an unknown city without friend or shelter,
living in that city is more difficult than living in a forest. There are many big
cities all over the surface of the globe, and wherever one looks he sees the
struggle for existence going on twenty-four hours a day, people rush about in
cars going seventy and eighty miles an hour, constantly coming and going, and
this sets the scene of the great struggle for existence. One has to rise early in
the morning and travel in that car at breakneck speed. There is always the
danger of an accident, and one has to take great care. In his automobile, the
living entity is full of anxieties, and his struggle is not at all auspicious. Apart
from human beings, other species like cats and dogs are also struggling very
hard day and night for existence. Thus the struggle for existence continues,
and the conditioned soul changes from one position to another. For a while, he
is a child, but he has to become a boy. From a boy, he has to change into a
youth, and from youth to manhood and old age. Finally, when the body is no
longer workable, he has to accept a new body in a different species. Giving up
the body is called death, and accepting another body is called birth. The
human form is an opportunity to take shelter of the bona fide spiritual master
and, through him, the Supreme Lord. This Kåñëa consciousness movement has
been started to give an opportunity to all the members of human society, who
are misled by foolish leaders. No one can get out of this struggle for existence,
which is full of miseries, without accepting a pure devotee of the Lord. The
material attempt changes from one position to another, and no one actually
gains relief from the struggle for existence. The only resort is the lotus feet of a
bona fide spiritual master, and, through him, the lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 2
YaSYaaMau h va WTae zi@iNd]YaNaaMaaNa" k-MaR<aa dSYav Wv Tae ) TaÛQaa
PauåzSYa DaNa& YaiTk-iÄÖMaaOEPaiYak&- bhuk*-C^\aiDaGaTa& Saa+aaTParMaPauåza‚
raDaNal/+a<aae Yaae_SaaE DaMaRSTa& Tau SaaMParaYa odahriNTa ) TaÖMYa| DaNa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
538
dXaRNaSPaXaRNaé[v<aaSvadNaavga]a<aSaªLPaVYavSaaYaGa*hGa]aMYaaePa>aaeGaeNa ku-NaaQaSYaa‚
iJaTaaTMaNaae YaQaa SaaQaRSYa ivlu/MPaiNTa )) 2 ))
yasyäm u ha vä ete ñaò-indriya-nämänaù karmaëä dasyava eva te; tad yathä
puruñasya dhanaà yat kiïcid dharmaupayikaà bahu-kåcchrädhigataà säkñät
parama-puruñärädhana-lakñaëo yo 'sau dharmas taà tu sämparäya
udäharanti; tad-dharmyaà dhanaà
darçana-sparçana-çravaëäsvädanävaghräëa-saìkalpa-vyavasäya-gåha-grämyop
abhogena kunäthasyäjitätmano yathä särthasya vilum-panti.
SYNONYMS
yasyäm—in which; u ha—certainly; vä—or; ete—all these;
ñaö-indriya-nämänaù—who are named the six senses (the mind and the five
knowledge-acquiring senses); karmaëä—by their activity; dasyavaù—the
plunderers; eva—certainly; te—they; tat—that; yathä—as; puruñasya—of a
person; dhanam—the wealth; yat—whatever; kiïcit—something;
dharma-aupayikam—which is a means to religious principles;
bahu-kåcchra-adhigatam—earned after much hard labor; säkñät—directly;
parama-puruña-ärädhana-lakñaëaù—whose symptoms are worship of the
Supreme Lord by performance of sacrifices and so on; yaù—which;
asau—that; dharmaù—religious principles; tam—that; tu—but;
sämparäye—for the benefit of the living entity after death; udäharanti—the
wise declare; tat-dharmyam—religious (relating to the prosecution of the
varëäçrama-dharma); dhanam—wealth; darçana—by seeing; sparçana—by
touching; çravaëa—by hearing; äsvädana—by tasting; avaghräëa—by
smelling; saìkalpa—by determination; vyavasäya—by a conclusion; gåha—in
the material home; grämya-upabhogena—by material sense gratification;
kunäthasya—of the misguided conditioned soul; ajita-ätmanaù—who has not
controlled himself; yathä—just as; särthasya—of the living entity interested in
sense gratification; vilumpanti—they plunder.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
539
TRANSLATION
In the forest of material existence, the uncontrolled senses are like
plunderers. The conditioned soul may earn some money for the advancement of
Kåñëa consciousness, but unfortunately the uncontrolled senses plunder his
money through sense gratification. The senses are plunderers because they
make one spend his money unnecessarily for seeing, smelling, tasting, touching,
hearing, desiring and willing. In this way the conditioned soul is obliged to
gratify his senses, and thus all his money is spent. This money is actually
acquired for the execution of religious principles, but it is taken away by the
plundering senses.
PURPORT
pürva jamnärjitä vidyä pürva janmärjitaà dhanaà agre dhävati dhävati. By
following the principles of the varëäçrama-dharma, one attains a better
position in the material world. One may be rich, learned, beautiful or
highborn. One who has all these assets should know that they are all meant for
the advancement of Kåñëa consciousness. Unfortunately, when a person is
misguided he misuses his high position for sense gratification. Therefore the
uncontrolled senses are considered plunderers. The good position one attains
by executing religious principles is wasted as the plundering senses take it
away. By executing religious principles under the laws of varëaçrama-dharma,
one is placed in a comfortable position. One may very easily use his assets for
the further advancement of Kåñëa consciousness. One should understand that
the wealth and opportunity one gets in the material world should not be
squandered in sense gratification. They are meant for the advancement of
Kåñëa consciousness. This Kåñëa consciousness movement is therefore
teaching people to control the mind and five knowledge-acquiring senses by a
definite process. One should practice a little austerity and not spend money on
anything other than the regulative life of devotional service. The senses
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
540
demand that one see beautiful things; therefore money should be spent for
decorating the Deity in the temple. Similarly, the tongue has to taste good
food, which should be bought and offered to the Deity. The nose can be
utilized in smelling the flowers offered to the Deity, and the hearing can be
utilized by listening to the vibration of the Hare Kåñëa mantra. In this way the
senses can be regulated and utilized to advance Kåñëa consciousness. Thus a
good position might not be spoiled by material sense gratification in the form
of illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. One spoils an opulent
position in the material world by driving cars, spending time in nightclubs or
tasting abominable food in restaurants. In these ways, the plundering senses
take away all the assets that the conditioned soul has acquired with great
difficulty.
TEXT 3
AQa c Ya}a k-aE$u=iMbk-a daraPaTYaadYaae NaaMNaa k-MaR<aa v*k-Sa*Gaal/a
WvaiNaC^Taae_iPa k-dYaRSYa ku-$u=iMbNa or<ak-vTSa&r+YaMaa<a& iMazTaae_iPa
hriNTa )) 3 ))
atha ca yatra kauöumbikä däräpatyädayo nämnä karmaëä våka-sågälä
evänicchato 'pi kadaryasya kuöumbina uraëakavat saàrakñyamäëaà miñato 'pi
haranti.
SYNONYMS
atha—in this way; ca—also; yatra—in which; kauöumbikäù—the family
members; dära-apatya-ädayaù—beginning with the wife and children;
nämnä—by name only; karmaëä—by their behavior; våka-sågäläù—tigers and
jackals; eva—certainly; anicchataù—of one who does not desire to spend his
wealth; api—certainly; kadaryasya—being too miserly; kuöumbinaù—who is
surrounded by family members; uraëaka-vat—like a lamb;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
541
saàrakñyamäëam—although protected; miñataù—of one who is observing;
api—even; haranti—they forcibly take away.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, family members in this material world go under the names of
wife and children, but actually they behave like tigers and jackals. A herdsman
tries to protect his sheep to the best of his ability, but the tigers and foxes take
them away by force. Similarly, although a miserly man wants to guard his
money very carefully, his family members take away all his assets forcibly, even
though he is very vigilant.
PURPORT
One Hindi poet has sung: din kä dakiné rät kä bäghiné pälak pälak rahu cuse.
During the daytime, the wife is compared to a witch, and at night she is
compared to a tigress. Her only business is sucking the blood of her husband
both day and night. During the day there are household expenditures, and the
money earned by the husband at the cost of his blood is taken away. At night,
due to sex pleasure, the husband discharges blood in the form of semen. In this
way he is bled by his wife both day and night, yet he is so crazy that he very
carefully maintains her. Similarly, the children are also like tigers, jackals and
foxes. As tigers, jackals and foxes take away lambs despite the herdsman's
vigilant protection, children take away the father's money, although the father
supervises the money himself. Thus family members may be called wives and
children, but actually they are plunderers.
TEXT 4
YaQaa ùNauvTSar& k*-ZYaMaa<aMaPYadGDabqJa& +ae}a& PauNarevavPaNak-ale
GauLMaTa*<avqåiÙGaRûriMav >avTYaevMaev Ga*haé[Ma" k-MaR+ae}a& YaiSMaà ih k-MaaR‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
542
<YauTSaqdiNTa YadYa& k-aMak-r<@ Wz AavSaQa" )) 4 ))
yathä hy anuvatsaraà kåñyamäëam apy adagdha-béjaà kñetraà punar
evävapana-käle gulma-tåëa-vérudbhir gahvaram iva bhavaty evam eva
gåhäçramaù karma-kñetraà yasmin na hi karmäëy utsédanti yad ayaà
käma-karaëòa eña ävasathaù.
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; hi—certainly; anuvatsaram—every year; kåñyamäëam—being
plowed; api—although; adagdha-béjam—in which the seeds are not burned;
kñetram—the field; punaù—again; eva—certainly; ävapana-käle—at the times
for sowing the seeds; gulma—by bushes; tåëa—by grasses; vérudbhiù—by the
creepers; gahvaram iva—like a bower; bhavati—becomes; evam—thus;
eva—certainly; gåha-äçramaù—family life; karma-kñetram—the field of
activities; yasmin—in which; na—not; hi—certainly; karmäëi
utsédanti—fruitive activities disappear; yat—therefore; ayam—this;
käma-karaëòaù—the storehouse of fruitive desire; eñaù—this;
ävasathaù—abode.
TRANSLATION
Every year the plowman plows over his grain field, completely uprooting all
weeds. Nonetheless, the seeds lie there and, not being completely burned, again
come up with the plants sown in the field. Even after being plowed under, the
weeds come up densely. Similarly, the gåhastha-äçrama [family life] is a field of
fruitive activity. Unless the desire to enjoy family life is completely burned out,
it grows up again and again. Even though camphor may be removed from a pot,
the pot nonetheless retains the aroma of camphor. As long as the seeds of desire
are not destroyed, fruitive activities are not destroyed.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
543
PURPORT
Unless one's desires are completely transferred to the service of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the desire for family life continues, even
after one has taken sannyäsa. Sometimes in our society, ISKCON, a person out
of sentiment may take sannyäsa, but because his desires are not burned
completely, he again takes to family life, even at the risk of losing his prestige
and disgracing his good name. These strong desires can be burned out
completely when one fully engages in the service of the Lord in devotional
service.
TEXT 5
Ta}aGaTaae d&XaMaXak-SaMaaPaSadEMaRNauJaE" Xal/>aXaku-NTaTaSk-rMaUzk-aidi>aåPaåDYa‚
MaaNabih"Pa[a<a" KvicTa( PairvTaRMaaNaae_iSMaàßNYaivÛak-aMak-MaRi>aåPar¢-MaNaSaa‚
NauPaPaàaQa| Narl/aek&- GaNDavRNaGarMauPaPaàiMaiTa iMaQYaad*iírNauPaXYaiTa )) 5 ))
tatra gato daàça-maçaka-samäpasadair manujaiù
çalabha-çakunta-taskara-müñakädibhir uparudhyamäna-bahiù-präëaù kvacit
parivartamäno 'sminn adhvany avidyä-käma-karmabhir
uparakta-manasänupapannärthaà nara-lokaà gandharva-nagaram
upapannam iti mithyä-dåñöir anupaçyati.
SYNONYMS
tatra—to that household life; gataù—gone; daàça—gadflies;
maçaka—mosquitoes; sama—equal to; apasadaiù—who are low-class;
manu-jaiù—by men; çalabha—locusts; çakunta—a large bird of prey;
taskara—thieves; müñaka-ädibhiù—by rats and so on; uparudhyamäna—being
disturbed; bahiù-präëaù—the external life air in the form of wealth and so on;
kvacit—sometimes; parivartamänaù—wandering; asmin—in this;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
544
adhvani—path of material existence; avidyä-käma—by ignorance and lust;
karmabhiù—and by fruitive activities; uparakta-manasä—due to the mind's
being influenced; anupapanna-artham—in which the desired results are never
obtained; nara-lokam—this material world; gandharva-nagaram—a
will-o'-the-wisp city; upapannam—existing; iti—taking it as; mithyä-dåñöiù—he
whose vision is mistaken; anupaçyati—observes.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the conditioned soul in household life, being attached to material
wealth and possessions, is disturbed by gadflies and mosquitoes, and sometimes
locusts, birds of prey and rats give him trouble. Nonetheless, he still wanders
down the path of material existence. Due to ignorance he becomes lusty and
engages in fruitive activity. Because his mind is absorbed in these activities, he
sees the material world as permanent, although it is temporary like a
phantasmagoria, a house in the sky.
PURPORT
The following song is sung by Narottama däsa Öhäkura:
ahaìkäre matta haïä, nitäi-pada päsariyä,
asatyere satya kari mäni
Due to forgetting the lotus feet of Lord Nityänanda and being puffed up by
material possessions, wealth and opulence, one thinks the false, temporary
material world to be an actual fact. This is the material disease. The living
entity is eternal and blissful, but despite miserable material conditions, he
thinks the material world to be real and factual due to his ignorance.
TEXT 6
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
545
Ta}a c KvicdaTaPaaedk-iNa>aaNa( ivzYaaNauPaDaaviTa PaaNa>aaeJaNaVYavaYaaid‚
VYaSaNal/aelu/Pa" )) 6 ))
tatra ca kvacid ätapodaka-nibhän viñayän upadhävati
päna-bhojana-vyaväyädi-vyasana-lolupaù.
SYNONYMS
tatra—there (in this phantom place); ca—also; kvacit—sometimes;
ätapa-udaka-nibhän—like the water in a mirage in the desert; viñayän—the
objects of sense enjoyment; upadhävati—runs after; päna—to drinking;
bhojana—to eating; vyaväya—to sex life; ädi—and so on; vyasana—with
addiction; lolupaù—a debauchee.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes in this house in the sky [gandharva-pura] the conditioned soul
drinks, eats and has sex. Being overly attached, he chases after the objects of
the senses just as a deer chases a mirage in the desert.
PURPORT
There are two worlds—the spiritual and the material. The material world is
false like a mirage in the desert. In the desert, animals think they see water,
but actually there is none. Similarly, those who are animalistic try to find
peace within the desert of material life. It is repeatedly said in different çästras
that there is no pleasure in this material world. Furthermore, even if we agree
to live without pleasure, we are not allowed to do so. In Bhagavad-gétä, Lord
Kåñëa says that the material world is not only full of miseries (duùkhälayam)
but also temporary (açäçvatam) [Bg. 8.15]. Even if we want to live here amid
miseries, material nature will not allow us to do so. It will oblige us to change
bodies and enter another atmosphere full of miserable conditions.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
546
TEXT 7
KvicÀaXaezdaeziNazdNa& PaurqzivXaez& TaÜ<aRGau<aiNaiMaRTaMaiTa" Sauv<aRMauPaaid‚
TSaTYaiGank-aMak-aTar wvaeLMauk-iPaXaacMa( )) 7 ))
kvacic cäçeña-doña-niñadanaà puréña-viçeñaà tad-varëa-guëa-nirmita-matiù
suvarëam upäditsaty agni-käma-kätara ivolmuka-piçäcam.
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; ca—also; açeña—unlimited; doña—of faults;
niñadanam—the source of; puréña—of stool; viçeñam—a particular type;
tat-varëa-guëa—whose color is the same as that of the mode of passion
(reddish); nirmita-matiù—whose mind is absorbed in that; suvarëam—gold;
upäditsati—desiring to get; agni-käma—by the desire for fire; kätaraù—who is
troubled; iva—like; ulmuka-piçäcam—a phosphorescent light known as a
will-o'-the-wisp, which is sometimes mistaken for a ghost.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the living entity is interested in the yellow stool known as gold
and runs after it. That gold is the source of material opulence and envy, and it
can enable one to afford illicit sex, gambling, meat-eating and intoxication.
Those whose minds are overcome by the mode of passion are attracted by the
color of gold, just as a man suffering from cold in the forest runs after a
phosphorescent light in a marshy land, considering it to be fire.
PURPORT
Parékñit Mahäräja told Kali-yuga to leave his kingdom immediately and
reside in four places: brothels, liquor shops, slaughterhouses and gambling
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
547
casinos. However, Kali-yuga requested him to give him only one place where
these four places are included, and Parékñit Mahäräja gave him the place where
gold is stored. Gold encompasses the four principles of sin, and therefore,
according to spiritual life, gold should be avoided as far as possible. If there is
gold, there is certainly illicit sex, meat-eating, gambling and intoxication.
Because people in the Western world have a great deal of gold, they are victims
of these four sins. The color of gold is very glittering, and a materialistic
person becomes very much attracted by its yellow color. However, this gold is
actually a type of stool. A person with a bad liver generally passes yellow stool.
The color of this stool attracts a materialistic person, just as the
will-o'-the-wisp attracts one who needs heat.
TEXT 8
AQa k-daiciàvaSaPaaNaqYad]iv<aaÛNaek-aTMaaePaJaqvNaai>aiNaveXa WTaSYaa& Sa&Saa‚
ra$=VYaaiMaTaSTaTa" PairDaaviTa )) 8 ))
atha kadäcin niväsa-pänéya-draviëädy-anekätmopajévanäbhiniveça etasyäà
saàsäräöavyäm itas tataù paridhävati.
SYNONYMS
atha—in this way; kadäcit—sometimes; niväsa—residence; pänéya—water;
draviëa—wealth; ädi—and so on; aneka—in various items;
ätma-upajévana—which are considered necessary to maintain body and soul
together; abhiniveçaù—a person fully absorbed; etasyäm—in this;
saàsära-aöavyäm—the material world, which is like a great forest; itaù
tataù—here and there; paridhävati—runs around.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
548
Sometimes the conditioned soul is absorbed in finding residential quarters or
apartments and getting a supply of water and riches to maintain his body.
Absorbed in acquiring a variety of necessities, he forgets everything and
perpetually runs around the forest of material existence.
PURPORT
As originally mentioned, a poor man belonging to the mercantile
community goes to the forest to get some cheap goods to bring back to the city
to sell at a profit. He is so absorbed in the thought of maintaining body and
soul together that he forgets his original relationship with Kåñëa and seeks
only the bodily comforts. Thus material activities are the conditioned soul's
only engagement. Not knowing the aim of life, the materialist perpetually
wanders in material existence, struggling to get the necessities of life. Not
understanding the aim of life, even though he acquires sufficient necessities,
he manufactures artificial necessities and thus becomes more and more
entangled. He creates a mental situation whereby he needs greater and greater
comforts. The materialist does not know the secret of nature's ways. As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (3.27):
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities which are in actuality carried
out by nature." Due to lusty desire, the living entity creates a certain mental
situation whereby he wants to enjoy this material world. He thus becomes
entangled, enters different bodies and suffers in them.
TEXT 9
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
549
KvicÀ vaTYaaEPaMYaYaa Pa[MadYaaraehMaaraeiPaTaSTaTk-al/rJaSaa rJaNaq>aUTa
wvaSaaDauMaYaaRdae rJaSvl/a+aae_iPa idGdevTaa AiTarJaSvl/MaiTaNaR ivJaa‚
NaaiTa )) 9 ))
kvacic ca vätyaupamyayä pramadayäroham äropitas tat-käla-rajasä
rajané-bhüta iväsädhu-maryädo rajas-valäkño 'pi dig-devatä atirajas-vala-matir
na vijänäti.
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; ca—also; vätyä aupamyayä—compared to a whirlwind;
pramadayä—by a beautiful woman; äroham äropitaù—raised onto the lap for
sex enjoyment; tat-käla-rajasä—by the passion of lusty desires at that moment;
rajané-bhütaù—the darkness of night; iva—like; asädhu-maryädaù—who is
without proper respect for the higher witnesses; rajaù-vala-akñaù—blinded by
strong lusty desires; api—certainly; dik-devatäù—the demigods in charge of
different directions, like the sun and the moon; atirajaù-vala-matiù—whose
mind is overcome by lust; na vijänäti—he does not know (that witnesses all
around take note of his impudent sexual act).
TRANSLATION
Sometimes, as if blinded by the dust of a whirlwind, the conditioned soul
sees the beauty of the opposite sex, which is called pramadä. Being thus
bewildered, he is raised upon the lap of a woman, and at that time his good
senses are overcome by the force of passion. He thus becomes almost blind with
lusty desire and disobeys the rules and regulations governing sex life. He does
not know that his disobedience is witnessed by different demigods, and he
enjoys illicit sex in the dead of night, not seeing the future punishment awaiting
him.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
550
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (7.11) it is said: dharmäviruddho bhüteñu kämo 'smi
bharatarñabha. Sex is allowed only for the begetting of children, not for
enjoyment. One can indulge in sex to beget a good child for the benefit of the
family, society and world. Otherwise, sex is against the rules and regulations of
religious life. A materialistic person does not believe that everything is
managed in nature, and he does not know that if one does something wrong,
he is witnessed by different demigods. A person enjoys illicit sex, and due to
his blind, lusty desire, he thinks that no one can see him, but this illicit sex is
thoroughly observed by the agents of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore the person is punished in so many ways, presently in Kali-yuga there
are many pregnancies due to illicit sex, and sometimes abortions ensue. These
sinful activities are witnessed by the agents of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and a man and woman who create such a situation are punished in
the future by the stringent laws of material nature (daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé
mama mäyä duratyayä [Bg. 7.14]). Illicit sex is never excused, and those who
indulge in it are punished life after life. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (16.20):
äsuréà yonim äpannä
müòhä janmani janmani
mäm apräpyaiva kaunteya
tato yänty adhamäà gatim
"Attaining repeated birth among the species of demoniac life, such persons can
never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the most abominable type of
existence."
The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not allow anyone to act against
the stringent laws of material nature; therefore illicit sex is punished life after
life. Illicit sex creates pregnancies, and these unwanted pregnancies lead to
abortion. Those involved become implicated in these sins, so much so that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
551
they are punished in the same way the next life. Thus in the next life they also
enter the womb of a mother and are killed in the same way. All these things
can be avoided by remaining on the transcendental platform of Kåñëa
consciousness. In this way one does not commit sinful activity. Illicit sex is the
most prominent sin due to lusty desire. When one associates with the mode of
passion, he is implicated in suffering life after life.
TEXT 10
KvicTSak*-dvGaTaivzYavETaQYa" SvYa& Parai>aDYaaNaeNa iv>a]&iXaTaSMa*iTaSTaYaEv
MarqicTaaeYaPa[aYaa&STaaNaevai>aDaaviTa )) 10 ))
kvacit sakåd avagata-viñaya-vaitathyaù svayaà paräbhidhyänena
vibhraàçita-småtis tayaiva maréci-toya-präyäàs tän eväbhidhävati.
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; sakåt—once; avagata-viñaya-vaitathyaù—becoming
conscious of the uselessness of enjoying material sense gratification;
svayam—himself; para-abhidhyänena—by the bodily concept of the self;
vibhraàçita—destroyed; småtiù—whose remembrance; tayä—by that;
eva—certainly; maréci-toya—water in a mirage; präyän—similar to; tän—those
sense objects; eva—certainly; abhidhävati—runs after.
TRANSLATION
The conditioned soul sometimes personally appreciates the futility of sense
enjoyment in the material world, and he sometimes considers material
enjoyment to be full of miseries. However, due to his strong bodily conception,
his memory is destroyed, and again and again he runs after material enjoyment,
just as an animal runs after a mirage in the desert.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
552
PURPORT
The main disease in material life is the bodily conception. Being baffled
again and again in material activity, the conditioned soul temporarily thinks of
the futility of material enjoyment, but he again tries the same thing. By the
association of devotees, a person may become convinced of the material
futility, but he cannot give up his engagement, although he is very eager to
return home, back to Godhead. Under these circumstances, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is situated in everyone's heart, compassionately
takes away all the material possessions of such a devotee. As stated in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.88.8): yasyäham anugåhëämi hariñye tad-dhanaà
çanaiù. Lord Kåñëa says that He takes everything away from the devotee whom
He especially favors when that devotee is overly attached to material
possessions. When everything is taken away, the devotee feels helpless and
frustrated in society, friendship and love. He feels that his family does not care
for him any longer, and he therefore completely surrenders unto the lotus feet
of the Supreme Lord. This is a special favor granted by the Lord to a devotee
who cannot fully surrender to the Lord due to a strong bodily conception. As
explained in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 22.39): ämi-vijïa, ei mürkhe 'viñaya'
kene diba. The Lord understands the devotee who hesitates to engage in the
Lord's service, not knowing whether he should again try to revive his material
life. After repeated attempts and failures, he fully surrenders to the lotus feet
of the Lord. The Lord then gives him directions, and, attaining happiness, he
forgets all material engagement.
TEXT 11
KvicdulU/k-i‡çISvNavdiTaPaåzr>aSaa$=aePa& Pa[TYa+a& Parae+a& va irPauraJaku-l/‚
iNa>aRiTSaRTaeNaaiTaVYaiQaTak-<aRMaUl/ôdYa" )) 11 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
553
kvacid ulüka-jhillé-svanavad ati-paruña-rabhasäöopaà pratyakñaà parokñaà vä
ripu-räja-kula-nirbhartsitenäti-vyathita-karëa-müla-hådayaù.
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; ulüka—of the owl; jhillé—and the cricket;
svana-vat—exactly like intolerable sounds; ati-paruña—extremely piercing;
rabhasa—by perseverance; äöopam—agitation; pratyakñam—directly;
parokñam—indirectly; vä—or; ripu—of enemies; räja-kula—and of
government officers; nirbhartsitena—by chastisement; ati-vyathita—very
aggrieved; karëa-müla-hådayaù—whose ear and heart.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the conditioned soul is very aggrieved by the chastisement of his
enemies and government servants, who use harsh words against him directly or
indirectly. At that time his heart and ears become very saddened. Such
chastisement may be compared to the sounds of owls and crickets.
PURPORT
There are different types of enemies within this material world. The
government chastises one due to not paying income taxes. Such criticism,
direct or indirect, saddens one, and sometimes the conditioned soul tries to
counteract that chastisement. Unfortunately, he cannot do anything.
TEXT 12
Sa Yada duGDaPaUvRSauk*-TaSTada k-arSk-rk-ak-Tau<@aÛPau<Yad]uMal/TaaivzaedPaaNav‚
du>aYaaQaRXaUNYad]iv<aaNa( JaqvNMa*TaaNa( SvYa& JaqviNMa]YaMaa<a oPaDaaviTa )) 12 ))
sa yadä dugdha-pürva-sukåtas tadä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
554
käraskara-käkatuëòädy-apuëya-druma-latä-viñoda-pänavad
ubhayärtha-çünya-draviëän jévan-måtän svayaà jévan-mriyamäëa upadhävati.
SYNONYMS
saù—that conditioned soul; yadä—when; dugdha—exhausted;
pürva—previous; sukåtaù—pious activities; tadä—at that time;
käraskara-käkatuëòa-ädi—named käraskara, käkatuëòa, etc.;
apuëya-druma-latä—impious trees and creepers; viña-uda-päna-vat—like wells
with poisonous water; ubhaya-artha-çünya—which cannot give happiness
either in this life or in the next; draviëän—those who possess wealth;
jévat-måtän—who are dead, although apparently alive; svayam—he himself;
jévat—living; mriyamäëaù—being dead; upadhävati—approaches for material
acquisition.
TRANSLATION
Due to his pious activities in previous lives, the conditioned soul attains
material facilities in this life, but when they are finished, he takes shelter of
wealth and riches, which cannot help him in this life or the next. Because of
this, he approaches the living dead who possess these things. Such people are
compared to impure trees, creepers and poisonous wells.
PURPORT
The wealth and riches acquired through previous pious activities should not
be misused for sense gratification. Enjoying them for sense gratification is like
enjoying the fruits of a poisonous tree. Such activities will not help the
conditioned soul in any way, neither in this life nor the next. However, if one
engages his possessions in the service of the Lord under the guidance of a
proper spiritual master. he will attain happiness both in this life and the next.
Unless he does so, he eats a forbidden apple and thereby loses his paradise.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
555
Lord Çré Kåñëa therefore advises that one's possessions should be given unto
Him.
yat karoñi yad açnäsi
yaj juhoñi dadäsi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kuruñva mad-arpaëam
"O son of Kunté, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give
away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done as an
offering unto Me." (Bg. 9.27) Material wealth and opulence attained through
previous pious activities can be fully utilized for one's benefit in this life and
the next if one is Kåñëa conscious. One should not try to possess more than he
needs for the bare necessities. If one gets more than is needed, the surplus
should be fully engaged in the Lord's service. That will make the conditioned
soul, the world and Kåñëa happy, and this is the aim of life.
TEXT 13
Wk-daSaTPa[Sa(r)aiàk*-TaMaiTaVYauRdk-óaeTa" S%l/Navd( o>aYaTaae_iPa du"%d& Paa%‚
<@Mai>aYaaiTa )) 13 ))
ekadäsat-prasaìgän nikåta-matir vyudaka-srotaù-skhalanavad ubhayato 'pi
duùkhadaà päkhaëòam abhiyäti.
SYNONYMS
ekadä—sometimes; asat-prasaìgät—by association of nondevotees who are
against the Vedic principles and who manufacture different paths of religion;
nikåta-matiù—whose intelligence has been brought to the abominable status of
defying the authority of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vyudaka-srotaù—into rivers without sufficient water; skhalana-vat—like
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
556
jumping; ubhayataù—from both sides; api—although; duùkha-dam—giving
distress; päkhaëòam—the atheistic path; abhiyäti—he approaches.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes, to mitigate distresses in this forest of the material world, the
conditioned soul receives cheap blessings from atheists. He then loses all
intelligence in their association. This is exactly like jumping in a shallow river.
As a result one simply breaks his head. He is not able to mitigate his sufferings
from the heat, and in both ways he suffers. The misguided conditioned soul also
approaches so-called sädhus and svämés who preach against the principles of the
Vedas. He does not receive benefit from them, either in the present or in the
future.
PURPORT
Cheaters are always there to manufacture their own way of spiritual
realization. To get some material benefit, the conditioned soul approaches
these pseudo sannyäsés and yogés for cheap blessings, but he does not receive
any benefit from them, either spiritual or material. In this age there are many
cheaters who show some jugglery and magic. They even create gold to amaze
their followers, and their followers accept them as God. This type of cheating
is very prominent in Kali-yuga. Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura describes the
real guru in this way.
saàsära-dävänala-léòha-lokaträëäya
käruëya-ghanäghanatvam
präptasya kalyäëa-guëärëavasya
vande guroù çré-caraëäravindam **(14)
One should approach a guru who can extinguish the blazing fire of this
material world, the struggle for existence, people want to be cheated, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
557
therefore they go to yogés and svämés who play tricks, but tricks do not mitigate
the miseries of material life. If being able to manufacture gold is a criterion for
becoming God, then why not accept Kåñëa, the proprietor of the entire
universe, wherein there are countless tons of gold? As mentioned before, the
color of gold is compared to the will-o'-the-wisp or yellow stool; therefore one
should not be allured by gold-manufacturing gurus but should sincerely
approach a devotee like Jaòa Bharata. Jaòa Bharata instructed Rahügaëa
Mahäräja so well that the King was relieved from the bodily conception. One
cannot become happy by accepting a false guru. A guru should be accepted as
advised in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.3.21). Tasmäd guruà prapadyeta jijïäsuù
çreya uttamam: One should approach a bona fide guru to inquire about the
highest benefit of life. Such a guru is described as follows: çäbde pare ca
niñëätam. Such a guru does not manufacture gold or juggle words. He is well
versed in the conclusions of Vedic knowledge (vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva
vedyaù [Bg. 15.15]). He is freed from all material contamination and is fully
engaged in Kåñëa's service. If one is able to obtain the dust of the lotus feet of
such a guru, his life becomes successful. Otherwise he is baffled both in this life
and in the next.
TEXT 14
Yada Tau ParbaDaYaaNDa AaTMaNae NaaePaNaMaiTa Tada ih iPaTa*Pau}abihRZMaTa"
iPaTa*Pau}aaNa( va Sa %lu/ >a+aYaiTa )) 14 ))
yadä tu para-bädhayändha ätmane nopanamati tadä hi pitå-putra-barhiñmataù
pitå-puträn vä sa khalu bhakñayati.
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; tu—but (because of misfortune); para-bädhayä—in spite of
exploiting all others; andhaù—blind; ätmane—for himself; na
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
558
upanamati—does not fall into one's share; tadä—at that time; hi—certainly;
pitå-putra—of the father or sons; barhiñmataù—as insignificant as a piece of
grass; pitå-puträn—father or sons; vä—or; saù—he (the conditioned soul);
khalu—indeed; bhakñayati—gives trouble to.
TRANSLATION
In this material world, when the conditioned soul cannot arrange for his own
maintenance, despite exploiting others, he tries to exploit his own father or son,
taking away that relative's possessions, although they may be very insignificant.
If he cannot acquire things from his father, son or other relatives, he is
prepared to give them all kinds of trouble.
PURPORT
Once we actually saw a distressed man steal ornaments from his daughter
just to maintain himself. As the English proverb goes, necessity knows no law.
When a conditioned soul needs something, he forgets his relationship with his
relatives and exploits his own father or son. We also receive information from
Çrémad-Bhägavatam that in this age of Kali the time is quickly approaching
when a relative will kill another relative for a small farthing. Without Kåñëa
consciousness, people will deteriorate further and further into a hellish
condition wherein they will perform abominable acts.
TEXT 15
KvicdaSaaÛ Ga*h& davviTPa[YaaQaRivDaurMaSau%aedk|- Xaaek-aiGanNaa dùMaaNaae
>a*Xa& iNaveRdMauPaGaC^iTa )) 15 ))
kvacid äsädya gåhaà dävavat priyärtha-vidhuram asukhodarkaà çokägninä
dahyamäno bhåçaà nirvedam upagacchati.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
559
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; äsädya—experiencing; gåham—the home life;
däva-vat—exactly like a blazing fire in the forest;
priya-artha-vidhuram—without any beneficial object;
asukha-udarkam—resulting only in more and more unhappiness;
çoka-agninä—by the fire of lamentation; dahyamänaù—being burned;
bhåçam—very great; nirvedam—disappointment; upagacchati—he obtains.
TRANSLATION
In this world, family life is exactly like a blazing fire in the forest. There is
not the least happiness, and gradually one becomes more and more implicated in
unhappiness. In household life, there is nothing favorable for perpetual
happiness. Being implicated in home life, the conditioned soul is burned by the
fire of lamentation. Sometimes he condemns himself as being very unfortunate,
and sometimes he claims that he suffers because he performed no pious
activities in his previous life.
PURPORT
In the Gurv-añöaka, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has sung:
saàsära-dävänala-léòha-lokaträëäya
käruëya-ghanäghanatvam **(15)
A life in this material world is exactly like a blazing forest fire. No one goes to
set fire to the forest, yet the fire takes place. Similarly, everyone wants to be
happy in the material world, but the miserable conditions of material life
simply increase. Sometimes a person caught in the blazing fire of material
existence condemns himself, but due to his bodily conception he cannot get
out of the entanglement, and thus he suffers more and more.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
560
TEXT 16
KvicTk-al/ivziMaTaraJaku-l/r+aSaaPaôTaiPa[YaTaMaDaNaaSau" Pa[Ma*Tak- wv ivGaTa‚
Jaqvl/+a<a AaSTae )) 16 ))
kvacit käla-viña-mita-räja-kula-rakñasäpahåta-priyatama-dhanäsuù pramåtaka
iva vigata-jéva-lakñaëa äste.
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; käla-viña-mita—made crooked by time; räja-kula—the
government men; rakñasä—by those who are like carnivorous human beings;
apahåta—being plundered; priya-tama—most dear; dhana—in the form of
wealth; asuù—whose life air; pramåtakaù—dead; iva—like;
vigata-jéva-lakñaëaù—bereft of all signs of life; äste—he remains.
TRANSLATION
Government men are always like carnivorous demons called Räkñasas
[man-eaters]. Sometimes these government men turn against the conditioned
soul and take away all his accumulated wealth. Being bereft of his life's reserved
wealth, the conditioned soul loses all enthusiasm. Indeed, it is as though he
loses his life.
PURPORT
The word räja-kula-rakñasä is very significant. Çrémad-Bhägavatam was
compiled about five thousand years ago, yet government men are referred to as
Räkñasas, or carnivorous demons. If government men are opposed to a person,
that person will be bereft of all his riches, which he has accumulated with great
care over a long period of time. Actually no one wants to pay income
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
561
taxes—even government men themselves try to avoid these taxes—but at
unfavorable times income taxes are exacted forcibly, and the taxpayers become
very morose.
TEXT 17
k-daicNMaNaaerQaaePaGaTaiPaTa*iPaTaa MahaÛSaTSaidiTa SvPaniNav*RiTal/+a<aMaNau>aviTa
)) 17 ))
kadäcin manorathopagata-pitå-pitämahädy asat sad iti svapna-nirvåti-lakñaëam
anubhavati.
SYNONYMS
kadäcit—sometimes; manoratha-upagata—obtained by mental concoction;
pitå—the father; pitä-maha-ädi—or grandfather and others; asat—although
long dead (and although no one knows that the soul has gone); sat—again the
father or grandfather has come; iti—thus thinking;
svapna-nirvåti-lakñaëam—the kind of happiness found in dreams;
anubhavati—the conditioned soul feels.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the conditioned soul imagines that his father or grandfather has
again come in the form of his son or grandson. In this way he feels the
happiness one sometimes feels in a dream, and the conditioned soul sometimes
takes pleasure in such mental concoctions.
PURPORT
Due to ignorance of the real existence of the Lord, the conditioned soul
imagines many things. Influenced by fruitive activity, he comes together with
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
562
his relatives, fathers, sons and grandfathers, exactly as straws gather together
in a moving stream. In a moment the straws are thrown everywhere, and they
lose contact. In conditional life, the living entity is temporarily with many
other conditioned souls. They gather together as family members, and the
material affection is so strong that even after a father or grandfather passes
away, one takes pleasure in thinking that they return to the family in different
forms. Sometimes this may happen, but in any case the conditioned soul likes
to take pleasure in such concocted thoughts.
TEXT 18
Kvicd( Ga*haé[Mak-MaRcaedNaaiTa>ariGairMaaåå+aMaa<aae l/aek-VYaSaNak-izRTaMaNaa"
k-<$=k-Xak-Rra+ae}a& Pa[ivXaiàv SaqdiTa )) 18 ))
kvacid gåhäçrama-karma-codanäti-bhara-girim ärurukñamäëo
loka-vyasana-karñita-manäù kaëöaka-çarkarä-kñetraà praviçann iva sédati.
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; gåha-äçrama—in householder life; karma-codana—of the
rules of fruitive activity; ati-bhara-girim—the big hill;
ärurukñamäëaù—desiring to ascend; loka—material; vyasana—to pursuits;
karñita-manäù—whose mind is attracted; kaëöaka-çarkarä-kñetram—a field
covered with thorns and sharp pebbles; praviçan—entering; iva—like;
sédati—he laments.
TRANSLATION
In household life one is ordered to execute many yajïas and fruitive
activities, especially the viväha-yajïa [the marriage ceremony for sons and
daughters] and the sacred thread ceremony. These are all the duties of a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
563
gåhastha, and they are very extensive and troublesome to execute. They are
compared to a big hill over which one must cross when one is attached to
material activities. A person desiring to cross over these ritualistic ceremonies
certainly feels pains like the piercing of thorns and pebbles endured by one
attempting to climb a hill. Thus the conditioned soul suffers unlimitedly.
PURPORT
There are many social functions for keeping a prestigious position in
society. In different countries and societies there are various festivals and
rituals. In India, the father is supposed to get his children married. When he
does so, his responsibility to the family is complete. Arranging marriages is
very difficult, especially in these days. At the present moment no one can
perform the proper ritual of sacrifice, nor can anyone afford to pay for the
marriage ceremony of sons and daughters. Therefore householders are very
much distressed when they are confronted by these social duties. It is as though
they were pierced by thorns and hurt by pebbles. Material attachment is so
strong that despite the suffering, one cannot give it up. Prahläda Mahäräja
therefore recommends (SB 7.5.5):
hitvätma-pätaà gåham andha-küpaà
vanaà gato yad dharim äçrayeta
The so-called comfortable family position is compared to a dark well in a field.
If one falls in a dark well covered by grass, his life is lost, despite his cry for
rescue. Highly advanced spiritualists therefore recommend that one should not
enter the gåhastha-äçrama. It is better to prepare oneself in the
brahmacarya-äçrama for austerities and remain a pure brahmacäré throughout
one's life so that one will not feel the piercing thorns of material life in the
gåhastha-äçrama. In the gåhastha-äçrama one has to accept invitations from
friends and relatives and perform ritualistic ceremonies. By so doing, one
becomes captivated by such things, although he may not have sufficient
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
564
resources to continue them. To maintain the gåhastha life-style, one has to
work very hard to acquire money. Thus one is implicated in material life, and
he suffers the thorn pricks.
TEXT 19
KvicÀ du"SaheNa k-aYaa>YaNTarviöNaa Ga*hqTaSaar" Svku-$u=MbaYa §u==DYaiTa
)) 19 ))
kvacic ca duùsahena käyäbhyantara-vahninä gåhéta-säraù sva-kuöumbäya
krudhyati.
SYNONYMS
kvacit ca—and sometimes; duùsahena—unbearable;
käya-abhyantara-vahninä—because of the fire of hunger and thirst within the
body; gåhéta-säraù—whose patience is exhausted; sva-kuöumbäya—unto his
own family members; krudhyati—he becomes angry.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes, due to bodily hunger and thirst, the conditioned soul becomes so
disturbed that he loses his patience and becomes angry with his own beloved
sons, daughters and wife. Thus, being unkind to them, he suffers all the more.
PURPORT
Çréla Vidyäpati Öhäkura has sung:
tätala saikate, väri-bindu-sama,
suta-mita-ramaëé-samäje
The happiness of family life is compared to a drop of water in the desert. No
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
565
one can be happy in family life. According to the Vedic civilization, one
cannot give up the responsibilities of family life, but today everyone is giving
up family life by divorce. This is due to the miserable condition experienced in
the family. Sometimes, due to misery, one becomes very hardened toward his
affectionate sons, daughters and wife. This is but part of the blazing fire of the
forest of material life.
TEXT 20
Sa Wv PauNaiNaRd]aJaGarGa*hqTaae_NDae TaMaiSa MaGan" XaUNYaar<Ya wv XaeTae
NaaNYaiTk-ÄNa ved Xav wvaPaivÖ" )) 20 ))
sa eva punar nidräjagara-gåhéto 'ndhe tamasi magnaù çünyäraëya iva çete
nänyat-kiïcana veda çava iväpaviddhaù.
SYNONYMS
saù—that conditioned soul; eva—certainly; punaù—again; nidrä-ajagara—by
the python of deep sleep; gåhétaù—being devoured; andhe—in deep darkness;
tamasi—in ignorance; magnaù—being absorbed; çünya-araëye—in the isolated
forest; iva—like; çete—he lies down; na—not; anyat—else;
kiïcana—anything; veda—knows; çavaù—a dead body; iva—like;
apaviddhaù—thrown away.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued speaking to Mahäräja Parékñit: My dear King,
sleep is exactly like a python. Those who wander in the forest of material life
are always devoured by the python of sleep. Being bitten by this python, they
always remain in the darkness of ignorance. They are like dead bodies thrown
in a distant forest. Thus the conditioned souls cannot understand what is going
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
566
on in life.
PURPORT
Material life means being fully absorbed in eating, sleeping, mating and
defending. Out of these, sleep is taken very seriously. While asleep, one
completely forgets the object of life and what to do. For spiritual realization,
one should try to avoid sleep as much as possible. The Gosvämés of Våndävana
practically did not sleep at all. Of course, they slept some, for the body requires
sleep, but they slept only about two hours, and sometimes not even that. They
always engaged in spiritual cultivation. Nidrähära-vihärakädi-vijitau **(16).
Following in the footsteps of the Gosvämés, we should try to reduce sleeping,
eating, mating and defending.
TEXT 21
k-daicÙGanMaaNad&í\ae duJaRNadNdXaUkE-rl/BDaiNad]a+a<aae VYaiQaTaôdYaeNaa‚
Nau+aqYaMaa<aivjaNaae_NDakU-Pae_NDavTPaTaiTa )) 21 ))
kadäcid bhagna-mäna-daàñöro durjana-danda-çükair alabdha-nidrä-kñaëo
vyathita-hådayenänukñéyamäëa-vijïäno 'ndha-küpe 'ndhavat patati.
SYNONYMS
kadäcit—sometimes; bhagna-mäna-daàñöraù—whose teeth of pride are
broken; durjana-danda-çükaiù—by the envious activities of evil men, who are
compared to a kind of serpent; alabdha-nidrä-kñaëaù—who does not get an
opportunity to sleep; vyathita-hådayena—by a disturbed mind;
anukñéyamäëa—gradually being decreased; vijïänaù—whose real
consciousness; andha-küpe—in a blind well; andha-vat—like illusion;
patati—he falls down.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
567
TRANSLATION
In the forest of the material world, the conditioned soul is sometimes bitten
by envious enemies, which are compared to serpents and other creatures.
Through the tricks of the enemy, the conditioned soul falls from his prestigious
position. Being anxious, he cannot even sleep properly. He thus becomes more
and more unhappy, and he gradually loses his intelligence and consciousness. In
that state he becomes almost perpetually like a blind man who has fallen into a
dark well of ignorance.
TEXT 22
k-ihR SMa icTk-aMaMaDaul/vaNa( ivicNvNa( Yada PardarPard]VYaa<YavåNDaaNaae
raja SvaiMai>avaR iNahTa" PaTaTYaPaare iNarYae )) 22 ))
karhi sma cit käma-madhu-lavän vicinvan yadä para-dära-para-drav-yäëy
avarundhäno räjïä svämibhir vä nihataù pataty apäre niraye.
SYNONYMS
karhi sma cit—sometimes; käma-madhu-lavän—little drops of honeylike sense
gratification; vicinvan—searching after; yadä—when; para-dära—another's
wife, or a woman other than his own wife; para-dravyäëi—another's money
and possessions; avarundhänaù—taking as his own property; räjïä—by the
government; svämibhiù vä -or by the husband or relatives of the woman;
nihataù—severely beaten; patati—he falls down; apäre—into unlimitedly;
niraye—hellish conditions of life (the government's prison for criminal
activities like rape, kidnapping or theft of others' property).
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
568
The conditioned soul is sometimes attracted to the little happiness derived
from sense gratification. Thus he has illicit sex or steals another's property. At
such a time he may be arrested by the government or chastised by the woman's
husband or protector. Thus simply for a little material satisfaction, he falls into
a hellish condition and is put into jail for rape, kidnapping, theft and so forth.
PURPORT
Material life is such that due to indulgence in illicit sex, gambling,
intoxication and meat-eating, the conditioned soul is always in a dangerous
condition. Meat-eating and intoxication excite the senses more and more, and
the conditioned soul falls victim to women. In order to keep women, money is
required, and to acquire money, one begs, borrows or steals. Indeed, he
commits abominable acts that cause him to suffer both in this life and in the
next. Consequently illicit sex must be stopped by those who are spiritually
inclined or who are on the path of spiritual realization. Many devotees fall
down due to illicit sex. They may steal money and even fall down from the
highly honored renounced order. Then for a livelihood they accept menial
services and become beggars. It is therefore said in the çästras, yan
maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukhaà hi tuccham: [SB 7.9.45] materialism is based on
sex, whether licit or illicit. Sex is full of dangers even for those who are
addicted to household life. Whether one has a license for sex or not, there is
great trouble. Bahu-duùkha-bhäk: after one indulges in sex, many volumes of
miseries ensue. One suffers more and more in material life. A miserly person
cannot properly utilize the wealth he has, and similarly a materialistic person
misuses the human form. Instead of using it for spiritual emancipation, he uses
the body for sense gratification. Therefore he is called a miser.
TEXT 23
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
569
AQa c TaSMaadu>aYaQaaiPa ih k-MaaRiSMaàaTMaNa" Sa&SaaravPaNaMaudahriNTa )) 23 ))
atha ca tasmäd ubhayathäpi hi karmäsminn ätmanaù saàsärävapanam
udäharanti.
SYNONYMS
atha—now; ca—and; tasmät—because of this; ubhayathä api—both in this life
and in the next; hi—undoubtedly; karma—fruitive activities; asmin—on this
path of sense enjoyment; ätmanaù—of the living entity; saàsära—of material
life; ävapanam—the cultivation ground or source; udäharanti—the authorities
of the Vedas say.
TRANSLATION
Learned scholars and transcendentalists therefore condemn the materialistic
path of fruitive activity because it is the original source and breeding ground of
material miseries, both in this life and in the next.
PURPORT
Not knowing the value of life, karmés create situations whereby they suffer
in this life and the next. Unfortunately, karmés are very attached to material
sense gratification, and they cannot appreciate the miserable condition of
material life, neither in this life nor in the next. Therefore the Vedas enjoin
that one should awaken to spiritual consciousness and utilize all his activities
to attain the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord Himself
says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.27):
yat karoñi yad açnäsi
yaj juhoñi dadäsi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
570
tat kuruñva mad-arpaëam
"O son of Kunté, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give
away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done as an
offering unto Me."
The results of all one's activities should be utilized not for sense
gratification but for the mission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
Supreme Lord gives all information in Bhagavad-gétä about the aim of life, and
at the end of Bhagavad-gétä He demands surrender unto Him. people do not
generally like this demand, but one who cultivates spiritual knowledge for
many births eventually surrenders unto the lotus feet of the Lord (bahünäà
janmanäm ante jïänavän mäà prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]).
TEXT 24
Mau¢-STaTaae Yaid bNDaaÕevdta oPaaiC^Naita TaSMaadiPa ivZ<auiMa}a
wTYaNaviSQaiTa" )) 24 ))
muktas tato yadi bandhäd devadatta upäcchinatti tasmäd api viñëumitra ity
anavasthitiù.
SYNONYMS
muktaù—liberated; tataù—from that; yadi—if; bandhät—from the
government imprisonment or being beaten by the protector of the woman;
deva-dattaù—person named Devadatta; upäcchinatti—takes the money from
him; tasmät—from the person named Devadatta; api—again; viñëu-mitraù—a
person named Viñëumitra; iti—thus; anavasthitiù—the riches do not stay in
one place but pass from one hand to another.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
571
TRANSLATION
Stealing or cheating another person out of his money, the conditioned soul
somehow or other keeps it in his possession and escapes punishment. Then
another man, named Devadatta, cheats him and takes the money away.
Similarly, another man, named Viñëumitra, steals the money from Devadatta
and takes it away. In any case, the money does not stay in one place. It passes
from one hand to another. Ultimately no one can enjoy the money, and it
remains the property of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Riches come from Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune, and the goddess of
fortune is the property of Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
goddess of fortune cannot stay anywhere but by the side of Näräyaëa;
therefore another of her names is Caïcalä, restless. She cannot be peaceful
unless she is in the company of her husband, Näräyaëa. For example, Lakñmé
was carried away by the materialistic Rävaëa. Rävaëa kidnapped Sétä, the
goddess of fortune belonging to Lord Räma. As a result, Rävaëa's entire family,
opulence and kingdom were smashed, and Sétä, the goddess of fortune, was
recovered from his clutches and reunited with Lord Räma. Thus all property,
riches and wealth belong to Kåñëa. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (5.29):
bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the true beneficiary of all sacrifices
and austerities, and He is the supreme proprietor of all the planetary systems."
Foolish materialistic people collect money and steal from other thieves, but
they cannot keep it. In any case, it must be spent. One person cheats another,
and another person cheats someone else; therefore the best way to possess
Lakñmé is to keep her by the side of Näräyaëa. This is the point of the Kåñëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
572
consciousness movement. We worship Lakñmé (Rädhäräëé) along with
Näräyaëa (Kåñëa). We collect money from various sources, but that money
does not belong to anyone but Rädhä and Kåñëa (Lakñmé-Näräyaëa). If money
is utilized in the service of Lakñmé-Näräyaëa, the devotee automatically lives
in an opulent way. However, if one wants to enjoy Lakñmé the way Rävaëa did,
he will be vanquished by the laws of nature, and whatever few possessions he
has will be taken away. Finally death will take everything away, and death is
the representative of Kåñëa.
TEXT 25
KvicÀ XaqTavaTaaÛNaek-aiDadEivk->aaEiTak-aTMaqYaaNaa& dXaaNaa& Pa[iTaiNavar<ae
_k-LPaae durNTaicNTaYaa ivz<<a AaSTae )) 25 ))
kvacic ca çéta-vätädy-anekädhidaivika-bhautikätméyänäà daçänäà
pratiniväraëe 'kalpo duranta-cintayä viñaëëa äste.
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; ca—also; çéta-väta-ädi—such as cold and strong wind;
aneka—various; adhidaivika—created by the demigods;
bhautika—adhibhautika, created by other living beings;
ätméyänäm—adhyätmika, created by the body and mind; daçänäm—of
conditions of misery; pratiniväraëe—in the counteracting; akalpaù—unable;
duranta—very severe; cintayä—by anxieties; viñaëëaù—morose; äste—he
remains.
TRANSLATION
Being unable to protect himself from the threefold miseries of material
existence, the conditioned soul becomes very morose and lives a life of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
573
lamentation. These threefold miseries are miseries suffered by mental calamity
at the hands of the demigods [such as freezing wind and scorching heat],
miseries offered by other living entities, and miseries arising from the mind and
body themselves.
PURPORT
The so-called happy materialistic person is constantly having to endure the
threefold miseries of life, called adhidaivika, adhyätmika and adhibhautika.
Actually no one can counteract these threefold miseries. All three may assail
one at one time, or one misery may be absent and the other present. Thus the
living entity is full of anxiety, fearing misery from one side or the other. The
conditioned soul must be disturbed by at least one of these three miseries.
There is no escape.
TEXT 26
KviciNMaQaae VYavhrNa( YaiTk-iÄÖNaMaNYae>Yaae va k-aik-i<ak-aMaa}aMaPYaPahrNa(
YaiTk-iÄÜa ivÜezMaeiTa ivtaXaa#yaTa( )) 26 ))
kvacin mitho vyavaharan yat kiïcid dhanam anyebhyo vä käkiëikä-mätram apy
apaharan yat kiïcid vä vidveñam eti vitta-çäöhyät.
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; mithaù—with one another; vyavaharan—trading; yat
kiïcit—whatever little bit; dhanam—money; anyebhyaù—from others; vä—or;
käkiëikä-mätram—a very small amount (twenty cowries); api—certainly;
apaharan—taking away by cheating; yat kiïcit—whatever small amount;
vä—or; vidveñam eti—creates enmity; vitta-çäöhyät—because of cheating.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
574
TRANSLATION
As far as transactions with money are concerned, if one person cheats
another by a farthing or less, they become enemies.
PURPORT
This is called saàsära-dävänala **(17). Even in ordinary transactions
between two people, there is invariably cheating because the conditioned soul
is defective in four ways—he is illusioned, he commits mistakes, his knowledge
is imperfect, and he has a propensity to cheat. Unless one is liberated from
material conditioning, these four defects must be there. Consequently every
man has a cheating propensity, which is employed in business or money
transactions. Although two friends may be living peacefully together, due to
their propensity to cheat they become enemies when there is a transaction
between them. A philosopher accuses an economist of being a cheater, and an
economist may accuse a philosopher of being a cheater when he comes in
contact with money. In any case, this is the condition of material life. One
may profess a high philosophy, but when one is in need of money, he becomes
a cheater. In this material world, so-called scientists, philosophers and
economists are nothing but cheaters in one way or another. The scientists are
cheaters because they present so many bogus things in the name of science.
They propose going to the moon, but actually they end up cheating the entire
public of large sums of money for their experiments. They cannot do anything
useful. Unless one can find a person transcendental to the four basic defects,
one should not accept advice and become a victim of the material condition.
The best process is to take the advice and instructions of Çré Kåñëa or His bona
fide representative. In this way one can be happy in this life and the next.
TEXT 27
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
575
AßNYaMauiZMaiàMa oPaSaGaaRSTaQaa Sau%du"%raGaÜez>aYaai>aMaaNaPa[MaadaeNMaadXaae‚
k-Maaehl/ae>aMaaTSaYaeRZYaaRvMaaNa+auiTPaPaaSaaiDaVYaaiDaJaNMaJaraMar<aadYa" )) 27 ))
adhvany amuñminn ima upasargäs tathä
sukha-duùkha-räga-dveña-bhayäbhimäna-pramädonmäda-çoka-moha-lobha-m
ätsaryerñyäva-mäna-kñut-pipäsädhi-vyädhi-janma-jarä-maraëädayaù.
SYNONYMS
adhvani—on the path of material life; amuñmin—on that; ime—all these;
upasargäù—eternal difficulties; tathä—so much also; sukha—so-called
happiness; duùkha—unhappiness; räga—attachment; dveña—hate;
bhaya—fear; abhimäna—false prestige; pramäda—illusion; unmäda—madness;
çoka—lamentation; moha—bewilderment; lobha—greed; mätsarya—envy;
érñya—enmity; avamäna—insult; kñut—hunger; pipäsä—thirst;
ädhi—tribulations; vyädhi—disease; janma—birth; jarä—old age;
maraëa—death; ädayaù—and so on.
TRANSLATION
In this materialistic life, there are many difficulties, as I have just
mentioned, and all of these are insurmountable. In addition, there are
difficulties arising from so-called happiness, distress, attachment, hate, fear,
false prestige, illusion, madness, lamentation, bewilderment, greed, envy,
enmity, insult, hunger, thirst, tribulation, disease, birth, old age and death. All
these combine together to give the materialistic conditioned soul nothing but
misery.
PURPORT
The conditioned soul has to accept all these conditions simply to enjoy
sense gratification in this world. Although people declare themselves great
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
576
scientists, economists, philosophers, politicians and sociologists. they are
actually nothing but rascals. Therefore they have been described as müòhas
and narädhamas in Bhagavad-gétä (7.15):
na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù
prapadyante narädhamäù
mäyayäpahåta-jïänä
äsuraà bhävam äçritäù
"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind. whose
knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of
demons, do not surrender unto Me."
Due to their foolishness, all these materialists are described in
Bhagavad-gétä as narädhamas. They have attained the human form in order to
get released from material bondage, but instead of doing so, they become
further embarrassed amid the miserable material conditions. Therefore they
are narädhamas, the lowest of men. One may ask whether scientists,
philosophers, economists and mathematicians are also narädhamas, the lowest
of men, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead replies that they are because
they have no actual knowledge. They are simply proud of their false prestige
and position. Actually they do not know how to get relief from the material
condition and renovate their spiritual life of transcendental bliss and
knowledge. Consequently they waste time and energy in the search for
so-called happiness. These are the qualifications of the demons. In
Bhagavad-gétä it says that when one has all these demonic qualities, he
becomes a müòha [Bg. 9.11]. Due to this, he envies the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; therefore birth after birth he is born into a demonic family, and he
transmigrates from one demonic body to another. Thus he forgets his
relationship with Kåñëa and remains a narädhama in an abominable condition
life after life.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
577
TEXT 28
KvaiPa devMaaYaYaa iñYaa >auJal/TaaePaGaU!" Pa[Sk-àivvek-ivjaNaae YaiÜharGa*ha‚
rM>aaku-l/ôdYaSTadaé[YaavSa¢-SauTaduihTa*k-l/}a>aaizTaavl/aek-ivceiíTaaPaôTaôdYa
AaTMaaNaMaiJaTaaTMaaPaare_NDae TaMaiSa Pa[ih<aaeiTa )) 28 ))
kväpi deva-mäyayä striyä bhuja-latopagüòhaù praskanna-viveka-vijïäno
yad-vihära-gåhärambhäkula-hådayas
tad-äçrayävasakta-suta-duhitå-kalatra-bhäñitävaloka-viceñöitäpahåta-hådaya
ätmänam ajitätmäpäre 'ndhe tamasi prahiëoti.
SYNONYMS
kväpi—somewhere; deva-mäyayä—by the influence of the illusory energy;
striyä—in the form of one's girl friend or wife; bhuja-latä—by beautiful arms,
which are compared to tender creepers in the forest; upagüòhaù—being deeply
embraced; praskanna—lost; viveka—all intelligence; vijïänaù—scientific
knowledge; yat-vihära—for the enjoyment of the wife; gåha-ärambha—to find
a house or apartment; äkula-hådayaù—whose heart becomes engrossed; tat—of
that house; äçraya-avasakta—who are under the shelter; suta—of sons;
duhitå—of daughters; kalatra—of the wife; bhäñita-avaloka—by the
conversations and by their beautiful glances; viceñöita—by activities;
apahåta-hådayaù—whose consciousness is taken away; ätmänam—himself;
ajita—uncontrolled; ätmä—whose self; apäre—in unlimited; andhe—blind
darkness; tamasi—in hellish life; prahiëoti—he hurls.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the conditioned soul is attracted by illusion personified (his wife
or girl friend) and becomes eager to be embraced by a woman. Thus he loses his
intelligence as well as knowledge of life's goal. At that time, no longer
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
578
attempting spiritual cultivation, he becomes overly attached to his wife or girl
friend and tries to provide her with a suitable apartment. Again, he becomes
very busy under the shelter of that home and is captivated by the talks, glances
and activities of his wife and children. In this way he loses his Kåñëa
consciousness and throws himself in the dense darkness of material existence.
PURPORT
When the conditioned soul is embraced by his beloved wife, he forgets
everything about Kåñëa consciousness. The more he becomes attached to his
wife, the more he becomes implicated in family life. One Bengali poet, Bankim
Chandra, says that to the eyes of the lover the beloved is always very beautiful,
even though ugly. This attraction is called deva-mäyä. The attraction between
man and woman is the cause of bondage for both. Actually both belong to the
parä prakåti, the superior energy of the Lord, but both are actually prakåti
(female). However, because both want to enjoy one another, they are
sometimes described as puruña (male). Actually neither is puruña, but both can
be superficially described as puruña. As soon as man and woman are united,
they become attached to home, hearth, land, friendship and money. In this
way they are both entrapped in material existence. The word
bhuja-latä-upagüòha, meaning "being embraced by beautiful arms which are
compared to creepers," describes the way the conditioned soul is bound within
this material world. The products of sex life—sons and daughters—certainly
follow. This is the way of material existence.
TEXT 29
k-daicdqìrSYa >aGavTaae ivZ<aaeê§-aTParMaa<vaidiÜParaDaaRPavGaRk-al/ae‚
Pal/+a<aaTPairviTaRTaeNa vYaSaa r&hSaa hrTa Aab]øTa*<aSTaMbadqNaa& >aUTaaNaaMa‚
iNaiMazTaae iMazTaa& iv}aSTaôdYaSTaMaeveìr& k-al/c§-iNaJaaYauDa& Saa+aaÙGavNTa&
YajPauåzMaNaad*TYa Paa%<@devTaa" k-ªGa*Da]bk-v$=Pa[aYaa AaYaRSaMaYaPairôTaa"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
579
SaaªeTYaeNaai>aDatae )) 29 ))
kadäcid éçvarasya bhagavato viñëoç cakrät
paramäëv-ädi-dvi-parärdhäpavarga-kälopalakñaëät parivartitena vayasä
raàhasä harata äbrahma-tåëa-stambädénäà bhütänäm animiñato miñatäà
vitrasta-hådayas tam eveçvaraà käla-cakra-nijäyudhaà säkñäd bhagavantaà
yajïa-puruñam anädåtya päkhaëòa-devatäù kaìka-gådhra-baka-vaöa-präyä
ärya-samaya-parihåtäù säìketyenäbhidhatte.
SYNONYMS
kadäcit—sometimes; éçvarasya—of the Supreme Lord; bhagavataù—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; cakrät—from the
disc; paramäëu-ädi—beginning from the time of minute atoms;
dvi-parärdha—the duration of the life of Brahmä; apavarga—ending; käla—of
time; upalakñaëät—having the symptoms; parivartitena—revolving;
vayasä—by the chronological order of ages; raàhasä—swiftly; harataù—taking
away; ä-brahma—beginning from Lord Brahmä; tåëa-stamba-ädénäm—down
to the small clumps of grass; bhütänäm—of all living entities;
animiñataù—without blinking the eyes (without fail); miñatäm—before the
eyes of the living entities (without their being able to stop it);
vitrasta-hådayaù—being afraid in the heart; tam—Him; eva—certainly;
éçvaram—the Supreme Lord; käla-cakra-nija-äyudham—whose personal
weapon is the disc of time; säkñät—directly; bhagavantam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; yajïa-puruñam—who accepts all kinds of sacrificial
ceremonies; anädåtya—without caring for; päkhaëòa-devatäù—concocted
incarnations of God (man-made gods or demigods); kaìka—buzzards;
gådhra—vultures; baka—herons; vaöa-präyäù—like crows;
ärya-samaya-parihåtäù—who are rejected by authorized Vedic scriptures
accepted by the Äryans; säìketyena—by concoction or with no basis of
authority indicated by scripture; abhidhatte—he accepts as worshipable.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
580
TRANSLATION
The personal weapon used by Lord Kåñëa, the disc, is called hari-cakra, the
disc of Hari. This cakra is the wheel of time. It expands from the beginning of
the atoms up to the time of Brahmä's death, and it controls all activities. It is
always revolving and spending the lives of the living entities, from Lord Brahmä
down to an insignificant blade of grass. Thus one changes from infancy, to
childhood, to youth and maturity, and thus one approaches the end of life. It is
impossible to check this wheel of time. This wheel is very exacting because it is
the personal weapon of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sometimes the
conditioned soul, fearing the approach of death, wants to worship someone who
can save him from imminent danger. Yet he does not care for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whose weapon is the indefatigable time factor. The
conditioned soul instead takes shelter of a man-made god described in
unauthorized scriptures. Such gods are like buzzards, vultures, herons and
crows. Vedic scriptures do not refer to them. Imminent death is like the attack
of a lion, and neither vultures, buzzards, crows nor herons can save one from
such an attack. One who takes shelter of unauthorized man-made gods cannot
be saved from the clutches of death.
PURPORT
It is stated: harià vinä måtià na taranti. No one can save himself from the
cruel hands of death without being favored by Hari, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gétä it is stated, mäm eva ye prapadyante mäyäm etäà
taranti te: [Bg. 7.14] whoever fully surrenders unto Kåñëa can be saved from the
cruel hands of material nature. The conditioned soul, however, sometimes
wants to take shelter of a demigod, man-made god, pseudo incarnation or
bogus svämé or yogé. All these cheaters claim to follow religious principles, and
all this has become very popular in this age of Kali. There are many päñaëòés
who, without referring to the çästras, pose themselves as incarnations, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
581
foolish people follow them. Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has
left behind Him Çrémad-Bhägavatam and Bhagavad-gétä. Not referring to these
authorized scriptures, rascals take shelter of man-made scriptures and try to
compete with Lord Kåñëa. That is the greatest difficulty one encounters when
trying to promote spiritual consciousness in human society. The Kåñëa
consciousness movement is trying its best to bring people back to Kåñëa
consciousness in its pure form, but the päñaëòés and atheists, who are cheaters,
are so numerous that sometimes we become perplexed and wonder how to push
this movement forward. In any case, we cannot accept the unauthorized ways
of so-called incarnations, gods, cheaters and bluffers, who are described here as
crows, vultures, buzzards and herons.
TEXT 30
Yada Paa%i<@i>araTMaviÄTaESTaEåå viÄTaae b]øku-l&/ SaMaavSa&STaeza& Xaql/‚
MauPaNaYaNaaidé[aETaSMaaTaRk-MaaRNauïaNaeNa >aGavTaae YajPauåzSYaaraDaNaMaev Tad‚
raecYaNa( éUd]ku-l&/ >aJaTae iNaGaMaacare_XauiÖTaae YaSYa iMaQauNaq>aav" ku-$u=Mb>ar<a&
YaQaa vaNarJaaTae" )) 30 ))
yadä päkhaëòibhir ätma-vaïcitais tair uru vaïcito brahma-kulaà samävasaàs
teñäà çélam upanayanädi-çrauta-smärta-karmänuñöhä-nena bhagavato
yajïa-puruñasyärädhanam eva tad arocayan çüdra-kulaà bhajate nigamäcäre
'çuddhito yasya mithuné-bhävaù kuöumba-bharaëaà yathä vänara-jäteù.
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; päkhaëòibhiù—by päñaëòés (godless atheists);
ätma-vaïcitaiù—who themselves are cheated; taiù—by them; uru—more and
more; vaïcitaù—being cheated; brahma-kulam—the bona fide brähmaëas
strictly following the Vedic culture; samävasan—settling among them to
advance spiritually; teñäm—of them (the brähmaëas who strictly follow Vedic
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
582
principles); çélam—the good character; upanayana-ädi—beginning with
offering the sacred thread or training the conditioned soul to qualify as a bona
fide brähmaëa; çrauta—according to the Vedic principles; smärta—according
to the authorized scriptures derived from the Vedas; karma-anuñöhänena—the
performance of activities; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; yajïa-puruñasya—who is worshiped by Vedic ritualistic ceremonies;
ärädhanam—the process of worshiping Him; eva—certainly; tat
arocayan—not finding pleasure in it due to its being difficult for unscrupulous
persons to perform; çüdra-kulam—the society of çüdras; bhajate—he turns to;
nigama-äcäre—in behaving according to Vedic principles; açuddhitaù—not
purified; yasya—of whom; mithuné-bhävaù—sex enjoyment or the materialistic
way of life; kuöumba-bharaëam—the maintenance of the family; yathä—as it
is; vänara-jäteù—of the society of monkeys, or the descendants of the monkey.
TRANSLATION
The pseudo svämés, yogés and incarnations who do not believe in the
Supreme Personality of Godhead are known as päñaëòés. They themselves are
fallen and cheated because they do not know the real path of spiritual
advancement, and whoever goes to them is certainly cheated in his turn. When
one is thus cheated, he sometimes takes shelter of the real followers of Vedic
principles [brähmaëas or those in Kåñëa consciousness], who teach everyone
how to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead according to the Vedic
rituals. However, being unable to stick to these principles, these rascals again
fall down and take shelter among çüdras who are very expert in making
arrangements for sex indulgence. Sex is very prominent among animals like
monkeys, and such people who are enlivened by sex may be called descendants
of monkeys.
PURPORT
By fulfilling the process of evolution from the aquatics to the animal
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
583
platform, a living entity eventually reaches the human form. The three modes
of material nature are always working in the evolutionary process. Those who
come to the human form through the quality of sattva-guëa were cows in their
last animal incarnation. Those who come to the human form through the
quality of rajo-guëa were lions in their last animal incarnation. And those who
come to the human form through the quality of tamo-guëa were monkeys in
their last animal incarnation. In this age, those who come through the monkey
species are considered by modern anthropologists like Darwin to be
descendants of monkeys. We receive information herein that those who are
simply interested in sex are actually no better than monkeys. Monkeys are very
expert in sexual enjoyment, and sometimes sex glands are taken from monkeys
and placed in the human body so that a human being can enjoy sex in old age.
In this way modern civilization has advanced. Many monkeys in India were
caught and sent to Europe so that their sex glands could serve as replacements
for those of old people. Those who actually descend from the monkeys are
interested in expanding their aristocratic families through sex. In the Vedas
there are also certain ceremonies especially meant for sexual improvement and
promotion to higher planetary systems, where the demigods are enjoying sex.
The demigods are also very much inclined toward sex because that is the basic
principle of material enjoyment.
First of all, the conditioned soul is cheated by so-called svämés, yogés and
incarnations when he approaches them to be relieved of material miseries.
When the conditioned soul is not satisfied with them, he comes to devotees
and pure brähmaëas who try to elevate him for final liberation from material
bondage. However, the unscrupulous conditioned soul cannot rigidly follow
the principles prohibiting illicit sex. intoxication, gambling and meat-eating.
Thus he falls down and takes shelter of people who are like monkeys. In the
Kåñëa consciousness movement these monkey disciples, being unable to follow
the strict regulative principles, sometimes fall down and try to form societies
based on sex. This is proof that such people are descendants of monkeys, as
confirmed by Darwin. In this verse it is therefore clearly stated: yathä vänara
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
584
jäteù.
TEXT 31
Ta}aaiPa iNarvraeDa" SvEre<a ivhràiTak*-Pa<abuiÖrNYaaeNYaMau%iNarq+a<aaidNaa
Ga]aMYak-MaR<aEv ivSMa*Tak-al/aviDa" )) 31 ))
taträpi niravarodhaù svaireëa viharann ati-kåpaëa-buddhir
anyonya-mukha-nirékñaëädinä grämya-karmaëaiva vismåta-kälävadhiù.
SYNONYMS
tatra api—in that condition (in the society of human beings descended from
monkeys); niravarodhaù—without hesitation; svaireëa—independently,
without reference to the goal of life; viharan—enjoying like monkeys;
ati-kåpaëa-buddhiù—whose intelligence is dull because he does not properly
utilize his assets; anyonya—of one another; mukha-nirékñaëa-ädinä—by seeing
the faces (when a man sees the beautiful face of a woman and the woman sees
the strong build of the man's body, they always desire one another);
grämya-karmaëä—by material activities for sense gratification; eva—only;
vismåta—forgotten; käla-avadhiù—the limited span of life (after which one's
evolution may be degrading or elevating).
TRANSLATION
In this way the descendants of the monkeys intermingle with each other,
and they are generally known as çüdras. Without hesitating, they live and move
freely, not knowing the goal of life. They are captivated simply by seeing the
faces of one another, which remind them of sense gratification. They are always
engaged in material activities, known as grämya-karma, and they work hard for
material benefit. Thus they forget completely that one day their small life spans
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
585
will be finished and they will be degraded in the evolutionary cycle.
PURPORT
Materialistic people are sometimes called çüdras, or descendants of
monkeys, due to their monkeylike intelligence. They do not care to know how
the evolutionary process is taking place, nor are they eager to know what will
happen after they finish their small human life span. This is the attitude of
çüdras. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu's mission, this Kåñëa consciousness
movement, is trying to elevate çüdras to the brähmaëa platform so that they
will know the real goal of life. Unfortunately, being overly attached to sense
gratification, materialists are not serious in helping this movement. Instead,
some of them try to suppress it. Thus it is the business of monkeys to disturb
the activities of the brähmaëas. The descendants of monkeys completely forget
that they have to die, and they are very proud of scientific knowledge and the
progress of material civilization. The word grämya-karmaëä indicates activities
meant only for the improvement of bodily comforts, presently all human
society is engaged in improving economic conditions and bodily comforts,
people are not interested in knowing what is going to happen after death, nor
do they believe in the transmigration of the soul. When one scientifically
studies the evolutionary theory, one can understand that human life is a
junction where one may take the path of promotion or degradation. As stated
in Bhagavad-gétä (9.25):
yänti deva-vratä devän
pitèn yänti pitå-vratäù
bhütäni yänti bhütejyä
yänti mad-yäjino 'pi mäm
"Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those
who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; those who
worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship Me will live with
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
586
Me."
In this life we have to prepare ourselves for promotion to the next life.
Those who are in the mode of rajo-guëa are generally interested in being
promoted to the heavenly planets. Some, unknowingly, are degraded to lower
animal forms. Those in the mode of goodness can engage in devotional service,
and after that they can return home, back to Godhead (yänti mad-yäjino 'pi
mäm). That is the real purpose of human life. This Kåñëa consciousness
movement is trying to bring intelligent human beings to the platform of
devotional service. Instead of wasting time trying to attain a better position in
material life, one should simply endeavor to return home, back to Godhead.
Then all problems will be solved. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.17):
çåëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù
puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù
hådy antaù-stho hy abhadräëi
vidhunoti su-håt-satäm
"Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Paramätmä [Supersoul] in
everyone's heart and the benefactor of the truthful devotee, cleanses the desire
for material enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who relishes His
messages, which are in themselves virtuous when properly heard and chanted."
One simply has to follow the regulative principles, act like a brähmaëa,
chant the Hare Kåñëa mantra and read Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
In this way one purifies himself of the baser material modes (tamo-guëa and
rajo-guëa) and, becoming freed from the greed of these modes, can attain
complete peace of mind. In this way one can understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and one's relationship with Him and thus be promoted
to the highest perfection (siddhià paramäà gatäù).
TEXT 32
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
587
Kvicd( d]uMavdEihk-aQaeRzu Ga*hezu r&SYaNa( YaQaa vaNar" SauTadarvTSal/ae
VYavaYa+a<a" )) 32 ))
kvacid drumavad aihikärtheñu gåheñu raàsyan yathä vänaraù suta-dära-vatsalo
vyaväya-kñaëaù.
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; druma-vat—like trees (as monkeys jump from one tree to
another, the conditioned soul transmigrates from one body to another);
aihika-artheñu—simply to bring about better worldly comforts; gåheñu—in
houses (or bodies); raàsyan—delighting (in one body after another, either in
animal life, human life or demigod life); yathä—exactly as; vänaraù—the
monkey; suta-dära-vatsalaù—very affectionate to the children and wife;
vyaväya-kñaëaù—whose leisure time is spent in sex pleasure.
TRANSLATION
Just as a monkey jumps from one tree to another, the conditioned soul jumps
from one body to another. As the monkey is ultimately captured by the hunter
and is unable to get out of captivity, the conditioned soul, being captivated by
momentary sex pleasure, becomes attached to different types of bodies and is
encaged in family life. Family life affords the conditioned soul a festival of
momentary sex pleasure, and thus he is completely unable to get out of the
material clutches.
PURPORT
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.9.29): viñayaù khalu sarvataù syät.
Bodily necessities-eating, sleeping, mating and defending-are all very easily
available in any form of life. It is stated here that the vänara (monkey) is very
much attracted to sex. Each monkey keeps at least two dozen wives, and he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
588
jumps from one tree to another to capture the female monkeys. Thus he
immediately engages in sexual intercourse. In this way the monkey's business is
to jump from one tree to another and enjoy sex with his wives. The
conditioned soul is doing the same thing, transmigrating from one body to
another and engaging in sex. He thus completely forgets how to become free
from the clutches of material encagement. Sometimes the monkey is captured
by a hunter, who sells its body to doctors so that its glands can be removed for
the benefit of another monkey. All this is going on in the name of economic
development and improved sex life.
TEXT 33
WvMaßNYavåNDaaNaae Ma*TYauGaJa>aYaataMaiSa iGairk-NdrPa[aYae )) 33 ))
evam adhvany avarundhäno måtyu-gaja-bhayät tamasi giri-kandara-präye.
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; adhvani—on the path of sense gratification;
avarundhänaù—being confined, he forgets the real purpose of life;
måtyu-gaja-bhayät—out of fear of the elephant of death; tamasi—in the
darkness; giri-kandara-präye—similar to the dark caves in the mountains.
TRANSLATION
In this material world, when the conditioned soul forgets his relationship
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead and does not care for Kåñëa
consciousness, he simply engages in different types of mischievous and sinful
activities. He is then subjected to the threefold miseries, and, out of fear of the
elephant of death, he falls into the darkness found in a mountain cave.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
589
PURPORT
Everyone is afraid of death, and however strong a materialistic person may
be, when there is disease and old age one must certainly accept death's notice.
The conditioned soul becomes very morose to receive notice of death. His fear
is compared to the fear experienced upon entering a dark mountain cave, and
death is compared to a great elephant.
TEXT 34
KvicC^qTavaTaa ÛNaek-dEivk->aaEiTak-aTMaqYaaNaa& du"%aNaa& Pa[iTaiNavar<ae_k-LPaae
durNTaivzYaivz<<a AaSTae )) 34 ))
kvacic chéta-vätädy-aneka-daivika-bhautikätméyänäà duùkhänäà
pratiniväraëe 'kalpo duranta-viñaya-viñaëëa äste.
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; çéta-väta-ädi—such as extreme cold or wind; aneka—many;
daivika—offered by the demigods or powers beyond our control;
bhautika—offered by other living entities; ätméyänäm—offered by the
conditioned material body and mind; duùkhänäm—the many miseries;
pratiniväraëe—in counteracting; akalpaù—being unable;
duranta—insurmountable; viñaya—from connection with sense gratification;
viñaëëaù—morose; äste—he remains.
TRANSLATION
The conditioned soul suffers many miserable bodily conditions, such as being
affected by severe cold and strong winds. He also suffers due to the activities of
other living beings and due to natural disturbances. When he is unable to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
590
counteract them and has to remain in a miserable condition, he naturally
becomes very morose because he wants to enjoy material facilities.
TEXT 35
KviciNMaQaae VYavhrNa( YaiTk-iÄÖNaMauPaYaaiTa ivtaXaa#yeNa )) 35 ))
kvacin mitho vyavaharan yat kiïcid dhanam upayäti vitta-çäöhyena.
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes or somewhere; mithaù vyavaharan—transacting with each
other; yat—whatever; kiïcit—little bit; dhanam—material benefit or wealth;
upayäti—he obtains; vitta-çäöhyena—by means of cheating someone of his
wealth.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes conditioned souls exchange money, but in due course of time,
enmity arises because of cheating. Although there may be a tiny profit, the
conditioned souls cease to be friends and become enemies.
PURPORT
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (5.5.8):
puàsaù striyä mithuné-bhävam etaà
tayor mitho hådaya-granthim ähuù
ato gåha-kñetra-sutäpta-vittair
janasya moho 'yam ahaà mameti
The monkeylike conditioned soul first becomes attached to sex, and when
intercourse actually takes place he becomes more attached. He then requires
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
591
some material comforts—apartment, house, food, friends, wealth and so on. In
order to acquire these things he has to cheat others, and this creates enmity
even among the most intimate friends. Sometimes this enmity is created
between the conditioned soul and the father or spiritual master. Unless one is
firmly fixed in the regulative principles, one may perform mischievous acts,
even if one is a member of the Kåñëa consciousness movement. We therefore
advise our disciples to strictly follow the regulative principles; otherwise the
most important movement for the upliftment of humanity will be hampered
due to dissension among its members. Those who are serious about pushing
forward this Kåñëa consciousness movement should remember this and strictly
follow the regulative principles so that their minds will not be disturbed.
TEXT 36
KvicT+aq<aDaNa" XaYYaaSaNaaXaNaaÛuPa>aaeGaivhqNaae YaavdPa[iTal/BDaMaNaaerQaaePaGa‚
TaadaNae_viSaTaMaiTaSTaTaSTaTaae_vMaaNaadqiNa JaNaadi>al/>aTae )) 36 ))
kvacit kñéëa-dhanaù çayyäsanäçanädy-upabhoga-vihéno yävad
apratilabdha-manorathopagatädäne 'vasita-matis tatas tato 'vamänädéni janäd
abhilabhate.
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; kñéëa-dhanaù—not having sufficient money;
çayyä-äsana-açana-ädi—accommodations for sleeping, sitting or eating;
upabhoga—of material enjoyment; vihénaù—being bereft; yävat—as long as;
apratilabdha—not achieved; manoratha—by his desire; upagata—obtained;
ädäne—in seizing by unfair means; avasita-matiù—whose mind is determined;
tataù—because of that; tataù—from that; avamäna-ädéni—insults and
punishment; janät—from the people in general; abhilabhate—he gets.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
592
TRANSLATION
Sometimes, having no money, the conditioned soul does not get sufficient
accommodations. Sometimes he doesn't even have a place to sit, nor does he
have the other necessities. In other words, he falls into scarcity, and at that
time, when he is unable to secure the necessities by fair means, he decides to
seize the property of others unfairly. When he cannot get the things he wants,
he simply receives insults from others and thus becomes very morose.
PURPORT
It is said that necessity knows no law. When the conditioned soul needs
money to acquire life's bare necessities, he adopts any means. He begs, borrows
or steals. Instead of receiving these things, he is insulted and chastised. Unless
one is very well organized, one cannot accumulate riches by unfair means.
Even if one acquires riches by unfair means, he cannot avoid punishment and
insult from the government or the general populace. There are many instances
of important people's embezzling money, getting caught and being put in
prison. One may be able to avoid the punishment of prison, but one cannot
avoid the punishment of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who works
through the agency of material nature. This is described in Bhagavad-gétä
(7.14): daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé mama mäyä duratyayä. Nature is very cruel. She
does not excuse anyone. When people do not care for nature, they commit all
kinds of sinful activities, and consequently they have to suffer.
TEXT 37
Wv& ivtaVYaiTaz(r)ivv*ÖvEraNaubNDaae_iPa PaUvRvaSaNaYaa iMaQa oÜhTYaQaa‚
PavhiTa )) 37 ))
evaà vitta-vyatiñaìga-vivåddha-vairänubandho 'pi pürva-väsanayä mitha
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
593
udvahaty athäpavahati.
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; vitta-vyatiñaìga—because of monetary transactions;
vivåddha—increased; vaira-anubandhaù—having relationships of enmity;
api—although; pürva-väsanayä—by the fructifying results of previous impious
activities; mithaù—with each other; udvahati—become united by means of the
marriage of sons and daughters; atha—thereafter; apavahati—they give up the
marriage or get a divorce.
TRANSLATION
Although people may be enemies, in order to fulfill their desires again and
again, they sometimes get married. Unfortunately, these marriages do not last
very long, and the people involved are separated again by divorce or other
means.
PURPORT
As stated previously, every conditioned soul has the propensity to cheat,
even in marriage. Everywhere in this material world, one conditioned soul is
envious of another. For the time being, people may remain friends, but
eventually they become enemies again and fight over money. Sometimes they
marry and then separate by divorce or other means. On the whole, unity is
never permanent. Due to the cheating propensity, both parties always remain
envious. Even in Kåñëa consciousness, separation and enmity take place due to
the prominence of material propensities.
TEXT 38
WTaiSMaNa( Sa&SaaraßiNa NaaNaa(c)e-XaaePaSaGaRbaiDaTa AaPaàivPaàae Ya}a YaSTaMau
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
594
h vaveTarSTa}a ivSa*JYa JaaTa& JaaTaMauPaadaYa XaaecNMauùNa( ib>YaiÜvdNa(
§-NdNa( Sa&ôZYaNa( GaaYaàùMaaNa" SaaDauviJaRTaae NaEvavTaRTae_ÛaiPa YaTa
AarBDa Wz Narl/aek-SaaQaaeR YaMaßNa" PaarMauPaidXaiNTa )) 38 ))
etasmin saàsärädhvani nänä-kleçopasarga-bädhita äpanna-vipanno yatra yas
tam u ha vävetaras tatra visåjya jätaà jätam upädäya çocan muhyan
bibhyad-vivadan krandan saàhåñyan gäyan nahyamänaù sädhu-varjito
naivävartate 'dyäpi yata ärabdha eña nara-loka-särtho yam adhvanaù päram
upadiçanti.
SYNONYMS
etasmin—on this; saàsära—of miserable conditions; adhvani—path;
nänä—various; kleça—by miseries; upasarga—by the troubles of material
existence; bädhitaù—disturbed; äpanna—sometimes having gained;
vipannaù—sometimes having lost; yatra—in which; yaù—who; tam—him; u
ha väva—or; itaraù—someone else; tatra—thereupon; visåjya—giving up;
jätam jätam—newly born; upädäya—accepting; çocan—lamenting;
muhyan—being illusioned; bibhyat—fearing; vivadan—sometimes exclaiming
loudly; krandan—sometimes crying; saàhåñyan—sometimes being pleased;
gäyan—singing; nahyamänaù—being bound; sädhu-varjitaù—being away from
saintly persons; na—not; eva—certainly; ävartate—achieves; adya api—even
until now; yataù—from whom; ärabdhaù—commenced; eñaù—this;
nara-loka—of the material world; sa-arthaù—the self-interested living
entities; yam—whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); adhvanaù—of
the path of material existence; päram—the other end; upadiçanti—saintly
persons indicate.
TRANSLATION
The path of this material world is full of material miseries, and various
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
595
troubles disturb the conditioned souls. Sometimes he loses, and sometimes he
gains. In either case, the path is full of danger. Sometimes the conditioned soul
is separated from his father by death or other circumstances. Leaving him aside
he gradually becomes attached to others, such as his children. In this way, the
conditioned soul is sometimes illusioned and afraid. Sometimes he cries loudly
out of fear. Sometimes he is happy maintaining his family, and sometimes he is
overjoyed and sings melodiously. In this way he becomes entangled and forgets
his separation from the Supreme Personality of Godhead since time
immemorial. Thus he traverses the dangerous path of material existence, and on
this path he is not at all happy. Those who are self-realized simply take shelter
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in order to get out of this dangerous
material existence. Without accepting the devotional path, one cannot get out of
the clutches of material existence. The conclusion is that no one can be happy
in material life. One must take to Kåñëa consciousness.
PURPORT
By thoroughly analyzing the materialistic way of life, any sane man can
understand that there is not the least happiness in this world. However, due to
continuing on the path of danger from time immemorial and not associating
with saintly persons, the conditioned soul, under illusion, wants to enjoy this
material world. Material energy sometimes gives him a chance at so-called
happiness, but the conditioned soul is perpetually being punished by material
nature. It is therefore said: daëòya-jane räjä yena nadéte cubäya (Cc. Madhya
20.118). Materialistic life means continuous unhappiness, but sometimes we
accept happiness as it appears between the gaps. Sometimes a condemned
person is submerged in water and hauled out. Actually all of this is meant for
punishment, but he feels a little comfort when he is taken out of the water.
This is the situation with the conditioned soul. All the çästras therefore advise
that one associate with devotees and saintly people.
'sädhu-saìga', 'sädhu-saìga'—sarva-çästre kaya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
596
lava-mätra sädhu-saìge sarva-siddhi haya
(Cc. Madhya 22.54)
Even by a little association with devotees, the conditioned soul can get out of
this miserable material condition. This Kåñëa consciousness movement is
therefore trying to give everyone a chance to associate with saintly people.
Therefore all the members of this Kåñëa consciousness society must themselves
be perfect sädhus in order to give a chance to fallen conditioned souls. This is
the best humanitarian work.
TEXT 39
Yaidd& YaaeGaaNauXaaSaNa& Na va WTadvåNDaTae YaNNYaSTad<@a MauNaYa oPaXaMa‚
Xaql/a oParTaaTMaaNa" SaMavGaC^iNTa )) 39 ))
yad idaà yogänuçäsanaà na vä etad avarundhate yan nyasta-daëòä munaya
upaçama-çélä uparatätmänaù samavagacchanti.
SYNONYMS
yat—which; idam—this ultimate abode of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; yoga-anuçäsanam—only to be achieved by practicing devotional
service; na—not; vä—either; etat—this path of liberation;
avarundhate—obtain; yat—therefore; nyasta-daëòäù—persons who have given
up envying others; munayaù—saintly persons; upaçama-çéläù—who are now
situated in a most peaceful existence; uparata-ätmänaù—who have control
over the mind and senses; samavagacchanti—very easily obtain.
TRANSLATION
Saintly persons, who are friends to all living entities, have a peaceful
consciousness. They have controlled their senses and minds, and they easily
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
597
attain the path of liberation, the path back to Godhead. Being unfortunate and
attached to the miserable material conditions, a materialistic person cannot
associate with them.
PURPORT
The great saint Jaòa Bharata described both the miserable condition and
the means to get out. The only way out of it is association with devotees, and
this association is very easy. Although unfortunate people also get this
opportunity, due to their great misfortune they cannot take shelter of pure
devotees, and consequently they continuously suffer. Nonetheless, this Kåñëa
consciousness movement insists that everyone take to this path by adopting
the chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra. The preachers of Kåñëa
consciousness go from door to door to inform people how they can be relieved
from the miserable conditions of material life. As stated by Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja: [Cc. Madhya 19.151] by
the mercy of Kåñëa and guru, one can get the seed of devotional service. If one
is a little intelligent he can cultivate Kåñëa consciousness and be freed from
the miserable conditions of material life.
TEXT 40
YadiPa idiGa>aJaiYaNaae YaiJvNaae Yae vE raJazRYa" ik&- Tau Par& Ma*Dae XaYaq‚
ràSYaaMaev MaMaeYaiMaiTa k*-TavEraNaubNDaaYaa& ivSa*JYa SvYaMauPaSa&ôTaa" )) 40 ))
yad api dig-ibha-jayino yajvino ye vai räjarñayaù kià tu paraà mådhe çayérann
asyäm eva mameyam iti kåta-vairänubandhäyäà visåjya svayam upasaàhåtäù.
SYNONYMS
yat api—although; dik-ibha-jayinaù—who are victorious in all directions;
yajvinaù—expert in performing great sacrifices; ye—all of whom; vai—indeed;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
598
räja-åñayaù—very great saintly kings; kim tu—but; param—only this earth;
mådhe—in battle; çayéran—lying down; asyäm—on this (earth); eva—indeed;
mama—mine; iyam—this; iti—considering in that way; kåta—on which is
created; vaira-anu-bandhäyäm—a relationship of enmity with others;
visåjya—giving up; svayam—his own life; upasaàhåtäù—being killed.
TRANSLATION
There were many great saintly kings who were very expert in performing
sacrificial rituals and very competent in conquering other kingdoms, yet despite
their power they could not attain the loving service of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. This is because those great kings could not even conquer the false
consciousness of "I am this body, and this is my property." Thus they simply
created enmity with rival kings, fought with them and died without having
discharged life's real mission.
PURPORT
The real mission of life for the conditioned soul is to reestablish the
forgotten relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engage
in devotional service so that he may revive Kåñëa consciousness after giving up
the body. One doesn't have to give up his occupation as a brähmaëa, kñatriya,
vaiçya, çüdra or whatever. In any position, while discharging his prescribed
duty, one can develop Kåñëa consciousness simply by associating with devotees
who are representatives of Kåñëa and who can teach this science. Regretfully,
the big politicians and leaders in the material world simply create enmity and
are not interested in spiritual advancement. Material advancement may be
very pleasing to an ordinary man, but ultimately he is defeated because he
identifies himself with the material body and considers everything related to it
to be his property. This is ignorance. Actually nothing belongs to him, not
even the body. By one's karma, one gets a particular body, and if he does not
utilize his body to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all his activities
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
599
are frustrated. The real purpose of life is stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.13):
ataù pumbhir dvija-çreñöhä
varëäçrama-vibhägaçaù
svanuñöhitasya dharmasya
saàsiddhir hari-toñaëam
It really doesn't matter what activity a man engages in. If he can simply satisfy
the Supreme Lord, his life is successful.
TEXT 41
k-MaRvçIMavl/MBYa TaTa AaPad" k-QaiÄàrk-aiÜMau¢-" PauNarPYaev& Sa&Saara‚
ßiNa vTaRMaaNaae Narl/aek-SaaQaRMauPaYaaiTa WvMauPair GaTaae_iPa )) 41 ))
karma-vallém avalambya tata äpadaù kathaïcin narakäd vimuktaù punar apy
evaà saàsärädhvani vartamäno nara-loka-särtham upayäti evam upari gato
'pi.
SYNONYMS
karma-vallém—the creeper of fruitive activities; avalambya—taking shelter of;
tataù—from that; äpadaù—dangerous or miserable condition;
kathaïcit—somehow or other; narakät—from the hellish condition of life;
vimuktaù—being freed; punaù api—again; evam—in this way;
saàsära-adhvani—on the path of material existence; vartamänaù—existing;
nara-loka-sa-artham—the field of self-interested material activities;
upayäti—he enters; evam—thus; upari—above (in the higher planetary
systems); gataù api—although promoted.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
600
When the conditioned soul accepts the shelter of the creeper of fruitive
activity, he may be elevated by his pious activities to higher planetary systems
and thus gain liberation from hellish conditions, but unfortunately he cannot
remain there. After reaping the results of his pious activities, he has to return
to the lower planetary systems. In this way he perpetually goes up and comes
down.
PURPORT
In this regard Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu says:
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
[Cc. Madhya 19.151]
Even if one wanders for many millions of years, from the time of creation until
the time of annihilation, one cannot get free from the path of material
existence unless one receives shelter at the lotus feet of a pure devotee. As a
monkey takes shelter of the branch of a banyan tree and thinks he is enjoying,
the conditioned soul, not knowing the real interest of his life, takes shelter of
the path of karma-käëòa, fruitive activities. Sometimes he is elevated to the
heavenly planets by such activities, and sometimes he again descends to earth.
This is described by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu as brahmäëòa bhramite.
However, if by Kåñëa's grace one is fortunate enough to come under the shelter
of the guru, by the mercy of Kåñëa he receives lessons on how to execute
devotional service to the Supreme Lord. In this way he receives a clue of how
to get out of his continuous struggle up and down within the material world.
Therefore the Vedic injunction is that one should approach a spiritual master.
The Vedas declare: tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum eväbhigacchet [MU 1.2.12(18)].
Similarly in Bhagavad-gétä (4.34) the Supreme Personality of Godhead advises:
tad viddhi praëipätena
paripraçnena sevayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
601
upadekñyanti te jïänaà
jïäninas tattva-darçinaù
"Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him
submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart
knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth." Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(11.3.21) gives similar advice:
tasmäd guruà prapadyeta
jijïäsuù çreya uttamam
çäbde pare ca niñëätaà
brahmaëy upaçamäçrayam
"Any person who seriously desires to achieve real happiness must seek out a
bona fide spiritual master and take shelter of him by initiation. The
qualification of his spiritual master is that he must have realized the
conclusion of the scriptures by deliberation and be able to convince others of
these conclusions. Such great personalities, who have taken shelter of the
Supreme Godhead, leaving aside all material considerations, are to be
understood as bona fide spiritual masters." Similarly, Viçvanätha Cakravarté, a
great Vaiñëava, also advises, yasya prasädäd bhagavat-prasädaù: **(19) "By the
mercy of the spiritual master one receives the mercy of Kåñëa." This is the
same advice given by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu (guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya
bhakti-latä-béja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]). This is essential. One must come to Kåñëa
consciousness, and therefore one must take shelter of a pure devotee. Thus one
can become free from the clutches of matter.
TEXT 42
TaSYaedMauPaGaaYaiNTaƒƒ
AazR>aSYaeh raJazeRMaRNaSaaiPa MahaTMaNa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
602
NaaNauvTMaaRhRiTa Na*Paae Mai+ake-v GaåTMaTa" )) 42 ))
tasyedam upagäyanti—
ärñabhasyeha räjarñer
manasäpi mahätmanaù
nänuvartmärhati nåpo
makñikeva garutmataù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Jaòa Bharata; idam—this glorification; upagäyanti—they sing;
ärñabhasya—of the son of Åñabhadeva; iha—here; räja-åñeù—of the great
saintly King; manasä api—even by the mind; mahä-ätmanaù—of the great
personality Jaòa Bharata; na—not; anuvartma arhati—able to follow the path;
nåpaù—any king; makñikä—a fly; iva—like; garutmataù—of Garuòa, the
carrier of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Having summarized the teachings of Jaòa Bharata, Çukadeva Gosvämé said:
My dear King Parékñit, the path indicated by Jaòa Bharata is like the path
followed by Garuòa, the carrier of the Lord, and ordinary kings are just like
flies. Flies cannot follow the path of Garuòa, and to date none of the great kings
and victorious leaders could follow this path of devotional service, not even
mentally.
PURPORT
As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.3):
manuñyäëäà sahasreñu
kaçcid yatati siddhaye
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
603
yatatäm api siddhänäà
kaçcin mäà vetti tattvataù
"Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and of
those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth." The path
of devotional service is very difficult, even for great kings who have conquered
many enemies. Although these kings were victorious on the battlefield, they
could not conquer the bodily conception. There are many big leaders, yogés,
svämés and so-called incarnations who are very much addicted to mental
speculation and who advertise themselves as perfect personalities, but they are
not ultimately successful. The path of devotional service is undoubtedly very
difficult to follow, but it becomes very easy if the candidate actually wants to
follow the path of the mahäjana. In this age there is the path of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, who appeared to deliver all fallen souls. This path is so simple
and easy that everyone can take to it by chanting the holy name of the Lord.
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
We are very satisfied that this path is being opened by this Kåñëa
consciousness movement because so many European and American boys and
girls are taking this philosophy seriously and gradually attaining perfection.
TEXT 43
Yaae duSTYaJaaNdarSauTaaNa( Sauôd]aJYa& ôidSPa*Xa" )
JahaE YauvEv Mal/vdutaMaëaek-l/al/Sa" )) 43 ))
yo dustyajän dära-sutän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
604
suhåd räjyaà hådi-spåçaù
jahau yuvaiva malavad
uttamaçloka-lälasaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—the same Jaòa Bharata who was formerly Mahäräja Bharata, the son of
Mahäräja Åñabhadeva; dustyajän—very difficult to give up; dära-sutän—the
wife and children or the most opulent family life; suhåt—friends and
well-wishers; räjyam—a kingdom that extended all over the world;
hådi-spåçaù—that which is situated within the core of one's heart; jahau—he
gave up; yuvä eva—even as a young man; mala-vat—like stool;
uttama-çloka-lälasaù—who was so fond of serving the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, known as Uttamaçloka.
TRANSLATION
While in the prime of life, the great Mahäräja Bharata gave up everything
because he was fond of serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Uttamaçloka. He gave up his beautiful wife, nice children, great friends and an
enormous empire. Although these things were very difficult to give up,
Mahäräja Bharata was so exalted that he gave them up just as one gives up stool
after evacuating. Such was the greatness of His Majesty.
PURPORT
The name of God is Kåñëa, because He is so attractive that the pure devotee
can give up everything within this material world on His behalf. Mahäräja
Bharata was an ideal king, instructor and emperor of the world. He possessed
all the opulences of the material world, but Kåñëa is so attractive that He
attracted Mahäräja Bharata from all his material possessions. Yet somehow or
other, the King became affectionate to a little deer and, falling from his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
605
position, had to accept the body of a deer in his next life. Due to Kåñëa's great
mercy upon him, he could not forget his position, and he could understand
how he had fallen. Therefore in the next life, as Jaòa Bharata, Mahäräja
Bharata was careful not to spoil his energy, and therefore he presented himself
as a deaf and dumb person. In this way he could concentrate on his devotional
service. We have to learn from the great King Bharata how to become cautious
in cultivating Kåñëa consciousness. A little inattention will retard our
devotional service for the time being. Yet any service rendered to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is never lost: svalpam apy asya dharmasya träyate
mahato bhayät (Bg. 2.40). A little devotional service rendered sincerely is a
permanent asset. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.17):
tyaktvä sva-dharmaà caraëämbujaà harer
bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva väbhadram abhüd amuñya kià
ko värtha äpto 'bhajatäà sva-dharmataù
Somehow or other, if one is attracted to Kåñëa, whatever he does in devotional
service is a permanent asset. Even if one falls down due to immaturity or bad
association, his devotional assets are never lost. There are many examples of
this—Ajämila, Mahäräja Bharata, and many others. This Kåñëa consciousness
movement is giving everyone a chance to engage in devotional service for at
least some time. A little service will give one an impetus to advance and thus
make one's life successful.
In this verse the Lord is described as Uttamaçloka. Uttama means "the best,"
and çloka means "reputation." Lord Kåñëa is full in six opulences, one of which
is reputation. Aiçvaryasya samagrasya véryasya yaçasaù çriyaù (Viñëu Puräëa
6.5.47). Kåñëa's reputation is still expanding. We are spreading the glories of
Kåñëa by pushing forward this Kåñëa consciousness movement. Kåñëa's
reputation, five thousand years after the Battle of Kurukñetra, is still
expanding throughout the world. Every important individual within this world
must have heard of Kåñëa, especially at the present moment, due to the Kåñëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
606
consciousness movement. Even people who do not like us and want to suppress
the movement are also somehow or other chanting Hare Kåñëa. They say, "The
Hare Kåñëa people should be chastised." Such foolish people do not realize the
true value of this movement, but the mere fact that they want to criticize it
gives them a chance to chant Hare Kåñëa, and this is its success.
TEXT 44
Yaae duSTYaJaaNa( i+aiTaSauTaSvJaNaaQaRdaraNa(
Pa[aQYaa| ié[Ya& SaurvrE" SadYaavl/aek-aMa( )
NaEC^à*PaSTaduicTa& MahTaa& MaDauiÜ$(‚
SaevaNaur¢-MaNaSaaMa>avae_iPa f-LGau" )) 44 ))
yo dustyajän kñiti-suta-svajanärtha-därän
prärthyäà çriyaà sura-varaiù sadayävalokäm
naicchan nåpas tad-ucitaà mahatäà madhudviösevänurakta-
manasäm abhavo 'pi phalguù
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; dustyajän—very difficult to give up; kñiti—the earth;
suta—children; sva-jana-artha-därän—relatives, riches and a beautiful wife;
prärthyäm—desirable; çriyam—the goddess of fortune; sura-varaiù—by the
best of the demigods; sa-daya-avalokäm—whose merciful glance; na—not;
aicchat—desired; nåpaù—the King; tat-ucitam—this is quite befitting him;
mahatäm—of great personalities (mahätmäs); madhu-dviö—of Lord Kåñëa, who
killed the demon Madhu; sevä-anurakta—attracted by the loving service;
manasäm—of those whose minds; abhavaù api—even the position of
liberation; phalguù—insignificant.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
607
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, the activities of Bharata
Mahäräja are wonderful. He gave up everything difficult for others to give up.
He gave up his kingdom, his wife and his family. His opulence was so great that
even the demigods envied it, yet he gave it up. It was quite befitting a great
personality like him to be a great devotee. He could renounce everything
because he was so attracted to the beauty, opulence, reputation, knowledge,
strength and renunciation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa.
Kåñëa is so attractive that one can give up all desirable things for His sake.
Indeed, even liberation is considered insignificant for those whose minds are
attracted to the loving service of the Lord.
PURPORT
This verse confirms Kåñëa's all-attractiveness. Mahäräja Bharata was so
attracted to Kåñëa that he gave up all his material possessions. Generally
materialistic people are attracted by such possessions.
ato gåha-kñetra-sutäpta-vittair
janasya moho 'yam ahaà mameti
(SB 5.5.8)
"One becomes attracted to his body, home, property, children, relatives and
wealth. In this way one increases life's illusions and thinks in terms of 'I and
mine.' " The attraction for material things is certainly due to illusion. There is
no value in attraction to material things, for the conditioned soul is diverted
by them. One's life is successful if he is absorbed in the attraction of Kåñëa's
strength, beauty and pastimes as described in the Tenth Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The Mäyävädés are attracted to merging into the
existence of the Lord, but Kåñëa is more attractive than the desire to merge.
The word abhavaù means "not to take birth again in this material world." A
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
608
devotee doesn't care whether he is going to be reborn or not. He is simply
satisfied with the Lord's service in any condition. That is real mukti.
éhä yasya harer däsye
karmaëä manasä girä
nikhiläsv apy avasthäsu
jévan-muktaù sa ucyate
"One who acts to serve Kåñëa with his body, mind, intelligence and words is a
liberated person, even within this material world." (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu
1.2.187) A person who always desires to serve Kåñëa is interested in ways to
convince people that there is a Supreme Personality of Godhead and that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is Kåñëa. That is his ambition. It doesn't
matter whether he is in heaven or in hell. This is called uttamaçloka-lälasa.
TEXT 45
YajaYa DaMaRPaTaYae iviDaNaEPau<aaYa
YaaeGaaYa Saa&:YaiXarSae Pa[k*-TaqìraYa )
NaaraYa<aaYa hrYae NaMa wTYaudar&
haSYaNMa*GaTvMaiPa Ya" SaMaudaJahar )) 45 ))
yajïäya dharma-pataye vidhi-naipuëäya
yogäya säìkhya-çirase prakåtéçvaräya
näräyaëäya haraye nama ity udäraà
häsyan mågatvam api yaù samudäjahära
SYNONYMS
yajïäya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who enjoys the results of
all great sacrifices; dharma-pataye—unto the master or propounder of religious
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
609
principles; vidhi-naipuëäya—who gives the devotee the intelligence to follow
the regulative principles expertly; yogäya—the personification of mystic yoga;
säìkhya-çirase—who taught the Säìkhya philosophy or who actually gives
knowledge of Säìkhya to the people of the world; prakåti-éçvaräya—the
supreme controller of this cosmic manifestation; näräyaëäya—the resting
place of the innumerable living entities (nara means the living entities, and
ayana means the shelter); haraye—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
known as Hari; namaù—respectful obeisances; iti—thus; udäram—very loudly;
häsyan—smiling; mågatvam api—although in the body of a deer; yaù—who;
samudäjahära—chanted.
TRANSLATION
Even though in the body of a deer, Mahäräja Bharata did not forget the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore when he was giving up the body of
a deer, he loudly uttered the following prayer: "The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is sacrifice personified. He gives the results of ritualistic activity. He
is the protector of religious systems, the personification of mystic yoga, the
source of all knowledge, the controller of the entire creation, and the Supersoul
in every living entity. He is beautiful and attractive. I am quitting this body
offering obeisances unto Him and hoping that I may perpetually engage in His
transcendental loving service." Uttering this, Mahäräja Bharata left his body.
PURPORT
The entire Vedas are meant for the understanding of karma, jïäna and
yoga—fruitive activity, speculative knowledge and mystic yoga. Whatever way
of spiritual realization we accept, the ultimate goal is Näräyaëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The living entities are eternally connected with Him
via devotional service. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, ante näräyaëa-småtiù:
[SB 2.1.6] the perfection of life is to remember Näräyaëa at the time of death.
Although Bharata Mahäräja had to accept the body of a deer, he could
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
610
remember Näräyaëa at the time of death. Consequently he took birth as a
perfect devotee in a brähmaëa family. This confirms the statement of
Bhagavad-gétä (6.41), çucénäà çrématäà gehe yoga-bhrañöo 'bhijäyate: "One who
falls from the path of self-realization takes birth in a family of brähmaëas or
wealthy aristocrats." Although Mahäräja Bharata appeared in the royal family,
he became neglectful and took birth as a deer. Because he was very cautious
within his deer body, he took birth in a brähmaëa family as Jaòa Bharata.
During this lifetime, he remained perfectly Kåñëa conscious and preached the
gospel of Kåñëa consciousness directly, beginning with his instructions to
Mahäräja Rahügaëa. In this regard, the word yogäya is very significant. The
purpose of añöäìga-yoga, as stated by Madhväcärya, is to link or connect with
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The goal is not to display some material
perfections.
TEXT 46
Ya wd& >aaGavTaSa>aaiJaTaavdaTaGau<ak-MaR<aae raJazeR>aRrTaSYaaNaucirTa& SvSTYa‚
YaNaMaaYauZYa& DaNYa& YaXaSYa& SvGYaaRPavGYa| vaNaué*<aaeTYaa:YaaSYaTYai>aNaNdiTa c
SavaR WvaiXaz AaTMaNa AaXaaSTae Na k-aÄNa ParTa wiTa )) 46 ))
ya idaà bhägavata-sabhäjitävadäta-guëa-karmaëo räjarñer
bharatasyänucaritaà svasty-ayanam äyuñyaà dhanyaà yaçasyaà
svargyäpavargyaà vänuçåëoty äkhyäsyaty abhinandati ca sarvä eväçiña ätmana
äçäste na käïcana parata iti.
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; idam—this; bhägavata—by exalted devotees;
sabhäjita—greatly worshiped; avadäta—pure; guëa—whose qualities;
karmaëaù—and activities; räja-åñeù—of the great saintly King; bharatasya—of
Bharata Mahäräja; anucaritam—the narration; svasti-ayanam—the abode of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
611
auspiciousness; äyuñyam—which increases one's duration of life;
dhanyam—increases one's fortune; yaçasyam—bestows reputation;
svargya—gives promotion to the higher planetary systems (the goal of the
karmés); apavargyam—gives liberation from this material world and enables
one to merge into the Supreme (the goal of the jïänés); vä—or;
anuçåëoti—always hears, following the path of devotional service;
äkhyäsyati—describes for the benefit of others; abhinandati—glorifies the
characteristics of devotees and the Supreme Lord; ca—and; sarväù—all;
eva—certainly; äçiñaù—blessings; ätmanaù—for himself; äçäste—he achieves;
na—not; käïcana—anything; parataù—from anyone else; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Devotees interested in hearing and chanting [çravaëaà kértanam] regularly
discuss the pure characteristics of Bharata Mahäräja and praise his activities. If
one submissively hears and chants about the all-auspicious Mahäräja Bharata,
one's life span and material opulences certainly increase. One can become very
famous and easily attain promotion to the heavenly planets, or attain liberation
by merging into the existence of the Lord. Whatever one desires can be attained
simply by hearing, chanting and glorifying the activities of Mahäräja Bharata.
In this way, one can fulfill all his material and spiritual desires. One does not
have to ask anyone else for these things, for simply by studying the life of
Mahäräja Bharata, one can attain all desirable things.
PURPORT
The forest of material existence is summarized in this Fourteenth Chapter.
The word bhaväöavé refers to the path of material existence. The merchant is
the living entity who comes to the forest of material existence to try to make
money for sense gratification. The six plunderers are the senses—eyes, ears,
nose, tongue, touch and mind. The bad leader is diverted intelligence.
Intelligence is meant for Kåñëa consciousness, but due to material existence we
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
612
divert all our intelligence to achieve material facilities. Everything belongs to
Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but due to our perverted mind
and senses, we plunder the property of the Lord and engage in satisfying our
senses. The jackals and tigers in the forest are our family members, and the
herbs and creepers are our material desires. The mountain cave is our happy
home, and the mosquitoes and serpents are our enemies. The rats, beasts and
vultures are different types of thieves who take away our possessions, and the
gandharva-pura is the phantasmagoria of the body and home. The
will-o'-the-wisp is our attraction for gold and its color, and material residence
and wealth are the ingredients for our material enjoyment. The whirlwind is
our attraction for our wife, and the dust storm is our blinding passion
experienced during sex. The demigods control the different directions, and the
cricket is the harsh words spoken by our enemy during our absence. The owl is
the person who directly insults us, and the impious trees are impious men. The
waterless river represents atheists who give us trouble in this world and the
next. The meat-eating demons are the government officials, and the pricking
thorns are the impediments of material life. The little taste experienced in sex
is our desire to enjoy another's wife, and the flies are the guardians of women,
like the husband, father-in-law, mother-in-law and so forth. The creeper itself
is women in general. The lion is the wheel of time, and the herons, crows and
vultures are so-called demigods, pseudo svämés, yogés and incarnations. All of
these are too insignificant to give one relief. The swans are the perfect
brähmaëas, and the monkeys are the extravagant çüdras engaged in eating,
sleeping, mating and defending. The trees of the monkeys are our households,
and the elephant is ultimate death. Thus all the constituents of material
existence are described in this chapter.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Material World as the Great Forest of
Enjoyment."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
613
15. The Glories of the Descendants of King Priyavrata
In this chapter the descendants of Bharata Mahäräja and many other kings
are described. The son of Mahäräja Bharata was named Sumati. He followed
the path of liberation given by Åñabhadeva. Some people mistakenly thought
Sumati to be the direct incarnation of Lord Buddha. The son of Sumati was
Devatäjit, and his son was Devadyumna. Devadyumna's son was Parameñöhé,
and his son was Pratéha. Pratéha was a very great devotee of Lord Viñëu, and
he had three sons, named Pratihartä, Prastotä and Udgätä. Pratihartä had two
sons, Aja and Bhümä. The son of Bhümä was Udgétha, and the son of Udgétha
was Prastäva. The son of Prastäva was Vibhu, and the son of Vibhu was
Påthuñeëa, whose son was Nakta. The wife of Nakta, Druti, gave birth to Gaya,
who was a very famous and saintly king. Actually King Gaya was a partial
incarnation of Lord Viñëu, and because of his great devotion to Lord Viñëu he
received the title Mahäpuruña. King Gaya had sons named Citraratha, Sumati
and Avarodhana. The son of Citraratha was the emperor Samräö, and his son
was Maréci, whose son was Bindu. Bindu's son was Madhu, and Madhu's son
was Véravrata. Véravrata's two sons were Manthu and Pramanthu, and the son
of Manthu was Bhauvana. The son of Bhauvana was Tvañöä, and the son of
Tvañöä was Viraja, who glorified the whole dynasty. Viraja had one hundred
sons and one daughter. Of these, the son named Çatajit became very famous.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
>arTaSYaaTMaJa" SauMaiTaNaaRMaai>aihTaae YaMau h vav ke-icTPaa%i<@Na
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
614
‰z>aPadvqMaNauvTaRMaaNa& caNaaYaaR AvedSaMaaMNaaTaa& devTaa& SvMaNaqzYaa PaaPaqYaSYaa
k-l/aE k-LPaiYaZYaiNTa )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
bharatasyätmajaù sumatir nämäbhihito yam u ha väva kecit päkhaëòina
åñabha-padavém anuvartamänaà cänäryä aveda-samämnätäà devatäà
sva-manéñayä päpéyasyä kalau kalpayiñyanti.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued to speak; bharatasya—of
Bharata Mahäräja; ätma-jaù—the son; sumatiù näma-abhihitaù—named
Sumati; yam—unto whom; u ha väva—indeed; kecit—some;
päkhaëòinaù—atheists, men without Vedic knowledge; åñabha-padavém—the
path of King Åñabhadeva; anuvartamänam—following; ca—and;
anäryäù—not belonging to the Äryans who strictly follow the Vedic
principles; aveda-samämnätäm—not enumerated in the Vedas; devatäm—to be
Lord Buddha or a similar Buddhist deity; sva-manéñayä—by their own mental
speculation; päpéyasyä—most sinful; kalau—in this age of Kali;
kalpayiñyanti—will imagine.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: The son of Mahäräja Bharata known as
Sumati followed the path of Åñabhadeva, but some unscrupulous people
imagined him to be Lord Buddha himself. These people, who were actually
atheistic and of bad character, took up the Vedic principles in an imaginary,
infamous way to support their activities. Thus these sinful people accepted
Sumati as Lord Buddhadeva and propagated the theory that everyone should
follow the principles of Sumati. In this way they were carried away by mental
concoction.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
615
PURPORT
Those who are Äryans strictly follow the Vedic principles, but in this age of
Kali a community has sprung up known as the ärya-samäja, which is ignorant
of the import of the Vedas in the paramparä system. Their leaders decry all
bona fide äcäryas, and they pose themselves as the real followers of the Vedic
principles. These äcäryas who do not follow the Vedic principles are presently
known as the ärya-samäjas, or the Jains. Not only do they not follow the Vedic
principles, but they have no relationship with Lord Buddha. Imitating the
behavior of Sumati, they claim to be the descendants of Åñabhadeva. Those
who are Vaiñëavas carefully avoid their company because they are ignorant of
the path of the Vedas. In Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) Kåñëa says, vedaiç ca sarvair
aham eva vedyaù: "The real purpose of the Vedas is to understand Me." This is
the injunction of all Vedic literatures. One who does not know the greatness
of Lord Kåñëa cannot be accepted as an Äryan. Lord Buddha, an incarnation
of Lord Kåñëa, adopted a particular means to propagate the philosophy of
bhägavata-dharma. He preached almost exclusively among atheists. Atheists do
not want any God, and Lord Buddha therefore said that there is no God, but
he adopted the means to instruct his followers for their benefit. Therefore he
preached in a duplicitous way, saying that there is no God. Nonetheless, he
himself was an incarnation of God.
TEXT 2
TaSMaad( v*ÖSaeNaaYaa& devTaaiJaàaMa Pau}aae_>avTa( )) 2 ))
tasmäd våddhasenäyäà devatäjin-näma putro 'bhavat.
SYNONYMS
tasmät—from Sumati; våddha-senäyäm—in the womb of his wife, named
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
616
Våddhasenä; devatäjit-näma—named Devatäjit; putraù—a son; abhavat—was
born.
TRANSLATION
From Sumati, a son named Devatäjit was born by the womb of his wife
named Våddhasenä.
TEXT 3
AQaaSauYaa| TataNaYaae devÛuMNaSTaTaae DaeNauMaTYaa& SauTa" ParMaeïq TaSYa SauvcRl/aYaa&
Pa[Taqh oPaJaaTa" )) 3 ))
athäsuryäà tat-tanayo devadyumnas tato dhenumatyäà sutaù parameñöhé tasya
suvarcaläyäà pratéha upajätaù.
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; äsuryäm—in the womb of his wife, named Äsuré;
tat-tanayaù—one son of Devatäjit; deva-dyumnaù—named Devadyumna;
tataù—from Devadyumna; dhenu-matyäm—in the womb of Dhenumaté, the
wife of Devadyumna; sutaù—one son; parameñöhé—named Parameñöhé;
tasya—of Parameñöhé; suvarcaläyäm—in the womb of his wife, named
Suvarcalä; pratéhaù—the son named Pratéha; upajätaù—appeared.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, in the womb of Äsuré, the wife of Devatäjit, a son named
Devadyumna was begotten. Devadyumna begot in the womb of his wife,
Dhenumaté, a son named Parameñöhé. Parameñöhé begot a son named Pratéha in
the womb of his wife, Suvarcalä.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
617
TEXT 4
Ya AaTMaivÛaMaa:YaaYa SvYa& Sa&XauÖae MahaPauåzMaNauSaSMaar )) 4 ))
ya ätma-vidyäm äkhyäya svayaà saàçuddho mahä-puruñam anusasmära.
SYNONYMS
yaù—who (King Pratéha); ätma-vidyäm äkhyäya—after instructing many
people about self-realization; svayam—personally; saàçuddhaù—being very
advanced and purified in self-realization; mahä-puruñam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Viñëu; anusasmära—perfectly understood and always
remembered.
TRANSLATION
King Pratéha personally propagated the principles of self-realization. In this
way, not only was he purified, but he became a great devotee of the Supreme
Person, Lord Viñëu, and directly realized Him.
PURPORT
The word anusasmära is very significant. God consciousness is not
imaginary or concocted. The devotee who is pure and advanced realizes God as
He is, Mahäräja Pratéha did so, and due to his direct realization of Lord Viñëu,
he propagated self-realization and became a preacher. A real preacher cannot
be bogus; he must first of all realize Lord Viñëu as He is. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.34), upadekñyanti te jïänaà jïäninas tattva-darçinaù: "one
who has seen the truth can impart knowledge." The word tattva-darçé refers to
one who has perfectly realized the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such a
person can become a guru and propound Vaiñëava philosophy all over the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
618
world. The paragon of bona fide preachers and guru is King Pratéha.
TEXT 5
Pa[TaqhaTSauvcRl/aYaa& Pa[iTah}aaRdYañYa AaSaiàJYaak-aeivda" SaUNav" Pa[iTahTauR"
STauTYaaMaJa>aUMaaNaavJaiNazaTaaMa( )) 5 ))
pratéhät suvarcaläyäà pratiharträdayas traya äsann ijyä-kovidäù sünavaù
pratihartuù stutyäm aja-bhümänäv ajaniñätäm.
SYNONYMS
pratéhät—from King Pratéha; suvarcaläyäm—in the womb of his wife, named
Suvarcalä; pratihartå-ädayaù trayaù—the three sons Pratihartä, Prastotä and
Udgätä; äsan—came into being; ijyä-kovidäù—who were all very expert in the
ritualistic ceremonies of the Vedas; sünavaù—sons; pratihartuù—from
Pratihartä; stutyäm—in the womb of Stuté, his wife; aja-bhümänau—the two
sons Aja and Bhümä; ajaniñätäm—were brought into existence.
TRANSLATION
In the womb of his wife Suvarcalä, Pratéha begot three sons, named
Pratihartä, Prastotä and Udgätä. These three sons were very expert in
performing Vedic rituals. Pratihartä begot two sons, named Aja and Bhümä, in
the womb of his wife, named Stuté.
TEXT 6
>aUMNa ‰izku-LYaaYaaMauÓqQaSTaTa" Pa[STaavae devku-LYaaYaa& Pa[STaavaiàYauTSaaYaa&
ôdYaJa AaSaqiÜ>auivR>aae rTYaa& c Pa*Qauze<aSTaSMaaà¢- AakU-TYaa& Jaje Na¢-ad(
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
619
d]uiTaPau}aae GaYaae raJaizRPa[vr odaré[va AJaaYaTa Saa+aaÙGavTaae ivZ<aaeJaRGad(
irri+azYaa Ga*hqTaSatvSYa k-l/aTMavtvaidl/+a<aeNa MahaPauåzTaa& Pa[aá" )) 6 ))
bhümna åñikulyäyäm udgéthas tataù prastävo devakulyäyäà prastävän
niyutsäyäà hådayaja äséd vibhur vibho ratyäà ca påthuñeëas tasmän nakta
äkütyäà jajïe naktäd druti-putro gayo räjarñi-pravara udära-çravä ajäyata
säkñäd bhagavato viñëor jagad-rirakñiñayä gåhéta-sattvasya
kalätmavattvädi-lakñaëena mahä-puruñatäà präptaù.
SYNONYMS
bhümnaù—from King Bhümä; åñi-kulyäyäm—in the womb of his wife, named
Åñikulyä; udgéthaù—the son named Udgétha; tataù—again from King Udgétha;
prastävaù—the son named Prastäva; deva-kulyäyäm—his wife, named
Devakulyä; prastävät—from King Prastäva; niyutsäyäm—in his wife, named
Niyutsä; hådaya-jaù—the son; äsét—was begotten; vibhuù—named Vibhu;
vibhoù—from King Vibhu; ratyäm—in his wife, named Raté; ca—also;
påthu-ñeëaù—named Påthuñeëa; tasmät—from him (King Påthuñeëa);
naktaù—a son named Nakta; äkütyäm—in his wife, named Äküti; jajïe—was
begotten; naktät—from King Nakta; druti-putraù—a son in the womb of Druti;
gayaù—named King Gaya; räja-åñi-pravaraù—most exalted among the saintly
royal order; udära-çraväù—famous as a very pious king; ajäyata—was born;
säkñät bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead directly;
viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; jagat-rirak-ñiñayä—for the purpose of giving protection
to the whole world; gåhéta—who is conceived; sattvasya—in the çuddha-sattva
qualities; kalä-ätma-vattva-ädi—of being a direct incarnation of the Lord;
lakñaëena—by symptoms; mahä-puruñatäm—the chief quality of being the
leader of the human society (exactly like the chief leader of all living beings,
Lord Viñëu); präptaù—achieved.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
620
In the womb of his wife, Åñikulyä, King Bhümä begot a son named Udgétha.
From Udgétha's wife, Devakulyä, a son named Prastäva was born, and Prastäva
begot a son named Vibhu through his wife, Niyutsä. In the womb of his wife,
Raté, Vibhu begot a son named Påthuñeëa. Påthuñeëa begot a son named Nakta
in the womb of his wife, named Äküti. Nakta's wife was Druti, and from her
womb the great King Gaya was born. Gaya was very famous and pious; he was
the best of saintly kings. Lord Viñëu and His expansions, who are meant to
protect the universe, are always situated in the transcendental mode of
goodness, known as viçuddha-sattva. Being the direct expansion of Lord Viñëu,
King Gaya was also situated in the viçuddha-sattva. Because of this, Mahäräja
Gaya was fully equipped with transcendental knowledge. Therefore he was
called Mahäpuruña.
PURPORT
From this verse it appears that the incarnations of God are various. Some
are part and parcel of the direct expansions, and some are direct expansions of
Lord Viñëu. A direct incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
called aàça or sväàça, whereas an incarnation from aàça is called kalä.
Among the kaläs there are the vibhinnäàça-jévas, or living entities. These are
counted among the jéva-tattvas. Those who come directly from Lord Viñëu are
called viñëu-tattva and are sometimes designated as Mahäpuruña. Another
name for Kåñëa is Mahäpuruña, and a devotee is sometimes called
mahä-pauruñika.
TEXT 7
Sa vE SvDaMaeR<a Pa[JaaPaal/Na Paaez<aPa[q<aNaaePal/al/NaaNauXaaSaNal/+a<aeNaeJYaaidNaa
c >aGaviTa MahaPauåze Paravre b]øi<a SavaRTMaNaaiPaRTaParMaaQaRl/+a<aeNa
b]øivÀr<aaNauSaevYaaPaaidTa>aGavÙi¢-YaaeGaeNa ca>aq+<aXa" Pair>aaivTaaiTaXauÖ
MaiTaåParTaaNaaTMYa AaTMaiNa SvYaMauPal/>YaMaaNab]øaTMaaNau>avae_iPa iNari>aMaaNa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
621
WvaviNaMaJaUGauPaTa( )) 7 ))
sa vai sva-dharmeëa
prajä-pälana-poñaëa-préëanopalälanänuçäsana-lakñaëenejyädinä ca bhagavati
mahä-puruñe parävare brahmaëi sarvätmanärpita-paramärtha-lakñaëena
brahmavic-caraëänusevayäpädita-bhagavad-bhakti-yogena cäbhékñëaçaù
paribhävitäti-çuddha-matir uparatänätmya ätmani svayam
upalabhyamäna-brahmätmänubhavo 'pi nirabhimäna evävanim ajügupat.
SYNONYMS
saù—that King Gaya; vai—indeed; sva-dharmeëa—by his own duty;
prajä-pälana—of protecting the subjects; poñaëa—of maintaining them;
préëana—of making them happy in all respects; upalälana—of treating them
as sons; anuçäsana—of sometimes chastising them for their mistakes;
lakñaëena—by the symptoms of a king; ijyä-ädinä—by performing the
ritualistic ceremonies as recommended in the Vedas; ca—also;
bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu;
mahä-puruñe—the chief of all living entities; para-avare—the source of all
living entities, from the highest, Lord Brahmä, to the lowest, like the
insignificant ants; brahmaëi—unto Parabrahman, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Väsudeva; sarva-ätmanä—in all respects; arpita—of being
surrendered; parama-artha-lakñaëena—with spiritual symptoms;
brahma-vit—of self-realized, saintly devotees; caraëa-anusevayä—by the
service of the lotus feet; äpädita—achieved; bhagavat-bhakti-yogena—by the
practice of devotional service to the Lord; ca—also;
abhékñëaçaù—continuously; paribhävita—saturated; ati-çuddha-matiù—whose
completely pure consciousness (full realization that the body and mind are
separate from the soul); uparata-anätmye—wherein identification with
material things was stopped; ätmani—in his own self; svayam—personally;
upalabhyamäna—being realized; brahma-ätma-anubhavaù—perception of his
own position as the Supreme Spirit; api—although; nirabhimänaù—without
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
622
false prestige; eva—in this way; avanim—the whole world; ajügupat—ruled
strictly according to the Vedic principles.
TRANSLATION
King Gaya gave full protection and security to the citizens so that their
personal property would not be disturbed by undesirable elements. He also saw
that there was sufficient food to feed all the citizens. [This is called poñaëa.] He
would sometimes distribute gifts to the citizens to satisfy them. [This is called
préëana.] He would sometimes call meetings and satisfy the citizens with sweet
words. [This is called upalälana.] He would also give them good instructions on
how to become first-class citizens. [This is called anuçäsana.] Such were the
characteristics of King Gaya's royal order. Besides all this, King Gaya was a
householder who strictly observed the rules and regulations of household life.
He performed sacrifices and was an unalloyed pure devotee of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He was called Mahäpuruña because as a king he gave
the citizens all facilities, and as a householder he executed all his duties so that
at the end he became a strict devotee of the Supreme Lord. As a devotee, he was
always ready to give respect to other devotees and to engage in the devotional
service of the Lord. This is the bhakti-yoga process. Due to all these
transcendental activities, King Gaya was always free from the bodily
conception. He was full in Brahman realization, and consequently he was
always jubilant. He did not experience material lamentation. Although he was
perfect in all respects, he was not proud, nor was he anxious to rule the
kingdom.
PURPORT
As Lord Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä, when He descends on earth, He has
two types of business—to give protection to the faithful and annihilate the
demons (pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm [Bg. 4.8]). Since the king
is the representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is sometimes
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
623
called nara-deva, that is, the Lord as a human being. According to the Vedic
injunctions, he is worshiped as God on the material platform. As a
representative of the Supreme Lord, the king had the duty to protect the
citizens in a perfect way so that they would not be anxious for food and
protection and so that they would be jubilant. The king would supply
everything for their benefit, and because of this he would levy taxes. If the
king or government otherwise levies taxes on the citizens, he becomes
responsible for the sinful activities of the citizens. In Kali-yuga, monarchy is
abolished because the kings themselves are subjected to the influence of
Kali-yuga. It is understood from the Rämäyaëa that when Bibhéñaëa became
friends with Lord Rämacandra, he promised that if by chance or will he broke
the laws of friendship with Lord Rämacandra, he would become a brähmaëa or
a king in Kali-yuga. In this age, as Bibhéñaëa indicated, both brähmaëas and
kings are in a wretched condition. Actually there are no kings or brähmaëas in
this age, and due to their absence the whole world is in a chaotic condition
and is always in distress. Compared to present standards, Mahäräja Gaya was a
true representative of Lord Viñëu; therefore he was known as Mahäpuruña.
TEXT 8
TaSYaeMaa& GaaQaa& Paa<@veYa Pauraivd oPaGaaYaiNTa )) 8 ))
tasyemäà gäthäà päëòaveya purävida upagäyanti.
SYNONYMS
tasya—of King Gaya; imäm—these; gäthäm—poetic verses of glorification;
päëòaveya—O Mahäräja Parékñit; purä-vidaù—those learned in the historical
events of the puräëas; upagäyanti—sing.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
624
My dear King Parékñit, those who are learned scholars in the histories of the
Puräëas eulogize and glorify King Gaya with the following verses.
PURPORT
The historical references to exalted kings serve as a good example for
present rulers. Those who are ruling the world at the present moment should
take lessons from King Gaya, King Yudhiñöhira and King Påthu and rule the
citizens so that they will be happy, presently the governments are levying taxes
without improving the citizens in any cultural, religious, social or political way.
According to the Vedas, this is not recommended.
TEXT 9
GaYa& Na*Pa" k-" Pa[iTaYaaiTa k-MaRi>a‚
YaRJvai>aMaaNaq bhuivÖMaRGaaeáa )
SaMaaGaTaé[q" SadSaSPaiTa" SaTaa&
SaTSaevk-ae_NYaae >aGavTk-l/aMa*Tae )) 9 ))
gayaà nåpaù kaù pratiyäti karmabhir
yajväbhimäné bahuvid dharma-goptä
samägata-çréù sadasas-patiù satäà
sat-sevako 'nyo bhagavat-kaläm åte
SYNONYMS
gayam—King Gaya; nåpaù—king; kaù—who; pratiyäti—is a match for;
karmabhiù—by his execution of ritualistic ceremonies; yajvä—who performed
all sacrifices; abhimäné—so widely respected all over the world; bahu-vit—fully
aware of the conclusion of Vedic literature; dharma-goptä—protector of the
occupational duties of everyone; samägata-çréù—possessing all kinds of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
625
opulence; sadasaù-patiù satäm—the dean of the assembly of great persons;
sat-sevakaù—servant of the devotees; anyaù—anyone else;
bhagavat-kaläm—the plenary incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; åte—besides.
TRANSLATION
The great King Gaya used to perform all kinds of Vedic rituals. He was
highly intelligent and expert in studying all the Vedic literatures. He
maintained the religious principles and possessed all kinds of opulence. He was a
leader among gentlemen and a servant of the devotees. He was a totally
qualified plenary expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore
who could equal him in the performance of gigantic ritualistic ceremonies?
TEXT 10
YaMa>YaizÄNa( ParYaa Mauda SaTaq"
SaTYaaiXazae d+ak-NYaa" SairiÙ" )
YaSYa Pa[JaaNaa& duduhe DaraiXazae
iNaraiXazae Gau<avTSaòuTaaeDaa" )) 10 ))
yam abhyañiïcan parayä mudä satéù
satyäçiño dakña-kanyäù saridbhiù
yasya prajänäà duduhe dharäçiño
niräçiño guëa-vatsa-snutodhäù
SYNONYMS
yam—whom; abhyañiïcan—bathed; parayä—with great; mudä—satisfaction;
satéù—all chaste and devoted to their husbands; satya—true; äçiñaù—whose
blessings; dakña-kanyäù—the daughters of King Dakña; saridbhiù—with
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
626
sanctified water; yasya—whose; prajänäm—of the citizens; duduhe—fulfilled;
dharä—the planet earth; äçiñaù—of all desires; niräçiñaù—although personally
having no desire; guëa-vatsa-snuta-udhäù—earth becoming like a cow whose
udders flowed upon seeing Gaya's qualities in ruling over the citizens.
TRANSLATION
All the chaste and honest daughters of Mahäräja Dakña, such as Çraddhä,
Maitré and Dayä, whose blessings were always effective, bathed Mahäräja Gaya
with sanctified water. Indeed, they were very satisfied with Mahäräja Gaya.
The planet earth personified came as a cow, and, as though she saw her calf, she
delivered milk profusely when she saw all the good qualities of Mahäräja Gaya.
In other words, Mahäräja Gaya was able to derive all benefits from the earth
and thus satisfy the desires of his citizens. However, he personally had no
desire.
PURPORT
The earth over which Mahäräja Gaya ruled is compared to a cow. The good
qualities whereby he maintained and ruled the citizens are compared to the
calf. A cow delivers milk in the presence of her calf; similarly the cow, or
earth, fulfilled the desires of Mahäräja Gaya, who was able to utilize all the
resources of the earth to benefit his citizens. This was possible because he was
bathed in sanctified water by the honest daughters of Dakña. Unless a king or
ruler is blessed by authorities, he cannot rule the citizens very satisfactorily.
Through the good qualities of the ruler, the citizens become very happy and
well qualified.
TEXT 11
^Nda&SYak-aMaSYa c YaSYa k-aMaaNa(
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
627
dudUhuraJahurQaae bil&/ Na*Paa" )
Pa[TYaiÄTaa YauiDa DaMaeR<a ivPa[a
YadaiXaza& zïMa&Xa& PareTYa )) 11 ))
chandäàsy akämasya ca yasya kämän
dudühur äjahrur atho balià nåpäù
pratyaïcitä yudhi dharmeëa viprä
yadäçiñäà ñañöham aàçaà paretya
SYNONYMS
chandäàsi—all the different parts of the Vedas; akämasya—of one who has no
desire for personal sense gratification; ca—also; yasya—whose; kämän—all
desirables; dudühuù—yielded; äjahruù—offered; atho—thus;
balim—presentation; nåpäù—all the kings; pratyaïcitäù—being satisfied by his
fighting in opposition; yudhi—in the war; dharmeëa—by religious principles;
vipräù—all the brähmaëas; yadä—when; äçiñäm—of blessings; ñañöham
aàçam—one sixth; paretya—in the next life.
TRANSLATION
Although King Gaya had no personal desire for sense gratification, all his
desires were fulfilled by virtue of his performance of Vedic rituals. All the kings
with whom Mahäräja Gaya had to fight were forced to fight on religious
principles. They were very satisfied with his fighting, and they would present
all kinds of gifts to him. Similarly, all the brähmaëas in his kingdom were very
satisfied with King Gaya's munificent charities. Consequently the brähmaëas
contributed a sixth of their pious activities for King Gaya's benefit in the next
life.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
628
As a kñatriya or emperor, Mahäräja Gaya sometimes had to fight with
subordinate kings to maintain his government, but the subordinate kings were
not dissatisfied with him because they knew that he fought for religious
principles. Consequently they accepted their subordination and offered all
kinds of gifts to him. Similarly, the brähmaëas who performed Vedic rituals
were so satisfied with the King that they very readily agreed to part with a
sixth of their pious activities for his benefit in the next life. Thus the
brähmaëas and kñatriyas were all satisfied with Mahäräja Gaya because of his
proper administration. In other words, Mahäräja Gaya satisfied the kñatriya
kings by his fighting and satisfied the brähmaëas by his charities. The vaiçyas
were also encouraged by kind words and affectionate dealings, and due to
Mahäräja Gaya's constant sacrifices, the çüdras were satisfied by sumptuous
food and charity. In this way Mahäräja Gaya kept all the citizens very satisfied.
When brähmaëas and saintly persons are honored, they part with their pious
activities, giving them to those who honor them and render them service.
Therefore, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.34), tad viddhi praëipätena
paripraçnena sevayä: one should try to approach a spiritual master submissively
and render service unto him.
TEXT 12
YaSYaaßre >aGavaNaßraTMaa
MagaaeiNa MaaÛTYauåSaaeMaPaqQae )
é[ÖaivXauÖacl/>ai¢-YaaeGa‚
SaMaiPaRTaeJYaaf-l/MaaJahar )) 12 ))
yasyädhvare bhagavän adhvarätmä
maghoni mädyaty uru-soma-péthe
çraddhä-viçuddhäcala-bhakti-yogasamarpitejyä-
phalam äjahära
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
629
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom (King Gaya); adhvare—in his different sacrifices;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhvara-ätmä—the supreme
enjoyer of all sacrifices, the yajïa-puruña; maghoni—when King Indra;
mädyati—intoxicated; uru—greatly; soma-péthe—drinking the intoxicant
called soma; çraddhä—by devotion; viçuddha—purified; acala—and steady;
bhakti-yoga—by devotional service; samarpita—offered; ijyä—of worshiping;
phalam—the result; äjahära—accepted personally.
TRANSLATION
In Mahäräja Gaya's sacrifices, there was a great supply of the intoxicant
known as soma. King Indra used to come and become intoxicated by drinking
large quantities of soma-rasa. Also, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Viñëu [the yajïa-puruña] also came and personally accepted all the sacrifices
offered unto Him with pure and firm devotion in the sacrificial arena.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Gaya was so perfect that he satisfied all the demigods, who were
headed by the heavenly King Indra. Lord Viñëu Himself also personally came
to the sacrificial arena to accept the offerings. Although Mahäräja Gaya did
not want them, he received all the blessings of the demigods and the Supreme
Lord Himself.
TEXT 13
YaTPa[q<aNaaØihRiz deviTaYaRx(‚
MaNauZYavqåta*<aMaaivirÄaTa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
630
Pa[qYaeTa SaÛ" Sa h ivìJaqv"
Pa[qTa" SvYa& Pa[qiTaMaGaaÓYaSYa )) 13 ))
yat-préëanäd barhiñi deva-tiryaìmanuñya-
vérut-tåëam äviriïcät
préyeta sadyaù sa ha viçva-jévaù
prétaù svayaà prétim agäd gayasya
SYNONYMS
yat-préëanät—because of pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
barhiñi—in the sacrificial arena; deva-tiryak—the demigods and lower animals;
manuñya—human society; vérut—the plants and trees; tåëam—the grass;
ä-viriïcät—beginning from Lord Brahmä; préyeta—becomes satisfied;
sadyaù—immediately; saù—that Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ha—indeed; viçva-jévaù—maintains the living entities all over the universe;
prétaù—although naturally satisfied; svayam—personally; prétim—satisfaction;
agät—he obtained; gayasya—of Mahäräja Gaya.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Lord is pleased by a person's actions, automatically all
the demigods, human beings, animals, birds, bees, creepers, trees, grass and all
other living entities, beginning with Lord Brahmä, are pleased. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the Supersoul of everyone, and He is by nature fully
pleased. Nonetheless, He came to the arena of Mahäräja Gaya and said, "I am
fully pleased."
PURPORT
It is explicitly stated herein that simply by satisfying the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, one satisfies the demigods and all other living entities
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
631
without differentiation. If one pours water on the root of a tree, all the
branches, twigs, flowers and leaves are nourished. Although the Supreme Lord
is self-satisfied, He was so pleased with the behavior of Mahäräja Gaya that He
personally came to the sacrificial arena and said, "I am fully satisfied." Who can
compare to Mahäräja Gaya?
TEXTS 14-15
GaYaaÓYaNTYaa& ic}arQa" SauGaiTarvraeDaNa wiTa }aYa" Pau}aa b>aUvu‚
iê}arQaadU<aaRYaa& SaMa]a@JaiNaí TaTa oTk-l/aYaa& MarqicMaRrqce )) 14 ))
ibRNduMaTYaa& ibNduMaaNaudPaÛTa TaSMaaTSargaaYaa& MaDauNaaRMaa>avNMaDaae" SauMaNaiSa
vqrv]TaSTaTaae >aaeJaaYaa& MaNQauPa[MaNQaU JajaTae MaNQaae" SaTYaaYaa& >aaEvNaSTaTaae
dUz<aaYaa& TvíaJaiNaí TvíuivRraecNaaYaa& ivrJaae ivrJaSYa XaTaiJaTPa[vr&
Pau}aXaTa& k-NYaa c ivzUCYaa& ik-l/ JaaTaMa( )) 15 ))
gayäd gayantyäà citrarathaù sugatir avarodhana iti trayaù puträ babhüvuç
citrarathäd ürëäyäà samräò ajaniñöa; tata utkaläyäà marécir marécer
bindumatyäà bindum änudapadyata tasmät saraghäyäà madhur nämäbhavan
madhoù sumanasi véravratas tato bhojäyäà manthu-pramanthü jajïäte
manthoù satyäyäà bhauvanas tato düñaëäyäà tvañöäjaniñöa tvañöur
virocanäyäà virajo virajasya çatajit-pravaraà putra-çataà kanyä ca viñücyäà
kila jätam.
SYNONYMS
gayät—from Mahäräja Gaya; gayantyäm—in his wife, named Gayanté;
citra-rathaù—named Citraratha; sugatiù—named Sugati;
avarodhanaù—named Avarodhana; iti—thus; trayaù—three; puträù—sons;
babhüvuù—were born; citrarathät—from Citraratha; ürëäyäm—in the womb
of Ürëä; samräö—named Samräö; ajaniñöa—was born; tataù—from him;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
632
utkaläyäm—in his wife named Utkalä; maréciù—named Maréci;
maréceù—from Maréci; bindu-matyäm—in the womb of his wife Bindumaté;
bindum—a son named Bindu; änudapadyata—was born; tasmät—from him;
saraghäyäm—in the womb of his wife Saraghä; madhuù—Madhu;
näma—named; abhavat—was born; madhoù—from Madhu; sumanasi—in the
womb of his wife, Sumanä; véra-vrataù—a son named Véravrata; tataù—from
Véravrata; bhojäyäm—in the womb of his wife Bhojä; manthu-pramanthü—two
sons named Manthu and Pramanthu; jajïäte—were born; manthoù—from
Manthu; satyäyäm—in his wife, Satyä; bhauvanaù—a son named Bhauvana;
tataù—from him; düñaëäyäm—in the womb of his wife Düñaëä; tvañöä—one
son named Tvañöä; ajaniñöa—was born; tvañöuù—from Tvañöä;
virocanäyäm—in his wife named Virocanä; virajaù—a son named Viraja;
virajasya—of King Viraja; çatajit-pravaram—headed by Çatajit;
putra-çatam—one hundred sons; kanyä—a daughter; ca—also; viñücyäm—in
his wife Viñücé; kila—indeed; jätam—took birth.
TRANSLATION
In the womb of Gayanté, Mahäräja Gaya begot three sons, named Citraratha,
Sugati and Avarodhana. In the womb of his wife Ürëä, Citraratha begot a son
named Samräö. The wife of Samräö was Utkalä, and in her womb Samräö begot
a son named Maréci. In the womb of his wife Bindumaté, Maréci begot a son
named Bindu. In the womb of his wife Saraghä, Bindu begot a son named
Madhu. In the womb of his wife named Sumanä, Madhu begot a son named
Véravrata. In the womb of his wife Bhojä, Véravrata begot two sons named
Manthu and Pramanthu. In the womb of his wife Satyä, Manthu begot a son
named Bhauvana, and in the womb of his wife Düñaëä, Bhauvana begot a son
named Tvañöä. In the womb of his wife Virocanä, Tvañöä begot a son named
Viraja. The wife of Viraja was Viñücé, and in her womb Viraja begot one
hundred sons and one daughter. Of all these sons, the son named Çatajit was
predominant.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
633
TEXT 16
Ta}aaYa& ëaek-"ƒƒ
Pa[EYav]Ta& v&XaiMaMa& ivrJaêrMaaeÙv" )
Ak-raedTYal&/ k-ITYaaR ivZ<au" SaurGa<a& YaQaa )) 16 ))
taträyaà çlokaù—
praiyavrataà vaàçam imaà
virajaç caramodbhavaù
akarod aty-alaà kértyä
viñëuù sura-gaëaà yathä
SYNONYMS
tatra—in that connection; ayam çlokaù—there is this famous verse;
praiyavratam—coming from King Priyavrata; vaàçam—the dynasty;
imam—this; virajaù—King Viraja; carama-udbhavaù—the source of one
hundred sons (headed by Çatajit); akarot—decorated; ati-alam—very greatly;
kértyä—by his reputation; viñëuù—Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sura-gaëam—the demigods; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
There is a famous verse about King Viraja. "Because of his high qualities
and wide fame, King Viraja became the jewel of the dynasty of King Priyavrata,
just as Lord Viñëu, by His transcendental potency, decorates and blesses the
demigods."
PURPORT
Within a garden, a flowering tree attains a good reputation because of its
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
634
fragrant flowers. Similarly, if there is a famous man in a family, he is compared
to a fragrant flower in a forest. Because of him, an entire family can become
famous in history. Because Lord Kåñëa took birth in the Yadu dynasty, the
Yadu dynasty and the Yädavas have remained famous for all time. Because of
King Viraja's appearance, the family of Mahäräja Priyavrata has remained
famous for all time.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Fifteenth Chapter of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, "The Glories of the Descendants of King Priyavrata."
16. A Description of Jambüdvépa
While describing the character of Mahäräja Priyavrata and his descendants,
Çukadeva Gosvämé also described Meru Mountain and the planetary system
known as Bhü-maëòala. Bhü-maëòala is like a lotus flower, and its seven
islands are compared to the whorl of the lotus. The place known as Jambüdvépa
is in the middle of that whorl. In Jambüdvépa there is a mountain known as
Sumeru, which is made of solid gold. The height of this mountain is 84,000
yojanas, of which 16,000 yojanas are below the earth. Its width is estimated to
be 32,000 yojanas at its summit and 16,000 yojanas at its foot. (One yojana
equals approximately eight miles.) This king of mountains, Sumeru, is the
support of the planet earth.
On the southern side of the land known as Ilävåta-varña are the mountains
known as Himavän, Hemaküöa and Niñadha, and on the northern side are the
mountains Néla, Çveta and Çåìga. Similarly, on the eastern and western side
there are Mälyavän and Gandhamädana, two large mountains. Surrounding
Sumeru Mountain are four mountains known as Mandara, Merumandara,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
635
Supärçva and Kumuda, each 10,000 yojanas long and 10,000 yojanas high. On
these four mountains there are trees a banyan tree. There are also lakes full of
milk, honey, sugarcane juice and pure water. These lakes can fulfill all desires.
There are also gardens named Nandana, Citraratha, Vaibhräjaka and
Sarvatobhadra. On the side of Supärçva Mountain is a kadamba tree with
streams of honey flowing from its hollows, and on Kumuda Mountain there is a
banyan tree named Çatavalça, from whose roots flow rivers containing milk,
yogurt and many other desirable things. Surrounding Sumeru Mountain like
filaments of the whorl of a lotus are twenty mountain ranges such as Kuraìga,
Kurara, Kusumbha, Vaikaìka and Triküöa. To the east of Sumeru are the
mountains Jaöhara and Devaküöa, to the west are Pavana and Päriyätra, to the
south are Kailäsa and Karavéra, and to the north are Triçåìga and Makara.
These eight mountains are about 18,000 yojanas long, 2,000 yojanas wide and
2,000 yojanas high. On the summit of Mount Sumeru is Brahmapuré, the
residence of Lord Brahmä. Each of its four sides is 10,000 yojanas long.
Surrounding Brahmapuré are the cities of King Indra and seven other
demigods. These cities are one fourth the size of Brahmapuré.
TEXT 1
raJaaevac
o¢-STvYaa >aUMa<@l/aYaaMaivXaezae YaavdaidTYaSTaPaiTa Ya}a caSaaE JYaaeiTaza&
Ga<aEêNd]Maa va Sah d*XYaTae )) 1 ))
räjoväca
uktas tvayä bhü-maëòaläyäma-viçeño yävad ädityas tapati yatra cäsau jyotiñäà
gaëaiç candramä vä saha dåçyate.
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—Mahäräja Parékñit said; uktaù—already been said; tvayä—by you;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
636
bhü-maëòala—of the planetary system known as Bhü-maëòala;
äyäma-viçeñaù—the specific length of the radius; yävat—as far as;
ädityaù—the sun; tapati—heats; yatra—wherever; ca—also; asau—that;
jyotiñäm—of the luminaries; gaëaiù—with hordes; candramä—the moon;
vä—either; saha—with; dåçyate—is seen.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit said to Çukadeva Gosvämé: O brähmaëa, you have already
informed me that the radius of Bhü-maëòala extends as far as the sun spreads
its light and heat and as far as the moon and all the stars can be seen.
PURPORT
In this verse it is stated that the planetary system known as Bhü-maëòala
extends to the limits of the sunshine. According to modern science, the
sunshine reaches earth from a distance of 93,000,000 miles. If we calculate
according to this modern information, 93,000,000 miles can be considered the
radius of Bhü-maëòala. In the Gäyatré mantra, we chant oà bhür bhuvaù svaù.
The word bhür refers to Bhü-maëòala. Tat savitur vareëyam: the sunshine
spreads throughout Bhü-maëòala. Therefore the sun is worshipable. The stars,
which are known as nakñatra, are not different suns, as modern astronomers
suppose. From Bhagavad-gétä (10.21) we understand that the stars are similar to
the moon (nakñaträëäm ahaà çaçé). Like the moon, the stars reflect the
sunshine. Apart from our modern distinguished estimations of where the
planetary systems are located, we can understand that the sky and its various
planets were studied long, long before Çrémad-Bhägavatam was compiled.
Çukadeva Gosvämé explained the location of the planets, and this indicates
that the information was known long, long before Çukadeva Gosvämé related it
to Mahäräja Parékñit. The location of the various planetary systems was not
unknown to the sages who flourished in the Vedic age.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
637
TEXT 2
Ta}aaiPa iPa[Yav]TarQacr<aPair%aTaE" Saái>a" Saá iSaNDav oPaoeáa YaTa
WTaSYaa" SaáÜqPaivXaezivk-LPaSTvYaa >aGavNa( %lu/ SaUicTa WTadevai%l/Mah&
MaaNaTaae l/+a<aTaê Sav| iviJajaSaaiMa )) 2 ))
taträpi priyavrata-ratha-caraëa-parikhätaiù saptabhiù sapta sindhava upakÿptä
yata etasyäù sapta-dvépa-viçeña-vikalpas tvayä bhagavan khalu sücita etad
eväkhilam ahaà mänato lakñaëataç ca sarvaà vi-jijïäsämi.
SYNONYMS
tatra api—in that Bhü-maëòala; priyavrata-ratha-caraëa-parikhätaiù—by the
ditches made by the wheels of the chariot used by Priyavrata Mahäräja while
circumambulating Sumeru behind the sun; saptabhiù—by the seven;
sapta—seven; sindhavaù—oceans; upakÿptäù—created; yataù—because of
which; etasyäù—of this Bhü-maëòala; sapta-dvépa—of the seven islands;
viçeña-vikalpaù—the mode of the construction; tvayä—by you; bhagavan—O
great saint; khalu—indeed; sücitaù—described; etat—this; eva—certainly;
akhilam—whole subject; aham—I; mänataù—from the point of view of
measurement; lakñaëataù—and from symptoms; ca—also;
sarvam—everything; vijijïäsämi—wish to know.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, the rolling wheels of Mahäräja Priyavrata's chariot created
seven ditches, in which the seven oceans came into existence. Because of these
seven oceans, Bhü-maëòala is divided into seven islands. You have given a very
general description of their measurement, names and characteristics. Now I
wish to know of them in detail. Kindly fulfill my desire.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
638
TEXT 3
>aGavTaae Gau<aMaYae SQaUl/æPa AaveiXaTa& MaNaae ùGau<ae_iPa SaU+MaTaMa AaTMaJYaaeiTaiz
Pare b]øi<a >aGaviTa vaSaudeva:Yae +aMaMaaveiXaTau& Tadu hETad( Gaurae_hRSYa‚
Nauv<aRiYaTauiMaiTa )) 3 ))
bhagavato guëamaye sthüla-rüpa äveçitaà mano hy aguëe 'pi sükñmatama
ätma-jyotiñi pare brahmaëi bhagavati väsudeväkhye kñamam äveçituà tad u
haitad guro 'rhasy anuvarëayitum iti.
SYNONYMS
bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guëa-maye—into the
external features, consisting of the three modes of material nature;
sthüla-rüpe—the gross form; äveçitam—entered; manaù—the mind;
hi—indeed; aguëe—transcendental; api—although; sükñmatame—in His
smaller form as Paramätmä within the heart; ätma-jyotiñi—who is full of
Brahman effulgence; pare—the supreme; brahmaëi—spiritual entity;
bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; väsudeva-äkhye—known as
Bhagavän Väsudeva; kñamam—suitable; äveçitum—to absorb; tat—that; u
ha—indeed; etat—this; guro—O my dear spiritual master; arhasi
anuvarëayitum—please describe factually; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
When the mind is fixed upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His
external feature made of the material modes of nature—the gross universal
form—it is brought to the platform of pure goodness. In that transcendental
position, one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva,
who in His subtler form is self-effulgent and beyond the modes of nature. O my
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
639
lord, please describe vividly how that form, which covers the entire universe, is
perceived.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Parékñit had already been advised by his spiritual master,
Çukadeva Gosvämé, to think of the universal form of the Lord, and therefore,
following the advice of his spiritual master, he continuously thought of that
form. The universal form is certainly material, but because everything is an
expansion of the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, ultimately
nothing is material. Therefore Parékñit Mahäräja's mind was saturated with
spiritual consciousness. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has stated:
präpaïcikatayä buddhyä
hari-sambandhi-vastunaù
mumukñubhiù parityägo
vairägyaà phalgu kathyate
Everything, even that which is material, is connected with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore everything should be engaged in the
service of the Lord. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura translates this
verse as follows:
hari-seväya yähä haya anuküla
viñaya baliyä tähära tyäge haya bhula
"One should not give up anything connected with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, thinking it material or enjoyable for the material senses." Even the
senses, when purified, are spiritual. When Mahäräja Parékñit was thinking of
the universal form of the Lord, his mind was certainly situated on the
transcendental platform. Therefore although he might not have had any
reason to be concerned with detailed information of the universe, he was
thinking of it in relationship with the Supreme Lord, and therefore such
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
640
geographical knowledge was not material but transcendental. Elsewhere in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.20) Närada Muni has said, idaà hi viçvaà bhagavän
ivetaraù: the entire universe is also the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
although it appears different from Him. Therefore although Parékñit Mahäräja
had no need for geographical knowledge of this universe, that knowledge was
also spiritual and transcendental because he was thinking of the entire
universe as an expansion of the energy of the Lord.
In our preaching work also, we deal with so much property and money and
so many books bought and sold, but because these dealings all pertain to the
Kåñëa consciousness movement, they should never be considered material.
That one is absorbed in thoughts of such management does not mean that he is
outside of Kåñëa consciousness. If one rigidly observes the regulative principle
of chanting sixteen rounds of the mahä-mantra every day, his dealings with
the material world for the sake of spreading the Kåñëa consciousness
movement are not different from the spiritual cultivation of Kåñëa
consciousness.
TEXT 4
‰izåvac
Na vE MaharaJa >aGavTaae MaaYaaGau<aiv>aUTae" k-aïa& MaNaSaa vcSaa vaiDa‚
GaNTauMal&/ ivbuDaaYauzaiPa PauåzSTaSMaaTPa[aDaaNYaeNaEv >aUGaael/k-ivXaez& NaaMaæPa
MaaNal/+a<aTaae VYaa:YaaSYaaMa" )) 4 ))
åñir uväca
na vai mahäräja bhagavato mäyä-guëa-vibhüteù käñöhäà manasä vacasä
vädhigantum alaà vibudhäyuñäpi puruñas tasmät prädhän-yenaiva
bhü-golaka-viçeñaà näma-rüpa-mäna-lakñaëato vyäkhyäsyämaù.
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
641
åñiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued to speak; na—not; vai—indeed;
mahä-räja—O great King; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; mäyä-guëa-vibhüteù—of the transformation of the qualities of the
material energy; käñöhäm—the end; manasä—by the mind; vacasä—by words;
vä—either; adhigantum—to understand fully; alam—capable;
vibudha-äyuñä—with a duration of life like that of Brahmä; api—even;
puruñaù—a person; tasmät—therefore; prädhänyena—by a general description
of the chief places; eva—certainly; bhü-golaka-viçeñam—the particular
description of Bhüloka; näma-rüpa—names and forms; mäna—measurements;
lakñaëataù—according to symptoms; vyäkhyäsyämaù—I shall try to explain.
TRANSLATION
The great åñi Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, there is no limit to the
expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's material energy. This
material world is a transformation of the material qualities [sattva-guëa,
rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa], yet no one could possibly explain it perfectly, even in
a lifetime as long as that of Brahmä No one in the material world is perfect, and
an imperfect person could not describe this material universe accurately, even
after continued speculation. O King, I shall nevertheless try to explain to you
the principal regions, such as Bhü-goloka [Bhüloka], with their names, forms,
measurements and various symptoms.
PURPORT
The material world is only one fourth of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead's creation, but it is unlimited and impossible for anyone to know or
describe, even with the qualification of a life as long as that of Brahmä, who
lives for millions and millions of years. Modern scientists and astronomers try
to explain the cosmic situation and the vastness of space, and some of them
believe that all the glittering stars are different suns. From Bhagavad-gétä,
however, we understand that all these stars (nakñatras) are like the moon, in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
642
that they reflect the sunshine [Bg. 15.12]. They are not independent
luminaries. Bhüloka is explained to be that portion of outer space through
which the heat and light of the sun extend. Therefore it is natural to conclude
that this universe extends in space as far as we can see and encompasses the
glittering stars. Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé admitted that to give full details of
this expansive material universe would be impossible, but nevertheless he
wanted to give the King as much knowledge as he had received through the
paramparä system. We should conclude that if one cannot comprehend the
material expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one certainly
cannot estimate the expansiveness of the spiritual world. The Brahma-saàhitä
(5.33) confirms this:
advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam
ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà nava-yauvanaà ca
The limits of the expansions of Govinda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
cannot be estimated by anyone, even a person as perfect as Brahmä, not to
speak of tiny scientists whose senses and instruments are all imperfect and who
cannot give us information of even this one universe. We should therefore be
satisfied with the information obtainable from Vedic sources as spoken by
authorities like Çukadeva Gosvämé.
TEXT 5
Yaae vaYa& ÜqPa" ku-vl/Yak-Mal/k-aeXaa>YaNTark-aeXaae iNaYauTaYaaeJaNa ivXaal/"
SaMavTauRl/ae YaQaa PauZk-rPa}aMa( )) 5 ))
yo väyaà dvépaù kuvalaya-kamala-koçäbhyantara-koço niyuta-yojana-viçälaù
samavartulo yathä puñkara-patram.
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
643
yaù—which; vä—either; ayam—this; dvépaù—island; kuvalaya—the Bhüloka;
kamala-koça—of the whorl of a lotus flower; abhyantara—inner;
koçaù—whorl; niyuta-yojana-viçälaù—one million yojanas (eight million
miles) wide; samavartulaù—equally round, or having a length and breadth of
the same measurement; yathä—like; puñkara-patram—a lotus leaf.
TRANSLATION
The planetary system known as Bhü-maëòala resembles a lotus flower, and
its seven islands resemble the whorl of that flower. The length and breadth of
the island known as Jambüdvépa, which is situated in the middle of the whorl,
are one million yojanas [eight million miles]. Jambüdvépa is round like the leaf
of a lotus flower.
TEXT 6
YaiSMaàv vzaRi<a NavYaaeJaNaSahóaYaaMaaNYaíi>aMaRYaaRdaiGairi>a" Sauiv>a¢-aiNa
>aviNTa )) 6 ))
yasmin nava varñäëi nava-yojana-sahasräyämäny añöabhir maryädä-giribhiù
suvibhaktäni bhavanti.
SYNONYMS
yasmin—in that Jambüdvépa; nava—nine; varñäëi—divisions of land;
nava-yojana-sahasra—72,000 miles in length; äyämäni—measuring;
añöabhiù—by eight; maryädä—indicating the boundaries; giribhiù—by
mountains; suvibhaktäni—nicely divided from one another; bhavanti—are.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
644
In Jambüdvépa there are nine divisions of land, each with a length of 9,000
yojanas [72,000 miles]. There are eight mountains that mark the boundaries of
these divisions and separate them nicely.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura gives the following quotation from
the Väyu Puräëa, wherein the locations of the various mountains, beginning
with the Himalayas, are described.
dhanurvat saàsthite jïeye dve varñe dakñiëottare; dérghäëi tatra catväri
caturasram ilävåtam iti dakñiëottare bhäratottara-kuru-varñe catväri
kiàpuruña-harivarña-ramyaka-hiraëmayäni varñäëi néla-niñadhayos
tiraçcinébhüya samudra-praviñöayoù saàlagnatvam aìgékåtya
bhadräçva-ketumälayor api dhanur-äkåtitvam; atas tayor dairghyata eva madhye
saìkucitatvena nava-sahasräyämatvam; ilävåtasya tu meroù sakäçät catur-dikñu
nava-sahasräyama-tvaà saàbhavet vastutas tv ilävåta-bhadräçva-ketumälänäà
catus-triàçat-sahasräyämatvaà jïeyam.
TEXT 7
Wza& MaDYae wl/av*Ta& NaaMaa>YaNTarvz| YaSYa Naa>YaaMaviSQaTa" SavRTa" SaaEv<aR"
ku-l/iGairraJaae MaeåÜsPaaYaaMaSaMauàah" k-i<aRk-a>aUTa" ku-vl/Yak-Mal/SYa MaUDaRiNa
Üai}a&XaTa( SahóYaaeJaNaivTaTaae MaUle/ zae@XaSahó& TaavTaaNTa>aURMYaa& Pa[iví" )) 7 ))
eñäà madhye ilävåtaà nämäbhyantara-varñaà yasya näbhyäm avasthitaù
sarvataù sauvarëaù kula-giri-räjo merur dvépäyäma-samunnähaù
karëikä-bhütaù kuvalaya-kamalasya mürdhani dvä-triàçat
sahasra-yojana-vitato müle ñoòaça-sahasraà tävat äntar-bhümyäà praviñöaù.
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
645
eñäm—all these divisions of Jambüdvépa; madhye—among; ilävåtam
näma—named Ilävåta-varña; abhyantara-varñam—the inner division;
yasya—of which; näbhyäm—in the navel; avasthitaù—situated;
sarvataù—entirely; sauvarëaù—made of gold; kula-giri-räjaù—the most
famous among famous mountains; meruù—Mount Meru;
dvépa-äyäma-samunnähaù—whose height is the same measurement as the
width of Jambüdvépa; karëikä-bhütaù—existing as the pericarp; kuvalaya—of
this planetary system; kamalasya—like a lotus flower; mürdhani—on the top;
dvä-triàçat—thirty-two; sahasra—thousand; yojana—yojanas (eight miles
each; vitataù—expanded; müle—at the base; ñoòaça-sahasram—sixteen
thousand yojanas; tävat—so much; äntaù-bhümyäm—within the earth;
praviñöaù—entered.
TRANSLATION
Amidst these divisions, or varñas, is the varña named Ilävåta, which is
situated in the middle of the whorl of the lotus. Within Ilävåta-varña is Sumeru
Mountain, which is made of gold. Sumeru Mountain is like the pericarp of the
lotuslike Bhü-maëòala planetary system. The mountain's height is the same as
the width of Jambüdvépa—or, in other words, 100,000 yojanas [800,000
miles]. Of that, 16,000 yojanas [128,000 miles] are within the earth, and
therefore the mountain's height above the earth is 84,000 yojanas [672,000
miles]. The mountain's width is 32,000 yojanas [256,000 miles] at its summit
and 16,000 yojanas at its base.
TEXT 8
otaraetare<ael/av*Ta& Naql/" ìeTa" é*(r)vaiNaiTa}aYaae rMYak-ihr<MaYaku-æ<aa& vzaR<aa&
MaYaaRdaiGarYa" Pa[aGaaYaTaa o>aYaTa" +aaraedavDaYaae iÜSahóPa*Qav WkE-k-Xa"
PaUvRSMaaTPaUvRSMaadutar otarae dXaa&XaaiDak-a&XaeNa dEgYaR Wv hSaiNTa )) 8 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
646
uttarottareëelävåtaà nélaù çvetaù çåìgavän iti trayo
ramyaka-hiraëmaya-kurüëäà varñäëäà maryädä-girayaù präg-äyatä
ubhayataù kñärodävadhayo dvi-sahasra-påthava ekaikaçaù pürvasmät
pürvasmäd uttara uttaro daçäàçädhikäàçena dairghya eva hrasanti.
SYNONYMS
uttara-uttareëa ilävåtam—further and further north of Ilävåta-varña;
nélaù—Néla; çvetaù—Çveta; çåìgavän—Çåìgavän; iti—thus; trayaù—three
mountains; ramyaka—Ramyaka; hiraëmaya—Hiraëmaya; kurüëäm—of the
Kuru division; varñäëäm—of the varñas; maryädä-girayaù—the mountains
marking the borders; präk-äyatäù—extended on the eastern side;
ubhayataù—to the east and the west; kñäroda—the ocean of salt water;
avadhayaù—extending to; dvi-sahasra-påthavaù—which are two thousand
yojanas wide; eka-ekaçaù—one after another; pürvasmät—than the former;
pürvasmät—than the former; uttaraù—further north; uttaraù—further north;
daça-aàça-adhika-aàçena—by one tenth of the former; dairghyaù—in length;
eva—indeed; hrasanti—become shorter.
TRANSLATION
Just north of Ilävåta-varña—and going further northward, one after
another—are three mountains named Néla, Çveta and Çåìgavän. These mark
the borders of the three varñas named Ramyaka, Hiraëmaya and Kuru and
separate them from one another. The width of these mountains is 2,000 yojanas
[16,000 miles]. Lengthwise, they extend east and west to the beaches of the
ocean of salt water. Going from south to north, the length of each mountain is
one tenth that of the previous mountain, but the height of them all is the same.
PURPORT
In this regard, Madhväcärya quotes the following verses from the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
647
Brahmäëòa Puräëa:
yathä bhägavate tüktaà
bhauvanaà koça-lakñaëam
tasyävirodhato yojyam
anya-granthäntare sthitam
maëòode puraëaà caiva
vyatyäsaà kñéra-sägare
rähu-soma-ravéëäà ca
maëòaläd dvi-guëoktitäm
vinaiva sarvam unneyaà
yojanäbhedato 'tra tu
It appears from these verses that aside from the sun and moon, there is an
invisible planet called Rähu. The movements of Rähu cause both solar and
lunar eclipses. We suggest that the modern expeditions attempting to reach
the moon are mistakenly going to Rähu.
TEXT 9
Wv& di+a<aeNael/av*Ta& iNazDaae heMakU-$=ae ihMaal/Ya wiTa Pa[aGaaYaTaa YaQaa
Naql/adYaae_YauTaYaaeJaNaaeTSaeDaa hirvzRik-MPauåz>aarTaaNaa& YaQaaSa&:YaMa( )) 9 ))
evaà dakñiëenelävåtaà niñadho hemaküöo himälaya iti präg-äyatä yathä
nélädayo 'yuta-yojanotsedhä hari-varña-kimpuruña-bhäratänäà
yathä-saìkhyam.
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; dakñiëena—by degrees to the southern side; ilävåtam—of
Ilävåta-varña; niñadhaù hema-küöaù himälayaù—three mountains named
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
648
Niñadha, Hemaküöa and Himälaya; iti—thus; präk-äyatäù—extended to the
east; yathä—just as; néla-ädayaù—the mountains headed by Néla;
ayuta-yojana-utsedhäù—ten thousand yojanas high; hari-varña—the division
named Hari-varña; kimpuruña—the division named Kimpuruña;
bhäratänäm—the division named Bhärata-varña; yathä-saìkhyam—according
to number.
TRANSLATION
Similarly, south of Ilävåta-varña and extending from east to west are three
great mountains named (from north to south) Niñadha, Hemaküöa and
Himälaya. Each of them is 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles] high. They mark the
boundaries of the three varñas named Hari-varña, Kimpuruña-varña and
Bhärata-varña [India].
TEXT 10
TaQaEvel/av*TaMaPare<a PaUveR<a c MaaLYavÓNDaMaadNaavaNaql/iNazDaaYaTaaE iÜSahó&
PaPa[QaTau" ke-TauMaal/>ad]aìYaae" SaqMaaNa& ivdDaaTae )) 10 ))
tathaivelävåtam apareëa pürveëa ca mälyavad-gandhamädanäv
änéla-niñadhäyatau dvi-sahasraà paprathatuù ketumäla-bhadräçvayoù
sémänaà vidadhäte.
SYNONYMS
tathä eva—exactly like that; ilävåtam apareëa—on the western side of
Ilävåta-varña; pürveëa ca—and on the eastern side;
mälyavad-gandha-mädanau—the demarcation mountains of Mälyavän on the
west and Gandhamädana on the east; ä-néla-niñadha-äyatau—on the northern
side up to the mountain known as Néla and on the southern side up to the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
649
mountain known as Niñadha; dvi-sahasram—two thousand yojanas;
paprathatuù—they extend; ketumäla-bhadräçvayoù—of the two varñas named
Ketumäla and Bhadräçva; sémänam—the border; vidadhäte—establish.
TRANSLATION
In the same way, west and east of Ilävåta-varña are two great mountains
named Mälyavän and Gandhamädana respectively. These two mountains, which
are 2,000 yojanas [16,000 miles] high, extend as far as Néla Mountain in the
north and Niñadha in the south. They indicate the borders of Ilävåta-varña and
also the varñas known as Ketumäla and Bhadräçva.
PURPORT
There are so many mountains, even on this planet earth. We do not think
that the measurements of all of them have actually been calculated. While
passing over the mountainous region from Mexico to Caracas, we actually saw
so many mountains that we doubt whether their height, length and breadth
have been properly measured. Therefore, as indicated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
by Çukadeva Gosvämé, we should not try to comprehend the greater
mountainous areas of the universe merely by our calculations. Çukadeva
Gosvämé has already stated that such calculations would be very difficult even
if one had a duration of life like that of Brahmä. We should simply be satisfied
with the statements of authorities like Çukadeva Gosvämé and appreciate how
the entire cosmic manifestation has been made possible by the external energy
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The measurements given herein, such
as 10,000 yojanas or 100,000 yojanas, should be considered correct because they
have been given by Çukadeva Gosvämé. Our experimental knowledge can
neither verify nor disprove the statements of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. We should
simply hear these statements from the authorities. If we can appreciate the
extensive energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, that will benefit us.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
650
TEXT 11
MaNdrae MaeåMaNdr" SauPaaìR" ku-Maud wTYaYauTaYaaeJaNaivSTaaraeàaha MaeraeêTau‚
idRXaMavíM>aiGarYa oPaoeáa" )) 11 ))
mandaro merumandaraù supärçvaù kumuda ity ayuta-yojana-vistäronnähä
meroç catur-diçam avañöambha-giraya upakÿptäù.
mandaraù—the mountain named Mandara; meru-mandaraù—the mountain
named Merumandara; supärçvaù—the mountain named Supärçva;
kumudaù—the mountain named Kumuda; iti—thus;
ayuta-yojana-vistära-unnähäù—which measure ten thousand yojanas high and
wide; meroù—of Sumeru; catuù-diçam—the four sides;
avañöambha-girayaù—mountains that are like the belts of Sumeru;
upakÿptäù—situated.
TRANSLATION
On the four sides of the great mountain known as Sumeru are four
mountains-Mandara, Merumandara, Supärçva and Kumuda—which are like its
belts. The length and height of these mountains are calculated to be 10,000
yojanas [80,000 miles].
TEXT 12
cTauZveRTaezu cUTaJaMbUk-dMbNYaGa]aeDaaêTvar" PaadPa Pa[vra" PavRTake-Tav wva‚
iDaSahóYaaeJaNaaeàahaSTaavd( iv$=PaivTaTaYa" XaTaYaaeJaNaPair<aaha" )) 12 ))
caturñv eteñu cüta-jambü-kadamba-nyagrodhäç catväraù pädapa-pravaräù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
651
parvata-ketava ivädhi-sahasra-yojanonnähäs tävad viöapa-vitatayaù
çata-yojana-pariëähäù.
SYNONYMS
caturñu—on the four; eteñu—on these mountains, beginning with Mandara;
cüta-jambü-kadamba—of trees such as the mango, rose apple and kadamba;
nyagrodhäù—and the banyan tree; catväraù—four kinds;
pädapa-pravaräù—the best of trees; parvata-ketavaù—the flagstaffs on the
mountains; iva—like; adhi—over; sahasra-yojana-unnähäù—one thousand
yojanas high; tävat—so much also; viöapa-vitatayaù—the length of the
branches; çata-yojana—one hundred yojanas; pariëähäù—wide.
TRANSLATION
Standing like flagstaffs on the summits of these four mountains are a mango
tree, a rose apple tree, a kadamba tree and a banyan tree. Those trees are
calculated to have a width of 100 yojanas [800 miles] and a height of 1,100
yojanas [8,800 miles]. Their branches also spread to a radius of 1,100 yojanas.
TEXTS 13-14
hdaêTvar" PaYaaeMaiß+aurSaMa*íJal/a YaduPaSPaiXaRNa oPadevGa<aa YaaeGaEìYaaRi<a
Sva>aaivk-aiNa >arTazR>a DaarYaiNTa )) 13 )) devae ÛaNaaiNa c >aviNTa
cTvair NaNdNa& cE}arQa& vE>a]aJak&- SavRTaae>ad]iMaiTa )) 14 ))
hradäç catväraù payo-madhv-ikñurasa-måñöa-jalä yad-upasparçina
upadeva-gaëä yogaiçvaryäëi sväbhävikäni bharatarñabha dhärayanti;
devodyänäni ca bhavanti catväri nandanaà caitrarathaà vaibhräjakaà
sarvatobhadram iti.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
652
SYNONYMS
hradäù—lakes; catväraù—four; payaù—milk; madhu—honey;
ikñu-rasa—sugarcane juice; måñöa-jaläù—filled with pure water; yat—of
which; upasparçinaù—those who use the liquids; upadeva-gaëäù—the
demigods; yoga-aiçvaryäëi—all the perfections of mystic yoga;
sväbhävikäni—without being tried for; bharata-åñabha—O best of the Bharata
dynasty; dhärayanti—possess; deva-udyänäni—celestial gardens; ca—also;
bhavanti—there are; catväri—four; nandanam—of the Nandana garden;
caitra-ratham—Caitraratha garden; vaibhräjakam—Vaibhräjaka garden;
sarvataù-bhadram—Sarvatobhadra garden; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, best of the Bharata dynasty, between these four
mountains are four huge lakes. The water of the first tastes just like milk; the
water of the second, like honey; and that of the third, like sugarcane juice. The
fourth lake is filled with pure water. The celestial beings such as the Siddhas,
Cäraëas and Gandharvas, who are also known as demigods, enjoy the facilities
of those four lakes. Consequently they have the natural perfections of mystic
yoga, such as the power to become smaller than the smallest or greater than the
greatest. There are also four celestial gardens named Nandana, Caitraratha,
Vaibhräjaka and Sarvatobhadra.
TEXT 15
YaeZvMar Pairv*!a" Sah Saurl/l/Naal/l/aMaYaUQaPaTaYa oPadevGa<aEåPaGaqYaMaa‚
NaMaihMaaNa" ik-l/ ivhriNTa )) 15 ))
yeñv amara-parivåòhäù saha sura-lalanä-laläma-yütha-pataya upadeva-gaëair
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
653
upagéyamäna-mahimänaù kila viharanti.
SYNONYMS
yeñu—in which; amara-parivåòhäù—the best of the demigods; saha—with;
sura-lalanä—of the wives of all the demigods and semidemigods; laläma—of
those women who are like ornaments; yütha-patayaù—the husbands;
upadeva-gaëaiù—by the semi-demigods (the Gandharvas);
upagéyamäna—being chanted; mahimänaù—whose glories; kila—indeed;
viharanti—they enjoy sports.
TRANSLATION
The best of the demigods, along with their wives, who are like ornaments of
heavenly beauty, meet together and enjoy within those gardens, while their
glories are sung by lesser demigods known as Gandharvas.
TEXT 16
MaNdraeTSa(r) Wk-adXaXaTaYaaeJaNaaetau(r)devcUTaiXarSaae iGairiXa%rSQaUl/aiNa
f-l/aNYaMa*Tak-LPaaiNa PaTaiNTa )) 16 ))
mandarotsaìga ekädaça-çata-yojanottuìga-devacüta-çiraso
giri-çikhara-sthüläni phaläny amåta-kalpäni patanti.
SYNONYMS
mandara-utsaìge—on the lower slopes of Mandara Mountain;
ekädaça-çata-yojana-uttuìga—1,100 yojanas high; devacüta-çirasaù—from the
top of a mango tree named Devacüta; giri-çikhara-sthüläni—which are as fat as
mountain peaks; phaläni—fruit; amåta-kalpäni—as sweet as nectar;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
654
patanti—fall down.
TRANSLATION
On the lower slopes of Mandara Mountain is a mango tree named Devacüta.
It is 1,100 yojanas high. Mangoes as big as mountain peaks and as sweet as
nectar fall from the top of this tree for the enjoyment of the denizens of heaven.
PURPORT
In the Väyu Puräëa there is also a reference to this tree by great learned
sages:
aratnénäà çatäny añöäv
eka-ñañöy-adhikäni ca
phala-pramäëam äkhyätam
åñibhis tattva-darçibhiù
TEXT 17
Taeza& ivXaqYaRMaa<aaNaaMaiTaMaDaurSauri>aSauGaiNDabhul/aå<arSaaedeNaaå<aaeda NaaMa Nadq
MaNdriGairiXa%raiàPaTaNTaq PaUveR<ael/av*TaMauPaâavYaiTa )) 17 ))
teñäà viçéryamäëänäm
ati-madhura-surabhi-sugandhi-bahuläruëa-rasodenäruëodä näma nadé
mandara-giri-çikharän nipatanté pür-veëelävåtam upaplävayati.
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of all the mangoes; viçéryamäëänäm—being broken because of falling
from the top; ati-madhura—very sweet; surabhi—fragrant; sugandhi—scented
with other aromas; bahula—large quantities; aruëa-rasa-udena—by reddish
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
655
juice; aruëodä—Aruëodä; näma—named; nadé—the river;
mandara-giri-çikharät—from the top of Mandara Mountain; nipatanté—falling
down; pürveëa—on the eastern side; ilävåtam—through Ilävåta-varña;
upaplävayati—flows.
TRANSLATION
When all those solid fruits fall from such a height, they break, and the
sweet, fragrant juice within them flows out and becomes increasingly more
fragrant as it mixes with other scents. That juice cascades from the mountain in
waterfalls and becomes a river called Aruëodä, which flows pleasantly through
the eastern side of Ilävåta.
TEXT 18
YaduPaJaaez<aaÙvaNYaa ANaucrq<aa& Pau<YaJaNavDaUNaaMavYavSPaXaRSauGaNDavaTaae dXa‚
YaaeJaNa& SaMaNTaadNauvaSaYaiTa )) 18 ))
yad-upajoñaëäd bhavänyä anucaréëäà puëya-jana-vadhünäm
avayava-sparça-sugandha-väto daça-yojanaà samantäd anuväsayati.
SYNONYMS
yat—of which; upajoñaëät—because of using the fragrant water;
bhavänyäù—of Bhaväné, the wife of Lord Çiva; anucaréëäm—of attendant
maidservants; puëya-jana-vadhünäm—who are wives of the most pious Yakñas;
avayava—of the bodily limbs; sparça—from contact; sugandha-vätaù—the
wind, which becomes fragrant; daça-yojanam—up to ten yojanas (about eighty
miles); samantät—all around; anuväsayati—makes fragrant.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
656
TRANSLATION
The pious wives of the Yakñas act as personal maidservants to assist
Bhaväné, the wife of Lord Çiva. Because they drink the water of the River
Aruëodä, their bodies become fragrant, and as the air carries away that
fragrance, it perfumes the entire atmosphere for eighty miles around.
TEXT 19
Wv& JaMbUf-l/aNaaMaTYauÀiNaPaaTaivXaq<aaRNaaMaNaiSQaPa[aYaa<aaiMa>ak-aYaiNa>aaNaa& rSaeNa
JaMbU NaaMa Nadq MaeåMaNdriXa%radYauTaYaaeJaNaadviNaTale/ iNaPaTaNTaq di+a<ae‚
NaaTMaaNa& Yaavidl/av*TaMauPaSYaNdYaiTa )) 19 ))
evaà jambü-phalänäm atyucca-nipäta-viçérëänäm anasthi-präyäëäm
ibha-käya-nibhänäà rasena jambü näma nadé meru-mandara-çikharäd
ayuta-yojanäd avani-tale nipatanté dakñiëenätmänaà yävad ilävåtam
upasyandayati.
SYNONYMS
evam—similarly; jambü-phalänäm—of the fruits called jambü (the rose apple);
ati-ucca-nipäta—because of falling from a great height; viçérëänäm—which are
broken to pieces; anasthi-präyäëäm—having very small seeds;
ibha-käya-nibhänäm—and which are as large as the bodies of elephants;
rasena—by the juice; jambü näma nadé—a river named Jambü-nadé;
meru-mandara-çikharät—from the top of Merumandara Mountain;
ayuta-yojanät—ten thousand yojanas high; avani-tale—on the ground;
nipatanté—falling; dakñiëena—on the southern side; ätmänam—itself;
yävat—the whole; ilävåtam—Ilävåta-varña; upasyandayati—flows through.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
657
TRANSLATION
Similarly, the fruits of the jambü tree, which are full of pulp and have very
small seeds, fall from a great height and break to pieces. Those fruits are the size
of elephants, and the juice gliding from them becomes a river named
Jambü-nadé. This river falls a distance of 10,000 yojanas, from the summit of
Merumandara to the southern side of Ilävåta, and floods the entire land of
Ilävåta with juice.
PURPORT
We can only imagine how much juice there might be in a fruit that is the
size of an elephant but has a very tiny seed. Naturally the juice from the
broken jambü fruits forms waterfalls and floods the entire land of Ilävåta. That
juice produces an immense quantity of gold, as will be explained in the next
verses.
TEXTS 20-21
Taavdu>aYaaeriPa raeDaSaaeYaaR Ma*itak-a Tad]SaeNaaNauivDYaMaaNaa vaYvk-RSa&YaaeGaivPaake-Na
SadaMarl/aek-a>ar<a& JaaMbUNad& NaaMa Sauv<a| >aviTa )) 20 )) Yadu h vav
ivbuDaadYa" Sah YauviTai>aMauRku-$=k-$=k-k-i$=SaU}aaÛa>ar<aæPae<a %lu/ Daar‚
YaiNTa )) 21 ))
tävad ubhayor api rodhasor yä måttikä tad-rasenänuvidhyamänä
väyv-arka-saàyoga-vipäkena sadämara-lokäbharaëaà jämbü-nadaà näma
suvarëaà bhavati; yad u ha väva vibudhädayaù saha yuvatibhir
mukuöa-kaöaka-kaöi-süträdy-äbharaëa-rüpeëa khalu dhärayanti.
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
658
tävat—entirely; ubhayoù api—of both; rodhasoù—of the banks; yä—which;
måttikä—the mud; tat-rasena—with the juice of the jambü fruits that flows in
the river; anuvidhyamänä—being saturated;
väyu-arka-saàyoga-vipäkena—because of a chemical reaction with the air and
sunshine; sadä—always; amara-loka-äbharaëam—which is used for the
ornaments of the demigods, the denizens of the heavenly planets;
jämbü-nadam näma—named Jämbü-nada; suvarëam—gold; bhavati—becomes;
yat—which; u ha väva—indeed; vibudha-ädayaù—the great demigods;
saha—with; yuvatibhiù—their everlastingly youthful wives; mukuöa—crowns;
kaöaka—bangles; kaöi-sütra—belts; ädi—and so on; äbharaëa—of all kinds of
ornaments; rüpeëa—in the form; khalu—indeed; dhärayanti—they possess.
TRANSLATION
The mud on both banks of the River Jambü-nadé, being moistened by the
flowing juice and then dried by the air and the sunshine, produces huge
quantities of gold called Jämbü-nada. The denizens of heaven use this gold for
various kinds of ornaments. Therefore all the inhabitants of the heavenly
planets and their youthful wives are fully decorated with golden helmets,
bangles and belts, and thus they enjoy life.
PURPORT
By the arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the rivers on
some planets produce gold on their banks. The poor inhabitants of this earth,
because of their incomplete knowledge, are captivated by a so-called bhagavän
who can produce a small quantity of gold. However, it is understood that in a
higher planetary system in this material world, the mud on the banks of the
Jambü-nadé mixes with jambü juice, reacts with the sunshine in the air, and
automatically produces huge quantities of gold. Thus the men and women are
decorated there by various golden ornaments, and they look very nice.
Unfortunately, on earth there is such a scarcity of gold that the governments
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
659
of the world try to keep it in reserve and issue paper currency. Because that
currency is not backed up by gold, the paper they distribute as money is
worthless, but nevertheless the people on earth are very proud of material
advancement. In modern times, girls and ladies have ornaments made of
plastic instead of gold, and plastic utensils are used instead of golden ones, yet
people are very proud of their material wealth. Therefore the people of this age
are described as mandäù sumanda-matayo manda-bhägyä hy upadrutäù (SB
1.1.10). In other words, they are extremely bad and slow to understand the
opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They have been described as
sumanda-matayaù because their conceptions are so crippled that they accept a
bluffer who produces a little gold to be God. Because they have no gold in their
possession, they are actually poverty-stricken, and therefore they are
considered unfortunate.
Sometimes these unfortunate people want to be promoted to the heavenly
planets to achieve fortunate positions, as described in this verse, but pure
devotees of the Lord are not at all interested in such opulence. Indeed,
devotees sometimes compare the color of gold to that of bright golden stool. Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu has instructed devotees not to be allured by golden
ornaments and beautifully decorated women. Na dhanaà na janaà na
sundarém: [Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4] a devotee should not be allured by
gold. beautiful women or the prestige of having many followers. Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, therefore, confidentially prayed, mama janmani janmanéçvare
bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi: "My Lord, please bless Me with Your devotional
service. I do not want anything else." A devotee may pray to be delivered from
this material world. That is his only aspiration.
ayi nanda-tanuja kiìkaraà
patitaà mäà viñame bhavämbudhau
kåpayä tava päda-paìkajasthita-
dhülé-sadåçaà vicintaya
[Cc. Antya 20.32, Çikñäñöaka 5]
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
660
The humble devotee simply prays to the Lord, "Kindly pick me up from the
material world, which is full of varieties of material opulence, and keep me
under the shelter of Your lotus feet."
Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura prays:
hä hä prabhu nanda-suta, våñabhänu-sutä-yuta,
karuëä karaha ei-bära
narottama-däsa kaya, nä öheliha räìgä-päya,
tomä vine ke äche ämära
"O my Lord, O son of Nanda Mahäräja, now You are standing before me with
Your consort, the daughter of Våñabhänu, Çrématé Rädhäräëé. Kindly accept
me as the dust of Your lotus feet. please do not kick me away, for I have no
other shelter."
Similarly, Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté indicates that the position of the
demigods, who are decorated with golden helmets and other ornaments, is no
better than a phantasmagoria (tri-daça-pür äkäça-puñpäyate). A devotee is
never allured by such opulences. He simply aspires to become the dust of the
lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 22
YaSTau Mahak-dMb" SauPaaìRiNaæ!ae YaaSTaSYa k-ae$=re>Yaae iviNa"Sa*Taa"
PaÄaYaaMaPair<aaha" PaÄ MaDauDaara" SauPaaìRiXa%raTPaTaNTYaae_Pare<aaTMaaNaiMal/av*‚
TaMaNauMaaedYaiNTa )) 22 ))
yas tu mahä-kadambaù supärçva-nirüòho yäs tasya koöarebhyo viniùsåtäù
païcäyäma-pariëähäù païca madhu-dhäräù supärçva-çikharät patantyo
'pareëätmänam ilävåtam anumodayanti.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
661
SYNONYMS
yaù—which; tu—but; mahä-kadambaù—the tree named Mahäkadamba;
supärçva-nirüòhaù—which stands on the side of the mountain known as
Supärçva; yäù—which; tasya—of that; koöarebhyaù—from the hollows;
viniùsåtäù—flowing; païca—five; äyäma—vyäma, a unit of measurement of
about eight feet; pariëähäù—whose measurement; païca—five;
madhu-dhäräù—flows of honey; supärçva-çikharät—from the top of Supärçva
Mountain; patantyaù—flowing down; apareëa—on the western side of Sumeru
Mountain; ätmänam—the whole of; ilävåtam—Ilävåta-varña;
anumodayanti—make fragrant.
TRANSLATION
On the side of Supärçva Mountain stands a big tree called Mahäkadamba,
which is very celebrated. From the hollows of this tree flow five rivers of
honey, each about five vyämas wide. This flowing honey falls incessantly from
the top of Supärçva Mountain and flows all around Ilävåta-varña, beginning
from the western side. Thus the whole land is saturated with the pleasing
fragrance.
PURPORT
The distance between one hand and another when one spreads both his
arms is called a vyäma. This comes to about eight feet. Thus each of the rivers
was about forty feet wide, making a total of about two hundred feet.
TEXT 23
Yaa ùuPaYauÅaNaaNaa& Mau%iNavaRiSaTaae vaYau" SaMaNTaaC^TaYaaeJaNaMaNauvaSaYaiTa )) 23 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
662
yä hy upayuïjänänäà mukha-nirväsito väyuù samantäc chata-yojanam
anuväsayati.
SYNONYMS
yäù—which (those flows of honey); hi—indeed; upayuïjänänäm—of those
who drink; mukha-nirväsitaù väyuù—the air emanating from the mouths;
samantät—all around; çata-yojanam—up to one hundred yojanas (eight
hundred miles); anuväsayati—makes sweetly flavored.
TRANSLATION
The air carrying the scent from the mouths of those who drink that honey
perfumes the land for a hundred yojanas around.
TEXT 24
Wv& ku-MaudiNaæ!ae Ya" XaTavLXaae NaaMa v$=STaSYa Sk-NDae>Yaae NaqcqNaa"
PaYaaediDaMaDauga*TaGau@aàaÛMbrXaYYaaSaNaa>ar<aadYa" SavR Wv k-aMadugaa Nada"
ku-MaudaGa]aTPaTaNTaSTaMautare<ael/av*TaMauPaYaaeJaYaiNTa )) 24 ))
evaà kumuda-nirüòho yaù çatavalço näma vaöas tasya skandhebhyo nécénäù
payo-dadhi-madhu-ghåta-guòännädy-ambara-çayyäsanäbharaëädayaù sarva
eva käma-dughä nadäù kumudägrät patantas tam uttareëelävåtam
upayojayanti.
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; kumuda-nirüòhaù—having grown on Kumuda Mountain;
yaù—that; çata-valçaù näma—the tree named Çatavalça (because of having
hundreds of trunks); vaöaù—a banyan tree; tasya—of it; skandhebhyaù—from
the thick branches; nécénäù—flowing down; payaù—milk; dadhi—yogurt;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
663
madhu—honey; ghåta—clarified butter; guòa—molasses; anna—food grains;
ädi—and so on; ambara—clothing; çayyä—bedding; äsana—sitting places;
äbharaëa-ädayaù—carrying ornaments and so on; sarve—everything;
eva—certainly; käma-dughäù—fulfilling all desires; nadäù—big rivers;
kumuda-agrät—from the top of Kumuda Mountain; patantaù—flowing;
tam—to that; uttareëa—on the northern side; ilävåtam—the land known as
Ilävåta-varña; upayojayanti—give happiness.
TRANSLATION
Similarly, on Kumuda Mountain there is a great banyan tree, which is called
Çatavalça because it has a hundred main branches. From those branches come
many roots, from which many rivers are flowing. These rivers flow down from
the top of the mountain to the northern side of Ilävåta-varña for the benefit of
those who live there. Because of these flowing rivers, all the people have ample
supplies of milk, yogurt, honey, clarified butter [ghee], molasses, food grains,
clothes, bedding, sitting places and ornaments. All the objects they desire are
sufficiently supplied for their prosperity, and therefore they are very happy.
PURPORT
The prosperity of humanity does not depend on a demoniac civilization
that has no culture and no knowledge but has only gigantic skyscrapers and
huge automobiles always rushing down the highways. The products of nature
are sufficient. When there is a profuse supply of milk, yogurt, honey, food
grains, ghee, molasses, dhotis, saris, bedding, sitting places and ornaments, the
residents are actually opulent. When a profuse supply of water from the river
inundates the land, all these things can be produced, and there will not be
scarcity. This all depends, however, on the performance of sacrifice as
described in the Vedic literature.
annäd bhavanti bhütäni
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
664
parjanyäd anna-sambhavaù
yajïäd bhavati parjanyo
yajïaù karma-samudbhavaù
"All living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from rains. Rains
are produced by performance of yajïa [sacrifice], and yajïa is born of
prescribed duties." These are the prescriptions given in Bhagavad-gétä (3.14). If
people follow these principles in full Kåñëa consciousness, human society will
be prosperous, and they will be happy both in this life and in the next.
TEXT 25
YaaNauPaJauza<aaNaa& Na k-daicdiPa Pa[JaaNaa& vl/IPail/Ta(c)-MaSveddaEGaRNDYaJaraMaYa‚
Ma*TYauXaqTaaeZ<avEv<YaaeRPaSaGaaRdYaSTaaPaivXaeza >aviNTa YaavÂqv& Sau%& iNariTaXaYa‚
Maev )) 25 ))
yän upajuñäëänäà na kadäcid api prajänäà
valé-palita-klama-sveda-daurgandhya-jarämaya-måtyu-çétoñëa-vaivarëyopasarg
ädayas täpa-viçeñä bhavanti yävaj jévaà sukhaà niratiçayam eva.
SYNONYMS
yän—which (all the products produced because of the flowing rivers
mentioned above); upajuñäëänäm—of persons who are fully utilizing; na—not;
kadäcit—at any time; api—certainly; prajänäm—of the citizens;
valé—wrinkles; palita—grey hair; klama—fatigue; sveda—perspiration;
daurgandhya—bad odors because of unclean perspiration; jarä—old age;
ämaya—disease; måtyu—untimely death; çéta—severe cold; uñëa—scorching
heat; vaivarëya—fading of the luster of the body; upasarga—troubles;
ädayaù—and so on; täpa—of sufferings; viçeñäù—varieties; bhavanti—are;
yävat—as long as; jévam—life; sukham—happiness; niratiçayam—unlimited;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
665
eva—only.
TRANSLATION
The residents of the material world who enjoy the products of these flowing
rivers have no wrinkles on their bodies and no grey hair. They never feel
fatigue, and perspiration does not give their bodies a bad odor. They are not
afflicted by old age, disease or untimely death, they do not suffer from chilly
cold or scorching heat, nor do their bodies lose their luster. They all live very
happily, without anxieties, until death.
PURPORT
This verse hints at the perfection of human society even within this
material world. The miserable conditions of this material world can be
corrected by a sufficient supply of milk, yogurt, honey, ghee, molasses, food
grains, ornaments, bedding, sitting places and so on. This is human civilization.
Ample food grains can be produced through agricultural enterprises, and
profuse supplies of milk, yogurt and ghee can be arranged through cow
protection. Abundant honey can be obtained if the forests are protected.
Unfortunately, in modern civilization, men are busy killing the cows that are
the source of yogurt, milk and ghee, they are cutting down all the trees that
supply honey, and they are opening factories to manufacture nuts, bolts,
automobiles and wine instead of engaging in agriculture. How can the people
be happy? They must suffer from all the misery of materialism. Their bodies
become wrinkled and gradually deteriorate until they become almost like
dwarves, and a bad odor emanates from their bodies because of unclean
perspiration resulting from eating all kinds of nasty things. This is not human
civilization. If people actually want happiness in this life and want to prepare
for the best in the next life, they must adopt a Vedic civilization. In a Vedic
civilization, there is a full supply of all the necessities mentioned above.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
666
TEXT 26
ku-r(r)ku-rrku-SauM>avEk-ªi}akU-$=iXaiXarPaTa(r)åck-iNazDaiXaNaqvaSak-iPal/Xa«‚
vEdUYaRJaaåiDah&SazR>aNaaGak-al/ÅrNaardadYaae iv&XaiTaiGarYaae Maerae" k-i<aRk-aYaa
wv ke-Sar>aUTaa MaUl/deXae PairTa oPaoeáa" )) 26 ))
kuraìga-kurara-kusumbha-vaikaìka-triküöa-çiçira-pataìga-rucaka-niñadha-çi
néväsa-kapila-çaìkha-vaidürya-järudhi-haàsa-åñabha-näga-kälaïjara-näradäd
ayo viàçati-girayo meroù karëikäyä iva kesara-bhütä müla-deçe parita
upakÿptäù.
SYNONYMS
kuraìga—Kuraìga; kurara—Kurara;
kusumbha-vaikaìka-triküöa-çiçira-pataìga-rucaka-niñadha-çinéväsa-kapila-çaìk
ha-vaidürya-järudhi-haàsa-åñabha-näga-kälaïjara-närada—the names of
mountains; ädayaù—and so on; viàçati-girayaù—twenty mountains;
meroù—of Sumeru Mountain; karëikäyäù—of the whorl of the lotus;
iva—like; kesara-bhütäù—as filaments; müla-deçe—at the base; paritaù—all
around; upakÿptäù—arranged by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
There are other mountains beautifully arranged around the foot of Mount
Meru like the filaments around the whorl of a lotus flower. Their names are
Kuraìga, Kurara, Kusumbha, Vaikaìka, Triküöa, Çiçira, Pataìga, Rucaka,
Niñadha, Sinéväsa, Kapila, Çaìkha, Vaidürya, Järudhi, Haàsa, Åñabha, Näga,
Kälaïjara and Närada.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
667
TEXT 27
Ja#=rdevkU-$=aE Maeå& PaUveR<aaíadXaYaaeJaNaSahóMaudGaaYaTaaE iÜSahó& Pa*QauTau(r)aE
>avTa" ) WvMaPare<a PavNaPaairYaa}aaE di+a<aeNa kE-l/aSak-rvqraE Pa[aGaaYa‚
TaavevMautarTaiñé*(r)Mak-ravíi>areTaE" PairSTa*Taae_iGanirv PairTaêk-aiSTak-aÄNa‚
iGair" )) 27 ))
jaöhara-devaküöau meruà pürveëäñöädaça-yojana-sahasram udagäyatau
dvi-sahasraà påthu-tuìgau bhavataù; evam apareëa pavana-päriyätrau
dakñiëena kailäsa-karavérau präg-äyatäv evam uttaratas triçåìga-makaräv
añöabhir etaiù parisåto 'gnir iva paritaç cakästi käïcana-giriù.
SYNONYMS
jaöhara-devaküöau—two mountains named Jaöhara and Devaküöa;
merum—Sumeru Mountain; pürveëa—on the eastern side;
añöädaça-yojana-sahasram—eighteen thousand yojanas;
udagäyatau—stretching from north to south; dvi-sahasram—two thousand
yojanas; påthu-tuìgau—in width and height; bhavataù—there are;
evam—similarly; apareëa—on the western side; pavana-päriyätrau—two
mountains named Pavana and Päriyätra; dakñiëena—on the southern side;
kailäsa-karavérau—two mountains named Kailäsa and Karavéra;
präk-äyatau—expanding east and west; evam—similarly; uttarataù—on the
northern side; triçåìga-makarau—two mountains named Triçåìga and Makara;
añöabhiù etaiù—by these eight mountains; parisåtaù—surrounded; agniù
iva—like fire; paritaù—all over; cakästi—brilliantly shines;
käïcana-giriù—the golden mountain named Sumeru, or Meru.
TRANSLATION
On the eastern side of Sumeru Mountain are two mountains named Jaöhara
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
668
and Devaküöa, which extend to the north and south for 18,000 yojanas
[144,000 miles]. Similarly, on the western side of Sumeru are two mountains
named Pavana and Päriyätra, which also extend north and south for the same
distance. On the southern side of Sumeru are two mountains named Kailäsa and
Karavéra, which extend east and west for 18,000 yojanas, and on the northern
side of Sumeru, extending for the same distance east and west, are two
mountains named Triçåìga and Makara. The width and height of all these
mountains is 2,000 yojanas [16,000 miles]. Sumeru, a mountain of solid gold
shining as brilliantly as fire, is surrounded by these eight mountains.
TEXT 28
MaeraeMaURDaRiNa >aGavTa AaTMaYaaeNaeMaRDYaTa oPaoeáa& PaurqMaYauTaYaaeJaNaSaahóq&
SaMacTauróa& XaaTak-aEM>aq& vdiNTa )) 28 ))
meror mürdhani bhagavata ätma-yoner madhyata upakÿptäà purém
ayuta-yojana-sähasréà sama-caturasräà çätakaumbhéà vadanti.
SYNONYMS
meroù—of Sumeru Mountain; mürdhani—on the head; bhagavataù—of the
most powerful being; ätma-yoneù—of Lord Brahmä; madhyataù—in the
middle; upakÿptäm—situated; purém—the great township; ayuta-yojana—ten
thousand yojanas; sähasrém—one thousand; sama-caturasräm—of the same
length on all sides; çäta-kaumbhém—made entirely of gold; vadanti—the great
learned sages say.
TRANSLATION
In the middle of the summit of Meru is the township of Lord Brahmä. Each
of its four sides is calculated to extend for ten million yojanas [eighty million
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
669
miles]. It is made entirely of gold, and therefore learned scholars and sages call
it Çätakaumbhé.
TEXT 29
TaaMaNauPairTaae l/aek-Paal/aNaaMaíaNaa& YaQaaidXa& YaQaaæPa& TaurqYaMaaNaeNa Paurae
_íavuPaoeáa" )) 29 ))
täm anuparito loka-pälänäm añöänäà yathä-diçaà yathä-rüpaà
turéya-mänena puro 'ñöäv upakÿptäù.
SYNONYMS
täm—that great township named Brahmapuré; anuparitaù—surrounding;
loka-pälänäm—of the governors of the planets; añöänäm—eight;
yathä-diçam—according to the directions; yathä-rüpam—in exact conformity
with the township of Brahmapuré; turéya-mänena—by measurement only one
fourth; puraù—townships; añöau—eight; upakÿptäù—situated.
TRANSLATION
Surrounding Brahmapuré in all directions are the residences of the eight
principal governors of the planetary systems, beginning with King Indra. These
abodes are similar to Brahmapuré but are one fourth the size.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura confirms that the townships of Lord
Brahmä and the eight subordinate governors of the planetary systems,
beginning with Indra, are mentioned in other Puräëas.
merau nava-püräëi syur
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
670
manovaty amarävaté
tejovaté saàyamané
tathä kåñëäìganä parä
çraddhävaté gandhavaté
tathä cänyä mahodayä
yaçovaté ca brahmendra
bahyädénäà yathä-kramam
Brahmä's township is known as Manovaté, and those of his assistants such as
Indra and Agni are known as Amarävaté, Tejovaté, Saàyamané, Kåñëäìganä,
Çraddhävaté, Gandhavaté, Mahodayä and Yaçovaté. Brahmapuré is situated in
the middle, and the other eight purés surround it in all directions.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Sixteenth Chapter of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled, "A Description of Jambüdvépa."
17. The Descent of the River Ganges
The Seventeenth Chapter describes the origin of the Ganges River and
how it flows in and around Ilävåta-varña. There is also a description of the
prayers Lord Çiva offers to Lord Saìkarñaëa, part of the quadruple expansions
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Viñëu once approached Bali
Mahäräja while the King was performing a sacrifice. The Lord appeared before
him as Trivikrama, or Vämana, and begged alms from the King in the form of
three steps of land. With two steps, Lord Vämana covered all three planetary
systems and pierced the covering of the universe with the toes of His left foot.
A few drops of water from the Causal Ocean leaked through this hole and fell
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
671
on the head of Lord Çiva, where they remained for one thousand millenniums.
These drops of water are the sacred Ganges River. It first flows onto the
heavenly planets, which are located on the soles of Lord Viñëu's feet. The
Ganges River is known by many names, such as the Bhägérathé and the
Jähnavé. It purifies Dhruvaloka and the planets of the seven sages because both
Dhruva and the sages have no other desire than to serve the Lord's lotus feet.
The Ganges River, emanating from the lotus feet of the Lord, inundates the
heavenly planets, especially the moon, and then flows through Brahmapuré
atop Mount Meru. Here the river divides into four branches (known as Sétä,
Alakanandä, Cakñu and Bhadrä), which then flow down to the ocean of salt
water. The branch known as Sétä flows through Çekhara-parvata and
Gandhamädana-parvata and then flows down to Bhadräçva-varña, where it
mixes with the ocean of salt water in the West. The Cakñu branch flows
through Mälyavän-giri and, after reaching Ketumäla-varña, mixes with the
ocean of salt water in the West. The branch known as Bhadrä flows onto
Mount Meru, Mount Kumuda, and the Néla, Çveta and Çåìgavän mountains
before it reaches Kuru-deça, where it flows into the ocean of salt water in the
north. The Alakanandä branch flows through Brahmälaya, crosses over many
mountains, including Hemaküöa and Himaküöa, and then reaches
Bhärata-varña, where it flows into the southern side of the ocean of salt water.
Many other rivers and their branches flow through the nine varñas.
The tract of land known as Bhärata-varña is the field of activities, and the
other eight varñas are for persons who are meant to enjoy heavenly comfort. In
each of these eight beautiful provinces, the celestial denizens enjoy various
standards of material comfort and pleasure. A different incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead distributes His mercy in each of the nine
varñas of Jambüdvépa.
In the Ilävåta-varña, Lord Çiva is the only male. There he lives with his wife,
Bhaväné, who is attended by many maidservants. If any other male enters that
province, Bhaväné curses him to become a woman. Lord Çiva worships Lord
Saìkarñaëa by offering various prayers, one of which is as follows: "My dear
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
672
Lord, please liberate all Your devotees from material life and bind all the
nondevotees to the material world. Without Your mercy, no one can be
released from the bondage of material existence."
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
Ta}a >aGavTa" Saa+aaÛjil/(r)SYa ivZ<aaeivR§-MaTaae vaMaPaadax(GauïNa%iNa‚
i>aRàaeßaR<@k-$=ahivvre<aaNTa"Pa[ivía Yaa baùJal/Daara TaÀr<aPaªJaavNaeJa‚
Naaå<aik-ÅLk-aePariÅTaai%l/JaGadgaMal/aPahaePaSPaXaRNaaMal/a Saa+aaÙGavTPadqTYa
NauPal/i+aTavcae_i>aDaqYaMaaNaaiTaMahTaa k-ale/Na YauGaSahóaePal/+a<aeNa idvae
MaUDaRNYavTaTaar YataiÜZ<auPadMaahu" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
tatra bhagavataù säkñäd yajïa-liìgasya viñëor vikramato
väma-pädäìguñöha-nakha-nirbhinnordhväëòa-kaöäha-vivareëäntaù-praviñöä yä
bähya-jala-dhärä
tac-caraëa-paìkajävanejanäruëa-kiïjalkoparaïjitäkhila-jagad-agha-maläpaho
pasparçanämalä säkñäd bhagavat-padéty anupalakñita-vaco
'bhidhéyamänäti-mahatä kälena yuga-sahasropalakñaëena divo mürdhany
avatatära yat tad viñëu-padam ähuù.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tatra—at that time;
bhagavataù—of the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
säkñät—directly; yajïa-liìgasya—the enjoyer of the results of all sacrifices;
viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; vikramataù—while taking His second step;
väma-päda—of His left leg; aìguñöha—of the big toe; nakha—by the nail;
nirbhinna—pierced; ürdhva—upper; aëòa-kaöäha—the covering of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
673
universe (consisting of seven layers-earth, water, fire, etc.); vivareëa—through
the bole; antaù-praviñöä—having entered the universe; yä—which;
bähya-jala-dhärä—the flow of water from the Causal Ocean outside the
universe; tat—of Him; caraëa-paìkaja—of the lotus feet; avanejana—by the
washing; aruëa-kiïjalka—by reddish powder; uparaïjitä—being colored;
akhila-jagat—of the whole world; agha-mala—the sinful activities;
apahä—destroys; upasparçana—the touching of which; amalä—completely
pure; säkñät—directly; bhagavat-padé—emanating from the lotus feet of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; iti—thus; anupalakñita—described;
vacaù—by the name; abhidhéyamänä—being called; ati-mahatä kälena—after a
long time; yuga-sahasra-upalakñaëena—consisting of one thousand
millenniums; divaù—of the sky; mürdhani—on the head (Dhruvaloka);
avatatära—descended; yat—which; tat—that; viñëu-padam—the lotus feet of
Lord Viñëu; ähuù—they call.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, Lord Viñëu, the enjoyer of all
sacrifices, appeared as Vämanadeva in the sacrificial arena of Bali Mahäräja.
Then He extended His left foot to the end of the universe and pierced a hole in
its covering with the nail of His big toe. Through the hole, the pure water of
the Causal Ocean entered this universe as the Ganges River. Having washed
the lotus feet of the Lord, which are covered with reddish powder, the water of
the Ganges acquired a very beautiful pink color. Every living being can
immediately purify his mind of material contamination by touching the
transcendental water of the Ganges, yet its waters remain ever pure. Because
the Ganges directly touches the lotus feet of the Lord before descending within
this universe, she is known as Viñëupadé. Later she received other names like
Jähnavé and Bhägérathé. After one thousand millenniums, the water of the
Ganges descended on Dhruvaloka, the topmost planet in this universe.
Therefore all learned sages and scholars proclaim Dhruvaloka to be Viñëupada
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
674
["situated on Lord Viñëu's lotus feet"].
PURPORT
In this verse, Çukadeva Gosvämé describes the glories of the Ganges River.
The water of the Ganges is called patita-pävané, the deliverer of all sinful living
beings. It is a proven fact that a person who regularly bathes in the Ganges is
purified both externally and internally. Externally his body becomes immune
to all kinds of disease, and internally he gradually develops a devotional
attitude toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Throughout India, many
thousands of people live on the banks of the Ganges, and by regularly bathing
in her waters, they are undoubtedly being purified both spiritually and
materially. Many sages, including Çaìkaräcärya, have composed prayers in
praise of the Ganges, and the land of India itself has become glorious because
such rivers as the Ganges, Yamunä, Godävaré, Käveré, Kåñëä and Narmadä
flow there. Anyone living on the land adjacent to these rivers is naturally
advanced in spiritual consciousness. Çréla Madhväcärya says:
värähe väma-pädaà tu
tad-anyeñu tu dakñiëam
pädaà kalpeñu bhagavän
ujjahära trivikramaù
Standing on His right foot and extending His left to the edge of the universe,
Lord Vämana became known as Trivikrama, the incarnation who performed
three heroic deeds.
TEXT 2
Ya}a h vav vqrv]Ta AaEtaaNaPaaid" ParMa>aaGavTaae_SMaTku-l/devTaacr<aarivNdae‚
dk-iMaiTa YaaMaNauSavNaMauTk*-ZYaMaa<a>aGavÙi¢-YaaeGaeNa d*!& i(c)-ÛMaaNaaNTaôRdYa
AaETk-<<35>yivvXaaMaqil/Tal/aecNaYauGal/ku-@(Mal/ivGail/TaaMal/baZPak-l/Yaai>aVYa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
675
JYa‚
MaaNaraeMaPaul/k-ku-l/k-ae_DauNaaiPa ParMaadre<a iXarSaa ib>aiTaR )) 2 ))
yatra ha väva véra-vrata auttänapädiù parama-bhägavato
'smat-kula-devatä-caraëäravindodakam iti yäm anusavanam
utkåñyamäëa-bhagavad-bhakti-yogena dåòhaà klidyamänäntar-hådaya
autkaëöhya-vivaçämélita-locana-yugala-kuòmala-vigalitämala-bäñpa-kalayäbhi
vyajyamäna-roma-pulaka-kulako 'dhunäpi paramädareëa çirasä bibharti.
SYNONYMS
yatra ha väva—in Dhruvaloka; véra-vrataù—firmly determined;
auttänapädiù—the famous son of Mahäräja Uttänapäda;
parama-bhägavataù—the most exalted devotee; asmat—our; kula-devatä—of
the family Deity; caraëa-aravinda—of the lotus feet; udakam—in the water;
iti—thus; yäm—which; anusavanam—constantly; utkåñyamäëa—being
increased; bhagavat-bhakti-yogena—by devotional service unto the Lord;
dåòham—greatly; klidyamäna-antaù-hådayaù—being softened within the core
of his heart; autkaëöhya—by great anxiety; vivaça—spontaneously;
amélita—slightly open; locana—of eyes; yugala—pair; kuòmala—from the
flowerlike; vigalita—emanating; amala—uncontaminated; bäñpa-kalayä—with
tears; abhivyajyamäna—being manifested; roma-pulaka-kulakaù—whose
symptoms of ecstasy on the body; adhunä api—even now;
parama-ädareëa—with great reverence; çirasä—by the head; bibharti—he
bears.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Mahäräja, the famous son of Mahäräja Uttänapäda, is known as the
most exalted devotee of the Supreme Lord because of his firm determination in
executing devotional service. Knowing that the sacred Ganges water washes the
lotus feet of Lord Viñëu, Dhruva Mahäräja, situated on his own planet, to this
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
676
very day accepts that water on his head with great devotion. Because he
constantly thinks of Kåñëa very devoutly within the core of his heart, he is
overcome with ecstatic anxiety. Tears flow from his half-open eyes, and
eruptions appear on his entire body.
PURPORT
When a person is firmly fixed in devotional service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he is described as véra-vrata, fully determined. Such a
devotee increases his ecstasy in devotional service more and more. Thus as
soon as he remembers Lord Viñëu, his eyes fill with tears. This is a symptom of
a mahä-bhägavata. Dhruva Mahäräja maintained himself in that devotional
ecstasy, and Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu also gave us a practical example of
transcendental ecstasy when He lived at Jagannätha Puré. His pastimes there
are fully narrated in Caitanya-caritämåta.
TEXT 3
TaTa" Saá ‰zYaSTaTPa[>aavai>aja Yaa& NaNau TaPaSaAaTYaiNTak-I iSaiÖreTaavTaq
>aGaviTa SavaRTMaiNa vaSaudeve_NauParTa>ai¢-YaaeGal/a>aeNaEvaePaei+aTaaNYaaQaaRTMaGaTaYaae
Maui¢-iMavaGaTaa& MauMau+av wv SabhuMaaNaMaÛaiPa Ja$=aJaU$E=åÜhiNTa )) 3 ))
tataù sapta åñayas tat prabhäväbhijïä yäà nanu tapasa ätyantiké siddhir etävaté
bhagavati sarvätmani väsudeve
'nuparata-bhakti-yoga-läbhenaivopekñitänyärthätma-gatayo muktim ivägatäà
mumukñava iva sabahu-mänam adyäpi jaöä-jüöair udvahanti.
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; sapta åñayaù—the seven great sages (beginning with
Maréci); tat prabhäva-abhijïäù—who knew very well the influence of the
Ganges River; yäm—this Ganges water; nanu—indeed; tapasaù—of our
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
677
austerities; ätyantiké—the ultimate; siddhiù—perfection; etävaté—this much;
bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-ätmani—in the
all-pervading; väsudeve—Kåñëa; anuparata—continuous; bhakti-yoga—of the
mystic process of devotional service; läbhena—simply by achieving this
platform; eva—certainly; upekñita—neglected; anya—other;
artha-ätma-gatayaù—all other means of perfection (namely religion, economic
development, sense gratification and liberation); muktim—liberation from
material bondage; iva—like; ägatäm—obtained; mumukñavaù—persons
desiring liberation; iva—like; sa-bahu-mänam—with great honor; adya
api—even now; jaöä-jüöaiù—with matted locks of hair; udvahanti—they carry.
TRANSLATION
The seven great sages [Maréci, Vasiñöha, Atri and so on] reside on planets
beneath Dhruvaloka. Well aware of the influence of the water of the Ganges, to
this day they keep Ganges water on the tufts of hair on their heads. They have
concluded that this is the ultimate wealth, the perfection of all austerities, and
the best means of prosecuting transcendental life. Having obtained
uninterrupted devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they
neglect all other beneficial processes like religion, economic development, sense
gratification and even merging into the Supreme. Just as jïänés think that
merging into the existence of the Lord is the highest truth, these seven exalted
personalities accept devotional service as the perfection of life.
PURPORT
Transcendentalists are divided into two primary groups: the nirviçeña-vädés,
or impersonalists, and the bhaktas, or devotees. The impersonalists do not
accept spiritual varieties of life. They want to merge into the existence of the
Supreme Lord in His Brahman feature (the brahmajyoti). The devotees,
however, desire to take part in the transcendental activities of the Supreme
Lord. In the upper planetary system, the topmost planet is Dhruvaloka, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
678
beneath Dhruvaloka are the seven planets occupied by the great sages,
beginning with Maréci, Vasiñöha and Atri. All these sages regard devotional
service as the highest perfection of life. Therefore they all carry the holy water
of the Ganges on their heads. This verse proves that for one who has achieved
the platform of pure devotional service, nothing else is important, even
so-called liberation (kaivalya). Çréla Çrédhara Svämé states that only by
achieving pure devotional service of the Lord can one give up all other
engagements as insignificant. Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté confirms his statement
as follows:
kaivalyaà narakäyate tri-daça-pür äkäça-puñpäyate
durdäntendriya-käla-sarpa-paöalé protkhäta-daàñöräyate
viçvaà pürëa-sukhäyate vidhi-mahendrädiç ca kéöäyate
yat käruëya-kaöäkña-vaibhavavatäà taà gauram eva stumaù
(Caitanya-candrämåta 5)
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has perfectly enunciated and broadcast the process
of bhakti-yoga. Consequently, for one who has taken shelter at the lotus feet of
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, the highest perfection of the Mäyävädés, kaivalya,
or becoming one with the Supreme, is considered hellish, to say nothing of the
karmés' aspiration to be promoted to the heavenly planets. Devotees consider
such goals to be worthless phantasmagoria. There are also yogés, who try to
control their senses, but they can never succeed without coming to the stage of
devotional service. The senses are compared to poisonous snakes, but the
senses of a bhakta engaged in the service of the Lord are like snakes with their
poisonous fangs removed. The yogé tries to suppress his senses, but even great
mystics like Viçvämitra fail in the attempt. Viçvämitra was conquered by his
senses when he was captivated by Menakä during his meditation. She later
gave birth to Çakuntalä. The wisest persons in the world, therefore, are the
bhakti-yogés, as Lord Kåñëa confirms in Bhagavad-gétä (6.47):
yoginäm api sarveñäà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
679
mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù
"Of all yogés, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is
the highest of all."
TEXT 4
TaTaae_Naek-Sahók-aei$=ivMaaNaaNaqk-Sax(ku-„l/devYaaNaeNaavTarNTaqNdu Ma<@l/MaavaYaR
b]øSadNae iNaPaTaiTa )) 4 ))
tato 'neka-sahasra-koöi-vimänänéka-saìkula-deva-yänenävatar-anténdu
maëòalam ävärya brahma-sadane nipatati.
SYNONYMS
tataù—after purifying the seven planets of the seven great sages;
aneka—many; sahasra—thousands; koöi—of millions; vimäna-anéka—with
contingents of airplanes; saìkula—congested; deva-yänena—by the spaceways
of the demigods; avataranté—descending; indu-maëòalam—the moon planet;
ävärya—inundated; brahma-sadane—to the abode of Lord Brahmä atop
Sumeru-parvata; nipatati—falls down.
TRANSLATION
After purifying the seven planets near Dhruvaloka [the polestar], the Ganges
water is carried through the spaceways of the demigods in billions of celestial
airplanes. Then it inundates the moon [Candraloka] and finally reaches Lord
Brahmä's abode atop Mount Meru.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
680
PURPORT
We should always remember that the Ganges River comes from the Causal
Ocean, beyond the covering of the universe. After the water of the Causal
Ocean leaks through the hole created by Lord Vämanadeva, it flows down to
Dhruvaloka (the polestar) and then to the seven planets beneath Dhruvaloka.
Then it is carried to the moon by innumerable celestial airplanes, and then it
falls to the top of Mount Meru, which is known as Sumeru-parvata. In this
way, the water of the Ganges finally reaches the lower planets and the peaks of
the Himalayas, and from there it flows through Hardwar and throughout the
plains of India, purifying the entire land. How the Ganges water reaches the
various planets from the top of the universe is explained herein. Celestial
airplanes carry the water from the planets of the sages to other planets.
So-called advanced scientists of the modern age are trying to go to the higher
planets, but at the same time they are experiencing a power shortage on earth.
If they were actually capable scientists, they could personally go by airplane to
other planets, but this they are unable to do. Having now given up their moon
excursions, they are attempting to go to other planets, but without success.
TEXT 5
Ta}a cTauDaaR i>aÛMaaNaa cTaui>aRNaaRMai>aêTauidRXaMai>aSPaNdNTaq NadNadq‚
PaiTaMaevai>aiNaivXaiTa SaqTaal/k-NaNda c+au>aRd]eiTa )) 5 ))
tatra caturdhä bhidyamänä caturbhir nämabhiç catur-diçam abhispandanté
nada-nadé-patim eväbhiniviçati sétälakanandä cakñur bhadreti.
SYNONYMS
tatra—there (on top of Mount Meru); caturdhä—into four branches;
bhidyamänä—being divided; caturbhiù—with four; nämabhiù—names;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
681
catuù-diçam—the four directions (east, west, north and south);
abhispandanté—profusely flowing; nada-nadé-patim—the reservoir of all great
rivers (the ocean); eva—certainly; abhiniviçati—enters; sétä-alakanandä—Sétä
and Alakanandä; cakñuù—Cakñu; bhadrä—Bhadrä; iti—known by these
names.
TRANSLATION
On top of Mount Meru, the Ganges divides into four branches, each of
which gushes in a different direction [east, west, north and south]. These
branches, known by the names Sétä, Alakanandä, Cakñu and Bhadrä, flow down
to the ocean.
TEXT 6
SaqTaa Tau b]øSadNaaTke-Saracl/aidiGairiXa%re>Yaae_Daae_Da" Pa[óvNTaq GaNDa‚
MaadNaMaUDaRSau PaiTaTvaNTare<a >ad]aìvz| Pa[aCYaa& idiXa +aarSaMaud]Mai>aPa[‚
ivXaiTa )) 6 ))
sétä tu brahma-sadanät kesaräcalädi-giri-çikharebhyo 'dho 'dhaù prasravanté
gandhamädana-mürdhasu patitväntareëa bhadräçva-varñaà präcyäà diçi
kñära-samudram abhipraviçati.
SYNONYMS
sétä—the branch known as Sétä; tu—certainly; brahma-sadanät—from
Brahmapuré; kesaräcala-ädi—of Kesaräcala and of other great mountains;
giri—hills; çikharebhyaù—from the tops; adhaù adhaù—downward;
prasravanté—flowing; gandhamädana—of Gandhamädana Mountain;
mürdhasu—on the top; patitvä—falling down; antareëa—within;
bhadräçva-varñam—the province known as Bhadräçva; präcyäm—in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
682
western; diçi—direction; kñära-samudram—the ocean of salt water;
abhipraviçati—enters.
TRANSLATION
The branch of the Ganges known as the Sétä flows through Brahmapuré atop
Mount Meru, and from there it runs down to the nearby peaks of the
Kesaräcala Mountains, which stand almost as high as Mount Meru itself. These
mountains are like a bunch of filaments around Mount Meru. From the
Kesaräcala Mountains, the Ganges falls to the peak of Gandhamädana Mountain
and then flows into the land of Bhadräçva-varña. Finally it reaches the ocean of
salt water in the west.
TEXT 7
Wv& MaaLYaviC^%raiàZPaTaNTaq TaTaae_NauParTaveGaa ke-TauMaal/Mai>a c+au" Pa[TaqCYaa&
idiXa SairTPaiTa& Pa[ivXaiTa )) 7 ))
evaà mälyavac-chikharän niñpatanté tato 'nuparata-vegä ketumälam abhi
cakñuù pratécyäà diçi sarit-patià praviçati.
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; mälyavat-çikharät—from the top of Mälyavän Mountain;
niñpatanté—falling down; tataù—thereafter; anuparata-vegä—whose force is
uninterrupted; ketumälam abhi—into the land known as Ketumäla-varña;
cakñuù—the branch known as Cakñu; pratécyäm—in the West; diçi—direction;
sarit-patim—the ocean; praviçati—enters into.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
683
The branch of the Ganges known as Cakñu falls onto the summit of
Mälyavän Mountain and from there cascades onto the land of Ketumäla-varña.
The Ganges flows incessantly through Ketumäla-varña and in this way also
reaches the ocean of salt water in the West.
TEXT 8
>ad]a caetarTaae MaeåiXarSaae iNaPaiTaTaa iGairiXa%raiÓiriXa%rMaiTahaYa
é*(r)vTa" é*(r)advSYaNdMaaNaa otara&STau ku-æNai>aTa odqCYaa& idiXa Jal/‚
iDaMai>aPa[ivXaiTa )) 8 ))
bhadrä cottarato meru-çiraso nipatitä giri-çikharäd giri-çikharam atihäya
çåìgavataù çåìgäd avasyandamänä uttaräàs tu kurün abhita udécyäà diçi
jaladhim abhipraviçati.
SYNONYMS
bhadrä—the branch known as Bhadrä; ca—also; uttarataù—to the northern
side; meru-çirasaù—from the top of Mount Meru; nipatitä—having fallen;
giri-çikharät—from the peak of Kumuda Mountain; giri-çikharam—to the peak
of Néla Mountain; atihäya—passing over as if not touching; çåìgavataù—of the
mountain known as Çåìgavän; çåìgät—from the peak;
avasyandamänä—flowing; uttarän—the northern; tu—but; kurün—the land
known as Kuru; abhitaù—on all sides; udécyäm—in the northern;
diçi—direction; jaladhim—the ocean of salt water; abhipraviçati—enters into.
TRANSLATION
The branch of the Ganges known as Bhadrä flows from the northern side of
Mount Meru. Its waters fall onto the peaks of Kumuda Mountain, Mount Néla,
Çveta Mountain and Çåìgavän Mountain in succession. Then it runs down into
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
684
the province of Kuru and, after crossing through that land, flows into the
saltwater ocean in the north.
TEXT 9
TaQaEval/k-NaNda di+a<aeNa b]øSadNaaØhUiNa iGairkU-$=aNYaiTa§-MYa heMakU-‚
$=aÖEMakU-$=aNYaiTar>aSaTarr&hSaa lu/#=YaNTaq >aarTaMai>avz| di+a<aSYaa& idiXa
Jal/iDaMai>aPa[ivXaiTa YaSYaa& òaNaaQa| caGaC^Ta" Pau&Sa" Pade Pade_ìMaeDa‚
raJaSaUYaadqNaa& f-l&/ Na dul/R>aiMaiTa )) 9 ))
tathaivälakanandä dakñiëena brahma-sadanäd bahüni giri-küöäny atikramya
hemaküöäd dhaimaküöäny ati-rabhasatara-raàhasä luöhayanté bhäratam
abhivarñaà dakñiëasyäà diçi jaladhim abhipraviçati yasyäà snänärthaà
cägacchataù puàsaù pade pade 'çvamedha-räjasüyädénäà phalaà na
durlabham iti.
SYNONYMS
tathä eva—similarly; alakanandä—the branch known as Alakanandä;
dakñiëena—by the southern side; brahma-sadanät—from the city known as
Brahmapuré; bahüni—many; giri-küöäni—the tops of mountains;
atikramya—crossing over; hemaküöät—from Hemaküöa Mountain;
haimaküöäni—and Himaküöa; ati-rabhasatara—more fiercely; raàhasä—with
great force; luöhayanté—plundering; bhäratam abhivarñam—on all sides of
Bhärata-varña; dakñiëasyäm—in the southern; diçi—direction; jaladhim—the
ocean of salt water; abhipraviçati—enters into; yasyäm—in which;
snäna-artham—for bathing; ca—and; ägacchataù—of one who is coming;
puàsaù—a person; pade pade—at every step; açvamedha-räjasüya-ädénäm—of
great sacrifices like the Açvamedha yajïa and Räjasüya yajïa; phalam—the
result; na—not; durlabham—very difficult to obtain; iti—thus.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
685
TRANSLATION
Similarly, the branch of the Ganges known as Alakanandä flows from the
southern side of Brahmapuré [Brahma-sadana]. Passing over the tops of
mountains in various lands, it falls down with fierce force upon the peaks of the
mountains Hemaküöa and Himaküöa. After inundating the tops of those
mountains, the Ganges falls down onto the tract of land known as
Bhärata-varña, which she also inundates. Then the Ganges flows into the ocean
of salt water in the south. Persons who come to bathe in this river are
fortunate. It is not very difficult for them to achieve with every step the results
of performing great sacrifices like the Räjasüya and Açvamedha yajïas.
PURPORT
The place where the Ganges flows into the salt water of the Bay of Bengal is
still known as Gaìgä-sägara, or the meeting place of the Ganges and the Bay of
Bengal. On Makara-saìkränti, in the month of January-February, thousands of
people still go there to bathe, hoping to be liberated. That they can actually be
liberated in this way is confirmed herein. For those who bathe in the Ganges
at any time, the results of great sacrifices like the Açvamedha and Räjasüya
yajïas are not at all difficult to achieve. Most people in India are still inclined
to bathe in the Ganges, and there are many places where they can do so. At
Prayäga (Allahabad), many thousands of people gather during the month of
January to bathe in the confluence of the Ganges and Yamunä. Afterward,
many of them go to the confluence of the Bay of Bengal and the Ganges to
take bath there. Thus it is a special facility for all the people of India that they
can bathe in the water of the Ganges at so many places of pilgrimage.
TEXT 10
ANYae c Nada NaÛê vzeR vzeR SaiNTa bhuXaae MaevaRidiGairduihTar" XaTaXa" )) 10
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
686
))
anye ca nadä nadyaç ca varñe varñe santi bahuço merv-ädi-giri-duhitaraù
çataçaù.
SYNONYMS
anye—many others; ca—also; nadäù—rivers; nadyaù—small rivers; ca—and;
varñe varñe—in each tract of land; santi—are; bahuçaù—of many varieties;
meru-ädi-giri-duhitaraù—daughters of the mountains beginning with Meru;
çataçaù—in the hundreds.
TRANSLATION
Many other rivers, both big and small, flow from the top of Mount Meru.
These rivers are like daughters of the mountain, and they flow to the various
tracts of land in hundreds of branches.
TEXT 11
Ta}aaiPa >aarTaMaev vz| k-MaR+ae}aMaNYaaNYaí vzaRi<a SviGaR<aa& Pau<Ya‚
XaezaePa>aaeGaSQaaNaaiNa >aaEMaaiNa SvGaRPadaiNa VYaPaidXaiNTa )) 11 ))
taträpi bhäratam eva varñaà karma-kñetram anyäny añöa varñäëi svargiëäà
puëya-çeñopabhoga-sthänäni bhaumäni svarga-padäni vyapadiçanti.
SYNONYMS
tatra api—out of all of them; bhäratam—known as Bhärata-varña;
eva—certainly; varñam—the tract of land; karma-kñetram—the field of
activities; anyäni—the others; añöa varñäëi—eight tracts of land;
svargiëäm—of the living entities elevated to the heavenly planets by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
687
extraordinary pious activities; puëya—of the results of pious activities;
çeña—of the remainder; upabhoga-sthänäni—the places for material
enjoyment; bhaumäni svarga-padäni—as the heavenly places on earth;
vyapadiçanti—they designate.
TRANSLATION
Among the nine varñas, the tract of land known as Bhärata-varña is
understood to be the field of fruitive activities. Learned scholars and saintly
persons declare the other eight varñas to be meant for very highly elevated pious
persons. After returning from the heavenly planets, they enjoy the remaining
results of their pious activities in these eight earthly varñas.
PURPORT
The heavenly places of enjoyment are divided into three groups: the
celestial heavenly planets, the heavenly places on earth, and the bila heavenly
places, which are found in the lower regions. Among these three classes of
heavenly places (bhauma-svarga-pada-ni), the heavenly places on earth are the
eight varñas other than Bhärata-varña. In Bhagavad-gétä (9.21) Kåñëa says, kñéëe
puëye martya-lokaà viçanti: when the persons living in the heavenly planets
exhaust the results of their pious activities, they return to this earth. In this
way, they are elevated to the heavenly planets, and then they again fall to the
earthly planets. This process is known as brahmäëòa bhramaëa, wandering up
and down throughout the universes. Those who are intelligent—in other
words, those who have not lost their intelligence—do not involve themselves
in this process of wandering up and down. They take to the devotional service
of the Lord so that they can ultimately penetrate the covering of this universe
and enter the spiritual kingdom. Then they are situated on one of the planets
known as Vaikuëöhaloka or, still higher. Kåñëaloka (Goloka Våndävana). A
devotee is never caught in the process of being promoted to the heavenly
planets and again coming down. Therefore Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu says:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
688
ei rüpe brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
[Cc. Madhya 19.151]
Among all the living entities wandering throughout the universe, one who is
most fortunate comes in contact with a representative of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and thus gets the opportunity to execute devotional
service. Those who are sincerely seeking the favor of Kåñëa come in contact
with a guru, a bona fide representative of Kåñëa. The Mäyävädés indulging in
mental speculation and the karmés desiring the results of their actions cannot
become gurus. A guru must be a direct representative of Kåñëa who distributes
the instructions of Kåñëa without any change. Thus only the most fortunate
persons come in contact with the guru. As confirmed in the Vedic literatures,
tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum eväbhigacchet: [MU 1.2.12(20)] one has to search out
a guru to understand the affairs of the spiritual world. Çrémad-Bhägavatam also
confirms this point. Tasmäd guruà prapadyeta jijïäsuù çreya uttamam: [SB
11.3.21] one who is very interested in understanding the activities in the
spiritual world must search out a guru—a bona fide representative of Kåñëa.
From all angles of vision, therefore, the word guru is especially meant for the
bona fide representative of Kåñëa and no one else. Padma Puräëa states,
avaiñëavo gurur na syät: one who is not a Vaiñëava, or who is not a
representative of Kåñëa, cannot be a guru. Even the most qualified brähmaëa
cannot become a guru if he is not a representative of Kåñëa. Brähmaëas are
supposed to acquire six kinds of auspicious qualifications: they become very
learned scholars (paöhana) and very qualified teachers (päöhana); they become
expert in worshiping the Lord or the demigods (yajana), and they teach others
how to execute this worship (yäjana); they qualify themselves as bona fide
persons to receive alms from others (pratigraha), and they distribute the wealth
in charity (däna). Yet even a brähmaëa possessing these qualifications cannot
become a guru unless he is the representative of Kåñëa (gurur na syät).
Vaiñëavaù çva-paco guruù: but a Vaiñëava, a bona fide representative of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
689
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, can become a guru, even if he is
çva-paca, a member of a family of dog-eaters. Of the three divisions of
heavenly planets (svarga-loka), bhauma-svarga is sometimes accepted as the
tract of land in Bhärata-varña known as Kashmir. In this region there are
certainly good facilities for material sense enjoyment, but this is not the
business of a pure transcendentalist. Rüpa Gosvämé describes the engagement
of a pure transcendentalist as follows:
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanaà
bhaktir uttamä
[Cc. Madhya 19.167]
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kåñëa
favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive
activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."
Those who fully engage in devotional service to Kåñëa just to please Him are
not interested in the three divisions of heavenly places, namely, divya-svarga,
bhauma-svarga and bila-svarga.
TEXT 12
Wzu Pauåza<aaMaYauTaPauåzaYauvRzaR<aa& devk-LPaaNaa& NaaGaaYauTaPa[a<aaNaa& vJa]Sa&hNa‚
Nabl/vYaaeMaaedPa[MauidTaMahaSaaErTaiMaQauNaVYavaYaaPavGaRvzRDa*TaEk-Ga>aR k-l/}aa<aa& Ta}a
Tau }aeTaaYauGaSaMa" k-al/ae vTaRTae )) 12 ))
eñu puruñäëäm ayuta-puruñäyur-varñäëäà deva-kalpänäà
nägäyuta-präëänäà
vajra-saàhanana-bala-vayo-moda-pramudita-mahä-saurata-mithuna-vyaväyä
pavarga-varña-dhåtaika-garbha-kalaträëäà tatra tu tretä-yuga-samaù kälo
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
690
vartate.
SYNONYMS
eñu—in these (eight) varñas, or tracts of land; puruñäëäm—of all the men;
ayuta—ten thousand; puruña—by the measure of men; äyuù-varñäëäm—of
those whose years of life; deva-kalpänäm—who are like the demigods;
näga-ayuta-präëänäm—having the strength of ten thousand elephants;
vajra-saàhanana—by bodies as solid as thunderbolts; bala—by bodily strength;
vayaù—by youth; moda—by abundant sense enjoyment; pramudita—being
excited; mahä-saurata—a great deal of sexual; mithuna—combinations of man
and woman; vyaväya-apavarga—at the end of their period of sexual
enjoyment; varña—in the last year; dhåta-eka-garbha—who conceive one
child; kalaträëäm—of those who have wives; tatra—there; tu—but;
tretä-yuga-samaù—exactly like the Tretä-yuga (when there is no tribulation);
kälaù—time; vartate—exists.
TRANSLATION
In these eight varñas, or tracts of land, human beings live ten thousand years
according to earthly calculations. All the inhabitants are almost like demigods.
They have the bodily strength of ten thousand elephants. Indeed, their bodies
are as sturdy as thunderbolts. The youthful duration of their lives is very
pleasing, and both men and women enjoy sexual union with great pleasure for a
long time. After years of sensual pleasure—when a balance of one year of life
remains—the wife conceives a child. Thus the standard of pleasure for the
residents of these heavenly regions is exactly like that of the human beings who
lived during Tretä-yuga.
PURPORT
There are four yugas: Satya-yuga, Tretä-yuga, Dväpara-yuga and Kali-yuga.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
691
During the first yuga, Satya-yuga, people were very pious. Everyone practiced
the mystic yoga system for spiritual understanding and realization of God.
Because everyone was always absorbed in samädhi, no one was interested in
material sense enjoyment. During Tretä-yuga, people enjoyed sense pleasure
without tribulations. Material miseries began in Dväpara-yuga, but they were
not very stringent. Stringent material miseries really began from the advent of
Kali-yuga.
Another point in this verse is that in all eight of these heavenly varñas,
although men and women enjoy sex pleasure, there is no pregnancy.
Pregnancy takes place only in lower-grade life. For example, animals like dogs
and hogs become pregnant twice a year, and each time they beget at least half
a dozen offspring. Even lower species of life such as snakes give birth to
hundreds of young at one time. This verse informs us that in grades of life
higher than ours, pregnancy occurs once in a lifetime. People still have sex life,
but there is no pregnancy. In the spiritual world, people are not very attracted
to sex life, due to their exalted devotional attitude. Practically speaking, there
is no sex life in the spiritual world, but even if sometimes it does occur, there is
no pregnancy at all. On the planet earth, however, human beings do become
pregnant, although the tendency is to avoid having children. In this sinful age
of Kali, people have even taken to the process of killing the child in the womb.
This is the most degraded practice; it can only perpetuate the miserable
material conditions of those who perform it.
TEXT 13
Ya}a h devPaTaYa" SvE" SvEGaR<aNaaYakE-ivRihTaMahahR<aa" SavRTauRku-SauMaSTab‚
k-f-l/ik-Sal/Yaié[YaaNaMYaMaaNaiv<36>=Pal/Taa
iv<36>=iPai>aåPaXauM>aMaaNaåicrk-aNaNaaé[‚
MaaYaTaNavzRiGaird]ae<aqzu TaQaa caMal/Jal/aXaYaezu ivk-civivDaNavvNaåhaMaae‚
dMauidTaraJah&SaJa„l/ku-¡u-<36>=k-ar<@vSaarSac§-vak-aidi>aMaRDauk-riNak-ra„k*-iTai>
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
692
aå‚
PakU-iJaTaezu Jal/§-I@aidi>aivRic}aivNaaedE" Saul/il/TaSaurSauNdrq<aa& k-aMak-il/l/‚
ivl/aSahaSal/Il/avl/aek-ak*-íMaNaaed*íYa" SvEr& ivhriNTa )) 13 ))
yatra ha deva-patayaù svaiù svair gaëa-näyakair vihita-mahärhaëäù
sarvartu-kusuma-stabaka-phala-kisalaya-çriyänamyamäna-viöapa-latä-viöapibh
ir upaçumbhamäna-rucira-känanäçramäyatana-varña-giri-droëéñu tathä
cämala-jaläçayeñu
vikaca-vividha-nava-vanaruhämoda-mudita-räja-haàsa-jala-kukkuöa-käraëòa
va-särasa-cakraväkädibhir madhukara-nikaräkåtibhir upaküjiteñu
jala-kréòädibhir vicitra-vinodaiù sulalita-sura-sundaréëäà
käma-kalila-viläsa-häsa-lélävalokäkåñöa-mano-dåñöayaù svairaà viharanti.
SYNONYMS
yatra ha—in those eight tracts of land; deva-patayaù—the lords of the
demigods, such as Lord Indra; svaiù svaiù—by their own respective;
gaëa-näyakaiù—leaders of the servants; vihita—furnished with;
mahä-arhaëäù—valuable gifts, such as sandalwood pulp and garlands;
sarva-åtu—in all seasons; kusuma-stabaka—of bunches of flowers; phala—of
fruits; kisalaya-çriyä—by the opulences of shoots; änamyamäna—being bent
down; viöapa—whose branches; latä—and creepers; viöapibhiù—by many trees;
upaçumbhamäna—being fully decorated; rucira—beautiful; känana—gardens;
äçrama-äyatana—and many hermitages; varña-giri-droëéñu—the valleys
between the mountains designating the borders of the tracts of land; tathä—as
well as; ca—also; amala-jala-äçayeñu—in lakes with clear water; vikaca—just
fructified; vividha—varieties; nava-vanaruha-ämoda—by the fragrance of lotus
flowers; mudita—enthused; räja-haàsa—great swans; jala-kukkuöa—water
fowl; käraëòava—aquatic birds called käraëòavas; särasa—cranes;
cakraväka-ädibhiù—by birds known as cakraväkas and so on;
madhukara-nikara-äkåtibhiù—by the bumblebees; upaküjiteñu—which were
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
693
made to resound; jala-kréòä-ädibhiù—such as water sports; vicitra—various;
vinodaiù—by pastimes; su-lalita—attractive; sura-sundaréëäm—of the women
of the demigods; käma—from lust; kalila—born; viläsa—pastimes;
häsa—smiling; lélä-avaloka—by playful glances; äkåñöa-manaù—whose minds
are attracted; dåñöayaù—and whose vision is attracted; svairam—very freely;
viharanti—engage in sportive enjoyment.
TRANSLATION
In each of those tracts of land, there are many gardens filled with flowers
and fruits according to the season, and there are beautifully decorated
hermitages as well. Between the great mountains demarcating the borders of
those lands lie enormous lakes of clear water filled with newly grown lotus
flowers. Aquatic birds such as swans, ducks, water chickens, and cranes become
greatly excited by the fragrance of lotus flowers, and the charming sound of
bumblebees fills the air. The inhabitants of those lands are important leaders
among the demigods. Always attended by their respective servants, they enjoy
life in gardens alongside the lakes. In this pleasing situation, the wives of the
demigods smile playfully at their husbands and look upon them with lusty
desires. All the demigods and their wives are constantly supplied with
sandalwood pulp and flower garlands by their servants. In this way, all the
residents of the eight heavenly varñas enjoy, attracted by the activities of the
opposite sex.
PURPORT
Here is a description of the lower heavenly planets. The inhabitants of
those planets enjoy life in a pleasing atmosphere of clear lakes filled with
newly grown lotus flowers and gardens filled with fruits, flowers, various kinds
of birds and humming bees. In that atmosphere they enjoy life with their very
beautiful wives, who are always sexually stimulated. Nonetheless, they are all
devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as will be explained in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
694
subsequent verses. The inhabitants of this earth also desire such heavenly
enjoyment, but when they somehow or other achieve imitation pleasures like
sex and intoxication, they completely forget the service of the Supreme Lord.
In the heavenly planets, however, although the residents enjoy superior sense
gratification, they never forget their positions as eternal servants of the
Supreme Being.
TEXT 14
NavSviPa vzeRzu >aGavaàaraYa<aae MahaPauåz" Pauåza<aa& TadNauGa]haYaaTMaTatv
VYaUheNaaTMaNaaÛaiPa SaiàDaqYaTae )) 14 ))
navasv api varñeñu bhagavän näräyaëo mahä-puruñaù puruñäëäà
tad-anugrahäyätma-tattva-vyühenätmanädyäpi sannidhéyate.
SYNONYMS
navasu—in the nine; api—certainly; varñeñu—tracts of land known as varñas;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; näräyaëaù—Lord Viñëu;
mahä-puruñaù—the Supreme Person; puruñäëäm—unto His various devotees;
tat-anugrahäya—to show His mercy; ätma-tattva-vyühena—by expansions of
Himself in the quadruple forms Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and
Aniruddha; ätmanä—personally; adya api—until now; sannidhéyate—is near
the devotees for accepting their services.
TRANSLATION
To show mercy to His devotees in each of these nine tracts of land, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead known as Näräyaëa expands Himself in His
quadruple principles of Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. In
this way He remains near His devotees to accept their service.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
695
PURPORT
In this connection, Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura informs us that the
demigods worship the Supreme Lord in His various Deity forms (arcä-vigraha)
because except in the spiritual world, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
cannot be directly worshiped in person. In the material world, the Lord is
always worshiped as the arcä-vigraha, or Deity in the temple. There is no
difference between the arcä-vigraha and the original person, and therefore
those who are engaged in worshiping the Deity in the temple in full opulence,
even on this planet, should be understood to be directly in touch with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead without a doubt. As enjoined in the çästras,
arcye viñëau çilä-dhér guruñu nara-matiù: "No one should treat the Deity in the
temple as stone or metal, nor should one think that the spiritual master is an
ordinary human being." One should strictly follow this çästric injunction and
worship the Deity, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without offenses. The
spiritual master is the direct representative of the Lord, and no one should
consider him an ordinary human being. By avoiding offenses against the Deity
and the spiritual master, one can advance in spiritual life, or Kåñëa
consciousness.
In this regard, the following quotation appears in the Laghu-bhägavatämåta:
pädme tu parama-vyomnaù
pürvädye dik-catuñöaye
väsudevädayo vyühaç
catväraù kathitäù kramät
tathä päda-vibhütau ca
nivasanti kramädi me
jalävåti-stha-vaikuëöhasthita
vedavaté-pure
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
696
satyordhve vaiñëave loke
nityäkhye dvärakä-pure
çuddhodäd uttare çvetadvépe
cairävaté-pure
kñérämbudhi-sthitänte
kroòa-paryaìka-dhämani
sätvatéye kvacit tantre
nava vyühäù prakértitäù
catväro väsudevädyä
näräyaëa-nåsiàhakau
hayagrévo mahä-kroòo
brahmä ceti navoditäù
tatra brahmä tu vijïeyaù
pürvokta-vidhayä hariù
"In the Padma Puräëa it is said that in the spiritual world the Lord personally
expands in all directions and is worshiped as Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa,
Pradyumna and Aniruddha. The same God is represented by the Deity in this
material world, which is only one quarter of His creation. Väsudeva,
Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha are also present in the four directions
of this material world. There is a Vaikuëöhaloka covered with water in this
material world, and on that planet is a place called Vedavaté, where Väsudeva
is located. Another planet known as Viñëuloka is situated above Satyaloka,
and there Saìkarñaëa is present. Similarly, in Dvärakä-puré, Pradyumna is the
predominator. On the island known as Çvetadvépa, there is an ocean of milk,
and in the midst of that ocean is a place called Airävaté-pura, where
Aniruddha lies on Ananta. In some of the sätvata-tantras, there is a
description of the nine varñas and the predominating Deity worshiped in each:
(1) Väsudeva, (2) Saìkarñaëa, (3) Pradyumna, (4) Aniruddha, (5) Näräyaëa,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
697
(6) Nåsiàha, (7) Hayagréva, (8) Mahävaräha, and (9) Brahmä. "The Lord
Brahmä mentioned in this connection is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
When there is no fit human being to empower as Lord Brahmä, the Lord
Himself takes the position of Lord Brahmä. Tatra brahmä tu vijïeyaù
pürvokta-vidhayä hariù. That Brahmä mentioned here is Hari Himself.
TEXT 15
wl/av*Tae Tau >aGavaNa( >av Wk- Wv PauMaaà ùNYaSTa}aaParae iNaivRXaiTa
>avaNYaa" XaaPaiNaiMatajae YaTPa[ve+YaTa" ñq>aavSTaTPaêaÜ+YaaiMa )) 15 ))
ilävåte tu bhagavän bhava eka eva pumän na hy anyas taträparo nirviçati
bhavänyäù çäpa-nimitta-jïo yat-pravekñyataù stré-bhävas tat paçcäd vakñyämi.
SYNONYMS
ilävåte—in the tract of land known as Ilävåta-varña; tu—but; bhagavän—the
most powerful; bhavaù—Lord Çiva; eka—only; eva—certainly; pumän—male
person; na—not; hi—certainly; anyaù—any other; tatra—there;
aparaù—besides; nirviçati—enters; bhavänyäù çäpa-nimitta-jïaù—who knows
the cause of the curse by Bhaväné, the wife of Lord Çiva; yat-pravekñyataù—of
one who forcibly enters that tract of land; stré-bhävaù—transformation into a
female; tat—that; paçcät—later; vakñyämi—I shall explain.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: In the tract of land known as Ilävåta-varña, the only
male person is Lord Çiva, the most powerful demigod. Goddess Durgä, the wife
of Lord Çiva, does not like any man to enter that land. If any foolish man dares
to do so, she immediately turns him into a woman. I shall explain this later [in
the Ninth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam].
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
698
TEXT 16
>avaNaqNaaQaE" ñqGa<aabuRdSahóErvåDYaMaaNaae >aGavTaêTauMaURTaeRMaRhaPauåzSYa TaurqYaa&
TaaMaSaq& MaUiTa| Pa[k*-iTaMaaTMaNa" SaªzR<aSa&jaMaaTMaSaMaaiDaæPae<a SaiàDaaPYaETa‚
di>aGa*<aNa( >av oPaDaaviTa )) 16 ))
bhaväné-näthaiù stré-gaëärbuda-sahasrair avarudhyamäno bhagavataç
catur-mürter mahä-puruñasya turéyäà tämaséà mürtià prakåtim ätmanaù
saìkarñaëa-saàjïäm ätma-samädhi-rüpeëa sannidhäpyaitad abhigåëan bhava
upadhävati.
SYNONYMS
bhaväné-näthaiù—by the company of Bhaväné; stré-gaëa—of females;
arbuda-sahasraiù—by ten billion; avarudhyamänaù—always being served;
bhagavataù catuù-mürteù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
expanded in four; mahä-puruñasya—of the Supreme Person; turéyäm—the
fourth expansion; tämasém—related to the mode of ignorance; mürtim—the
form; prakåtim—as the source; ätmanaù—of himself (Lord Çiva);
saìkarñaëa-saàjïäm—known as Saìkarñaëa; ätma-samädhi-rüpeëa—by
meditating upon Him in trance; sannidhäpya—bringing Him near; etat—this;
abhigåëan—clearly chanting; bhavaù—Lord Çiva; upadhävati—worships.
TRANSLATION
In Ilävåta-varña, Lord Çiva is always encircled by ten billion maidservants of
goddess Durgä, who minister to him. The quadruple expansion of the Supreme
Lord is composed of Väsudeva, Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Saìkarñaëa.
Saìkarñaëa, the fourth expansion, is certainly transcendental, but because his
activities of destruction in the material world are in the mode of ignorance, He
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
699
is known as tämasé, the Lord's form in the mode of ignorance. Lord Çiva knows
that Saìkarñaëa is the original cause of his own existence, and thus he always
meditates upon Him in trance by chanting the following mantra.
PURPORT
Sometimes we see a picture of Lord Çiva engaged in meditation. This verse
explains that Lord Çiva is always meditating upon Lord Saìkarñaëa in trance.
Lord Çiva is in charge of the destruction of the material world. Lord Brahmä
creates the material world, Lord Viñëu maintains it, and Lord Çiva destroys it.
Because destruction is in the mode of ignorance, Lord Çiva and his
worshipable Deity, Saìkarñaëa, are technically called tämasé. Lord Çiva is the
incarnation of tamo-guëa. Since both Lord Çiva and Saìkarñaëa are always
enlightened and situated in the transcendental position, they have nothing to
do with the modes of material nature—goodness, passion and ignorance—but
because their activities involve them with the mode of ignorance, they are
sometimes called tämasé.
TEXT 17
é[q>aGavaNauvac
p NaMaae >aGavTae MahaPauåzaYa SavRGau<aSa&:YaaNaaYaaNaNTaaYaaVYa¢-aYa NaMa
wiTa )) 17 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
oà namo bhagavate mahä-puruñäya sarva-guëa-saìkhyänäyänantäyävyaktäya
nama iti.
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the most powerful Lord Çiva says; om namo bhagavate—O
Supreme Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
700
mahä-puruñäya—who are the Supreme person; sarva-guëa-saìkhyänäya—the
reservoir of all transcendental qualities; anantäya—the unlimited;
avyaktäya—not manifested within the material world; namaù—my respectful
obeisances; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
The most powerful Lord Çiva says: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You in Your expansion as Lord Saìkarñaëa.
You are the reservoir of all transcendental qualities. Although You are
unlimited, You remain unmanifest to the nondevotees.
TEXT 18
>aJae >aJaNYaar<aPaadPaªJa&
>aGaSYa k*-TòSYa Par& ParaYa<aMa( )
>a¢e-Zvl&/ >aaivTa>aUTa>aavNa&
>avaPah& Tva >av>aavMaqìrMa( )) 18 ))
bhaje bhajanyäraëa-päda-paìkajaà
bhagasya kåtsnasya paraà paräyaëam
bhakteñv alaà bhävita-bhüta-bhävanaà
bhaväpahaà tvä bhava-bhävam éçvaram
SYNONYMS
bhaje—I worship; bhajanya—O worshipable Lord;
araëa-päda-paìkajam—whose lotus feet protect His devotees from all fearful
situations; bhagasya—of opulences; kåtsnasya—of all different varieties
(wealth, fame, strength, knowledge, beauty and renunciation); param—the
best; paräyaëam—the ultimate shelter; bhakteñu—to the devotees;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
701
alam—beyond value; bhävita-bhüta-bhävanam—who manifests His different
forms for the satisfaction of His devotees; bhava-apaham—who stops the
devotees' repetition of birth and death; tvä—unto You; bhava-bhävam—who is
the origin of the material creation; éçvaram—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, You are the only worshipable person, for You are the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of all opulences. Your secure lotus feet
are the only source of protection for all Your devotees, whom You satisfy by
manifesting Yourself in various forms. O my Lord, You deliver Your devotees
from the clutches of material existence. Nondevotees, however, remain
entangled in material existence by Your will. Kindly accept me as Your eternal
servant.
TEXT 19
Na YaSYa MaaYaaGau<aictav*itai>a‚
iNaRrq+aTaae ù<viPa d*iírJYaTae )
wRXae YaQaa Naae_iJaTaMaNYaur&hSaa&
k-STa& Na MaNYaeTa iJaGaqzuraTMaNa" )) 19 ))
na yasya mäyä-guëa-citta-våttibhir
nirékñato hy aëv api dåñöir ajyate
éçe yathä no 'jita-manyu-raàhasäà
kas taà na manyeta jigéñur ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
na—never; yasya—whose; mäyä—of the illusory energy; guëa—in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
702
qualities; citta—of the heart; våttibhiù—by the activities (thinking. feeling and
willing); nirékñataù—of Him who is glancing; hi—certainly; aëu—slightly;
api—even; dåñöiù—vision; ajyate—is affected; éçe—for the purpose of
regulating; yathä—as; naù—of us; ajita—who have not conquered; manyu—of
anger; raàhasäm—the force; kaù—who; tam—unto Him (the Supreme Lord);
na—not; manyeta—would worship; jigéñuù—aspiring to conquer;
ätmanaù—the senses.
TRANSLATION
We cannot control the force of our anger. Therefore when we look at
material things, we cannot avoid feeling attraction or repulsion for them. But
the Supreme Lord is never affected in this way. Although He glances over the
material world for the purpose of creating, maintaining and destroying it, He is
not affected, even to the slightest degree. Therefore, one who desires to conquer
the force of the senses must take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. Then he
will be victorious.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is always equipped with
inconceivable potencies. Although creation takes place by His glancing over
the material energy, He is not affected by the modes of material nature.
Because of His eternally transcendental position, when the Supreme
Personality of Godhead appears in this material world, the modes of material
nature cannot affect Him. Therefore the Supreme Lord is called
Transcendence, and anyone who wants to be secure from the influence of the
modes of material nature must take shelter of Him.
TEXT 20
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
703
ASad(d*Xaae Ya" Pa[iTa>aaiTa MaaYaYaa
+aqbev MaßaSavTaaMa]l/aecNa" )
Na NaaGavßae_hR<a wRiXare ihYaa
YaTPaadYaae" SPaXaRNaDaizRTaeiNd]Yaa" )) 20 ))
asad-dåço yaù pratibhäti mäyayä
kñébeva madhv-äsava-tämra-locanaù
na näga-vadhvo 'rhaëa éçire hriyä
yat-pädayoù sparçana-dharñitendriyäù
SYNONYMS
asat-dåçaù—for a person with polluted vision; yaù—who; pratibhäti—appears;
mäyayä—the influence of mäyä; kñébaù—one who is inebriated or angry;
iva—like; madhu—by honey; äsava—and liquor; tämra-locanaù—having eyes
reddish like copper; na—not; näga-vadhvaù—the wives of the serpent demon;
arhaëe—in worshiping; éçire—were unable to proceed; hriyä—because of
bashfulness; yat-pädayoù—of whose lotus feet; sparçana—by the touching;
dharñita—agitated; indriyäù—whose senses.
TRANSLATION
For persons with impure vision, the Supreme Lord's eyes appear like those of
someone who indiscriminately drinks intoxicating beverages. Thus bewildered,
such unintelligent persons become angry at the Supreme Lord, and due to their
angry mood the Lord Himself appears angry and very fearful. However, this is
an illusion. When the wives of the serpent demon were agitated by the touch of
the Lord's lotus feet, due to shyness they could proceed no further in their
worship of Him. Yet the Lord remained unagitated by their touch, for He is
equipoised in all circumstances. Therefore who will not worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead ?
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
704
PURPORT
Anyone who remains unagitated, even in the presence of cause for
agitation, is called dhéra, or equipoised. The Supreme Personality of Godhead,
being always in a transcendental position, is never agitated by anything.
Therefore someone who wants to become dhéra must take shelter of the lotus
feet of the Lord. In Bhagavad-gétä (2.13) Kåñëa says, dhéras tatra na muhyati: a
person who is equipoised in all circumstances is never bewildered. Prahläda
Mahäräja is a perfect example of a dhéra. When the fierce form of
Nåsiàhadeva appeared in order to kill Hiraëyakaçipu, Prahläda was
unagitated. He remained calm and quiet, whereas others, including even Lord
Brahmä, were frightened by the features of the Lord.
TEXT 21
YaMaahurSYa iSQaiTaJaNMaSa&YaMa&
i}ai>aivRhqNa& YaMaNaNTaMa*zYa" )
Na ved iSaÖaQaRiMav KviciTSQaTa&
>aUMa<@l&/ MaUDaRSahóDaaMaSau )) 21 ))
yam ähur asya sthiti-janma-saàyamaà
tribhir vihénaà yam anantam èñayaù
na veda siddhärtham iva kvacit sthitaà
bhü-maëòalaà mürdha-sahasra-dhämasu
SYNONYMS
yam—whom; ähuù—they said; asya—of the material world; sthiti—the
maintenance; janma—creation; saàyamam—annihilation; tribhiù—these
three; vihénam—without; yam—which; anantam—unlimited; èñayaù—all the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
705
great sages; na—not; veda—feels; siddha-artham—a mustard seed; iva—like;
kvacit—where; sthitam—situated; bhü-maëòalam—the universe;
mürdha-sahasra-dhämasu—on the hundreds and thousands of hoods of the
Lord.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çiva continued: All the great sages accept the Lord as the source of
creation, maintenance and destruction, although He actually has nothing to do
with these activities. Therefore the Lord is called unlimited. Although the Lord
in His incarnation as Çeña holds all the universes on His hoods, each universe
feels no heavier than a mustard seed to Him. Therefore, what person desiring
perfection will not worship the Lord?
PURPORT
The incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead known as Çeña or
Ananta has unlimited strength, fame, wealth, knowledge, beauty and
renunciation. As described in this verse, Ananta's strength is so great that the
innumerable universes rest on His hoods. He has the bodily features of a snake
with thousands of hoods, and since His strength is unlimited, all the universes
resting on His hoods feel no heavier than mustard seeds. We can just imagine
how insignificant a mustard seed is on the hood of a serpent. In this
connection, the reader is referred to Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi-lélä, Chapter
Five, verses 117-125. There it is stated that Lord Viñëu's incarnation as the
serpentine Ananta Çeña Näga supports all the universes on His hoods. By our
calculation, a universe may be very, very heavy, but because the Lord is ananta
(unlimited), He feels the weight to be no heavier than a mustard seed.
TEXTS 22-23
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
706
YaSYaaÛ AaSaqd( Gau<aivGa]hae MahaNa(
ivjaNaiDaZ<Yaae >aGavaNaJa" ik-l/ )
YaTSaM>avae_h& i}av*Taa SvTaeJaSaa
vEk-airk&- TaaMaSaMaEiNd]Ya& Sa*Jae )) 22 ))
WTae vYa& YaSYa vXae MahaTMaNa"
iSQaTaa" Xaku-NTaa wv SaU}aYaiN}aTaa" )
MahaNah& vEk*-TaTaaMaSaeiNd]Yaa"
Sa*JaaMa SaveR YadNauGa]haiddMa( )) 23 ))
yasyädya äséd guëa-vigraho mahän
vijïäna-dhiñëyo bhagavän ajaù kila
yat-sambhavo 'haà tri-våtä sva-tejasä
vaikärikaà tämasam aindriyaà såje
ete vayaà yasya vaçe mahätmanaù
sthitäù çakuntä iva sütra-yantritäù
mahän ahaà vaikåta-tämasendriyäù
såjäma sarve yad-anugrahäd idam
SYNONYMS
yasya—from whom; ädyaù—the beginning; äsét—there was;
guëa-vigrahaù—the incarnation of the material qualities; mahän—the total
material energy; vijïäna—of full knowledge; dhiñëyaù—the reservoir;
bhagavän—the most powerful; ajaù—Lord Brahmä; kila—certainly; yat—from
whom; sambhavaù—born; aham—I; tri-våtä—having three varieties according
to the three modes of nature; sva-tejasä—by my material strength;
vaikärikam—all the demigods; tämasam—material elements; aindriyam—the
senses; såje—I create; ete—all of these; vayam—we; yasya—of whom;
vaçe—under the control; mahä-ätmanaù—great personalities;
sthitäù—situated; çakuntäù—vultures; iva—like; sütra-yantritäù—bound by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
707
rope; mahän—the mahat-tattva; aham—I; vaikåta—the demigods; tämasa—the
five material elements; indriyäù—senses; såjämaù—we create; sarve—all of us;
yat—of whom; anugrahät—by the mercy; idam—this material world.
TRANSLATION
From that Supreme Personality of Godhead appears Lord Brahmä, whose
body is made from the total material energy, the reservoir of intelligence
predominated by the passionate mode of material nature. From Lord Brahmä, I
myself am born as a representation of false ego known as Rudra. By my own
power I create all the other demigods, the five elements and the senses.
Therefore, I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than
any of us and under whose control are situated all the demigods, material
elements and senses, and even Lord Brahmä and I myself, like birds bound by a
rope. Only by the Lord's grace can we create, maintain and annihilate the
material world. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme
Being.
PURPORT
A summary of creation is given in this verse. From Saìkarñaëa,
Mahä-Viñëu expands, and from Mahä-Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu expands.
Lord Brahmä, who was born of Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, fathers Lord Çiva, from
whom all the other demigods gradually evolve. Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva and
Lord Viñëu are incarnations of the different material qualities. Lord Viñëu is
actually above all material qualities, but He accepts control of sattva-guëa (the
mode of goodness) to maintain the universe. Lord Brahmä is born from the
mahat-tattva. Brahmä creates the entire universe, Lord Viñëu maintains it, and
Lord Çiva annihilates it. The Supreme Personality of Godhead controls all the
most important demigods—especially Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva—exactly as
the owner of a bird controls it by binding it with a rope. Sometimes vultures
are controlled in this way.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
708
TEXT 24
YaiàiMaRTaa& k-ùRiPa k-MaRPavR<aq&
MaaYaa& JaNaae_Ya& Gau<aSaGaRMaaeihTa" )
Na ved iNaSTaar<aYaaeGaMaÅSaa
TaSMaE NaMaSTae ivl/YaaedYaaTMaNae )) 24 ))
yan-nirmitäà karhy api karma-parvaëéà
mäyäà jano 'yaà guëa-sarga-mohitaù
na veda nistäraëa-yogam aïjasä
tasmai namas te vilayodayätmane
SYNONYMS
yat—by whom; nirmitäm—created; karhi api—at any time;
karma-parvaëém—which ties the knots of fruitive activity; mäyäm—the
illusory energy; janaù—a person; ayam—this; guëa-sarga-mohitaù—bewildered
by the three modes of material nature; na—not; veda—knows;
nistäraëa-yogam—the process of getting out of material entanglement;
aïjasä—soon; tasmai—unto Him (the Supreme); namaù—respectful
obeisances; te—unto You; vilaya-udaya-ätmane—in whom everything is
annihilated and from whom everything is again manifested.
TRANSLATION
The illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead binds all of us
conditioned souls to this material world. Therefore, without being favored by
Him, persons like us cannot understand how to get out of that illusory energy.
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who is the cause of
creation and annihilation.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
709
PURPORT
Kåñëa clearly states in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14):
daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé
mama mäyä duratyayä
mäm eva ye prapadyante
mäyäm etäà taranti te
"This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature,
is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily
cross beyond it." All conditioned souls working within the illusory energy of
the Lord consider the body to be the self, and thus they continuously wander
throughout the universe, taking birth in different species of life and creating
more and more problems. Sometimes they become disgusted with the problems
and seek out a process by which they can get out of this entanglement.
Unfortunately, such so-called research workers are unaware of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and His illusory energy, and thus all of them work only
in darkness, never finding a way out. So-called scientists and advanced
research scholars are ludicrously trying to find the cause of life. They take no
notice of the fact that life is already being produced. What will be their credit
if they find out the chemical composition of life? All their chemicals are
nothing but different transformations of the five elements—earth, water, fire,
air and ether. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.20), the living entity is never
created (na jäyate mriyate vä kadäcin). There are five gross material elements
and three minor material elements (mind, intelligence and ego), and there are
eternal living entities. The living entity desires a certain type of body, and by
the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, that body is created from
material nature, which is nothing but a kind of machine handled by the
Supreme Lord. The Lord gives the living entity a particular type of mechanical
body, and the living entity must work with it according to the law of fruitive
activities. Fruitive activities are described in this verse: karma-pamanéà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
710
mäyäm. The living entity is seated on a machine (the body), and according to
the order of the Supreme Lord, he operates the machine. This is the secret of
transmigration of the soul from one body to another. The living entity thus
becomes entangled in fruitive activities in this material world. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (15.7), manaù ñañöhänéndriyäëi prakåti-sthäni karñati: the living
entity is struggling very hard against the six senses, which include the mind.
In all the activities of creation and annihilation, the living entity is
entangled in fruitive activities, which are executed by the illusory energy,
mäyä. He is exactly like a computer handled by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The so-called scientists say that nature acts independently, but they
cannot explain what nature is. Nature is nothing but a machine operated by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one understands the operator, his
problems of life are solved. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.19):
bahünäà janmanäm ante
jïänavän mäà prapadyate
väsudevaù sarvam iti
sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù
"After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders
unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great
soul is very rare." A sane man, therefore, surrenders to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and thus gets out of the clutches of the illusory energy,
mäyä.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Seventeenth Chapter of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Descent of the River Ganges."
18. The Prayers Offered to the Lord by the Residents of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
711
Jambüdvépa
In this chapter Çukadeva Gosvämé describes the different varñas of
Jambüdvépa and the incarnation of the Supreme Lord worshiped in each. The
predominating ruler of Bhadräçva-varña is Bhadraçravä. He and his many
servants always worship the incarnation known as Lord Hayagréva. At the end
of each kalpa, when the demon Ajïäna steals the Vedic knowledge, Lord
Hayagréva appears and preserves it. Then He delivers it to Lord Brahmä. In the
land known as Hari-varña, the exalted devotee Prahläda Mahäräja worships
Lord Nåsiàhadeva. (The appearance of Lord Nåsiàhadeva is described in the
Seventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.) Following in the footsteps of Prahläda
Mahäräja, the inhabitants of Hari-varña always worship Lord Nåsiàhadeva to
receive from Him the benediction of being engaged in His loving service. In
the tract of land known as Ketumäla-varña, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (Lord Håñékeça) appears in the form of Cupid. The goddess of fortune
and the demigods living there engage in His service day and night. Manifesting
Himself in sixteen parts, Lord Håñékeça is the source of all encouragement,
strength and influence. The conditioned living entity has the defect of being
always fearful, but simply by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, he can rid himself of this defect of material life. Therefore the Lord
alone can be addressed as master. In the tract of land known as
Ramyaka-varña, Manu and all the inhabitants worship Matsyadeva to this very
day. Matsyadeva, whose form is pure goodness, is the ruler and maintainer of
the whole universe, and as such He is the director of all the demigods, headed
by King Indra. In Hiraëmaya-varña Lord Viñëu has assumed the form of a
tortoise (Kürma mürti) and is worshiped there by Aryamä, along with all the
other residents. Similarly, in the tract of land known as Uttarakuru-varña,
Lord Çré Hari has assumed the form of a boar, and in that form He accepts
service from all the inhabitants living there.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
712
All the information in this chapter can be fully realized by one who
associates with devotees of the Lord. Therefore in the çästras it is
recommended that one associate with devotees. This is better than residing on
the banks of the Ganges. In the hearts of pure devotees reside all good
sentiments as well as all the superior qualities of the demigods. In the hearts of
nondevotees, however, there cannot be any good qualities, for such people are
simply enchanted by the external, illusory energy of the Lord. Following in the
footsteps of devotees, one should know that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the only worshipable Deity. Everyone should accept this proposal
and worship the Lord. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), vedaiç ca sarvair
aham eva vedyaù: the purpose of studying all Vedic literature is to worship the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. If after studying all the Vedic
literature, one does not awaken his dormant love for the Supreme Lord, it is to
be understood that he has labored for nothing. He has simply wasted his time.
Lacking attachment for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he remains
attached to family life in this material world. Thus the lesson of this chapter is
that one should get out of family life and completely take shelter of the lotus
feet of the Lord.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
TaQaa c >ad]é[va NaaMa DaMaRSauTaSTaTku-l/PaTaYa" Pauåza >ad]aìvzeR Saa+aaÙ‚
GavTaae vaSaudevSYa iPa[Yaa&TaNau& DaMaRMaYaq& hYaXaqzaRi>aDaaNaa& ParMae<a SaMaaiDaNaa
SaiàDaaPYaedMai>aGa*<aNTa oPaDaaviNTa )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
tathä ca bhadraçravä näma dharma-sutas tat-kula-patayaù puruñä
bhadräçva-varñe säkñäd bhagavato väsudevasya priyäà tanuà dharmamayéà
hayaçérñäbhidhänäà parameëa samädhinä sannidhäpyedam abhigåëanta
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
713
upadhävanti.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tathä ca—similarly (just as Lord
Çiva worships Saìkarñaëa in Ilävåta-varña); bhadra-çravä—Bhadraçravä;
näma—known as; dharma-sutaù—the son of Dharmaräja; tat—of him;
kula-patayaù—the chiefs of the dynasty; puruñäù—all the residents;
bhadräçva-varñe—in the land known as Bhadräçva-varña; säkñät—directly;
bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; väsudevasya—of Lord
Väsudeva; priyäm tanum—very dear form; dharma-mayém—the director of all
religious principles; hayaçérña-abhidhänäm—the Lord's incarnation named
Hayaçérña (also called Hayagréva); parameëa samädhinä—with the highest
form of trance; sannidhäpya—coming near; idam—this;
abhigåëantaù—chanting; upadhävanti—they worship.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Bhadraçravä, the son of Dharmaräja, rules the
tract of land known as Bhadräçva-varña. Just as Lord Çiva worships Saìkarñaëa
in Ilävåta-varña, Bhadraçravä, accompanied by his intimate servants and all the
residents of the land, worships the plenary expansion of Väsudeva known as
Hayaçérña. Lord Hayaçérña is very dear to the devotees, and He is the director of
all religious principles. Fixed in the topmost trance, Bhadraçravä and his
associates offer their respectful obeisances to the Lord and chant the following
prayers with careful pronunciation.
TEXT 2
>ad]é[vSa Ocu"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
714
p NaMaae >aGavTae DaMaaRYaaTMaivXaaeDaNaaYa NaMa wiTa )) 2 ))
bhadraçravasa ücuù
oà namo bhagavate dharmäyätma-viçodhanäya nama iti.
SYNONYMS
bhadraçravasaù ücuù—the ruler Bhadraçravä and his intimate associates said;
om—O Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; dharmäya—the source of all religious principles;
ätma-viçodhanäya—who purifies us of material contamination; namaù—our
obeisances; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
The ruler Bhadraçravä and his intimate associates utter the following prayer:
We offer our respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the reservoir of all religious principles, who cleanses the heart of the
conditioned soul in this material world. Again and again we offer our respectful
obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
Foolish materialistic persons do not know how they are being controlled
and punished at every step by the laws of nature. They think they are very
happy in the conditioned state of material life, not knowing the purpose of
repeated birth, death, old age and disease. Therefore in Bhagavad-gétä (7.15)
Lord Kåñëa describes such materialistic persons as müòhas (rascals): na mäà
duñkåtino müòhäù prapadyante narädhamäù. These müòhas do not know that if
they want to purify themselves, they must worship Lord Väsudeva (Kåñëa) by
performing penances and austerities. This purification is the aim of human
life. This life is not meant for blind indulgence in sense gratification. In the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
715
human form, the living being must engage himself in Kåñëa consciousness to
purify his existence: tapo divyaà putrakä yena sattvaà çuddhyet [SB 5.5.1]. This
is the instruction of King Åñabhadeva to His sons. In the human form of life,
one must undergo all kinds of austerities to purify his existence. Yasmäd
brahma-saukhyaà tv anantam. We are all seeking happiness, but because of our
ignorance and foolishness, we cannot know what unobstructed happiness
really is. Unobstructed happiness is called brahma-saukhya, spiritual happiness.
Although we may get some so-called happiness in this material world, that
happiness is temporary. The foolish materialists cannot understand this.
Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja points out, mäyä-sukhäya bharam udvahato
vimüòhän: [SB 7.9.43] merely for temporary materialistic happiness, these
rascals are making huge arrangements, and thus they are baffled life after life.
TEXT 3
Ahae ivic}a& >aGaviÜceiíTa&
ganNTa& JaNaae_Ya& ih iMazà PaXYaiTa )
DYaaYaàSaÛihR ivk-MaR SaeivTau&
iNaôRTYa Pau}a& iPaTar& iJaJaqivziTa )) 3 ))
aho vicitraà bhagavad-viceñöitaà
ghnantaà jano 'yaà hi miñan na paçyati
dhyäyann asad yarhi vikarma sevituà
nirhåtya putraà pitaraà jijéviñati
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; vicitram—wonderful; bhagavat-viceñöitam—the pastimes of the
Lord; ghnantam—death; janaù—a person; ayam—this; hi—certainly;
miñan—although seeing; na paçyati—does not see; dhyäyan—thinking about;
asat—material happiness; yarhi—because; vikarma—forbidden activities;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
716
sevitum—to enjoy; nirhåtya—burning; putram—sons; pitaram—the father;
jijéviñati—desires a long life.
TRANSLATION
Alas! How wonderful it is that the foolish materialist does not heed the great
danger of impending death! He knows that death will surely come, yet he is
nevertheless callous and neglectful. If his father dies, he wants to enjoy his
father's property, and if his son dies, he wants to enjoy his son's possessions as
well. In either case, he heedlessly tries to enjoy material happiness with the
acquired money.
PURPORT
Material happiness means to have good facilities for eating, sleeping, sexual
intercourse and defense. Within this world, the materialistic person lives only
for these four principles of sense gratification, not caring for the impending
danger of death. After his father's death, a son tries to inherit his money and
use it for sense gratification. Similarly, one whose son dies tries to enjoy the
possessions of his son. Sometimes the father of a dead son even enjoys his son's
widow. Materialistic persons behave in this way. Thus Çukadeva Gosvämé says,
"How wonderful are these pastimes of material happiness transacted by the will
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead!" In other words, materialistic persons
want to commit all kinds of sinful activities, but without the sanction of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, no one can do anything. Why does the
Supreme Personality of Godhead permit sinful activities? The Supreme Lord
does not want any living being to act sinfully, and He begs him through his
good conscience to refrain from sin. But when someone insists upon acting
sinfully, the Supreme Lord gives him the sanction to act at his own risk
(mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca [Bg. 15.15]). No one can do anything
without the sanction of the Lord, but He is so kind that when the conditioned
soul persists in doing something, the Lord permits the individual soul to act at
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
717
his own risk.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, sons always outlive
their fathers in other planetary systems and other lands in this universe,
especially on Svargaloka. However, on this planet earth a son often dies before
his father, and the materialistic father is pleased to enjoy the possessions of his
son. Neither the father nor the son can see the reality—that both of them are
awaiting death. When death comes, however, all their plans for material
enjoyment are finished.
TEXT 4
vdiNTa ivì& k-vYa" SMa Naìr&
PaXYaiNTa caDYaaTMaivdae ivPaiêTa" )
TaQaaiPa MauùiNTa TavaJa MaaYaYaa
SauiviSMaTa& k*-TYaMaJa& NaTaae_iSMa TaMa( )) 4 ))
vadanti viçvaà kavayaù sma naçvaraà
paçyanti cädhyätmavido vipaçcitaù
tathäpi muhyanti taväja mäyayä
suvismitaà kåtyam ajaà nato 'smi tam
SYNONYMS
vadanti—they say authoritatively; viçvam—the entire material creation;
kavayaù—great learned sages; sma—certainly; naçvaram—perishable;
paçyanti—they see in trance; ca—also; adhyätma-vidaù—who have realized
spiritual knowledge; vipaçcitaù—very learned scholars; tathä api—still;
muhyanti—become illusioned; tava—your; aja—O unborn one; mäyayä—by
the illusory energy; su-vismitam—most wonderful; kåtyam—activity;
ajam—unto the supreme unborn one; nataù asmi—I offer my obeisances;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
718
tam—unto Him.
TRANSLATION
O unborn one, learned Vedic scholars who are advanced in spiritual
knowledge certainly know that this material world is perishable, as do other
logicians and philosophers. In trance they realize the factual position of this
world, and they preach the truth as well. Yet even they are sometimes
bewildered by Your illusory energy. This is Your own wonderful pastime.
Therefore, I can understand that Your illusory energy is very wonderful, and I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
Not only does the illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
act on the conditioned soul within this material world, but sometimes it also
acts on the most advanced learned scholars, who factually know the
constitutional position of this material world through realization. As soon as
someone thinks, "I am this material body (ahaà mameti [SB 5.5.8]) and
everything in relationship with this material body is mine," he is in illusion
(moha). This illusion caused by the material energy acts especially on the
conditioned souls, but it sometimes also acts on liberated souls as well. A
liberated soul is a person who has sufficient knowledge of this material world
and is therefore unattached to the bodily conception of life. But because of
association with the modes of material nature for a very long time, even
liberated souls sometimes become captivated by the illusory energy due to
inattentiveness in the transcendental position. Therefore Lord Kåñëa says in
Bhagavad-gétä (7.14), mäm eva ye prapadyante mäyäm etäà taranti te: "Only
those who surrender unto Me can overcome the influence of the material
energy." Therefore no one should think of himself as a liberated person
immune to the influence of mäyä. Everyone should very cautiously execute
devotional service by rigidly following regulative principles. Thus he will
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
719
remain fixed at the lotus feet of the Lord. Otherwise, a little inattention will
create havoc. We have already seen an example of this in the case of Mahäräja
Bharata. Mahäräja Bharata was undoubtedly a great devotee, but because he
turned his attention slightly toward a small deer, he had to suffer two more
births, one as a deer and another as the brähmaëa Jaòa Bharata. Afterward he
was liberated and went back home, back to Godhead.
The Lord is always prepared to excuse His devotee, but if a devotee takes
advantage of the Lord's leniency and purposefully commits mistakes again and
again, the Lord will certainly punish him by letting him fall down into the
clutches of the illusory energy. In other words, theoretical knowledge acquired
by studying the Vedas is insufficient to protect one from the clutches of mäyä.
One must strongly adhere to the lotus feet of the Lord in devotional service.
Then one's position is secure.
TEXT 5
ivìaeÙvSQaaNaiNaraeDak-MaR Tae
ùk-TauRr(r)qk*-TaMaPYaPaav*Ta" )
Yau¢&- Na ic}a& TviYa k-aYaRk-ar<ae
SavaRTMaiNa VYaiTair¢e- c vSTauTa" )) 5 ))
viçvodbhava-sthäna-nirodha-karma te
hy akartur aìgékåtam apy apävåtaù
yuktaà na citraà tvayi kärya-käraëe
sarvätmani vyatirikte ca vastutaù
SYNONYMS
viçva—of the whole universe; udbhava—of the creation; sthäna—of the
maintenance; nirodha—of the annihilation; karma—these activities; te—of
You (O dear Lord); hi—indeed; akartuù—aloof; aìgékåtam—still accepted by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
720
the Vedic literature; api—although; apävåtaù—untouched by all these
activities; yuktam—befitting; na—not; citram—wonderful; tvayi—in You;
kärya-käraëe—the original cause of all effects; sarva-ätmani—in all respects;
vyatirikte—set apart; ca—also; vastutaù—the original substance.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, although You are completely detached from the creation,
maintenance and annihilation of this material world and are not directly
affected by these activities, they are all attributed to You. We do not wonder at
this, for Your inconceivable energies perfectly qualify You to be the cause of all
causes. You are the active principle in everything, although You are separate
from everything. Thus we can realize that everything is happening because of
Your inconceivable energy.
TEXT 6
vedaNa( YauGaaNTae TaMaSaa iTarSk*-TaaNa(
rSaaTal/aÛae Na*Taur(r)ivGa]h" )
Pa[TYaadde vE k-vYae_i>aYaacTae
TaSMaE NaMaSTae_ivTaQaeihTaaYa wiTa )) 6 ))
vedän yugänte tamasä tiraskåtän
rasätaläd yo nå-turaìga-vigrahaù
pratyädade vai kavaye 'bhiyäcate
tasmai namas te 'vitathehitäya iti
SYNONYMS
vedän—the four Vedas; yuga-ante—at the end of the millennium; tamasä—by
the demon of ignorance personified; tiraskåtän—stolen away; rasätalät—from
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
721
the lowest planetary system (Rasätala); yaù—who (the Supreme Personality of
Godhead); nå-turaìga-vigrahaù—assuming the form of half-horse, half-man;
pratyädade—returned; vai—indeed; kavaye—to the supreme poet (Lord
Brahmä); abhiyä-cate—when he asked for them; tasmai—unto Him (the form
of Hayagréva); namaù—my respectful obeisances; te—to You;
avitatha-éhitäya—whose resolution never fails; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
At the end of the millennium, ignorance personified assumed the form of a
demon, stole all the Vedas and took them down to the planet of Rasätala. The
Supreme Lord, however, in His form of Hayagréva retrieved the Vedas and
returned them to Lord Brahmä when he begged for them. I offer my respectful
obeisances unto the Supreme Lord, whose determination never fails.
PURPORT
Although Vedic knowledge is imperishable, within this material world it is
sometimes manifest and sometimes not. When the people of this material
world become too absorbed in ignorance, the Vedic knowledge disappears.
Lord Hayagréva or Lord Matsya, however, always protects the Vedic
knowledge, and in due course of time it is again distributed through the
medium of Lord Brahmä. Brahmä is the trustworthy representative of the
Supreme Lord. Therefore when he again asked for the treasure of Vedic
knowledge, the Lord fulfilled his desire.
TEXT 7
hirvzeR caiPa >aGavaàrhiræPae<aaSTae ) Tad]UPaGa]h<aiNaiMataMautar}aai>aDaaSYae )
TaÕiYaTa& æPa& MahaPauåzGau<a>aaJaNaae Maha>aaGavTaae dETYadaNavku-l/TaqQas‚
k-r<aXaql/acirTa" Pa[úadae_VYavDaaNaaNaNYa>ai¢-YaaeGaeNa Sah TaÜzRPauåzEåPaaSTae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
722
wd& caedahriTa )) 7 ))
hari-varñe cäpi bhagavän nara-hari-rüpeëäste; tad-rüpa-grahaëa-nimittam
uttaraträbhidhäsye; tad dayitaà rüpaà mahä-puruña-guëa-bhäjano
mahä-bhägavato daitya-dänava-kula-térthékaraëa-çélä-caritaù prahlädo
'vyavadhänänanya-bhakti-yogena saha tad-varña-puruñair upäste idaà
codäharati.
SYNONYMS
hari-varñe—in the tract of land known as Harivarña; ca—also; api—indeed;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nara-hari-rüpeëa—His form
of Nåsiàhadeva; äste—is situated; tat-rüpa-grahaëa-nimittam—the reason why
Lord Kåñëa (Keçava) assumed the form of Nåsiàha; uttaratra—in later
chapters; abhidhäsye—I shall describe; tat—that; dayitam—most pleasing;
rüpam—form of the Lord; mahä-puruña-guëa-bhäjanaù—Prahläda Mahäräja,
who is the abode of all the good qualities of great personalities;
mahä-bhägavataù—the topmost devotee;
daitya-dänava-kula-térthé-karaëa-çélä-caritaù—whose activities and character
were so exalted that he delivered all the daityas (demons) born in his family;
prahlädaù—Mahäräja Prahläda; avyavadhäna-ananya-bhakti-yogena—by
uninterrupted and unflinching devotional service; saha—with;
tat-varña-puruñaiù—the inhabitants of Hari-varña; upäste—offers obeisances to
and worships; idam—this; ca—and; udäharati—chants.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, Lord Nåsiàhadeva resides in
the tract of land known as Hari-varña. In the Seventh Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, I shall describe to you how Prahläda Mahäräja caused the
Lord to assume the form of Nåsiàhadeva. Prahläda Mahäräja, the topmost
devotee of the Lord, is a reservoir of all the good qualities of great personalities.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
723
His character and activities have delivered all the fallen members of his
demoniac family. Lord Nåsiàhadeva is very dear to this exalted personality.
Thus Prahläda Mahäräja, along with his servants and all the denizens of
Hari-varña, worships Lord Nåsiàhadeva by chanting the following mantra.
PURPORT
Jayadeva Gosvämé's ten prayers worshiping the incarnations of Lord Kåñëa
(Keçava) contain His name in every stanza. For example, keçava
dhåta-nara-hari-rüpa jaya jagad-éça hare, keçava dhåta-ména-çaréra jaya jagad-éça
hare, and keçava dhåta-vämana-rüpa jaya jagad-éça hare. The word jagad-éça
refers to the proprietor of all the universes. His original form is the
two-handed form of Lord Kåñëa, standing with a flute in His hands and
engaged in tending the cows. As stated in Brahma-saàhitä:
cintämaëi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-våkñalakñävåteñu
surabhér abhipälayantam
lakñmé-sahasra-çata-sambhrama-sevyamänaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
[Bs. 5.29]
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor, who is tending the
cows, yielding all desires, in abodes built with spiritual gems and surrounded by
millions of purpose trees. He is always served with great reverence and
affection by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune." From this verse
we learn that Govinda, or Kåñëa, is the ädi-puruña (the original person). The
Lord has innumerable incarnations, exactly like the innumerable waves of a
flowing river, but the original form is Kåñëa, or Keçava.
Çukadeva Gosvämé refers to Nåsiàhadeva because of Prahläda Mahäräja.
Prahläda Mahäräja was put into great distress by his powerful father, the
demon Hiraëyakaçipu. Apparently helpless before him, Prahläda Mahäräja
called on the Lord, who immediately assumed the gigantic form of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
724
Nåsiàhadeva, half-lion and half-man, to kill the gigantic demon. Although
Kåñëa is the original person, one without a second, He assumes different forms
just to satisfy His devotees or to execute a specific purpose. Therefore Jayadeva
Gosvämé always repeats the name of Keçava, the original Personality of
Godhead, in his prayers describing the Lord's different incarnations for
different purposes.
TEXT 8
p NaMaae >aGavTae NariSa&haYa NaMaSTaeJaSTaeJaSae Aaivraiv>aRv vJa]Na% vJa]d&í\
k-MaaRXaYaaNa( rNDaYa rNDaYa TaMaae Ga]Sa Ga]Sa p Svaha ) A>aYaMa>aYaMaaTMaiNa
>aUiYaïa p +a]aEMa( )) 8 ))
oà namo bhagavate narasiàhäya namas tejas-tejase ävir-ävirbhava
vajra-nakha vajra-daàñöra karmäçayän randhaya randhaya tamo grasa grasa
oà svähä; abhayam abhayam ätmani bhüyiñöhä oà kñraum.
SYNONYMS
om—O Lord; namaù—my respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; nara-siàhäya—known as Lord Nåsiàha;
namaù—obeisances; tejaù-tejase—the power of all power;
äviù-ävirbhava—please be fully manifest; vajra-nakha—O You who possess
nails like thunderbolts; vajra-daàñöra—O You who possess teeth like
thunderbolts; karma-äçayän—demoniac desires to be happy by material
activities; randhaya randhaya—kindly vanquish; tamaù—ignorance in the
material world; grasa—kindly drive away; grasa—kindly drive away; om—O
my Lord; svähä—respectful oblations; abhayam—fearlessness;
abhayam—fearlessness; ätmani—in my mind; bhüyiñöhäù—may You appear;
om—O Lord; kñraum—the béja, or seed, of mantras offering prayers to Lord
Nåsiàha.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
725
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Nåsiàhadeva, the source of all
power. O my Lord who possesses nails and teeth just like thunderbolts, kindly
vanquish our demonlike desires for fruitive activity in this material world.
Please appear in our hearts and drive away our ignorance so that by Your mercy
we may become fearless in the struggle for existence in this material world.
PURPORT
In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (4.22.39) Sanat-kumära speaks the following words
to Mahäräja Påthu:
yat-päda-paìkaja-paläça-viläsa-bhaktyä
karmäçayaà grathitam udgrathayanti santaù
tadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo 'pi ruddhasrotogaëäs
tam araëaà bhaja väsudevam
"Devotees always engaged in the service of the toes of the Lord's lotus feet can
very easily become free from hard-knotted desires for fruitive activities.
Because this is very difficult, the nondevotees—the jïänés and yogés—cannot
stop the waves of sense gratification, although they try to do so. Therefore you
are advised to engage in the devotional service of Kåñëa, the son of Vasudeva."
Every living being within this material world has a strong desire to enjoy
matter to his fullest satisfaction. For this purpose, the conditioned soul must
accept one body after another, and thus his strongly fixed fruitive desires
continue. One cannot stop the repetition of birth and death without being
completely desireless. Therefore Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé describes pure bhakti
(devotional service) as follows:
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
726
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanaà
bhaktir uttamä
[Cc. Madhya 19.167]
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kåñëa
favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive
activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."
Unless one is completely freed of all material desires, which are caused by the
dense darkness of ignorance, one cannot fully engage in the devotional service
of the Lord. Therefore we should always offer our prayers to Lord
Nåsiàhadeva, who killed Hiraëyakaçipu, the personification of material desire.
Hiraëya means "gold," and kaçipu means "a soft cushion or bed." Materialistic
persons always desire to make the body comfortable, and for this they require
huge amounts of gold. Thus Hiraëyakaçipu was the perfect representative of
materialistic life. He was therefore the cause of great disturbance to the
topmost devotee, Prahläda Mahäräja, until Lord Nåsiàhadeva killed him. Any
devotee aspiring to be free of material desires should offer his respectful
prayers to Nåsiàhadeva as Prahläda Mahäräja did in this verse.
TEXT 9
SvSTYaSTau ivìSYa %l/" Pa[SaqdTaa&
DYaaYaNTau >aUTaaiNa iXav& iMaQaae iDaYaa )
MaNaê >ad]& >aJaTaadDaae+aJae
AaveXYaTaa& Naae MaiTarPYahETauk-I )) 9 ))
svasty astu viçvasya khalaù prasédatäà
dhyäyantu bhütäni çivaà mitho dhiyä
manaç ca bhadraà bhajatäd adhokñaje
äveçyatäà no matir apy ahaituké
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
727
SYNONYMS
svasti—auspiciousness; astu—let there be; viçvasya—of the entire universe;
khalaù—the envious (almost everyone); prasédatäm—let them be pacified;
dhyäyantu—let them consider; bhütäni—all the living entities;
çivam—auspiciousness; mithaù—mutual; dhiyä—by their intelligence;
manaù—the mind; ca—and; bhadram—calmness; bhajatät—let it experience;
adhokñaje—in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond the
perception of mind. intelligence and senses; äveçyatäm—let it be absorbed;
naù—our; matiù—intelligence; api—indeed; ahaituké—without any motive.
TRANSLATION
May there be good fortune throughout the universe, and may all envious
persons be pacified. May all living entities become calm by practicing
bhakti-yoga, for by accepting devotional service they will think of each other's
welfare. Therefore let us all engage in the service of the supreme transcendence,
Lord Çré Kåñëa, and always remain absorbed in thought of Him.
PURPORT
The following verse describes a Vaiñëava:
väïchä-kalpa-tarubhyaç ca
kåpä-sindhubhya eva ca
patitänäà pävanebhyo
vaiñëavebhyo namo namaù
Just like a desire tree, a Vaiñëava can fulfill all the desires of anyone who takes
shelter of his lotus feet. Prahläda Mahäräja is a typical Vaiñëava. He prays not
for himself, but for all living entities—the gentle, the envious and the
mischievous. He always thought of the welfare of mischievous persons like his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
728
father, Hiraëyakaçipu. Prahläda Mahäräja did not ask for anything for himself;
rather, he prayed for the Lord to excuse his demoniac father. This is the
attitude of a Vaiñëava, who always thinks of the welfare of the entire universe.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and bhägavata-dharma are meant for persons who are
completely free of envy (parama-nirmatsaräëäm). Therefore Prahläda
Mahäräja prays in this verse, khalaù prasédatäm: "May all the envious persons
be pacified." The material world is full of envious persons, but if one frees
himself of envy, he becomes liberal in his social dealings and can think of
others' welfare. Anyone who takes up Kåñëa consciousness and engages himself
completely in the service of the Lord cleanses his mind of all envy (manaç ca
bhadraà bhajatäd adhokñaje). Therefore we should pray to Lord Nåsiàhadeva
to sit in our hearts. We should pray, bahir nåsiàho hådaye nåsiàhaù: "Let Lord
Nåsiàhadeva sit in the core of my heart, killing all my bad propensities. Let my
mind become clean so that I may peacefully worship the Lord and bring peace
to the entire world."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has given us a very fine purport in
this regard. Whenever one offers a prayer to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one always requests some benediction from Him. Even pure
(niñkäma) devotees pray for some benediction, as instructed by Lord Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu in His Çikñäñöaka:
ayi nanda-tanuja kiìkaraà
patitaà mäà viñame bhavämbudhau
kåpayä tava päda-paìkajasthita-
dhülé-sadåçaà vicintaya
[Cc. Antya 20.32, Çikñäñöaka 5]
"O son of Mahäräja Nanda [Kåñëa], I am Your eternal servitor, yet somehow or
other I have fallen into the ocean of birth and death. Please pick Me up from
the ocean of death and place Me as one of the atoms at Your lotus feet." In
another prayer Lord Caitanya says, mama janmani janmanéçvare bhavatäd
bhaktir ahaituké tvayi: [Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4] "Life after life, kindly let
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
729
Me have unalloyed love and devotion at Your Lordship's lotus feet." When
Prahläda Mahäräja chants oà namo bhagavate narasiàhäya, he prays for a
benediction from the Lord, but because he is also an exalted Vaiñëava, he
wants nothing for his personal sense gratification. The first desire expressed in
his prayer is svasty astu viçvasya: "Let there be good fortune throughout the
entire universe." Prahläda Mahäräja thus requested the Lord to be merciful to
everyone, including his father, a most envious person. According to Cäëakya
Paëòita, there are two kinds of envious living entities: one is a snake, and the
other is the man like Hiraëyakaçipu, who is by nature envious of everyone,
even of his father or son. Hiraëyakaçipu was envious of his little son Prahläda,
but Prahläda Mahäräja asked a benediction for the benefit of his father.
Hiraëyakaçipu was very envious of devotees, but Prahläda wished that his
father and other demons like him would give up their envious nature by the
grace of the Lord and stop harassing the devotees (khalaù prasédatäm). The
difficulty is that the khala (envious living entity) is rarely pacified. One kind
of khala, the snake, can be pacified simply by mantras or by the action of a
particular herb (mantrauñadhi-vaçaù sarpaù khalakena niväryate). An envious
person, however, cannot be pacified by any means. Therefore Prahläda
Mahäräja prays that all envious persons may undergo a change of heart and
think of the welfare of others.
If the Kåñëa consciousness movement spreads all over the world, and if by
the grace of Kåñëa everyone accepts it, the thinking of envious people will
change. Everyone will think of the welfare of others. Therefore Prahläda
Mahäräja prays, çivaà mitho dhiyä. In material activities, everyone is envious
of others, but in Kåñëa consciousness, no one is envious of anyone else;
everyone thinks of the welfare of others. Therefore Prahläda Mahäräja prays
that everyone's mind may become gentle by being fixed at the lotus feet of
Kåñëa (bhajatäd adhokñaje). As indicated elsewhere in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (sa
vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]) and as advised by Lord Kåñëa in
Bhagavad-gétä (18.65), man-manä bhava mad-bhaktaù, one should constantly
think of the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa. Then one's mind will certainly be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
730
cleansed (ceto-darpaëa-märjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]). Materialists always think
of sense gratification, but Prahläda Mahäräja prays that the Lord's mercy will
change their minds and they will stop thinking of sense gratification. If they
think of Kåñëa always, everything will be all right. Some people argue that if
everyone thought of Kåñëa in that way, the whole universe would be vacated
because everyone would go back home, back to Godhead. However, Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that this is impossible because the living
entities are innumerable. If one set of living entities is actually delivered by
the Kåñëa consciousness movement, another set will fill the entire universe.
TEXT 10
MaaGaardaraTMaJaivtabNDauzu
Sa(r)ae Yaid SYaaÙGaviTPa[Yaezu Na" )
Ya" Pa[a<av*tYaa PairTauí AaTMavaNa(
iSaÖyTYadUraà TaQaeiNd]YaiPa[Ya" )) 10 ))
mägära-därätmaja-vitta-bandhuñu
saìgo yadi syäd bhagavat-priyeñu naù
yaù präëa-våttyä parituñöa ätmavän
siddhyaty adürän na tathendriya-priyaù
SYNONYMS
mä—not; agära—house; dära—wife; ätma-ja—children; vitta—bank balance;
bandhuñu—among friends and relatives; saìgaù—association or attachment;
yadi—if; syät—there must be; bhagavat-priyeñu—among persons to whom the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is very dear; naù—of us; yaù—anyone who;
präëa-våttyä—by the bare necessities of life; parituñöaù—satisfied;
ätma-vän—who has controlled his mind and realized his self;
siddhyati—becomes successful; adürät—very soon; na—not; tathä—so much;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
731
indriya-priyaù—a person attached to sense gratification.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, we pray that we may never feel attraction for the prison of
family life, consisting of home, wife, children, friends, bank balance, relatives
and so on. If we do have some attachment, let it be for devotees, whose only
dear friend is Kåñëa. A person who is actually self-realized and who has
controlled his mind is perfectly satisfied with the bare necessities of life. He
does not try to gratify his senses. Such a person quickly advances in Kåñëa
consciousness, whereas others, who are too attached to material things, find
advancement very difficult.
PURPORT
When Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu was requested to explain the duty
of a Vaiñëava, a Kåñëa conscious person, He immediately said,
asat-saìga-tyäga-ei vaiñëava-äcära [Cc. Madhya 22.87]. The first business of a
Vaiñëava is to give up the association of persons who are not devotees of Kåñëa
and who are too attached to material things—wife, children, bank balance and
so on. Prahläda Mahäräja also prays to the Personality of Godhead that he may
avoid the association of nondevotees attached to the materialistic way of life.
If he must be attached to someone, he prays to be attached only to a devotee.
A devotee is not interested in unnecessarily increasing the demands of the
senses for gratification. Of course, as long as one is in this material world, one
must have a material body, and it must be maintained for executing devotional
service. The body can be maintained very easily by eating kåñëa-prasäda. As
Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.26):
patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà
yo me bhaktyä prayacchati
tad ahaà bhakty-upahåtam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
732
açnämi prayatätmanaù
"If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will
accept it." Why should the menu be unnecessarily increased for the
satisfaction of the tongue? Devotees should eat as simply as possible.
Otherwise, attachment for material things will gradually increase, and the
senses, being very strong, will soon require more and more material enjoyment.
Then the real business of life—to advance in Kåñëa consciousness—will stop.
TEXT 11
YaTSa(r)l/BDa& iNaJavqYaRvE>av&
TaqQa| Mauhu" Sa&SPa*XaTaa& ih MaaNaSaMa( )
hrTYaJaae_NTa" é[uiTai>aGaRTaae_(r)Ja&
k-ae vE Na SaeveTa Mauku-Ndiv§-MaMa( )) 11 ))
yat-saìga-labdhaà nija-vérya-vaibhavaà
térthaà muhuù saàspåçatäà hi mänasam
haraty ajo 'ntaù çrutibhir gato 'ìgajaà
ko vai na seveta mukunda-vikramam
SYNONYMS
yat—of whom (the devotees); saìga-labdham—achieved by the association;
nija-vérya-vaibhavam—whose influence is uncommon; tértham—holy places
like the Ganges; muhuù—repeatedly; saàspåçatäm—of those touching;
hi—certainly; mänasam—the dirty things in the mind; harati—vanquishes;
ajaù—the supreme unborn one; antaù—in the core of the heart; çrutibhiù—by
the ears; gataù—entered; aìga-jam—dirty things or infections of the body;
kaù—who; vai—indeed; na—not; seveta—would serve;
mukunda-vikramam—the glorious activities of Mukunda, the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
733
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
By associating with persons for whom the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Mukunda, is the all in all, one can hear of His powerful activities and soon
come to understand them. The activities of Mukunda are so potent that simply
by hearing of them one immediately associates with the Lord. For a person who
constantly and very eagerly hears narrations of the Lord's powerful activities,
the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead in the form of sound
vibrations, enters within his heart and cleanses it of all contamination. On the
other hand, although bathing in the Ganges diminishes bodily contaminations
and infections, this process and the process of visiting holy places can cleanse
the heart only after a long time. Therefore who is the sane man who will not
associate with devotees to quickly perfect his life?
PURPORT
Bathing in the Ganges can certainly cure one of many infectious diseases,
but it cannot cleanse one's materially attached mind, which creates all kinds of
contaminations in material existence. However, one who directly associates
with the Supreme Lord by hearing of His activities cleanses the dirt from his
mind and very soon comes to Kåñëa consciousness. Süta Gosvämé confirms this
in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.17):
çåëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù
puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù
hådy antaù-stho hy abhadräëi
vidhunoti suhåt-satäm
The Supreme Lord within everyone's heart becomes very pleased when a
person hears narrations of His activities, and He personally cleanses the dirt
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
734
from the mind of the listener. Hådy antaù-stho hy abhadräëi vidhunoti: He
washes off all dirt from the mind. Material existence is caused by dirty things
within the mind. If one can cleanse his mind, he immediately comes to his
original position of Kåñëa consciousness, and thus his life becomes successful.
Therefore all the great saints in the devotional line very strongly recommend
the process of hearing. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu introduced the
congregational chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mantra to give everyone a chance
to hear Kåñëa's holy name, for simply by hearing Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa,
Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare,
one becomes purified (ceto-darpaëa-märjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]). Therefore
our Kåñëa consciousness movement is chiefly engaged in chanting the Hare
Kåñëa mantra all over the world.
After one's mind becomes cleansed by chanting Hare Kåñëa, one gradually
comes to the platform of Kåñëa consciousness and then reads books like
Bhagavad-gétä, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Caitanya-caritämåta and The Nectar of
Devotion. In this way, one becomes more and more purified of material
contamination. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.18):
nañöa-präyeñv abhadreñu
nityaà bhägavata-sevayä
bhagavaty uttama-çloke
bhaktir bhavati naiñöhiké
"By regularly hearing the Bhägavatam and rendering service unto the pure
devotee, all that is troublesome to the heart is practically destroyed, and loving
service unto the glorious Lord, who is praised with transcendental songs, is
established as an irrevocable fact." In this way, simply by hearing of the
powerful activities of the Lord, the devotee's heart becomes almost completely
cleansed of material contamination, and thus his original position as an
eternal servant who is part and parcel of the Lord becomes manifest. While
the devotee engages in devotional service, the passionate and ignorant modes
of material nature are gradually vanquished, and then he acts only in the mode
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
735
of goodness. At that time he becomes happy and gradually advances in Kåñëa
consciousness.
All the great äcäryas strongly recommend that people be given a chance to
hear about the Supreme Lord. Then success is assured. The more we cleanse
the dirt of material attachment from our hearts, the more we will be attracted
by Kåñëa's name, form, qualities, paraphernalia and activities. This is the sum
and substance of the Kåñëa consciousness movement.
TEXT 12
YaSYaaiSTa >ai¢->aRGavTYaik-ÄNaa
SavOEGauR<aESTa}a SaMaaSaTae Saura" )
hrav>a¢-SYa ku-Taae Mahd(Gau<aa
MaNaaerQaeNaaSaiTa DaavTaae bih" )) 12 ))
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
haräv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëä
manorathenäsati dhävato bahiù
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; asti—there is; bhaktiù—devotional service; bhagavati—to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; akiïcanä—without any motive;
sarvaiù—with all; guëaiù—good qualities; tatra—there (in that person);
samäsate—reside; suräù—all the demigods; harau—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; abhaktasya—of a person who is not devoted;
kutaù—where; mahat-guëäù—good qualities; manorathena—by mental
speculation; asati—in the temporary material world; dhävataù—who is
running; bahiù—outside.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
736
TRANSLATION
All the demigods and their exalted qualities, such as religion, knowledge and
renunciation, become manifest in the body of one who has developed unalloyed
devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva. On the other
hand, a person devoid of devotional service and engaged in material activities
has no good qualities. Even if he is adept at the practice of mystic yoga or the
honest endeavor of maintaining his family and relatives, he must be driven by
his own mental speculations and must engage in the service of the Lord's
external energy. How can there be any good qualities in such a man?
PURPORT
As explained in the next verse, Kåñëa is the original source of all living
entities. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (15.7), wherein Kåñëa says:
mamaiväàço jéva-loke
jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù
manaù ñañöhänéndriyäëi
prakåti-sthäni karñati
"The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental parts.
Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses,
which include the mind." All living entities are part and parcel of Kåñëa, and
therefore when they revive their original Kåñëa consciousness, they possess all
the good qualities of Kåñëa in a small quantity. When one engages himself in
the nine processes of devotional service (çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù smaraëaà
päda-sevanam/ arcanaà vandanaà däsyaà sakhyam ätma-nivedanam [SB
7.5.23]), one's heart becomes purified, and he immediately understands his
relationship with Kåñëa. He then revives his original quality of Kåñëa
consciousness.
In the Ädi-lélä of Caitanya-caritämåta, Chapter Eight, there is a description
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
737
of some of the qualities of devotees. For example, Çré Paëòita Haridäsa is
described as being very well-behaved, tolerant, peaceful, magnanimous and
grave. In addition, he spoke very sweetly, his endeavors were very pleasing, he
was always patient, he respected everyone, he always worked for everyone's
benefit, his mind was free of duplicity, and he was completely devoid of all
malicious activities. These are all originally qualities of Kåñëa, and when one
becomes a devotee they automatically become manifest. Çré Kåñëadäsa
Kaviräja, the author of Caitanya-caritämåta, says that all good qualities become
manifest in the body of a Vaiñëava and that only by the presence of these good
qualities can one distinguish a Vaiñëava from a non-Vaiñëava. Kåñëadäsa
Kaviräja lists the following twenty-six good qualities of a Vaiñëava: (1) He is
very kind to everyone. (2) He does not make anyone his enemy. (3) He is
truthful. (4) He is equal to everyone. (5) No one can find any fault in him. (6)
He is magnanimous. (7) He is mild. (8) He is always clean. (9) He is without
possessions. (10) He works for everyone's benefit. (11) He is very peaceful. (12)
He is always surrendered to Kåñëa. (13) He has no material desires. (14) He is
very meek. (15) He is steady. (16) He controls his senses. (17) He does not eat
more than required. (18) He is not influenced by the Lord's illusory energy.
(19) He offers respect to everyone. (20) He does not desire any respect for
himself. (21) He is very grave. (22) He is merciful. (23) He is friendly. (24) He
is poetic. (25) He is expert. (26) He is silent.
TEXT 13
hirihR Saa+aaÙGavaNa( Xarqir<aa‚
MaaTMaa ‡za<aaiMav TaaeYaMaqiPSaTaMa( )
ihTva Maha&STa& Yaid SaÂTae Ga*he
Tada Mahtv& vYaSaa dMPaTaqNaaMa( )) 13 ))
harir hi säkñäd bhagavän çarériëäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
738
ätmä jhañäëäm iva toyam épsitam
hitvä mahäàs taà yadi sajjate gåhe
tadä mahattvaà vayasä dampaténäm
SYNONYMS
hariù—the Lord; hi—certainly; säkñät—directly; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; çarériëäm—of all living entities who have accepted
material bodies; ätmä—the life and soul; jhañäëäm—of the aquatics; iva—like;
toyam—the vast water; épsitam—is desired; hitvä—giving up; mahän—a great
personality; tam—Him; yadi—if; sajjate—becomes attached; gåhe—to
household life; tadä—at that time; mahattvam—greatness; vayasä—by age;
dam-paténäm—of the husband and wife.
TRANSLATION
Just as aquatics always desire to remain in the vast mass of water, all
conditioned living entities naturally desire to remain in the vast existence of the
Supreme Lord. Therefore if someone very great by material calculations fails to
take shelter of the Supreme Soul but instead becomes attached to material
household life, his greatness is like that of a young, low-class couple. One who
is too attached to material life loses all good spiritual qualities.
PURPORT
Although crocodiles are very fierce animals, they are powerless when they
venture out of the water onto land. When they are out of the water, they
cannot exhibit their original power. Similarly, the all-pervading Supersoul,
Paramätmä, is the source of all living entities, and all living entities are part
and parcel of Him. When the living entity remains in contact with the
all-pervading Väsudeva, the Personality of Godhead, he manifests his spiritual
power, exactly as the crocodile exhibits its strength in the water. In other
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
739
words, the greatness of the living entity can be perceived when he is in the
spiritual world, engaged in spiritual activities. Many householders, although
well-educated in the knowledge of the Vedas, become attached to family life.
They are compared herein to crocodiles out of water, for they are devoid of all
spiritual strength. Their greatness is like that of a young husband and wife
who, though uneducated, praise one another and become attracted to their
own temporary beauty. This kind of greatness is appreciated only by low-class
men with no qualifications.
Everyone should therefore seek the shelter of the Supreme Soul, the source
of all living entities. No one should waste his time in the so-called happiness of
materialistic household life. In the Vedic civilization, this type of crippled life
is allowed only until one's fiftieth year, when one must give up family life and
enter either the order of vänaprastha (independent retired life for cultivation
of spiritual knowledge) or sannyäsa (the renounced order, in which one
completely takes shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead).
TEXT 14
TaSMaad]JaaeraGaivzadMaNYau‚
MaaNaSPa*ha>aYadENYaaiDaMaUl/Ma( )
ihTva Ga*h& Sa&Sa*iTac§-val&/
Na*iSa&hPaad& >aJaTaaku-Taae>aYaiMaiTa )) 14 ))
tasmäd rajo-räga-viñäda-manyumäna-
spåhä-bhayadainyädhimülam
hitvä gåhaà saàsåti-cakravälaà
nåsiàha-pädaà bhajatäkutobhayam iti
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; rajaù—of passion or material desires; räga—attachment for
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
740
material things; viñäda—then disappointment; manyu—anger;
mäna-spåhä—the desire to be respectable in society; bhaya—fear; dainya—of
poverty; adhimülam—the root cause; hitvä—giving up; gåham—household life;
saàsåti-cakravälam—the cycle of repeated birth and death;
nåsiàha-pädam—the lotus feet of Lord Nåsiàhadeva; bhajata—worship;
akutaù-bhayam—the shelter of fearlessness; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O demons, give up the so-called happiness of family life and
simply take shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Nåsiàhadeva, which are the actual
shelter of fearlessness. Entanglement in family life is the root cause of material
attachment, indefatigable desires, moroseness, anger, despair, fear and the desire
for false prestige, all of which result in the repetition of birth and death.
TEXT 15
ke-TauMaale/_iPa >aGavaNa( k-aMadevSvæPae<a l/+MYaa" iPa[Yaick-IzRYaa
Pa[JaaPaTaeduRihTa›<aa& Pau}aa<aa& TaÜzRPaTaqNaa& PauåzaYauzahaera}aPairSa&:YaaNaaNaa& YaaSaa&
Ga>aaR MahaPauåzMahañTaeJaSaaeÜeiJaTaMaNaSaa& ivßSTaa VYaSav" Sa&vTSaraNTae
iviNaPaTaiNTa )) 15 ))
ketumäle 'pi bhagavän kämadeva-svarüpeëa lakñmyäù priya-cikérñayä
prajäpater duhitèëäà puträëäà tad-varña-paténäà
puruñäyuñäho-rätra-parisaìkhyänänäà yäsäà garbhä
mahä-puruña-mahästra-tejasodvejita-manasäà vidhvastä vyasavaù
saàvatsaränte vinipatanti.
SYNONYMS
ketumäle—in the tract of land known as Ketumäla-varña; api—also;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
741
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu;
kämadeva-svarüpeëa—in the form of Kämadeva (Cupid or Pradyumna);
lakñmyäù—of the goddess of fortune; priya-cikérñayä—with a desire to bring
about the satisfaction; prajäpateù—of Prajäpati; duhitèëäm—of the daughters;
puträëäm—of the sons; tat-varña-paténäm—the ruler of that land;
puruña-äyuñä—in a human lifetime (about one hundred years);
ahaù-rätra—the days and nights; parisaìkhyänänäm—which equal in number;
yäsäm—of whom (the daughters); garbhäù—fetuses; mahä-puruña—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahä-astra—of the great weapon (the disc);
tejasä—by the effulgence; udvejita-manasäm—whose minds are agitated;
vidhvastäù—ruined; vyasavaù—dead; saàvatsara-ante—at the end of the year;
vinipatanti—fall down.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: In the tract of land called Ketumäla-varña,
Lord Viñëu lives in the form of Kämadeva, only for the satisfaction of His
devotees. These include Lakñméjé [the goddess of fortune], the Prajäpati
Saàvatsara and all of Saàvatsara's sons and daughters. The daughters of
Prajäpati are considered the controlling deities of the nights, and his sons are
considered the controllers of the days. The Prajäpati's offspring number
36,000, one for each day and each night in the lifetime of a human being. At
the end of each year, the Prajäpati's daughters become very agitated upon seeing
the extremely effulgent disc of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus
they all suffer miscarriages.
PURPORT
This Kämadeva, who appears as Kåñëa's son named Pradyumna, is
viñëu-tattva. How this is so is explained by Madhväcärya, who quotes from the
Brahmäëòa Puräëa: kämadeva-sthitaà viñëum upäste. Although this Kämadeva
is viñëu-tattva, His body is not spiritual but material. Lord Viñëu as Pradyumna
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
742
or Kämadeva accepts a material body, but He still acts spiritually. It does not
make any difference whether He accepts a spiritual or a material body; He can
act spiritually in any condition of existence. Mäyävädé philosophers regard
even Lord Kåñëa's body as material, but their opinions cannot impede the
spiritual activity of the Lord.
TEXT 16
ATaqv Saul/il/TaGaiTaivl/aSaivl/iSaTaåicrhaSale/Xaavl/aek-l/Il/Yaa ik-iÄduta‚
iM>aTaSauNdr>a]UMa<@l/Sau>aGavdNaarivNdié[Yaa rMaa& rMaYaiàiNd]Yaai<a rMaYaTae )) 16
))
atéva sulalita-gati-viläsa-vilasita-rucira-häsa-leçävaloka-lélayä
kiïcid-uttambhita-sundara-bhrü-maëòala-subhaga-vadanäravinda-çriyä
ramäà ramayann indriyäëi ramayate.
SYNONYMS
atéva—very much; su-lalita—beautiful; gati—with movements; viläsa—by
pastimes; vilasita—manifested; rucira—pleasing; häsa-leça—mild smiling;
avaloka-lélayä—by playful glancing; kiïcit-uttambhita—slightly raised;
sundara—beautiful; bhrü-maëòala—by the eyebrows; subhaga—auspicious;
vadana-aravinda-çriyä—with His beautiful lotuslike face; ramäm—the goddess
of fortune; ramayan—pleasing; indriyäëi—all the senses; ramayate—He
pleases.
TRANSLATION
In Ketumäla-varña, Lord Kämadeva [Pradyumna] moves very graciously. His
mild smile is very beautiful, and when He increases the beauty of His face by
slightly raising His eyebrows and glancing playfully, He pleases the goddess of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
743
fortune. Thus He enjoys His transcendental senses.
TEXT 17
TaÙGavTaae MaaYaaMaYa& æPa& ParMaSaMaaiDaYaaeGaeNa rMaa devq Sa&vTSarSYa rai}azu
Pa[JaaPaTaeduRihTa*i>aåPaeTaah"Sau c TaÙTa*Ri>aåPaaSTae wd& caedahriTa )) 17 ))
tad bhagavato mäyämayaà rüpaà parama-samädhi-yogena ramä devé
saàvatsarasya rätriñu prajäpater duhitåbhir upetähaùsu ca tad-bhartåbhir
upäste idaà codäharati.
SYNONYMS
tat—that; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
mäyä-mayam—full of affection for the devotees; rüpam—form;
parama—highest; samädhi-yogena—by absorption of the mind in the service of
the Lord; ramä—the goddess of fortune; devé—divine woman;
saàvatsarasya—known as Saàvatsara; rätriñu—during the nights;
prajäpateù—of Prajäpati; duhitåbhiù—with the daughters; upeta—combined;
ahaùsu—during the days; ca—also; tat-bhartåbhiù—with the husbands;
upäste—worships; idam—this; ca—also; udäharati—chants.
TRANSLATION
Accompanied during the daytime by the sons of the Prajäpati [the
predominating deities of the days] and accompanied at night by his daughters
[the deities of the nights], Lakñmédevé worships the Lord during the period
known as the Saàvatsara in His most merciful form as Kämadeva. Fully
absorbed in devotional service, she chants the following mantras.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
744
The word mäyämayam used in this verse should not be understood
according to the interpretations of the Mäyävädés. Mäyä means affection as
well as illusion. When a mother deals with her child affectionately, she is
called mäyämaya. In whatever form the Supreme Lord Viñëu appears, He is
always affectionate toward His devotees. Thus the word mäyämayam is used
here to mean "very affectionate toward the devotees." Çréla Jéva Gosvämé
writes in this regard that mäyämayam can also mean kåpä-pracuram, deeply
merciful. Similarly, Çréla Véraräghava says, mäyä-pracuranätméya-saìkalpena
parigåhétam ity arthaù jïäna-paryäyo'tra mäyä-çabdaù: when one is very
affectionate due to an intimate relationship, one is described as mäyämaya.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains mäyämayam by dividing it into
the words mäyä and ämayam. He explains these words to indicate that because
the living entity is covered by the disease of illusion, the Lord is always eager
to deliver His devotee from the clutches of mäyä and cure him of the disease
caused by the illusory energy.
TEXT 18
p ha& hq& hU& p NaMaae >aGavTae ôzqke-XaaYa SavRGau<aivXaezEivRl/i+aTaaTMaNae
AakU-TaqNaa& ictaqNaa& ceTaSaa& ivXaeza<aa& caiDaPaTaYae zae@Xak-l/aYa‚
C^NdaeMaYaaYaaàMaYaaYaaMa*TaMaYaaYa SavRMaYaaYa SahSae AaeJaSae bl/aYa k-aNTaaYa
k-aMaaYa NaMaSTae o>aYa}a >aUYaaTa( )) 18 ))
oà hräà hréà hrüà oà namo bhagavate håñékeçäya sarva-guëa-viçeñair
vilakñitätmane äküténäà citténäà cetasäà viçeñäëäà cädhipataye
ñoòaça-kaläya cchando-mayäyänna-mayäyämåta-mayäya sarva-mayäya sahase
ojase baläya käntäya kämäya namas te ubhayatra bhüyät.
SYNONYMS
om—O Lord; hräm hrém hrüm—the seeds of the mantra, chanted for a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
745
successful result; om—O Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances;
bhagavate—unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
håñékeçäya—unto Håñékeça, the Lord of the senses; sarva-guëa—with all
transcendental qualities; viçeñaiù—with all varieties; vilakñita—particularly
observed; ätmane—unto the soul of all living entities; äküténäm—of all kinds
of activity; citténäm—of all kinds of knowledge; cetasäm—of the functions of
the mind, such as determination and mental effort; viçeñäëäm—of their
respective objects; ca—and; adhipataye—unto the master;
ñoòaça-kaläya—whose parts are the sixteen original ingredients of creation
(namely the five objects of the senses and the eleven senses, including the
mind); chandaù-mayäya—unto the enjoyer of all ritualistic ceremonies;
anna-mayäya—who maintains all living entities by supplying the necessities of
life; amåta-mayäya—who awards eternal life; sarva-mayäya—who is
all-pervading; sahase—the powerful; ojase—who supplies strength to the
senses; baläya—who supplies strength to the body; käntäya—the supreme
husband or master of all living entities; kämäya—who supplies all necessities
for the devotees; namaù—respectful obeisances; te—unto You;
ubhayatra—always (during both day and night, or both in this life and the
next); bhüyät—may there be all good fortune.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Håñékeça, the controller of all my senses and the origin of
everything. As the supreme master of all bodily, mental and intellectual
activities, He is the only enjoyer of their results. The five sense objects and
eleven senses, including the mind, are His partial manifestations. He supplies all
the necessities of life, which are His energy and thus nondifferent from Him,
and He is the cause of everyone's bodily and mental prowess, which is also
nondifferent from Him. Indeed, He is the husband and provider of necessities
for all living entities. The purpose of all the Vedas is to worship Him.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
746
Therefore let us all offer Him our respectful obeisances. May He always be
favorable toward us in this life and the next.
PURPORT
In this verse the word mäyämaya is further explained in regard to how the
Lord expands His mercy in different ways. paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate:
[Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport] the energies of the Supreme Lord are understood in
different ways. In this verse He is described as the original source of
everything, even our body, senses, mind, activities, prowess, bodily strength,
mental strength and determination for securing the necessities of life. Indeed,
the Lord's energies can be perceived in everything. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(7.8), raso 'ham apsu kaunteya: the taste of water is also Kåñëa. Kåñëa is the
active principle of everything we need for our maintenance.
This verse offering respectful obeisances unto the Lord was composed by
Ramä, the goddess of fortune, and is full of spiritual power. Under the
guidance of a spiritual master, everyone should chant this mantra and thus
become a complete and perfect devotee of the Lord. One may chant this
mantra for complete liberation from material bondage, and after liberation one
may continue to chant it while worshiping the Supreme Lord in
Vaikuëöhaloka. All mantras, of course, are meant for this life and the next life,
as Kåñëa Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gétä (9.14):
satataà kértayanto mäà
yatantaç ca dåòha-vratäù
namasyantaç ca mäà bhaktyä
nitya-yuktä upäsate
"Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination, bowing
down before Me, the great souls perpetually worship Me with devotion." A
devotee who both in this life and the next chants the mahä-mantra, or any
mantra, is called nitya-yuktopäsaka.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
747
TEXT 19
iñYaae v]TaESTva ôzqke-ìr& SvTaae
ùaraDYa l/aeke- PaiTaMaaXaaSaTae_NYaMa( )
TaaSaa& Na Tae vE PairPaaNTYaPaTYa&
iPa[Ya& DaNaaYaU&iz YaTaae_SvTaN}aa" )) 19 ))
striyo vratais tvä håñékeçvaraà svato
hy ärädhya loke patim äçäsate 'nyam
täsäà na te vai paripänty apatyaà
priyaà dhanäyüàñi yato 'sva-tanträù
SYNONYMS
striyaù—all women; vrataiù—by observing fasting and other vows; tvä—you;
håñékeçvaram—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, master of the senses;
svataù—of your own accord; hi—certainly; ärädhya—worshiping; loke—in the
world; patim—a husband; äçäsate—ask for; anyam—another; täsäm—of all
those women; na—not; te—the husbands; vai—indeed; paripänti—able to
protect; apatyam—the children; priyam—very dear; dhana—the wealth;
äyüàñi—or the duration of life; yataù—because; asva-tanträù—dependent.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You are certainly the fully independent master of all the
senses. Therefore all women who worship You by strictly observing vows
because they wish to acquire a husband to satisfy their senses are surely under
illusion. They do not know that such a husband cannot actually give protection
to them or their children. Nor can he protect their wealth or duration of life,
for he himself is dependent on time, fruitive results and the modes of nature,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
748
which are all subordinate to You.
PURPORT
In this verse, Lakñmédevé (Ramä) shows compassion toward women who
worship the Lord for the benediction of possessing a good husband. Although
such women desire to be happy with children, wealth, a long duration of life
and everything dear to them, they cannot possibly do so. In the material world,
a so-called husband is dependent on the control of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. There are many examples of a woman whose husband, being
dependent on the result of his own fruitive actions, cannot maintain his wife,
her children, her wealth or her duration of life. Therefore, factually the only
real husband of all women is Kåñëa, the supreme husband. Because the gopés
were liberated souls, they understood this fact. Therefore they rejected their
material husbands and accepted Kåñëa as their real husband. Kåñëa is the real
husband not only of the gopés, but of every living entity. Everyone should
perfectly understand that Kåñëa is the real husband of all living entities, who
are described in the Bhagavad-gétä as prakåti (female), not puruña (male). In
Bhagavad-gétä (10.12), only Kåñëa is addressed as puruña:
paraà brahma paraà dhäma
pavitraà paramaà bhavän
puruñaà çäçvataà divyam
ädi-devam ajaà vibhum
"You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode and purifier,
the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person. You are the primal God,
transcendental and original, and You are the unborn and all-pervading
beauty."
Kåñëa is the original puruña, and the living entities are prakåti. Thus Kåñëa
is the enjoyer, and all living entities are meant to be enjoyed by Him.
Therefore any woman who seeks a material husband for her protection, or any
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
749
man who desires to become the husband of a woman, is under illusion. To
become a husband means to maintain a wife and children nicely by supplying
wealth and security. However, a material husband cannot possibly do this, for
he is dependent on his karma. Karmaëä-daiva-netreëa: [SB 3.31.1] his
circumstances are determined by his past fruitive activities. Therefore if one
proudly thinks he can protect his wife, he is under illusion. Kåñëa is the only
husband, and therefore the relationship between a husband and wife in this
material world cannot be absolute. Because we have the desire to marry, Kåñëa
mercifully allows the so-called husband to possess a wife, and the wife to
possess a so-called husband, for mutual satisfaction. In the Éçopaniñad it is said,
tena tyaktena bhuïjéthä: [Éço mantra 1] the Lord provides everyone with his
quota. Actually, however, every living entity is prakåti, or female, and Kåñëa is
the only husband.
ekale éçvara kåñëa, ära saba bhåtya
yäre yaiche näcäya, se taiche kare nåtya
[Cc. Ädi 5.142]
Kåñëa is the original master or husband of everyone, and all other living
entities, having taken the form of so-called husbands, or wives, are dancing
according to His desire. A so-called husband may unite with his wife for sense
gratification, but his senses are conducted by Håñékeça, the master of the
senses, who is therefore the actual husband.
TEXT 20
Sa vE PaiTa" SYaadku-Taae>aYa" SvYa&
SaMaNTaTa" PaaiTa >aYaaTaur& JaNaMa( )
Sa Wk- WveTarQaa iMaQaae >aYa&
NaEvaTMal/a>aadiDa MaNYaTae ParMa( )) 20 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
750
sa vai patiù syäd akutobhayaù svayaà
samantataù päti bhayäturaà janam
sa eka evetarathä mitho bhayaà
naivätmaläbhäd adhi manyate param
SYNONYMS
saù—he; vai—indeed; patiù—a husband; syät—would be;
akutaù-bhayaù—who is not fearful of anyone; svayam—self-sufficient;
samantataù—entirely; päti—maintains; bhaya-äturam—who is very afraid;
janam—a person; saù—therefore he; ekaù—one; eva—only;
itarathä—otherwise; mithaù—from one another; bhayam—fear; na—not;
eva—indeed; ätma-läbhät—than the attainment of You; adhi—greater;
manyate—is accepted; param—other thing.
TRANSLATION
He alone who is never afraid but who, on the contrary, gives complete
shelter to all fearful persons can actually become a husband and protector.
Therefore, my Lord, you are the only husband, and no one else can claim this
position. If you were not the only husband, You would be afraid of others.
Therefore persons learned in all Vedic literature accept only Your Lordship as
everyone's master, and they think no one else a better husband and protector
than You.
PURPORT
Here the meaning of husband or guardian is clearly explained, people want
to become a husband, a guardian, a governor or a political leader without
knowing the actual meaning of such a superior position. There are many
people all over the world—indeed, throughout the universe—who claim for
some time that they are husbands, political leaders or guardians, but in due
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
751
course of time the Supreme Lord desires their removal from their posts, and
their careers are immediately finished. Therefore those who are actually
learned and advanced in spiritual life do not accept any leader, husband or
maintainer other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Lord Kåñëa personally states in Bhagavad-gétä (18.66), ahaà tväà
sarva-päpebhyo mokñayiñyämi: "I shall deliver you from all sinful reactions."
Kåñëa is not afraid of anyone. On the contrary, everyone is afraid of Kåñëa.
Therefore He can actually give protection to a subordinate living entity. Since
so-called leaders or dictators are completely under the control of material
nature, they can never give complete protection to others, although they claim
this ability due to false prestige. Na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum: [SB 7.5.31]
people do not know that real advancement in life consists of accepting the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as one's master. Instead of deceiving
themselves and others by pretending to be all-powerful, all political leaders,
husbands and guardians should spread the Kåñëa consciousness movement so
that everyone can learn how to surrender to Kåñëa, the supreme husband.
TEXT 21
Yaa TaSYa Tae PaadSaraeåhahR<a&
iNak-aMaYaeTSaai%l/k-aMal/MPa$=a )
Tadev raSaqiPSaTaMaqiPSaTaae_icRTaae
YaÙGanYaaÁa >aGavNa( Pa[TaPYaTae )) 21 ))
yä tasya te päda-saroruhärhaëaà
nikämayet säkhila-käma-lampaöä
tad eva räsépsitam épsito 'rcito
yad-bhagna-yäcïä bhagavan pratapyate
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
752
yä—a woman who; tasya—of Him; te—of You; päda-saroruha—of the lotus
feet; arhaëam—the worship; nikämayet—fully desires; sä—such a woman;
akhila-käma-lampaöä—although maintaining all kinds of material desire;
tat—that; eva—only; räsi—You award; épsitam—some other desired
benediction; épsitaù—being looked to for; arcitaù—worshiped; yat—from
which; bhagna-yäcïä—one who desires objects other than Your lotus feet and
who thus becomes broken; bhagavan—O my Lord; pratapyate—is pained.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You automatically fulfill all the desires of a woman who
worships Your lotus feet in pure love. However, if a woman worships Your
lotus feet for a particular purpose, You also quickly fulfill her desires, but in the
end she becomes broken-hearted and laments. Therefore one need not worship
Your lotus feet for some material benefit.
PURPORT
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé describes pure devotional service as
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. One
should not worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead to fulfill some
material desire for success in fruitive activities or mental speculation. To serve
the lotus feet of the Lord means to serve Him exactly as He desires. The
neophyte devotee is therefore ordered to worship the Lord strictly according to
the regulative principles given by the spiritual master and the çästras. By
executing devotional service in that way, he gradually becomes attached to
Kåñëa, and when his original dormant love for the Lord becomes manifest, he
spontaneously serves the Lord without any motive. This condition is the
perfect stage of one's relationship with the Lord. The Lord then looks after the
comfort and security of His devotee without being asked. Kåñëa promises in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.22):
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
753
ananyäç cintayanto mäà
ye janäù paryupäsate
teñäà nityäbhiyuktänäà
yoga-kñemaà vahämy aham
The Supreme Lord personally takes care of anyone who is completely engaged
in His devotional service. Whatever he has, the Lord protects, and whatever
he needs, the Lord supplies. Therefore why should one bother the Lord for
something material? Such prayers are unnecessary.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that even if a devotee wishes
the Lord to fulfill a particular desire, the devotee should not be considered a
sakäma-bhakta (a devotee with some motive). In the Bhagavad-gétä (7.16)
Kåñëa says:
catur-vidhä bhajante mäà
janäù sukåtino 'rjuna
ärto jijïäsur arthärthé
jïäné ca bharatarñabha
"O best among the Bharatas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render
devotional service unto Me—the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the
inquisitive and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute." The ärta
and the arthärthé, who approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead for relief
from misery or for some money, are not sakäma-bhaktas, although they appear
to be. Being neophyte devotees, they are simply ignorant. Later in
Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says, udäräù sarva evaite: [Bg. 7.18] they are all
magnanimous (udäräù). Although in the beginning a devotee may harbor some
desire, in due course of time it will vanish. Therefore the Çrémad-Bhägavatam
enjoins:
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
754
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"A person who has broader intelligence, whether he is full of all material
desire, is free from material desire, or has a desire for liberation, must by all
means worship the supreme whole, the Personality of Godhead." (SB 2.3.10)
Even if one wants something material, he should pray to no one but the
Lord to fulfill his desire. If one approaches a demigod for the fulfillment of his
desires, he is to be considered nañöa-buddhi, bereft of all good sense. Kåñëa says
in Bhagavad-gétä (7.20):
kämais tais tair håta-jïänäù
prapadyante 'nya-devatäù
taà taà niyamam ästhäya
prakåtyä niyatäù svayä
"Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto demigods
and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship according to their
own natures."
Lakñmédevé advises all devotees who approach the Lord with material
desires that according to her practical experience, the Lord is Kämadeva, and
thus there is no need to ask Him for anything material. She says that everyone
should simply serve the Lord without any motive. Since the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is sitting in everyone's heart, He knows everyone's
thoughts, and in due course of time He will fulfill all desires. Therefore let us
completely depend on the service of the Lord without bothering Him with our
material requests.
TEXT 22
MaTPa[aáYae_JaeXaSauraSauradYa‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
755
STaPYaNTa oGa]& TaPa WeiNd]YaeiDaYa" )
‰Tae >avTPaadParaYa<aaà Maa&
ivNdNTYah& Tvd(Da*dYaa YaTaae_iJaTa )) 22 ))
mat-präptaye 'jeça-suräsurädayas
tapyanta ugraà tapa aindriye dhiyaù
åte bhavat-päda-paräyaëän na mäà
vindanty ahaà tvad-dhådayä yato 'jita
SYNONYMS
mat-präptaye—to obtain my mercy; aja—Lord Brahmä; éça—Lord Çiva;
sura—the other demigods, headed by King Indra, Candra and Varuëa;
asura-ädayaù—as well as the demons; tapyante—undergo; ugram—severe;
tapaù—austerity; aindriye dhiyaù—whose minds are absorbed in thoughts of
superior sense gratification; åte—unless; bhavat-päda-paräyaëät—one who is
wholly and solely engaged in the service of the Supreme Lord's lotus feet;
na—not; mäm—me; vindanti—obtain; aham—I; tvat—in You;
hådayäù—whose hearts; yataù—therefore; ajita—O unconquerable one.
TRANSLATION
O supreme unconquerable Lord, when they become absorbed in thoughts of
material enjoyment, Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, as well as other demigods and
demons, undergo severe penances and austerities to receive my benedictions.
But I do not favor anyone, however great he may be; unless he is always
engaged in the service of Your lotus feet. Because I always keep You within my
heart, I cannot favor anyone but a devotee.
PURPORT
In this verse the goddess of fortune, Lakñmédevé, clearly states that she does
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
756
not bestow her favor on any materialistic person. Although sometimes a
materialist becomes very opulent in the eyes of another materialist, such
opulence is bestowed upon him by the goddess Durgädevé, a material expansion
of the goddess of fortune, not by Lakñmédevé herself. Those who desire material
wealth worship Durgädevé with the following mantra: dhanaà dehi rüpaà dehi
rupavati bharyam dehi. "O worshipable mother Durgädevé, please give me
wealth, strength, fame, a good wife and so on." By pleasing goddess Durgä one
can obtain such benefits, but since they are temporary, they result only in
mäyä-sukha (illusory happiness). As stated by Prahläda Mahäräja,
mäyä-sukhäya bharam udvahato vimüòhän: [SB 7.9.43] those who work very
hard for material benefits are vimüòhas, foolish rascals, because such happiness
will not endure. On the other hand, devotees like Prahläda and Dhruva
Mahäräja achieved extraordinary material opulences, but such opulences were
not mäyä-sukha. When a devotee acquires unparalleled opulences, they are the
direct gifts of the goddess of fortune, who resides in the heart of Näräyaëa.
The material opulences a person obtains by offering prayers to the goddess
Durgä are temporary. As described in Bhagavad-gétä (7.23), antavat tu phalaà
teñäà tad bhavaty alpa-medhasäm: men of meager intelligence desire temporary
happiness. We have actually seen that one of the disciples of Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura wanted to enjoy the property of his spiritual master, and the
spiritual master, being merciful toward him, gave him the temporary property,
but not the power to preach the cult of Caitanya Mahäprabhu all over the
world. That special mercy of the power to preach is given to a devotee who
does not want anything material from his spiritual master but wants only to
serve him. The story of the demon Rävaëa illustrates this point. Although
Rävaëa tried to abduct the goddess of fortune Sétädevé from the custody of
Lord Rämacandra, he could not possibly do so. The Sétädevé he forcibly took
with him was not the original Sétädevé, but an expansion of mäyä, or
Durgädevé. As a result, instead of winning the favor of the real goddess of
fortune, Rävaëa and his whole family were vanquished by the power of
Durgädevé (såñöi-sthiti-pralaya-sädhana-çaktir ekä [Bs. 5.44]).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
757
TEXT 23
Sa Tv& MaMaaPYaCYauTa XaqiZ<aR viNdTa&
k-raMbuJa& YatvdDaaiYa SaaTvTaaMa( )
ib>aizR Maa& l/+Ma vre<Ya MaaYaYaa
k- wRìrSYaeihTaMaUihTau& iv>auiriTa )) 23 ))
sa tvaà mamäpy acyuta çérñëi vanditaà
karämbujaà yat tvad-adhäyi sätvatäm
bibharñi mäà lakñma vareëya mäyayä
ka éçvarasyehitam ühituà vibhur iti
SYNONYMS
saù—that; tvam—You; mama—of me; api—also; acyuta—O infallible one;
çérñëi—on the head; vanditam—worshiped; kara-ambujam—Your lotus hand;
yat—which; tvat—by You; adhäyi—placed; sätvatäm—on the head of the
devotees; bibharñi—You maintain; mäm—me; lakñma—as an insignia on Your
chest; vareëya—O worshipable one; mäyayä—with deceit; kaù—who;
éçvarasya—of the supremely powerful controller; éhitam—the desires;
ühitum—to understand by reason and argument; vibhuù—is able; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
O infallible one, Your lotus palm is the source of all benediction. Therefore
Your pure devotees worship it, and You very mercifully place Your hand on
their heads. I wish that You may also place Your hand on My head, for
although You already bear my insignia of golden streaks on Your chest, I regard
this honor as merely a kind of false prestige for me. You show Your real mercy
to Your devotees, not to me. Of course, You are the supreme absolute
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
758
controller, and no one can understand Your motives.
PURPORT
In many places, the çästras describe the Supreme Personality of Godhead as
being more inclined toward His devotees than toward His wife, who always
remains on His chest. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.14.15) it is stated:
na tathä me priyatama
ätma-yonir na çaìkaraù
na ca saìkarñaëo na çrér
naivätmä ca yathä bhavän
Here Kåñëa plainly says that His devotees are more dear to Him than Lord
Brahmä, Lord Çiva, Lord Saìkarñaëa (the original cause of creation), the
goddess of fortune or even His own Self. Elsewhere in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(10.9.20) Çukadeva Gosvämé says,
nemam viriïco na bhavo
na çrér apy aìga saàçrayä
prasädaà lebhire gopé
yat tat präpa vimuktidät
The Supreme Lord, who can award liberation to anyone, showed more mercy
toward the gopés than to Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva or even the goddess of
fortune, who is His own wife and is associated with His body. Similarly,
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.47.60) also states:
näyaà çriyo 'ìga u nitänta-rateù prasädaù
svar-yoñitäà nalina-gandha-rucäà kuto 'nyäù
räsotsave 'sya bhuja-daëòa-gåhéta-kaëöhalabdhäçiñäà
ya udagäd vraja-sundaréëäm
"The gopés received benedictions from the Lord that neither Lakñmédevé nor
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
759
the most beautiful dancers in the heavenly planets could attain. In the räsa
dance, the Lord showed His favor to the most fortunate gopés by placing His
arms on their shoulders and dancing with each of them individually. No one
can compare with the gopés, who received the causeless mercy of the Lord."
In the Caitanya-caritämåta it is said that no one can receive the real favor
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead without following in the footsteps of
the gopés. Even the goddess of fortune could not receive the same favor as the
gopés, although she underwent severe austerities and penances for many years.
Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu discusses this point with Vyeìkaöa Bhaööa in
Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 9.111-131): "The Lord inquired from Vyeìkaöa
Bhaööa, 'Your worshipable goddess of fortune, Lakñmé, always remains on the
chest of Näräyaëa, and she is certainly the most chaste woman in the creation.
However, My Lord is Lord Çré Kåñëa, a cowherd boy engaged in tending cows.
Why is it that Lakñmé, being such a chaste wife, wants to associate with My
Lord? Just to associate with Kåñëa, Lakñmé abandoned all transcendental
happiness in Vaikuëöha and for a long time accepted vows and regulative
principles and performed unlimited austerities.'
"Vyeìkaöa Bhaööa replied, 'Lord Kåñëa and Lord Näräyaëa are one and the
same, but the pastimes of Kåñëa are more relishable due to their sportive
nature. They are very pleasing for Kåñëa's çaktis. Since Kåñëa and Näräyaëa
are both the same personality, Lakñmé's association with Kåñëa did not break
her vow of chastity. Rather, it was in great fun that the goddess of fortune
wanted to associate with Lord Kåñëa. The goddess of fortune considered that
her vow of chastity would not be damaged by her relationship with Kåñëa.
Rather, by associating with Kåñëa she could enjoy the benefit of the räsa
dance. If she wanted to enjoy herself with Kåñëa what fault is there? Why are
you joking so about this?'
"Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu replied, 'I know that there is no fault in the
goddess of fortune, but still she could not enter into the räsa dance. We hear
this from revealed scriptures. The authorities of Vedic knowledge met Lord
Rämacandra in Daëòakäraëya, and by their penances and austerities, they
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
760
were allowed to enter into the räsa dance. But can you tell me why the goddess
of fortune, Lakñmé, could not get that opportunity? '
"To this Vyeìkaöa Bhaööa replied, 'I cannot enter into the mystery of this
incident. I am an ordinary living being. My intelligence is limited, and I am
always disturbed. How can I understand the pastimes of the Supreme Lord?
They are deeper than millions of oceans.'
"Lord Caitanya replied, 'Lord Kåñëa has a specific characteristic. He attracts
everyone's heart by the mellow of His personal conjugal love. By following in
the footsteps of the inhabitants of the planet known as Vrajaloka or Goloka
Våndävana, one can attain the shelter of the lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa. However,
the inhabitants of that planet do not know that Lord Kåñëa is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Unaware that Kåñëa is the Supreme Lord, the
residents of Våndävana like Nanda Mahäräja, Yaçodädevé and the gopés treat
Kåñëa as their beloved son or lover. Mother Yaçodä accepts Him as her son and
sometimes binds Him to a grinding mortar. Kåñëa's cowherd boy friends think
He is an ordinary boy and get up on His shoulders. In Goloka Våndävana no
one has any desire other than to love Kåñëa.' "
The conclusion is that one cannot associate with Kåñëa unless he has fully
received the favor of the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi. Therefore if one wants to
be delivered by Kåñëa directly, he must take to the service of the residents of
Våndävana, who are unalloyed devotees of the Lord.
TEXT 24
rMYake- c >aGavTa" iPa[YaTaMa& MaaTSYaMavTaaræPa& TaÜzRPauåzSYa MaNaae"
Pa[aKPa[diXaRTa& Sa wdaNaqMaiPa MahTaa >ai¢-YaaeGaeNaaraDaYaTaqd& caedahriTa )) 24 ))
ramyake ca bhagavataù priyatamaà mätsyam avatära-rüpaà
tad-varña-puruñasya manoù präk-pradarçitaà sa idäném api mahatä
bhakti-yogenärädhayatédaà codäharati.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
761
SYNONYMS
ramyake ca—also in Ramyaka-varña; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; priya-tamam—the foremost; mätsyam—fish; avatära-rüpam—the
form of the incarnation; tat-varña-puruñasya—of the ruler of that land;
manoù—Manu; präk—previously (at the end of the Cäkñuña-manvantara);
pradarçitam—exhibited; saù—that Manu; idäném api—even until now; mahatä
bhakti-yogena—by dint of advanced devotional service; ärädhayati—worships
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; idam—this; ca—and;
udäharati—chants.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: In Ramyaka-varña, where Vaivasvata Manu
rules, the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared as Lord Matsya at the end
of the last era [the Cäkñuña-manvantara]. Vaivasvata Manu now worships Lord
Matsya in pure devotional service and chants the following mantra.
TEXT 25
p NaMaae >aGavTae Mau:YaTaMaaYa NaMa" SatvaYa Pa[a<aaYaaEJaSae SahSae bl/aYa
MahaMaTSYaaYa NaMa wiTa )) 25 ))
oà namo bhagavate mukhyatamäya namaù sattväya präëäyaujase sahase
baläya mahä-matsyäya nama iti.
SYNONYMS
om—O my Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; mukhya-tamäya—the first incarnation to
appear; namaù—my respectful obeisances; sattväya—unto the pure
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
762
transcendence; präëäya—the origin of life; ojase—the source of the potency of
the senses; sahase—the origin of all mental power; baläya—the origin of bodily
strength; mahä-matsyäya—unto the gigantic fish incarnation;
namaù—respectful obeisances; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is pure transcendence. He is the origin of all life, bodily strength, mental
power and sensory ability. Known as Matsyävatära, the gigantic fish
incarnation, He appears first among all the incarnations. Again I offer my
obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
Çréla Jayadeva Gosvämé sings:
pralayo payodhi-jale dhåtavän asi vedaà
vihita-vahitra-caritram akhedam
keçava dhåta-ména-çaréra jaya jagad-éça hare
Soon after the cosmic creation, the entire universe was inundated with water.
At that time Lord Kåñëa (Keçava) incarnated as a gigantic fish to protect the
Vedas. Therefore Manu addresses Lord Matsya as mukhyatama, the first
incarnation to appear. Fish are generally considered a mixture of the modes of
ignorance and passion, but we must understand that every incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is completely transcendental. There is never
any deterioration of the Supreme Lord's original transcendental quality.
Therefore the word sattväya is used here, meaning pure goodness on the
transcendental platform. There are many incarnations of the Supreme Lord:
Varäha mürti (the boar form), Kürma mürti (the tortoise form), Hayagréva
mürti (the form of a horse) and so on. Yet we should never think any of Them
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
763
material. They are always situated on the platform of çuddha-sattva, pure
transcendence.
TEXT 26
ANTabRihêai%l/l/aek-Paal/kE-‚
rd*íæPaae ivcrSYauåSvNa" )
Sa wRìrSTv& Ya wd& vXae_NaYa‚
àaMNaa YaQaa daåMaYaq& Nar" iñYaMa( )) 26 ))
antar bahiç cäkhila-loka-pälakair
adåñöa-rüpo vicarasy uru-svanaù
sa éçvaras tvaà ya idaà vaçe 'nayan
nämnä yathä därumayéà naraù striyam
SYNONYMS
antaù—within; bahiù—without; ca—also; akhila-loka-pälakaiù—by the leaders
of the different planets, societies, kingdoms and so on; adåñöa-rüpaù—not seen;
vicarasi—You wander; uru—very great; svanaù—whose sounds (Vedic
mantras); saù—He; éçvaraù—the supreme controller; tvam—You; yaù—who;
idam—this; vaçe—under control; anayat—has brought; nämnä—by different
names like brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra; yathä—exactly like;
därumayém—made of wood; naraù—a man; striyam—a doll.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, just as a puppeteer controls his dancing dolls and a husband
controls his wife, Your Lordship controls all the living entities in the universe,
such as the brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras. Although You are in
everyone's heart as the supreme witness and commander and are outside
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
764
everyone as well, the so-called leaders of societies, communities and countries
cannot realize You. Only those who hear the vibration of the Vedic mantras can
appreciate You.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is antarbahiù, present within and
without everything. One must overcome the delusion caused by the Lord's
external energy and realize His presence both externally and internally. In
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.8.19) Çrématé Kuntédevé has explained that Kåñëa
appears in this world naöo näöyadharo yathä, "exactly like an actor dressed as a
player." In Bhagavad-gétä (18.61) Kåñëa says, éçvaraù sama-bhütänäà håd-deçe
'rjuna tiñöhati: "The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna."
The Lord is situated within everyone's heart, and outside as well. Within the
heart He is the Supersoul, the incarnation who acts as the adviser and witness.
Yet although God is residing within their hearts, foolish people say, "I cannot
see God. Please show Him to me."
Everyone is under the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
exactly like dancing dolls controlled by a puppeteer or a woman controlled by
her husband. A woman is compared to a doll (därumayé) because she has no
independence. She should always be controlled by a man. Still, due to false
prestige, a class of women wants to remain independent. What to speak of
women, all living entities are prakåti (female) and therefore dependent on the
Supreme Lord, as Kåñëa Himself explains in Bhagavad-gétä (apareyam itas tv
anyäà prakåtià viddhi me paräm [Bg. 7.5]). The living entity is never
independent. Under all circumstances, he is dependent on the mercy of the
Lord. The Lord creates the social divisions of human society—brähmaëas,
kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras—and ordains that they follow rules and
regulations suited to their particular position. In this way, all members of
society remain always under the Supreme Lord's control. Still, some people
foolishly deny the existence of God.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
765
Self-realization means to understand one's subordinate position in relation
to the Lord. When one is thus enlightened, he surrenders to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and is liberated from the clutches of the material
energy. In other words, unless one surrenders to the lotus feet of the Lord, the
material energy in its many varieties will continue to control him. No one in
the material world can deny that he is under control. The Supreme Lord,
Näräyaëa, who is beyond this material existence, controls everyone. The
following Vedic mantra confirms this point: eko ha vai näräyaëa äsét. Foolish
persons think Näräyaëa to be on the platform of ordinary material existence.
Because they do not realize the natural constitutional position of the living
entity, they concoct names like daridra-näräyaëa, svämi-näräyaëa or
mithyä-näräyaëa. However, Näräyaëa is actually the supreme controller of
everyone. This understanding is self-realization.
TEXT 27
Ya& l/aek-Paal/a" ik-l/ MaTSarJvra
ihTva YaTaNTaae_iPa Pa*Qak( SaMaeTYa c )
PaaTau& Na Xaeku-iÜRPadêTauZPad"
SarqSa*Pa& SQaa<au Yad}a d*XYaTae )) 27 ))
yaà loka-päläù kila matsara-jvarä
hitvä yatanto 'pi påthak sametya ca
pätuà na çekur dvi-padaç catuñ-padaù
sarésåpaà sthäëu yad atra dåçyate
SYNONYMS
yam—whom (You); loka-päläù—the great leaders of the universe, beginning
with Lord Brahmä; kila—what to speak of others; matsara-jvaräù—who are
suffering from the fever of envy; hitvä—leaving aside; yatantaù—endeavoring;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
766
api—although; påthak—separately; sametya—combined; ca—also; pätum—to
protect; na—not; çekuù—able; dvi-padaù—two-legged;
catuù-padaù—four-legged; sarésåpam—reptiles; sthäëu—not moving;
yat—whatever; atra—within this material world; dåçyate—is visible.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, from the great leaders of the universe, such as Lord Brahmä and
other demigods, down to the political leaders of this world, all are envious of
Your authority. Without Your help, however, they could neither separately nor
concertedly maintain the innumerable living entities within the universe. You
are actually the only maintainer of all human beings, of animals like cows and
asses, and of plants, reptiles, birds, mountains and whatever else is visible
within this material world.
PURPORT
It is fashionable for materialistic persons to compete with the power of God.
When so-called scientists try to manufacture living entities in their
laboratories, their only purpose is to defy the talent and ability of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This is called illusion. It exists even in the higher
planetary systems, where great demigods like Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva and
others reside. In this world everyone is puffed up with false prestige despite the
failure of all his endeavors. When so-called philanthropists, who supposedly
want to help the poor, are approached by members of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement, they say, "You are simply wasting your time, while I am feeding vast
masses of starving people." Unfortunately, their meager efforts, either singly or
together, do not solve anyone's problems.
Sometimes so-called svämés are very eager to feed poor people, thinking
them to be daridra-näräyaëa, the Lord's incarnations as beggars. They prefer to
serve the manufactured daridra-näräyaëa than the original, supreme
Näräyaëa. They say, "Don't encourage service to Lord Näräyaëa. It is better to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
767
serve the starving people of the world." Unfortunately such materialists, either
singly or combined in the form of the United Nations, cannot fulfill their
plans. The truth is that the many millions of human beings, animals, birds and
trees—indeed, all living entities—are maintained solely by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän: one person, the
Supreme Lord, is supplying the necessities of life for all other living entities.
To challenge the authority of Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
is the business of asuras (demons). Yet sometimes suras, or devotees, are also
bewildered by the illusory energy and falsely claim to be the maintainer of the
entire universe. Such incidents are described in the Tenth Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, where Çukadeva Gosvämé tells how Lord Brahmä and
King Indra became puffed up and were eventually chastised by Kåñëa.
TEXT 28
>avaNa( YauGaaNTaa<aRv OiMaRMaail/iNa
+aae<aqiMaMaaMaaeziDavqåDaa& iNaiDaMa( )
MaYaa Sahaeå §-MaTae_Ja AaeJaSaa
TaSMaE JaGaTPa[a<aGa<aaTMaNae NaMa wiTa )) 28 ))
bhavän yugäntärëava ürmi-mälini
kñoëém imäm oñadhi-vérudhäà nidhim
mayä sahoru kramate 'ja ojasä
tasmai jagat-präëa-gaëätmane nama iti
SYNONYMS
bhavän—Your Lordship; yuga-anta-arëave—in the water of devastation at the
end of the millennium; ürmi-mälini—possessing rows of big waves;
kñoëém—the planet earth; imäm—this; oñadhi-vérudhäm—of all kinds of herbs
and drugs; nidhim—the storehouse; mayä—me; saha—with; uru—great;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
768
kramate—You roamed; aja—O unborn one; ojasä—with speed; tasmai—unto
Him; jagat—of the entire universe; präëa-gaëa-ätmane—the ultimate source
of life; namaù—my respectful obeisances; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
O almighty Lord, at the end of the millennium this planet earth, which is the
source of all kinds of herbs, drugs and trees, was inundated by water and
drowned beneath the devastating waves. At that time, You protected me along
with the earth and roamed the sea with great speed. O unborn one, You are the
actual maintainer of the entire universal creation, and therefore You are the
cause of all living entities. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
Envious persons cannot appreciate how wonderfully the Lord creates,
maintains and annihilates the universe, but devotees of the Lord can
understand this perfectly well. Devotees can see how the Lord is acting behind
the wonderful workings of the material nature. In Bhagavad-gétä (9.10) the
Lord says:
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunté, and it is
producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is
created and annihilated again and again." All the wonderful transformations
of nature are happening under the superintendence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Envious persons cannot see this, but a devotee, even
though very humble and even if uneducated, knows that behind all the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
769
activities of nature is the supreme hand of the Supreme Being.
TEXT 29
ihr<MaYae_iPa >aGavaiàvSaiTa kU-MaRTaNau& ib>a]a<aSTaSYa TaiTPa[YaTaMaa& TaNauMaYaRMaa
Sah vzRPauåzE" iPaTa*Ga<aaiDaPaiTaåPaDaaviTa MaN}aiMaMa& caNauJaPaiTa )) 29 ))
hiraëmaye 'pi bhagavän nivasati kürma-tanuà bibhräëas tasya tat priyatamäà
tanum aryamä saha varña-puruñaiù pitå-gaëädhipatir upadhävati mantram
imaà cänujapati.
SYNONYMS
hiraëmaye—in Hiraëmaya-varña; api—indeed; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; nivasati—resides; kürma-tanum—the body of a
tortoise; bibhräëaù—manifesting; tasya—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tat—that; priya-tamäm—dearmost; tanum—body;
aryamä—Aryamä, the chief resident of Hiraëmaya-varña; saha—with;
varña-puruñaiù—the people of that tract of land; pitå-gaëa-adhipatiù—who is
the chief of the pitäs; upadhävati—worships in devotional service;
mantram—hymn; imam—this; ca—also; anujapati—chants.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: In Hiraëmaya-varña, the Supreme Lord,
Viñëu, lives in the form of a tortoise [kürma-çaréra]. This most dear and
beautiful form is always worshiped there in devotional service by Aryamä, the
chief resident of Hiraëmaya-varña, along with the other inhabitants of that
land. They chant the following hymns.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
770
The word priyatama (dearmost) is very significant in this verse. Each
devotee regards a particular form of the Lord as most dear. Because of an
atheistic mentality, some people think that the tortoise, boar and fish
incarnations of the Lord are not very beautiful. They do not know that any
form of the Lord is always the fully opulent Personality of Godhead. Since one
of His opulences is infinite beauty, all the Lord's incarnations are very
beautiful and are appreciated as such by devotees. Nondevotees, however,
think that Lord Kåñëa's incarnations are ordinary material creatures, and
therefore they distinguish between the beautiful and the not beautiful. A
certain form of the Lord is worshiped by a particular devotee because he loves
to see that form of the Lord. As stated in Brahma-saàhitä (5.33): advaitam
acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà nava-yauvanaà ca. The
very beautiful form of the Lord is always youthful. Sincere servants of a
particular form of the Lord always see that form as very beautiful, and thus
they engage in constant devotional service to Him.
TEXT 30
p NaMaae >aGavTae AkU-PaaraYa SavRSatvGau<aivXaez<aaYaaNauPal/i+aTaSQaaNaaYa NaMaae
vZMaR<ae NaMaae >aUMNae NaMaae NaMaae_vSQaaNaaYa NaMaSTae )) 30 ))
oà namo bhagavate aküpäräya
sarva-sattva-guëa-viçeñaëäyänu-palakñita-sthänäya namo varñmaëe namo
bhümne namo namo 'vasthänäya namas te.
SYNONYMS
om—O my Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto You, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; aküpäräya—in the form of a tortoise;
sarva-sattva-guëa-viçeñaëäya—whose form consists of çuddha-sattva,
transcendental goodness; anupalakñita-sthänäya—unto You, whose position is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
771
not discernible; namaù—my respectful obeisances; varñmaëe—unto You who,
although the oldest, are unaffected by time; namaù—my respectful obeisances;
bhümne—to the great one who can go everywhere; namaù namaù—repeated
obeisances; avasthänäya—the shelter of everything; namaù—respectful
obeisances; te—unto You.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who have assumed
the form of a tortoise. You are the reservoir of all transcendental qualities, and
being entirely untinged by matter, You are perfectly situated in pure goodness.
You move here and there in the water, but no one can discern Your position.
Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You. Because of Your
transcendental position, You are not limited by past, present and future. You
are present everywhere as the shelter of all things, and therefore I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You again and again.
PURPORT
In the Brahma-saàhitä it is said, goloka eva nivasaty akhilätma-bhütaù: [Bs.
5.37] the Lord always remains in Goloka, the topmost planet in the spiritual
world. At the same time, He is all-pervading. This paradox is only possible for
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is full of all opulences. The Lord's
all-pervasiveness is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (18.61) where Kåñëa states,
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati: "The Supreme Lord is seated in
everyone's heart, O Arjuna." Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) the Lord says,
sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: "I am seated
in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and
forgetfulness." Therefore, although the Lord is present everywhere, He cannot
be seen with ordinary eyes. As Aryamä says, the Lord is anupalakñita-sthäna:
no one can locate Him. This is the greatness of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
772
TEXT 31
Yad]UPaMaeTaiàJaMaaYaYaaiPaRTa‚
MaQaRSvæPa& bhuæPaæiPaTaMa( )
Sa&:Yaa Na YaSYaaSTYaYaQaaePal/M>aNaaTa(
TaSMaE NaMaSTae_VYaPadeXaæiPa<ae )) 31 ))
yad-rüpam etan nija-mäyayärpitam
artha-svarüpaà bahu-rüpa-rüpitam
saìkhyä na yasyästy ayathopalambhanät
tasmai namas te 'vyapadeça-rüpiëe
SYNONYMS
yat—of whom; rüpam—the form; etat—this; nija-mäyayä arpitam—manifested
by Your personal potency; artha-svarüpam—this entire visible cosmic
manifestation; bahu-rüpa-rüpitam—manifested in various forms; saìkhyä—the
measurement; na—not; yasya—of which; asti—there is; ayathä—falsely;
upalambhanät—from perceiving; tasmai—unto Him (the Supreme Lord);
namaù—my respectful obeisances; te—unto You; avyapadeça—cannot be
ascertained by mental speculation; rüpiëe—whose real form.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, this visible cosmic manifestation is a demonstration of Your
own creative energy. Since the countless varieties of forms within this cosmic
manifestation are simply a display of Your external energy, this viräö-rüpa
[universal body] is not Your real form. Except for a devotee in transcendental
consciousness, no one can perceive Your actual form. Therefore I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
773
PURPORT
Mäyävädé philosophers think the universal form of the Lord to be real and
His personal form illusory. We can understand their mistake by a simple
example. A fire consists of three elements: heat and light, which are the
energy of the fire, and the fire itself. Anyone can understand that the original
fire is the reality and that the heat and light are simply the fire's energy. Heat
and light are the formless energies of fire, and in that sense they are unreal.
Only the fire has form, and therefore it is the real form of the heat and light.
As Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä (9.4), mayä tatam idaà sarvaà jagad
avyakta-mürtinä: "By Me, in My unmanifested form. this entire universe is
pervaded." Thus the impersonal conception of the Lord is like the expansion of
heat and light from a fire. In Bhagavad-gétä the Lord also says, mat-sthäni
sarva-bhütäni na cähaà teñv avasthitaù: the entire material creation is resting
on Kåñëa's energy, either material, spiritual or marginal, but because His form
is absent from the expansion of His energy, He is not personally present. This
inconceivable expansion of the Supreme Lord's energy is called acintya-çakti.
Therefore no one can understand the real form of the Lord without becoming
His devotee.
TEXT 32
JaraYauJa& SvedJaMa<@JaaeiÙd&
cracr& devizRiPaTa*>aUTaMaEiNd]YaMa( )
ÛaE" %& i+aiTa" XaEl/SairTSaMaud]‚
ÜqPaGa]h+aeRTYai>aDaeYa Wk-" )) 32 ))
jaräyujaà svedajam aëòajodbhidaà
caräcaraà devarñi-pitå-bhütam aindriyam
dyauù khaà kñitiù çaila-sarit-samudracopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
774
dvépa-graharkñety abhidheya ekaù
SYNONYMS
jaräyu-jam—one born from a womb; sveda-jam—one born from perspiration;
aëòa-ja—one born from an egg; udbhidam—one born of the earth;
cara-acaram—the moving and the stationary; deva—the demigods; åñi—the
great sages; pitå—the inhabitants of Pitåloka; bhütam—the material elements
air, fire, water and earth; aindriyam—all the senses; dyauù—the higher
planetary systems; kham—the sky; kñitiù—the earthly planets; çaila—the hills
and mountains; sarit—the rivers; samudra—the oceans; dvépa—the islands;
graha-åkña—the stars and planets; iti—thus; abhidheyaù—to be variously
named; ekaù—one.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You manifest Your different energies in countless forms: as
living entities born from wombs, from eggs and from perspiration; as plants and
trees that grow out of the earth; as all living entities, both moving and standing,
including the demigods, the learned sages and the pitäs; as outer space, as the
higher planetary system containing the heavenly planets, and as the planet earth
with its hills, rivers, seas, oceans and islands. Indeed, all the stars and planets
are simply manifestations of Your different energies, but originally You are one
without a second. Therefore there is nothing beyond You. This entire cosmic
manifestation is therefore not false but is simply a temporary manifestation of
Your inconceivable energy.
PURPORT
This verse completely rejects the theory of brahma satyaà jagan mithyä,
which states that spirit, or Brahman, is real, whereas the manifested material
world, with its great variety of things, is false. Nothing is false. One thing may
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
775
be permanent and another temporary, but both the permanent and the
temporary are facts. For example, if someone becomes angry for a certain
period, no one can say that his anger is false. It is simply temporary. Everything
we experience in our daily lives is of this same character; it is temporary but
real.
The different kinds of living entities coming from various sources are very
clearly described in this verse. Some are born from a womb and some (like
certain insects) from human perspiration. Others hatch from eggs, and still
others sprout from the earth. A living entity takes birth under different
circumstances according to his past activities (karma). Although the body of
the living entity is material, it is never false. No one will accept the argument
that since a person's material body is false, murder has no repercussions. Our
temporary bodies are given to us according to our karma, and we must remain
in our given bodies to enjoy the pains and pleasures of life. Our bodies cannot
be called false; they are only temporary. In other words, the energy of the
Supreme Lord is as permanent as the Lord Himself, although His energy is
sometimes manifest and sometimes not. As summarized in the Vedas, sarvaà
khalv idaà brahma: "Everything is Brahman."
TEXT 33
YaiSMaàSa&:YaeYaivXaezNaaMa‚
æPaak*-TaaE k-ivi>a" k-iLPaTaeYaMa( )
Sa&:Yaa YaYaa Tatvd*XaaPaNaqYaTae
TaSMaE NaMa" Saa&:YaiNadXaRNaaYa Tae wiTa )) 33 ))
yasminn asaìkhyeya-viçeña-nämarüpäkåtau
kavibhiù kalpiteyam
saìkhyä yayä tattva-dåçäpanéyate
tasmai namaù säìkhya-nidarçanäya te iti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
776
SYNONYMS
yasmin—in You (the Supreme Personality of Godhead);
asaìkhyeya—innumerable; viçeña—particular; näma—names; rüpa—forms;
äkåtau—possessing bodily features; kavibhiù—by great learned persons;
kalpitä—imagined; iyam—this; saìkhyä—number; yayä—by whom; tattva—of
the truth; dåçä—by knowledge; apanéyate—is extracted; tasmai—unto Him;
namaù—respectful obeisances; säìkhya-nidarçanäya—who is the revealer of
this numerical knowledge; te—unto You; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, Your name, form and bodily features are expanded in countless
forms. No one can determine exactly how many forms exist, yet You Yourself,
in Your incarnation as the learned scholar Kapiladeva, have analyzed the cosmic
manifestation as containing twenty-four elements. Therefore if one is interested
in Säìkhya philosophy, by which one can enumerate the different truths, he
must hear it from You. Unfortunately, nondevotees simply count the different
elements and remain ignorant of Your actual form. I offer my respectful
obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
Philosophers and scientists have been trying to study the entire cosmic
situation and have been theorizing and calculating in different ways for
millions and millions of years. However, the speculative research work of a
so-called scientist or philosopher is always interrupted when he dies, and the
laws of nature go on without regard for his work.
For billions of years changes take place in the material creation, until at last
the whole universe is dissolved and remains in an unmanifested state.
Constant change and destruction (bhütvä bhütvä praléyate [Bg. 8.19]) is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
777
perpetually going on in nature, yet the material scientists want to study
natural laws without knowing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the
background of nature. As Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10):
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunté, and it is
producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is
created and annihilated again and again."
Now the material creation is manifest, eventually it will be annihilated and
remain for many millions of years in a dormant state, and finally it will again
be created. This is the law of nature.
TEXT 34
otarezu c ku-åzu >aGavaNa( YajPauåz" k*-TavrahæPa AaSTae Ta& Tau devq
hEza >aU" Sah ku-åi>arS%il/Ta>ai¢-YaaeGaeNaaePaDaaviTa wMaa& c ParMaaMauPaiNazd‚
MaavTaRYaiTa )) 34 ))
uttareñu ca kuruñu bhagavän yajïa-puruñaù kåta-varäha-rüpa äste taà tu devé
haiñä bhüù saha kurubhir askhalita-bhakti-yogenopadhävati imäà ca paramäm
upaniñadam ävartayati.
SYNONYMS
uttareñu—on the northern side; ca—also; kuruñu—in the tract of land known
as Kuru; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
yajïa-puruñaù—who accepts all results of sacrifices;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
778
kåta-varäha-rüpaù—having accepted the form of a boar; äste—exists eternally;
tam—Him; tu—certainly; devé—the goddess; ha—certainly; eñä—this;
bhüù—planet earth; saha—along with; kurubhiù—the inhabitants of the land
known as Kuru; askhalita—unfailing; bhakti-yogena—by devotional service;
upadhävati—worship; imäm—this; ca—also; paramäm upaniñadam—the
supreme Upaniñad (the process by which one can approach the Lord);
ävartayati—chants again and again for the purpose of practice.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Dear King, the Supreme Lord in His boar
incarnation, who accepts all sacrificial offerings, lives in the northern part of
Jambüdvépa. There, in the tract of land known as Uttarakuru-varña, mother
earth and all the other inhabitants worship Him with unfailing devotional
service by repeatedly chanting the following Upaniñad mantra.
TEXT 35
p NaMaae >aGavTae MaN}aTatvil/(r)aYa Yaj§-Tave MahaßravYavaYa MahaPauåzaYa
NaMa" k-MaRXau(c)-aYa i}aYauGaaYa NaMaSTae )) 35 ))
oà namo bhagavate mantra-tattva-liìgäya yajïa-kratave
mahä-dhvarävayaväya mahä-puruñäya namaù karma-çukläya tri-yugäya
namas te.
SYNONYMS
om—O Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; mantra-tattva-liìgäya—who is understood in truth by
different mantras; yajïa—in the form of animal sacrifices; kratave—and
animal sacrifice; mahä-dhvara—great sacrifices; avayaväya—whose limbs and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
779
bodily parts; mahä-puruñäya—unto the Supreme Person; namaù—respectful
obeisances; karma-çukläya—who purifies the fruitive activities of the living
entities; tri-yugäya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is full
with six opulences and who appears in three yugas (remaining concealed in
the fourth yuga); namaù—my respectful obeisances; te—unto You.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You as the gigantic person.
Simply by chanting mantras, we shall be able to understand You fully. You are
yajïa [sacrifice], and You are the kratu [ritual]. Therefore all the ritualistic
ceremonies of sacrifice are part of Your transcendental body, and You are the
only enjoyer of all sacrifices. Your form is composed of transcendental goodness.
You are known as tri-yuga because in Kali-yuga You appeared as a concealed
incarnation and because You always fully possess the three pairs of opulences.
PURPORT
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is the incarnation for this age of Kali, as
confirmed in many places throughout the puräëas, the Mahäbhärata,
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and the Upaniñads. The summary of His appearance is
given in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 6.99) as follows:
kali-yuge lélävatära nä kare bhagavän
ataeva 'tri-yuga' kari' kahi tära näma
In this age of Kali, the Supreme Personality of Godhead (Bhagavän) does not
appear as a lélävatära, an incarnation to display pastimes. Therefore He is
known as tri-yuga. Unlike other incarnations, Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
appears in this age of Kali as a devotee of the Lord. Therefore He is called a
concealed incarnation (channävatära).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
780
TEXT 36
YaSYa SvæPa& k-vYaae ivPaiêTaae
Gau<aezu daåiZvv JaaTavedSaMa( )
MaQNaiNTa MaQNaa MaNaSaa idd*+avae
GaU!& i§-YaaQaOENaRMa wRirTaaTMaNae )) 36 ))
yasya svarüpaà kavayo vipaçcito
guëeñu däruñv iva jäta-vedasam
mathnanti mathnä manasä didåkñavo
güòhaà kriyärthair nama éritätmane
SYNONYMS
yasya—whose; sva-rüpam—form; kavayaù—the greatly learned sages;
vipaçcitaù—expert in ascertaining the Absolute Truth; guëeñu—in the
material manifestation, consisting of the three modes of nature; däruñu—in
wood; iva—like; jäta—manifested; vedasam—fire; mathnanti—stir;
mathnä—with a piece of wood used for producing fire; manasä—by the mind;
didåkñavaù—who are inquisitive; güòham—hidden; kriyä-arthaiù—by fruitive
activities and their results; namaù—respectful obeisances; érita-ätmane—unto
the Lord, who is manifested.
TRANSLATION
By manipulating a fire-generating stick, great saints and sages can bring
forth the fire lying dormant within wood. In the same way, O Lord, those
expert in understanding the Absolute Truth try to see You in
everything—even in their own bodies. Yet you remain concealed. You are not
to be understood by indirect processes involving mental or physical activities.
Because You are self-manifested, only when You see that a person is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
781
wholeheartedly engaged in searching for You do You reveal Yourself. Therefore
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
The word kriyärthaiù means "by performing ritualistic ceremonies to satisfy
the demigods." The word vipaçcitaù is explained in the Taittiréya Upaniñad as
follows: satyaà jïänam anantaà brahma. yo veda nihitaà guhäyäà parame
vyoman. so 'çnute sarvän kämän saha brahmaëä vipaçciteti. As Kåñëa states in
Bhagavad-gétä (7.19), bahünäà janmanäm ante jïänavän mäà prapadyate:
"After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders
unto Me." When one understands that the Lord is situated in everyone's heart
and actually sees the Lord present everywhere, he has perfect knowledge. The
word jäta-vedaù means "fire which is produced by rubbing wood." In Vedic
times, learned sages could bring forth fire from wood. Jäta-vedaù also indicates
the fire in the stomach, which digests everything we eat and which produces
an appetite. The word güòha is explained in the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad. Eko
devaù sarva-bhüteñu güòhaù: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is
understood by chanting the Vedic mantras. Sarva-vyäpé sarva-bhütäntar-ätmä:
He is all-pervading, and He is within the heart of living entities.
Karmädhyakñaù sarva-bhütädhiväsaù: He witnesses all activities of the living
entity. Säkñé cetä kevalo nirguëaç ca: The Supreme Lord is the witness as well
as the living force, yet He is transcendental to all material qualities.
TEXT 37
d]VYai§-YaaheTvYaNaeXak-Ta*Ri>a‚
MaaRYaaGau<aEvRSTauiNarqi+aTaaTMaNae )
ANvq+aYaa(r)aiTaXaYaaTMabuiÖi>a‚
iNaRrSTaMaaYaak*-TaYae NaMaae NaMa" )) 37 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
782
dravya-kriyä-hetv-ayaneça-kartåbhir
mäyä-guëair vastu-nirékñitätmane
anvékñayäìgätiçayätma-buddhibhir
nirasta-mäyäkåtaye namo namaù
SYNONYMS
dravya—by the objects of sense enjoyment; kriyä—the activities of the senses;
hetu—the predominating deities of sensory activities; ayana—the body;
éça—the predominating time; kartåbhiù—by false egotism; mäyä-guëaiù—by
the modes of material nature; vastu—as a fact; nirékñita—being observed;
ätmane—unto the Supreme Soul; anvékñayä—by careful consideration;
aìga—by the limbs of yogic practice; atiçaya-ätma-buddhibhiù—by those
whose intelligence has become fixed; nirasta—completely freed from;
mäyä—the illusory energy; äkåtaye—whose form; namaù—all respectful
obeisances; namaù—respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
The objects of material enjoyment [sound, form, taste, touch and smell], the
activities of the senses, the controllers of sensory activities [the demigods], the
body, eternal time and egotism are all creations of Your material energy. Those
whose intelligence has become fixed by perfect execution of mystic yoga can see
that all these elements result from the actions of Your external energy. They
can also see Your transcendental form as Supersoul in the background of
everything. Therefore I repeatedly offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
The objects of material enjoyment, the sensory activities, attachment to
sensual pleasure, the body, false egotism and so on are produced by the Lord's
external energy, mäyä. The background of all these activities is the living
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
783
being, and the director of the living beings is the Supersoul. The living being is
not the all in all. He is directed by the Supersoul. In Bhagavad-gétä (15.15)
Kåñëa confirms this:
sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo
mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca
"I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge
and forgetfulness." The living entity depends on the Supersoul for directions.
A person advanced in spiritual knowledge, or a person expert in the practice
of mystic yoga (yama, niyama, äsana and so on) can understand transcendence
either as Paramätmä or as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme
Lord is the original cause of all natural events. Therefore He is described as
sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1], the cause of all causes. Behind everything
visible to our material eyes is some cause, and one who can see the original
cause of all causes, Lord Kåñëa, can actually see. Kåñëa, the
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], is the background of everything, as He Himself
confirms in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10):
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunté, and it is
producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is
created and annihilated again and again."
TEXT 38
k-raeiTa ivìiSQaiTaSa&YaMaaedYa&
YaSYaeiPSaTa& NaeiPSaTaMaqi+aTauGauR<aE" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
784
MaaYaa YaQaaYaae >a]MaTae Tadaé[Ya&
Ga]aV<aae NaMaSTae Gau<ak-MaRSaai+a<ae )) 38 ))
karoti viçva-sthiti-saàyamodayaà
yasyepsitaà nepsitam ékñitur guëaiù
mäyä yathäyo bhramate tad-äçrayaà
grävëo namas te guëa-karma-säkñiëe
SYNONYMS
karoti—performing; viçva—of the universe; sthiti—the maintenance;
saàyama—winding up; udayam—creation; yasya—of whom; épsitam—desired;
na—not; épsitam—desired; ékñituù—of the one glancing over; guëaiù—with
the modes of material nature; mäyä—the material energy; yathä—as much as;
ayaù—iron; bhramate—moves; tat-äçrayam—placed near that; grävëaù—a
magnetic stone; namaù—my respectful obeisances; te—unto You;
guëa-karma-säkñiëe—the witness of the actions and reactions of material
nature.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You do not desire the creation, maintenance or annihilation of this
material world, but You perform these activities for the conditioned souls by
Your creative energy. Exactly as a piece of iron moves under the influence of a
lodestone, inert matter moves when You glance over the total material energy.
PURPORT
Sometimes the question arises why the Supreme Lord has created this
material world, which is so full of suffering for the living entities entrapped in
it. The answer given herein is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead does
not wish to create this material world just to inflict suffering on the living
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
785
entities. The Supreme Lord creates this world only because the conditioned
souls want to enjoy it.
The workings of nature are not going on automatically. It is only because
the Lord glances over the material energy that it acts in wonderful ways, just as
a lodestone causes a piece of iron to move here and there. Because materialistic
scientists and so-called Säìkhya philosophers do not believe in God, they
think that material nature is working without supervision. But that is not the
fact. In Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 6.18-19) the creation of the material world is
explained as follows:
yadyapi säìkhya mäne 'pradhäna'—käraëa
jaòa ha-ite kabhu nahe jagat-såjana
nija-såñöi-çakti prabhu saïcäre pradhäne
éçvarera çaktye tabe haye ta' nirmäëe
"Atheistic Säìkhya philosophers think that the total material energy causes
the cosmic manifestation, but they are wrong. Dead matter has no moving
power, and therefore it cannot act independently. The Lord infuses the
material ingredients with His own creative potency. Then, by the power of the
Lord, matter moves and interacts." Sea waves are moved by the air, the air is
created from ether, the ether is produced by the agitation of the three modes
of material nature, and the three modes of material nature interact due to the
Supreme Lord's glance over the total material energy. Therefore the
background of all natural occurrences is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram
[Bg. 9.10]). This is also further explained in Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 5.59-61):
jagat-käraëa nahe prakåti jaòa-rüpä
çakti saïcäriyä täre kåñëa kare kåpä
kåñëa-çaktye prakåti haya gauëa käraëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
786
agni-çaktye lauha yaiche karaye järaëa
ataeva kåñëa müla-jagat-käraëa
prakåti—käraëa yaiche ajä-gala-stana
"Because prakåti [material nature] is dull and inert, it cannot actually be the
cause of the material world. Lord Kåñëa shows His mercy by infusing His
energy into the dull, inert material nature. Thus prakåti, by the energy of Lord
Kåñëa, becomes the secondary cause, just as iron becomes red-hot by the
energy of fire. Therefore Lord Kåñëa is the original cause of the cosmic
manifestation. prakåti is like the nipples on the neck of a goat, for they cannot
give any milk." Thus it is a great mistake on the part of the material scientists
and philosophers to think that matter moves independently.
TEXT 39
Pa[MaQYa dETYa& Pa[iTavar<a& Ma*Dae
Yaae Maa& rSaaYaa JaGadaidSaUk-r" )
k*-TvaGa]d&í\e iNarGaadudNvTa"
§-I@iàve>a" Pa[<aTaaiSMa Ta& iv>auiMaiTa )) 39 ))
pramathya daityaà prativäraëaà mådhe
yo mäà rasäyä jagad-ädi-sükaraù
kåtvägra-daàñöre niragäd udanvataù
kréòann ivebhaù praëatäsmi taà vibhum iti
SYNONYMS
pramathya—after killing; daityam—the demon; prativäraëam—most
formidable opponent; mådhe—in the fight; yaù—He who; mäm—me (the
earth); rasäyäù—fallen to the bottom of the universe; jagat—in this material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
787
world; ädi-sükaraù—the original form of a boar; kåtvä—keeping it;
agra-daàñöre—on the end of the tusk; niragät—came out of the water;
udanvataù—from the Garbhodaka Ocean; kréòan—playing; iva—like;
ibhaù—elephant; praëatä asmi—I bow down; tam—to Him; vibhum—the
Supreme Lord; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, as the original boar within this universe, You fought and killed the
great demon Hiraëyakña. Then You lifted me [the earth] from the Garbhodaka
Ocean on the end of Your tusk, exactly as a sporting elephant plucks a lotus
flower from the water. I bow down before You.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Eighteenth Chapter of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled, "The prayers Offered to the Lord by the
Residents of Jambüdvépa."
19. A Description of the Island of Jambüdvépa
This chapter describes the glories of Bhärata-varña, and it also describes
how Lord Rämacandra is being worshiped in the tract of land known as
Kimpuruña-varña. The inhabitants of Kimpuruña-varña are fortunate because
they worship Lord Rämacandra with His faithful servant Hanumän. Lord
Rämacandra exemplifies an incarnation of Godhead who descends for the
mission of pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm [Bg. 4.8]—protecting
the devotees and destroying the miscreants. Lord Rämacandra exhibits the
actual purpose of an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
788
the devotees take the opportunity to offer loving transcendental service to
Him. One should surrender fully to the Lord, forgetting one's so-called
material happiness, opulence and education, which are not at all useful for
pleasing the Lord. The Lord is pleased only by the process of surrender unto
Him.
When Devarñi Närada descended to instruct Särvaëi Manu, he described
the opulence of Bhärata-varña, India. Särvaëi Manu and the inhabitants of
Bhärata-varña engage in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is the origin of creation, maintenance and annihilation and
who is always worshiped by self-realized souls. In the planet known as
Bhärata-varña there are many rivers and mountains, as there are in other tracts
of land, yet Bhärata-varña has special significance because in this tract of land
there exists the Vedic principle of varëäçrama-dharma, which divides society
into four varëas and four äçramas. Furthermore, Närada Muni's opinion is that
even if there is some temporary disturbance in the execution of the
varëäçrama-dharma principles, they can be revived at any moment. The effect
of adhering to the institution of varëäçrama is gradual elevation to the
spiritual platform and liberation from material bondage. By following the
principles of varëäçrama-dharma, one gets the opportunity to associate with
devotees. Such association gradually awakens one's dormant propensity to
serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead and frees one from all the basic
principles of sinful life. One then gets the opportunity to offer unalloyed
devotional service to the Supreme Lord, Väsudeva. Because of this
opportunity, the inhabitants of Bhärata-varña are praised even in the heavenly
planets. Even in the topmost planet of this universe, Brahmaloka, the position
of Bhärata-varña is discussed with great relish.
All the conditioned living entities are evolving within the universe in
different planets and different species of life. Thus one may be elevated to
Brahmaloka, but then one must again descend to earth, as confirmed in Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä (äbrahma-bhuvanäl lokäù punar ävartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]). If
those who live in Bhärata-varña rigidly follow the principles of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
789
varëäçrama-dharma and develop their dormant Kåñëa consciousness, they
need not return to this material world after death. Any place where one
cannot hear about the Supreme Personality of Godhead from realized souls,
even if it be Brahmaloka, is not very congenial to the living entity. If one who
has taken birth in the land of Bhärata-varña as a human being does not take
advantage of the opportunity for spiritual elevation, his position is certainly
the most miserable. In the land known as Bhäratavarña, even if one is a
sarva-käma-bhakta, a devotee seeking the fulfillment of some material desire,
he is freed from all material desires by his association with devotees, and
ultimately he becomes a pure devotee and returns home, back to Godhead,
without difficulty.
At the end of this chapter, Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé describes to Mahäräja
Parékñit the eight sub-islands within the island of Jambüdvépa.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
ik-MPauåze vzeR >aGavNTaMaaidPauåz& l/+Ma<aaGa]Ja& SaqTaai>araMa& raMa& TaÀr<aSa‚
iàk-zaRi>arTa" ParMa>aaGavTaae hNauMaaNa( Sah ik-MPauåzErivrTa>ai¢-åPaaSTae )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
kimpuruñe varñe bhagavantam ädi-puruñaà lakñmaëägrajaà sétäbhirämaà
rämaà tac-caraëa-sannikarñäbhirataù parama-bhägavato hanumän saha
kimpuruñair avirata-bhaktir upäste.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued to speak; kimpuruñe
varñe—the tract of land known as Kimpuruña; bhagavantam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; ädi-puruñam—the original cause of all causes;
lakñmaëa-agra-jam—the elder brother of Lakñmaëa; sétä-abhirämam—who is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
790
very pleasing to mother Sétä, or who is the husband of Sétädevé; rämam—Lord
Rämacandra; tat-caraëa-sannikarña-abhirataù—one always engaged in service
at the lotus feet of Lord Rämacandra; parama-bhägavataù—the great devotee
celebrated throughout the universe; hanumän—His Grace Hanumänjé;
saha—with; kimpuruñaiù—the inhabitants of the tract of land known as
Kimpuruña; avirata—continuous; bhaktiù—who possesses devotional service;
upäste—worships.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, in Kimpuruña-varña the great
devotee Hanumän is always engaged with the inhabitants of that land in
devotional service to Lord Rämacandra, the elder brother of Lakñmaëa and dear
husband of Sétädevé.
TEXT 2
AaiíRze<aeNa Sah GaNDavOErNauGaqYaMaaNaa& ParMak-LYaa<aq& >aTa*R>aGavTk-Qaa& SaMau‚
Paé*<aaeiTa SvYa& ced& GaaYaiTa )) 2 ))
ärñöiñeëena saha gandharvair anugéyamänäà parama-kalyäëéà
bhartå-bhagavat-kathäà samupaçåëoti svayaà cedaà gäyati.
SYNONYMS
ärñöi-ñeëena—Ärñöiñeëa, the chief personality of Kimpuruña-varña; saha—with;
gandharvaiù—by a company of Gandharvas; anugéyamänäm—being chanted;
parama-kalyäëém—most auspicious; bhartå-bhagavat-kathäm—the glories of
his master, who is also the Supreme Personality of Godhead; samupaçåëoti—he
hears with great attention; svayam ca—and personally; idam—this;
gäyati—chants.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
791
TRANSLATION
A host of Gandharvas is always engaged in chanting the glories of Lord
Rämacandra. That chanting is always extremely auspicious. Hanumänjé and
Arñöiñeëa, the chief person in Kimpuruña-varña, constantly hear those glories
with complete attention. Hanumän chants the following mantras.
PURPORT
In the Puräëas there are two different opinions concerning Lord
Rämacandra. In the Laghu-bhägavatämåta (5.34-36) this is confirmed in the
description of the incarnation of Manu.
väsudevädi-rüpäëäm
avatäräù prakértitäù
viñëu-dharmottare rämalakñmaëädyäù
kramädamé
pädme tu rämo bhagavän
näräyaëa itéritaù
çeñaç cakraà ca çaìkhaç ca
kramät syur lakñmaëädayaù
madhya-deça-sthitäyodhyäpure
'sya vasatiù småtä
mahä-vaikuëöhaloke ca
räghavedrasya kértitä
The Viñëu-dharmottara describes that Lord Rämacandra and His
brothers—Lakñmaëa, Bharata and Çatrughna—are incarnations of Väsudeva,
Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha respectively. The Padma Puräëa,
however, says that Lord Rämacandra is an incarnation of Näräyaëa and that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
792
the other three brothers are incarnations of Çeña, Cakra and Çaìkha.
Therefore Çréla Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa has concluded, tad idaà
kalpa-bhedenaiva sambhävyam. In other words, these opinions are not
contradictory. In some millenniums Lord Rämacandra and His brothers appear
as incarnations of Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, and in
other millenniums They appear as incarnations of Näräyaëa, Çeña, Cakra and
Çaìkha. The residence of Lord Rämacandra on this planet is Ayodhyä.
Ayodhyä City is still existing in the district of Faizabad, which is situated on
the northern side of Uttar Pradesh.
TEXT 3
p NaMaae >aGavTae otaMaëaek-aYa NaMa AaYaRl/+a<aXaql/v]TaaYa NaMa oPaiXai+a‚
TaaTMaNa oPaaiSaTal/aek-aYa NaMa" SaaDauvadiNak-z<aaYa NaMaae b]ø<YadevaYa
MahaPauåzaYa MaharaJaaYa NaMa wiTa )) 3 ))
oà namo bhagavate uttamaçlokäya nama ärya-lakñaëa-çéla-vratäya nama
upaçikñitätmana upäsita-lokäya namaù sädhu-väda-nikañaëäya namo
brahmaëya-deväya mahä-puruñäya mahä-räjäya nama iti.
SYNONYMS
om—O my Lord; namaù—my respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; uttama-çlokäya—who is always worshiped
with selected verses; namaù—my respectful obeisances;
ärya-lakñaëa-çéla-vratäya—who possesses all the good qualities of advanced
personalities; namaù—my respectful obeisances; upaçikñita-ätmane—unto You
whose senses are under control; upäsita-lokäya—who is always remembered
and worshiped by all the different classes of living entities; namaù—my
respectful obeisances; sädhu-väda-nikañaëäya—to the Lord, who is like a stone
for examining all the good qualities of a sädhu; namaù—my respectful
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
793
obeisances; brahmaëya-deväya—who is worshiped by the most qualified
brähmaëas; mahä-puruñäya—unto the Supreme Lord, who is worshiped by the
puruña-sükta because of being the cause of this material creation;
mahä-räjäya—unto the supreme king, or the king of all kings; namaù—my
respectful obeisances; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Let me please Your Lordship by chanting the béja-mantra oàkära. I wish to
offer my respectful obeisances unto the Personality of Godhead, who is the best
among the most highly elevated personalities. Your Lordship is the reservoir of
all the good qualities of Äryans, people who are advanced. Your character and
behavior are always consistent, and You always control Your senses and mind.
Acting just like an ordinary human being, You exhibit exemplary character to
teach others how to behave. There is a touchstone that can be used to examine
the quality of gold, but You are like a touchstone that can verify all good
qualities. You are worshiped by brähmaëas who are the foremost of all devotees.
You, the Supreme Person, are the King of kings, and therefore I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 4
YataiÜXauÖaNau>avMaa}aMaek&-
SvTaeJaSaa ßSTaGau<aVYavSQaMa( )
Pa[TYak( Pa[XaaNTa& SauiDaYaaePal/M>aNa&
ùNaaMaæPa& iNarh& Pa[PaÛe )) 4 ))
yat tad viçuddhänubhava-mätram ekaà
sva-tejasä dhvasta-guëa-vyavastham
pratyak praçäntaà sudhiyopalambhanaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
794
hy anäma-rüpaà nirahaà prapadye
SYNONYMS
yat—which; tat—to that supreme truth; viçuddha—transcendentally pure,
without contamination by material nature; anubhava—experience;
mätram—that sac-cid-änanda transcendental body; ekam—the one;
sva-tejasä—by His own spiritual potency; dhvasta—vanquished;
guëa-vyavastham—the influence of the modes of material nature;
pratyak—transcendental, not to be seen with material eyes;
praçäntam—undisturbed by material agitation; sudhiyä—by Kåñëa
consciousness, or purified consciousness, uncontaminated by material desires,
fruitive activities and speculative philosophy; upalambhanam—who can be
achieved; hi—indeed; anäma-rüpam—without a material name and form;
niraham—without a material ego; prapadye—let me offer my respectful
obeisances.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, whose pure form [sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]] is
uncontaminated by the modes of material nature, can be perceived by pure
consciousness. In the Vedänta He is described as being one without a second.
Because of His spiritual potency, He is untouched by the contamination of
material nature, and because He is not subjected to material vision, He is
known as transcendental. He has no material activities, nor has He a material
form or name. Only in pure consciousness, Kåñëa consciousness, can one
perceive the transcendental form of the Lord. Let us be firmly fixed at the lotus
feet of Lord Rämacandra, and let us offer our respectful obeisances unto those
transcendental lotus feet.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
795
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, appears in various
expansions, as stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.39):
rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena tiñöhan
nänävatäram akarod bhuvaneñu kintu
kåñëaù svayaà samabhavat paramaù pumän yo
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who is always
situated in various incarnations such as Räma, Nåsiàha and many
subincarnations as well, but who is the original Personality of Godhead known
as Kåñëa and who incarnates personally also." Kåñëa, who is viñëu-tattva, has
expanded Himself in many Viñëu forms, of which Lord Rämacandra is one.
We know that the viñëu-tattva is carried by the transcendental bird Garuòa
and is equipped with different types of weapons in four hands. Therefore we
may doubt whether Lord Rämacandra could be in the same category, since He
was carried by Hanumän, not by Garuòa, and had neither four hands nor the
çaìkha, cakra, gadä and padma. Consequently this verse clarifies that
Rämacandra is as good as Kåñëa (rämädi-mürtiñu kalä). Although Kåñëa is the
original Supreme Personality of Godhead, Rämacandra is not different from
Him. Rämacandra is unaffected by the modes of material nature, and therefore
He is praçänta, never disturbed by those modes.
Unless one is saturated with love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
one cannot appreciate the transcendental value of Lord Rämacandra; one
cannot see Him with material eyes. Because demons like Rävaëa have no
spiritual vision, they consider Lord Rämacandra an ordinary kñatriya king.
Rävaëa therefore attempted to kidnap Lord Rämacandra's eternal consort,
Sétädevé. Actually, however, Rävaëa could not carry off Sétädevé in her
original form. As soon as she was touched by Rävaëa's hands, she gave him a
material form, but she maintained her original form beyond his vision.
Therefore in this verse the words pratyak praçäntam indicate that Lord
Rämacandra and His potency, the goddess Sétä, keep themselves aloof from the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
796
influence of the material energy.
In the Upaniñads it is said: yam evaiña våëute tena labhyaù-labhyaù Kaöha
Upaniñad 1.2.23. The Supreme Lord, Paramätmä, the Personality of Godhead,
can be seen or perceived only by persons who are saturated with devotional
service. As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.38):
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
yaà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the devotee
whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in His eternal form
of Çyämasundara, situated within the heart of the devotee." Similarly, in the
Chändogya Upaniñad it is stated, etäs tisro devatä anena jévena. In this verse of
the Chändogya Upaniñad the word anena is used to distinguish the ätmä and
Paramätmä as two separate identities. The words tisro devatä indicate that the
body of the living entity is made of three material elements—fire, earth and
water. Although the Paramätmä enters the heart of the jévätmä, who is
influenced and designated by a material body, the Paramätmä has nothing to
do with the jévätmä's body. Because the Paramätmä has no material
connections, He is described here as anäma-rüpaà niraham. The Paramätmä
has no material identity, whereas the jévätmä does. The jévätmä may introduce
himself as an Indian, American, German and so on, but the Paramätmä has no
such material designations, and therefore He has no material name. The
jévätmä is different from his name, but the Paramätmä is not; His name and He
Himself are one and the same. This is the meaning of niraham, which means
"without material designations." This word cannot possibly be twisted to mean
that the Paramätmä has no ahaìkära, no "I-ness" or identity. He has His
transcendental identity as the Supreme. This is the explanation given by Çréla
Jéva Gosvämé. According to another interpretation, given by Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura, niraham means nirniçcayena aham. Niraham does not
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
797
mean that the Supreme Lord has no identity. Rather, the stress given by the
word aham proves strongly that He does have His personal identity because nir
not only means "negative" but also means "strong ascertainment."
TEXT 5
MaTYaaRvTaariSTvh MaTYaRiXa+a<a&
r+aaevDaaYaEv Na ke-vl&/ iv>aae" )
ku-Taae_NYaQaa SYaad]MaTa" Sv AaTMaNa"
SaqTaak*-TaaiNa VYaSaNaaNaqìrSYa )) 5 ))
martyävatäras tv iha martya-çikñaëaà
rakño-vadhäyaiva na kevalaà vibhoù
kuto 'nyathä syäd ramataù sva ätmanaù
sétä-kåtäni vyasanänéçvarasya
SYNONYMS
martya—as a human being; avatäraù—whose incarnation; tu—however;
iha—in the material world; martya-çikñaëam—for teaching all the living
entities, especially human beings; rakñaù-vadhäya—to kill the demon Rävaëa;
eva—certainly; na—not; kevalam—only; vibhoù—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; kutaù—from where; anyathä—otherwise; syät—there would be;
ramataù—of one enjoying; sve—in Himself; ätmanaù—the spiritual identity of
the universe; sétä—of the wife of Lord Rämacandra; kåtäni—appearing due to
the separation; vyasanäni—all the miseries; éçvarasya—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
It was ordained that Rävaëa, chief of the Räkñasas, could not be killed by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
798
anyone but a man, and for this reason Lord Rämacandra, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, appeared in the form of a human being. Lord
Rämacandra's mission, however, was not only to kill Rävaëa but also to teach
mortal beings that material happiness centered around sex life or centered
around one's wife is the cause of many miseries. He is the self-sufficient
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and nothing is lamentable for Him. Therefore
why else could He be subjected to tribulations by the kidnapping of mother
Sétä?
PURPORT
When the Lord appears in this universe in the form of a human being, He
has two purposes, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä [Bg. 4.8]—pariträëäya sädhünäà
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm: to destroy the demons and protect the devotees. To
protect the devotees, the Lord not only satisfies them by His personal presence
but also teaches them so that they will not fall down from devotional service.
By His personal example, Lord Rämacandra taught the devotees that it is
better not to enter married life, which is certainly followed by many
tribulations. As confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (7.9.45):
yan maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukhaà hi tucchaà
kaëòüyanena karayor iva duùkha-duùkham
tåpyanti neha kåpaëä bahu-duùkha-bhäjaù
kaëòütivan manasijaà viñaheta-dhéraù
Kåpaëas, those who are not advanced in spiritual knowledge and who are
therefore just the opposite of brähmaëas, generally take to family life, which is
a concession for sex. Thus they enjoy sex again and again, although that sex is
followed by many tribulations. This is a warning to devotees. To teach this
lesson to devotees and to human society in general, Lord Çré Rämacandra,
although the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, underwent a series of
tribulations because He accepted a wife, mother Sétä. Lord Rämacandra
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
799
underwent these austerities, of course, only to instruct us; actually He never
has any reason to lament for anything.
Another aspect of the Lord's instructions is that one who accepts a wife
must be a faithful husband and give her full protection. Human society is
divided into two classes of men—those who strictly follow the religious
principles and those who are devotees. By His personal example, Lord
Rämacandra wanted to instruct both of them how to fully adopt the discipline
of the religious system and how to be a beloved and dutiful husband.
Otherwise He had no reason to undergo apparent tribulations. One who
strictly follows religious principles must not neglect to provide all facilities for
the complete protection of his wife. There may be some suffering because of
this, but one must nevertheless endure it. That is the duty of a faithful
husband. By His personal example, Lord Rämacandra demonstrated this duty.
Lord Rämacandra could have produced hundreds and thousands of Sétäs from
His pleasure energy, but just to show the duty of a faithful husband, He not
only rescued Sétä from the hands of Rävaëa but also killed Rävaëa and all the
members of his family.
Another aspect of the teachings of Lord Rämacandra is that although Lord
Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His devotees may apparently
suffer from material tribulations, they have nothing to do with such
tribulations. They are mukta-puruñas, liberated persons, under all
circumstances. It is therefore said in the Caitanya-bhägavata:
yata dekha vaiñëavera vyavahära duùkha
niçcaya jäniha tähä paramänanda-sukha
A Vaiñëava is always firmly situated in transcendental bliss because of
engagement in devotional service. Although he may appear to suffer material
pains, his position is called transcendental bliss in separation (viraha). The
emotions a lover and beloved feel when separated from one another are
actually very blissful, although apparently painful. Therefore the separation of
Lord Rämacandra from Sétädevé, as well as the consequent tribulation they
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
800
suffered, is but another display of transcendental bliss. That is the opinion of
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura.
TEXT 6
Na vE Sa AaTMaaTMavTaa& SauôtaMa"
Sa¢-iñl/aeKYaa& >aGavaNa( vaSaudev" )
Na ñqk*-Ta& k-XMal/MaénuvqTa
Na l/+Ma<a& caiPa ivhaTauMahRiTa )) 6 ))
na vai sa ätmätmavatäà suhåttamaù
saktas tri-lokyäà bhagavän väsudevaù
na stré-kåtaà kaçmalam açnuvéta
na lakñmaëaà cäpi vihätum arhati
SYNONYMS
na—not; vai—indeed; saù—He; ätmä—the Supreme Soul; ätmavatäm—of the
self-realized souls; suhåt-tamaù—the best friend; saktaù—attached;
tri-lokyäm—to anything within the three worlds; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; väsudevaù—the all-pervading Lord; na—not;
stré-kåtam—obtained because of His wife; kaçmalam—sufferings of separation;
açnuvéta—would obtain; na—not; lakñmaëam—His younger brother
Lakñmaëa; ca—also; api—certainly; vihätum—to give up; arhati—be able.
TRANSLATION
Since Lord Çré Rämacandra is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Väsudeva, He is not attached to anything in this material world. He is the most
beloved Supersoul of all self-realized souls, and He is their very intimate friend.
He is full of all opulences. Therefore He could not possibly have suffered
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
801
because of separation from His wife, nor could He have given up His wife and
Lakñmaëa, His younger brother. To give up either would have been absolutely
impossible.
PURPORT
In defining the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we say that He is full in
all six opulences—wealth, fame, strength, influence, beauty and renunciation.
He is called renounced because He is not attached to anything in this material
world; He is specifically attached to the spiritual world and the living entities
there. The affairs of the material world take place under the superintendence
of Durgädevé (såñöi-sthiti-pralaya-sädhana-çaktir ekä/ chäyeva yasya bhuvanäni
bibharti durgä [Bs. 5.44]). Everything is going on under the strict rules and
regulations of the material energy, represented by Durgä. Therefore the Lord is
completely detached and need not give attention to the material world.
Sétädevé belongs to the spiritual world. Similarly, Lord Lakñmaëa,
Rämacandra's younger brother, is a manifestation of Saìkarñaëa, and Lord
Rämacandra Himself is Väsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Since the Lord is always spiritually qualified, He is attached to servants who
always render transcendental loving service unto Him. He is attached to the
truth in life, not to brahminical qualities. Indeed, He is never attached to any
material qualities. Although He is the Supersoul of all living entities, He is
specifically manifest to those who are self-realized, and He is especially dear to
the hearts of His transcendental devotees. Because Lord Rämacandra
descended to teach human society how dutiful a king should be, He apparently
gave up the company of mother Sétä and Lakñmaëa. Factually, however, He
could not have given them up. One should therefore learn about the activities
of Lord Rämacandra from a self-realized soul. Then one can understand the
transcendental activities of the Lord.
TEXT 7
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
802
Na JaNMa NaUNa& MahTaae Na SaaE>aGa&
Na vax( Na buiÖNaaRk*-iTaSTaaezheTau" )
TaEYaRiÜSa*íaNaiPa Naae vNaaEk-Sa‚
êk-ar Sa:Yae bTa l/+Ma<aaGa]Ja" )) 7 ))
na janma nünaà mahato na saubhagaà
na väì na buddhir näkåtis toña-hetuù
tair yad visåñöän api no vanaukasaç
cakära sakhye bata lakñmaëägrajaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; janma—birth in a very polished, aristocratic family; nünam—indeed;
mahataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na—nor;
saubhagam—great fortune; na—nor; väk—an elegant manner of speaking;
na—nor; buddhiù—sharpness of intelligence; na—not; äkåtiù—features of the
body; toña-hetuù—the cause of pleasure to the Lord; taiù—by all those
above-mentioned qualities; yat—because; visåñöän—rejected; api—although;
naù—us; vana-okasaù—the inhabitants of the forest; cakära—accepted;
sakhye—in friendship; bata—alas; lakñmaëa-agra-jaù—Lord Çré Rämacandra,
the elder brother of Lakñmaëa.
TRANSLATION
One cannot establish a friendship with the Supreme Lord Rämacandra on
the basis of material qualities such as one's birth in an aristocratic family, one's
personal beauty, one's eloquence, one's sharp intelligence or one's superior race
or nation. None of these qualifications is actually a prerequisite for friendship
with Lord Çré Rämacandra. Otherwise how is it possible that although we
uncivilized inhabitants of the forest have not taken noble births, although we
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
803
have no physical beauty and although we cannot speak like gentlemen, Lord
Rämacandra has nevertheless accepted us as friends?
PURPORT
In a prayer to Kåñëa expressing her feelings, Çrématé Kuntédevé called Him
akiïcana-gocara. The prefix a means "not," and kiïcana "something of this
material world." One may be very proud of his prestigious position, material
wealth, beauty, education and so on, but although these are certainly good
qualifications in material dealings, they are not necessary for achieving
friendship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who possesses all
these material qualities is expected to become a devotee, and when he actually
does, the qualities are properly utilized. Those who are puffed up by a high
birth, wealth, education and personal beauty (janmaiçvarya-çruta-çré [SB
1.8.26]) unfortunately do not care for developing Kåñëa consciousness, nor
does the Supreme Personality of Godhead care about all these material
qualifications. The Supreme Lord is achieved by devotion (bhaktyä mäm
abhijänäti [Bg. 18.55]). One's devotion and sincere desire to serve the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are the only qualifications. Rüpa Gosvämé has also said
that the price for achieving God's favor is simply one's sincere eagerness to
have it (laulyam ekaà mülyam). In the Caitanya-bhägavata it is said:
kholävecä sevakera dekha bhägya-sémä
brahmä çiva käìde yära dekhiyä mahimä
dhane jane päëòitye kåñere nähi päi
kevala bhaktira vaça caitanya-gosäïi
"Behold the great fortune of the devotee Kholävecä. Lord Brahmä and Çiva
shed tears upon seeing his greatness. One cannot attain Lord Kåñëa by any
amount of wealth, followers, or learning. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is
controlled only by pure devotion. "Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu had a very
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
804
sincere devotee whose name was Kholävecä Çrédhara and whose only business
was to sell pots made of the skin of banana trees. Whatever income he had, he
used fifty percent for the worship of mother Ganges, and with the other fifty
percent he provided for his necessities. On the whole, he was so very poor that
he lived in a cottage that had a broken roof with many holes in it. He could
not afford brass utensils, and therefore he drank water from an iron pot.
Nevertheless, he was a great devotee of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. He is a
typical example of how a poor man with no material possessions can become a
most exalted devotee of the Lord. The conclusion is that one cannot attain
shelter at the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa or Çré Caitanya Gosäïi through material
opulence; that shelter is attainable only by pure devotional service.
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanaà
bhaktir uttamä
[Cc. Madhya 19.167]
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kåñëa
favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive
activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."
TEXT 8
Saurae_Saurae vaPYaQa vaNarae Nar"
SavaRTMaNaa Ya" Sauk*-TajMautaMaMa( )
>aJaeTa raMa& MaNauJaak*-iTa& hir„&
Ya otaraNaNaYaTk-aeSal/aiNdviMaiTa )) 8 ))
suro 'suro väpy atha vänaro naraù
sarvätmanä yaù sukåtajïam uttamam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
805
bhajeta rämaà manujäkåtià harià
ya uttarän anayat kosalän divam iti
SYNONYMS
suraù—demigod; asuraù—demon; vä api—or; atha—therefore; vä—or;
anaraù—other than a human being (bird, beast, animal and so on); naraù—a
human being; sarva-ätmanä—wholeheartedly; yaù—who; su-kåtajïam—easily
made grateful; uttamam—most highly elevated; bhajeta—should worship;
rämam—Lord Rämacandra; manuja-äkåtim—appearing as a human being;
harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaù—who; uttarän—of
northern India; anayat—brought back; kosalän—the inhabitants of
Kosala-deça, Ayodhyä; divam—to the spiritual world, Vaikuëöha; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, whether one is a demigod or a demon, a man or a creature other
than man, such as a beast or bird, everyone should worship Lord Rämacandra,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who appears on this earth just like a
human being. There is no need of great austerities or penances to worship the
Lord, for Me accepts even a small service offered by His devotee. Thus He is
satisfied, and as soon as He is satisfied, the devotee is successful. Indeed, Lord
Çré Rämacandra brought all the devotees of Ayodhyä back home, back to
Godhead [Vaikuëöha].
PURPORT
Lord Çré Rämacandra is so kind and merciful to His devotees that He is very
easily satisfied by a little service rendered by anyone, human or not. This is the
special advantage of worshiping Lord Rämacandra, and there is the same
advantage in worshiping Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Lord Kåñëa and Lord
Rämacandra, in the manner of kñatriyas, sometimes showed Their mercy by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
806
killing asuras, but Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu awarded love of God
without difficulty even to the asuras. All the incarnations of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead—but especially Lord Rämacandra, Lord Kåñëa and,
later, Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu—delivered many of the living entities
present before Them, indeed almost all of them. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is
therefore represented in the six-armed form of ñaò-bhüja-mürti, which is a
combination of Lord Rämacandra, Lord Kåñëa and Lord Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu. The best purpose of human life can be fulfilled by worshiping the
ñaò-bhüja-mürti, the form of the Lord with six arms-two arms of Rämacandra,
two arms of Kåñëa and two arms of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
TEXT 9
>aarTae_iPa vzeR >aGavaàrNaaraYa<aa:Ya Aak-LPaaNTaMauPaicTaDaMaRjaNavEraGYaE‚
ìYaaeRPaXaMaaeParMaaTMaaePal/M>aNaMaNauGa]haYaaTMavTaaMaNauk-MPaYaa TaPaae_VYa¢-GaiTaêriTa ))
9 ))
bhärate 'pi varñe bhagavän nara-näräyaëäkhya äkalpäntam
upacita-dharma-jïäna-vairägyaiçvaryopaçamoparamätmopalambhanam
anugrahäyätmavatäm anukampayä tapo 'vyakta-gatiç carati.
SYNONYMS
bhärate—in Bhärata; api—also; varñe—the tract of land; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; nara-näräyaëa-äkhyaù—known as
Nara-Näräyaëa; ä-kalpa-antam—up to the end of the millennium;
upacita—increasing; dharma—religion; jïäna—knowledge;
vairägya—renunciation or nonattachment; aiçvarya—mystic opulences;
upaçama—control of the senses; uparama—freedom from false ego;
ätma-upalambhanam—self-realization; anugrahäya—to show favor;
ätma-vatäm—unto persons interested in self-realization; anukampayä—by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
807
causeless mercy; tapaù—austerities; avyakta-gatiù—whose glories are
inconceivable; carati—executes.
TRANSLATION
[Çukadeva Gosvämé continued:] The glories of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead are inconceivable. He has appeared in the form of Nara-Näräyaëa in
the land of Bhärata-varña, at the place known as Badarikäçrama, to favor His
devotees by teaching them religion, knowledge, renunciation, spiritual power,
sense control and freedom from false ego. He is advanced in the opulence of
spiritual assets, and He engages in executing austerity until the end of this
millennium. This is the process of self-realization.
PURPORT
People in India may visit the temple of Nara-Näräyaëa at Badarikäçrama
just to learn how the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His incarnation as
Nara-Näräyaëa engages in austerities to teach the people of the world how to
achieve self-realization. It is impossible to realize oneself simply by absorbing
oneself in speculation and material activities. One must be very serious about
self-realization and the practice of austerity. Unfortunately, the people of this
age of Kali do not even know the meaning of austerity. Under these
circumstances, the Lord has appeared as Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu to bestow
upon the fallen souls the easiest method of self-realization, technically called
ceto-darpaëa-märjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12], cleansing of the dirt from the core of
one's heart. This method is extremely simple. Anyone can chant the glorious
kåñëa-saìkértana—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare
Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. In this age there are different
forms of so-called advanced scientific knowledge, such as anthropology,
Marxism, Freudianism, nationalism and industrialism, but if we work very hard
under their guidance instead of adopting the process practiced by
Nara-Näräyaëa, we shall waste our valuable human form of life. Thus we shall
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
808
certainly be cheated and misled.
TEXT 10
Ta& >aGavaàardae v<aaRé[MavTaqi>a>aaRrTaqi>a" Pa[Jaai>a>aRGavTPa[ae¢-a>Yaa& Saa&:YaYaae‚
Gaa>Yaa& >aGavdNau>aavaePav<aRNa& Saav<aeRåPade+YaMaa<a" ParMa>ai¢->aaveNaaePaSariTa
wd& cai>aGa*<aaiTa )) 10 ))
taà bhagavän närado varëäçramavatébhir bhäratébhiù prajäbhir
bhagavat-proktäbhyäà säìkhya-yogäbhyäà bhagavad-anubhävopavarëanaà
sävarëer upadekñyamäëaù parama-bhakti-bhävenopasarati idaà cäbhigåëäti.
SYNONYMS
tam—Him (Nara-Näräyaëa); bhagavän—the most powerful saintly person;
näradaù—the great sage Närada; varëa-äçrama-vatébhiù—by followers of the
institution of the four varëas and four äçramas; bhäratébhiù—of the land
known as Bhärata-varña (India); prajäbhiù—who are the inhabitants;
bhagavat-proktäbhyäm—which was stated by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; säìkhya—by the säìkhya-yoga system (the analytical study of
material conditions); yogäbhyäm—by practice of the yoga system;
bhagavat-anubhäva-upavarëanam—which describes the process of God
realization; sävarëeù—unto Sävarëi Manu; upadekñyamäëaù—instructing;
parama-bhakti-bhävena—in greatly ecstatic loving service to the Lord;
upasarati—serves the Lord; idam—this; ca—and; abhigåëäti—chants.
TRANSLATION
In his own book, known as Närada Païcarätra, Bhagavän Närada has very
vividly described how to work to achieve the ultimate goal of
life—devotion—through knowledge and through execution of the mystic yoga
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
809
system. He has also described the glories of the Lord, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. The great sage Närada instructed the tenets of this transcendental
literature to Sävarëi Manu in order to teach those inhabitants of Bhärata-varña
who strictly follow the principles of varëäçrama-dharma how to achieve the
devotional service of the Lord. Thus Närada Muni, along with the other
inhabitants of Bhärata-varña, always engages in the service of Nara-Näräyaëa,
and he chants as follows.
PURPORT
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has clearly declared:
bhärata-bhümite haila manuñya-janma yära
janma särthaka kari' kara para-upakära
[Cc. Ädi 9.41]
The real success or fulfillment of the mission of human life can be achieved in
India, Bhärata-varña, because in Bhärata-varña the purpose of life and the
method for achieving success are evident. People should take advantage of the
opportunity afforded by Bhärata-varña, and this is especially so for those who
are following the principles of varëäçrama-dharma. If we do not take to the
principles of varëäçrama-dharma by accepting the four social orders
(brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra) and the four orders of spiritual life
(brahmacäré, gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa), there can be no question of
success in life. Unfortunately, because of the influence of Kali-yuga,
everything is now being lost. The inhabitants of Bhärata-varña are gradually
becoming degraded mlecchas and yavanas. How then will they teach others?
Therefore, this Kåñëa consciousness movement has been started not only for
the inhabitants of Bhärata-varña but for all the people of the world, as
announced by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. There is still time, and if the
inhabitants of Bhärata-varña take this movement of Kåñëa consciousness
seriously, the entire world will be saved from gliding down to a hellish
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
810
condition. The Kåñëa consciousness movement follows the process of
païcarätrika-vidhi and that of bhägavata-vidhi simultaneously, so that people
can take advantage of the movement and make their lives successful.
TEXT 11
p NaMaae >aGavTae oPaXaMaXaql/aYaaeParTaaNaaTMYaaYa NaMaae_ik-ÄNaivtaaYa
‰iz‰z>aaYa NarNaaraYa<aaYa ParMah&SaParMaGaurve AaTMaaraMaaiDaPaTaYae NaMaae
NaMa wiTa )) 11 ))
oà namo bhagavate upaçama-çéläyoparatänätmyäya namo 'kiïcana-vittäya
åñi-åñabhäya nara-näräyaëäya paramahaàsa-parama-gurave
ätmärämädhipataye namo nama iti.
SYNONYMS
om—O Supreme Lord; namaù—my respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; upaçama-çéläya—who has mastered the
senses; uparata-anätmyäya—having no attachment for this material world;
namaù—my respectful obeisances; akiïcana-vittäya—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is the only asset of persons who have no material
possessions; åñi-åñabhäya—the most exalted of saintly persons;
nara-näräyaëäya—Nara-Näräyaëa; paramahaàsa-parama-gurave—the most
exalted spiritual master of all paramahaàsas, liberated persons;
ätmäräma-adhipataye—the best of self-realized persons; namaù namaù—my
respectful obeisances again and again; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Nara-Näräyaëa, the best of all
saintly persons, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the most
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
811
self-controlled and self-realized, He is free from false prestige, and He is the
asset of persons who have no material possessions. He is the spiritual master of
all paramahaàsas, who are the most exalted human beings, and He is the master
of the self-realized. Let me offer my repeated obeisances at His lotus feet.
TEXT 12
GaaYaiTa cedMa(ƒƒ
k-TaaRSYa SaGaaRidzu Yaae Na bDYaTae
Na hNYaTae dehGaTaae_iPa dEihkE-" )
d]íuNaR d*GYaSYa Gau<aEivRdUZYaTae
TaSMaE NaMaae_Sa¢-iviv¢-Saai+a<ae )) 12 ))
gäyati cedam—
kartäsya sargädiñu yo na badhyate
na hanyate deha-gato 'pi daihikaiù
drañöur na dåg yasya guëair vidüñyate
tasmai namo 'sakta-vivikta-säkñiëe
SYNONYMS
gäyati—he sings; ca—and; idam—this; kartä—the executor; asya—of this
cosmic manifestation; sarga-ädiñu—of the creation, maintenance and
destruction; yaù—one who; na badhyate—is not attached as the creator,
master or proprietor; na—not; hanyate—is victimized; deha-gataù
api—although appearing as a human being; daihikaiù—by bodily tribulations
such as hunger, thirst and fatigue; drañöuù—of Him who is the seer of
everything; na—not; dåk—the power of vision; yasya—of whom; guëaiù—by
the material qualities; vidüñyate—is polluted; tasmai—unto Him; namaù—my
respectful obeisances; asakta—unto the Supreme person, who is unattached;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
812
vivikta—without affection; säkñiëe—the witness of everything.
TRANSLATION
Närada, the most powerful saintly sage, also worships Nara-Näräyaëa by
chanting the following mantra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
master of the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this visible cosmic
manifestation, yet He is completely free from false prestige. Although to the
foolish He appears to have accepted a material body like us, He is unaffected by
bodily tribulations like hunger, thirst and fatigue. Although He is the witness
who sees everything, His senses are unpolluted by the objects He sees. Let me
offer my respectful obeisances unto that unattached, pure witness of the world,
the Supreme Soul, the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is described as
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], the body of eternity, transcendental bliss and
full knowledge. Now in this verse He is more fully described. Kåñëa is the
creator of the entire cosmic manifestation, yet He is unattached to it. If we
were to construct a very tall skyscraper, we would be very attached to it, but
Kåñëa is so renounced that although He has created everything, He is not
attached to anything (na badhyate). Furthermore, although Kåñëa has His
transcendental form, sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], He is not disturbed by
the bodily necessities of life, which are called daihika; for example, He is never
hungry, thirsty or fatigued (na hanyate deha-gato 'pi daihikaiù). Then again,
since everything is Kåñëa's property, He sees everything and is present
everywhere, but because His body is transcendental, He is above vision, the
objects of vision and the process of vision. When we see someone beautiful, we
are attracted. The sight of a beautiful woman immediately attracts a man, and
the sight of a man naturally attracts a woman. Kåñëa, however, is
transcendental to all these faults. Although He is the seer of everything, He is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
813
not afflicted with faulty vision (na dåg yasya guëair vidüñyate). Therefore,
although He is the witness and seer, He is aloof from all affection for the
activities He sees. He is always unattached and separate; He is only a witness.
TEXT 13
wd& ih YaaeGaeìr YaaeGaNaEPau<a&
ihr<YaGa>aaeR >aGavaÅGaad YaTa( )
YadNTak-ale/ TviYa iNaGauR<ae MaNaae
>a¢-ya dDaqTaaeiJ‡TaduZk-le/vr" )) 13 ))
idaà hi yogeçvara yoga-naipuëaà
hiraëyagarbho bhagaväï jagäda yat
yad anta-käle tvayi nirguëe mano
bhaktyä dadhétojjhita-duñkalevaraù
SYNONYMS
idam—this; hi—certainly; yoga-éçvara—O my Lord, master of all mystic power;
yoga-naipuëam—the expert process of executing yogic principles;
hiraëya-garbhaù—Lord Brahmä; bhagavän—the most powerful; jagäda—spoke;
yat—which; yat—which; anta-käle—at the time of death; tvayi—in You;
nirguëe—the transcendence; manaù—the mind; bhaktyä—with a devotional
attitude; dadhéta—one should place; ujjhita-duñkalevaraù—having given up his
identification with the material body.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, master of all mystic yoga, this is the explanation of the yogic
process spoken of by Lord Brahmä [Hiraëyagarbha], who is self-realized. At the
time of death, all yogés give up the material body with full detachment simply by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
814
placing their minds at Your lotus feet. That is the perfection of yoga.
PURPORT
Çréla Madhväcärya says:
yasya samyag bhagavati
jïänaà bhaktis tathaiva ca
niçcintas tasya mokñaù syät
sarva-päpa-kåto 'pi tu
"For one who very seriously practices devotional service during his lifetime in
order to understand the constitutional position of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, liberation from this material world is guaranteed, even if he has
previously been addicted to sinful habits." This is also confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä:
api cet su-duräcäro
bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù
samyag vyavasito hi saù
"Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly
situated." (Bg. 9.30) The only purpose of life is to be fully absorbed in thoughts
of Kåñëa and His form, pastimes, activities and qualities. If one is able to think
of Kåñëa in this way, twenty-four hours a day, he is already liberated
(svarüpeëa vyavasthitiù [SB 2.10.6]). Whereas materialists are absorbed in
material thoughts and activities, devotees, on the contrary, are always
absorbed in thoughts of Kåñëa and Kåñëa's activities. Therefore they are
already on the platform of liberation. One has to think of Kåñëa with full
absorption at the time of death. Then he will certainly return home, back to
Godhead, without a doubt.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
815
TEXT 14
YaQaEihk-aMauiZMak-k-aMal/MPa$="
SauTaezu darezu DaNaezu icNTaYaNa( )
XaªeTa ivÜaNa( ku-k-le/vraTYaYaad(
YaSTaSYa YaÒ" é[Ma Wv ke-vl/Ma( )) 14 ))
yathaihikämuñmika-käma-lampaöaù
suteñu däreñu dhaneñu cintayan
çaìketa vidvän kukalevarätyayäd
yas tasya yatnaù çrama eva kevalam
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; aihika—in the present life; amuñmika—in the expected future life;
käma-lampaöaù—a person who is very attached to lusty desires for bodily
enjoyment; suteñu—children; däreñu—wife; dhaneñu—wealth;
cintayan—thinking about; çaìketa—is afraid; vidvän—a person advanced in
spiritual knowledge; ku-kalevara—of this body, which is full of stool and urine;
atyayät—because of loss; yaù—anyone; tasya—his; yatnaù—endeavors;
çramaù—a waste of time and energy; eva—certainly; kevalam—only.
TRANSLATION
Materialists are generally very attached to their present bodily comforts and
to the bodily comforts they expect in the future. Therefore they are always
absorbed in thoughts of their wives, children and wealth and are afraid of giving
up their bodies, which are full of stool and urine. If a person engaged in Kåñëa
consciousness, however, is also afraid of giving up his body, what is the use of
his having labored to study the çästras? It was simply a waste of time.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
816
PURPORT
At the time of death a materialist thinks of his wife and children. He is
absorbed in thinking of how they will live and who will take care of them after
he leaves. Consequently he is never prepared to give up his body; rather, he
wants to continue to live in his body to serve his society, family, friends and so
on. Therefore by practicing the mystic yoga system one must become detached
from bodily relationships. If despite practicing bhakti-yoga and studying all the
Vedic literature, one is afraid of giving up his bad body, which is the cause of
all his suffering, what is the use of his attempts to advance in spiritual life? The
secret of success in practicing yoga is to become free from bodily attachments.
Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura says, deha-småti nähi yära, saàsära-bandhana
kähäì tära: one whose practice has freed him from the anxieties of bodily
needs is no longer in conditional life. Such a person is freed from conditional
bondage. A person in Kåñëa consciousness must fully discharge his devotional
duties without material attachment. Then his liberation is guaranteed.
TEXT 15
Taà" Pa[>aae Tv& ku-k-le/vraiPaRTaa&
TvNMaaYaYaah&MaMaTaaMaDaae+aJa )
i>aNÛaMa YaeNaaXau vYa& Saudui>aRda&
ivDaeih YaaeGa& TviYa Na" Sv>aaviMaiTa )) 15 ))
tan naù prabho tvaà kukalevarärpitäà
tvan-mäyayähaà-mamatäm adhokñaja
bhindyäma yenäçu vayaà sudurbhidäà
vidhehi yogaà tvayi naù svabhävam iti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
817
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; naù—our; prabho—O my Lord; tvam—You;
ku-kalevara-arpitäm—invested in this bad body full of stool and urine;
tvat-mäyayä—by Your illusory energy; aham-mamatäm—the conception of "I
and my"; adhokñaja—O Transcendence; bhindyäma—may give up; yena—by
which; äçu—very soon; vayam—we; sudurbhidäm—which is very difficult to
give up; vidhehi—please give; yogam—the mystic process; tvayi—unto You;
naù—our; svabhävam—which is symptomized by a steady mind; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Lord, O Transcendence, kindly help us by giving us the power
to execute bhakti-yoga so that we can control our restless minds and fix them
upon You. We are all infected by Your illusory energy; therefore we are very
attached to the body, which is full of stool and urine, and to anything related
with the body. Except for devotional service, there is no way to give up this
attachment. Therefore kindly bestow upon us this benediction.
PURPORT
The Lord advises in Bhagavad-gétä: man-manä bhava mad-bhakto mad-yäjé
mäà namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. The perfect yoga system consists of always
thinking of Kåñëa, always engaging in devotional service, always worshiping
Kåñëa and always offering obeisances unto Him. Unless we practice this yoga
system, our illusory attachment for this bad body, which is full of stool and
urine, is impossible to give up. The perfection of yoga consists of giving up
attachment for this body and bodily relationships and transferring that
attachment to Kåñëa. We are very attached to material enjoyment, but when
we transfer that same attachment to Kåñëa, we traverse the path of liberation.
One has to practice this yoga system and none other.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
818
TEXT 16
>aarTae_PYaiSMaNa( vzeR SairC^El/a" SaiNTa bhvae Mal/Yaae Ma(r)l/Pa[SQaae
MaENaak-iñkU-$= ‰z>a" kU-$=k-" k-aeçk-" Saùae deviGair‰RZYaMaUk-" é[qXaEl/ae
veª$=ae MaheNd]ae vairDaarae ivNDYa" éui¢-MaaNa*+aiGair" PaairYaa}aae d]ae<aiê}akU-$=ae
GaaevDaRNaae rEvTak-" k-ku->aae Naql/ae Gaaek-aMau% wNd]k-Il/" k-aMaiGaiririTa caNYae
c XaTaSahóXa" XaEl/aSTaeza& iNaTaMbPa[>ava Nada NaÛê SaNTYaSa&:YaaTaa" )) 16 ))
bhärate 'py asmin varñe saric-chailäù santi bahavo malayo maìgala-prastho
mainäkas triküöa åñabhaù küöakaù kollakaù sahyo devagirir åñyamükaù çré-çailo
veìkaöo mahendro väridhäro vindhyaù çuktimän åkñagiriù päriyätro droëaç
citraküöo govardhano raivatakaù kakubho nélo gokämukha indrakélaù
kämagirir iti cänye ca çata-sahasraçaù çailäs teñäà nitamba-prabhavä nadä
nadyaç ca santy asaìkhyätäù.
SYNONYMS
bhärate—in the land of Bhärata-varña; api—also; asmin—in this; varñe—tract
of land; sarit—rivers; çailäù—mountains; santi—there are; bahavaù—many;
malayaù—Malaya; maìgala-prasthaù—Maìgala-prastha; mainäkaù—Mainäka;
tri-küöaù—Triküöa; åñabhaù—Åñabha; küöakaù—Küöaka; kollakaù—Kollaka;
sahyaù—Sahya; devagiriù—Devagiri; åñya-mükaù—Åñyamüka;
çré-çailaù—Çré-çaila; veìkaöaù—Veìkaöa; mahendraù—Mahendra;
väri-dhäraù—Väridhära; vindhyaù—Vindhya; çuktimän—Çuktimän;
åkña-giriù—Åkñagiri; päriyätraù—Päriyätra; droëaù—Droëa;
citra-küöaù—Citraküöa; govardhanaù—Govardhana; raivatakaù—Raivataka;
kakubhaù—Kakubha; nélaù—Néla; gokämukhaù—Gokämukha;
indrakélaù—Indrakéla; käma-giriù—Kämagiri; iti—thus; ca—and;
anye—others; ca—also; çata-sahasraçaù—many hundreds and thousands;
çailäù—mountains; teñäm—of them; nitamba-prabhaväù—born of the slopes;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
819
nadäù—big rivers; nadyaù—small rivers; ca—and; santi—there are;
asaìkhyätäù—innumerable.
TRANSLATION
In the tract of land known as Bhärata-varña, as in Ilävåta-varña, there are
many mountains and rivers. Some of the mountains are known as Malaya,
Maìgala-prastha, Mainäka, Triküöa, Åñabha, Küöaka, Kollaka, Sahya, Devagiri,
Åñyamüka, Çré-çaila, Veìkaöa, Mahendra, Väridhära, Vindhya, Çuktimän,
Åkñagiri, Päriyätra, Droëa, Citraküöa, Govardhana, Raivataka, Kakubha, Néla,
Gokämukha, Indrakéla and Kämagiri. Besides these, there are many other hills,
with many large and small rivers flowing from their slopes.
TEXTS 17-18
WTaaSaaMaPaae >aarTYa" Pa[Jaa NaaMai>arev PauNaNTaqNaaMaaTMaNaa caePaSPa*XaiNTa )) 17 ))
cNd]vSaa TaaMa]Pa<as Av$=aeda k*-TaMaal/a vEhaYaSaq k-averq ve<aq
PaYaiSvNaq Xak-RravTaaR Tau(r)>ad]a k*-Z<aa ve<Yaa >aqMarQaq Gaaedavrq iNaivRNDYaa
PaYaaeZ<aq TaaPaq reva SaurSaa NaMaRda cMaR<vTaq iSaNDaurNDa" Xaae<aê NadaE
MahaNadq vedSMa*iTa‰Rizku-LYaa i}aSaaMaa k-aEiXak-I MaNdaik-Naq YaMauNaa
SarSvTaq d*zÜTaq GaaeMaTaq SarYaU raeDaSvTaq SaávTaq SauzaeMaa XaTad]UêNd]>aaGaa
Maåd(v*Daa ivTaSTaa AiSa¥-I ivìeiTa MahaNaÛ" )) 18 ))
etäsäm apo bhäratyaù prajä nämabhir eva punanténäm ätmanä copaspåçanti;
candravasä tämraparëé avaöodä kåtamälä vaihäyasé käveré veëé payasviné
çarkarävartä tuìgabhadrä kåñëäveëyä bhémarathé godävaré nirvindhyä payoñëé
täpé revä surasä narmadä carmaëvaté sindhur andhaù çoëaç ca nadau
mahänadé vedasmåtir åñikulyä trisämä kauçiké mandäkiné yamunä sarasvaté
dåñadvaté gomaté sarayü rodhasvaté saptavaté suñomä çatadrüç candrabhägä
marudvådhä vitastä asikné viçveti mahä-nadyaù.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
820
SYNONYMS
etäsäm—of all these; apaù—water; bhäratyaù—of Bhärata-varña (India);
prajäù—the residents; nämabhiù—by the names; eva—only; punanténäm—are
purifying; ätmanä—by the mind; ca—also; upaspåçanti—touch;
candra-vasä—Candravasä; tämra-parëé—Tämraparëé; avaöodä—Avaöodä;
kåta-mälä—Kåtamälä; vaihäyasé—Vaihäyasé; käveré—Käveré; veëé—Veëé;
payasviné—Payasviné; çarkarävartä—Çarkarävartä;
tuìga-bhadrä—Tuìgabhadrä; kåñëä-veëyä—Kåñëäveëyä;
bhéma-rathé—Bhémarathé; godävaré—Godävaré; nirvindhyä—Nirvindhyä;
payoñëé—Payoñëé; täpé—Täpé; revä—Revä; surasä—Surasä;
narmadä—Narmadä; carmaëvaté—Carmaëvaté; sindhuù—Sindhu;
andhaù—Andha; çoëaù—Çoëa; ca—and; nadau—two rivers;
mahä-nadé—Mahänadé; veda-småtiù—Vedasmåti; åñi-kulyä—Åñikulyä;
tri-sämä—Trisämä; kauçiké—Kauçiké; mandäkiné—Mandäkiné;
yamunä—Yamunä; sarasvaté—Sarasvaté; dåñadvaté—Dåñadvaté;
gomaté—Gomaté; sarayü—Sarayü; rodhasvaté—Rodhasvaté;
saptavaté—Saptavaté; suñomä—Suñomä; çata-drüù—Çatadrü;
candrabhägä—Candrabhägä; marudvådhä—Marudvådhä; vitastä—Vitastä;
asikné—Asikné; viçvä—Viçvä; iti—thus; mahä-nadyaù—big rivers.
TRANSLATION
Two of the rivers—the Brahmaputra and the Çoëa—are called nadas, or
main rivers. These are other great rivers that are very prominent: Candravasä,
Tämraparëé, Avaöodä, Kåtamälä, Vaihäyasé, Käveré, Veëé, Payasviné,
Çarkarävartä, Tuìgabhadrä, Kåñëäveëyä, Bhémarathé, Godävaré, Nirvindhyä,
Payoñëé, Täpé, Revä, Surasä, Narmadä, Carmaëvaté, Mahänadé, Vedasmåti,
Åñikulyä, Trisämä, Kauçiké, Mandäkiné, Yamunä, Sarasvaté, Dåñadvaté, Gomaté,
Sarayü, Rodhasvaté, Saptavaté, Suñomä, Çatadrü, Candrabhägä, Marudvådhä,
Vitastä, Asikné and Viçvä. The inhabitants of Bhärata-varña are purified
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
821
because they always remember these rivers. Sometimes they chant the names of
these rivers as mantras, and sometimes they go directly to the rivers to touch
them and bathe in them. Thus the inhabitants of Bhärata-varña become
purified.
PURPORT
All these rivers are transcendental. Therefore one can be purified by
remembering them, touching them or bathing in them. This practice is still
going on.
TEXT 19
AiSMaàev vzeR PauåzEl/RBDaJaNMai>a" Xau(c)-l/aeihTak*-Z<av<aeRNa SvarBDaeNa k-MaR<aa
idVYaMaaNauzNaark-GaTaYaae bûy AaTMaNa AaNauPaUVYaeR<a SavaR ùev SaveRza&
ivDaqYaNTae YaQaav<aRivDaaNaMaPavGaRêaiPa >aviTa )) 19 ))
asminn eva varñe puruñair labdha-janmabhiù çukla-lohita-kåñëa-varëena
svärabdhena karmaëä divya-mänuña-näraka-gatayo bahvya ätmana
änupürvyeëa sarvä hy eva sarveñäà vidhéyante yathä-varëa-vidhänam
apavargaç cäpi bhavati.
SYNONYMS
asmin eva varñe—in this tract of land (Bhärata-varña); puruñaiù—by the
people; labdha-janmabhiù—who have taken birth; çukla—of the mode of
goodness; lohita—of the mode of passion; kåñëa—of the mode of ignorance;
varëena—according to the division; sva—by himself; ärabdhena—begun;
karmaëä—by activities; divya—divine; mänuña—human; näraka—hellish;
gatayaù—goals; bahvyaù—many; ätmanaù—of his own;
änupürvyeëa—according to acts performed previously; sarväù—all;
hi—certainly; eva—indeed; sarveñäm—of all of them; vidhéyante—are allotted;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
822
yathä-varëa-vidhänam—in terms of different castes; apavargaù—the path of
liberation; ca—and; api—also; bhavati—is possible.
TRANSLATION
The people who take birth in this tract of land are divided according to the
qualities of material nature—the modes of goodness [sattva-guëa], passion
[rajo-guëa], and ignorance [tamo-guëa]. Some of them are born as exalted
personalities, some are ordinary human beings, and some are extremely
abominable, for in Bhärata—varña one takes birth exactly according to one's
past karma. If one's position is ascertained by a bona fide spiritual master and
one is properly trained to engage in the service of Lord Viñëu according to the
four social divisions [brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra] and the four
spiritual divisions [brahmacäré, gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa], one's life
becomes perfect.
PURPORT
For further information, one should refer to Bhagavad-gétä (14.18 and
18.42-45). Çréla Rämänujäcärya writes in his book Vedänta-saìgraha:
evaà-vidha-paräbhakti-svarüpa-jïäna-viçeñasyotpädakaù pürvoktäharahar
upacéyamäna-jïäna-pürvaka-karmänugåhéta-bhakti-yoga eva; yathoktaà
bhagavatä paräçareëa—varëäçrameti. nikhila-jagad-uddhäraëäyävanitale
'vatérëaà para-brahma-bhütaù puruñottamaù svayam etad
uktavän—"svakarma-nirataù siddhià yathä vindati tac chåëu" "yataù pravåttir
bhütänäà yena sarvam idaà tatam / svakarmaëä tam abhyarcya siddhià vindati
mänavaù"
Quoting from the Viñëu Puräëa (389), the great sage Paräçara Muni has
recommended:
varëäçramäcäravatä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
823
puruñeëa paraù pumän
viñëur ärädhyate panthä
nänyat tat-toña-käraëam
[Cc. Madhya 8.58]
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu, is worshiped by the proper
execution of prescribed duties in the system of varëa and äçrama. There is no
other way to satisfy the Lord." In the land of Bhärata-varña, the institution of
varëäçrama-dharma may be easily adopted. At the present moment, certain
demoniac sections of the population of Bhäratavarña are disregarding the
system of varëäçrama-dharma. Because there is no institution to teach people
how to become brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras or brahmacärés,
gåhasthas, vänaprasthas and sannyäsés, these demons want a classless society.
This is resulting in chaotic conditions. In the name of secular government,
unqualified people are taking the supreme governmental posts. No one is being
trained to act according to the principles of varëäçrama-dharma, and thus
people are becoming increasingly degraded and are heading in the direction of
animal life. The real aim of life is liberation, but unfortunately the opportunity
for liberation is being denied to people in general, and therefore their human
lives are being spoiled. The Kåñëa consciousness movement, however, is being
propagated all over the world to reestablish the varëäçrama-dharma system and
thus save human society from gliding down to hellish life.
TEXT 20
Yaae_SaaE >aGaviTa SavR>aUTaaTMaNYaNaaTMYae_iNaå¢e-_iNal/YaNae ParMaaTMaiNa vaSau‚
deve_NaNYaiNaiMata>ai¢-YaaeGal/+a<aae NaaNaaGaiTaiNaiMataaivÛaGa]iNQarNDaNaÜare<a Yada
ih MahaPauåzPauåzPa[Sa(r)" )) 20 ))
yo 'sau bhagavati sarva-bhütätmany anätmye 'nirukte 'nilayane paramätmani
väsudeve 'nanya-nimitta-bhakti-yoga-lakñaëo
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
824
nänä-gati-nimittävidyä-granthi-randhana-dväreëa yadä hi
mahä-puruña-puruña-prasaìgaù.
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; asau—that; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sarva-bhüta-ätmani—the Supersoul of all living entities;
anätmye—having no attachment; anirukte—who is beyond the mind and
speech; anilayane—not dependent on anything else; parama-ätmani—unto
the Supreme Soul; väsudeve—Lord Väsudeva, the son of Vasudeva;
ananya—without any other; nimitta—cause; bhakti-yoga-lakñaëaù—having
symptoms of pure devotional service; nänä-gati—of varied destinations;
nimitta—the cause; avidyä-granthi—the bondage of ignorance; randhana—of
cutting; dväreëa—by means; yadä—when; hi—indeed; mahä-puruña—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; puruña—with the devotee; prasaìgaù—an
intimate relationship.
TRANSLATION
After many, many births, when the results of one's pious activities mature,
one gets an opportunity to associate with pure devotees. Then one is able to cut
the knot of bondage to ignorance, which bound him because of varied fruitive
activities. As a result of associating with devotees, one gradually renders service
to Lord Väsudeva, who is transcendental, free from attachment to the material
world, beyond the mind and words, and independent of everything else. That
bhakti-yoga, devotional service to Lord Väsudeva, is the real path of liberation.
PURPORT
Brahman realization is the beginning of liberation, and Paramätmä
realization is still further advancement toward the realm of liberation, but one
achieves real liberation when he understands his position as an eternal servant
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
825
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (muktir hitvänyathä rüpaà svarüpeëa
vyavasthitiù [SB 2.10.6]). In the material world, in the bodily concept of life,
everyone is working in the wrong direction. When one becomes brahma-bhüta
[SB 4.30.20], spiritually realized, one understands that he is not the body and
that working in the bodily concept of life is useless and misdirected. Then his
devotional service begins. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.54):
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
"One who is thus transcendentally situated realizes the Supreme Brahman and
becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to have anything; he is
equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional
service unto Me." Devotional service is actual liberation. When one is
attracted by the beauty of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and his mind is
always engaged at the Lord's lotus feet, he is no longer interested in subjects
that do not help him in self-realization. In other words, he loses all attraction
for material activities. In the Taittiréya Upaniñad (2.7) it is said: eña hy
evänandayati. yadä hy evaiña etasmin na dåçye 'nätmye anirukte 'nilayane
'bhayaà pratiñöhäà vindate 'tha so 'bhayaà gato bhavati. A living entity
becomes established in spiritual, blissful life when he fully understands that his
happiness depends on spiritual self-realization, which is the basic principle of
änanda (bliss), and when he is eternally situated in the service of the Lord,
who has no other lord above Him.
TEXT 21
WTadev ih deva GaaYaiNTaƒƒ
Ahae AMaqza& ik-Mak-air Xaae>aNa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
826
Pa[Saà Wza& iSvduTa SvYa& hir" )
YaEJaRNMa l/BDa& Na*zu >aarTaaiJare
Mauku-NdSaevaEPaiYak&- SPa*ha ih Na" )) 21 ))
etad eva hi devä gäyanti—
aho améñäà kim akäri çobhanaà
prasanna eñäà svid uta svayaà hariù
yair janma labdhaà nåñu bhäratäjire
mukunda-sevaupayikaà spåhä hi naù
SYNONYMS
etat—this; eva—indeed; hi—certainly; deväù—all the demigods;
gäyanti—chant; aho—oh; améñäm—of these inhabitants of Bhäratavarña;
kim—what; akäri—was done; çobhanam—pious, beautiful activities;
prasannaù—pleased; eñäm—upon them; svit—or; uta—it is said;
svayam—personally; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaiù—by
whom; janma—birth; labdham—obtained; nåñu—in human society;
bhärata-ajire—in the courtyard of Bhärata-varña; mukunda—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who can offer liberation; sevä-aupayikam—which is
the means of serving; spåhä—desire; hi—indeed; naù—our.
TRANSLATION
Since the human form of life is the sublime position for spiritual realization,
all the demigods in heaven speak in this way: How wonderful it is for these
human beings to have been born in the land of Bhärata-varña. They must have
executed pious acts of austerity in the past, or the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Himself must have been pleased with them. Otherwise, how could
they engage in devotional service in so many ways? We demigods can only
aspire to achieve human births in Bhärata-varña to execute devotional service,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
827
but these human beings are already engaged there.
PURPORT
These facts are further explained in Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 9.41):
bhärata-bhümite haila manuñya-janma yära
janma särthaka kari' kara para-upakära
"One who has taken his birth as a human being in the land of India
[Bhärata-varña] should make his life successful and work for the benefit of all
other people."
There are many facilities in India, Bhärata-varña, for executing devotional
service. In Bhärata-varña, all the äcäryas contributed their experience, and Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu personally appeared to teach the people of
Bhärata-varña how to progress in spiritual life and be fixed in devotional
service to the Lord. From all points of view, Bhärata-varña is the special land
where one can very easily understand the process of devotional service and
adopt it to make his life successful. If one makes his life successful in
devotional service and then preaches devotional service in other parts of the
world, people throughout the world will actually benefit.
TEXT 22
ik&- duZk-rENaR" §-Taui>aSTaPaaev]TaE‚
daRNaaidi>avaR ÛuJaYaeNa f-LGauNaa )
Na Ya}a NaaraYa<aPaadPaªJa‚
SMa*iTa" Pa[MauíaiTaXaYaeiNd]YaaeTSavaTa( )) 22 ))
kià duñkarair naù kratubhis tapo-vratair
dänädibhir vä dyujayena phalgunä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
828
na yatra näräyaëa-päda-paìkajasmåtiù
pramuñöätiçayendriyotsavät
SYNONYMS
kim—what is the value; duñkaraiù—very difficult to perform; naù—our;
kratubhiù—with performances of sacrifice; tapaù—with austerities;
vrataiù—vows; däna-ädibhiù—with executing charitable activities and so on;
vä—or; dyujayena—with achieving the heavenly kingdom; phalgunä—which
is insignificant; na—no; yatra—where; näräyaëa-päda-paìkaja—of the lotus
feet of Lord Näräyaëa; småtiù—the remembrance; pramuñöa—lost;
atiçaya—excessive; indriya-utsavät—due to material sense gratification.
TRANSLATION
The demigods continue: After performing the very difficult tasks of
executing Vedic ritualistic sacrifices, undergoing austerities, observing vows
and giving charity, we have achieved this position as inhabitants of the
heavenly planets. But what is the value of this achievement? Here we are
certainly very engaged in material sense gratification, and therefore we can
hardly remember the lotus feet of Lord Näräyaëa. Indeed, because of our
excessive sense gratification, we have almost forgotten His lotus feet.
PURPORT
The land of Bhärata-varña is so exalted that by taking birth there one can
not only attain the heavenly planets but also go directly back home, back to
Godhead. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.25):
yänti deva-vratä devän
pitèn yänti pitå-vratäù
bhütäni yänti bhütejyä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
829
yänti mad-yäjino 'pi mäm
"Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those
who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; those who
worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship Me will live with
Me." People in the land of Bhärata-varña generally follow the Vedic principles
and consequently perform great sacrifices by which they can be elevated to the
heavenly planets. However, what is the use of such great attainments? As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä (9.21), kñéëe puëye martya-lokaà viçanti: after the
results of one's sacrifices, charity and other pious activities expire, one must
return to the lower planetary systems and again feel the pangs of birth and
death. However, one who becomes Kåñëa conscious can go back to Kåñëa
(yänti-mad-yäjino 'pi mäm [Bg. 9.25]). Therefore the demigods even regret
having been elevated to the higher planetary systems. The denizens of the
heavenly planets regret that they could not take full advantage of being born
in the land of Bhärata-varña. Instead, they became captivated by a higher
standard of sense gratification, and therefore they forgot the lotus feet of Lord
Näräyaëa at the time of death. The conclusion is that one who has taken birth
in the land of Bhärata-varña must follow the instructions given personally by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Yad gatvä na nivartante tad dhäma
paramaà mama [Bg. 15.6]. One should try to return home, back to Godhead, to
the Vaikuëöha planets—or to the topmost Vaikuëöha planet, Goloka
Våndävana—to live eternally in full, blissful knowledge in the company of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 23
k-LPaaYauza& SQaaNaJaYaaTPauNa>aRvaTa(
+a<aaYauza& >aarTa>aUJaYaae vrMa( )
+a<aeNa MaTYaeRNa k*-Ta& MaNaiSvNa"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
830
SaNNYaSYa Sa&YaaNTYa>aYa& Pad& hre" )) 23 ))
kalpäyuñäà sthänajayät punar-bhavät
kñaëäyuñäà bhärata-bhüjayo varam
kñaëena martyena kåtaà manasvinaù
sannyasya saàyänty abhayaà padaà hareù
SYNONYMS
kalpa-äyuñäm—of those who have a life duration of many millions of years,
like Lord Brahmä; sthäna-jayät—than achievement of the place or planetary
systems; punaù-bhavät—which is liable to birth, death and old age;
kñaëa-äyuñäm—of persons who have only one hundred years of life;
bhärata-bhü-jayaù—a birth in the land of Bhärata-varña; varam—more
valuable; kñaëena—for such a short life; martyena—by the body; kåtam—the
work executed; manasvinaù—those actually understanding the value of life;
sannyasya—surrendering unto the lotus feet of Kåñëa; saàyänti—they
achieve; abhayam—where there is no anxiety; padam—the abode; hareù—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
A short life in the land of Bharata-varña is preferable to a life achieved in
Brahmaloka for millions and billions of years because even if one is elevated to
Brahmaloka, he must return to repeated birth and death. Although life in
Bhärata-varña, in a lower planetary system, is very short, one who lives there
can elevate himself to full Kåñëa consciousness and achieve the highest
perfection, even in this short life, by fully surrendering unto the lotus feet of
the Lord. Thus one attains Vaikuëöhaloka, where there is neither anxiety nor
repeated birth in a material body.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
831
PURPORT
This is further confirmation of the statement given by Lord Caitanya
Mahäprabhu:
bhärata-bhümite haila manuñya-janma yära
janma särthaka kari' kara para-upakära
[Cc. Ädi 9.41]
One who has taken birth in the land of Bhärata-varña has a full opportunity to
study the direct instructions given by Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä and thus finally
decide what to do in his human form of life. One should certainly give up all
other propositions and surrender to Kåñëa. Kåñëa will then immediately take
charge and relieve one of the results of past sinful life (ahaà tväà
sarva-päpebhyo mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù [Bg. 18.66]). Therefore one should take
to Kåñëa consciousness, as Kåñëa Himself recommends. Man-manä bhava
mad-bhakto mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru: [Bg. 18.65] "Always think of Me, become
My devotee, worship Me and offer Me obeisances." This is very easy, even for a
child. Why not take this path? One should try to follow the instructions of
Kåñëa exactly and thus become fully eligible to be promoted to the kingdom of
God (tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm eti so'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]). One should
go directly to Kåñëa and engage in His service. This is the best opportunity
offered to the inhabitants of Bhärata-varña. One who is fit to return home,
back to Godhead, is no longer liable to the results of karma, good or bad.
TEXT 24
Na Ya}a vEku-<#=k-QaaSauDaaPaGaa
Na SaaDavae >aaGavTaaSTadaé[Yaa" )
Na Ya}a YajeXaMa%a MahaeTSava"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
832
SaureXal/aek-ae_iPa Na vE Sa SaeVYaTaaMa( )) 24 ))
na yatra vaikuëöha-kathä-sudhäpagä
na sädhavo bhägavatäs tadäçrayäù
na yatra yajïeça-makhä mahotsaväù
sureça-loko 'pi na vai sa sevyatäm
SYNONYMS
na—not; yatra—where; vaikuëöha-kathä-sudhä-äpagäù—the nectarean rivers
of discussions about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is called
Vaikuëöha, or one who drives away all anxiety; na—nor; sädhavaù—devotees;
bhägavatäù—always engaged in the service of the Lord; tat-äçrayäù—who are
sheltered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na—nor; yatra—where;
yajïa-éça-makhäù—the performance of devotional service to the Lord of
sacrifices; mahä-utsaväù—which are actual festivals; sureça-lokaù—a place
inhabited by the denizens of heaven; api—although; na—not; vai—certainly;
saù—that; sevyatäm—be frequented.
TRANSLATION
An intelligent person does not take interest in a place, even in the topmost
planetary system, if the pure Ganges of topics concerning the Supreme Lord's
activities does not flow there, if there are not devotees engaged in service on the
banks of such a river of piety, or if there are no festivals of saìkértana-yajïa to
satisfy the Lord [especially since saìkértana-yajïa is recommended in this age].
PURPORT
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu appeared in the land of Bhärata-varña,
specifically in Bengal, in the district of Nadia, where Navadvépa is situated. It
is therefore to be concluded, as stated by Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura, that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
833
within this universe, this earth is the best planet, and on this planet the land
of Bhärata-varña is the best; in the land of Bhäratavarña, Bengal is still better,
in Bengal the district of Nadia is still better, and in Nadia the best place is
Navadvépa because Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu appeared there to inaugurate
the performance of the sacrifice of chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra.
The çästras recommend:
kåñëa-varëaà tviñäkåñëaà
säìgopäìgästra-pärñadam
yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair
yajanti hi sumedhasaù
[SB 11.5.32]
Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is always accompanied by His very confidential
associates such as Çré Nityänanda, Çré Gadädhara and Çré Advaita and by many
devotees like Çréväsa. They are always engaged in chanting the name of the
Lord and are always describing Lord Kåñëa. Therefore this is the best among
all the places in the universe. The Kåñëa consciousness movement has
established its center in Mäyäpur, the birthsite of Lord Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, to give men the great opportunity to go there and perform a
constant festival of saìkértana-yajïa, as recommended herein (yajïeça-makhä
mahotsaväù) and to distribute prasäda to millions of hungry people hankering
for spiritual emancipation. This is the mission of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement. Caitanya-bhägavata confirms this as follows: "One should not
desire to be elevated even to a place in the heavenly planetary systems if it has
no propaganda to expand the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
no trace of Vaiñëavas, pure devotees of the Lord, and no festivals for spreading
Kåñëa consciousness. It would be better to live perpetually cramped within the
airtight bag of a mother's womb, where one can at least remember the lotus
feet of the Lord, than to live in a place where there is no opportunity to
remember His lotus feet. I pray not to be allowed to take birth in such a
condemned place." Similarly, in Caitanya-caritämåta, Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
834
Gosvämé says that since Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is the inaugurator of the
saìkértana movement, anyone who performs saìkértana to please the Lord is
very, very glorious. Such a person has perfect intelligence, whereas others are
in the ignorance of material existence. Of all the sacrifices mentioned in the
Vedic literatures, the performance of saìkértana-yajïa is the best. Even the
performance of one hundred açvamedha sacrifices cannot compare to the
sacrifice of saìkértana. According to the author of Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, if
one compares saìkértana-yajïa to other yajïas, he is a päñaëòé, an infidel, and
is liable to be punished by Yamaräja. There are many Mäyävädés who think
that the performance of saìkértana-yajïa is a pious activity similar to the
performance of the açvamedha-yajïa and other such pious functions, but this is
a näma-aparädha. Chanting of the holy name of Näräyaëa and chanting of
other names are never equal, despite what Mäyävädés think.
TEXT 25
Pa[aáa Na*JaaiTa& iTvh Yae c JaNTavae
jaNai§-Yaad]VYak-l/aPaSaM>a*TaaMa( )
Na vE YaTaeràPauNa>aRvaYa Tae
>aUYaae vNaaEk-a wv YaaiNTa bNDaNaMa( )) 25 ))
präptä nå-jätià tv iha ye ca jantavo
jïäna-kriyä-dravya-kaläpa-sambhåtäm
na vai yaterann apunar-bhaväya te
bhüyo vanaukä iva yänti bandhanam
SYNONYMS
präptäù—who have obtained; nå-jätim—a birth in human society;
tu—certainly; iha—in this land of Bhärata-varña; ye—those who; ca—also;
jantavaù—the living beings; jïäna—with knowledge; kriyä—with activities;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
835
dravya—of ingredients; kaläpa—with a collection; sambhåtäm—full; na—not;
vai—certainly; yateran—endeavor; apunaù-bhaväya—for the position of
immortality; te—such persons; bhüyaù—again; vanaukäù—birds; iva—like;
yänti—go; bandhanam—to bondage.
TRANSLATION
Bhärata-varña offers the proper land and circumstances in which to execute
devotional service, which can free one from the results of jïäna and karma. If
one obtains a human body in the land of Bhärata-varña, with clear sensory
organs with which to execute the saìkértana-yajïa, but in spite of this
opportunity he does not take to devotional service, he is certainly like liberated
forest animals and birds that are careless and are therefore again bound by a
hunter.
PURPORT
In the land of Bhärata-varña one can very easily perform the
saìkértana-yajïa, which consists of çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23], or
one can perform other methods of devotional service, such as smaraëaà
vandanaà arcanaà däsyaà sakhyam and ätma-nivedanam. In Bhärata-varña
one has the opportunity to visit many holy places, especially Lord Caitanya's
birthsite and Lord Kåñëa's birthsite-Navadvépa and Våndävana—where there
are many pure devotees who have no desire other than to execute devotional
service (anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]),
and one may thus become free from the bondage of material conditions. Other
paths, such as the path of jïäna and the path of karma, are not very profitable.
Pious activities can elevate one to the higher planetary systems, and by
speculative knowledge one can merge into the Brahman existence, but that is
not real profit, for one has to come down again even from the liberated
condition of being merged in Brahman, and certainly one must come down
from the heavenly kingdom. One should endeavor to go back home, back to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
836
Godhead (yänti mad-yäjino 'pi mäm [Bg. 9.25]). Otherwise there is no
difference between human life and the lives of jungle animals and birds.
Animals and birds also have freedom, but because of their lower birth, they
cannot use it. Taking advantage of all the facilities offered him, a human being
who has taken birth in the land of Bhärata-varña should become a fully
enlightened devotee and go back home, back to Godhead. This is the subject
matter of the Kåñëa consciousness movement. The inhabitants of places other
than Bhärata-varña have facilities for material enjoyment, but they do not
have the same facility to take to Kåñëa consciousness. Therefore Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu has advised that one who has taken birth as a human being in
Bhärata-varña must first realize himself as a part and parcel of Kåñëa, and after
taking to Kåñëa consciousness, he must distribute this knowledge all over the
world.
TEXT 26
YaE" é[ÖYaa bihRiz >aaGaXaae hiv‚
iNaRåáiMaí& iviDaMaN}avSTauTa" )
Wk-" Pa*Qax(NaaMai>arahuTaae Mauda
Ga*õaiTa PaU<aR" SvYaMaaiXaza& Pa[>au" )) 26 ))
yaiù çraddhayä barhiñi bhägaço havir
niruptam iñöaà vidhi-mantra-vastutaù
ekaù påthaì-nämabhir ähuto mudä
gåhëäti pürëaù svayam äçiñäà prabhuù
SYNONYMS
yaiù—by whom (the inhabitants of Bhärata-varña); çraddhayä—faith and
confidence; barhiñi—in the performance of Vedic ritualistic sacrifices;
bhägaçaù—by division; haviù—oblations; niruptam—offered; iñöam—to the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
837
desired deity; vidhi—by the proper method; mantra—by reciting mantras;
vastutaù—with the proper ingredients; ekaù—that one Supreme Personality of
Godhead; påthak—separate; nämabhiù—by names; ähutaù—called;
mudä—with great happiness; gåhëäti—He accepts; pürëaù—the Supreme
Lord. who is full in Himself; svayam—personally; äçiñäm—of all benedictions;
prabhuù—the bestower.
TRANSLATION
In India [Bhärata-varña], there are many worshipers of the demigods, the
various officials appointed by the Supreme Lord, such as Indra, Candra and
Sürya, all of whom are worshiped differently. The worshipers offer the
demigods their oblations, considering the demigods part and parcel of the whole,
the Supreme Lord. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepts
these offerings and gradually raises the worshipers to the real standard of
devotional service by fulfilling their desires and aspirations. Because the Lord is
complete, He offers the worshipers the benedictions they desire even if they
worship only part of His transcendental body.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (9.13) Lord Kåñëa says:
mahätmänas tu mäà pärtha
daivéà prakåtim äçritäù
bhajanty ananya-manaso
jïätvä bhütädim avyayam
"O son of Påthä, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the
protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional service
because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, original and
inexhaustible." Mahätmä, advanced devotees, worship only the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
838
Personality of Godhead. Others, however, who are also sometimes called
mahätmäs, worship the Lord as ekatvena påthaktvena [Bg. 9.15]. In other words,
they accept the demigods as different parts of Kåñëa and worship them for
various benedictions. Although the devotees of the demigods thus achieve the
desired results offered by Kåñëa, they have been described in Bhagavad-gétä as
håta-jïänah [Bg. 7.20], not very intelligent. Kåñëa does not desire to be
worshiped indirectly through the different parts of His body; Kåñëa wants
direct devotional worship. Therefore a devotee who directly worships Lord
Kåñëa through staunch devotional service, as recommended in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, (tévreëa bhakti-yogena yajeta puruñaà param [SB 2.3.10]),
is very quickly elevated to the transcendental position. Nevertheless, devotees
who worship the demigods, the different parts of the Lord, receive the
benedictions they desire because the Lord is the original master of all
benedictions. If anyone wants a particular benediction, for the Lord to award
it is not at all difficult.
TEXT 27
SaTYa& idXaTYaiQaRTaMaiQaRTaae Na*<aa&
NaEvaQaRdae YaTPauNariQaRTaa YaTa" )
SvYa& ivDatae >aJaTaaMaiNaC^Taa‚
iMaC^aiPaDaaNa& iNaJaPaadPaçvMa( )) 27 ))
satyaà diçaty arthitam arthito nåëäà
naivärthado yat punar arthitä yataù
svayaà vidhatte bhajatäm anicchatäm
icchäpidhänaà nija-päda-pallavam
SYNONYMS
satyam—certainly; diçati—He offers; arthitam—the object prayed for;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
839
arthitaù—being prayed to; nåëäm—by the human beings; na—not;
eva—indeed; artha-daù—the bestower of benedictions; yat—which;
punaù—again; arthitä—a demand for a benediction; yataù—from which;
svayam—personally; vidhatte—He gives; bhajatäm—unto those engaged in His
service; anicchatäm—although not desiring it; icchä-pidhänam—which covers
all desirable things; nija-päda-pallavam—His own lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead fulfills the material desires of a
devotee who approaches Him with such motives, but He does not bestow
benedictions upon the devotee that will cause him to demand more benedictions
again. However, the Lord willingly gives the devotee shelter at His own lotus
feet, even though such a person does not aspire for it, and that shelter satisfies
all his desires. That is the Supreme Personality's special mercy.
PURPORT
The devotees mentioned in the previous verse approach the Supreme
Personality of Godhead with material motives, but this verse explains how
such devotees are saved from those desires. Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.3.10)
advises:
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"Whether one is freed from all material desires, is full of material desires, or
desires to become one with the Supreme, he should engage in devotional
service." In this way, not only will the devotee's desires be fulfilled, but the day
will come when he will have no other desire than to serve the lotus feet of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
840
Lord. One who engages in the service of the Lord with some motive is called a
sakäma-bhakta, and one who serves the Lord without any motives is called an
akäma-bhakta. Kåñëa is so merciful that He turns a sakäma-bhakta into an
akäma-bhakta. A pure devotee, an akäma-bhakta, who has no material motives,
is satisfied simply to serve the lotus feet of the Lord. This is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (6.22). Yaà labdhvä cäparaà läbhaà manyate nädhikaà tataù: if
one engages in the service of the lotus feet of the Lord, he does not want
anything more. This is the highest stage of devotional service. The Lord is so
kind even to a sakäma-bhakta, a motivated devotee, that He satisfies his desires
in such a way that one day he becomes an akäma-bhakta. Dhruva Mahäräja, for
example, became a bhakta with the motive of getting a better kingdom than
that of his father, but finally he became an akäma-bhakta and said to the Lord,
svämin kåtärtho'smi varaà na yäce: [Cc. Madhya 22.42] "My dear Lord, I am
very satisfied simply to serve Your lotus feet. I do not want any material
benefits." Sometimes it is found that a small child eats dirty things, but his
parents take away the dirty things and offer him a sandeça or some other
sweetmeat. Devotees who aspire for material benedictions are compared to
such children. The Lord is so kind that He takes away their material desires
and gives them the highest benediction. Therefore, even for material motives,
one should not worship anyone other than the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; one must fully engage himself in the devotional service of the Lord
so that all his desires will be fulfilled and at the end he can go back home, back
to Godhead. This is explained in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 22.37-39, 41) as
follows.
Anyakämé—a devotee may desire something other than service to the lotus
feet of the Lord; yadi kare kåñëera bhajana—but if he engages in Lord Kåñëa's
service; nä mägiteha kåñëa täre dena sva-caraëa—Kåñëa gives him shelter at
His lotus feet, even though he does not aspire for it. Kåñëa kahe—the Lord
says; ämä bhaje—"He is engaged in My service"; mäge viñaya-sukha—"but he
wants the benefits of material sense gratification." Amåta chäòi' viña
mäge:—"such a devotee is like a person who asks for poison instead of nectar."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
841
Ei baòa mürkha: "That is his foolishness." Ami-vijïa: "But I am experienced." Ei
mürkhe 'viñaya' kene diba: "Why should I give such a foolish person the dirty
things of material enjoyment?" Sva-caraëa-måta: "It would be better for Me to
give him shelter at My lotus feet." 'Viñaya' bhuläiba: "I shall cause him to forget
all material desires." Käma lägi' kåñëa bhaje—if one engages in the service of
the Lord for sense gratification; paya kåñëa-rase—the result is that he
ultimately gets a taste for serving the lotus feet of the Lord. Käma chäòi' 'da'
haite haya abhiläñe: He then gives up all material desires and wants to become
an eternal servant of the Lord.
TEXT 28
YaÛ}a Na" SvGaRSau%avXaeizTa&
iSvíSYa SaU¢-SYa k*-TaSYa Xaae>aNaMa( )
TaeNaaJaNaa>ae SMa*iTaMaÂNMa Na" SYaad(
vzeR hirYaRÙJaTaa& Xa& TaNaaeiTa )) 28 ))
yady atra naù svarga-sukhävaçeñitaà
sviñöasya süktasya kåtasya çobhanam
tenäjanäbhe småtimaj janma naù syäd
varñe harir yad-bhajatäà çaà tanoti
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; atra—in this heavenly planet; naù—of us;
svarga-sukha-avaçeñitam—whatever remains after the enjoyment of heavenly
happiness; su-iñöasya—of a perfect sacrifice; su-uktasya—of diligently studying
the Vedic literature; kåtasya—of having performed a kind act; çobhanam—the
resultant actions; tena—by such a resultant action; ajanäbhe—in the land of
Bhärata-varña; småti-mat janma—a birth enabling one to remember the lotus
feet of the Lord; naù—of us; syät—let there be; varñe—in the land; hariù—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
842
Supreme Personality of Godhead; yat—wherein; bhajatäm—of the devotees;
çam tanoti—expands the auspiciousness.
TRANSLATION
We are now living in the heavenly planets, undoubtedly as a result of our
having performed ritualistic ceremonies, pious activities and yajïas and having
studied the Vedas. However, our lives here will one day be finished. We pray
that at that time, if any merit remains from our pious activities, we may again
take birth in Bhärata-varña as human beings able to remember the lotus feet of
the Lord. The Lord is so kind that He personally comes to the land of
Bhärata-varña and expands the good fortune of its people.
PURPORT
It is certainly as a result of pious activities that one takes birth in the
heavenly planets, but from those planets one must nevertheless come down
again to earth, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (kñéëe puëye martya-lokaà viçanti [Bg.
9.21]). Even the demigods must return to earth to work like ordinary men
when the results of their pious activities expire. Nevertheless, the demigods
desire to come to the land of Bhärata-varña if even a small portion of the
merits of their pious activities remains. In other words, to take birth in
Bhärata-varña, one must perform more pious activities than the demigods. In
Bhärata-varña one is naturally Kåñëa conscious, and if one further cultivates
his Kåñëa consciousness, by the grace of Kåñëa he certainly expands his good
fortune by becoming perfect in Kåñëa consciousness and very easily going back
home, back to Godhead. In many other places in the Vedic literature it is
found that even the demigods want to come to this land of Bhärata-varña. A
foolish person may desire to be promoted to the heavenly planets as a result of
his pious activities, but even the demigods from the heavenly planets want to
come to Bhärata-varña and achieve bodies that may be very easily used to
cultivate Kåñëa consciousness. Therefore Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu repeatedly
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
843
says:
bhärata-bhümite haila manuñya-janma yära
janma särthaka kari' kara para-upakära
[Cc. Ädi 9.41]
A human being born in the land of Bhärata-varña has the special prerogative
to develop Kåñëa consciousness. Therefore those already born in Bhärata-varña
should take lessons from the çästras and guru and should fully take advantage
of the mercy of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu in order to be fully equipped with
Kåñëa consciousness. By taking full advantage of Kåñëa consciousness, one goes
back home, back to Godhead (yänti mad-yäjino 'pi mäm [Bg. 9.25]). The Kåñëa
consciousness movement is therefore spreading this facility to human society
by opening many, many centers all over the world so that people may associate
with the pure devotees of the Kåñëa consciousness movement, understand the
science of Kåñëa consciousness and ultimately go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXTS 29-30
é[qXauk- ovac
JaMbUÜqPaSYa c raJaàuPaÜqPaaNaíaE hEk- oPaidXaiNTa SaGaraTMaJaErìaNvez<a
wMaa& Mahq& PairTaae iNa%NaiÙåPak-iLPaTaaNa( )) 29 )) TaÛQaa Sv<aRPa[SQaêNd]‚
Xau(c)- AavTaRNaae rMa<ak-ae MaNdrhir<a" PaaÄJaNYa" iSa&hl/ae l/ªeiTa )) 30 ))
çré-çuka uväca
jambüdvépasya ca räjann upadvépän añöau haika upadiçanti sagarätmajair
açvänveñaëa imäà mahéà parito nikhanadbhir upakalpitän; tad yathä
svarëaprasthaç candraçukla ävartano ramaëako mandarahariëaù päïcajanyaù
siàhalo laìketi.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
844
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued to speak;
jambüdvépasya—of the island known as Jambüdvépa; ca—also; räjan—O King;
upadvépän añöau—eight subordinate islands; ha—certainly; eke—some;
upadiçanti—learned scholars describe; sagara-ätma-jaiù—by the sons of
Mahäräja Sagara; açva-anveñaëe—while trying to find their lost horse;
imäm—this; mahém—tract of land; paritaù—all around;
nikhanadbhiù—digging; upakalpitän—created; tat—that; yathä—as follows;
svarëa-prasthaù—Svarëaprastha; candra-çuklaù—Candraçukla;
ävartanaù—Ävartana; ramaëakaù—Ramaëaka;
mandara-hariëaù—Mandara-hariëa; päïcajanyaù—Päïcajanya;
siàhalaù—Siàhala; laìkä—Laìkä; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, in the opinion of some learned
scholars, eight smaller islands surround Jambüdvépa. When the sons of
Mahäräja Sagara were searching all over the world for their lost horse, they dug
up the earth, and in this way eight adjoining islands came into existence. The
names of these islands are Svarëaprastha, Candraçukla, Ävartana, Ramaëaka,
Mandara-hariëa, Päïcajanya, Siàhala and Laìkä.
PURPORT
In the Kürma Puräëa there is this statement about the desires of the
demigods:
anadhikäriëo deväù
svarga-sthä bhäratodbhavam
väïchanty ätma-vimokñärthacopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
845
mudrekärthe 'dhikäriëaù
Although the demigods are situated in exalted positions in the heavenly
planets, they nevertheless desire to descend to the land of Bhärata-varña on
the planet earth. This indicates that even the demigods are unfit to reside in
Bhärata-varña. Therefore if persons already born in Bhäratavarña live like cats
and dogs, not taking full advantage of their birth in this land, they are
certainly unfortunate.
TEXT 31
Wv& Tav >aarTaaetaMa JaMbUÜqPavzRiv>aaGaae YaQaaePadeXaMauPavi<aRTa wiTa )) 31 ))
evaà tava bhäratottama jambüdvépa-varña-vibhägo yathopadeçam upavarëita
iti.
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; tava—unto you; bhärata-uttama—O best of the descendents of
Bharata; jambüdvépa-varña-vibhägaù—the divisions of the island of
Jambüdvépa; yathä-upadeçam—as much as I am instructed by the authorities;
upavarëitaù—explained; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, O best of the descendants of Bharata Mahäräja, I
have thus described to you, as I myself have been instructed, the island of
Bhärata-varña and its adjoining islands. These are the islands that constitute
Jambüdvépa.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Nineteenth Chapter of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "A Description of the Island of Jambüdvépa."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
846
20. Studying the Structure of the Universe
In this chapter there is a description of various islands, beginning with
Plakñadvépa, and the oceans that surround them. There is also a description of
the location and dimensions of the mountain known as Lokäloka. The island
of Plakñadvépa, which is twice as broad as Jambüdvépa, is surrounded by an
ocean of salt water. The master of this island is Idhmajihva, one of the sons of
Mahäräja Priyavrata. The island is divided into seven regions, each with a
mountain and a large river.
The second island is called Sälmalédvépa. It is surrounded by an ocean of
liquor and is 3,200,000 miles wide, twice as wide as Plakñadvépa. The master of
this island is Yajïabähu, one of the sons of Mahäräja Priyavrata. Like
Plakñadvépa, this island is also divided into seven regions, each with a
mountain and a very large river. The inhabitants of this island worship the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of Candrätmä.
The third island, which is surrounded by an ocean of clarified butter and is
also divided into seven regions, is called Kuçadvépa. Its master is Hiraëyaretä,
another son of Mahäräja Priyavrata, and its inhabitants worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in the form of Agni, the fire-god. The width of this
island is 6,400,000 miles, or, in other words, twice the width of Sälmalédvépa.
The fourth island, Krauïcadvépa, which is surrounded by an ocean of milk,
is 12,800,000 miles wide and is also divided, like the others, into seven regions,
each with a large mountain and a large river. The master of this island is
Ghåtapåñöha, another son of Mahäräja Priyavrata. The inhabitants of this
island worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of water.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
847
The fifth island, Çäkadvépa, which is 25,600,000 miles wide, is surrounded
by an ocean of yogurt. Its master is Medhätithi, another son of Mahäräja
Priyavrata. It is also divided into seven regions, each with a large mountain
and a large river. Its inhabitants worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in the form of Väyu, air.
The sixth island, Puñkaradvépa, which is twice as wide as the previous
island, is surrounded by an ocean of clear water. Its master is Vétihotra,
another son of Mahäräja Priyavrata. The island is divided in two by a large
mountain named Mänasottara. The inhabitants of this island worship
Svayambhü, another feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Beyond
Puñkaradvépa there are two islands, one always lit by the sunshine and the
other always dark. Between them is a mountain called Lokäloka, which is
situated one billion miles from the edge of the universe. Lord Näräyaëa,
expanding His opulence, resides upon this mountain. The area beyond
Lokäloka Mountain is called Aloka-varña, and beyond Aloka-varña is the pure
destination of persons who desire liberation.
Vertically, the sun-globe is situated just in the middle of the universe, in
Antarikña, the space between Bhürloka and Bhuvarloka. The distance between
the sun and the circumference of Aëòa-golaka, the globe of the universe, is
estimated to be twenty-five koöi yojanas (two billion miles). Because the sun
enters the universe and divides the sky, it is known as Märtaëòa, and because
it is produced from Hiraëyagarbha, the body of the mahat-tattva, it is also
called Hiraëyagarbha.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
ATa" Par& â+aadqNaa& Pa[Maa<al/+a<aSa&SQaaNaTaae vzRiv>aaGa oPav<YaRTae )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
848
ataù paraà plakñädénäà pramäëa-lakñaëa-saàsthänato varña-vibhäga
upavarëyate.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; ataù param—after this;
plakña-ädénäm—of the island named Plakña and others;
pramäëa-lakñaëa-saàsthänataù—from the angle of dimensions, particular
characteristics and form; varña-vibhägaù—the division of the island;
upavarëyate—is described.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Hereafter I shall describe the
dimensions, characteristics and forms of the six islands beginning with the
island of Plakña.
TEXT 2
JaMbUÜqPaae_Ya& YaavTPa[Maa<aivSTaarSTaavTaa +aaraediDaNaa PairveiíTaae YaQaa
MaeåJaRMBva:YaeNa l/v<aaediDariPa TaTaae iÜGau<aivXaale/Na â+aa:YaeNa Pairi+aáae
YaQaa Pair%a baùaePavNaeNa ) â+aae JaMbUPa[Maa<aae ÜqPaa:Yaak-rae ihr<MaYa
oiTQaTaae Ya}aaiGanåPaaSTae SaáiJaûSTaSYaaiDaPaiTa" iPa[Yav]TaaTMaJa wDMaiJaû" Sv&
ÜqPa& SaávzaRi<a iv>aJYa SaávzRNaaMa>Ya AaTMaJae>Ya Aak-l/YYa SvYaMaa‚
TMaYaaeGaeNaaeParraMa )) 2 ))
jambüdvépo 'yaà yävat-pramäëa-vistäras tävatä kñärodadhinä pariveñöito yathä
merur jambv-äkhyena lavaëodadhir api tato dvi-guëa-viçälena plakñäkhyena
parikñipto yathä parikhä bähyopavanena; plakño jambü-pramäëo
dvépäkhyäkaro hiraëmaya utthito yaträgnir upäste sapta-jihvas tasyädhipatiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
849
priyavratätmaja idhmajihvaù svaà dvépaà sapta-varñäëi vibhajya
sapta-varña-nämabhya ätmajebhya äkalayya svayam ätma-yogenopararäma.
SYNONYMS
jambü-dvépaù—Jambüdvépa, the island named Jambü; ayam—this;
yävat-pramäëa-vistäraù—as much as the measure of its width, namely 100,000
yojanas (one yojana equals eight miles); tävatä—so much; kñära-udadhinä—by
the ocean of salt water; pariveñöitaù—surrounded; yathä—just as;
meruù—Sumeru Mountain; jambü-äkhyena—by the island named Jambü;
lavaëa-udadhiù—the ocean of salt water; api—certainly; tataù—thereafter;
dvi-guëa-viçälena—which is twice as wide; plakña-äkhyena—by the island
named Plakña; parikñiptaù—surrounded; yathä—like; parikhä—a moat;
bähya—external; upavanena—by a gardenlike forest; plakñaù—a plakña tree;
jambü-pramäëaù—having the height of the jambü tree;
dvépa-äkhyä-karaù—causing the name of the island;
hiraëmayaù—magnificently splendorous; utthitaù—rising; yatra—where;
agniù—a fire; upäste—is situated; sapta-jihvaù—having seven flames;
tasya—of that island; adhipatiù—the king or master; priyavrata-ätmajaù—the
son of King Priyavrata; idhma-jihvaù—named Idhmajihva; svam—own;
dvépam—island; sapta—seven; varñäëi—tracts of land; vibhajya—dividing
into; sapta-varña-nämabhyaù—for whom the seven tracts of land were named;
ätmajebhyaù—to his own sons; äkalayya—offering; svayam—personally;
ätma-yogena—by the devotional service of the Lord; upararäma—he retired
from all material activities.
TRANSLATION
As Sumeru Mountain is surrounded by Jambüdvépa, Jambüdvépa is also
surrounded by an ocean of salt water. The breadth of Jambüdvépa is 100,000
yojanas [800,000 miles], and the breadth of the saltwater ocean is the same. As
a moat around a fort is sometimes surrounded by gardenlike forest, the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
850
saltwater ocean surrounding Jambüdvépa is itself surrounded by Plakñadvépa.
The breadth of Plakñadvépa is twice that of the saltwater ocean—in other words
200,000 yojanas [1,600,000 miles]. On Plakñadvépa there is a tree shining like
gold and as tall as the jambü tree on Jambüdvépa. At its root is a fire with seven
flames. It is because this tree is a plakña tree that the island is called
Plakñadvépa. Plakñadvépa was governed by Idhmajihva, one of the sons of
Mahäräja Priyavrata. He endowed the seven islands with the names of his seven
sons, divided the islands among the sons, and then retired from active life to
engage in the devotional service of the Lord.
TEXTS 3-4
iXav& YavSa& Sau>ad]& XaaNTa& +aeMaMaMa*TaMa>aYaiMaiTa vzaRi<a Taezu iGarYaae NaÛê
SaáEvai>ajaTaa" )) 3 )) Mai<akU-$=ae vJa]kU-$= wNd]SaeNaae JYaaeiTaZMaaNa( SauPa<aaeR
ihr<Yaïqvae MaegaMaal/ wiTa SaeTauXaEl/a" ) Aå<aa Na*M<aai(r)rSaq Saaiv}aq SauPa[>aaTaa
‰TaM>ara SaTYaM>ara wiTa MahaNaÛ" ) YaaSaa& Jal/aePaSPaXaRNaivDaUTarJaSTaMaSaae
h&SaPaTa(r)aeßaRYaNaSaTYaa(r)Sa&jaêTvarae v<aaR" SahóaYauzae ivbuDaaePaMaSaNdXaRNaPa[‚
JaNaNaa" SvGaRÜar& }aYYaa ivÛYaa >aGavNTa& }aYaqMaYa& SaUYaRMaaTMaaNa& YaJaNTae )) 4 ))
çivaà yavasaà subhadraà çäntaà kñemam amåtam abhayam iti varñäëi teñu
girayo nadyaç ca saptaiväbhijïätäù; maëiküöo vajraküöa indraseno jyotiñmän
suparëo hiraëyañöhévo meghamäla iti setu-çailäù aruëä nåmëäìgirasé sävitré
suptabhätä åtambharä satyambharä iti mahä-nadyaù; yäsäà
jalopasparçana-vidhüta-rajas-tamaso
haàsa-pataìgordhväyana-satyäìga-saàjïäç catväro varëäù sahasräyuño
vibudhopama-sandarçana-prajananäù svarga-dväraà trayyä vidyayä
bhagavantaà trayémayaà süryam ätmänaà yajante.
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
851
çivam—Çiva; yavasam—Yavasa; subhadram—Subhadra; çäntam—Çänta;
kñemam—Kñema; amåtam—Amåta; abhayam—Abhaya; iti—thus;
varñäëi—the tracts of land according to the names of the seven sons; teñu—in
them; girayaù—mountains; nadyaù ca—and rivers; sapta—seven; eva—indeed;
abhijïätäù—are known; maëi-küöaù—Maëiküöa; vajra-küöaù—Vajraküöa;
indra-senaù—Indrasena; jyotiñmän—Jyotiñmän; suparëaù—Suparëa;
hiraëya-ñöhévaù—Hiraëyañöhéva; megha-mälaù—Meghamäla; iti—thus;
setu-çailäù—the ranges of mountains marking the borders of the varñas;
aruëä—Aruëä; nåmëä—Nåmëä; äìgirasé—Äìgirasé; sävitré—Sävitré;
supta-bhätä—Suptabhätä; åtambharä—Åtambharä;
satyambharä—Satyambharä; iti—thus; mahä-nadyaù—very large rivers;
yäsäm—of which; jala-upasparçana—simply by touching the water;
vidhüta—washed off; rajaù-tamasaù—whose modes of passion and ignorance;
haàsa—Haàsa; pataìga—Pataìga; ürdhväyana—Ürdhväyana;
satyäìga—Satyäìga; saàjïäù—named; catväraù—four; varëäù—castes or
divisions of men; sahasra-äyuñaù—living for one thousand years;
vibudha-upama—similar to the demigods; sandarçana—in having very
beautiful forms; prajananäù—and in producing children; svarga-dväram—the
gateway to the heavenly planets; trayyä vidyayä—by performing ritualistic
ceremonies according to Vedic principles; bhagavantam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; trayé-mayam—established in the Vedas; süryam
ätmänam—the Supersoul, represented by the sun-god; yajante—they worship.
TRANSLATION
The seven islands [varñas] are named according to the names of those seven
sons—Çiva, Yavasa, Subhadra, Çänta, Kñema, Amåta and Abhaya. In those
seven tracts of land, there are seven mountains and seven rivers. The
mountains are named Maëiküöa, Vajraküöa, Indrasena, Jyotiñmän, Suparëa,
Hiraëyañöhéva and Meghamäla, and the rivers are named Aruëä, Nåmëä,
Äìgirasé, Sävitré, Suptabhätä, Åtambharä and Satyambharä. One can
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
852
immediately be free from material contamination by touching or bathing in
those rivers, and the four castes of people who live in Plakñadvépa—the
Haàsas, Pataìgas, Ürdhväyanas and Satyäìgas—purify themselves in that way.
The inhabitants of Plakñadvépa live for one thousand years. They are beautiful
like the demigods, and they also beget children like the demigods. By completely
performing the ritualistic ceremonies mentioned in the Vedas and by
worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead as represented by the sun-god,
they attain the sun, which is a heavenly planet.
PURPORT
According to general understanding, there are originally three
deities—Lord Brahmä, Lord Viñëu and Lord Çiva—and people with a poor
fund of knowledge consider Lord Viñëu no better than Lord Brahmä or Lord
Çiva. This conclusion, however, is invalid. As stated in the Vedas, iñöäpürtaà
bahudhä jäyamänaà viçvaà bibharti bhuvanasya näbhiù tad evägnis tad väyus tat
süryas tad u candramäù agniù sarvadaivataù. This means that the Supreme
Lord, who accepts and enjoys the results of Vedic ritualistic ceremonies
(technically called iñöäpürta), who maintains the entire creation, who supplies
the necessities of all living entities (eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän) and who
is the central point of all creation, is Lord Viñëu. Lord Viñëu expands as the
demigods known as Agni, Väyu, Sürya and Candra, who are simply parts and
parcels of His body. Lord Kåñëa says in Çrémad Bhagavad-gétä (9.23):
ye 'py anya-devatä-bhaktä
yajante çraddhayänvitäù
te 'pi mäm eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-pürvakam
"Devotees who worship the demigods with firm faith worship Me also, but not
according to regulative principles." In other words, if one worships the
demigods but does not understand the relationship between the demigods and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
853
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his worship is irregular. Kåñëa also says
in Bhagavad-gétä (9.24), ahaà hi sarva-yajïänäà bhoktä ca prabhur eva ca: "I
am the only enjoyer of ritualistic ceremonies."
It may be argued that the demigods are as important as Lord Viñëu because
the names of the demigods are different names of Viñëu. This, however, is not
a sound conclusion, for it is contradicted in the Vedic literatures. The Vedas
declare:
candramä manaso jätaç cakñoù süryo ajäyata; çroträdayaç ca präëaç ca
mukhäd agnir ajäyata; näräyaëäd brahmä, näräyaëäd rudro jäyate, näräyaëät
prajäpatiù jäyate, näräyaëäd indro jäyate, näräyaëäd añöau vasavo jäyante,
näräyaëäd ekädaça rudrä jäyante.
"The demigod of the moon, Candra, came from the mind of Näräyaëa, and the
sun-god came from His eyes. The controlling deities of hearing and the life air
came from Näräyaëa, and the controlling deity of fire was generated from His
mouth. Prajäpati, Lord Brahmä, came from Näräyaëa, Indra came from
Näräyaëa, and the eight Vasus, the eleven expansions of Lord Çiva and the
twelve Ädityas also came from Näräyaëa." In the småti Vedic literature it is
also said:
brahmä çambhus tathaivärkaç
candramäç ca çatakratuù
evam ädyäs tathaivänye
yuktä vaiñëava-tejasä
jagat-käryävasäne tu
viyujyante ca tejasä
vitejaç ca te sarve
païcatvam upayänti te
"Brahmä, Çambhu, Sürya and Indra are all merely products of the power of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is also true of the many other demigods
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
854
whose names are not mentioned here. When the cosmic manifestation is
annihilated, these different expansions of Näräyaëa's potencies will merge into
Näräyaëa. In other words, all these demigods will die. Their living force will be
withdrawn, and they will merge into Näräyaëa."
Therefore it should be concluded that Lord Viñëu, not Lord Brahmä or
Lord Çiva, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As a government officer is
sometimes accepted as the entire government although he is actually but a
departmental manager, so the demigods, having achieved power of attorney
from Viñëu, act on His behalf, although they are not as powerful as He. All the
demigods must work under the orders of Viñëu. Therefore it is said, ekale éçvara
kåñëa, ära saba bhåtya [Cc. Ädi 5.142]. The only master is Lord Kåñëa, or Lord
Viñëu, and all others are His obedient servants, who act exactly according to
His orders. The distinction between Lord Viñëu and the demigods is also
expressed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.25).
yänti deva-vratä devän
pitèn yänti pitå-vratäù
bhütäni yänti bhütejyä
yänti mad-yäjino 'pi mäm
those who worship the demigods go to the planets of the demigods, whereas
the worshipers of Lord Kåñëa and Lord Viñëu go to the planets in Vaikuëöha.
These are the statements of the småti. Therefore the idea that Lord Viñëu is on
the same level as the demigods is in contradiction to the çästras. The demigods
are not supreme. The supremacy of the demigods is dependent on the mercy of
Lord Näräyaëa (Viñëu, or Kåñëa).
TEXT 5
Pa[ÒSYa ivZ<aae æPa& YaTSaTYaSYaTaRSYa b]ø<a" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
855
AMa*TaSYa c Ma*TYaaeê SaUYaRMaaTMaaNaMaqMahqiTa )) 5 ))
pratnasya viñëo rüpaà yat
satyasyartasya brahmaëaù
amåtasya ca måtyoç ca
süryam ätmänam émahéti
SYNONYMS
pratnasya—of the oldest person; viñëoù—Lord Viñëu; rüpam—the form;
yat—which; satyasya—of the Absolute Truth; åtasya—of dharma;
brahmaëaù—of the Supreme Brahman; amåtasya—of the auspicious result;
ca—and; måtyoù—of death (the inauspicious result); ca—and; süryam—the
demigod Sürya; ätmänam—the Supersoul or origin of all souls; émahi—we
approach for shelter; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
[This is the mantra by which the inhabitants of Plakñadvépa worship the
Supreme Lord.] Let us take shelter of the sun-god, who is a reflection of Lord
Viñëu, the all-expanding Supreme Personality of Godhead, the oldest of all
persons. Viñëu is the only worshipable Lord. He is the Vedas, He is religion,
and He is the origin of all auspicious and inauspicious results.
PURPORT
Lord Viñëu is even the Supreme Lord of death, as confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (måtyuù sarva-haraç cäham [Bg. 10.34]). There are two kinds of
activity—auspicious and inauspicious—and both are controlled by Lord
Viñëu. Inauspicious activities are said to be behind Lord Viñëu, whereas
auspicious activities stand before Him. The auspicious and the inauspicious
exist throughout the entire world, and Lord Viñëu is the controller of them
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
856
both.
In regard to this verse, Çréla Madhväcärya says:
sürya-somägni-väréçavidhätåñu
yathä-kramam
plakñädi-dvépa-saàsthäsu
sthitaà harim upäsate
There are many lands, fields, mountains and oceans throughout the creation,
and everywhere the Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshiped by His
different names.
Çréla Véraräghava Äcärya explains this verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam as
follows. The original cause of the cosmic manifestation must be the oldest
person and must therefore be beyond material transformations. He is the
enjoyer of all auspicious activities and is the cause of conditional life and also
liberation. The demigod Sürya, who is categorized as a very powerful jéva, or
living entity, is a representation of one of the parts of His body. We are
naturally subordinate to powerful living entities, and therefore we can worship
the various demigods as living beings who are powerful representatives of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although the worship of the sun-god is
recommended in this mantra, He is worshiped not as the Supreme Personality
of Godhead but as His powerful representative.
In the Kaöha Upaniñad (1.3.1) it is said:
åtaà pibantau sukåtasya loke
guhäà praviñöau parame parärdhe
chäyätapau brahmavido vadanti
païcägnayo ye ca tri-ëäciketäù
"O Näciketä, the expansions of Lord Viñëu as the tiny living entity and the
Supersoul are both situated within the cave of the heart of this body. Having
entered that cavity, the living entity, resting on the chief of the life airs,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
857
enjoys the results of activities, and the Supersoul, acting as witness enables
him to enjoy them. Those who are well-versed in knowledge of Brahman and
those householders who carefully follow the Vedic regulations say that the
difference between the two is like the difference between a shadow and the
sun."
In the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (6.16) it is said:
sa viçvakåd viçvavidätmayoniù
jïaù käläkäro guëé sarvavid yaù
pradhäna-kñetrajïa-patir guëeçaù
saàsära-mokña-sthiti-bandha-hetuù
"The Supreme Lord, the creator of this cosmic manifestation, knows every
nook and corner of His creation. Although He is the cause of creation, there is
no cause for His appearance. He is fully aware of everything. He is the
Supersoul, the master of all transcendental qualities, and He is the master of
this cosmic manifestation in regard to bondage to the conditional state of
material existence and liberation from that bondage."
Similarly, in the Taittiréya Upaniñad (2.8) it is said:
bhéñäsmäd vätaù pavate
bhéñodeti süryaù
bhéñäsmäd agniç candraç ca
måtyur dhävati païcamaù
"It is out of fear of the Supreme Brahman that the wind is blowing, out of fear
of Him that the sun regularly rises and sets, and out of fear of Him that fire
acts. It is only due to fear of Him that death and Indra, the King of heaven,
perform their respective duties."
As described in this chapter, the inhabitants of the five islands beginning
with Plakñadvépa worship the sun-god, the moon-god, the fire-god, the air-god
and Lord Brahmä respectively. Although they engage in the worship of these
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
858
five demigods, however, they actually worship Lord Viñëu, the Supersoul of all
living entities, as indicated in this verse by the words pratnasya viñëo rüpam.
Viñëu is brahma, amåta, måtyu—the Supreme Brahman and the origin of
everything, auspicious and inauspicious. He is situated in the heart of
everyone, including all the demigods. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.20), kämais
tais tair håta-jïänäù prapadyante 'nya devatäù: those whose minds are distorted
by material desires surrender unto the demigods. People who are almost blind
because of lusty desires are recommended to worship the demigods to have
their material desires fulfilled, but actually those desires are not fulfilled by the
material demigods. Whatever the demigods do is done with the sanction of
Lord Viñëu. People who are too lusty worship various demigods instead of
worshiping Lord Viñëu, the Supersoul of all living entities, but ultimately it is
Lord Viñëu they worship because He is the Supersoul of all demigods.
TEXT 6
â+aaidzu PaÄSau Pauåza<aaMaaYauiriNd]YaMaaeJa" Sahae bl&/ buiÖivR§-Ma wiTa c
SaveRzaMaaETPaitak-I iSaiÖrivXaeze<a vTaRTae )) 6 ))
plakñädiñu païcasu puruñäëäm äyur indriyam ojaù saho balaà buddhir
vikrama iti ca sarveñäm autpattiké siddhir aviçeñeëa vartate.
SYNONYMS
plakña-ädiñu—in the islands headed by Plakña; païcasu—five; puruñäëäm—of
the inhabitants; äyuù—long duration of life; indriyam—soundness of the
senses; ojaù—bodily strength; sahaù—mental strength; balam—physical
strength; buddhiù—intelligence; vikramaù—bravery; iti—thus; ca—also;
sarveñäm—of all of them; autpattiké—inborn; siddhiù—perfection;
aviçeñeëa—without distinction; vartate—exists.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
859
TRANSLATION
O King, longevity, sensory prowess, physical and mental strength,
intelligence and bravery are naturally and equally manifested in all the
inhabitants of the five islands headed by Plakñadvépa.
TEXT 7
â+a" SvSaMaaNaeNae+aurSaaedeNaav*Taae YaQaa TaQaa ÜqPaae_iPa XaaLMal/ae iÜGau<a‚
ivXaal/" SaMaaNaeNa SauraedeNaav*Ta" Pairv*»e )) 7 ))
plakñaù sva-samänenekñu-rasodenävåto yathä tathä dvépo 'pi çälmalo
dvi-guëa-viçälaù samänena surodenävåtaù parivåìkte.
SYNONYMS
plakñaù—the land known as Plakñadvépa; sva-samänena—equal in width;
ikñu-rasa—of sugarcane juice; udena—by an ocean; ävåtaù—surrounded;
yathä—just as; tathä—similarly; dvépaù—another island; api—also;
çälmalaù—known as Çälmala; dvi-guëa-viçälaù—twice as big;
samänena—equal in width; surä-udena—by an ocean of liquor;
ävåtaù—surrounded; parivåìkte—exists.
TRANSLATION
Plakñadvépa is surrounded by an ocean of sugarcane juice, equal in breadth to
the island itself. Similarly, there is then another island—Sälmalédvépa—twice
as broad as Plakñadvépa [400,000 yojanas, or 3,200,000 miles] and surrounded
by an equally broad body of water called Suräsägara, the ocean that tastes like
liquor.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
860
TEXT 8
Ya}a h vE XaaLMal/I â+aaYaaMaa YaSYaa& vav ik-l/ iNal/YaMaahu>aRGavTaX^Nd"
STauTa" PaTaiT}araJaSYa Saa ÜqPahUTaYae oPal/+YaTae )) 8 ))
yatra ha vai çälmalé plakñäyämä yasyäà väva kila nilayam ähur bhagavataç
chandaù-stutaù patattri-räjasya sä dvépa-hütaye upalakñyate.
SYNONYMS
yatra—where; ha vai—certainly; çälmalé—a çälmalé tree; plakña-äyämä—as big
as the plakña tree (one hundred yojanas broad and eleven hundred yojanas
high); yasyäm—in which; väva kila—indeed; nilayam—rest or living place;
ähuù—they say; bhagavataù—of the most powerful; chandaù-stutaù—who
worships the Lord by Vedic prayers; patattri-räjasya—of Garuòa, the carrier of
Lord Viñëu; sä—that tree; dvépa-hütaye—for the name of the island;
upalakñyate—is distinguished.
TRANSLATION
On Sälmalédvépa there is a çälmalé tree, from which the island takes its name.
That tree is as broad and tall as the plakña tree—in other words 100 yojanas
[800 miles] broad and 1,100 yojanas [8,800 miles] tall. Learned scholars say
that this gigantic tree is the residence of Garuòa, the king of all birds and
carrier of Lord Viñëu. In that tree, Garuòa offers Lord Viñëu his Vedic prayers.
TEXT 9
Tad(ÜqPaaiDaPaiTa" iPa[Yav]TaaTMaJaae Yajbahu" SvSauTae>Ya" Saá>YaSTaàaMaaiNa
SaávzaRi<a VYa>aJaTSauraecNa& SaaEMaNaSYa& rMa<ak&- devvz| Paair>ad]MaaPYaa‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
861
YaNaMaivjaTaiMaiTa )) 9 ))
tad-dvépädhipatiù priyavratätmajo yajïabähuù sva-sutebhyaù saptabhyas
tan-nämäni sapta-varñäëi vyabhajat surocanaà saumanasyaà ramaëakaà
deva-varñaà päribhadram äpyäyanam avijïätam iti.
SYNONYMS
tat-dvépa-adhipatiù—the master of that island; priyavrata-ätmajaù—the son of
Mahäräja Priyavrata; yajïa-bähuù—named Yajïabähu; sva-sutebhyaù—unto
his sons; saptabhyaù—seven in number; tat-nämäni—having names according
to their names; sapta-varñäëi—seven tracts of land; vyabhajat—divided;
surocanam—Surocana; saumanasyam—Saumanasya; ramaëakam—Ramaëaka;
deva-varñam—Deva-varña; päribhadram—Päribhadra; äpyäyanam—Äpyäyana;
avijïätam—Avijïäta; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
The son of Mahäräja Priyavrata named Yajïabähu, the master of
Sälmalédvépa, divided the island into seven tracts of land, which he gave to his
seven sons. The names of those divisions, which correspond to the names of the
sons, are Surocana, Saumanasya, Ramaëaka, Deva-varña, Päribhadra, Äpyäyana
and Avijïäta.
TEXT 10
Taezu vzaRd]Yaae NaÛê SaáEvai>ajaTaa" SvrSa" XaTaé*(r)ae vaMadev" ku-Ndae
Mauku-Nd" PauZPavzR" Sahóé[uiTairiTa ) ANauMaiTa" iSaNaqval/I SarSvTaq ku-hU
rJaNaq NaNda rake-iTa )) 10 ))
teñu varñädrayo nadyaç ca saptaiväbhijïätäù svarasaù çataçåìgo vämadevaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
862
kundo mukundaù puñpa-varñaù sahasra-çrutir iti; anumatiù sinévälé sarasvaté
kuhü rajané nandä räketi.
SYNONYMS
teñu—in those tracts of land; varña-adrayaù—mountains; nadyaù ca—as well
as rivers; sapta eva—seven in number; abhijïätäù—understood;
svarasaù—Svarasa; çata-çåìgaù—Çataçåìga; väma-devaù—Vämadeva;
kundaù—Kunda; mukundaù—Mukunda; puñpa-varñaù—Puñpa-varña;
sahasra-çrutiù—Sahasra-çruti; iti—thus; anumatiù—Anumati;
sinévälé—Sinévälé; sarasvaté—Sarasvaté; kuhü—Kuhü; rajané—Rajané;
nandä—Nandä; räkä—Räkä; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
In those tracts of land there are seven mountains—Svarasa, Çataçåìga,
Vämadeva, Kunda, Mukunda, Puñpa-varña and Sahasra-çruti. There are also
seven rivers—Anumati, Sinévälé, Sarasvaté, Kuhü, Rajané, Nandä and Räkä.
They are still existing.
TEXT 11
TaÜzRPauåza" é[uTaDarvqYaRDarvSauNDarezNDarSa&ja >aGavNTa& vedMaYa& SaaeMaMaaTMaaNa&
vedeNa YaJaNTae )) 11 ))
tad-varña-puruñäù çrutadhara-véryadhara-vasundhareñandhara-saàjïä
bhagavantaà vedamayaà somam ätmänaà vedena yajante.
SYNONYMS
tat-varña-puruñäù—the residents of those tracts of land;
çrutadhara—Çrutadhara; véryadhara—Véryadhara; vasundhara—Vasundhara;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
863
iñandhara—Iñandhara; saàjïäù—known as; bhagavantam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; veda-mayam—fully conversant with the Vedic
knowledge; somam ätmänam—represented by the living entity known as
Soma; vedena—by following the Vedic rules and regulations; yajante—they
worship.
TRANSLATION
Strictly following the cult of varëäçrama-dharma, the inhabitants of those
islands, who are known as Çrutidharas, Véryadharas, Vasundharas and
Iñandharas, all worship the expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
named Soma, the moon-god.
TEXT 12
SvGaaei>a" iPaTa*deve>Yaae iv>aJaNa( k*-Z<aXau(c)-Yaae" )
Pa[JaaNaa& SavaRSaa& raJaaNDa" SaaeMaae Na AaiSTviTa )) 12 ))
sva-gobhiù pitå-devebhyo
vibhajan kåñëa-çuklayoù
prajänäà sarväsäà räjändhaù
somo na ästv iti
SYNONYMS
sva-gobhiù—by expansion of his own illuminating rays; pitå-devebhyaù—unto
the pitäs and the demigods; vibhajan—dividing; kåñëa-çuklayoù—into the two
fortnights, dark and light; prajänäm—of the citizens; sarväsäm—of all;
räjä—the king; andhaù—food grains; somaù—the moon-god; naù—toward us;
ästu—let him remain favorable; iti—thus.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
864
TRANSLATION
[The inhabitants of Çälmalédvépa worship the demigod of the moon in the
following words.] By his own rays, the moon-god has divided the month into
two fortnights, known as çukla and kåñëa, for the distribution of food grains to
the pitäs and the demigods. The demigod of the moon is he who divides time,
and he is the king of all the residents of the universe. We therefore pray that he
may remain our king and guide, and we offer him our respectful obeisances.
TEXT 13
Wv& SauraedaØihSTad(iÜGau<a" SaMaaNaeNaav*Taae ga*TaaedeNa YaQaaPaUvR" ku-XaÜqPaae YaiSMaNa(
ku-XaSTaMbae devk*-TaSTad(ÜqPaa:Yaak-rae Jvl/Na wvaPar" SvXaZParaeicza idXaae
ivraJaYaiTa )) 13 ))
evaà surodäd bahis tad-dvi-guëaù samänenävåto ghåtodena yathä-pürvaù
kuça-dvépo yasmin kuça-stambo deva-kåtas tad-dvépäkhyäkaro jvalana iväparaù
sva-çañpa-rociñä diço viräjayati.
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; surodät—from the ocean of liquor; bahiù—outside;
tat-dvi-guëaù—twice that; samänena—equal in width; ävåtaù—surrounded;
ghåta-udena—an ocean of clarified butter; yathä-pürvaù—as previously with
Sälmalédvépa; kuça-dvépa—the island called Kuçadvépa; yasmin—in which;
kuça-stambaù—kuça grass; deva-kåtaù—created by the supreme will of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat-dvépa-äkhyä-karaù—giving the island its
name; jvalanaù—fire; iva—like; aparaù—another; sva-çañpa-rociñä—by the
effulgence of the young sprouting grass; diçaù—all directions;
viräjayati—illuminates.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
865
TRANSLATION
Outside the ocean of liquor is another island, known as Kuçadvépa, which is
800,000 yojanas [6,400,000 miles] wide, twice as wide as the ocean of liquor.
As Çälmalédvépa is surrounded by a liquor ocean, Kuçadvépa is surrounded by an
ocean of liquid ghee as broad as the island itself. On Kuçadvépa there are clumps
of kuça grass, from which the island takes its name. This kuça grass, which was
created by the demigods by the will of the Supreme Lord, appears like a second
form of fire, but with very mild and pleasing flames. Its young shoots illuminate
all directions.
PURPORT
From the descriptions in this verse, we can make an educated guess about
the nature of the flames on the moon. Like the sun, the moon must also be full
of flames because without flames there cannot be illumination. The flames on
the moon, however, unlike those on the sun, must be mild and pleasing. This is
our conviction. The modern theory that the moon is full of dust is not
accepted in the verses of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. In regard to this verse, Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says, suçañpäëi sukomala-çikhäs teñäà rociñä:
the kuça grass illuminates all directions, but its flames are very mild and
pleasing. This gives some idea of the flames existing on the moon.
TEXT 14
Tad(ÜqPaPaiTa" Pa[EYav]Taae raJaNa( ihr<YareTaa NaaMa Sv& ÜqPa& Saá>Ya" SvPau}ae>Yaae
YaQaa>aaGa& iv>aJYa SvYa& TaPa AaiTaïTa vSauvSaudaNad*!åicNaai>aGauáSTauTYa‚
v]Taiviv¢-vaMadevNaaMa>Ya" )) 14 ))
tad-dvépa-patiù praiyavrato räjan hiraëyaretä näma svaà dvépaà saptabhyaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
866
sva-putrebhyo yathä-bhägaà vibhajya svayaà tapa ätiñöhata
vasu-vasudäna-dåòharuci-näbhigupta-stutyavrata-vivikta-vämadeva-nämabhya
ù.
SYNONYMS
tat-dvépa-patiù—the master of that island; praiyavrataù—the son of Mahäräja
Priyavrata; räjan—O King; hiraëyaretä—Hiraëyaretä; näma—named;
svam—his own; dvépam—island; saptabhyaù—unto seven; sva-putrebhyaù—his
own sons; yathä-bhägam—according to division; vibhajya—dividing;
svayam—himself; tapaù ätiñöhata—engaged in austerities; vasu—unto Vasu;
vasudäna—Vasudäna; dåòharuci—Dåòharuci; näbhi-gupta—Näbhigupta;
stutya-vrata—Stutyavrata; vivikta—Vivikta; väma-deva—Vämadeva;
nämabhyaù—named.
TRANSLATION
O King, another son of Mahäräja Priyavrata, Hiraëyaretä, was the king of
this island. He divided it into seven parts, which he delivered to his seven sons
according to the rights of inheritance. The King then retired from family life to
engage in austerities. The names of those sons are Vasu, Vasudäna, Dåòharuci,
Stutyavrata, Näbhigupta, Vivikta and Vämadeva.
TEXT 15
Taeza& vzeRzu SaqMaaiGarYaae NaÛêai>ajaTaa" Saá SaáEv c§-êTau"é*(r)" k-iPa‚
l/iê}akU-$=ae devaNaqk- OßRraeMaa d]iv<a wiTa rSaku-LYaa MaDauku-LYaa iMa}aivNda
é[uTaivNda devGa>aaR ga*TaCYauTaa MaN}aMaale/iTa )) 15 ))
teñäà varñeñu sémä-girayo nadyaç cäbhijïätäù sapta saptaiva cakraç
catuùçåìgaù kapilaç citraküöo devänéka ürdhvaromä draviëa iti rasakulyä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
867
madhukulyä mitravindä çrutavindä devagarbhä ghåtacyutä mantramäleti.
SYNONYMS
teñäm—all those sons; varñeñu—in the tracts of land; sémä-girayaù—border
mountains; nadyaù ca—as well as rivers; abhijïätäù—known; sapta—seven;
sapta—seven; eva—certainly; cakraù—Cakra; catuù-çåìgaù—Catuù-çåìga;
kapilaù—Kapila; citra-küöaù—Citraküöa; devänékaù—Devänéka;
ürdhva-romä—Ürdhvaromä; draviëaù—Draviëa; iti—thus;
rasa-kulyä—Ramakulyä; madhu-kulyä—Madhukulyä;
mitra-vindä—Mitravindä; çruta-vindä—Çrutavindä;
deva-garbhä—Devagarbhä; ghåta-cyutä—Ghåtacyutä;
mantra-mälä—Mantramälä; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
In those seven islands there are seven boundary mountains, known as Cakra,
Catuùçåìga, Kapila, Citraküöa, Devänéka, Ürdhvaromä and Draviëa. There are
also seven rivers, known as Ramakulyä, Madhukulyä, Mitravindä, Çrutavindä,
Devagarbhä, Ghåtacyutä and Mantramälä.
TEXT 16
YaaSaa& PaYaaei>a" ku-XaÜqPaaEk-Sa" ku-Xal/k-aeivdai>aYau¢-ku-l/k-Sa&ja >aGavNTa&
JaaTavedSaæiPa<a& k-MaRk-aEXale/Na YaJaNTae )) 16 ))
yäsäà payobhiù kuçadvépaukasaù kuçala-kovidäbhiyukta-kulaka-saàjïä
bhagavantaà jätaveda-sarüpiëaà karma-kauçalena yajante.
SYNONYMS
yäsäm—of which; payobhiù—by the water; kuça-dvépa-okasaù—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
868
inhabitants of the island known as Kuçadvépa; kuçala—Kuçala;
kovida—Kovida; abhiyukta—Abhiyukta; kulaka—Kulaka; saàjïäù—named;
bhagavantam—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; jätaveda—the
demigod of fire; sa-rüpiëam—manifesting the form; karma-kauçalena—by
expertise in ritualistic ceremonies; yajante—they worship.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of the island of Kuçadvépa are celebrated as the Kuçalas,
Kovidas, Abhiyuktas and Kulakas. They are like the brähmaëas, kñatriyas,
vaiçyas and çüdras respectively. By bathing in the waters of those rivers, they
all become purified. They are expert in performing ritualistic ceremonies
according to the orders of the Vedic scriptures. Thus they worship the Lord in
His aspect as the demigod of fire.
TEXT 17
ParSYa b]ø<a" Saa+aaÂaTavedae_iSa hVYava$( )
devaNaa& Pauåza(r)aNaa& YajeNa Pauåz& YaJaeiTa )) 17 ))
parasya brahmaëaù säkñäj
jäta-vedo 'si havyaväö
devänäà puruñäìgänäà
yajïena puruñaà yajeti
SYNONYMS
parasya—of the Supreme; brahmaëaù—Brahman; säkñät—directly;
jäta-vedaù—O fire-god; asi—you are; havyaväö—the carrier of Vedic offerings
of grains and ghee; devänäm—of all the demigods; puruña-aìgänäm—who are
limbs of the Supreme Person; yajïena—by performing the ritualistic sacrifices;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
869
puruñam—to the Supreme person; yaja—please carry oblations; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
[This is the mantra by which the inhabitants of Kuçadvépa worship the
fire-god.] O fire-god, you are a part of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Hari, and you carry to Him all the offerings of sacrifices. Therefore we request
you to offer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead the yajïic ingredients we
are offering the demigods, for the Lord is the real enjoyer.
PURPORT
The demigods are servants who assist the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
If one worships the demigods, the demigods, as servants of the Supreme, carry
the sacrificial offerings to the Lord, like tax collectors collecting revenue from
the citizens and bringing it to the government's treasury. The demigods cannot
accept the sacrificial offerings; they simply carry the offerings to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. As stated by Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura,
yasya prasädäd bhagavat-prasädaù: **(21) since the guru is a representative of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he carries to the Lord whatever is
offered to him. Similarly, all the demigods, as faithful servants of the Supreme
Lord, hand over to the Supreme Lord whatever is offered to them in sacrificial
performances. There is no fault in worshiping the demigods with this
understanding, but to think that the demigods are independent of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and equal to Him is called håta-jïäna, a loss
of intelligence (kämais tais tair håta jïänäù [Bg. 7.20]). One who thinks that
the demigods themselves are the actual benefactors is mistaken.
TEXT 18
TaQaa ga*TaaedaØih" §-aEÄÜqPaae iÜGau<a" SvMaaNaeNa +aqraedeNa PairTa oPaoeáae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
870
v*Taae YaQaa ku-XaÜqPaae ga*TaaedeNa YaiSMaNa( §-aEÄae NaaMa PavRTaraJaae ÜqPaNaa‚
MaiNavRTaRk- AaSTae )) 18 ))
tathä ghåtodäd bahiù krauïcadvépo dvi-guëaù sva-mänena kñérodena parita
upakÿpto våto yathä kuçadvépo ghåtodena yasmin krauïco näma parvata-räjo
dvépa-näma-nirvartaka äste.
SYNONYMS
tathä—so also; ghåta-udät—from the ocean of clarified butter; bahiù—outside;
krauïca-dvépaù—another island, known as Krauïcadvépa; dvi-guëaù—twice as
big; sva-mänena—as the same measurement; kñéra-udena—by an ocean of milk;
paritaù—all around; upakÿptaù—surrounded; våtaù—surrounded; yathä—like;
kuça-dvépaù—the island known as Kuçadvépa; ghåta-udena—by an ocean of
clarified butter; yasmin—in which; krauïcaù näma—named Krauïca;
parvata-räjaù—a king of mountains; dvépa-näma—the name of the island;
nirvartakaù—bringing about; äste—exists.
TRANSLATION
Outside the ocean of clarified butter is another island, known as
Krauïcadvépa, which has a width of 1,600,000 yojanas [12,800,000 miles],
twice the width of the ocean of clarified butter. As Kuçadvépa is surrounded by
an ocean of clarified butter, Krauïcadvépa is surrounded by an ocean of milk as
broad as the island itself. On Krauïcadvépa there is a great mountain known as
Krauïca, from which the island takes its name.
TEXT 19
Yaae_SaaE GauhPa[hr<aaeNMaiQaTaiNaTaMbku-Åae_iPa +aqraedeNaaiSaCYaMaaNaae >aGavTaa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
871
vå<aeNaai>aGauáae iv>aYaae b>aUv )) 19 ))
yo 'sau guha-praharaëonmathita-nitamba-kuïjo 'pi kñérodenä-sicyamäno
bhagavatä varuëenäbhigupto vibhayo babhüva.
SYNONYMS
yaù—which; asau—that (mountain); guha-praharaëa—by the weapons of
Kärttikeya, the son of Lord Çiva; unmathita—shaken; nitamba-kuïjaù—whose
trees and vegetables along the slopes; api—although; kñéra-udena—by the
ocean of milk; äsicyamänaù—being always bathed; bhagavatä—by the greatly
powerful; varuëena—the demigod known as Varuëa; abhiguptaù—protected;
vibhayaù babhüva—has become fearless.
TRANSLATION
Although the vegetables living on the slopes of Mount Krauïca were
attacked and devastated by the weapons of Kärttikeya, the mountain has
become fearless because it is always bathed on all sides by the ocean of milk and
protected by Varuëadeva.
TEXT 20
TaiSMaàiPa Pa[EYav]Taae ga*TaPa*ïae NaaMaaiDaPaiTa" Sve ÜqPae vzaRi<a Saá iv>aJYa
Taezu Pau}aNaaMaSau Saá irKQaadaNa( vzRPaaiàveXYa SvYa& >aGavaNa( >aGavTa" ParMa‚
k-LYaa<aYaXaSa AaTMa>aUTaSYa hreêr<aarivNdMauPaJaGaaMa )) 20 ))
tasminn api praiyavrato ghåtapåñöho nämädhipatiù sve dvépe varñäëi sapta
vibhajya teñu putra-nämasu sapta rikthädän varñapän niveçya svayaà bhagavän
bhagavataù parama-kalyäëa-yaçasa ätma-bhütasya hareç caraëäravindam
upajagäma.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
872
SYNONYMS
tasmin—in that island; api—also; praiyavrataù—the son of Mahäräja
Priyavrata; ghåta-påñöhaù—Ghåtapåñöha; näma—named; adhipatiù—the king
of that island; sve—his own; dvépe—in the island; varñäëi—tracts of land;
sapta—seven; vibhajya—dividing; teñu—in each of them;
putra-nämasu—possessing the names of his sons; sapta—seven;
rikthä-dän—sons; varña-pän—the masters of the varñas; niveçya—appointing;
svayam—himself; bhagavän—very powerful; bhagavataù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; parama-kalyäëa-yaçasaù—whose glories are so
auspicious; ätma-bhütasya—the soul of all souls; hareù caraëa-aravindam—the
lotus feet of the Lord; upajagäma—took shelter at.
TRANSLATION
The ruler of this island was another son of Mahäräja Priyavrata. His name
was Ghåtapåñöha, and he was a very learned scholar. He also divided his own
island among his seven sons. After dividing the island into seven parts, named
according to the names of his sons, Ghåtapåñöha Mahäräja completely retired
from family life and took shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord, the soul of all
souls, who has all auspicious qualities. Thus he attained perfection.
TEXT 21
AaMaae MaDauåhae MaegaPa*ï" SauDaaMaa >a]aiJaïae l/aeihTaa<aaeR vNaSPaiTairiTa
ga*TaPa*ïSauTaaSTaeza& vzRiGarYa" Saá SaáEv NaÛêai>a:YaaTaa" Xau(c)-ae vDaRMaaNaae
>aaeJaNa oPabihR<aae NaNdae NaNdNa" SavRTaae>ad] wiTa A>aYaa AMa*TaaEgaa AaYaRk-a
TaqQaRvTaq æPavTaq Paiv}avTaq Xau(c)e-iTa )) 21 ))
ämo madhuruho meghapåñöhaù sudhämä bhräjiñöho lohitärëo vanaspatir iti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
873
ghåtapåñöha-sutäs teñäà varña-girayaù sapta saptaiva nadyaç cäbhikhyätäù
çuklo vardhamäno bhojana upabarhiëo nando nandanaù sarvatobhadra iti
abhayä amåtaughä äryakä térthavaté rüpavaté pavitravaté çukleti.
SYNONYMS
ämaù—Äma; madhu-ruhaù—Madhuruha; megha-påñöhaù—Meghapåñöha;
sudhämä—Sudhämä; bhräjiñöhaù—Bhräjiñöha; lohitärëaù—Lohitärëa;
vanaspatiù—Vanaspati; iti—thus; ghåtapåñöha-sutäù—the sons of Ghåtapåñöha;
teñäm—of those sons; varña-girayaù—boundary hills of the tracts of land;
sapta—seven; sapta—seven; eva—also; nadyaù—rivers; ca—and;
abhikhyätäù—celebrated; çuklaù vardhamänaù—Çukla and Vardhamäna;
bhojanaù—Bhojana; upabarhiëaù—Upabarhiëa; nandaù—Nanda;
nandanaù—Nandana; sarvataù-bhadraù—Sarvatobhadra; iti—thus;
abhayä—Abhayä; amåtaughä—Amåtaughä; äryakä—Äryakä;
térthavaté—Térthavaté; rüpavaté—Rüpavaté; pavitravaté—Pavitravaté;
çuklä—Çuklä; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
The sons of Mahäräja Ghåtapåñöha were named Äma, Madhuruha,
Meghapåñöha, Sudhämä, Bhräjiñöha, Lohitärëa and Vanaspati. In their island
there are seven mountains, which indicate the boundaries of the seven tracts of
land, and there are also seven rivers. The mountains are named Çukla,
Vardhamäna, Bhojana, Upabarhiëa, Nanda, Nandana and Sarvatobhadra. The
rivers are named Abhayä, Amåtaughä, Äryakä, Térthavaté, Rüpavaté,
Pavitravaté and Çuklä.
TEXT 22
YaaSaaMaM>a" Paiv}aMaMal/MauPaYauÅaNaa" Pauåz‰z>ad]iv<adevk-Sa&ja vzRPauåza
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
874
AaPaaeMaYa& devMaPaa& PaU<aeRNaaÅil/Naa YaJaNTae )) 22 ))
yäsäm ambhaù pavitram amalam upayuïjänäù
puruña-åñabha-draviëa-devaka-saàjïä varña-puruñä äpomayaà devam apäà
pürëenäïjalinä yajante.
SYNONYMS
yäsäm—of all the rivers; ambhaù—the water; pavitram—very sanctified;
amalam—very clean; upayuïjänäù—using; puruña—Puruña; åñabha—Åñabha;
draviëa—Draviëa; devaka—Devaka; saàjïäù—endowed with the names;
varña-puruñäù—the inhabitants of those varñas; äpaù-mayam—Varuëa, the
lord of water; devam—as the worshipable deity; apäm—of water;
pürëena—with full; aïjalinä—folded palms; yajante—do worship.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Krauïcadvépa are divided into four castes, called the
Puruñas, Åñabhas, Draviëas and Devakas. Using the waters of those sanctified
rivers, they worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead by offering a palmful
of water at the lotus feet of Varuëa, the demigod who has a form of water.
PURPORT
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says, äpomayaù asmayam: with joined
palms the inhabitants of the various sections of Krauïcadvépa offer the
sanctified waters of the rivers to a deity made of stone or iron.
TEXT 23
AaPa" PauåzvqYaaR" SQa PauNaNTaq>aUR>auRv"Sauv" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
875
Taa Na" PauNaqTaaMaqvganq" SPa*XaTaaMaaTMaNaa >auv wiTa )) 23 ))
äpaù puruña-véryäù stha
punantér bhür-bhuvaù-suvaù
tä naù punétäméva-ghnéù
spåçatäm ätmanä bhuva iti
SYNONYMS
äpaù—O water; puruña-véryäù—endowed with the energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; stha—you are; punantéù—sanctifying; bhüù—of the
planetary system known as Bhüù; bhuvaù—of the Bhuvaù planetary system;
suvaù—of the Svaù planetary system; täù—that water; naù—of us;
punéta—purify; améva-ghnéù—who destroys sin; spåçatäm—of those touching;
ätmanä—by your constitutional position; bhuvaù—the bodies; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
[The inhabitants of Krauïcadvépa worship with this mantra.] O water of the
rivers, you have obtained energy from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore you purify the three planetary systems, known as Bhüloka,
Bhuvarloka and Svarloka. By your constitutional nature, you take away sins,
and that is why we are touching you. Kindly continue to purify us.
PURPORT
Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.4):
bhümir äpo 'nalo väyuù
khaà mano buddhir eva ca
ahaìkära itéyaà me
bhinnä prakåtir añöadhä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
876
"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all together
these eight comprise My separated material energies."
The energy of the Lord acts throughout the creation, just as heat and light,
the energies of the sun, act within the universe and make everything work.
The specific rivers mentioned in the çästras are also energies of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and people who regularly bathe in them are purified.
It can actually be seen that many people are cured of diseases simply by
bathing in the Ganges. Similarly, the inhabitants of Krauïcadvépa purify
themselves by bathing in the rivers there.
TEXT 24
Wv& PaurSTaaT+aqraedaTPairTa oPaveiXaTa" Xaak-ÜqPaae Üai}a&Xaç+aYaaeJaNaaYaaMa"
SaMaaNaeNa c diDaMa<@aedeNa ParqTaae YaiSMaNa( Xaak-ae NaaMa Mahqåh" Sv+ae}aVYa‚
PadeXak-ae YaSYa h MahaSauri>aGaNDaSTa& ÜqPaMaNauvaSaYaiTa )) 24 ))
evaà purastät kñérodät parita upaveçitaù çäkadvépo
dvätriàçal-lakña-yojanäyämaù samänena ca dadhi-maëòodena paréto yasmin
çäko näma mahéruhaù sva-kñetra-vyapadeçako yasya ha mahä-surabhi-gandhas
taà dvépam anuväsayati.
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; purastät—beyond; kñéra-udät—from the ocean of milk;
paritaù—all around; upaveçitaù—situated; çäka-dvépaù—another island,
known as Çäkadvépa; dvä-triàçat—thirty-two; lakña—100,000;
yojana—yojanas; äyämaù—whose measure; samänena—of equal length;
ca—and; dadhi-maëòa-udena—by an ocean containing water resembling
churned yogurt; parétaù—surrounded; yasmin—in which land; çäkaù—çäka;
näma—named; mahéruhaù—a fig tree; sva-kñetra-vyapadeçakaù—giving the
island its name; yasya—of which; ha—indeed; mahä-surabhi—a greatly
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
877
fragrant; gandhaù—aroma; tam dvépam—that island; anuväsayati—makes
fragrant.
TRANSLATION
Outside the ocean of milk is another island, Çäkadvépa, which has a width of
3,200,000 yojanas [25,600,000 miles]. As Krauïcadvépa is surrounded by its
own ocean of milk, Çäkadvépa is surrounded by an ocean of churned yogurt as
broad as the island itself. In Çäkadvépa there is a big çäka tree, from which the
island takes its name. This tree is very fragrant. Indeed, it lends its scent to the
entire island.
TEXT 25
TaSYaaiPa Pa[EYav]Ta WvaiDaPaiTaNaaRMNaa MaeDaaiTaiQa" Saae_iPa iv>aJYa Saá vzaRi<a
Pau}aNaaMaaiNa Taezu SvaTMaJaaNa( PauraeJavMaNaaeJavPavMaaNaDaUMa]aNaqk-ic}aref-bhuæPa‚
ivìDaarSa&jaiàDaaPYaaiDaPaTaqNa( SvYa& >aGavTYaNaNTa AaveiXaTaMaiTaSTaPaaevNa&
Pa[ivveXa )) 25 ))
tasyäpi praiyavrata evädhipatir nämnä medhätithiù so 'pi vibhajya sapta varñäëi
putra-nämäni teñu svätmajän
purojava-manojava-pavamäna-dhümränéka-citrarepha-bahurüpa-viçvadhära-s
aàjïän nidhäpyädhipatén svayaà bhagavaty ananta ä-veçita-matis tapovanaà
praviveça.
SYNONYMS
tasya api—of that island also; praiyavrataù—a son of Mahäräja Priyavrata;
eva—certainly; adhipatiù—the ruler; nämnä—by the name;
medhä-tithiù—Medhätithi; saù api—he also; vibhajya—dividing; sapta
varñäëi—seven divisions of the island; putra-nämäni—possessing the names of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
878
his sons; teñu—in them; sva-ätmajän—his own sons; purojava—Purojava;
manojava—Manojava; pavamäna—Pavamäna; dhümränéka—Dhümränéka;
citra-repha—Citrarepha; bahu-rüpa—Bahurüpa; viçvadhära—Viçvadhära;
saàjïän—having as names; nidhäpya—establishing as; adhipatén—the rulers;
svayam—himself; bhagavati—in the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
anante—in the unlimited; äveçita-matiù—whose mind was fully absorbed;
tapaù-vanam—in the forest where meditation is performed; praviveça—he
entered.
TRANSLATION
The master of this island, also one of the sons of Priyavrata, was known as
Medhätithi. He also divided his island into seven sections, named according to
the names of his own sons, whom he made the kings of that island. The names
of those sons are Purojava, Manojava, Pavamäna, Dhümränéka, Citrarepha,
Bahurüpa and Viçvadhära. After dividing the island and situating his sons as its
rulers, Medhätithi personally retired, and to fix his mind completely upon the
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he entered a forest suitable
for meditation.
TEXT 26
WTaeza& vzRMaYaaRdaiGarYaae NaÛê Saá SaáEv wRXaaNa oåé*(r)ae bl/>ad]"
XaTake-Sar" SahóóaeTaae devPaal/ae MahaNaSa wiTa ANagaaYaudaR o>aYaSPa*iír‚
ParaiJaTaa PaÄPadq SahóóuiTaiNaRJaDa*iTairiTa )) 26 ))
eteñäà varña-maryädä-girayo nadyaç ca sapta saptaiva éçäna uruçåìgo
balabhadraù çatakesaraù sahasrasroto devapälo mahänasa iti anaghäyurdä
ubhayaspåñöir aparäjitä païcapadé sahasrasrutir nijadhåtir iti.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
879
SYNONYMS
eteñäm—of all these divisions; varña-maryädä—acting as the boundary limits;
girayaù—the big hills; nadyaù ca—and the rivers also; sapta—seven;
sapta—seven; eva—indeed; éçänaù—Éçäna; uruçåìgaù—Uruçåìga;
bala-bhadraù—Balabhadra; çata-kesaraù—Çatakesara;
sahasra-srotaù—Sahasrasrota; deva-pälaù—Devapäla; mahänasaù—Mahänasa;
iti—thus; anaghä—Anaghä; äyurdä—Äyurdä; ubhayaspåñöiù—Ubhayaspåñöi;
aparäjitä—Aparäjitä; païcapadé—Païcapadé; sahasra-srutiù—Sahasra-çruti;
nija-dhåtiù—Nijadhåti; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
For these lands also, there are seven boundary mountains and seven rivers.
The mountains are Éçäna, Uruçåìga, Balabhadra, Çatakesara, Sahasrasrota,
Devapäla and Mahänasa. The rivers are Anaghä, Äyurdä, Ubhayaspåñöi,
Aparäjitä, Païcapadé, Sahasra-çruti and Nijadhåti.
TEXT 27
TaÜzRPauåza ‰Tav]TaSaTYav]TadaNav]TaaNauv]TaNaaMaaNaae >aGavNTa& vaYvaTMak&-
Pa[a<aaYaaMaivDaUTarJaSTaMaSa" ParMaSaMaaiDaNaa YaJaNTae )) 27 ))
tad-varña-puruñä åtavrata-satyavrata-dänavratänuvrata-nämäno bhagavantaà
väyv-ätmakaà präëäyäma-vidhüta-rajas-tamasaù parama-samädhinä yajante.
SYNONYMS
tat-varña-puruñäù—the inhabitants of those tracts of land;
åta-vrata—Åtavrata; satya-vrata—Satyavrata; däna-vrata—Dänavrata;
anuvrata—Anuvrata; nämänaù—having the four names; bhagavantam—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
880
Supreme Personality of Godhead; väyu-ätmakam—represented by the demigod
Väyu; präëäyäma—by the practice of regulating the airs within the body;
vidhüta—cleansed away; rajaù-tamasaù—whose passion and ignorance;
parama—sublime; samädhinä—by trance; yajante—they worship.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of those islands are also divided into four castes—Åtavrata,
Satyavrata, Dänavrata and Anuvrata—which exactly resemble brähmaëa,
kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra. They practice präëäyäma and mystic yoga, and in
trance they worship the Supreme Lord in the form of Väyu.
TEXT 28
ANTa"Pa[ivXYa >aUTaaiNa Yaae ib>aTYaaRTMake-Taui>a" )
ANTaYaaRMaqìr" Saa+aaTPaaTau Naae YaÜXae Sfu-$=Ma( )) 28 ))
antaù-praviçya bhütäni
yo bibharty ätma-ketubhiù
antaryäméçvaraù säkñät
pätu no yad-vaçe sphuöam
SYNONYMS
antaù-praviçya—entering within; bhütäni—all living entities; yaù—who;
bibharti—maintains; ätma-ketubhiù—by the functions of the inner airs (präëa,
apäna, etc.); antaryämé—the Supersoul within; éçvaraù—the Supreme person;
säkñät—directly; pätu—please maintain; naù—us; yat-vaçe—under whose
control; sphuöam—the cosmic manifestation.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
881
TRANSLATION
[The inhabitants of Çäkadvépa worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in the form of Väyu in the following words.] O Supreme Person, situated as the
Supersoul within the body, You direct the various actions of the different airs,
such as präëa, and thus You maintain all living entities. O Lord, O Supersoul of
everyone, O controller of the cosmic manifestation under whom everything
exists, may You protect us from all dangers.
PURPORT
Through the mystic yoga practice called präëäyäma, the yogé controls the
airs within the body to maintain the body in a healthy condition. In this way,
the yogé comes to the point of trance and tries to see the Supersoul within the
core of his heart. Präëäyäma is the means to attain samädhi, trance, in order to
fully absorb oneself in seeing the Supreme Lord as antaryämé, the Supersoul
within the core of the heart.
TEXT 29
WvMaev diDaMa<@aedaTParTa" PauZk-rÜqPaSTaTaae iÜGau<aaYaaMa" SaMaNTaTa
oPak-iLPaTa" SaMaaNaeNa SvadUdke-Na SaMaud]e<a bihrav*Taae YaiSMaNa( b*hTPauZk-r&
Jvl/NaiXa%aMal/k-Nak-Pa}aaYauTaaYauTa& >aGavTa" k-Mal/aSaNaSYaaDYaaSaNa& Pair‚
k-iLPaTaMa( )) 29 ))
evam eva dadhi-maëòodät parataù puñkaradvépas tato dvi-guëäyämaù
samantata upakalpitaù samänena svädüdakena samudreëa bahir ävåto yasmin
båhat-puñkaraà jvalana-çikhämala-kanaka-paträyutäyutaà bhagavataù
kamaläsanasyädhyäsanaà parikalpitam.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
882
SYNONYMS
evam eva—thus; dadhi-maëòa-udät—the ocean of yogurt; parataù—beyond;
puñkara-dvépaù—another island, named Puñkaradvépa; tataù—than that
(Çäkadvépa); dvi-guëa-äyämaù—whose measurement is twice as great;
samantataù—on all sides; upakalpitaù—surrounded; samänena—equal in
width; svädu-udakena—possessing sweet water; samudreëa—by an ocean;
bahiù—outside; ävåtaù—surrounded; yasmin—in which; båhat—very big;
puñkaram—lotus flower; jvalana-çikhä—like the flames of a blazing fire;
amala—pure; kanaka—gold; patra—leaves; ayuta-ayutam—possessing
100,000,000; bhagavataù—greatly powerful; kamala äsanasya—of Lord
Brahmä, whose sitting place is on the lotus flower; adhyäsanam—sitting place;
parikalpitam—considered.
TRANSLATION
Outside the ocean of yogurt is another island, known as Puñkaradvépa, which
is 6,400,000 yojanas [51,200,000 miles] wide, twice as wide as the ocean of
yogurt. It is surrounded by an ocean of very tasteful water as broad as the island
itself. On Puñkaradvépa there is a great lotus flower with 100,000,000 pure
golden petals, as effulgent as the flames of fire. That lotus flower is considered
the sitting place of Lord Brahmä, who is the most powerful living being and
who is therefore sometimes called bhagavän.
TEXT 30
Tad(ÜqPaMaDYae MaaNaSaaetarNaaMaEk- WvavaRcqNaParacqNavzRYaaeMaRYaaRdacl/ae_YauTaYaaeJa‚
NaaeC^\aYaaYaaMaae Ya}a Tau cTaSa*zu id+au cTvair Paurai<a l/aek-Paal/aNaaiMaNd]adqNaa&
YaduPairíaTSaUYaRrQaSYa Maeå& Pair>a]MaTa" Sa&vTSaraTMak&- c§&- devaNaaMahaera}aa>Yaa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
883
Pair>a]MaiTa )) 30 ))
tad-dvépa-madhye mänasottara-nämaika evärväcéna-paräcéna-varñayor
maryädäcalo 'yuta-yojanocchräyäyämo yatra tu catasåñu dikñu catväri puräëi
loka-pälänäm indrädénäà yad-upariñöät sürya-rathasya meruà paribhramataù
saàvatsarätmakaà cakraà devänäm aho-räträbhyäà paribhramati.
SYNONYMS
tat-dvépa-madhye—within that island; mänasottara—Mänasottara;
näma—named; ekaù—one; eva—indeed; arväcéna—on this side;
paräcéna—and beyond, or outside; varñayoù—of tracts of land;
maryädä—indicating the boundary; acalaù—a great mountain; ayuta—ten
thousand; yojana—eight miles; ucchräya-äyämaù—whose height and width;
yatra—where; tu—but; catasåñu—in the four; dikñu—directions;
catväri—four; puräëi—cities; loka-pälänäm—of the directors of planetary
systems; indra-ädénäm—headed by Indra; yat—of which; upariñöät—on the
top; sürya-rathasya—of the chariot of the sun-god; merum—Meru Mountain;
paribhramataù—while circumambulating; saàvatsara-ätmakam—consisting of
one saàvatsara; cakram—wheel or orbit; devänäm—of the demigods;
ahaù-räträbhyäm—by the day and night; paribhramati—moves around.
TRANSLATION
In the middle of that island is a great mountain named Mänasottara, which
forms the boundary between the inner side and the outer side of the island. Its
breadth and height are 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles]. On that mountain, in
the four directions, are the residential quarters of demigods such as Indra. In
the chariot of the sun-god, the sun travels on the top of the mountain in an
orbit called the Saàvatsara, encircling Mount Meru. The sun's path on the
northern side is called Uttaräyaëa, and its path on the southern side is called
Dakñiëäyana. One side represents a day for the demigods, and the other
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
884
represents their night.
PURPORT
The movement of the sun is confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.52):
yasyäjïäya bhramati saàbhåta-käla-cakraù. The sun orbits around Mount
Sumeru, for six months on the northern side and for six months on the
southern. This adds up to the duration of a day and night of the demigods in
the upper planetary systems.
TEXT 31
Tad(ÜqPaSYaaPYaiDaPaiTa" Pa[EYav]Taae vqiTahae}aae NaaMaETaSYaaTMaJaaE rMa<ak-DaaTa‚
ik-NaaMaaNaaE vzRPaTaq iNaYauJYa Sa SvYa& PaUvRJavÙGavTk-MaRXaql/ WvaSTae )) 31 ))
tad-dvépasyäpy adhipatiù praiyavrato vétihotro nämaitasyätmajau
ramaëaka-dhätaki-nämänau varña-paté niyujya sa svayaà
pürvajavad-bhagavat-karma-çéla eväste.
SYNONYMS
tat-dvépasya—of that island; api—also; adhipatiù—the ruler; praiyavrataù—a
son of Mahäräja Priyavrata; vétihotraù näma—named Vétihotra; etasya—of
him; ätma-jau—unto the two sons; ramaëaka—Ramaëaka; dhätaki—and
Dhätaki; nämänau—having the names; varña-paté—the rulers of the two tracts
of land; niyujya—appointing; saù svayam—himself; pürvaja-vat—like his other
brothers; bhagavat-karma-çélaù—being absorbed in activities to satisfy the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; eva—indeed; äste—remains.
TRANSLATION
The ruler of this island, the son of Mahäräja Priyavrata named Vétihotra,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
885
had two sons named Ramaëaka and Dhätaki. He granted the two sides of the
island to these two sons and then personally engaged himself in activities for the
sake of the Supreme Personality of Godhead like his elder brother Medhätithi.
TEXT 32
TaÜzRPauåza >aGavNTa& b]øæiPa<a& Sak-MaRke-<a k-MaR<aaraDaYaNTaqd& caeda‚
hriNTa )) 32 ))
tad-varña-puruñä bhagavantaà brahma-rüpiëaà sakarmakeëa
karmaëärädhayantédaà codäharanti.
SYNONYMS
tat-varña-puruñäù—the inhabitants of that island; bhagavantam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; brahma-rüpiëam—exhibited as Lord Brahmä being
seated on the lotus; sa-karmakeëa—for fulfillment of material desires;
karmaëä—by performing ritualistic activities according to the Vedas;
ärädhayanti—worship; idam—this; ca—and; udäharanti—they chant.
TRANSLATION
For the fulfillment of material desires, the inhabitants of this tract of land
worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead as represented by Lord Brahmä.
They offer prayers to the Lord as follows.
TEXT 33
YataTk-MaRMaYa& il/(r)& b]øil/(r)& JaNaae_cRYaeTa( )
Wk-aNTaMaÜYa& XaaNTa& TaSMaE >aGavTae NaMa wiTa )) 33 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
886
yat tat karmamayaà liìgaà
brahma-liìgaà jano 'rcayet
ekäntam advayaà çäntaà
tasmai bhagavate nama iti
SYNONYMS
yat—which; tat—that; karma-mayam—obtainable by the Vedic ritualistic
system; liìgam—the form; brahma-liìgam—which makes known the Supreme
Brahman; janaù—a person; arcayet—must worship; ekäntam—who has full
faith in the one Supreme; advayam—nondifferent; çäntam—peaceful;
tasmai—unto him; bhagavate—the most powerful; namaù—our respects;
iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä is known as karma-maya, the form of ritualistic ceremonies,
because by performing ritualistic ceremonies one may attain his position and
because the Vedic ritualistic hymns become manifest from him. He is devoted
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead without deviation, and therefore in one
sense he is not different from the Lord. Nevertheless, he should be worshiped
not as the monists worship him, but in duality. One should always remain a
servitor of the Supreme Lord, the supreme worshipable Deity. We therefore
offer our respectful obeisances unto Lord Brahmä, the form of manifest Vedic
knowledge.
PURPORT
In this verse, the word karma-mayam ("obtainable by the Vedic ritualistic
system") is significant. The Vedas say, svadharma-niñöhaù çata janmabhiù
pumän viriïcatäm eti: "One who strictly follows the principles of
varëäçrama-dharma for at least one hundred births will be rewarded with the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
887
post of Lord Brahmä." It is also significant that although Lord Brahmä is
extremely powerful, he never thinks himself one with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; he always knows that he is an eternal servitor of the Lord.
Because the Lord and the servant are identical on the spiritual platform,
Brahmä is herein addressed as bhagavän. Bhagavän is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Kåñëa, but if a devotee serves Him with full faith, the meaning of
the Vedic literature is revealed to him. Therefore Brahmä is called
brahma-liìga, which indicates that his entire form consists of Vedic
knowledge.
TEXT 34
‰iZaåvac
TaTa" ParSTaaçaek-al/aek-NaaMaacl/ae l/aek-al/aek-YaaerNTarale/ PairTa oPai+aá" )) 34
))
tataù parastäl lokäloka-nämäcalo lokälokayor antaräle parita upakñiptaù.
SYNONYMS
tataù—from that ocean of sweet drinking water; parastät—beyond;
lokäloka-näma—named Lokäloka; acalaù—a mountain; loka-alokayoù
antaräle—between the countries full of sunlight and those without sunlight;
paritaù—all around; upakñiptaù—exists.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, beyond the ocean of sweet water and fully surrounding it, is a
mountain named Lokäloka, which divides the countries that are full of sunlight
from those not lit by the sun.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
888
TEXT 35
YaavNMaaNaSaaetarMaevaeRrNTar& TaavTaq >aUiMa" k-aÄNYaNYaadXaRTal/aePaMaa YaSYaa& Pa[ihTa"
PadaQaaeR Na k-QaiÄTPauNa" Pa[TYauPal/>YaTae TaSMaaTSavRSatvPairôTaaSaqTa( )) 35 ))
yävan mänasottara-mervor antaraà tävaté bhümiù käïcany
anyädarça-talopamä yasyäà prahitaù padärtho na kathaïcit punaù
pratyupalabhyate tasmät sarva-sattva-parihåtäsét.
SYNONYMS
yävat—as much as; mänasottara-mervoù antaram—the land between
Mänasottara and Meru (beginning from the middle of Mount Sumeru);
tävaté—that much; bhümiù—land; käïcané—made of gold; anyä—another;
ädarça-tala-upamä—whose surface is just like the surface of a mirror;
yasyäm—on which; prahitaù—dropped; padärthaù—a thing; na—not;
kathaïcit—in any way; punaù—again; pratyupalabhyate—is found;
tasmät—therefore; sarva-sattva—by all living entities; parihåtä—abandoned;
äsét—was.
TRANSLATION
Beyond the ocean of sweet water is a tract of land as broad as the area
between the middle of Mount Sumeru and the boundary of Mänasottara
Mountain. In that tract of land there are many living beings. Beyond it,
extending to Lokäloka Mountain, is another land, which is made of gold.
Because of its golden surface, it reflects light like the surface of a mirror, and
any physical article that falls on that land can never be perceived again. All
living entities, therefore, have abandoned that golden land.
TEXT 36
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
889
l/aek-al/aek- wiTa SaMaa:Yaa YadNaeNaacle/Na l/aek-al/aek-SYaaNTavRiTaRNaavSQaaPYaTae ))
36 ))
lokäloka iti samäkhyä yad anenäcalena lokälokasyäntarvar-tinävasthäpyate.
SYNONYMS
loka—with light (or with inhabitants); alokaù—without light (or without
inhabitants); iti—in this way; samäkhyä—designation; yat—which; anena—by
this; acalena—mountain; loka—of the land inhabited by living entities;
alokasya—and of the land not inhabited by living entities;
antarvartinä—which is in the middle; avasthäpyate—is established.
TRANSLATION
Between the lands inhabited by living entities and those that are uninhabited
stands the great mountain which separates the two and which is therefore
celebrated as Lokäloka.
TEXT 37
Sa l/aek-}aYaaNTae PairTa wRìre<a ivihTaae YaSMaaTSaUYaaRdqNaa& Da]uvaPavGaaR<aa&
JYaaeiTaGaR<aaNaa& Ga>aSTaYaae_vaRcqNaa&ñq==mçaek-aNaaivTaNvaNaa Na k-daicTParacqNaa
>aivTauMauTSahNTae TaavduàhNaaYaaMa" )) 37 ))
sa loka-trayänte parita éçvareëa vihito yasmät süryädénäà dhruväpavargäëäà
jyotir-gaëänäà gabhastayo 'rväcénäàs tréû lokän ävitanvänä na kadäcit
paräcénä bhavitum utsahante tävad un-nahanäyämaù.
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
890
saù—that mountain; loka-traya-ante—at the end of the three lokas (Bhürloka,
Bhuvarloka and Svarloka); paritaù—all around; éçvareëa—by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa; vihitaù—created; yasmät—from which;
sürya-ädénäm—of the sun planet; dhruva-apavargäëäm—up to Dhruvaloka
and other, inferior luminaries; jyotiù-gaëänäm—of all the luminaries;
gabhastayaù—the rays; arväcénän—on this side; trén—the three;
lokän—planetary systems; ävitanvänäù—spreading throughout; na—not;
kadäcit—at any time; paräcénäù—beyond the jurisdiction of that mountain;
bhavitum—to be; utsahante—are able; tävat—that much;
unnahana-äyämaù—the measure of the height of the mountain.
TRANSLATION
By the supreme will of Kåñëa, the mountain known as Lokäloka has been
installed as the outer border of the three worlds—Bhürloka, Bhuvarloka and
Svarloka—to control the rays of the sun throughout the universe. All the
luminaries, from the sun up to Dhruvaloka, distribute their rays throughout the
three worlds, but only within the boundary formed by this mountain. Because it
is extremely high, extending even higher than Dhruvaloka, it blocks the rays of
the luminaries, which therefore can never extend beyond it.
PURPORT
When we speak of loka-traya, we refer to the three primary planetary
systems—Bhüù, Bhuvaù and Svaù—into which the universe is divided.
Surrounding these planetary systems are the eight directions, namely east,
west, north, south, northeast, southeast, northwest and southwest. Lokäloka
Mountain has been established as the outer boundary of all the lokas to
distribute the rays of the sun and other luminaries equally throughout the
universe.
This vivid description of how the rays of the sun are distributed throughout
the different planetary systems of the universe is very scientific. Çukadeva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
891
Gosvämé described these universal affairs to Mahäräja Parékñit as he had heard
about them from his predecessor. He explained these facts five thousand years
ago, but the knowledge existed long, long before because Çukadeva Gosvämé
received it through disciplic succession. Because this knowledge is accepted
through the disciplic succession, it is perfect. The history of modern scientific
knowledge, on the contrary, does not go back more than a few hundred years.
Therefore, even if modern scientists do not accept the other factual
presentations of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, how can they deny the perfect
astronomical calculations that existed long before they could imagine such
things? There is so much information to gather from Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
Modern scientists, however, have no information of other planetary systems
and, indeed, are hardly conversant with the planet on which we are now
living.
TEXT 38
WTaavamçaek-ivNYaaSaae MaaNal/+a<aSa&SQaai>aivRiciNTaTa" k-ivi>a" Sa Tau PaÄaXa‚
Tk-aei$=Gai<aTaSYa >aUGaael/SYa TaurqYa>aaGaae_Ya& l/aek-al/aek-acl/" )) 38 ))
etäväû loka-vinyäso mäna-lakñaëa-saàsthäbhir vicintitaù kavibhiù sa tu
païcäçat-koöi-gaëitasya bhü-golasya turéya-bhägo 'yaà lokälokäcalaù.
SYNONYMS
etävän—this much; loka-vinyäsaù—the placing of the different planets;
mäna—with measurements; lakñaëa—symptoms; saàsthäbhiù—as well as with
their different situations; vicintitaù—established by scientific calculations;
kavibhiù—by learned scholars; saù—that; tu—but; païcäçat-koöi—500,000,000
yojanas; gaëitasya—which is measured at; bhü-golasya—of the planetary
system known as Bhügolaka; turéya-bhägaù—one fourth; ayam—this;
lokäloka-acalaù—the mountain known as Lokäloka.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
892
TRANSLATION
Learned scholars who are free from mistakes, illusions and propensities to
cheat have thus described the planetary systems and their particular symptoms,
measurements and locations. With great deliberation, they have established the
truth that the distance between Sumeru and the mountain known as Lokäloka
is one fourth of the diameter of the universe—or, in other words, 125,000,000
yojanas [1 billion miles].
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has given accurate astronomical
information about the location of Lokäloka Mountain, the movements of the
sun globe and the distance between the sun and the circumference of the
universe. However, the technical terms used in the astronomical calculations
given by the Jyotir Veda are difficult to translate into English. Therefore to
satisfy the reader, we may include the exact Sanskrit statement given by Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, which records exact calculations regarding
universal affairs.
sa tu lokälokas tu bhü-golakasya bhü-sambandhäëòa-golakasyety arthaù; süryasy
eva bhuvo 'py aëòa-golakayor madhya-vartitvät kha-golam iva bhü-golam api
païcäçat-koöi-yojana-pramäëaà tasya turéya-bhägaù
särdha-dvädaça-koöi-yojana-vistärocchräya ity arthaù bhüs tu
catus-triàçal-lakñonapaïcäçat-koöi-pramäëä jïeyä; yathä meru-madhyän
mänasottara-madhya-paryantaà
särdha-sapta-païcäçal-lakñottara-koöi-yojana-pramäëam; mänasottara-madhyät
svädüdaka-samudra-paryantaà ñaë-ëavati-lakña-yojana-pramäëaà tataù
käïcané-bhümiù särdha-sapta-païcäçal-lakñottara-koöi-yojana-pramäëä evam
ekato meru-lokälokayor antarälam ekädaça-çal-lakñädhika-catuñ-koöi-parimitam
anyato 'pi tathatyeto lokälokäl loka-paryantaà sthänaà
dväviàçati-lakñottaräñöa-koöi-parimitaà lokälokäd bahir apy ekataù etävad eva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
893
anyato 'py etävad eva yad vakñyate, yo 'ntar-vistära etena hy aloka-parimäëaà ca
vyäkhyätaà yad-bahir lokälokäcaläd ity ekato lokälokaù
särdha-dvädaça-koöi-yojana-parimäëaù anyato 'pi sa tathety evaà
catus-triàçal-lakñonapaïcäçat-koöi-pramäëä bhüù säbdhi-dvépa-parvatä jïeyä;
ata eväëòa-golakät sarvato dikñu sapta-daça-lakña-yojanävakäçe vartamäne sati
påthivyäù çeña-nägena dhäraëaà dig-gajaiç ca niçcalé-karaëaà särthakaà bhaved
anyathä tu vyäkhyäntare païcäçat-koöi-pramäëatväd aëòa-golaka-lagnatve tat
tat sarvam akiïcit-karaà syät cäkñuñe manvantare cäkasmät majjanaà
çré-varäha-devenotthäpanaà ca durghaöaà syäd ity adikaà vivecanéyam.
TEXT 39
TaduPairíaÀTaSa*ZvaXaaSvaTMaYaaeiNaNaai%l/JaGad(Gauå<aaiDaiNaveiXaTaa Yae iÜrdPaTaYa
‰z>a" PauZk-rcU@ae =vaMaNaae_ParaiJaTa =wiTa Sak-l/l/aek-iSQaiTaheTav" )) 39 ))
tad-upariñöäc catasåñv äçäsvätma-yoninäkhila-jagad-guruëädhiniveçitä ye
dvirada-pataya åñabhaù puñkaracüòo vämano 'paräjita iti
sakala-loka-sthiti-hetavaù.
SYNONYMS
tat-upariñöät—on the top of Lokäloka Mountain; catasåñu äçäsu—in the four
directions; ätma-yoninä—by Lord Brahmä; akhila-jagat-guruëä—the spiritual
master of the whole universe; adhiniveçitäù—established; ye—all those;
dvirada-patayaù—the best of elephants; åñabhaù—Åñabha;
puñkara-cüòaù—Puñkaracüòa; vämanaù—Vämana; aparäjitaù—Aparäjita;
iti—thus; sakala-loka-sthiti-hetavaù—the causes of the maintenance of the
different planets within the universe.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
894
On the top of Lokäloka Mountain are the four gaja-patis, the best of
elephants, which were established in the four directions by Lord Brahmä, the
supreme spiritual master of the entire universe. The names of those elephants
are Åñabha, Puñkaracüòa, Vämana and Aparäjita. They are responsible for
maintaining the planetary systems of the universe.
TEXT 40
Taeza& Sviv>aUTaqNaa& l/aek-Paal/aNaa& c ivivDavqYaaeRPab*&h<aaYa >aGavaNa( ParMa‚
MahaPauåzae Mahaiv>aUiTaPaiTarNTaYaaRMYaaTMaNaae ivXauÖSatv& DaMaRjaNavEraGYaE‚
ìYaaRÛíMahaiSaÖyuPal/+a<a& ivZvKSaeNaaidi>a" SvPaazRdPa[vrE" PairvairTaae
iNaJavraYauDaaePaXaaei>aTaEiNaRJa>auJad<@E" SaNDaarYaMaa<aSTaiSMaNa( iGairvre SaMaNTaa‚
TSak-l/l/aek-SvSTaYa AaSTae )) 40 ))
teñäà sva-vibhüténäà loka-pälänäà ca vividha-véryopabåàhaëäya bhagavän
parama-mahä-puruño mahä-vibhüti-patir antaryämy ätmano viçuddha-sattvaà
dharma-jïäna-vairägyaiçvaryädy-añöa-mahä-siddhy-upalakñaëaà
viñvaksenädibhiù sva-pärñada-pravaraiù parivärito nija-varäyudhopaçobhitair
nija-bhuja-daëòaiù sandhärayamäëas tasmin giri-vare samantät
sakala-loka-svastaya äste.
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of all of them; sva-vibhüténäm—who are his personal expansions and
assistants; loka-pälänäm—who are entrusted with looking after the universal
affairs; ca—and; vividha—varieties; vérya-upabåàhaëäya—for expanding the
powers; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
parama-mahä-puruñaù—the foremost master of all kinds of opulence, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahä-vibhüti-patiù—the master of all
inconceivable potencies; antaryämé—the Supersoul; ätmanaù—of Himself;
viçuddha-sattvam—having an existence without contamination by the material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
895
modes of nature; dharma-jïäna-vairägya—of religion, pure knowledge and
renunciation; aiçvarya-ädi—of all kinds of opulence; añöa—eight;
mahä-siddhi—and of great mystic perfections; upalakñaëam—having the
characteristics; viñvaksena-ädibhiù—by His expansion known as Viñvaksena
and others; sva-pärñada-pravaraiù—the best of personal assistants;
pariväritaù—surrounded; nija—His own; vara-äyudha—by different types of
weapons; upaçobhitaiù—being decorated; nija—own; bhuja-daëòaiù—with
stout arms; sandhärayamäëaù—manifesting this form; tasmin—on that;
giri-vare—great mountain; samantät—all around; sakala-loka-svastaye—for
the benefit of all the planetary systems; äste—exists.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master of all transcendental
opulences and the master of the spiritual sky. He is the Supreme Person,
Bhagavän, the Supersoul of everyone. The demigods, led by Indra, the King of
heaven, are entrusted with seeing to the affairs of the material world. To
benefit all living beings in all the varied planets and to increase the power of
those elephants and of the demigods, the Lord manifests Himself on top of that
mountain in a spiritual body, uncontaminated by the modes of material nature.
Surrounded by His personal expansions and assistants like Viñvaksena, He
exhibits all His perfect opulences, such as religion and knowledge, and His
mystic powers such as aëimä, laghimä and mahimä. He is beautifully situated,
and He is decorated by the different weapons in His four hands.
TEXT 41
Aak-LPaMaev& vez& GaTa Wz >aGavaNaaTMaYaaeGaMaaYaYaa ivricTaivivDal/aek-‚
Yaa}aaGaaePaqYaaYaeTYaQaR" )) 41 ))
äkalpam evaà veñaà gata eña bhagavän ätma-yogamäyayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
896
viracita-vividha-loka-yäträ-gopéyäyety arthaù.
SYNONYMS
ä-kalpam—for the duration of the time of creation; evam—thus;
veñam—appearance; gataù—has accepted; eñaù—this; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; ätma-yoga-mäyayä—by His own spiritual potency;
viracita—perfected; vividha-loka-yäträ—the livelihood of the various
planetary systems; gopéyäya—just to maintain; iti—thus; arthaù—the purpose.
TRANSLATION
The various forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, such as
Näräyaëa and Viñëu, are beautifully decorated with different weapons. The
Lord exhibits those forms to maintain all the varied planets created by His
personal potency, yogamäyä.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (4.6) Lord Kåñëa says, sambhavämy ätma-mäyayä: "I appear
by My internal potency. "The word ätma-mäyä refers to the Lord's personal
potency, yogamäyä. After creating both the material world and spiritual world
through yogamäyä, the Supreme Personality of Godhead personally maintains
them by expanding Himself in different categories as the Viñëu mürtis and the
demigods. He maintains the material creation from beginning to end, and He
personally maintains the spiritual world.
TEXT 42
Yaae_NTaivRSTaar WTaeNa ùl/aek-PairMaa<a& c VYaa:YaaTa& YaØihl/aeRk-al/aek-acl/aTa( )
TaTa" ParSTaaÛaeGaeìrGaiTa& ivXauÖaMaudahriNTa )) 42 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
897
yo 'ntar-vistära etena hy aloka-parimäëaà ca vyäkhyätaà yad bahir
lokälokäcalät; tataù parastäd yogeçvara-gatià viçuddhäm udäharanti.
SYNONYMS
yaù—that which; antaù-vistäraù—the distance inside Lokäloka Mountain;
etena—by this; hi—indeed; aloka-parimäëam—the width of the tract of land
known as Aloka-varña; ca—and; vyäkhyätam—described; yat—which;
bahiù—outside; lokäloka-acalät—beyond Lokäloka Mountain; tataù—that;
parastät—beyond; yogeçvara-gatim—the path of Yogeçvara (Kåñëa) in
penetrating the coverings of the universe; viçuddhäm—without material
contamination; udäharanti—they say.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, outside Lokäloka Mountain is the tract of land known as
Aloka-varña, which extends for the same breadth as the area within the
mountain—in other words, 125,000,000 yojanas [one billion miles]. Beyond
Aloka-varña is the destination of those who aspire for liberation from the
material world. It is beyond the jurisdiction of the material modes of nature,
and therefore it is completely pure. Lord Kåñëa took Arjuna through this place
to bring back the sons of the brähmaëa.
TEXT 43
A<@MaDYaGaTa" SaUYaaeR Ûava>aUMYaaeYaRdNTarMa( )
SaUYaaR<@Gaael/YaaeMaRDYae k-ae$y" SYau" PaÄiv&XaiTa" )) 43 ))
aëòa-madhya-gataù süryo
dyäv-äbhümyor yad antaram
süryäëòa-golayor madhye
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
898
koöyaù syuù païca-viàçatiù
SYNONYMS
aëòa-madhya-gataù—situated in the center of the universe; süryaù—the sun
globe; dyäv-äbhümyoù—the two planetary systems Bhürloka and Bhuvarloka;
yat—which; antaram—in between; sürya—of the sun; aëòa-golayoù—and the
globe of the universe; madhye—in the middle; koöyaù—groups of ten million;
syuù—are; païca-viàçatiù—twenty-five.
TRANSLATION
The sun is situated [vertically] in the middle of the universe, in the area
between Bhürloka and Bhuvarloka, which is called antarikña, outer space. The
distance between the sun and the circumference of the universe is twenty-five
koöi yojanas [two billion miles].
PURPORT
The word koöi means ten million, and a yojana is eight miles. The diameter
of the universe is fifty koöi yojanas (four billion miles). Therefore, since the
sun is in the middle of the universe, the distance between the sun and the edge
of the universe is calculated to be twenty-five koöi yojanas (two billion miles).
TEXT 44
Ma*Tae_<@ Wz WTaiSMaNa( Yad>aUtaTaae MaaTaR<@ wiTa VYaPadeXa" )
ihr<YaGa>aR wiTa YaiÖr<Yaa<@SaMauÙv" )) 44 ))
måte 'ëòa eña etasmin yad abhüt tato märtaëòa iti vyapadeçaù; hiraëyagarbha
iti yad dhiraëyäëòa-samudbhavaù.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
899
SYNONYMS
måte—dead; aëòe—in the globe; eñaù—this; etasmin—in this; yat—which;
abhüt—entered personally at the time of creation; tataù—from that;
märtaëòa—Märtaëòa; iti—thus; vyapadeçaù—the designation;
hiraëya-garbhaù—known as Hiraëyagarbha; iti—thus; yat—because;
hiraëya-aëòa-samudbhavaù—his material body was created from
Hiraëyagarbha.
TRANSLATION
The sun-god is also known as Vairäja, the total material body for all living
entities. Because he entered this dull egg of the universe at the time of creation,
he is also called Märtaëòa. He is also known as Hiraëyagarbha because he
received his material body from Hiraëyagarbha [Lord Brahmä].
PURPORT
The post of Lord Brahmä is meant for very highly elevated, spiritually
advanced living beings. When such living beings are unavailable, Lord Viñëu,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, expands Himself as Lord Brahmä. This
takes place very rarely. Consequently there are two kinds of Brahmäs.
Sometimes Brahmä is an ordinary living entity, and at other times Brahmä is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Brahmä spoken of here is an
ordinary living being. Whether Brahmä is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead or an ordinary living being, he is known as Vairäja Brahmä and
Hiraëyagarbha Brahmä. Therefore the sun-god is also accepted as Vairäja
Brahmä.
TEXT 45
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
900
SaUYaeR<a ih iv>aJYaNTae idXa" %& ÛaEMaRhq i>ada )
SvGaaRPavGaaOE Nark-a rSaaEk-a&iSa c SavRXa" )) 45 ))
süryeëa hi vibhajyante
diçaù khaà dyaur mahé bhidä
svargäpavargau narakä
rasaukäàsi ca sarvaçaù
SYNONYMS
süryeëa—by the sun-god within the sun planet; hi—indeed; vibhajyante—are
divided; diçaù—the directions; kham—the sky; dyauù—the heavenly planets;
mahé—the earthly planets; bhidä—other divisions; svarga—the heavenly
planets; apavargau—and the places for liberation; narakäù—the hellish
planets; rasaukäàsi—such as Atala; ca—also; sarvaçaù—all.
TRANSLATION
O King, the sun-god and the sun planet divide all the directions of the
universe. It is only because of the presence of the sun that we can understand
what the sky, the higher planets, this world and the lower planets are. It is also
only because of the sun that we can understand which places are for material
enjoyment, which are for liberation, which are hellish and subterranean.
TEXT 46
deviTaYaRx(MaNauZYaa<aa& SarqSa*PaSavqåDaaMa(
SavRJaqviNak-aYaaNaa& SaUYaR AaTMaa d*Gaqìr" )) 46 ))
deva-tiryaì-manuñyäëäà
sarésåpa-savérudhäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
901
sarva-jéva-nikäyänäà
sürya ätmä dåg-éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
deva—of the demigods; tiryak—the lower animals; manuñyäëäm—and the
human beings; sarésåpa—the insects and the serpents; sa-vérudhäm—and the
plants and trees; sarva-jéva-nikäyänäm—of all groups of living entities;
süryaù—the sun-god; ätmä—the life and soul; dåk—of the eyes; éçvaraù—the
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
All living entities, including demigods, human beings, animals, birds, insects,
reptiles, creepers and trees, depend upon the heat and light given by the
sun-god from the sun planet. Furthermore, it is because of the sun's presence
that all living entities can see, and therefore he is called dåg-éçvara, the
Personality of Godhead presiding over sight.
PURPORT
In this regard, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says, sürya ätmä
ätmatvenopäsyaù. The actual life and soul of all living entities within this
universe is the sun. He is therefore upäsya, worshipable. We worship the
sun-god by chanting the Gäyatré mantra (oà bhür bhuvaù svaù tat savitur
vareëyaà bhargo devasya dhémahi). Sürya is the life and soul of this universe,
and there are innumerable universes for which a sun-god is the life and soul,
just as the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the life and soul of the entire
creation. We have information that Vairäja, Hiraëyagarbha, entered the great,
dull, material globe called the sun. This indicates that the theory held by
so-called scientists that no one lives there is wrong. Bhagavad-gétä also says
that Kåñëa first instructed Bhagavad-gétä to the sun-god (imaà vivasvate yogaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
902
proktavän aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]). Therefore the sun is not vacant. It is
inhabited by living entities, and the predominating deity is Vairäja, or
Vivasvän. The difference between the sun and earth is that the sun is a fiery
planet, but everyone there has a suitable body and can live there without
difficulty.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twentieth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled, "Studying the Structure of the Universe."
21. The Movements of the Sun
This chapter informs us of the movements of the sun. The sun is not
stationary; it is also moving like the other planets. The sun's movements
determine the duration of night and day. When the sun travels north of the
equator, it moves slowly during the day and very quickly at night, thus
increasing the duration of the daytime and decreasing the duration of night.
Similarly, when the sun travels south of the equator, the exact opposite is
true-the duration of the day decreases, and the duration of night increases.
When the sun enters Karkaöa-räçi (Cancer) and then travels to Siàha-räçi
(Leo) and so on through Dhanuù-räçi (Sagittarius), its course is called
Dakñiëäyana, the southern way, and when the sun enters Makara-räçi
(Capricorn) and thereafter travels through Kumbharäçi (Aquarius) and so on
through Mithuna-räçi (Gemini), its course is called Uttaräyaëa, the northern
way. When the sun is in Meña-räçi (Aries) and Tulä-räçi (Libra), the duration
of day and night are equal.
On Mänasottara Mountain are the abodes of four demigods. East of Sumeru
Mountain is Devadhäné, where King Indra lives, and south of Sumeru is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
903
Saàyamané, the abode of Yamaräja, the superintendent of death. Similarly,
west of Sumeru is Nimlocané, the abode of Varuëa, the demigod who controls
the water, and north of Sumeru is Vibhävaré, where the demigod of the moon
lives. Sunrise, noon, sunset and midnight occur in all these places because of
the movements of the sun. Diametrically opposite the place where the sunrise
takes places and the sun is seen by human eyes, the sun will be setting and
passing away from human vision. Similarly, the people residing diametrically
opposite the point where it is midday will be experiencing midnight. The sun
rises and sets with all the other planets, headed by the moon and other
luminaries.
The entire käla-cakra, or wheel of time, is established on the wheel of the
sun-god's chariot. This wheel is known as Saàvatsara. The seven horses
pulling the chariot of the sun are known as Gäyatré, Båhaté, Uñëik, Jagaté,
Triñöup, Anuñöup and Paìkti. They are harnessed by a demigod known as
Aruëadeva to a yoke 900,000 yojanas wide. Thus the chariot carries
Ädityadeva, the sun-god. Always staying in front of the sun-god and offering
their prayers are sixty thousand sages known as Välikhilyas. There are
fourteen Gandharvas, Apsaräs and other demigods, who are divided into seven
parties and who perform ritualistic activities every month to worship the
Supersoul through the sun-god according to different names. Thus the sun-god
travels through the universe for a distance of 95,100,000 yojanas (760,800,000
miles) at a speed of 16,004 miles at every moment.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
WTaavaNaev >aUvl/YaSYa SaiàveXa" Pa[Maa<al/+a<aTaae VYaa:YaaTa" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
etävän eva bhü-valayasya sanniveçaù pramäëa-lakñaëato vyäkhyätaù.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
904
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; etävän—so much;
eva—certainly; bhü-valayasya sanniveçaù—the arrangement of the whole
universe; pramäëa-lakñaëataù—according to measurement (fifty crores of
yojanas, or four billion miles in width and length) and characteristics;
vyäkhyätaù—estimated.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, I have thus far described the
diameter of the universe [fifty crores of yojanas, or four billion miles] and its
general characteristics, according to the estimations of learned scholars.
TEXT 2
WTaeNa ih idvae Ma<@l/MaaNa& TaiÜd oPaidXaiNTa YaQaa iÜdl/YaaeiNaRZPaavadqNaa&
Tae ANTare<aaNTair+a& Tadu>aYaSaiNDaTaMa( )) 2 ))
etena hi divo maëòala-mänaà tad-vida upadiçanti yathä dvi-dalayor
niñpävädénäà te antareëäntarikñaà tad-ubhaya-sandhitam.
SYNONYMS
etena—by this estimation; hi—indeed; divaù—of the upper planetary system;
maëòala-mänam—the measurement of the globe; tat-vidaù—the experts who
know about it; upadiçanti—instruct; yathä—just as; dvi-dalayoù—in the two
halves; niñpäva-ädénäm—of grain such as wheat; te—of the two divisions;
antareëa—in the intervening space; antarikñam—the sky or outer space;
tat—by the two; ubhaya—on both sides; sandhitam—where the two parts join.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
905
TRANSLATION
As a grain of wheat is divided into two parts and one can estimate the size of
the upper part by knowing that of the lower, so, expert geographers instruct,
one can understand the measurements of the upper part of the universe by
knowing those of the lower part. The sky between the earthly sphere and
heavenly sphere is called antarikña, or outer space. It adjoins the top of the
sphere of earth and the bottom of that of heaven.
TEXT 3
YaNMaDYaGaTaae >aGava&STaPaTaaMPaiTaSTaPaNa AaTaPaeNa i}al/aek-I& Pa[TaPaTYav>aaSaYaTYaa‚
TMa>aaSaa Sa Wz odGaYaNadi+a<aaYaNavEzuvTaSa&jai>aMaaRNÛXaEgY]aSaMaaNaai>aGaRiTai>a‚
raraeh<aavraeh<aSaMaaNaSQaaNaezu YaQaaSavNaMai>aPaÛMaaNaae Mak-raidzu raiXaZv‚
ha era}aai<a dqgaRhSvSaMaaNaaiNa ivDatae )) 3 ))
yan-madhya-gato bhagaväàs tapatäà patis tapana ätapena tri-lokéà pratapaty
avabhäsayaty ätma-bhäsä sa eña udagayana-dakñiëäyana-vaiñuvata-saàjïäbhir
mändya-çaighrya-samänäbhir gatibhir ärohaëävarohaëa-samäna-sthäneñu
yathä-savanam abhipadyamäno makarädiñu räçiñv aho-räträëi
dérgha-hrasva-samänäni vidhatte.
SYNONYMS
yat—of which (the intermediate space); madhya-gataù—being situated in the
middle; bhagavän—the most powerful; tapatäm patiù—the master of those that
heat the whole universe; tapanaù—the sun; ätapena—by heat; tri-lokém—the
three worlds; pratapati—heats; avabhäsayati—lights; ätma-bhäsä—by its own
illuminating rays; saù—that; eñaù—the sun globe; udagayana—of passing to
the northern side of the equator; dakñiëa-ayana—of passing to the southern
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
906
side of the equator; vaiñuvata—or of passing through the equator;
saàjïäbhiù—by different names; mändya—characterized by slowness;
çaighrya—swiftness; samänäbhiù—and by equality; gatibhiù—by movement;
ärohaëa—of rising; avarohaëa—of going down; samäna—or of staying in the
middle; sthäneñu—in positions; yathä-savanam—according to the order of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; abhipadyamänaù—moving;
makara-ädiñu—headed by the sign Makara (Capricorn); räçiñu—in different
signs; ahaù-räträëi—the days and nights; dérgha—long; hrasva—short;
samänäni—equal; vidhatte—makes.
TRANSLATION
In the midst of that region of outer space [antarikña] is the most opulent sun,
the king of all the planets that emanate heat, such as the moon. By the
influence of its radiation, the sun heats the universe and maintains its proper
order. It also gives light to help all living entities see. While passing toward the
north, toward the south or through the equator, in accordance with the order of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, it is said to move slowly, swiftly or
moderately. According to its movements in rising above, going beneath or
passing through the equator—and correspondingly coming in touch with
various signs of the zodiac, headed by Makara [Capricorn]—days and nights are
short, long or equal to one another.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä prays in his Brahma-saàhitä (5.52):
yac cakñur eña savitä sakala-grahäëäà
räjä samasta-sura-mürtir açeña-tejäù
yasyäjïayä bhramati saàbhåta-käla-cakro
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
907
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
under whose control even the sun, which is considered to be the eye of the
Lord, rotates within the fixed orbit of eternal time. The sun is the king of all
planetary systems and has unlimited potency in heat and light." Although the
sun is described as bhagavän, the most powerful, and although it is actually the
most powerful planet within the universe, it nevertheless has to carry out the
order of Govinda, Kåñëa. The sun-god cannot deviate even an inch from the
orbit designated to him. Therefore in every sphere of life, the supreme order of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is carried out. The entire material nature
carries out His orders. However, we foolishly see the activities of material
nature without understanding the supreme order and Supreme Person behind
them. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù: [Bg. 9.10]
material nature carries out the orders of the Lord, and thus everything is
maintained in an orderly way.
TEXT 4
Yada MaezTaul/YaaevRTaRTae Tadahaera}aai<a SaMaaNaaiNa >aviNTa Yada v*z>aaidzu
PaÄSau c raiXazu criTa TadahaNYaev vDaRNTae hSaiTa c MaaiSa MaaSYaekE-k-a
gai$=k-a rai}azu )) 4 ))
yadä meña-tulayor vartate tadäho-räträëi samänäni bhavanti yadä våñabhädiñu
païcasu ca räçiñu carati tadähäny eva vardhante hrasati ca mäsi mäsy ekaikä
ghaöikä rätriñu.
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; meña-tulayoù—in Meña (Aries) and Tulä (Libra); vartate—the
sun exists; tadä—at that time; ahaù-räträëi—the days and nights;
samänäni—equal in duration; bhavanti—are; yadä—when;
våñabha-ädiñu—headed by Våñabha (Taurus) and Mithuna (Gemini);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
908
païcasu—in the five; ca—also; räçiñu—signs; carati—moves; tadä—at that
time; ahäni—the days; eva—certainly; vardhante—increase; hrasati—is
diminished; ca—and; mäsi mäsi—in every month; eka-ekä—one;
ghaöikä—half hour; rätriñu—in the nights.
TRANSLATION
When the sun passes through Meña [Aries] and Tulä [Libra], the durations
of day and night are equal. When it passes through the five signs headed by
Våñabha [Taurus], the duration of the days increases [until Cancer], and then it
gradually decreases by half an hour each month, until day and night again
become equal [in Libra].
TEXT 5
Yada v*iêk-aidzu PaÄSau vTaRTae Tadahaera}aai<a ivPaYaRYaai<a >aviNTa )) 5 ))
yadä våçcikädiñu païcasu vartate tadäho-räträëi viparyayäëi bhavanti.
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; våçcika-ädiñu—headed by Våçcika (Scorpio); païcasu—five;
vartate—remains; tadä—at that time; ahaù-räträëi—the days and nights;
viparyayäëi—the opposite (the duration of the day decreases, and that of night
increases); bhavanti—are.
TRANSLATION
When the sun passes through the five signs beginning with Våçcika
[Scorpio], the duration of the days decreases [until Capricorn], and then
gradually it increases month after month, until day and night become equal [in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
909
Aries].
TEXT 6
YaavÕi+a<aaYaNaMahaiNa vDaRNTae YaavdudGaYaNa& ra}aYa" )) 6 ))
yävad dakñiëäyanam ahäni vardhante yävad udagayanaà rätrayaù.
SYNONYMS
yävat—until; dakñiëa-ayanam—the sun passes to the southern side;
ahäni—the days; vardhante—increase; yävat—until; udagayanam—the sun
passes to the northern side; rätrayaù—the nights.
TRANSLATION
Until the sun travels to the south the days grow longer, and until it travels
to the north the nights grow longer.
TEXT 7
Wv& Nav k-ae$=Ya Wk-PaÄaXaç+aai<a YaaeJaNaaNaa& MaaNaSaaetariGairPairvTaRNa‚
SYaaePaidXaiNTa TaiSMaàENd]q& Paurq& PaUvRSMaaNMaeraedeRvDaaNaq& NaaMa di+a<aTaae YaaMYaa&
Sa&YaMaNaq& NaaMa PaêaÜaå<aq& iNaãaecNaq& NaaMa otarTa" SaaEMYaa& iv>aavrq& NaaMa
TaaSaUdYaMaDYaaöaSTaMaYaiNaXaqQaaNaqiTa >aUTaaNaa& Pa[v*itaiNav*itaiNaiMataaiNa SaMaYaiv‚
Xaeze<a MaeraeêTauidRXaMa( )) 7 ))
evaà nava koöaya eka-païcäçal-lakñäëi yojanänäà
mänasottara-giri-parivartanasyopadiçanti tasminn aindréà puréà pürvasmän
meror devadhänéà näma dakñiëato yämyäà saàyamanéà näma paçcäd
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
910
väruëéà nimlocanéà näma uttarataù saumyäà vibhävaréà näma
täsüdaya-madhyähnästamaya-niçéthänéti bhütänäà pravåtti-nivåtti-nimittäni
samaya-viçeñeëa meroç catur-diçam.
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; nava—nine; koöayaù—ten millions; eka-païcäçat—fifty-one;
lakñäëi—hundred thousands; yojanänäm—of the yojanas;
mänasottara-giri—of the mountain known as Mänasottara; parivartanasya—of
the circumambulation; upadiçanti—they (learned scholars) teach; tasmin—on
that (Mänasottara Mountain); aindrém—of King Indra; purém—the city;
pürvasmät—on the eastern side; meroù—of Sumeru Mountain;
devadhäném—Devadhäné; näma—of the name; dakñiëataù—on the southern
side; yämyäm—of Yamaräja; saàyamaném—Saàyamané; näma—named;
paçcät—on the western side; väruëém—of Varuëa; nimlocaném—Nimlocané;
näma—named; uttarataù—on the northern side; saumyäm—of the moon;
vibhävarém—Vibhävaré; näma—named; täsu—in all of them; udaya—rising;
madhyähna—midday; astamaya—sunset; niçéthäni—midnight; iti—thus;
bhütänäm—of the living entities; pravåtti—of activity; nivåtti—and cessation
of activity; nimittäni—the causes; samaya-viçeñeëa—by the particular times;
meroù—of Sumeru Mountain; catuù-diçam—the four sides.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued; My dear King, as stated before, the learned
say that the sun travels over all sides of Mänasottara Mountain in a circle whose
length is 95,100,000 yojanas [760,800,000 miles]. On Mänasottara Mountain,
due east of Mount Sumeru, is a place known as Devadhäné, possessed by King
Indra. Similarly, in the south is a place known as Saàyamané, possessed by
Yamaräja, in the west is a place known as Nimlocané, possessed by Varuëa, and
in the north is a place named Vibhävaré, possessed by the moon-god. Sunrise,
midday, sunset and midnight occur in all those places according to specific
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
911
times, thus engaging all living entities in their various occupational duties and
also making them cease such duties.
TEXTS 8-9
Ta}aTYaaNaa& idvSaMaDYa(r)Ta Wv SadaidTYaSTaPaiTa SaVYaeNaacl&/ di+a<aeNa
k-raeiTa )) 8 )) Ya}aaedeiTa TaSYa h SaMaaNaSaU}aiNaPaaTae iNaãaeciTa Ya}a
KvcNa SYaNdeNaai>aTaPaiTa TaSYa hEz SaMaaNaSaU}aiNaPaaTae Pa[SvaPaYaiTa Ta}a GaTa&
Na PaXYaiNTa Yae Ta& SaMaNauPaXYaerNa( )) 9 ))
tatratyänäà divasa-madhyaìgata eva sadädityas tapati savyenäcalaà
dakñiëena karoti; yatrodeti tasya ha samäna-sütra-nipäte nimlocati yatra
kvacana syandenäbhitapati tasya haiña samäna-sütra-nipäte prasväpayati tatra
gataà na paçyanti ye taà samanupaçyeran.
SYNONYMS
tatratyänäm—for the living entities residing on Mount Meru;
divasa-madhyaìgataù—being positioned as at midday; eva—indeed;
sadä—always; ädityaù—the sun; tapati—heats; savyena—to the left side;
acalam—Sumeru Mountain; dakñiëena—to the right (being forced by wind
blowing to the right, the sun moves to the right); karoti—moves; yatra—the
point where; udeti—it rises; tasya—of that position; ha—certainly;
samäna-sütra-nipäte—at the diametrically opposite point; nimlocati—the sun
sets; yatra—where; kvacana—somewhere; syandena—with perspiration;
abhitapati—heats (at midday); tasya—of that; ha—certainly; eñaù—this (the
sun); samäna-sütra-nipäte—at the diametrically opposite point;
prasväpayati—the sun causes to sleep (as at midnight); tatra—there;
gatam—gone; na paçyanti—do not see; ye—who; tam—the sunset;
samanupaçyeran—seeing.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
912
TRANSLATION
The living entities residing on Sumeru Mountain are always very warm, as
at midday, because for them the sun is always overhead. Although the sun
moves counterclockwise, facing the constellations, with Sumeru Mountain on
its left, it also moves clockwise and appears to have the mountain on its right
because it is influenced by the dakñiëävarta wind. People living in countries at
points diametrically opposite to where the sun is first seen rising will see the
sun setting, and if a straight line were drawn from a point where the sun is at
midday, the people in countries at the opposite end of the line would be
experiencing midnight. Similarly, if people residing where the sun is setting
were to go to countries diametrically opposite, they would not see the sun in the
same condition.
TEXT 10
Yada cENÛ\a" PauYaaR" Pa[cl/Tae PaÄdXagai$=k-ai>aYaaRMYaa& SaPaadk-aei$=ÜYa&
YaaeJaNaaNaa& SaaDaRÜadXal/+aai<a SaaiDak-aiNa caePaYaaiTa )) 10 ))
yadä caindryäù puryäù pracalate païcadaça-ghaöikäbhir yämyäà
sapäda-koöi-dvayaà yojanänäà särdha-dvädaça-lakñäëi sädhikäni copayäti.
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; ca—and; aindryäù—of Indra; puryäù—from the residence;
pracalate—it moves; païcadaça—by fifteen; ghaöikäbhiù—half hours (actually
twenty-four minutes); yämyäm—to the residence of Yamaräja;
sapäda-koöi-dvayam—two and a quarter crores (22,500,000); yojanänäm—of
yojanas; särdha—and one half; dvädaça-lakñäëi—twelve hundred thousand;
sädhikäni—twenty-five thousand more; ca—and; upayäti—he passes over.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
913
TRANSLATION
When the sun travels from Devadhäné, the residence of Indra, to
Saàyamané, the residence of Yamaräja, it travels 23,775,000 yojanas
[190,200,000 miles] in fifteen ghaöikäs [six hours].
PURPORT
The distance indicated by the word sädhikäni is
païca-viàçati-sahasrädhikäni, or 25,000 yojanas. That plus two and a half
crores and twelve and a half lakña of yojanas is the distance the sun travels
between each two cities. This comes to 23,775,000 yojanas, or 190,200,000
miles. The total orbit of the sun is four times that distance, or 95,100,000
yojanas (760,800,000 miles).
TEXT 11
Wv& TaTaae vaå<aq& SaaEMYaaMaENd]q& c PauNaSTaQaaNYae c Ga]ha" SaaeMaadYaae
Na+a}aE" Sah JYaaeiTaê§e- SaMa>YauÛiNTa Sah va iNaãaeciNTa )) 11 ))
evaà tato väruëéà saumyäm aindréà ca punas tathänye ca grahäù somädayo
nakñatraiù saha jyotiç-cakre samabhyudyanti saha vä nimlo-canti.
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; tataù—from there; väruëém—to the quarters where
Varuëa lives; saumyäm—to the quarters where the moon lives; aindréà
ca—and to the quarters where Indra lives; punaù—again; tathä—so also;
anye—the others; ca—also; grahäù—planets; soma-ädayaù—headed by the
moon; nakñatraiù—all the stars; saha—with; jyotiù-cakre—in the celestial
sphere; samabhyudyanti—rise; saha—along with; vä—or; nimlocanti—set.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
914
TRANSLATION
From the residence of Yamaräja the sun travels to Nimlocané, the residence
of Varuëa, from there to Vibhävaré, the residence of the moon-god, and from
there again to the residence of Indra. In a similar way, the moon, along with the
other stars and planets, becomes visible in the celestial sphere and then sets and
again becomes invisible.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (10.21) Kåñëa says, nakñaträëäm ahaà çaçé: "Of stars I am
the moon." This indicates that the moon is similar to the other stars. The
Vedic literature informs us that within this universe there is one sun, which is
moving. The Western theory that all the luminaries in the sky are different
suns is not confirmed in the Vedic literature. Nor can we assume that these
luminaries are the suns of other universes, for each universe is covered by
various layers of material elements, and therefore although the universes are
clustered together, we cannot see from one universe to another. In other
words, whatever we see is within this one universe. In each universe there is
one Lord Brahmä, and there are other demigods on other planets, but there is
only one sun.
TEXT 12
Wv& MauhUTaeRNa cTauiñ&Xaç+aYaaeJaNaaNYaíXaTaaiDak-aiNa SaaErae rQañYaqMaYaae_SaaE
cTaSa*zu PairvTaRTae Paurqzu )) 12 ))
evaà muhürtena catus-triàçal-lakña-yojanäny añöa-çatädhikäni sauro rathas
trayémayo 'sau catasåñu parivartate puréñu.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
915
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; muhürtena—in a muhürta (forty-eight minutes);
catuù-triàçat—thirty-four; lakña—hundred thousands; yojanäni—yojanas;
añöa-çatädhikäni—increased by eight hundred; sauraù rathaù—the chariot of
the sun-god; trayé-mayaù—which is worshiped by the Gäyatré mantra (oà bhür
bhuvaù svaù tat savitur, etc.); asau—that; catasåñu—to the four;
parivartate—he moves; puréñu—through different residential quarters.
TRANSLATION
Thus the chariot of the sun-god, which is trayémaya, or worshiped by the
words oà bhür bhuvaù svaù, travels through the four residences mentioned
above at a speed of 3,400,800 yojanas [27,206,400 miles] in a muhürta.
TEXT 13
YaSYaEk&- c§&- ÜadXaar& z<NaeiMa i}a<aai>a Sa&vTSaraTMak&- SaMaaMaNaiNTa
TaSYaa+aae MaeraeMaURDaRiNa k*-Taae MaaNaSaaetare k*-TaeTar>aaGaae Ya}a Pa[aeTa& rivrQac§&-
TaEl/YaN}ac§-vd( >a[MaNMaaNaSaaetariGaraE Pair>a]MaiTa )) 13 ))
yasyaikaà cakraà dvädaçäraà ñaë-nemi tri-ëäbhi saàvatsarätmakaà
samämananti tasyäkño meror mürdhani kåto mänasottare kåtetara-bhägo yatra
protaà ravi-ratha-cakraà taila-yantra-cakravad bhraman mänasottara-girau
paribhramati.
SYNONYMS
yasya—of which; ekam—one; cakram—wheel; dvädaça—twelve;
aram—spokes; ñaö—six; nemi—the segments of the rim; tri-ëäbhi—the three
pieces of the hub; saàvatsara-ätmakam—whose nature is a saàvatsara;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
916
samämananti—they fully describe; tasya—the chariot of the sun-god;
akñaù—the axle; meroù—of Sumeru Mountain; mürdhani—on the top;
kåtaù—fixed; mänasottare—on the mountain known as Mänasottara;
kåta—fixed; itara-bhägaù—the other end; yatra—where; protam—fixed on;
ravi-ratha-cakram—the wheel of the chariot of the sun-god;
taila-yantra-cakra-vat—like the wheel of an oil-pressing machine;
bhramat—moving; mänasottara-girau—on Mänasottara Mountain;
paribhramati—turns.
TRANSLATION
The chariot of the sun-god has only one wheel, which is known as
Saàvatsara. The twelve months are calculated to be its twelve spokes, the six
seasons are the sections of its rim, and the three cätur-mäsya periods are its
three-sectioned hub. One side of the axle carrying the wheel rests upon the
summit of Mount Sumeru, and the other rests upon Mänasottara Mountain.
Affixed to the outer end of the axle, the wheel continuously rotates on
Mänasottara Mountain like the wheel of an oil-pressing machine.
TEXT 14
TaiSMaà+ae k*-TaMaUl/ae iÜTaqYaae_+aSTauYaRMaaNaeNa SaiMMaTaSTaEl/YaN}aa+avd( D]auve
k*-TaaePair>aaGa" )) 14 ))
tasminn akñe kåtamülo dvitéyo 'kñas turyamänena sammitas taila-yanträkñavad
dhruve kåtopari-bhägaù.
SYNONYMS
tasmin akñe—in that axle; kåta-mülaù—whose base is fixed; dvitéyaù—a
second; akñaù—axle; turyamänena—by one fourth; sammitaù—measured;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
917
taila-yantra-akña-vat—like the axle of an oil-pressing machine; dhruve—to
Dhruvaloka; kåta—fixed; upari-bhägaù—upper portion.
TRANSLATION
As in an oil-pressing machine, this first axle is attached to a second axle,
which is one-fourth as long [3,937,500 yojanas, or 31,500,000 miles]. The
upper end of this second axle is attached to Dhruvaloka by a rope of wind.
TEXT 15
rQaNaq@STau z$(i}a&Xaç+aYaaeJaNaaYaTaSTataurqYa>aaGaivXaal/STaavaNa( rivrQaYau‚
Gaae Ya}a hYaaX^NdaeNaaMaaNa" Saáaå<aYaaeiJaTaa vhiNTa devMaaidTYaMa( )) 15 ))
ratha-néòas tu ñaö-triàçal-lakña-yojanäyatas tat-turéya-bhäga-viçälas tävän
ravi-ratha-yugo yatra hayäç chando-nämänaù saptäruëa-yojitä vahanti devam
ädityam.
SYNONYMS
ratha-néòaù—the interior of the chariot; tu—but;
ñaö-triàçat-lakña-yojana-äyataù—3,600,000 yojanas long;
tat-turéya-bhäga—one quarter of that measure (900,000 yojanas);
viçälaù—having a width; tävän—so much also; ravi-ratha-yugaù—the yoke for
the horses; yatra—where; hayäù—horses; chandaù-nämänaù—having the
different names of Vedic meters; sapta—seven; aruëa-yojitäù—hooked up by
Aruëadeva; vahanti—carry; devam—the demigod; ädityam—the sun-god.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the carriage of the sun-god's chariot is estimated to be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
918
3,600,000 yojanas [28,800,000 miles] long and one-fourth as wide [900,000
yojanas, or 7,200,000 miles]. The chariot's horses, which are named after
Gäyatré and other Vedic meters, are harnessed by Aruëadeva to a yoke that is
also 900,000 yojanas wide. This chariot continuously carries the sun-god.
PURPORT
In the Viñëu Puräëa it is stated:
gäyatré ca båhaty uñëig
jagaté triñöup eva ca
anuñöup paìktir ity uktäç
chandäàsi harayo raveù
The seven horses yoked to the sun-god's chariot are named Gäyatré, Båhati,
Uñëik, Jagaté, Triñöup, Anuñöup and Paìkti. These names of various Vedic
meters designate the seven horses that carry the sun-god's chariot.
TEXT 16
PaurSTaaTSaivTaurå<a" PaêaÀ iNaYau¢-" SaaETYae k-MaRi<a ik-l/aSTae )) 16 ))
purastät savitur aruëaù paçcäc ca niyuktaù sautye karmaëi kiläste.
SYNONYMS
purastät—in front; savituù—of the sun-god; aruëaù—the demigod named
Aruëa; paçcät—looking backward; ca—and; niyuktaù—engaged; sautye—of a
charioteer; karmaëi—in the work; kila—certainly; äste—remains.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
919
Although Aruëadeva sits in front of the sun-god and is engaged in driving
the chariot and controlling the horses, he looks backward toward the sun-god.
PURPORT
In the Väyu Puräëa the position of the horses is described:
saptäçva-rüpa-cchandäàsé
vahante vämato ravim
cakra-pakña-nibaddhäni
cakre väkñaù samähitaù
Although Aruëadeva is in the front seat, controlling the horses, he looks back
toward the sun-god from his left side.
TEXT 17
TaQaa val/i%LYaa ‰zYaae_x(GauïPavRMaa}aa" ziíSahóai<a PaurTa" SaUYa| SaU¢-‚
vak-aYa iNaYau¢-a" Sa&STauviNTa )) 17 ))
tathä välikhilyä åñayo 'ìguñöha-parva-mäträù ñañöi-sahasräëi purataù süryaà
sükta-väkäya niyuktäù saàstuvanti.
SYNONYMS
tathä—there; välikhilyäù—Välikhilyas; åñayaù—great sages;
aìguñöha-parva-mäträù—whose size is that of a thumb; ñañöi-sahasräëi—sixty
thousand; purataù—in front; süryam—the sun-god; su-ukta-väkäya—for
speaking eloquently; niyuktäù—engaged; saàstuvanti—offer prayers.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
920
There are sixty thousand saintly persons named Välikhilyas, each the size of
a thumb, who are located in front of the sun-god and who offer him eloquent
prayers of glorification.
TEXT 18
TaQaaNYae c ‰zYaae GaNDavaRPSarSaae NaaGaa Ga]aMa<Yaae YaaTauDaaNaa deva wTYae‚
kE-k-Xaae Ga<aa" Saá cTaudRXa MaaiSa MaaiSa >aGavNTa& SaUYaRMaaTMaaNa& NaaNaaNaaMaaNa&
Pa*Qax(NaaNaaNaaMaaNa" Pa*Qa¡-MaRi>aÜRNÜXa oPaaSaTae )) 18 ))
tathänye ca åñayo gandharväpsaraso nägä grämaëyo yätudhänä devä ity
ekaikaço gaëäù sapta caturdaça mäsi mäsi bhagavantaà süryam ätmänaà
nänä-nämänaà påthaì-nänä-nämänaù påthak-karmabhir dvandvaça upäsate.
SYNONYMS
tathä—similarly; anye—others; ca—also; åñayaù—saintly persons;
gandharva-apsarasaù—Gandharvas and Apsaräs; nägäù—Näga snakes;
grämaëyaù—Yakñas; yätudhänäù—Räkñasas; deväù—demigods; iti—thus;
eka-ekaçaù—one by one; gaëäù—groups; sapta—seven; caturdaça—fourteen
in number; mäsi mäsi—in every month; bhagavantam—unto the most
powerful demigod; süryam—the sun-god; ätmänam—the life of the universe;
nänä—various; nämänam—who possesses names; påthak—separate;
nänä-nämänaù—having various names; påthak—separate; karmabhiù—by
ritualistic ceremonies; dvandvaçaù—in groups of two; upäsate—worship.
TRANSLATION
Similarly, fourteen other saints, Gandharvas, Apsaräs, Nägas, Yakñas,
Räkñasas and demigods, who are divided into groups of two, assume different
names every month and continuously perform different ritualistic ceremonies to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
921
worship the Supreme Lord as the most powerful demigod Süryadeva, who holds
many names.
PURPORT
In the Viñëu Puräëa it is said:
stuvanti munayaù süryaà
gandharvair géyate puraù
nåtyanto 'psaraso yänti
süryasyänu niçäcaräù
vahanti pannagä yakñaiù
kriyate 'bhiñusaìgrahaù
välikhilyäs tathaivainaà
parivärya samäsate
so 'yaà sapta-gaëaù süryamaëòale
muni-sattama
himoñëa väri-våñöéëäà
hetutve samayaà gataù
Worshiping the most powerful demigod Sürya, the Gandharvas sing in front of
him, the Apsaräs dance before the chariot, the Niçäcaras follow the chariot,
the Pannagas decorate the chariot, the Yakñas guard the chariot, and the saints
called the Välikhilyas surround the sun-god and offer prayers. The seven
groups of fourteen associates arrange the proper times for regular snow, heat
and rain throughout the universe.
TEXT 19
l/+aaetar& SaaDaRNavk-aei$=YaaeJaNaPairMa<@l&/ >aUvl/YaSYa +a<aeNa SaGaVYaUTYautar&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
922
iÜSahó YaaeJaNaaiNa Sa >au»e )) 19 ))
lakñottaraà särdha-nava-koöi-yojana-parimaëòalaà bhü-valayasya kñaëena
sagavyüty-uttaraà dvi-sahasra-yojanäni sa bhuìkte.
SYNONYMS
lakña-uttaram—increased by 100,000; särdha—with 5,000,000;
nava-koöi-yojana—of 90,000,000 yojanas; parimaëòalam—circumference;
bhü-valayasya—of the earthly sphere; kñaëena—in one moment;
sagavyüti-uttaram—augmented by two kroças (four miles);
dvi-sahasra-yojanäni—2,000 yojanas; saù—the sun-god; bhuìkte—traverses.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, in his orbit through Bhü-maëòala, the sun-god traverses a
distance of 95,100,000 yojanas [760,800,000 miles] at the speed of 2,000
yojanas and two kroças [16,004 miles] in a moment.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-first Chapter of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled, "The Movements of the Sun."
22. The Orbits of the Planets
In this chapter the orbits of the planets are described. According to the
movements of the moon and other planets, all the inhabitants of the universe
are prone to auspicious and inauspicious situations. This is referred to as the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
923
influence of the stars.
The sun-god, who controls the affairs of the entire universe, especially in
regard to heat, light, seasonal changes and so on, is considered an expansion of
Näräyaëa. He represents the three Vedas-Åg, Yajur and Säma-and therefore he
is known as Trayémaya, the form of Lord Näräyaëa. Sometimes the sun-god is
also called Sürya Näräyaëa. The sun-god has expanded himself in twelve
divisions, and thus he controls the six seasonal changes and causes winter,
summer, rain and so on. Yogés and karmés following the varëäçrama institution,
who practice haöha or añöäìga-yoga or who perform agnihotra sacrifices,
worship Sürya Näräyaëa for their own benefit. The demigod Sürya is always in
touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa. Residing in outer
space, which is in the middle of the universe, between Bhüloka and
Bhuvarloka, the sun rotates through the time circle of the zodiac, represented
by twelve räçis, or signs, and assumes different names according to the sign he
is in. For the moon, every month is divided into two fortnights. Similarly,
according to solar calculations, a month is equal to the time the sun spends in
one constellation; two months constitute one season, and there are twelve
months in a year. The entire area of the sky is divided into two halves, each
representing an ayana, the course traversed by the sun within a period of six
months. The sun travels sometimes slowly, sometimes swiftly and sometimes at
a moderate speed. In this way it travels within the three worlds, consisting of
the heavenly planets, the earthly planets and outer space. These orbits are
referred to by great learned scholars by the names Saàvatsara, Parivatsara,
Iòävatsara, Anuvatsara and Vatsara.
The moon is situated 100,000 yojanas above the rays of the sunshine. Day
and night on the heavenly planets and Pitåloka are calculated according to its
waning and waxing. Above the moon by a distance of 200,000 yojanas are
some stars, and above these stars is Çukra-graha (Venus), whose influence is
always auspicious for the inhabitants of the entire universe. Above
Çukra-graha by 200,000 yojanas is Budha-graha (Mercury), whose influence is
sometimes auspicious and sometimes inauspicious. Next, above Budha-graha by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
924
200,000 yojanas, is Aìgäraka (Mars), which almost always has an unfavorable
influence. Above Aìgäraka by another 200,000 yojanas is the planet called
Båhaspati-graha (Jupiter), which is always very favorable for qualified
brähmaëas. Above Båhaspati-graha is the planet Çanaiçcara (Saturn), which is
very inauspicious, and above Saturn is a group of seven stars occupied by great
saintly persons who are always thinking of the welfare of the entire universe.
These seven stars circumambulate Dhruvaloka, which is the residence of Lord
Viñëu within this universe.
TEXT 1
raJaaevac
YadeTaÙGavTa AaidTYaSYa Maeå& Da]uv& c Pa[di+a<aeNa Pair§-aMaTaae
raXaqNaaMai>aMau%& Pa[cil/Ta& caPa[di+a<a& >aGavTaaePavi<aRTaMaMauZYa vYa& k-QaMa‚
NauiMaMaqMahqiTa )) 1 ))
räjoväca
yad etad bhagavata ädityasya meruà dhruvaà ca pradakñiëena parikrämato
räçénäm abhimukhaà pracalitaà cäpradakñiëaà bhagavatopavarëitam amuñya
vayaà katham anumimémahéti.
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—the King (Mahäräja Parékñit) inquired; yat—which; etat—this;
bhagavataù—of the most powerful; ädityasya—of the sun (Sürya Näräyaëa);
merum—the mountain known as Sumeru; dhruvam ca—as well as the planet
known as Dhruvaloka; pradakñiëena—by placing on the right;
parikrämataù—which is going around; räçénäm—the different signs of the
zodiac; abhimukham—facing toward; pracalitam—moving; ca—and;
apradakñiëam—placing on the left; bhagavatä—by Your Lordship;
upavarëitam—described; amuñya—of that; vayam—we (the hearer);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
925
katham—how; anumimémahi—can accept it by argument and inference;
iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé: My dear lord, you have
already affirmed the truth that the supremely powerful sun-god travels around
Dhruvaloka with both Dhruvaloka and Mount Sumeru on his right. Yet at the
same time the sun-god faces the signs of the zodiac and keeps Sumeru and
Dhruvaloka on his left. How can we reasonably accept that the sun-god
proceeds with Sumeru and Dhruvaloka on both his left and right
simultaneously?
TEXT 2
Sa haevac
YaQaa ku-l/al/c§e-<a >a]MaTaa Sah >a]MaTaa& Tadaé[Yaa<aa& iPaPaqil/k-adqNaa&
GaiTarNYaEv Pa[deXaaNTareZvPYauPal/>YaMaaNaTvadev& Na+a}araiXai>aåPal/i+aTaeNa
k-al/c§e-<a Da]uv& Maeå& c Pa[di+a<aeNa PairDaavTaa Sah PairDaavMaaNaaNaa&
Tadaé[Yaa<aa& SaUYaaRdqNaa& Ga]ha<aa& GaiTarNYaEv Na+a}aaNTare raXYaNTare
caePal/>YaMaaNaTvaTa( )) 2 ))
sa hoväca
yathä kuläla-cakreëa bhramatä saha bhramatäà tad-äçrayäëäà pipélikädénäà
gatir anyaiva pradeçäntareñv apy upalabhyamänatväd evaà nakñatra-räçibhir
upalakñitena käla-cakreëa dhruvaà meruà ca pradakñiëena paridhävatä saha
paridhävamänänäà tad-äçrayäëäà süryädénäà grahäëäà gatir anyaiva
nakñaträntare räçy-antare copalabhyamänatvät.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
926
SYNONYMS
saù—Çukadeva Gosvämé; ha—very clearly; uväca—answered; yathä—just as;
kuläla-cakreëa—a potter's wheel; bhramatä—turning around; saha—with;
bhramatäm—of those turning around; tat-äçrayäëäm—being located on that
(wheel); pipélika-ädénäm—of small ants; gatiù—the motion; anyä—other;
eva—certainly; pradeça-antareñu—in different locations; api—also;
upalabhyamänatvät—due to being experienced; evam—similarly;
nakñatra-räçibhiù—by the stars and signs; upalakñitena—being seen;
käla-cakreëa—with the great wheel of time; dhruvam—the star known as
Dhruvaloka; merum—the mountain known as Sumeru; ca—and;
pradakñiëena—on the right; paridhävatä—going around; saha—with;
paridhävamänänäm—of those going around; tat-äçrayäëäm—whose shelter is
that wheel of time; sürya-ädénäm—headed by the sun; grahäëäm—of the
planets; gatiù—the motion; anyä—other; eva—certainly; nakñatra-antare—in
different stars; räçi-antare—in different signs; ca—and;
upalabhyamänatvät—due to being observed.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé clearly answered: When a potter's wheel is moving
and small ants located on that big wheel are moving with it, one can see that
their motion is different from that of the wheel because they appear sometimes
on one part of the wheel and sometimes on another. Similarly, the signs and
constellations, with Sumeru and Dhruvaloka on their right, move with the
wheel of time, and the antlike sun and other planets move with them. The sun
and planets, however, are seen in different signs and constellations at different
times. This indicates that their motion is different from that of the zodiac and
the wheel of time itself.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
927
TEXT 3
Sa Wz >aGavaNaaidPauåz Wv Saa+aaàaraYa<aae l/aek-aNaa& SvSTaYa AaTMaaNa&
}aYaqMaYa& k-MaRivXauiÖiNaiMata& k-ivi>ariPa c vedeNa iviJajaSYaMaaNaae ÜadXaDaa
iv>aJYa z$(Sau vSaNTaaidZv*Tauzu YaQaaePaJaaezMa*TauGau<aaNa( ivdDaaiTa )) 3 ))
sa eña bhagavän ädi-puruña eva säkñän näräyaëo lokänäà svastaya ätmänaà
trayémayaà karma-viçuddhi-nimittaà kavibhir api ca vedena vijijïäsyamäno
dvädaçadhä vibhajya ñaösu vasantädiñv åtuñu yathopa-joñam åtu-guëän
vidadhäti.
SYNONYMS
saù—that; eñaù—this; bhagavän—the supremely powerful; ädi-puruñaù—the
original person; eva—certainly; säkñät—directly; näräyaëaù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa; lokänäm—of all the planets; svastaye—for
the benefit; ätmänam—Himself; trayé-mayam—consisting of the three Vedas
(Säma, Yajur and Åg); karma-viçuddhi—of purification of fruitive activities;
nimittam—the cause; kavibhiù—by great saintly persons; api—also; ca—and;
vedena—by Vedic knowledge; vijijïäsyamänaù—being inquired about;
dvädaça-dhä—in twelve divisions; vibhajya—dividing; ñaösu—in six;
vasanta-ädiñu—headed by spring; åtuñu—seasons; yathä-upajoñam—according
to the enjoyment of their past activities; åtu-guëän—the qualities of the
different seasons; vidadhäti—he arranges.
TRANSLATION
The original cause of the cosmic manifestation is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Näräyaëa. When great saintly persons, fully aware of the Vedic
knowledge, offered prayers to the Supreme Person, He descended to this
material world in the form of the sun to benefit all the planets and purify
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
928
fruitive activities. He divided Himself into twelve parts and created seasonal
forms, beginning with spring. In this way He created the seasonal qualities,
such as heat, cold and so on.
TEXT 4
TaMaeTaiMah PauåzañYYaa ivÛYaa v<aaRé[MaacaraNauPaQaa oÀavcE" k-MaRi>araMNaaTaE‚
YaaeRGaivTaaNaEê é[ÖYaa YaJaNTaae_ÅSaa é[eYa" SaMaiDaGaC^iNTa )) 4 ))
tam etam iha puruñäs trayyä vidyayä varëäçramäcäränupathä uccävacaiù
karmabhir ämnätair yoga-vitänaiç ca çraddhayä yajanto 'ïjasä çreyaù
samadhigacchanti.
SYNONYMS
tam—Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); etam—this; iha—in this
world of mortality; puruñäù—all people; trayyä—having three divisions;
vidyayä—by the Vedic knowledge; varëa-äçrama-äcära—the practices of the
varëäçrama system; anupathäù—following; ucca-avacaiù—higher or lower
according to the different positions in the varëäçrama-dharma (brähmaëa,
kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra); karmabhiù—by their respective activities;
ämnätaiù—handed down; yoga-vitänaiù—by meditation and other yogic
processes; ca—and; çraddhayä—with great faith; yajantaù—worshiping;
aïjasä—without difficulty; çreyaù—the ultimate benefit of life;
samadhigacchanti—they attain.
TRANSLATION
According to the system of four varëas and four äçramas, people generally
worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, who is situated as the
sun-god. With great faith they worship the Supreme Personality as the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
929
Supersoul according to ritualistic ceremonies handed down in the three Vedas,
such as agnihotra and similar higher and lower fruitive acts, and according to
the process of mystic yoga. In this way they very easily attain the ultimate goal
of life.
TEXT 5
AQa Sa Wz AaTMaa l/aek-aNaa& ÛavaPa*iQaVYaaerNTare<a Na>aaevl/YaSYa k-al/‚
c§-GaTaae ÜadXa MaaSaaNa( >au»e raiXaSa&jaNa( Sa&vTSaravYavaNMaaSa" Pa+aÜYa&
idva Na¢&- ceiTa SaPaad+aRÜYaMauPaidXaiNTa YaavTaa zïMa&Xa& >auÅqTa Sa vE
‰TauirTYauPaidXYaTae Sa&vTSaravYav" )) 5 ))
atha sa eña ätmä lokänäà dyäv-äpåthivyor antareëa nabho-valayasya
kälacakra-gato dvädaça mäsän bhuìkte räçi-saàjïän saàvatsarävayavän
mäsaù pakña-dvayaà divä naktaà ceti sapädarkña-dvayam upadiçanti yävatä
ñañöham aàçaà bhuïjéta sa vai åtur ity upadiçyate saàvatsarävayavaù.
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; saù—He; eñaù—this; ätmä—the living force; lokänäm—of all
the three worlds; dyäv-ä-påthivyoù antareëa—between the upper and lower
portions of the universe; nabhaù-valayasya—of outer space;
käla-cakra-gataù—positioned in the wheel of time; dvädaça mäsän—twelve
months; bhuìkte—passes; räçi-saàjïän—named after the zodiac signs;
saàvatsara-avayavän—the parts of the whole year; mäsaù—one month;
pakña-dvayam—two fortnights; divä—a day; naktam ca—and a night;
iti—thus; sapäda-åkña-dvayam—by stellar calculations, two and a quarter
constellations; upadiçanti—they instruct; yävatä—by as much time; ñañöham
aàçam—one sixth of his orbit; bhuïjéta—pass; saù—that portion;
vai—indeed; åtuù—a season; iti—thus; upadiçyate—is instructed;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
930
saàvatsara-avayavaù—a part of a year.
TRANSLATION
The sun-god, who is Näräyaëa, or Viñëu, the soul of all the worlds, is
situated in outer space between the upper and lower portions of the universe.
Passing through twelve months on the wheel of time, the sun comes in touch
with twelve different signs of the zodiac and assumes twelve different names
according to those signs. The aggregate of those twelve months is called a
saàvatsara, or an entire year. According to lunar calculations, two
fortnights—one of the waxing moon and the other of the waning—form one
month. That same period is one day and night for the planet Pitåloka.
According to stellar calculations, a month equals two and one quarter
constellations. When the sun travels for two months, a season passes, and
therefore the seasonal changes are considered parts of the body of the year.
TEXT 6
AQa c YaavTaaDaeRNa Na>aaevqQYaa& Pa[criTa Ta& k-al/MaYaNaMaac+aTae )) 6 ))
atha ca yävatärdhena nabho-véthyäà pracarati taà kälam ayanam äcakñate.
SYNONYMS
atha—now; ca—also; yävatä—by as long as; ardhena—half;
nabhaù-véthyäm—in outer space; pracarati—the sun moves; tam—that;
kälam—time; ayanam—ayana; äcakñate—is said.
TRANSLATION
Thus the time the sun takes to rotate through half of outer space is called an
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
931
ayana, or its period of movement [in the north or in the south].
TEXT 7
AQa c Yaavà>aaeMa<@l&/ Sah ÛavaPa*iQaVYaaeMaR<@l/a>Yaa& k-aTSNYaeRNa Sa h
>auÅqTa Ta& k-al&/ Sa&vTSar& PairvTSariMa@avTSarMaNauvTSar& vTSariMaiTa
>aaNaaeMaaRNÛXaEg]YaSaMaGaiTai>a" SaMaaMaNaiNTa )) 7 ))
atha ca yävan nabho-maëòalaà saha dyäv-äpåthivyor maëòaläbhyäà
kärtsnyena sa ha bhuïjéta taà kälaà saàvatsaraà parivatsaram iòävatsaram
anuvatsaraà vatsaram iti bhänor mändya-çaighrya-sama-gatibhiù
samämananti.
SYNONYMS
atha—now; ca—also; yävat—as long as; nabhaù-maëòalam—outer space,
between the upper and lower world; saha—along with; dyau—of the upper
world; äpåthivyoù—of the lower world; maëòaläbhyäm—the spheres;
kärtsnyena—entirely; saù—he; ha—indeed; bhuïjéta—may pass through;
tam—that; kälam—time; saàvatsaram—Saàvatsara;
parivatsaram—Parivatsara; iòävatsaram—Iòävatsara;
anuvatsaram—Anuvatsara; vatsaram—Vatsara; iti—thus; bhänoù—of the sun;
mändya—slow; çaighrya—speedy; sama—and equal; gatibhiù—by the speeds;
samämananti—the experienced scholars describe.
TRANSLATION
The sun-god has three speeds—slow, fast and moderate. The time he takes
to travel entirely around the spheres of heaven, earth and space at these three
speeds is referred to, by learned scholars, by the five names Saàvatsara,
Parivatsara, Iòävatsara, Anuvatsara and Vatsara.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
932
PURPORT
According to solar astronomical calculations, each year extends six days
beyond the calendar year, and according to lunar calculations, each year is six
days shorter. Therefore, because of the movements of the sun and moon, there
is a difference of twelve days between the solar and lunar years. As the
Saàvatsara, Parivatsara, Iòävatsara, Anuvatsara and Vatsara pass by, two extra
months are added within each five years. This makes a sixth saàvatsara, but
because that saàvatsara is extra, the solar system is calculated according to the
above five names.
TEXT 8
Wv& cNd]Maa Ak-RGa>aiSTa>Ya oPairíaç+aYaaeJaNaTa oPal/>YaMaaNaae_k-RSYa
Sa&vTSar>aui¢&- Pa+aa>Yaa& MaaSa>aui¢&- SaPaad+aaR>Yaa& idNaeNaEv Pa+a>aui¢-MaGa]carq
d]uTaTarGaMaNaae >au»e )) 8 ))
evaà candramä arka-gabhastibhya upariñöäl lakña-yojanata upalabhyamäno
'rkasya saàvatsara-bhuktià pakñäbhyäà mäsa-bhuktià sapädarkñäbhyäà
dinenaiva pakña-bhuktim agracäré drutatara-gamano bhuìkte.
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; candramä—the moon; arka-gabhastibhyaù—from the rays of the
sunshine; upariñöät—above; lakña-yojanataù—by a measurement of 100,000
yojanas; upalabhyamänaù—being situated; arkasya—of the sun globe;
saàvatsara-bhuktim—the passage of one year of enjoyment; pakñäbhyäm—by
two fortnights; mäsa-bhuktim—the passage of one month;
sapäda-åkñäbhyäm—by two and a quarter days; dinena—by a day; eva—only;
pakña-bhuktim—the passage of a fortnight; agracäré—moving impetuously;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
933
druta-tara-gamanaù—passing more speedily; bhuìkte—passes through.
TRANSLATION
Above the rays of the sunshine by a distance of 100,000 yojanas [800,000
miles] is the moon, which travels at a speed faster than that of the sun. In two
lunar fortnights the moon travels through the equivalent of a saàvatsara of the
sun, in two and a quarter days it passes through a month of the sun, and in one
day it passes through a fortnight of the sun.
PURPORT
When we take into account that the moon is 100,000 yojanas, or 800,000
miles, above the rays of the sunshine, it is very surprising that the modern
excursions to the moon could be possible. Since the moon is so distant, how
space vehicles could go there is a doubtful mystery. Modern scientific
calculations are subject to one change after another, and therefore they are
uncertain. We have to accept the calculations of the Vedic literature. These
Vedic calculations are steady; the astronomical calculations made long ago and
recorded in the Vedic literature are correct even now. Whether the Vedic
calculations or modern ones are better may remain a mystery for others, but as
far as we are concerned, we accept the Vedic calculations to be correct.
TEXT 9
AQa caPaUYaRMaa<aai>aê k-l/ai>arMara<aa& +aqYaMaa<aai>aê k-l/ai>a" iPaTa›<aaMa‚
haera}aai<a PaUvRPa+aaParPa+aa>Yaa& ivTaNvaNa" SavRJaqviNavhPa[a<aae JaqvêEk-Maek&-
Na+a}a& i}a&XaTaa MauhUTaOE>auR»e )) 9 ))
atha cäpüryamäëäbhiç ca kaläbhir amaräëäà kñéyamäëäbhiç ca kaläbhiù
pitèëäm aho-räträëi pürva-pakñäpara-pakñäbhyäà vitanvänaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
934
sarva-jéva-nivaha-präëo jévaç caikam ekaà nakñatraà triàçatä muhürtair
bhuìkte.
SYNONYMS
atha—thus; ca—also; äpüryamäëäbhiù—gradually increasing; ca—and;
kaläbhiù—by the parts of the moon; amaräëäm—of the demigods;
kñéyamäëäbhiù—by gradually decreasing; ca—and; kaläbhiù—by parts of the
moon; pitèëäm—of those on the planet known as Pitåloka; ahaù-räträëi—the
days and nights; pürva-pakña-apara-pakñäbhyäm—by the period of waxing and
waning; vitanvänaù—distributing; sarva-jéva-nivaha—of the total living
entities; präëaù—the life; jévaù—the chief living being; ca—also; ekam
ekam—one after another; nakñatram—a constellation of stars; triàçatä—by
thirty; muhürtaiù—muhürtas; bhuìkte—passes through.
TRANSLATION
When the moon is waxing, the illuminating portions of it increase daily, thus
creating day for the demigods and night for the pitäs. When the moon is
waning, however, it causes night for the demigods and day for the pitäs. In this
way the moon passes through each constellation of stars in thirty muhürtas [an
entire day]. The moon is the source of nectarean coolness that influences the
growth of food grains, and therefore the moon-god is considered the life of all
living entities. He is consequently called Jéva, the chief living being within the
universe.
TEXT 10
Ya Wz zae@Xak-l/" Pauåzae >aGavaNMaNaaeMaYaae_àMaYaae_Ma*TaMaYaae deviPa‚
Ta*MaNauZYa>aUTaPaXauPai+aSarqSa*PavqåDaa& Pa[a<aaPYaaYaNaXaql/TvaTSavRMaYa wiTa v<aR‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
935
YaiNTa )) 10 ))
ya eña ñoòaça-kalaù puruño bhagavän manomayo 'nnamayo 'måtamayo
deva-pitå-manuñya-bhüta-paçu-pakñi-sarésåpa-vérudhäà präëäpy äyana-çélatvät
sarvamaya iti varëayanti.
SYNONYMS
yaù—that; eñaù—this; ñoòaça-kalaù—having all sixteen parts (the full moon);
puruñaù—the person; bhagavän—having great power received from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; manaù-mayaù—the predominating deity of
the mind; anna-mayaù—the source of potency for food grains;
amåta-mayaù—the source of the substance of life; deva—of all the demigods;
pitå—of all the inhabitants of Pitåloka; manuñya—all human beings;
bhüta—all living entities; paçu—of the animals; pakñi—of the birds;
sarésåpa—of the reptiles; vérudhäm—of all kinds of herbs and plants;
präëa—life air; api—certainly; äyana-çélatvät—due to refreshing;
sarva-mayaù—all-pervading; iti—thus; varëayanti—the learned scholars
describe.
TRANSLATION
Because the moon is full of all potentialities, it represents the influence of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The moon is the predominating deity of
everyone's mind, and therefore the moon-god is called Manomaya. He is also
called Annamaya because he gives potency to all herbs and plants, and he is
called Amåtamaya because he is the source of life for all living entities. The
moon pleases the demigods, pitäs, human beings, animals, birds, reptiles, trees,
plants and all other living entities. Everyone is satisfied by the presence of the
moon. Therefore the moon is also called Sarvamaya [all-pervading].
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
936
TEXT 11
TaTa oPairíad(iÜl/+aYaaeJaNaTaae Na+a}aai<a Maeå& di+a<aeNaEv k-al/aYaNa
wRìrYaaeiJaTaaiNa Sahai>aiJaTaaíaiv&XaiTa" )) 11 ))
tata upariñöäd dvi-lakña-yojanato nakñaträëi meruà dakñiëenaiva käläyana
éçvara-yojitäni sahäbhijitäñöä-viàçatiù.
SYNONYMS
tataù—from that region of the moon; upariñöät—above;
dvi-lakña-yojanataù—200,000 yojanas; nakñaträëi—many stars;
merum—Sumeru Mountain; dakñiëena eva—to the right side; käla-ayane—in
the wheel of time; éçvara-yojitäni—attached by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; saha—with; abhijitä—the star known as Abhijit;
añöä-viàçatiù—twenty-eight.
TRANSLATION
There are many stars located 200,000 yojanas [1,600,000 miles] above the
moon. By the supreme will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they are
fixed to the wheel of time, and thus they rotate with Mount Sumeru on their
right, their motion being different from that of the sun. There are twenty-eight
important stars, headed by Abhijit.
PURPORT
The stars referred to herein are 1,600,000 miles above the sun, and thus
they are 4,000,000 miles above the earth.
TEXT 12
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
937
TaTa oPairíaduXaNaa iÜl/+aYaaeJaNaTa oPal/>YaTae PaurTa" PaêaTSahEv vak-RSYa
XaEg]YaMaaNÛSaaMYaai>aGaRiTai>ark-RvÀriTa l/aek-aNaa& iNaTYadaNaukU-l/ Wv Pa[aYae<a
vzRYa&êare<aaNauMaqYaTae Sa v*iíivíM>aGa]haePaXaMaNa" )) 12 ))
tata upariñöäd uçanä dvi-lakña-yojanata upalabhyate purataù paçcät sahaiva
värkasya çaighrya-mändya-sämyäbhir gatibhir arkavac carati lokänäà
nityadänuküla eva präyeëa varñayaàç cäreëänuméyate sa
våñöi-viñöambha-grahopaçamanaù.
SYNONYMS
tataù—from that bunch of stars; upariñöät—above; uçanä—Venus;
dvi-lakña-yojanataù—200,000 yojanas (1,600,000 miles); upalabhyate—is
experienced; purataù—in front; paçcät—behind; saha—along with;
eva—indeed; vä—and; arkasya—of the sun; çaighrya—speedy; mändya—slow;
sämyäbhiù—equal; gatibhiù—the movements; arkavat—exactly like the sun;
carati—rotates; lokänäm—of all the planets within the universe;
nityadä—constantly; anukülaù—offering favorable conditions; eva—indeed;
präyeëa—almost always; varñayan—causing rainfall; cäreëa—by infusing the
clouds; anuméyate—is perceived; saù—he (Venus); våñöi-viñöambha—obstacles
to rainfall; graha-upaçamanaù—nullifying planets.
TRANSLATION
Some 1,600,000 miles above this group of stars is the planet Venus, which
moves at almost exactly the same pace as the sun according to swift, slow and
moderate movements. Sometimes Venus moves behind the sun, sometimes in
front of the sun and sometimes along with it. Venus nullifies the influence of
planets that are obstacles to rainfall. Consequently its presence causes rainfall,
and it is therefore considered very favorable for all living beings within this
universe. This has been accepted by learned scholars.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
938
TEXT 13
oXaNaSaa buDaae VYaa:YaaTaSTaTa oPairíad( iÜl/+aYaaeJaNaTaae buDa"
SaaeMaSauTa oPal/>YaMaaNa" Pa[aYae<a Xau>ak*-Ûdak-aRd( VYaiTairCYaeTa TadaiTava‚
Taa>a]Pa[aYaaNaav*íyaid>aYaMaaXa&SaTae )) 13 ))
uçanasä budho vyäkhyätas tata upariñöäd dvi-lakña-yojanato budhaù soma-suta
upalabhyamänaù präyeëa çubha-kåd yadärkäd vyatiricyeta
tadätivätäbhra-präyänävåñöy-ädi-bhayam äçaàsate.
SYNONYMS
uçanasä—with Venus; budhaù—Mercury; vyäkhyätaù—explained;
tataù—from that (Venus); upariñöät—above; dvi-lakña-yojanataù—1,600,000
miles; budhaù—Mercury; soma-sutaù—the son of the moon;
upalabhyamänaù—is situated; präyeëa—almost always; çubha-kåt—very
auspicious to the inhabitants of the universe; yadä—when; arkät—from the
sun; vyatiricyeta—is separated; tadä—at that time; ativäta—of cyclones and
other bad effects; abhra—clouds; präya—almost always; anävåñöi-ädi—such as
scarcity of rain; bhayam—fearful conditions; äçaàsate—expands.
TRANSLATION
Mercury is described to be similar to Venus, in that it moves sometimes
behind the sun, sometimes in front of the sun and sometimes along with it. It is
1,600,000 miles above Venus, or 7,200,000 miles above earth. Mercury, which
is the son of the moon, is almost always very auspicious for the inhabitants of
the universe, but when it does not move along with the sun, it forbodes
cyclones, dust, irregular rainfall, and waterless clouds. In this way it creates
fearful conditions due to inadequate or excessive rainfall.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
939
TEXT 14
ATa OßRMa(r)ark-ae_iPa YaaeJaNal/+aiÜTaYa oPal/>YaMaaNaiñi>aiñi>a" Pa+aErekE-k-Xaae
raXaqNÜadXaaNau>au»e Yaid Na v§e-<aai>avTaRTae Pa[aYae<aaXau>aGa]hae_gaXa&Sa" )) 14 ))
ata ürdhvam aìgärako 'pi yojana-lakña-dvitaya upalabhyamänas tribhis tribhiù
pakñair ekaikaço räçén dvädaçänubhuìkte yadi na vakreëäbhivartate
präyeëäçubha-graho 'gha-çaàsaù.
SYNONYMS
ataù—from this; ürdhvam—above; aìgärakaù—Mars; api—also;
yojana-lakña-dvitaye—at a distance of 1,600,000 miles; upalabhyamänaù—is
situated; tribhiù tribhiù—with each three and three; pakñaiù—fortnights;
eka-ekaçaù—one after another; räçén—the signs; dvädaça—twelve;
anubhuìkte—passes through; yadi—if; na—not; vakreëa—with a curve;
abhivartate—approaches; präyeëa—almost always; açubha-grahaù—an
unfavorable, inauspicious planet; agha-çaàsaù—creating trouble.
TRANSLATION
Situated 1,600,000 miles above Mercury, or 8,800,000 miles above earth, is
the planet Mars. If this planet does not travel in a crooked way, it crosses
through each sign of the zodiac in three fortnights and in this way travels
through all twelve, one after another. It almost always creates unfavorable
conditions in respect to rainfall and other influences.
TEXT 15
TaTa oPairíad( iÜl/+aYaaeJaNaaNTarGaTaa >aGavaNa( b*hSPaiTarekE-k-iSMaNa( raXaaE
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
940
PairvTSar& PairvTSar& criTa Yaid Na v§-" SYaaTPa[aYae<aaNaukU-l/ae b]aø<a‚
ku-l/SYa )) 15 ))
tata upariñöäd dvi-lakña-yojanäntara-gatä bhagavän båhaspatir ekaikasmin
räçau parivatsaraà parivatsaraà carati yadi na vakraù syät präyeëänukülo
brähmaëa-kulasya.
SYNONYMS
tataù—that (Mars); upariñöät—above; dvi-lakña-yojana-antara-gatäù—situated
at a distance of 1,600,000 miles; bhagavän—the most powerful planet;
båhaspatiù—Jupiter; eka-ekasmin—in one after another; räçau—sign;
parivatsaram parivatsaram—for the period of Parivatsara; carati—moves;
yadi—if; na—not; vakraù—curved; syät—becomes; präyeëa—almost always;
anukülaù—very favorable; brähmaëa-kulasya—to the brähmaëas of the
universe.
TRANSLATION
Situated 1,600,000 miles above Mars, or 10,400,000 miles above earth, is
the planet Jupiter, which travels through one sign of the zodiac within the
period of a Parivatsara. If its movement is not curved, the planet Jupiter is very
favorable to the brähmaëas of the universe.
TEXT 16
TaTa oPairíaÛaeJaNal/+aÜYaaTPa[TaqYaMaaNa" XaNaEêr WkE-k-iSMaNa( raXaaE
i}a&XaNMaaSaaNa( ivl/MbMaaNa" SavaRNaevaNauPaYaeRiTa TaaviÙrNauvTSarE" Pa[aYae<a ih
SaveRzaMaXaaiNTak-r" )) 16 ))
tata upariñöäd yojana-lakña-dvayät pratéyamänaù çanaiçcara ekaikasmin räçau
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
941
triàçan mäsän vilambamänaù sarvän evänuparyeti tävadbhir anuvatsaraiù
präyeëa hi sarveñäm açäntikaraù.
SYNONYMS
tataù—that (Jupiter); upariñöät—above; yojana-lakña-dvayät—by a distance of
1,600,000 miles; pratéyamänaù—is situated; çanaiçcaraù—the planet Saturn;
eka-ekasmin—in one after another; räçau—zodiac signs; triàçat mäsän—for a
period of thirty months in each; vilam-bamänaù—lingering; sarvän—all
twelve signs of the zodiac; eva—certainly; anuparyeti—passes through;
tävadbhiù—by so many; anuvatsaraiù—Anuvatsaras; präyeëa—almost always;
hi—indeed; sarveñäm—to all the inhabitants; açäntikaraù—very troublesome.
TRANSLATION
Situated 1,600,000 miles above Jupiter, or 12,000,000 miles above earth, is
the planet Saturn, which passes through one sign of the zodiac in thirty months
and covers the entire zodiac circle in thirty Anuvatsaras. This planet is always
very inauspicious for the universal situation.
TEXT 17
TaTa otarSMaad*zYa Wk-adXal/+aYaaeJaNaaNTar oPal/>YaNTae Ya Wv l/aek-aNaa&
XaMaNau>aavYaNTaae >aGavTaae ivZ<aaeYaRTParMa& Pad& Pa[di+a<a& Pa[§-MaiNTa )) 17 ))
tata uttarasmäd åñaya ekädaça-lakña-yojanäntara upalabhyante ya eva
lokänäà çam anubhävayanto bhagavato viñëor yat paramaà padaà
pradakñiëaà prakramanti.
SYNONYMS
tataù—the planet Saturn; uttarasmät—above; åñayaù—great saintly sages;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
942
ekädaça-lakña-yojana-antare—at a distance of 1,100,000 yojanas;
upalabhyante—are situated; ye—all of them; eva—indeed; lokänäm—for all
the inhabitants of the universe; çam—the good fortune;
anubhävayantaù—always thinking of; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; viñëoù—Lord Viñëu; yat—which; paramam padam—the supreme
abode; pradakñiëam—placing on the right; prakramanti—circumambulate.
TRANSLATION
Situated 8,800,000 miles above Saturn, or 20,800,000 miles above earth,
are the seven saintly sages, who are always thinking of the well-being of the
inhabitants of the universe. They circumambulate the supreme abode of Lord
Viñëu, known as Dhruvaloka, the polestar.
PURPORT
Çréla Madhväcärya quotes the following verse from the Brahmäëòa Puräëa:
jïänänandätmano viñëuù
çiçumära-vapuñy atha
ürdhva-lokeñu sa vyäpta
ädityädyäs tad-äçritä
Lord Viñëu, who is the source of knowledge and transcendental bliss, has
assumed the form of Çiçumära in the seventh heaven, which is situated in the
topmost level of the universe. All the other planets, beginning with the sun,
exist under the shelter of this Çiçumära planetary system.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-second Chapter
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Orbits of the Planets."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
943
23. The Çiçumära Planetary Systems
This chapter describes how all the planetary systems take shelter of the
polestar, Dhruvaloka. It also describes the totality of these planetary systems to
be Çiçumära, another expansion of the external body of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Dhruvaloka, the abode of Lord Viñëu within this
universe, is situated 1,300,000 yojanas from the seven stars. In the planetary
system of Dhruvaloka are the planets of the fire-god, Indra, Prajäpati, Kaçyapa
and Dharma, all of whom are very respectful to the great devotee Dhruva, who
lives on the polestar. Like bulls yoked to a central pivot, all the planetary
systems revolve around Dhruvaloka, impelled by eternal time. Those who
worship the viräö-puruña, the universal form of the Lord, conceive of this
entire rotating system of planets as an animal known as çiçumära. This
imaginary çiçumära is another form of the Lord. The head of the çiçumära form
is downward, and its body appears like that of a coiled snake. On the end of its
tail is Dhruvaloka, on the body of the tail are Prajäpati, Agni, Indra and
Dharma, and on the root of the tail are Dhätä and Vidhätä. On its waist are
the seven great sages. The entire body of the çiçumära faces toward its right
and appears like a coil of stars. On the right side of this coil are the fourteen
prominent stars from Abhijit to Punarvasu, and on the left side are the
fourteen prominent stars from Puñyä to Uttaräñäòhä. The stars known as
Punarvasu and Puñyä are on the right and left hips of the çiçumära, and the
stars known as Ärdrä and Açleñä are on the right and left feet of the çiçumära.
Other stars are also fixed on different sides of the Çiçumära planetary system
according to the calculations of Vedic astronomers. To concentrate their
minds, yogés worship the Çiçumära planetary system, which is technically
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
944
known as the kuëòalini-cakra.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
AQa TaSMaaTParTañYaaedXal/+aYaaeJaNaaNTarTaae YataiÜZ<aae" ParMa& PadMai>avdiNTa
Ya}a h Maha>aaGavTaae Da]uv AaEtaaNaPaaidriGanNaeNd]e<a Pa[JaaPaiTaNaa k-XYaPaeNa
DaMaeR<a c SaMak-al/YauiG>a" SabhuMaaNa& di+a<aTa" i§-YaMaa<a wdaNaqMaiPa
k-LPaJaqivNaaMaaJaqVYa oPaaSTae TaSYaehaNau>aav oPavi<aRTa" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
atha tasmät paratas trayodaça-lakña-yojanäntarato yat tad viñëoù paramaà
padam abhivadanti yatra ha mahä-bhägavato dhruva auttänapädir
agninendreëa prajäpatinä kaçyapena dharmeëa ca samakäla-yugbhiù
sabahu-mänaà dakñiëataù kriyamäëa idäném api kalpa-jévinäm äjévya upäste
tasyehänubhäva upavarëitaù.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atha—thereupon; tasmät—the
sphere of the seven stars; parataù—beyond that;
trayodaça-lakña-yojana-antarataù—another 1,300,000 yojanas; yat—which;
tat—that; viñëoù paramam padam—the supreme abode of Lord Viñëu, or the
lotus feet of Lord Viñëu; abhivadanti—the Åg Veda mantras praise; yatra—on
which; ha—indeed; mahä-bhägavataù—the great devotee; dhruvaù—Mahäräja
Dhruva; auttänapädiù—the son of Mahäräja Uttänapäda; agninä—by the
fire-god; indreëa—by the heavenly King, Indra; prajäpatinä—by the Prajäpati;
kaçyapena—by Kaçyapa; dharmeëa—by Dharmaräja; ca—also;
samakäla-yugbhiù—who are engaged at the time; sa-bahu-mänam—always
respectfully; dakñiëataù—on the right side; kriyamäëaù—being
circumambulated; idäném—now; api—even; kalpa-jévinäm—of the living
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
945
entities who exist at the end of the creation; äjévyaù—the source of life;
upäste—remains; tasya—his; iha—here; anubhävaù—greatness in discharging
devotional service; upavarëitaù—already described (in the Fourth Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam).
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, 1,300,000 yojanas
[10,400,000 miles] above the planets of the seven sages is the place that learned
scholars describe as the abode of Lord Viñëu. There the son of Mahäräja
Uttänapäda, the great devotee Mahäräja Dhruva, still resides as the life source
of all the living entities who live until the end of the creation. Agni, Indra,
Prajäpati, Kaçyapa and Dharma all assemble there to offer him honor and
respectful obeisances. They circumambulate him with their right sides toward
him. I have already described the glorious activities of Mahäräja Dhruva [in the
Fourth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam].
TEXT 2
Sa ih SaveRza& JYaaeiTaGaR<aaNaa& Ga]hNa+a}aadqNaaMaiNaiMaze<aaVYa¢-r&hSaa >aGavTaa
k-ale/Na >a]aMYaMaa<aaNaa& SQaa<auirvavíM>a wRìre<a ivihTa" Xaìdv>aaSaTae )) 2 ))
sa hi sarveñäà jyotir-gaëänäà graha-nakñaträdénäm animiñeëävyakta-raàhasä
bhagavatä kälena bhrämyamäëänäà sthäëur ivävañöambha éçvareëa vihitaù
çaçvad avabhäsate.
SYNONYMS
saù—that planet of Dhruva Mahäräja; hi—indeed; sarveñäm—of all;
jyotiù-gaëänäm—the luminaries; graha-nakñatra-ädénäm—such as the planets
and stars; animiñeëa—who does not rest; avyakta—inconceivable;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
946
raàhasä—whose force; bhagavatä—the most powerful; kälena—by the time
factor; bhrämyamäëänäm—being caused to revolve; sthäëuù iva—like a post;
avañöambhaù—the pivot; éçvareëa—by the will of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; vihitaù—established; çaçvat—constantly; avabhäsate—shines.
TRANSLATION
Established by the supreme will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
polestar, which is the planet of Mahäräja Dhruva, constantly shines as the
central pivot for all the stars and planets. The unsleeping, invisible, most
powerful time factor causes these luminaries to revolve around the polestar
without cessation.
PURPORT
It is distinctly stated herein that all the luminaries, the planets and stars,
revolve by the influence of the supreme time factor. The time factor is another
feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everyone is under the
influence of the time factor, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead is so
kind and loves His devotee Mahäräja Dhruva so much that He has placed all
the luminaries under the control of Dhruva's planet and has arranged for the
time factor to work under him or with his cooperation. Everything is actually
done according to the will and direction of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but to make His devotee Dhruva the most important individual
within the universe, the Lord has placed the activities of the time factor under
his control.
TEXT 3
YaQaa Mae!qSTaM>a Aa§-Ma<aPaXav" Sa&YaaeiJaTaaiñi>aiñi>a" SavNaEYaRQaaSQaaNa&
Ma<@l/aiNa crNTYaev& >aGa<aa Ga]hadYa WTaiSMaàNTabRihYaaeRGaeNa k-al/c§-
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
947
AaYaaeiJaTaa Da]uvMaevavl/MBYa vaYauNaaedqYaRMaa<aa Aak-LPaaNTa& Paircx(§-MaiNTa
Na>aiSa YaQaa Maegaa" XYaeNaadYaae vaYauvXaa" k-MaRSaarQaYa" PairvTaRNTae
Wv& JYaaeiTaGaR<aa" Pa[k*-iTaPauåzSa&YaaeGaaNauGa*hqTaa" k-MaRiNaiMaRTaGaTaYaae >auiv Na
PaTaiNTa )) 3 ))
yathä meòhéstambha äkramaëa-paçavaù saàyojitäs tribhis tribhiù savanair
yathä-sthänaà maëòaläni caranty evaà bhagaëä grahädaya etasminn
antar-bahir-yogena käla-cakra äyojitä dhruvam evävalambya
väyunodéryamäëä äkalpäntaà paricaì kramanti nabhasi yathä meghäù
çyenädayo väyu-vaçäù karma-särathayaù parivartante evaà jyotirgaëäù
prakåti-puruña-saàyogänugåhétäù karma-nirmita-gatayo bhuvi na patanti.
SYNONYMS
yathä—exactly like; meòhéstambhe—to the pivot post;
äkramaëa-paçavaù—bulls for threshing rice; saàyojitäù—being yoked; tribhiù
tribhiù—by three; savanaiù—movements; yathä-sthänam—in their proper
places; maëòaläni—orbits; caranti—traverse; evam—in the same way;
bha-gaëäù—the luminaries, like the sun, the moon, Venus, Mercury, Mars and
Jupiter; graha-ädayaù—the different planets; etasmin—in this;
antaù-bahiù-yogena—by connection with the inner or outer circles;
käla-cakre—in the wheel of eternal time; äyojitäù—fixed;
dhruvam—Dhruvaloka; eva—certainly; avalambya—taking support of;
väyunä—by the wind; udéryamäëäù—being propelled; ä-kalpa-antam—until
the end of the creation; paricaì kramanti—revolve all around; nabhasi—in the
sky; yathä—exactly like; meghäù—heavy clouds; çyena-ädayaù—birds such as
the big eagle; väyu-vaçäù—controlled by the air; karma-särathayaù—whose
chariot drivers are the results of their own past activities; parivartante—move
around; evam—in this way; jyotiù-gaëäù—the luminaries, the planets and stars
in the sky; prakåti—of material nature; puruña—and of the Supreme
Personality, Kåñëa; saàyoga-anugåhétäù—supported by the combined efforts;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
948
karma-nirmita—caused by their own past fruitive activities; gatayaù—whose
movements; bhuvi—on the ground; na—not; patanti—fall down.
TRANSLATION
When bulls are yoked together and tied to a central post to thresh rice, they
tread around that pivot without deviating from their proper positions—one bull
being closest to the post, another in the middle, and a third on the outside.
Similarly, all the planets and all the hundreds and thousands of stars revolve
around the polestar, the planet of Mahäräja Dhruva, in their respective orbits,
some higher and some lower. Fastened by the Supreme Personality of Godhead
to the machine of material nature according to the results of their fruitive acts,
they are driven around the polestar by the wind and will continue to be so until
the end of creation. These planets float in the air within the vast sky, just as
clouds with hundreds of tons of water float in the air or as the great çyena
eagles, due to the results of past activities, fly high in the sky and have no
chance of falling to the ground.
PURPORT
According to the description of this verse, the hundreds and thousands of
stars and the great planets such as the sun, the moon, Venus, Mercury, Mars
and Jupiter are not clustered together because of the law of gravity or any
similar idea of the modern scientists. These planets and stars are all servants of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda or Kåñëa, and according to His
order they sit in their chariots and travel in their respective orbits. The orbits
in which they move are compared to machines given by material nature to the
operating deities of the stars and planets, who carry out the orders of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by revolving around Dhruvaloka, which is
occupied by the great devotee Mahäräja Dhruva. This is confirmed in the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.52) as follows:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
949
yac-cakñur eña savitä sakala-grahäëäà
räjä samasta-sura-mürtir açeña-tejäù
yasyäjïayä bhramati sambhåta-käla-cakro
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
under whose control even the sun, which is considered to be the eye of the
Lord, rotates within the fixed orbit of eternal time. The sun is the king of all
planetary systems and has unlimited potency in heat and light." This verse
from Brahma-saàhitä confirms that even the largest and most powerful planet,
the sun, rotates within a fixed orbit, or käla-cakra, in obedience to the order of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This has nothing to do with gravity or
any other imaginary laws created by the material scientists.
Material scientists want to avoid the ruling government of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and therefore they imagine different conditions
under which they suppose the planets move. The only condition, however, is
the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. All the various
predominating deities of the planets are persons, and the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is also a person. The Supreme Personality orders the subordinate
persons, the demigods of various names, to carry out His supreme will. This
fact is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10), wherein Kåñëa says:
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunté, and it is
producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is
created and annihilated again and again."
The orbits of the planets resemble the bodies in which all living entities are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
950
seated because they are both machines controlled by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.61):
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of
the material energy." The machine given by material nature—whether the
machine of the body or the machine of the orbit, or käla-cakra—works
according to the orders given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead and material nature work together to
maintain this great universe, and not only this universe but also the millions of
other universes beyond this one.
The question of how the planets and stars are floating is also answered in
this verse. It is not because of the laws of gravity. Rather, the planets and stars
are enabled to float by manipulations of the air. It is due to such manipulations
that big, heavy clouds float and big eagles fly in the sky. Modern airplanes like
the 747 jet aircraft work in a similar way: by controlling the air, they float high
in the sky, resisting the tendency to fall to earth. Such adjustments of the air
are all made possible by the cooperation of the principles of puruña (male) and
prakåti (female). By the cooperation of material nature, which is considered to
be prakåti, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is considered the
puruña, all the affairs of the universe are going on nicely in their proper order.
prakåti, material nature, is also described in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.44) as
follows:
såñöi-sthiti-pralaya-sädhana-çaktir ekä
chäyeva yasya bhuvanäni bibharti durgä
icchänurüpam api yasya ca ceñöate sä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
951
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"The external potency, mäyä, who is of the nature of the shadow of the cit
[spiritual] potency, is worshiped by all people as Durgä, the creating, preserving
and destroying agency of this mundane world. I adore the primeval Lord
Govinda, in accordance with whose will Durgä conducts herself." Material
nature, the external energy of the Supreme Lord, is also known as Durgä, or
the female energy that protects the great fort of this universe. The word Durgä
also means fort. This universe is just like a great fort in which all the
conditioned souls are kept, and they cannot leave it unless they are liberated
by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord Himself
declares in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." Thus simply by Kåñëa consciousness, by
the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can be liberated, or, in
other words, one can be released from the great fort of this universe and go
outside it to the spiritual world.
It is also significant that the predominating deities of even the greatest
planets have been offered their exalted posts because of the very valuable pious
activities they performed in previous births. This is indicated herein by the
words karma-nirmita-gatayaù. For example, as we have previously discussed,
the moon is called jéva, which means that he is a living entity like us, but
because of his pious activities he has been appointed to his post as the
moon-god. Similarly, all the demigods are living entities who have been
appointed to their various posts as the masters of the moon, the earth, Venus
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
952
and so on because of their great service and pious acts. Only the
predominating deity of the sun, Sürya Näräyaëa, is an incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Mahäräja Dhruva, the predominating deity
of Dhruvaloka, is also a living entity. Thus there are two kinds of entities—the
supreme entity, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the ordinary living
entity, the jéva (nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm (Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13)).
All the demigods are engaged in the service of the Lord, and only by such an
arrangement are the affairs of the universe going on.
Regarding the great eagles mentioned in this verse, it is understood that
there are eagles so big that they can prey on big elephants. They fly so high
that they can travel from one planet to another. They start flying in one
planet and land in another, and while in flight they lay eggs that hatch into
other birds while falling through the air. In Sanskrit such eagles are called
çyena. Under the present circumstances, of course, we cannot see such huge
birds, but at least we know of eagles that can capture monkeys and then throw
them down to kill and eat them. Similarly, it is understood that there are
gigantic birds that can carry off elephants, kill them and eat them.
The two examples of the eagle and the cloud are sufficient to prove that
flying and floating can be made possible through adjustments of the air. The
planets, in a similar way, are floating because material nature adjusts the air
according to the orders of the Supreme Lord. It could be said that these
adjustments constitute the law of gravity, but in any case, one must accept that
these laws are made by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The so-called
scientists have no control over them. The scientists can falsely, improperly
declare that there is no God, but this is not a fact.
TEXT 4
ke-cNaETaJJYaaeiTarNaqk&- iXaXauMaarSa&SQaaNaeNa >aGavTaae vaSaudevSYa YaaeGa‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
953
Daar<aaYaaMaNauv<aRYaiNTa )) 4 ))
kecanaitaj jyotir-anékaà çiçumära-saàsthänena bhagavato väsudevasya
yoga-dhäraëäyäm anuvarëayanti.
SYNONYMS
kecana—some yogés or learned scholars of astronomy; etat—this;
jyotiù-anékam—great wheel of planets and stars;
çiçumära-saàsthänena—imagine this wheel to be a çiçumära (dolphin);
bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; väsudevasya—Lord
Väsudeva (the son of Vasudeva), Kåñëa; yoga-dhäraëäyäm—in absorption in
worship; anuvarëayanti—describe.
TRANSLATION
This great machine, consisting of the stars and planets, resembles the form of
a çiçumära [dolphin] in the water. It is sometimes considered an incarnation of
Kåñëa, Väsudeva. Great yogés meditate upon Väsudeva in this form because it is
actually visible.
PURPORT
Transcendentalists such as yogés whose minds cannot accommodate the
form of the Lord prefer to visualize something very great, such as the
viräö-puruña. Therefore some yogés contemplate this imaginary çiçumära to be
swimming in the sky the way a dolphin swims in water. They meditate upon it
as the viräö-rüpa, the gigantic form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 5
YaSYa PauC^aGa]e_vaiKXarSa" ku-<@l/I>aUTadehSYa Da]uv oPak-iLPaTaSTaSYa l/a(r)Ule/
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
954
Pa[JaaPaiTariGanirNd]ae DaMaR wiTa PauC^MaUle/ DaaTaa ivDaaTaa c k-$ya& SaázRYa" )
TaSYa di+a<aavTaRku-<@l/I>aUTaXarqrSYa YaaNYaudGaYaNaaiNa di+a<aPaaìeR Tau Na+a‚
}aa<YauPak-LPaYaiNTa di+a<aaYaNaaiNa Tau SaVYae ) YaQaa iXaXauMaarSYa ku-<@l/a‚
>aaeGaSaiàveXaSYa PaaìRYaaeå>aYaaerPYavYava" SaMaSa&:Yaa >aviNTa ) Pa*ïe TvJavqQaq
Aak-aXaGa(r)a caedrTa" )) 5 ))
yasya pucchägre 'väkçirasaù kuëòalé-bhüta-dehasya dhruva upakalpitas tasya
läìgüle prajäpatir agnir indro dharma iti puccha-müle dhätä vidhätä ca kaöyäà
saptarñayaù; tasya dakñiëävarta-kuëòalé-bhüta-çarérasya yäny udagayanäni
dakñiëa-pärçve tu nakñaträëy upakalpayanti dakñiëäyanäni tu savye; yathä
çiçumärasya kuëòalä-bhoga-sanniveçasya pärçvayor ubhayor apy avayaväù
samasaìkhyä bhavanti; påñöhe tv ajavéthé äkäça-gaìgä codarataù.
SYNONYMS
yasya—of which; puccha-agre—at the end of the tail; aväkçirasaù—whose
head is downward; kuëòalé-bhüta-dehasya—whose body, which is coiled;
dhruvaù—Mahäräja Dhruva on his planet, the polestar; upakalpitaù—is
situated; tasya—of that; läìgüle—on the tail; prajäpatiù—of the name
Prajäpati; agniù—Agni; indraù—Indra; dharmaù—Dharma; iti—thus;
puccha-müle—at the base of the tail; dhätä vidhätä—the demigods known as
Dhätä and Vidhätä; ca—also; kaöyäm—on the hip; sapta-åñayaù—the seven
saintly sages; tasya—of that; dakñiëa-ävarta-kuëòalé-bhüta-çarérasya—whose
body is like a coil turning toward the right side; yäni—which;
udagayanäni—marking the northern courses; dakñiëa-pärçve—on the right
side; tu—but; nakñaträëi—constellations; upakalpayanti—are situated;
dakñiëa-äyanäni—the fourteen stars, from Puñyä to Uttaräñäòhä, marking the
northern course; tu—but; savye—on the left side; yathä—just like;
çiçumärasya—of the dolphin; kuëòalä-bhoga-sanniveçasya—whose body
appears like a coil; pärçvayoù—on the sides; ubhayoù—both; api—certainly;
avayaväù—the limbs; samasaìkhyäù—of equal number (fourteen);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
955
bhavanti—are; påñöhe—on the back; tu—of course; ajavéthé—the first three
stars marking the southern route (Mülä, Pürvañäòhä and Uttaräñäòhä);
äkäça-gaìgä—the Ganges in the sky (the Milky Way); ca—also; udarataù—on
the abdomen.
TRANSLATION
This form of the çiçumära has its head downward and its body coiled. On the
end of its tail is the planet of Dhruva, on the body of its tail are the planets of
the demigods Prajäpati, Agni, Indra and Dharma, and at the base of its tail are
the planets of the demigods Dhätä and Vidhätä. Where the hips might be on the
çiçumära are the seven saintly sages like Vasiñöha and Aìgirä. The coiled body
of the Çiçumära-cakra turns toward its right side, on which the fourteen
constellations from Abhijit to Punarvasu are located. On its left side are the
fourteen stars from Puñyä to Uttaräñäòhä. Thus its body is balanced because its
sides are occupied by an equal number of stars. On the back of the çiçumära is
the group of stars known as Ajavéthé, and on its abdomen is the Ganges that
flows in the sky [the Milky Way].
TEXT 6
PauNavRSauPauZYaaE di+a<avaMaYaae" é[ae<Yaaerad]aRëeze c di+a<avaMaYaae" PaiêMaYaae"
PaadYaaeri>aiJadutaraza!e di+a<avaMaYaaer( NaaiSak-YaaeYaRQaaSa&:Ya& é[v<aPaUvaRza!e
di+a<avaMaYaael/aeRcNaYaaeDaRiNaïa MaUl&/ c di+a<avaMaYaae" k-<aRYaaeMaRgaadqNYaí
Na+a}aai<a di+a<aaYaNaaiNa vaMaPaaìRvx(ik[-zu YauÅqTa TaQaEv Ma*GaXaqzaRdq‚
NYaudGaYaNaaiNa di+a<aPaaìRvx(ik[-zu Pa[aiTal/aeMYaeNa Pa[YauÅqTa XaTai>azaJYaeïe
Sk-NDaYaaedRi+a<avaMaYaaeNYaRSaeTa( )) 6 ))
punarvasu-puñyau dakñiëa-vämayoù çroëyor ärdräçleñe ca dakñiëa-vämayoù
paçcimayoù pädayor abhijid-uttaräñäòhe dakñiëa-vämayor näsikayor
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
956
yathä-saìkhyaà çravaëa-pürväñäòhe dakñiëa-vämayor locanayor dhaniñöhä
mülaà ca dakñiëa-vämayoù karëayor maghädény añöa nakñaträëi
dakñiëäyanäni väma-pärçva-vaìkriñu yuïjéta tathaiva måga-çérñädény
udagayanäni dakñiëa-pärçva-vaìkriñu prätilomyena prayuïjéta
çatabhiñä-jyeñöhe skandhayor dakñiëa-vämayor nyaset.
SYNONYMS
punarvasu—the star named Punarvasu; puñyau—and the star named Puñyä;
dakñiëa-vämayoù—on the right and left; çroëyoù—loins; ärdrä—the star
named Ärdrä; açleñe—the star named Açleñä; ca—also; dakñiëa-vämayoù—at
the right and left; paçcimayoù—behind; pädayoù—feet;
abhijit-uttaräñäòhe—the stars named Abhijit and Uttaräñäòhä;
dakñiëa-vämayoù—on the right and left; näsikayoù—nostrils;
yathä-saìkhyam—according to numerical order; çravaëa-pürväñäòhe—the
stars named Çravaëä and Pürväñäòhä; dakñiëa-vämayoù—at the right and left;
locanayoù—eyes; dhaniñöhä mülam ca—and the stars named Dhaniñöhä and
Mülä; dakñiëa-vämayoù—at the right and left; karëayoù—ears;
maghä-ädéni—the stars such as Maghä; añöa nakñaträëi—eight stars;
dakñiëa-äyanäni—which mark the southern course; väma-pärçva—of the left
side; vaìkriñu—at the ribs; yuïjéta—may place; tathä eva—similarly;
måga-çérñä-ädéni—such as Mågaçérñä; udagayanäni—marking the northern
course; dakñiëa-pärçva-vaìkriñu—on the right side; prätilomyena—in the
reverse order; prayuïjéta—may place; çatabhiñä—Çatabhiñä; jyeñöhe—Jyeñöhä;
skandhayoù—on the two shoulders; dakñiëa-vämayoù—right and left;
nyaset—should place.
TRANSLATION
On the right and left sides of where the loins might be on the
Çiçumära-cakra are the stars named Punarvasu and Puñyä. Ärdrä and Açleñä are
on its right and left feet, Abhijit and Uttaräñäòhä are on its right and left
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
957
nostrils, Çravaëä and Pürväñäòhä are at its right and left eyes, and Dhaniñöhä
and Mülä are on its right and left ears. The eight stars from Maghä to
Anurädhä, which mark the southern course, are on the ribs of the left of its
body, and the eight stars from Mågaçérñä to Pürvabhädra, which mark the
northern course, are on the ribs on the right side. Çatabhiñä and Jyeñöhä are on
the right and left shoulders.
TEXT 7
otarahNaavGaiSTarDarahNaaE YaMaae Mau%ezu ca(r)ark-" XaNaEêr oPaSQae
b*hSPaiTa" k-ku-id v+aSYaaidTYaae ôdYae NaaraYa<aae MaNaiSa cNd]ae Naa>YaaMauXaNaa
STaNaYaaeriìNaaE buDa" Pa[a<aaPaaNaYaae rahuGaRle ke-Tav" SavaR(r)ezu raeMaSau SaveR
TaaraGa<aa" )) 7 ))
uttarä-hanäv agastir adharä-hanau yamo mukheñu cäìgärakaù çanaiçcara
upasthe båhaspatiù kakudi vakñasy ädityo hådaye näräyaëo manasi candro
näbhyäm uçanä stanayor açvinau budhaù präëäpänayo rähur gale ketavaù
sarväìgeñu romasu sarve tärä-gaëäù.
SYNONYMS
uttarä-hanau—on the upper jaw; agastiù—the star named Agasti;
adharä-hanau—on the lower jaw; yamaù—Yamaräja; mukheñu—on the mouth;
ca—also; aìgärakaù—Mars; çanaiçcaraù—Saturn; upasthe—on the genitals;
båhaspatiù—Jupiter; kakudi—on the back of the neck; vakñasi—on the chest;
ädityaù—the sun; hådaye—within the heart; näräyaëaù—Lord Näräyaëa;
manasi—in the mind; candraù—the moon; näbhyäm—on the navel;
uçanä—Venus; stanayoù—on the two breasts; açvinau—the two stars named
Açvin; budhaù—Mercury; präëäpänayoù—in the inner airs known as präëa
and apäna; rähuù—the planet Rähu; gale—on the neck; ketavaù—comets;
sarva-aìgeñu—all over the body; romasu—in the pores of the body; sarve—all;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
958
tärä-gaëäù—the numerous stars.
TRANSLATION
On the upper chin of the çiçumära is Agasti; on its lower chin, Yamaräja; on
its mouth, Mars; on its genitals, Saturn; on the back of its neck, Jupiter; on its
chest, the sun; and within the core of its heart, Näräyaëa. Within its mind is
the moon; on its navel, Venus; and on its breasts, the Açviné-kumäras. Within
its life air, which is known as präëäpäna, is Mercury, on its neck is Rähu, all
over its body are comets, and in its pores are the numerous stars.
TEXT 8
WTadu hEv >aGavTaae ivZ<aae" SavRdevTaaMaYa& æPaMahrh" SaNDYaaYaa& Pa[YaTaae
vaGYaTaae iNarq+aMaa<a oPaiTaïeTa NaMaae JYaaeiTal/aeRk-aYa k-al/aYaNaaYaaiNaiMaza&
PaTaYae MahaPauåzaYaai>aDaqMahqiTa )) 8 ))
etad u haiva bhagavato viñëoù sarva-devatämayaà rüpam aharahaù
sandhyäyäà prayato vägyato nirékñamäëa upatiñöheta namo jyotir-lokäya
käläyanäyänimiñäà pataye mahä-puruñäyäbhidhémahéti.
SYNONYMS
etat—this; u ha—indeed; eva—certainly; bhagavataù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu;
sarva-devatä-mayam—consisting of all the demigods; rüpam—form;
ahaù-ahaù—always; sandhyäyäm—in the morning, noon and evening;
prayataù—meditating upon; vägyataù—controlling the words;
nirékñamäëaù—observing; upatiñöheta—one should worship;
namaù—respectful obeisances; jyotiù-lokäya—unto the resting place of all the
planetary systems; käläyanäya—in the form of supreme time; animiñäm—of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
959
the demigods; pataye—unto the master; mahä-puruñäya—unto the Supreme
person; abhidhémahi—let us meditate; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the body of the çiçumära, as thus described, should be
considered the external form of Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Morning, noon and evening, one should silently observe the form of
the Lord as the Çiçumära-cakra and worship Him with this mantra: "O Lord
who has assumed the form of time! O resting place of all the planets moving in
different orbits! O master of all demigods, O Supreme Person, I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You and meditate upon You."
TEXT 9
Ga]h+aRTaaraMaYaMaaiDadEivk&
PaaPaaPah& MaN}ak*-Taa& i}ak-al/Ma( )
NaMaSYaTa" SMarTaae va i}ak-al&
NaXYaeTa TaTk-al/JaMaaXau PaaPaMa( )) 9 ))
graharkñatärämayam ädhidaivikaà
päpäpahaà mantra-kåtäà tri-kälam
namasyataù smarato vä tri-kälaà
naçyeta tat-kälajam äçu päpam
SYNONYMS
graha-åkña-tärä-mayam—consisting of all the planets and stars;
ädhidaivikam—the leader of all the demigods; päpa-apaham—the killer of
sinful reactions; mantra-kåtäm—of those who chant the mantra mentioned
above; tri-kälam—three times; namasyataù—offering obeisances;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
960
smarataù—meditating; vä—or; tri-kälam—three times; naçyeta—destroys;
tat-käla-jam—born at that time; äçu—very quickly; päpam—all sinful
reactions.
TRANSLATION
The body of the Supreme Lord, Viñëu, which forms the Çiçumära-cakra, is
the resting place of all the demigods and all the stars and planets. One who
chants this mantra to worship that Supreme Person three times a
day—morning, noon and evening—will surely be freed from all sinful
reactions. If one simply offers his obeisances to this form or remembers this
form three times a day, all his recent sinful activities will be destroyed.
PURPORT
Summarizing the entire description of the planetary systems of the
universe, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that one who is able to
meditate upon this arrangement as the viräö-rüpa, or viçva-rüpa, the external
body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and worship Him three times a
day by meditation will always be free from all sinful reactions. Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura estimates that Dhruvaloka, the polestar, is 3,800,000
yojanas above the sun. Above Dhruvaloka by 10,000,000 yojanas is Maharloka,
above Maharloka by 20,000,000 yojanas is Janaloka, above Janaloka by
80,000,000 yojanas is Tapoloka, and above Tapoloka by 120,000,000 yojanas is
Satyaloka. Thus the distance from the sun to Satyaloka is 233,800,000 yojanas,
or 1,870,400,000 miles. The Vaikuëöha planets begin 26,200,000 yojanas
(209,600,000 miles) above Satyaloka. Thus the Viñëu Puräëa describes that the
covering of the universe is 260,000,000 yojanas (2,080,000,000 miles) away
from the sun. The distance from the sun to the earth is 100,000 yojanas, and
below the earth by 70,000 yojanas are the seven lower planetary systems called
Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talätala, Mahätala, Rasätala and Pätäla. Below these
lower planets by 30,000 yojanas, Çeña Näga is lying on the Garbhodaka Ocean.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
961
That ocean is 249,800,000 yojanas deep. Thus the total diameter of the
universe is approximately 500,000,000 yojanas, or 4,000,000,000 miles.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Fifth Canto, Twenty-third Chapter of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Çiçumära planetary System."
24. The Subterranean Heavenly Planets
This chapter describes the planet Rähu, which is 10,000 yojanas (80,000
miles) below the sun, and it also describes Atala and the other lower planetary
systems. Rähu is situated below the sun and moon. It is between these two
planets and the earth. When Rähu conceals the sun and moon, eclipses occur,
either total or partial, depending on whether Rähu moves in a straight or
curving way.
Below Rähu by another 1,000,000 yojanas are the planets of the Siddhas,
Cäraëas and Vidyädharas, and below these are planets such as Yakñaloka and
Rakñaloka. Below these planets is the earth, and 70,000 yojanas below the
earth are the lower planetary systems-Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talätala, Mahätala,
Rasätala and Pätäla. Demons and Rakñasas live in these lower planetary
systems with their wives and children, always engaged in sense gratification
and not fearing their next births. The sunshine does not reach these planets,
but they are illuminated by jewels fixed upon the hoods of snakes. Because of
these shining gems there is practically no darkness. Those living in these
planets do not become old or diseased, and they are not afraid of death from
any cause but the time factor, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
In the planet Atala, the yawning of a demon has produced three kinds of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
962
women, called svairiëé (independent), kämiëé (lusty) and puàçcalé (very easily
subdued by men). Below Atala is the planet Vitala, wherein Lord Çiva and his
wife Gauré reside. Because of their presence, a kind of gold is produced called
häöaka. Below Vitala is the planet Sutala, the abode of Bali Mahäräja, the most
fortunate king. Bali Mahäräja was favored by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Vämanadeva, because of his intense devotional service. The Lord
went to the sacrificial arena of Bali Mahäräja and begged him for three paces
of land, and on this plea the Lord took from him all his possessions. When Bali
Mahäräja agreed to all this, the Lord was very pleased, and therefore the Lord
serves as his doorkeeper. The description of Bali Mahäräja appears in the
Eighth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead offers a devotee material
happiness, this is not His real favor. The demigods, who are very puffed up by
their material opulence, pray to the Lord only for material happiness, not
knowing anything better. Devotees like Prahläda Mahäräja, however, do not
want material happiness. Not to speak of material happiness, they do not want
even liberation from material bondage, although one can achieve this
liberation simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord, even with improper
pronunciation.
Below Sutala is the planet Talätala, the abode of the demon Maya. This
demon is always materially happy because he is favored by Lord Çiva, but he
cannot achieve spiritual happiness at any time. Below Talätala is the planet
Mahätala, where there are many snakes with hundreds and thousands of
hoods. Below Mahätala is Rasätala, and below that is Pätäla, where the serpent
Vasuké lives with his associates.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
ADaSTaaTSaivTauYaaeRJaNaaYauTae Sv>aaRNauNaR+a}avÀrTaqTYaeke- Yaae_SaavMarTv&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
963
Ga]hTv& cal/>aTa >aGavdNauk-MPaYaa SvYaMaSauraPaSad" SaE„&ihke-Yaae ùTadhRSTaSYa
TaaTa JaNMa k-MaaRi<a caePairíaÜ+YaaMa" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
adhastät savitur yojanäyute svarbhänur nakñatravac caratéty eke yo 'säv
amaratvaà grahatvaà cälabhata bhagavad-anukampayä svayam asuräpasadaù
saiàhikeyo hy atad-arhas tasya täta janma karmäëi copariñöäd vakñyämaù.
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; adhastät—below; savituù—the
sun globe; yojana—a measurement equal to eight miles; ayute—ten thousand;
svarbhänuù—the planet known as Rähu; nakñatra-vat—like one of the stars;
carati—is rotating; iti—thus; eke—some who are learned in the Puräëas;
yaù—which; asau—that; amaratvam—a lifetime like those of the demigods;
grahatvam—a position as one of the chief planets; ca—and;
alabhata—obtained; bhagavat-anukampayä—by the compassion of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; svayam—personally; asura-apasadaù—the
lowest of the asuras; saiàhikeyaù—being the son of Siàhikä; hi—indeed;
a-tat-arhaù—not qualified for that position; tasya—his; täta—O my dear
King; janma—birth; karmäëi—activities; ca—also; upariñöät—later;
vakñyämaù—I shall explain.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, some historians, the speakers of
the Puräëas, say that 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles] below the sun is the planet
known as Rähu, which moves like one of the stars. The presiding deity of that
planet, who is the son of Siàhikä, is the most abominable of all asuras, but
although he is completely unfit to assume the position of a demigod or planetary
deity, he has achieved that position by the grace of the Supreme Personality of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
964
Godhead. Later I shall speak further about him.
TEXT 2
YaddSTar<aeMaR<@l&/ Pa[TaPaTaSTaiÜSTarTaae YaaeJaNaaYauTaMaac+aTae ÜadXaSahó&
SaaeMaSYa }aYaaedXaSahó& rahaeYaR" PavRi<a Tad(VYavDaaNak*-ÜEraNaubNDa" SaUYaaR‚
cNd]MaSaavi>aDaaviTa )) 2 ))
yad adas taraëer maëòalaà pratapatas tad vistarato yojanäyutam äcakñate
dvädaça-sahasraà somasya trayodaça-sahasraà rähor yaù parvaëi
tad-vyavadhäna-kåd vairänubandhaù süryä-candramasäv abhidhävati.
SYNONYMS
yat—which; adaù—that; taraëeù—of the sun; maëòalam—globe;
pratapataù—which is always distributing heat; tat—that; vistarataù—in terms
of width; yojana—a distance of eight miles; ayutam—ten thousand;
äcakñate—they estimate; dvädaça-sahasram—20,000 yojanas (160,000 miles);
somasya—of the moon; trayodaça—thirty; sahasram—one thousand;
rähoù—of the planet Rähu; yaù—which; parvaëi—on occasion;
tat-vyavadhäna-kåt—who created an obstruction to the sun and moon at the
time of the distribution of nectar; vaira-anubandhaù—whose intentions are
inimical; süryä—the sun; candramasau—and the moon; abhidhävati—runs
after them on the full-moon night and the dark-moon day.
TRANSLATION
The sun globe, which is a source of heat, extends for 10,000 yojanas
[80,000 miles]. The moon extends for 20,000 yojanas [160,000 miles], and
Rähu extends for 30,000 yojanas [240,000 miles]. Formerly, when nectar was
being distributed, Rähu tried to create dissension between the sun and moon by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
965
interposing himself between them. Rähu is inimical toward both the sun and
the moon, and therefore he always tries to cover the sunshine and moonshine
on the dark-moon day and full-moon night.
PURPORT
As stated herein, the sun extends for 10,000 yojanas, and the moon extends
for twice that, or 20,000 yojanas. The word dvädaça should be understood to
mean twice as much as ten, or twenty. In the opinion of Vijayadhvaja, the
extent of Rähu should be twice that of the moon, or 40,000 yojanas. However
to reconcile this apparent contradiction to the text of the Bhägavatam,
Vijayadhvaja cites the following quotation concerning Rähu;
rähu-soma-ravéëäà tu maëòalä dvi-guëoktitäm. This means that Rähu is twice
as large as the moon, which is twice as large as the sun. This is the conclusion
of the commentator Vijayadhvaja.
TEXT 3
TaiàXaMYaae>aYa}aaiPa >aGavTaa r+a<aaYa Pa[Yau¢&- SaudXaRNa& NaaMa >aaGavTa&
diYaTaMañ& TataeJaSaa duivRzh& Mauhu" PairvTaRMaaNaMa>YaviSQaTaae MauhUTaRMauiÜ‚
JaMaaNaêik-TaôdYa Aaradev iNavTaRTae TaduParaGaiMaiTa vdiNTa l/aek-a" )) 3 ))
tan niçamyobhayaträpi bhagavatä rakñaëäya prayuktaà sudarçanaà näma
bhägavataà dayitam astraà tat tejasä durviñahaà muhuù parivartamänam
abhyavasthito muhürtam udvijamänaç cakita-hådaya äräd eva nivartate tad
uparägam iti vadanti lokäù.
SYNONYMS
tat—that situation; niçamya—hearing; ubhayatra—around both the sun and
moon; api—indeed; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
rakñaëäya—for their protection; prayuktam—engaged; sudarçanam—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
966
wheel of Kåñëa; näma—named; bhägavatam—the most confidential devotee;
dayitam—the most favorite; astram—weapon; tat—that; tejasä—by its
effulgence; durviñaham—unbearable heat; muhuù—repeatedly;
parivartamänam—moving around the sun and moon;
abhyavasthitaù—situated; muhürtam—for a muhürta (forty-eight minutes);
udvijamänaù—whose mind was full of anxieties; cakita—frightened;
hådayaù—the core of whose heart; ärät—to a distant place; eva—certainly;
nivartate—flees; tat—that situation; uparägam—an eclipse; iti—thus;
vadanti—they say; lokäù—the people.
TRANSLATION
After hearing from the sun and moon demigods about Rähu's attack, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, engages His disc, known as the
Sudarçana cakra, to protect them. The Sudarçana cakra is the Lord's most
beloved devotee and is favored by the Lord. The intense heat of its effulgence,
meant for killing non-Vaiñëavas, is unbearable to Rähu, and he therefore flees
in fear of it. During the time Rähu disturbs the sun or moon, there occurs what
people commonly know as an eclipse.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, is always the protector of His
devotees, who are also known as demigods. The controlling demigods are most
obedient to Lord Viñëu, although they also want material sense enjoyment,
and that is why they are called demigods, or almost godly. Although Rähu
attempts to attack both the sun and the moon, they are protected by Lord
Viñëu. Being very afraid of Lord Viñëu's cakra, Rähu cannot stay in front of
the sun or moon for more than a muhürta (forty-eight minutes). The
phenomenon that occurs when Rähu blocks the light of the sun or moon is
called an eclipse. The attempt of the scientists of this earth to go to the moon
is as demoniac as Rähu's attack. Of course. their attempts will be failures
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
967
because no one can enter the moon or sun so easily. Like the attack of Rähu,
such attempts will certainly be failures.
TEXT 4
TaTaae_DaSTaaiTSaÖcar<aivÛaDara<aa& SadNaaiNa TaavNMaa}a Wv )) 4 ))
tato 'dhastät siddha-cäraëa-vidyädharäëäà sadanäni tävan mätra eva.
SYNONYMS
tataù—the planet Rähu; adhastät—below; siddha-cäraëa—of the planets
known as Siddhaloka and Cäraëaloka; vidyädharäëäm—and the planets of the
Vidyädharas; sadanäni—the residential places; tävat mätra—only that much
distance (eighty thousand miles); eva—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Below Rähu by 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles] are the planets known as
Siddhaloka, Cäraëaloka and Vidyädhara-loka.
PURPORT
It is said that the residents of Siddhaloka, being naturally endowed with the
powers of yogés, can go from one planet to another by their natural mystic
powers without using airplanes or similar machines.
TEXT 5
TaTaae_DaSTaaÛ+ar+a" iPaXaacPa[eTa>aUTaGa<aaNaa& ivharaiJarMaNTair+a& YaavÜaYau"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
968
Pa[vaiTa YaavNMaegaa oPal/>YaNTae )) 5 ))
tato 'dhastäd yakña-rakñaù-piçäca-preta-bhüta-gaëänäà vihäräjiram
antarikñaà yävad väyuù praväti yävan meghä upalabhyante.
SYNONYMS
tataù adhastät—beneath the planets occupied by the Siddhas, Cäraëas and
Vidyädharas; yakña-rakñaù-piçäca-preta-bhüta-gaëänäm—of Yakñas, Räkñasas,
Piçäcas, ghosts and so on; vihära-ajiram—the place of sense gratification;
antarikñam—in the sky or outer space; yävat—as far as; väyuù—the wind;
praväti—blows; yävat—as far as; meghäù—the clouds; upalabhyante—are seen.
TRANSLATION
Beneath Vidyädhara-loka, Cäraëaloka and Siddhaloka, in the sky called
antarikña, are the places of enjoyment for the Yakñas, Räkñasas, Piçäcas, ghosts
and so on. Antarikña extends as far as the wind blows and the clouds float in the
sky. Above this there is no more air.
TEXT 6
TaTaae_DaSTaaC^TaYaaeJaNaaNTar wYa& Pa*iQavq YaavÖ&Sa>aaSaXYaeNa SauPa<aaRdYa"
PaTaiT}aPa[vra oTPaTaNTaqiTa )) 6 ))
tato 'dhastäc chata-yojanäntara iyaà påthivé yävad
dhaàsa-bhäsa-çyena-suparëädayaù patattri-pravarä utpatantéti.
SYNONYMS
tataù adhastät—beneath that; çata-yojana—of one hundred yojanas;
antare—by an interval; iyam—this; påthivé—planet earth; yävat—as high as;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
969
haàsa—swans; bhäsa—vultures; çyena—eagles; suparëa-ädayaù—and other
birds; patattri-pravaräù—the chief among birds; utpatanti—can fly; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Below the abodes of the Yakñas and Räkñasas by a distance of 100 yojanas
[800 miles] is the planet earth. Its upper limits extend as high as swans, hawks,
eagles and similar large birds can fly.
TEXT 7
oPavi<aRTa& >aUMaeYaRQaaSaiàveXaavSQaaNaMavNaerPYaDaSTaaTa( Saá >aUivvra WkE-k-Xaae
YaaeJaNaaYauTaaNTare<aaYaaMaivSTaare<aaePaoeáa ATal&/ ivTal&/ SauTal&/ Tal/aTal&/
MahaTal&/ rSaaTal&/ PaaTaal/iMaiTa )) 7 ))
upavarëitaà bhümer yathä-sanniveçävasthänam avaner apy adhastät sapta
bhü-vivarä ekaikaço yojanäyutäntareëäyäma-vistäreëopakÿptä atalaà vitalaà
sutalaà talätalaà mahätalaà rasätalaà pätälam iti.
SYNONYMS
upavarëitam—stated previously; bhümeù—of the planet earth;
yathä-sanniveça-avasthänam—according to the arrangement of the different
places; avaneù—the earth; api—certainly; adhastät—beneath; sapta—seven;
bhü-vivaräù—other planets; eka-ekaçaù—in succession, up to the outer limit of
the universe; yojana-ayuta-antareëa—with an interval of ten thousand yojanas
(eighty thousand miles); äyäma-vistäreëa—by width and length;
upakÿptäù—situated; atalam—named Atala; vitalam—Vitala; sutalam—Sutala;
talätalam—Talätala; mahätalam—Mahätala; rasätalam—Rasätala;
pätälam—Pätäla; iti—thus.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
970
TRANSLATION
My dear King, beneath this earth are seven other planets, known as Atala,
Vitala, Sutala, Talätala, Mahätala, Rasätala and Pätäla. I have already explained
the situation of the planetary systems of earth. The width and length of the
seven lower planetary systems are calculated to be exactly the same as those of
earth.
TEXT 8
WTaezu ih ibl/SvGaeRzu SvGaaRdPYaiDak-k-aMa>aaeGaEìYaaRNaNd>aUiTaiv>aUiTai>a"
SauSaMa*Ö>avNaaeÛaNaa§-I@ivharezu dETYadaNavk-ad]veYaa iNaTYaPa[MauidTaaNaur¢-‚
k-l/}aaPaTYabNDauSauôdNaucra Ga*hPaTaYa wRìradPYaPa[iTahTak-aMaa MaaYaaivNaaeda
iNavSaiNTa )) 8 ))
eteñu hi bila-svargeñu svargäd apy
adhika-käma-bhogaiçvaryänanda-bhüti-vibhütibhiù
susamåddha-bhavanodyänäkréòa-vihäreñu daitya-dänava-kädraveyä
nitya-pramuditänurakta-kalaträpatya-bandhu-suhåd-anucarä gåha-pataya
éçvaräd apy apratihata-kämä mäyä-vinodä nivasanti.
SYNONYMS
eteñu—in these; hi—certainly; bila-svargeñu—known as the heavenly
subterranean worlds; svargät—than the heavenly planets; api—even;
adhika—a greater quantity; käma-bhoga—enjoyment of sense gratification;
aiçvarya-änanda—bliss due to opulence; bhüti—influence; vibhütibhiù—by
those things and wealth; su-samåddha—improved; bhavana—houses;
udyäna—gardens; äkréòa-vihäreñu—in places for different types of sense
gratification; daitya—the demons; dänava—ghosts; kädraveyäù—snakes;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
971
nitya—who are always; pramudita—overjoyed; anurakta—because of
attachment; kalatra—to wife; apatya—children; bandhu—family relations;
suhåt—friends; anucaräù—followers; gåha-patayaù—the heads of the
households; éçvarät—than those more capable, like the demigods; api—even;
apratihata-kämäù—whose fulfillment of lusty desires is unimpeded;
mäyä—illusory; vinodäù—who feel happiness; nivasanti—live.
TRANSLATION
In these seven planetary systems, which are also known as the subterranean
heavens [bila-svarga], there are very beautiful houses, gardens and places of
sense enjoyment, which are even more opulent than those in the higher planets
because the demons have a very high standard of sensual pleasure, wealth and
influence. Most of the residents of these planets, who are known as Daityas,
Dänavas and Nägas, live as householders. Their wives, children, friends and
society are all fully engaged in illusory, material happiness. The sense
enjoyment of the demigods is sometimes disturbed, but the residents of these
planets enjoy life without disturbances. Thus they are understood to be very
attached to illusory happiness.
PURPORT
According to the statements of Prahläda Mahäräja, material enjoyment is
mäyä-sukha, illusory enjoyment. A Vaiñëava is full of anxieties for the
deliverance of all living entities from such false enjoyment. Prahläda Mahäräja
says, mäyä-sukhäya bharam udvahato vimüòhän: [SB 7.9.43] these fools
(vimüòhas) are engaged in material happiness, which is surely temporary.
Whether in the heavenly planets, the lower planets or the earthly planets,
people are engrossed in temporary, material happiness, forgetting that in due
course of time they have to change their bodies according to the material laws
and suffer the repetition of birth, death, old age and disease. Not caring what
will happen in the next birth, gross materialists are simply busy enjoying
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
972
during the present short span of life. A Vaiñëava is always anxious to give all
such bewildered materialists the real happiness of spiritual bliss.
TEXT 9
Yaezu MaharaJa MaYaeNa MaaYaaivNaa iviNaiMaRTaa" Paurae NaaNaaMai<aPa[vrPa[vek-ivr‚
icTa„iv„ic}a>avNa„Pa[ak-arGa„ae„PaurSa>aacETYacTv„raYaTaNaaidi>aNaaRGaaSauriMaQauNaPaaravTa‚
Xauk-Saairk-ak-I<aRk*-i}aMa>aUiMai>aivRvreìrGa*haetaMaE" SaMal/x(k*„„„Taaêk-aSaiTa )) 9 ))
yeñu mahäräja mayena mäyävinä vinirmitäù puro
nänä-maëi-pravara-praveka-viracita-vicitra-bhavana-präkära-gopura-sabhä-ca
itya-catvaräyatanädibhir
nägäsura-mithuna-pärävata-çuka-särikäkérëa-kåtrima-bhümibhir
vivareçvara-gåhottamaiù samalaìkåtäç cakäsati.
SYNONYMS
yeñu—in those lower planetary systems; mahä-räja—O my dear King;
mayena—by the demon named Maya; mäyä-vinä—possessing advanced
knowledge in the construction of material comforts; vinirmitäù—constructed;
puraù—cities; nänä-maëi-pravara—of valuable gems; praveka—with excellent;
viracita—constructed; vicitra—wonderful; bhavana—houses; präkära—walls;
gopura—gates; sabhä—legislative meeting rooms; caitya—temples;
catvara—schools; äyatana-ädibhiù—with hotels or recreation halls and so on;
näga—of living entities with snakelike bodies; asura—of demons, or godless
persons; mithuna—by couples; pärävata—pigeons; çuka—parrots;
särikä—mynas; äkérëa—crowded; kåtrima—artificial; bhümibhiù—possessing
areas; vivara-éçvara—of the leaders of the planets; gåha-uttamaiù—with
first-class houses; samalaìkåtäù—decorated; cakäsati—shine magnificently.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
973
TRANSLATION
My dear King, in the imitation heavens known as bila-svarga there is a great
demon named Maya Dänava, who is an expert artist and architect. He has
constructed many brilliantly decorated cities. There are many wonderful
houses, walls, gates, assembly houses, temples, yards and temple compounds, as
well as many hotels serving as residential quarters for foreigners. The houses
for the leaders of these planets are constructed with the most valuable jewels,
and they are always crowded with living entities known as Nägas and Asuras, as
well as many pigeons, parrots and similar birds. All in all, these imitation
heavenly cities are most beautifully situated and attractively decorated.
TEXT 10
oÛaNaaiNa caiTaTara& MaNawiNd]YaaNaiNdi>a" ku-SauMaf-l/STabk-Sau>aGaik-Sal/Yaa‚
vNaTaåicriv$=Paiv$=iPaNaa& l/Taa(r)ail/i(r)TaaNaa& é[qi>a" SaiMaQauNaivivDaivh(r)Ma‚
Jal/aXaYaaNaaMaMal/Jal/PaU<aaRNaa& ‡zku-l/aeçºNa+aui>aTaNaqrNaqrJaku-Maudku-vl/Ya‚
k-úarNaql/aeTPal/ l/aeihTaXaTaPa}aaidvNaezu k*-TaiNake-TaNaaNaaMaek-ivharaku-l/MaDaur‚
ivivDaSvNaaidi>airiNd]YaaeTSavErMarl/aek-ié[YaMaiTaXaiYaTaaiNa )) 10 ))
udyänäni cätitaräà mana-indriyänandibhiù
kusuma-phala-stabaka-subhaga-kisalayävanata-rucira-viöapa-viöapinäà
latäìgäliìgitänäà çrébhiù samithuna-vividha-vihaìgama-jaläçayänäm
amala-jala-pürëänäà
jhañakulollaìghana-kñubhita-néra-néraja-kumuda-kuva-laya-kahlära-nélotpala
-lohita-çatapaträdi-vaneñu kåta-niketanänäm
eka-vihäräkula-madhura-vividha-svanädibhir indriyotsavair
amara-loka-çriyam atiçayitäni.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
974
SYNONYMS
udyänäni—the gardens and parks; ca—also; atitaräm—greatly; manaù—to the
mind; indriya—and to the senses; änandibhiù—which cause pleasure;
kusuma—by flowers; phala—of fruits; stabaka—bunches; subhaga—very
beautiful; kisalaya—new twigs; avanata—bent low; rucira—attractive;
viöapa—possessing branches; viöapinäm—of trees;
latä-aìga-äliìgitänäm—which are embraced by the limbs of creepers;
çrébhiù—by the beauty; sa-mithuna—in pairs; vividha—varieties;
vihaìgama—frequented by birds; jala-äçayänäm—of reservoirs of water;
amala-jala-pürëänäm—full of clear and transparent water;
jhaña-kula-ullaìghana—by the jumping of different fish; kñubhita—agitated;
néra—in the water; néraja—of lotus flowers; kumuda—lilies;
kuvalaya—flowers named kuvalaya; kahlära-kahlära flowers; néla-utpala—blue
lotus flowers; lohita—red; çata-patra-ädi—lotus flowers with a hundred petals
and so on; vaneñu—in forests; kåta-niketanänäm—of birds that have made
their nests; eka-vihära-äkula—full of uninterrupted enjoyment;
madhura—very sweet; vividha—varieties; svana-ädibhiù—by vibrations;
indriya-utsavaiù—invoking sense enjoyment; amara-loka-çriyam—the beauty
of the residential places of the demigods; atiçayitäni—surpassing.
TRANSLATION
The parks and gardens in the artificial heavens surpass in beauty those of
the upper heavenly planets. The trees in those gardens, embraced by creepers,
bend with a heavy burden of twigs with fruits and flowers, and therefore they
appear extraordinarily beautiful. That beauty could attract anyone and make his
mind fully blossom in the pleasure of sense gratification. There are many lakes
and reservoirs with clear, transparent water, agitated by jumping fish and
decorated with many flowers such as lilies, kuvalayas, kahläras and blue and red
lotuses. Pairs of cakraväkas and many other water birds nest in the lakes and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
975
always enjoy in a happy mood, making sweet, pleasing vibrations that are very
satisfying and conducive to enjoyment of the senses.
TEXT 11
Ya}a h vav Na >aYaMahaera}aaidi>a" k-al/iv>aaGaEåPal/+YaTae )) 11 ))
yatra ha väva na bhayam aho-räträdibhiù käla-vibhägair upalakñyate.
SYNONYMS
yatra—where; ha väva—certainly; na—not; bhayam—fearfulness;
ahaù-rätra-ädibhiù—because of days and nights; käla-vibhägaiù—the divisions
of time; upalakñyate—is experienced.
TRANSLATION
Since there is no sunshine in those subterranean planets, time is not divided
into days and nights, and consequently fear produced by time does not exist.
TEXT 12
Ya}a ih MahaihPa[vriXaraeMa<aYa" Sav| TaMa" Pa[baDaNTae )) 12 ))
yatra hi mahähi-pravara-çiro-maëayaù sarvaà tamaù prabädhante.
SYNONYMS
yatra—where; hi—indeed; mahä-ahi—of great serpents; pravara—of the best;
çiraù-maëayaù—the gems on the hoods; sarvam—all; tamaù—darkness;
prabädhante—drive away.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
976
TRANSLATION
Many great serpents reside there with gems on their hoods, and the
effulgence of these gems dissipates the darkness in all directions.
TEXT 13
Na va WTaezu vSaTaa& idVYaaEziDarSarSaaYaNaaàPaaNaòaNaaidi>araDaYaae VYaaDaYaae
vl/IPail/TaJaradYaê dehvEv<YaRdaEGaRNDYaSved(c)-MaGl/aiNairiTa vYaae_vSQaaê
>aviNTa )) 13 ))
na vä eteñu vasatäà divyauñadhi-rasa-rasäyanänna-päna-snänädibhir ädhayo
vyädhayo valé-palita-jarädayaç ca
deha-vaivarëya-daurgandhya-sveda-klama-glänir iti vayo 'vasthäç ca bhavanti.
SYNONYMS
na—not; vä—either; eteñu—in these planets; vasatäm—of those residing;
divya—wonderful; auñadhi—of herbs; rasa—the juices; rasäyana—and elixirs;
anna—by eating; päna—drinking; snäna-ädibhiù—by bathing in and so on;
ädhayaù—mental troubles; vyädhayaù—diseases; valé—wrinkles; palita—grey
hair; jarä—old age; ädayaù—and so on; ca—and; deha-vaivarëya—the fading
of bodily luster; daurgandhya—bad odor; sveda—perspiration; klama—fatigue;
gläniù—lack of energy; iti—thus; vayaù avasthäù—miserable conditions due to
increasing age; ca—and; bhavanti—are.
TRANSLATION
Since the residents of these planets drink and bathe in juices and elixirs
made from wonderful herbs, they are freed from all anxieties and physical
diseases. They have no experience of grey hair, wrinkles or invalidity, their
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
977
bodily lusters do not fade, their perspiration does not cause a bad smell, and
they are not troubled by fatigue or by lack of energy or enthusiasm due to old
age.
TEXT 14
Na ih Taeza& k-LYaa<aaNaa& Pa[>aviTa ku-TaêNa Ma*TYauivRNaa >aGavtaeJaSaê§-a‚
PadeXaaTa( )) 14 ))
na hi teñäà kalyäëänäà prabhavati kutaçcana måtyur vinä bhagavat-tejasaç
cakräpadeçät.
SYNONYMS
na hi—not; teñäm—of them; kalyäëänäm—who are by nature auspicious;
prabhavati—able to influence; kutaçcana—from anywhere; måtyuù—death;
vinä—except; bhagavat-tejasaù—of the energy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; cakra-apadeçät—from that weapon named the Sudarçana cakra.
TRANSLATION
They live very auspiciously and do not fear death from anything but death's
established time, which is the effulgence of the Sudarçana cakra of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
This is the defect of material existence. Everything in the subterranean
heavens is very nicely arranged. There are well situated residential quarters,
there is a pleasing atmosphere, and there are no bodily inconveniences or
mental anxieties, but nevertheless those who live there have to take another
birth according to karma. Persons whose minds are dull cannot understand
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
978
this defect of a materialistic civilization aiming at material comforts. One may
make his living conditions very pleasing for the senses, but despite all
favorable conditions, one must in due course of time meet death. The members
of a demoniac civilization endeavor to make their living conditions very
comfortable, but they cannot check death. The influence of the Sudarçana
cakra will not allow their so-called material happiness to endure.
TEXT 15
YaiSMaNa( Pa[ivíe_SaurvDaUNaa& Pa[aYa" Pau&SavNaaiNa >aYaadev óviNTa PaTa‚
iNTa =c )) 15 ))
yasmin praviñöe 'sura-vadhünäà präyaù puàsavanäni bhayäd eva sravanti
patanti ca.
SYNONYMS
yasmin—where; praviñöe—when entered; asura-vadhünäm—of the wives of
those demons; präyaù—almost always; puàsavanäni—fetuses; bhayät—because
of fear; eva—certainly; sravanti—slip out; patanti—fall down; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
When the Sudarçana disc enters those provinces, the pregnant wives of the
demons all have miscarriages due to fear of its effulgence.
TEXT 16
AQaaTale/ MaYaPau}aae_Saurae bl/ae iNavSaiTa YaeNa h va wh Sa*ía" z<<aviTa‚
MaaRYaa" k-aêNaaÛaiPa MaaYaaivNaae DaarYaiNTa YaSYa c Ja*M>aMaa<aSYa Mau%TañYa"
ñqGa<aa odPaÛNTa SvEir<Ya" k-aiMaNYa" Pau&êLYa wiTa Yaa vE ibl/aYaNa& Pa[iví&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
979
Pauåz& rSaeNa ha$=k-a:YaeNa SaaDaiYaTva Svivl/aSaavl/aek-NaaNauraGaiSMaTaSa&l/aPaae‚
PaGaUhNaaidi>a" SvEr& ik-l/ rMaYaiNTa YaiSMaàuPaYau¢e- Pauåz wRìrae_h& iSaÖae
_hiMaTYaYauTaMahaGaJabl/MaaTMaaNaMai>aMaNYaMaaNa" k-TQaTae MadaNDa wv )) 16 ))
athätale maya-putro 'suro balo nivasati yena ha vä iha såñöäù ñaë-ëavatir
mäyäù käçcanädyäpi mäyävino dhärayanti yasya ca jåmbhamäëasya mukhatas
trayaù stré-gaëä udapadyanta svairiëyaù käminyaù puàçcalya iti yä vai
biläyanaà praviñöaà puruñaà rasena häöakäkhyena sädhayitvä
sva-viläsävalokanänuräga-smita-saàläpopagühanädibhiù svairaà kila
ramayanti yasminn upayukte puruña éçvaro 'haà siddho 'ham ity
ayuta-mahä-gaja-balam ätmänam abhimanyamänaù katthate madändha iva.
SYNONYMS
atha—now; atale—on the planet named Atala; maya-putraù asuraù—the
demon son of Maya; balaù—Bala; nivasati—resides; yena—by whom; ha
vä—indeed; iha—in this; såñöäù—propagated; ñaö-ëavatiù—ninety-six;
mäyäù—varieties of illusion; käçcana—some; adya api—even today;
mäyä-vinaù—those who know the art of magical feats (like manufacturing
gold); dhärayanti—utilize; yasya—of whom; ca—also; jåmbhamäëasya—while
yawning; mukhataù—from the mouth; trayaù—three; stré-gaëäù—varieties of
women; udapadyanta—were generated; svairiëyaù—svairiëé (one who only
marries in her same class); käminyaù—kämiëé (one who, being lusty, marries
men from any group); puàçcalyaù—puàçcalé (one who wants to go from one
husband to another); iti—thus; yäù—who; vai—certainly; bila-ayanam—the
subterranean planets; praviñöam—entering; puruñam—a male; rasena—by a
juice; häöaka-äkhyena—made from an intoxicating herb known as häöaka;
sädhayitvä—making sexually fit; sva-viläsa—for their personal sense
gratification; avalokana—by glances; anuräga—lustful; smita—by smiling;
saàläpa—by talking; upagühana-ädibhiù—and by embracing;
svairam—according to their own desire; kila—indeed; ramayanti—enjoy sex
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
980
pleasure; yasmin—which; upayukte—when used; puruñaù—a man; éçvaraù
aham—I am the most powerful person; siddhaù aham—I am the greatest and
most elevated person; iti—thus; ayuta—ten thousand; mahä-gaja—of big
elephants; balam—the strength; ätmänam—himself; abhimanyamänaù—being
full of pride; katthate—they say; mada-andhaù—blinded by false prestige;
iva—like.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, now I shall describe to you the lower planetary systems, one
by one, beginning from Atala. In Atala there is a demon, the son of Maya
Dänava named Bala, who created ninety-six kinds of mystic power. Some
so-called yogés and svämés take advantage of this mystic power to cheat people
even today. Simply by yawning, the demon Bala created three kinds of women,
known as svairiëé, kämiëé and puàçcalé. The svairiëés like to marry men from
their own group, the kämiëés marry men from any group, and the puàçcalés
change husbands one after another. If a man enters the planet of Atala, these
women immediately capture him and induce him to drink an intoxicating
beverage made with a drug known as häöaka [cannabis indica]. This intoxicant
endows the man with great sexual prowess, of which the women take advantage
for enjoyment. A woman will enchant him with attractive glances, intimate
words, smiles of love and then embraces. In this way she induces him to enjoy
sex with her to her full satisfaction. Because of his increased sexual power, the
man thinks himself stronger than ten thousand elephants and considers himself
most perfect. Indeed, illusioned and intoxicated by false pride, he thinks himself
God, ignoring impending death.
TEXT 17
TaTaae_DaSTaaiÜTale/ hrae >aGavaNa( ha$=ke-ìr" SvPaazRd>aUTaGa<aav*Ta"
Pa[JaaPaiTaSaGaaeRPab*&h<aaYa >avae >avaNYaa Sah iMaQauNaq>aUTa AaSTae YaTa" Pa[v*taa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
981
SairTPa[vra ha$=k-I NaaMa >avYaaevsYaeR<a Ya}a ic}a>aaNauMaaRTairìNaa SaiMaDYaMaaNa
AaeJaSaa iPabiTa TaiàïyUTa& ha$=k-a:Ya& Sauv<a| >aUz<aeNaaSaureNd]avraeDaezu Pauåza"
Sah Pauåzqi>aDaaRrYaiNTa )) 17 ))
tato 'dhastäd vitale haro bhagavän häöakeçvaraù sva-pärñada-bhüta-gaëävåtaù
prajäpati-sargopabåàhaëäya bhavo bhavänyä saha mithuné-bhüta äste yataù
pravåttä sarit-pravarä häöaké näma bhavayor véryeëa yatra citrabhänur
mätariçvanä samidhyamäna ojasä pibati tan niñöhyütaà häöakäkhyaà
suvarëaà bhüñaëenäsurendrävarodheñu puruñäù saha puruñébhir dhärayanti.
SYNONYMS
tataù—the planet Atala; adhastät—beneath; vitale—on the planet;
haraù—Lord Çiva; bhagavän—the most powerful personality;
häöakeçvaraù—the master of gold; sva-pärñada—by his own associates;
bhüta-gaëa—who are ghostly living beings; ävåtaù—surrounded;
prajäpati-sarga—of the creation of Lord Brahmä; upabåàhaëäya—to increase
the population; bhavaù—Lord Çiva; bhavänyä saha—with his wife, Bhaväné;
mithuné-bhütaù—being united in sex; äste—remains; yataù—from that planet
(Vitala); pravåttä—being emanated; sarit-pravarä—the great river;
häöaké—Häöaké; näma—named; bhavayoù véryeëa—due to the semina and
ovum of Lord Çiva and Bhaväné; yatra—where; citra-bhänuù—the fire-god;
mätariçvanä—by the wind; samidhyamänaù—being brightly inflamed;
ojasä—with great strength; pibati—drinks; tat—that; niñöhyütam—spit out
with a hissing sound; häöaka-äkhyam—named Häöaka; suvarëam—gold;
bhüñaëena—by different types of ornaments; asura-indra—of the great asuras;
avarodheñu—in the homes; puruñäù—the males; saha—with; puruñébhiù—their
wives and women; dhärayanti—wear.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
982
The next planet below Atala is Vitala, wherein Lord Çiva, who is known as
the master of gold mines, lives with his personal associates, the ghosts and
similar living entities. Lord Çiva, as the progenitor, engages in sex with
Bhaväné, the progenitress, to produce living entities, and from the mixture of
their vital fluid the river named Häöaké is generated. When fire, being made to
blaze by the wind, drinks of this river and then sizzles and spits it out, it
produces gold called Häöaka. The demons who live on that planet with their
wives decorate themselves with various ornaments made from that gold, and
thus they live there very happily.
PURPORT
It appears that when Bhava and Bhaväné, Lord Çiva and his wife, unite
sexually, the emulsification of their secretions creates a chemical which when
heated by fire can produce gold. It is said that the alchemists of the medieval
age tried to prepare gold from base metal, and Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé also
states that when bell metal is treated with mercury, it can produce gold. Çréla
Sanätana Gosvämé mentions this in regard to the initiation of low-class men to
turn them into brähmaëas. Sanätana Gosvämé said:
yathä käïcanatäà yäti
käàsyaà rasa-vidhänataù
tathä dékñä-vidhänena
dvijatvaà jäyate nåëäm
"As one can transform kaàsa, or bell metal, into gold by treating it with
mercury, one can also turn a lowborn man into a brähmaëa by initiating him
properly into Vaiñëava activities." The International Society for Krishna
Consciousness is trying to turn mlecchas and yavanas into real brähmaëas by
properly initiating them and stopping them from engaging in meat-eating,
intoxication, illicit sex and gambling. One who stops these four principles of
sinful activity and chants the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra can certainly become a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
983
pure brähmaëa through the process of bona fide initiation, as suggested by
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé.
Apart from this, if one takes a hint from this verse and learns how to mix
mercury with bell metal by properly heating and melting them, one can get
gold very cheaply. The alchemists of the medieval age tried to manufacture
gold, but they were unsuccessful, perhaps because they did not follow the right
instructions.
TEXT 18
TaTaae_DaSTaaTSauTale/ odaré[va" Pau<Yaëaek-ae ivraecNaaTMaJaae bil/>aRGavTaa
MaheNd]SYa iPa[Ya& ick-IzRMaa<aeNaaidTael/RBDak-aYaae >aUTva v$u=vaMaNaæPae<a
Parai+aál/aek-}aYaae >aGavdNauk-MPaYaEv PauNa" Pa[veiXaTa wNd]aidZvivÛMaaNaYaa
SauSaMa*ÖYaa ié[Yaai>aJauí" SvDaMaeR<aaraDaYa&STaMaev >aGavNTaMaaraDaNaqYaMaPaGaTa‚
SaaßSa AaSTae_DauNaaiPa )) 18 ))
tato 'dhastät sutale udära-çraväù puëya-çloko virocanätmajo balir bhagavatä
mahendrasya priyaà cikérñamäëenäditer labdha-käyo bhütvä
vaöu-vämana-rüpeëa paräkñipta-loka-trayo bhagavad-anukampayaiva punaù
praveçita indrädiñv avidyamänayä susamåddhayä çriyäbhijuñöaù
sva-dharmeëärädhayaàs tam eva bhagavantam ärädhanéyam apagata-sädhvasa
äste 'dhunäpi.
SYNONYMS
tataù adhastät—beneath the planet known as Vitala; sutale—on the planet
known as Sutala; udära-çraväù—very greatly celebrated; puëya-çlokaù—very
pious and advanced in spiritual consciousness; virocana-ätmajaù—the son of
Virocana; baliù—Bali Mahäräja; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; mahä-indrasya—of the King of heaven, Indra; priyam—the welfare;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
984
cikérñamäëena—desiring to perform; äditeù—from Aditi;
labdha-käyaù—having obtained His body; bhütvä—appearing;
vaöu—brahmacäri; vämana-rüpeëa—in the form of a dwarf;
paräkñipta—wrested away; loka-trayaù—the three worlds;
bhagavat-anukampayä—by the causeless mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; eva—certainly; punaù—again; praveçitaù—caused to enter;
indra-ädiñu—even among the demigods like the King of heaven;
avidyamänayä—not existing; susamåddhayä—much enriched by such exalted
opulence; çriyä—by good fortune; abhijuñöaù—being blessed;
sva-dharmeëa—by discharging devotional service; ärädhayan—worshiping;
tam—Him; eva—certainly; bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; ärädhanéyam—who is most worshipable;
apagata-sädhvasaù—without fear; äste—remains; adhunä api—even today.
TRANSLATION
Below the planet Vitala is another planet, known as Sutala, where the great
son of Mahäräja Virocana, Bali Mahäräja, who is celebrated as the most pious
king, resides even now. For the welfare of Indra, the King of heaven, Lord
Viñëu appeared in the form of a dwarf brahmacäré as the son of Aditi and
tricked Bali Mahäräja by begging for only three paces of land but taking all the
three worlds. Being very pleased with Bali Mahäräja for giving all his
possessions, the Lord returned his kingdom and made him richer than the
opulent King Indra. Even now, Bali Mahäräja engages in devotional service by
worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the planet of Sutala.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described as Uttamaçloka, "He who
is worshiped by the best of selected Sanskrit verses," and His devotees such as
Bali Mahäräja are also worshiped by puëya-çloka, verses that increase one's
piety. Bali Mahäräja offered everything to the Lord—his wealth, his kingdom
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
985
and even his own body (sarvätma-nivedane baliù). The Lord appeared before
Bali Mahäräja as a brähmaëa beggar, and Bali Mahäräja gave Him everything
he had. However, Bali Mahäräja did not become poor; by donating all his
possessions to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he became a successful
devotee and got everything back again with the blessings of the Lord.
Similarly, those who give contributions to expand the activities of the Kåñëa
consciousness movement and to accomplish its objectives will never be losers;
they will get their wealth back with the blessings of Lord Kåñëa. On the other
side, those who collect contributions on behalf of the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness should be very careful not to use even a farthing of the
collection for any purpose other than the transcendental loving service of the
Lord.
TEXT 19
Naae WvETaTSaa+aaTk-arae >aUiMadaNaSYa YataÙGavTYaXaezJaqviNak-aYaaNaa& Jaqv‚
>aUTaaTMa>aUTae ParMaaTMaiNa vaSaudeve TaqQaRTaMae Paa}a oPaPaàe ParYaa é[ÖYaa
ParMaadrSaMaaihTaMaNaSaa SaMPa[iTaPaaidTaSYa Saa+aadPavGaRÜarSYa YaiØl/iNa‚
l/YaEìYaRMa( )) 19 ))
no evaitat säkñätkäro bhümi-dänasya yat tad bhagavaty açeña-jéva-nikäyänäà
jéva-bhütätma-bhüte paramätmani väsudeve térthatame pätra upapanne parayä
çraddhayä paramädara-samähita-manasä sampratipäditasya säkñäd
apavarga-dvärasya yad bila-nilayaiçvaryam.
SYNONYMS
no—not; eva—indeed; etat—this; säkñätkäraù—the direct result;
bhümi-dänasya—of contribution of land; yat—which; tat—that;
bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
açeña-jéva-nikäyänäm—of unlimited numbers of living entities;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
986
jéva-bhüta-ätma-bhüte—who is the life and the Supersoul; parama-ätmani—the
supreme regulator; väsudeve—Lord Väsudeva (Kåñëa); tértha-tame—who is the
best of all places of pilgrimage; pätre—the most worthy recipient;
upapanne—having approached; parayä—by the topmost; çraddhayä—faith;
parama-ädara—with great respect; samähita-manasä—with an attentive mind;
sampratipäditasya—which was given; säkñät—directly;
apavarga-dvärasya—the gate of liberation; yat—which; bila-nilaya—of
bila-svarga, the imitation heavenly planets; aiçvaryam—the opulence.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, Bali Mahäräja donated all his possessions to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Vämanadeva, but one should certainly not conclude
that he achieved his great worldly opulence in bila-svarga as a result of his
charitable disposition. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the source
of life for all living entities, lives within everyone as the friendly Supersoul, and
under His direction a living entity enjoys or suffers in the material world.
Greatly appreciating the transcendental qualities of the Lord, Bali Mahäräja
offered everything at His lotus feet. His purpose, however, was not to gain
anything material, but to become a pure devotee. For a pure devotee, the door of
liberation is automatically opened. One should not think that Bali Mahäräja was
given so much material opulence merely because of his charity. When one
becomes a pure devotee in love, he may also be blessed with a good material
position by the will of the Supreme Lord. However, one should not mistakenly
think that the material opulence of a devotee is the result of his devotional
service. The real result of devotional service is the awakening of pure love for
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, which continues under all circumstances.
TEXT 20
YaSYa h vav +auTaPaTaNaPa[S%l/Naaidzu ivvXa" Sak*-àaMaai>aGa*<aNa( Pauåz"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
987
k-MaRbNDaNaMaÅSaa ivDauNaaeiTa YaSYa hEv Pa[iTabaDaNa& MauMau+avae_NYaQaEvaePal/>aNTae
)) 20 ))
yasya ha väva kñuta-patana-praskhalanädiñu vivaçaù sakån nämäbhigåëan
puruñaù karma-bandhanam aïjasä vidhunoti yasya haiva pratibädhanaà
mumukñavo 'nyathaivopalabhante.
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; ha väva—indeed; kñuta—when in hunger; patana—falling
down; praskhalana-ädiñu—stumbling and so on; vivaçaù—being helpless;
sakåt—once; näma abhigåëan—chanting the holy name of the Lord;
puruñaù—a person; karma-bandhanam—the bondage of fruitive activity;
aïjasä—completely; vidhunoti—washes away; yasya—of which; ha—certainly;
eva—in this way; pratibädhanam—the repulsion; mumukñavaù—persons
desiring liberation; anyathä—otherwise; eva—certainly; upalabhante—are
trying to realize.
TRANSLATION
If one who is embarrassed by hunger or who falls down or stumbles chants
the holy name of the Lord even once, willingly or unwillingly, he is immediately
freed from the reactions of his past deeds. Karmés entangled in material
activities face many difficulties in the practice of mystic yoga and other
endeavors to achieve that same freedom.
PURPORT
It is not a fact that one has to offer his material possessions to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and be liberated before he can engage in devotional
service. A devotee automatically attains liberation without separate endeavors.
Bali Mahäräja did not get back all his material possessions merely because of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
988
his charity to the Lord. One who becomes a devotee, free from material desires
and motives, regards all opportunities, both material and spiritual, as
benedictions from the Lord, and in this way his service to the Lord is never
hampered. Bhukti, material enjoyment, and mukti, liberation, are only
by-products of devotional service. A devotee need not work separately to
attain mukti. Çréla Bilvamaìgala Öhäkura said, muktiù svayaà mukulitäïjaliù
sevate 'smän: a pure devotee of the Lord does not have to endeavor separately
for mukti, because mukti is always ready to serve him.
In this regard, Caitanya-caritämåta (Antya 3.177-188) describes Haridäsa
Öhäkura's confirmation of the effect of chanting the holy name of the Lord.
keha bale—'näma haite haya päpa-kñaya'
keha bale—'näma haite jévera mokña haya'
Some say that by chanting the holy name of the Lord one is freed from all the
reactions of sinful life, and others say that by chanting the holy name of the
Lord one attains liberation from material bondage.
haridäsa kahena,—"nämera ei dui phala naya
nämera phale kåñëa-pade prema upajaya
Haridäsa Öhäkura, however, said that the desired result of chanting the holy
name of the Lord is not that one is liberated from material bondage or freed
from the reactions of sinful life. The actual result of chanting the holy name of
the Lord is that one awakens his dormant Kåñëa consciousness, his loving
service to the Lord.
änuñaìgika phala nämera—'mukti', 'päpa-näça'
tähära dåñöänta yaiche süryera prakäça
Haridäsa Öhäkura said that liberation and freedom from the reactions of sinful
activities are only by-products of chanting the holy name of the Lord. If one
chants the holy name of the Lord purely, he attains the platform of loving
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
989
service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this regard Haridäsa
Öhäkura gave an example comparing the power of the holy name to sunshine.
ei çlokera artha kara paëòitera gaëa"
sabe kahe,—'tumi kaha artha-vivaraëa'
He placed a verse before all the learned scholars present, but the learned
scholars asked him to state the purport of the verse.
haridäsa kahena,—"yaiche süryera udaya
udaya nä haite ärambhe tamera haya kñaya
Haridäsa Öhäkura said that as the sun begins to rise, it dissipates the darkness
of night, even before the sunshine is visible.
caura-preta-räkñasädira bhaya haya näça
udaya haile dharma-karma-ädi parakäça
Before the sunrise even takes place, the light of dawn destroys the fear of the
dangers of the night, such as disturbances by thieves, ghosts and Räkñasas, and
when the sunshine actually appears, one engages in his duties.
aiche nämodayärambhe päpa-ädira kñaya
udaya kaile kåñëa-pade haya premodaya
Similarly, even before one's chanting of the holy name is pure, one is freed
from all sinful reactions, and when he chants purely he becomes a lover of
Kåñëa.
'mukti' tuccha-phala haya nämäbhäsa haite
ye mukti bhakta nä laya, se kåñëa cähe dite"
A devotee never accepts mukti, even if Kåñëa offers it. Mukti, freedom from all
sinful reactions, is obtained even by nämäbhäsa, or a glimpse of the light of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
990
holy name before its full light is perfectly visible.
The nämäbhäsa stage is between that of näma-aparädha, or chanting of the
holy name with offenses, and pure chanting. There are three stages in
chanting the holy name of the Lord. In the first stage, one commits ten kinds
of offenses while chanting. In the next stage, nämäbhäsa, the offenses have
almost stopped, and one is coming to the platform of pure chanting. In the
third stage, when one chants the Hare Kåñëa mantra without offenses, his
dormant love for Kåñëa immediately awakens. This is the perfection.
TEXT 21
TaÙ¢-aNaaMaaTMavTaa& SaveRzaMaaTMaNYaaTMad AaTMaTaYaEv )) 21 ))
tad bhaktänäm ätmavatäà sarveñäm ätmany ätmada ätmatayaiva.
SYNONYMS
tat—that; bhaktänäm—of great devotees; ätma-vatäm—of self-realized persons
like Sanaka and Sanätana; sarveñäm—of all; ätmani—to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is the soul; ätma-de—who gives Himself without
hesitation; ätmatayä—who is the Supreme Soul, Paramätmä; eva—indeed.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in everyone's heart as
the Supersoul, sells Himself to His devotees such as Närada Muni. In other
words, the Lord gives pure love to such devotees and gives Himself to those
who love Him purely. Great, self-realized mystic yogés such as the four
Kumäras also derive great transcendental bliss from realizing the Supersoul
within themselves.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
991
PURPORT
The Lord became Bali Mahäräja's doorkeeper not because of his giving
everything to the Lord, but because of his exalted position as a lover of the
Lord.
TEXT 22
Na vE >aGavaàUNaMaMauZYaaNauJaGa]ah YaduTa PauNaraTMaaNauSMa*iTaMaaez<a& MaaYaaMaYa>aae‚
GaEìYaRMaevaTaNauTaeiTa )) 22 ))
na vai bhagavän nünam amuñyänujagräha yad uta punar
ätmänusmåti-moñaëaà mäyämaya-bhogaiçvaryam evätanuteti.
SYNONYMS
na—not; vai—indeed; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
nünam—certainly; amuñya—unto Bali Mahäräja; anujagräha—showed His
favor; yat—because; uta—certainly; punaù—again; ätma-anusmåti—of
remembrance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; moñaëam—which robs
one; mäyä-maya—an attribute of Mäyä; bhoga-aiçvaryam—the material
opulence; eva—certainly; ätanuta—extended; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead did not award His mercy to Bali
Mahäräja by giving him material happiness and opulence, for these make one
forget loving service to the Lord. The result of material opulence is that one can
no longer absorb his mind in the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
992
PURPORT
There are two kinds of opulence. One, which results from one's karma, is
material, whereas the other is spiritual. A surrendered soul who fully depends
upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not want material opulence
for sense gratification. Therefore when a pure devotee is seen to possess
exalted material opulence, it is not due to his karma. Rather, it is due to his
bhakti. In other words, he is in that position because the Supreme Lord wants
him to execute service to Him very easily and opulently. The special mercy of
the Lord for the neophyte devotee is that he becomes materially poor. This is
the Lord's mercy because if a neophyte devotee becomes materially opulent, he
forgets the service of the Lord. However, if an advanced devotee is favored by
the Lord with opulence, it is not material opulence but a spiritual opportunity.
Material opulence offered to the demigods causes forgetfulness of the Lord, but
opulence was given to Bali Mahäräja for continuing service to the Lord, which
was free from any touch of mäyä.
TEXT 23
YataÙGavTaaNaiDaGaTaaNYaaePaaYaeNa YaaÁaC^le/NaaPaôTaSvXarqravXaeizTal/aek-}aYaae
vå<aPaaXaEê SaMPa[iTaMau¢-ae iGairdYaa| caPaivÖ wiTa haevac )) 23 ))
yat tad bhagavatänadhigatänyopäyena
yäcïä-cchalenäpahåta-sva-çarérävaçeñita-loka-trayo varuëa-päçaiç ca
sampratimukto giri-daryäà cäpaviddha iti hoväca.
SYNONYMS
yat—which; tat—that; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
anadhigata-anya-upäyena—who is not perceived by other means;
yäcïä-chalena—by a trick of begging; apahåta—taken away;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
993
sva-çaréra-avaçeñita—with only his own body remaining; loka-trayaù—the
three worlds; varuëa-päçaiù—by the ropes of Varuëa; ca—and;
sampratimuktaù—completely bound; giri-daryäm—in a cave in a mountain;
ca—and; apaviddhaù—being detained; iti—thus; ha—indeed; uväca—said.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead could see no other means of
taking everything away from Bali Mahäräja, He adopted the trick of begging
from him and took away all the three worlds. Thus only his body was left, but
the Lord was still not satisfied. He arrested Bali Mahäräja, bound him with the
ropes of Varuëa and threw him in a cave in a mountain. Nevertheless, although
all his property was taken and he was thrown into a cave, Bali Mahäräja was
such a great devotee that he spoke as follows.
TEXT 24
NaUNa& bTaaYa& >aGavaNaQaeRzu Na iNaZ<aaTaae Yaae_SaaivNd]ae YaSYa Saicvae MaN}aaYa
v*Ta Wk-aNTaTaae b*hSPaiTaSTaMaiTahaYa SvYaMauPaeNd]e<aaTMaaNaMaYaacTaaTMaNaêaiXazae
Naae Wv TaÕaSYaMaiTaGaM>aqrvYaSa" k-al/SYa MaNvNTarPairv*ta& ik-Yaçaek-}a‚
YaiMadMa( )) 24 ))
nünaà batäyaà bhagavän artheñu na niñëäto yo 'säv indro yasya sacivo
manträya våta ekäntato båhaspatis tam atihäya svayam upendreëätmänam
ayäcatätmanaç cäçiño no eva tad-däsyam ati-gambhéra-vayasaù kälasya
manvantara-parivåttaà kiyal loka-trayam idam.
SYNONYMS
nünam—certainly; bata—alas; ayam—this; bhagavän—very learned;
artheñu—in self-interest; na—not; niñëätaù—very experienced; yaù—who;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
994
asau—the King of heaven; indraù—Indra; yasya—of whom; sacivaù—the
prime minister; manträya—for giving instructions; våtaù—chosen;
ekäntataù—alone; båhaspatiù—named Båhaspati; tam—him;
atihäya—ignoring; svayam—personally; upendreëa—by means of Upendra
(Lord Vämanadeva); ätmänam—myself; ayäcata—requested; ätmanaù—for
himself; ca—and; äçiñaù—blessings (the three worlds); no—not;
eva—certainly; tat-däsyam—the loving service of the Lord; ati—very;
gambhéra-vayasaù—having an insurmountable duration; kälasya—of time;
manvantara-parivåttam—changed by the end of a life of a Manu; kiyat—what
is the value of; loka-trayam—three worlds; idam—these.
TRANSLATION
Alas, how pitiable it is for Indra, the King of heaven, that although he is
very learned and powerful and although he chose Båhaspati as his prime
minister to instruct him, he is completely ignorant concerning spiritual
advancement. Båhaspati is also unintelligent because he did not properly
instruct his disciple Indra. Lord Vämanadeva was standing at Indra's door, but
King Indra, instead of begging Him for an opportunity to render transcendental
loving service, engaged Him in asking me for alms to gain the three worlds for
his sense gratification. Sovereignty over the three worlds is very insignificant
because whatever material opulence one may possess lasts only for an age of
Manu, which is but a tiny fraction of endless time.
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja was so powerful that he fought with Indra and took
possession of the three worlds. Indra was certainly very advanced in
knowledge, but instead of asking Vämanadeva for engagement in His service,
he used the Lord to beg for material possessions that would lie finished at the
end of one age of Manu. An age of Manu, which is the duration of Manu's life,
is calculated to last seventy-two yugas. One yuga consists of 4,300,000 years,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
995
and therefore the duration of Manu's life is 309,600,000 years. The demigods
possess their material opulence only until the end of the life of Manu. Time is
insurmountable. The time one is allotted, even if it be millions of years, is
quickly gone. The demigods own their material possessions only within the
limits of time. Therefore Bali Mahäräja lamented that although Indra was very
learned, he did not know how to use his intelligence properly, for instead of
asking Vämanadeva to allow him to engage in His service, Indra used Him to
beg Bali Mahäräja for material wealth. Although Indra was learned and his
prime minister, Båhaspati, was also learned, neither of them begged to be able
to render loving service to Lord Vämanadeva. Therefore Bali Mahäräja
lamented for Indra.
TEXT 25
YaSYaaNaudaSYaMaevaSMaiTPaTaaMah" ik-l/ vv]e Na Tau SviPa}Ya& YaduTaaku-Taae>aYa&
Pad& dqYaMaaNa& >aGavTa" PariMaiTa >aGavTaaeParTae %lu/ SviPaTair )) 25 ))
yasyänudäsyam eväsmat-pitämahaù kila vavre na tu sva-pitryaà yad
utäkutobhayaà padaà déyamänaà bhagavataù param iti bhagavatoparate
khalu sva-pitari.
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); anudäsyam—the
service; eva—certainly; asmat—our; pitä-mahaù—grandfather; kila—indeed;
vavre—accepted; na—not; tu—but; sva—own; pitryam—paternal property;
yat—which; uta—certainly; akutaù-bhayam—fearlessness; padam—position;
déyamänam—being offered; bhagavataù—than the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; param—other; iti—thus; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; uparate—when killed; khalu—indeed; sva-pitari—his own father.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
996
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja said: My grandfather Prahläda Mahäräja is the only person
who understood his own self-interest. Upon the death of Prahläda's father,
Hiraëyakaçipu, Lord Nåsiàhadeva wanted to offer Prahläda his father's
kingdom and even wanted to grant him liberation from material bondage, but
Prahläda accepted neither. Liberation and material opulence, he thought, are
obstacles to devotional service, and therefore such gifts from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are not His actual mercy. Consequently, instead of
accepting the results of karma and jïäna, Prahläda Mahäräja simply begged the
Lord for engagement in the service of His servant.
PURPORT
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has instructed that an unalloyed devotee should
consider himself a servant of the servant of the servant of the Supreme Lord
(gopé-bhartuù päda-kamalayor däsa-däsänudäsaù [Cc. Madhya 13.80]). In
Vaiñëava philosophy, one should not even become a direct servant. Prahläda
Mahäräja was offered all the blessings of an opulent position in the material
world and even the liberation of merging into Brahman, but he refused all this.
He simply wanted to engage in the service of the servant of the servant of the
Lord. Therefore Bali Mahäräja said that because his grandfather Prahläda
Mahäräja had rejected the blessings of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
terms of material opulence and liberation from material bondage, he truly
understood his self-interest.
TEXT 26
TaSYa MahaNau>aavSYaaNauPaQaMaMa*iJaTak-zaYa" k-ae vaSMaiÜDa" Pairhq<a>aGavdNauGa]h
oPaiJaGaiMazTaqiTa )) 26 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
997
tasya mahänubhävasyänupatham amåjita-kañäyaù ko väsmad-vidhaù
parihéëa-bhagavad-anugraha upajigamiñatéti.
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Prahläda Mahäräja; mahä-anubhävasya—who was an exalted
devotee; anupatham—the path; amåjita-kañäyaù—a person who is materially
contaminated; kaù—what; vä—or; asmat-vidhaù—like us;
parihéëa-bhagavat-anugrahaù—being without the favor of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; upajigamiñati—desires to follow; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja said: Persons like us, who are still attached to material
enjoyment, who are contaminated by the modes of material nature and who lack
the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, cannot follow the supreme
path of Prahläda Mahäräja, the exalted devotee of the Lord.
PURPORT
It is said that for spiritual realization one must follow great personalities like
Lord Brahmä, Devarñi Närada, Lord Çiva and Prahläda Mahäräja. The path of
bhakti is not at all difficult if we follow in the footsteps of previous äcäryas and
authorities, but those who are too materially contaminated by the modes of
material nature cannot follow them. Although Bali Mahäräja was actually
following the path of his grandfather, because of his great humility he thought
that he was not. It is characteristic of advanced Vaiñëavas following the
principles of bhakti that they think themselves ordinary human beings. This is
not an artificial exhibition of humility; a Vaiñëava sincerely thinks this way
and therefore never admits his exalted position.
TEXT 27
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
998
TaSYaaNaucirTaMauPairíaiÜSTairZYaTae YaSYa >aGavaNa( SvYaMai%l/JaGad(Gauå‚
NaaRraYa<aae Üair GadaPaai<arviTaïTae iNaJaJaNaaNauk-iMPaTaôdYaae YaeNaax(GauïeNa Pada
dXak-NDarae YaaeJaNaaYauTaaYauTa& idiGvJaYa oÀai$=Ta" )) 27 ))
tasyänucaritam upariñöäd vistariñyate yasya bhagavän svayam
akhila-jagad-gurur näräyaëo dväri gadä-päëir avatiñöhate
nija-janänukampita-hådayo yenäìguñöhena padä daça-kandharo
yojanäyutäyutaà dig-vijaya uccäöitaù.
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Bali Mahäräja; anucaritam—the narration; upariñöät—later (in the
Eighth Canto); vistariñyate—will be explained; yasya—of whom;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; svayam—personally;
akhila-jagat-guruù—the master of all the three worlds; näräyaëaù—the
Supreme Lord, Näräyaëa Himself; dväri—at the gate; gadä-päëiù—bearing the
club in His hand; avatiñöhate—stands; nija-jana-anukampita-hådayaù—whose
heart is always filled with mercy for His devotees; yena—by whom;
aìguñöhena—by the big toe; padä—of His foot; daça-kandharaù—Rävaëa, who
had ten heads; yojana-ayuta-ayutam—a distance of eighty thousand miles;
dik-vijaye—for the purpose of gaining victory over Bali Mahäräja;
uccäöitaù—driven away.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, how shall I glorify the
character of Bali Mahäräja? The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of
the three worlds, who is most compassionate to His own devotee, stands with
club in hand at Bali Mahäräja's door. When Rävaëa, the powerful demon, came
to gain victory over Bali Mahäräja, Vämanadeva kicked him a distance of eighty
thousand miles with His big toe. I shall explain the character and activities of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
999
Bali Mahäräja later [in the Eighth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam].
TEXT 28
TaTaae_DaSTaatal/aTale/ MaYaae NaaMa daNaveNd]iñPauraiDaPaiTa>aRGavTaa Paurair<aa
i}al/aek-IXa& ick-IzuR<aa iNadRGDaSvPaur}aYaSTaTPa[SaadaçBDaPadae MaaYaaivNaa‚
MaacaYaaeR MahadeveNa Pairri+aTaae ivGaTaSaudXaRNa>aYaae MahqYaTae )) 28 ))
tato 'dhastät talätale mayo näma dänavendras tri-purädhipatir bhagavatä
puräriëä tri-loké-çaà cikérñuëä nirdagdha-sva-pura-trayas tat-prasädäl
labdha-pado mäyävinäm äcäryo mahädevena parirakñito
vigata-sudarçana-bhayo mahéyate.
SYNONYMS
tataù—the planet known as Sutala; adhastät—below; talätale—in the planet
known as Talätala; mayaù—Maya; näma—named; dänava-indraù—the king of
the Dänava demons; tri-pura-adhipatiù—the Lord of the three cities;
bhagavatä—by the most powerful; puräriëä—Lord Çiva, who is known as
Tripuräri; tri-loké—of the three worlds; çam—the good fortune;
cikérñuëä—who was desiring; nirdagdha—burned; sva-pura-trayaù—whose
three cities; tat-prasädät—by Lord Çiva's mercy; labdha—obtained; padaù—a
kingdom; mäyä-vinäm äcäryaù—who is the äcärya, or master, of all the
conjurers; mahä-devena—by Lord Çiva; parirakñitaù—protected;
vigata-sudarçana-bhayaù—who is not afraid of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and His Sudarçana cakra; mahéyate—is worshiped.
TRANSLATION
Beneath the planet known as Sutala is another planet, called Talätala, which
is ruled by the Dänava demon named Maya. Maya is known as the äcärya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1000
[master] of all the mäyävés, who can invoke the powers of sorcery. For the
benefit of the three worlds, Lord Çiva, who is known as Tripuräri, once set fire
to the three kingdoms of Maya, but later, being pleased with him, he returned
his kingdom. Since that time, Maya Dänava has been protected by Lord Çiva,
and therefore he falsely thinks that he need not fear the Sudarçana cakra of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 29
TaTaae_DaSTaaNMahaTale/ k-ad]veYaa<aa& SaPaaR<aa& NaEk-iXarSaa& §-aeDavXaae NaaMa
Ga<a" ku-hk-Ta+ak-k-ail/YaSauze<aaidPa[DaaNaa Maha>aaeGavNTa" PaTaiT}araJaaiDaPaTae"
PauåzvahadNavrTaMauiÜJaMaaNaa" Svk-l/}aaPaTYaSauôTku-$u=MbSa(r)eNa KvicTPa[Mataa
ivhriNTa )) 29 ))
tato 'dhastän mahätale kädraveyäëäà sarpäëäà naika-çirasäà krodhavaço
näma gaëaù kuhaka-takñaka-käliya-suñeëädi-pradhänä mahä-bhogavantaù
patattri-räjädhipateù puruña-vähäd anavaratam udvijamänäù
sva-kalaträpatya-suhåt-kuöumba-saìgena kvacit pramattä viharanti.
SYNONYMS
tataù—the planet Talätala; adhastät—beneath; mahätale—in the planet
known as Mahätala; kädraveyäëäm—of the descendants of Kadrü;
sarpäëäm—who are big snakes; na eka-çirasäm—who have many hoods;
krodha-vaçaù—always subject to anger; näma—named; gaëaù—the group;
kuhaka—Kuhaka; takñaka—Takñaka; käliya—Käliya; suñeëa—Suñeëa;
ädi—and so on; pradhänäù—who are the prominent ones;
mahä-bhogavantaù—addicted to all kinds of material enjoyment;
patattri-räja-adhipateù—from the king of all birds, Garuòa; puruña-vähät—who
carries the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anavaratam—constantly;
udvijamänäù—afraid; sva—of their own; kalatra-apatya—wives and children;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1001
suhåt—friends; kuöumba—relatives; saìgena—in the association;
kvacit—sometimes; pramattäù—infuriated; viharanti—they sport.
TRANSLATION
The planetary system below Talätala is known as Mahätala. It is the abode of
many-hooded snakes, descendants of Kadrü, who are always very angry. The
great snakes who are prominent are Kuhaka, Takñaka, Käliya and Suñeëa. The
snakes in Mahätala are always disturbed by fear of Garuòa, the carrier of Lord
Viñëu, but although they are full of anxiety, some of them nevertheless sport
with their wives, children, friends and relatives.
PURPORT
It is stated here that the snakes who live in the planetary system known as
Mahätala are very powerful and have many hoods. They live with their wives
and children and consider themselves very happy, although they are always
full of anxiety because of Garuòa, who comes there to destroy them. This is the
way of material life. Even if one lives in the most abominable condition, he
still thinks himself happy with his wife, children, friends and relatives.
TEXT 30
TaTaae_DaSTaad]SaaTale/ dETaeYaa daNava" Pa<aYaae NaaMa iNavaTak-vca" k-ale/Yaa
ihr<YaPaurvaiSaNa wiTa ivbuDaPa[TYaNaqk-a oTPatYaa MahaEJaSaae MahaSaahiSaNaae
>aGavTa" Sak-l/l/aek-aNau>aavSYa hrerev TaeJaSaa Pa[iTahTabl/avle/Paa ible/XaYaa
wv vSaiNTa Yae vE SarMaYaeNd]dUTYaa vaiG>aMaRN}av<aaRi>airNd]aiØ>YaiTa )) 30 ))
tato 'dhastäd rasätale daiteyä dänaväù paëayo näma niväta-kavacäù käleyä
hiraëya-puraväsina iti vibudha-pratyanékä utpattyä mahaujaso mahä-sähasino
bhagavataù sakala-lokänubhävasya harer eva tejasä pratihata-balävalepä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1002
bileçayä iva vasanti ye vai saramayendra-dütyä vägbhir mantra-varëäbhir
indräd bibhyati.
SYNONYMS
tataù adhastät—below the planetary system Mahätala; rasätale—on the planet
called Rasätala; daiteyäù—the sons of Diti; dänaväù—the sons of Danu;
paëayaù näma—named Paëis; niväta-kavacäù—Niväta-kavacas;
käleyäù—Käleyas; hiraëya-puraväsinaù—Hiraëya-puraväsés; iti—thus;
vibudha-pratyanékäù—enemies of the demigods; utpattyäù—from birth;
mahä-ojasaù—very powerful; mahä-sähasinaù—very cruel; bhagavataù—of the
Personality of Godhead; sakala-loka-anubhävasya—who is auspicious for all
planetary systems; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
eva—certainly; tejasä—by the Sudarçana cakra; pratihata—defeated;
bala—strength; avalepäù—and pride (because of bodily strength);
bila-éçayäù—the snakes; iva—like; vasanti—they live; ye—who; vai—indeed;
saramayä—by Saramä; indra-dütyä—the messenger of Indra; vägbhiù—by the
words; mantra-varëäbhiù—in the form of a mantra; indrät—from King Indra;
bibhyati—are afraid.
TRANSLATION
Beneath Mahätala is the planetary system known as Rasätala, which is the
abode of the demoniac sons of Diti and Danu. They are called Paëis,
Niväta-kavacas, Käleyas and Hiraëya-puraväsés [those living in Hiraëya-pura].
They are all enemies of the demigods, and they reside in holes like snakes. From
birth they are extremely powerful and cruel, and although they are proud of
their strength, they are always defeated by the Sudarçana cakra of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who rules all the planetary systems. When a female
messenger from Indra named Saramä chants a particular curse, the serpentine
demons of Mahätala become very afraid of Indra.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1003
PURPORT
It is said that there was a great fight between these serpentine demons and
Indra, the King of heaven. When the defeated demons met the female
messenger Saramä, who was chanting a mantra, they became afraid, and
therefore they are living in the planet called Rasätala.
TEXT 31
TaTaae_DaSTaaTPaaTaale/ NaaGal/aek-PaTaYaae vaSauik-Pa[Mau%a" Xa«ku-il/k-MahaXa«ìe‚
TaDaNaÅYaDa*Taraí\Xa«cU@k-Mbl/aìTardevdtaadYaae Maha>aaeiGaNaae MahaMazaR iNav‚
SaiNTa YaezaMau h vE PaÄSaádXaXaTaSahóXaqzaR<aa& f-<aaSau ivricTaa MahaMa<aYaae
raeicZ<av" PaaTaal/ivvriTaiMariNak-r& Svraeicza ivDaMaiNTa )) 31 ))
tato 'dhastät pätäle näga-loka-patayo väsuki-pramukhäù
çaìkha-kulika-mahäçaìkha-çveta-dhanaïjaya-dhåtaräñöra-çaìkhacüòa-kambal
äçvatara-devadattädayo mahä-bhogino mahämarñä nivasanti yeñäm u ha vai
païca-sapta-daça-çata-sahasra-çérñäëäà phaëäsu viracitä mahä-maëayo
rociñëavaù pätäla-vivara-timira-nikaraà sva-rociñä vidhamanti.
SYNONYMS
tataù adhastät—beneath that planet Rasätala; pätäle—on the planet known as
Pätäla; näga-loka-patayaù—the masters of the Nägalokas; väsuki—by Väsuki;
pramukhäù—headed; çaìkha—Çaìkha; kulika—Kulika;
mahä-çaìkha—Mahäçaìkha; çveta—Çveta; dhanaïjaya—Dhanaïjaya;
dhåtaräñöra—Dhåtaräñöra; çaìkha-cüòa—Çaìkhacüòa; kambala—Kambala;
açvatara—Açvatara; deva-datta—Devadatta; ädayaù—and so on;
mahä-bhoginaù—very addicted to material happiness; mahä-amarñäù—greatly
envious by nature; nivasanti—live; yeñäm—of all of them; u ha—certainly;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1004
vai—indeed; païca—five; sapta—seven; daça—ten; çata—one hundred;
sahasra—one thousand; çérñäëäm—of those possessing hoods; phaëäsu—on
those hoods; viracitäù—fixed; mahä-maëayaù—very valuable gems;
rociñëavaù—full of effulgence; pätäla-vivara—the caves of the Pätäla
planetary system; timira-nikaram—the mass of darkness; sva-rociñä—by the
effulgence of their hoods; vidhamanti—disperse.
TRANSLATION
Beneath Rasätala is another planetary system, known as Pätäla or Nägaloka,
where there are many demoniac serpents, the masters of Nägaloka, such as
Çaìkha, Kulika, Mahäçaìkha, Çveta, Dhanaïjaya, Dhåtaräñöra, Çaìkhacüòa,
Kambala, Açvatara and Devadatta. The chief among them is Väsuki. They are
all extremely angry, and they have many, many hoods—some snakes five hoods,
some seven, some ten, others a hundred and others a thousand. These hoods are
bedecked with valuable gems, and the light emanating from the gems illuminates
the entire planetary system of bila-svarga.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-fourth Chapter
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Subterranean Heavenly Planets."
25. The Glories of Lord Ananta
In this chapter, Çukadeva Gosvämé describes Ananta, the source of Lord
Çiva. Lord Ananta, whose body is completely spiritual, resides at the root of
the planet Pätäla. He always lives in the core of Lord Çiva's heart, and He
helps him destroy the universe. Ananta instructs Lord Çiva how to destroy the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1005
cosmos, and thus He is sometimes called tämasé, or "one who is in the mode of
darkness." He is the original Deity of material consciousness, and because He
attracts all living entities, He is sometimes known as Saìkarñaëa. The entire
material world is situated on the hoods of Lord Saìkarñaëa. From His forehead
He transmits to Lord Çiva the power to destroy this material world. Because
Lord Saìkarñaëa is an expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
many devotees offer Him prayers, and in the planetary system of Pätäla, all the
suras, asuras, Gandharvas, Vidyädharas and learned sages offer Him their
respectful obeisances. The Lord talks with them in a sweet voice. His bodily
construction is completely spiritual and very, very beautiful. Anyone who
hears about Him from a proper spiritual master becomes free from all material
conceptions of life. The entire material energy is working according to the
plans of Anantadeva. Therefore we should regard Him as the root cause of the
material creation. There is no end to His strength, and no one can fully
describe Him, even with countless mouths. Therefore He is called Ananta
(unlimited). Being very merciful toward all living entities, He has exhibited
His spiritual body. Çukadeva Gosvämé describes the glories of Anantadeva to
Mahäräja Parékñit in this way.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
TaSYa MaUl/deXae i}a&XaÛaeJaNaSahóaNTar AaSTae Yaa vE k-l/a >aGavTaSTaaMaSaq
SaMaa:YaaTaaNaNTa wiTa SaaTvTaqYaa d]í*d*XYaYaae" SaªzR<aMahiMaTYai>aMaaNal/+a<a&
Ya& SaªzR<aiMaTYaac+aTae )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
tasya müla-deçe triàçad-yojana-sahasräntara äste yä vai kalä bhagavatas
tämasé samäkhyätänanta iti sätvatéyä drañöå-dåçyayoù saìkarñaëam aham ity
abhimäna-lakñaëaà yaà saìkarñaëam ity äcakñate.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1006
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tasya—of the planet Pätäla;
müla-deçe—in the region beneath the base; triàçat—thirty;
yojana—eight-mile units of measurement; sahasra-antare—at an interval of
one thousand; äste—remains; yä—which; vai—indeed; kalä—an expansion of
an expansion; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tämasé—related to darkness; samäkhyätä—called; anantaù—Ananta;
iti—thus; sätvatéyäù—the devotees; drañöå-dåçyayoù—of matter and spirit;
saìkarñaëam—the drawing together; aham—I; iti—thus; abhimäna—by
self-conception; lakñaëam—symptomized; yam—whom;
saìkarñaëam—Saìkarñaëa; iti—thus; äcakñate—learned scholars describe.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said to Mahäräja Parékñit: My dear King,
approximately 240,000 miles beneath the planet Pätäla lives another
incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the expansion of
Lord Viñëu known as Lord Ananta or Lord Saìkarñaëa. He is always in the
transcendental position, but because He is worshiped by Lord Çiva, the deity of
tamo-guëa or darkness, He is sometimes called tämasé. Lord Ananta is the
predominating Deity of the material mode of ignorance as well as the false ego
of all conditioned souls. When a conditioned living being thinks, "I am the
enjoyer, and this world is meant to be enjoyed by me," this conception of life is
dictated to him by Saìkarñaëa. Thus the mundane conditioned soul thinks
himself the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
There is a class of men akin to Mäyävädé philosophers who misinterpret the
ahaà brahmäsmi(22) and so'ham Vedic mantras to mean, "I am the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1007
Brahman" and "I am identical with the Lord." This kind of false conception, in
which one thinks himself the supreme enjoyer, is a kind of illusion. It is
described elsewhere in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (5.5.8): janasya moho 'yam ahaà
mameti. As explained in the above verse, Lord Saìkarñaëa is the
predominating Deity of this false conception. Kåñëa confirms this in
Bhagavad-gétä (15.15):
sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo
mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca
"I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge
and forgetfulness." The Lord is situated in everyone's heart as Saìkarñaëa, and
when a demon thinks himself one with the Supreme Lord, the Lord keeps him
in that darkness. Although such a demoniac living entity is only an
insignificant part of the Supreme Lord, he forgets his true position and thinks
he is the Supreme Lord. Because this forgetfulness is created by Saìkarñaëa,
He is sometimes called tämasé. The name tämasé does not indicate that He has
a material body. He is always transcendental, but because He is the Supersoul
of Lord Çiva, who must perform tamasic activities, Saìkarñaëa is sometimes
called tämasé.
TEXT 2
YaSYaed& i+aiTaMa<@l&/ >aGavTaae_NaNTaMaUTaeR" SahóiXarSa Wk-iSMaàev XaqzRi<a
iDa]YaMaa<a& iSaÖaQaR wv l/+YaTae )) 2 ))
yasyedaà kñiti-maëòalaà bhagavato 'nanta-mürteù sahasra-çirasa ekasminn
eva çérñaëi dhriyamäëaà siddhärtha iva lakñyate.
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; idam—this; kñiti-maëòalam—universe; bhagavataù—of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1008
Supreme Personality of Godhead; ananta-mürteù—in the form of Anantadeva;
sahasra-çirasaù—who has thousands of hoods; ekasmin—on one; eva—only;
çérñaëi—hood; dhriyamäëam—is being sustained; siddhärthaù iva—and like a
white mustard seed; lakñyate—is seen.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: This great universe, situated on one of Lord
Anantadeva's thousands of hoods, appears just like a white mustard seed. It is
infinitesimal compared to the hood of Lord Ananta.
TEXT 3
YaSYa h va wd& k-ale/NaaePaSaiÅhqzRTaae_MazRivricTaåicr>a]Mad(>a]uvaerNTare<a
SaaªzR<aae NaaMa åd] Wk-adXaVYaUhS}Ya+aiñiXa%& XaUl/MautaM>aYaàudiTaïTa( )) 3 ))
yasya ha vä idaà kälenopasaïjihérñato 'marña-viracita-rucira-bhramad-bhruvor
antareëa säìkarñaëo näma rudra ekädaça-vyühas try-akñas tri-çikhaà çülam
uttambhayann udatiñöhat.
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; ha vä—indeed; idam—this (material world); kälena—in due
course of time; upasaïjihérñataù—desiring to destroy; amarña—by anger;
viracita—formed; rucira—very beautiful; bhramat—moving; bhruvoù—the two
eyebrows; antareëa—from between; säìkarñaëaù näma—named Säìkarñaëa;
rudraù—an incarnation of Lord Çiva; ekädaça-vyühaù—who has eleven
expansions; tri-akñaù—three eyes; tri-çikham—having three points; çülam—a
trident; uttambhayan—raising; udatiñöhat—arose.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1009
TRANSLATION
At the time of devastation, when Lord Anantadeva desires to destroy the
entire creation, He becomes slightly angry. Then from between His two
eyebrows appears three-eyed Rudra, carrying a trident. This Rudra, who is
known as Säìkarñaëa, is the embodiment of the eleven Rudras, or incarnations
of Lord Çiva. He appears in order to devastate the entire creation.
PURPORT
In each creation, the living entities are given a chance to close their
business as conditioned souls. When they misuse this opportunity and do not
go back home, back to Godhead, Lord Saìkarñaëa becomes angry. The eleven
Rudras, expansions of Lord Çiva, come out of Lord Saìkarñaëa's eyebrows due
to His angry mood, and all of them together devastate the entire creation.
TEXT 4
YaSYaax(ig]ak-Mal/YauGal/aå<aivXadNa%Mai<az<@Ma<@le/ZvihPaTaYa" Sah SaaTvTa‚
zR>aErek-aNTa>ai¢-YaaeGaeNaavNaMaNTa" SvvdNaaiNa PairSfu-rTku-<@l/Pa[>aaMai<@Ta‚
Ga<@SQal/aNYaiTaMaNaaehrai<a Pa[MauidTaMaNaSa" %lu/ ivl/aek-YaiNTa )) 4 ))
yasyäìghri-kamala-yugaläruëa-viçada-nakha-maëi-ñaëòa-maëòaleñv
ahi-patayaù saha sätvatarñabhair ekänta-bhakti-yogenävanamantaù
sva-vadanäni parisphurat-kuëòala-prabhä-maëòita-gaëòa-sthaläny
ati-manoharäëi pramudita-manasaù khalu vilokayanti.
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; aìghri-kamala—of lotus feet; yugala—of the pair;
aruëa-viçada—brilliant pink; nakha—of the nails; maëi-ñaëòa—like gems;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1010
maëòaleñu—on the round surfaces; ahi-patayaù—the leaders of the snakes;
saha—with; sätvata-åñabhaiù—the best devotees; ekänta-bhakti-yogena—with
unalloyed devotional service; avanamantaù—offering obeisances;
sva-vadanäni—their own faces; parisphurat—glittering; kuëòala—of the
earrings; prabhä—by the effulgence; maëòita—decorated;
gaëòa-sthaläni—whose cheeks; ati-manoharäëi—very beautiful;
pramudita-manasaù—their minds refreshed; khalu—indeed; vilokayanti—they
see.
TRANSLATION
The pink, transparent toenails on the Lord's lotus feet are exactly like
valuable gems polished to a mirror finish. When the unalloyed devotees and the
leaders of the snakes offer their obeisances to Lord Saìkarñaëa with great
devotion, they become very joyful upon seeing their own beautiful faces
reflected in His toenails. Their cheeks are decorated with glittering earrings,
and the beauty of their faces is extremely pleasing to see.
TEXT 5
YaSYaEv ih NaaGaraJaku-MaaYaR AaiXaz AaXaaSaaNaaêavR(r)vl/Yaivl/iSaTaivXad
ivPaul/Davl/Sau>aGaåicr>auJarJaTaSTaM>aeZvGauåcNdNaku-x(ku-MaPaªaNaule/PaeNaavil/MPa‚
MaaNaaSTadi>aMaXaRNaaeNMaiQaTa„ôdYaMak-rßJaaveXaåicrl/il/„TaiSMaTaaSTadNauraGaMadMau‚
idTaMad ivgaUi<aRTaaå<ak-å<aavl/aek-NaYaNavdNaarivNd& Sav]q@& ik-l/ ivl/ae‚
k-YaiNTa )) 5 ))
yasyaiva hi näga-räja-kumärya äçiña äçäsänäç
cärv-aìga-valaya-vilasita-viçada-vipula-dhavala-subhaga-rucira-bhuja-rajata-s
tambheñv aguru-candana-kuìkuma-paìkänulepenävalimpamänäs
tad-abhimarçanonmathita-hådaya-makara-dhvajäveça-rucira-lalita-smitäs
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1011
tad-anurägamada-mudita-mada-vighürëitäruëa-karuëävaloka-nayana-vadanä
ravindaà savréòaà kila vilokayanti.
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; eva—certainly; hi—indeed; näga-räja-kumäryaù—the
unmarried princesses of the serpent kings; äçiñaù—blessings;
äçäsänäù—hoping for; cäru—beautiful; aìga-valaya—on the sphere of His
body; vilasita—gleaming; viçada—spotless; vipula—long; dhavala—white;
subhaga—indicating good fortune; rucira—beautiful; bhuja—on His arms;
rajata-stambheñu—like columns of silver; aguru—of aloe; candana—of
sandalwood; kuìkuma—of saffron; paìka—from the pulp; anulepena—with an
ointment; avalimpamänäù—smearing; tat-abhimarçana—by contact with His
limbs; unmathita—agitated; hådaya—in their hearts; makara-dhvaja—of
Cupid; äveça—due to the entrance; rucira—very beautiful; lalita—delicate;
smitäù—whose smiling; tat—of Him; anuräga—of attachment; mada—by the
intoxication; mudita—delighted; mada—due to intoxication with kindness;
vighürëita—rolling; aruëa—pink; karuëa-avaloka—glancing with kindness;
nayana—eyes; vadana—and face; aravindam—like lotus flowers;
sa-vréòam—with bashfulness; kila—indeed; vilokayanti—they see.
TRANSLATION
Lord Ananta's arms are attractively long, beautifully decorated with bangles
and completely spiritual. They are white, and so they appear like silver
columns. When the beautiful princesses of the serpent kings, hoping for the
Lord's auspicious blessing, smear His arms with aguru pulp, sandalwood pulp
and kuìkuma, the touch of His limbs awakens lusty desires within them.
Understanding their minds, the Lord looks at the princesses with a merciful
smile, and they become bashful, realizing that He knows their desires. Then
they smile beautifully and look upon the Lord's lotus face, which is beautified
by reddish eyes rolling slightly from intoxication and delighted by love for His
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1012
devotees.
PURPORT
When males and females touch each other's bodies, their lusty desires
naturally awaken. It appears from this verse that there are similar sensations in
spiritual bodies. Both Lord Ananta and the women giving Him pleasure had
spiritual bodies. Thus all sensations originally exist in the spiritual body. This
is confirmed in the Vedänta-sütra: janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1]. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has commented in this connection that the
word ädi means ädi-rasa, the original lusty feeling, which is born from the
Supreme. However, spiritual lust and material lust are as completely different
as gold and iron. Only one who is very highly elevated in spiritual realization
can understand the lusty feelings exchanged between Rädhä and Kåñëa, or
between Kåñëa and the damsels of Vraja. Therefore, unless one is very
experienced and advanced in spiritual realization, he is forbidden to discuss
the lusty feelings of Kåñëa and the gopés. However, if one is a sincere and pure
devotee, the material lust in his heart is completely vanquished as he discusses
the lusty feelings between the gopés and Kåñëa, and he makes quick progress in
spiritual life.
TEXT 6
Sa Wv >aGavaNaNaNTaae_NaNTaGau<aa<aRv Aaiddev oPaSa&ôTaaMazRraezveGaae
l/aek-aNaa& SvSTaYa AaSTae )) 6 ))
sa eva bhagavän ananto 'nanta-guëärëava ädi-deva
upasaàhåtämarña-roña-vego lokänäà svastaya äste.
SYNONYMS
saù—that; eva—certainly; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1013
anantaù—Anantadeva; ananta-guëa-arëavaù—the reservoir of unlimited
transcendental qualities; ädi-devaù—the original Lord, or nondifferent from
the original Supreme Personality of Godhead; upasaàhåta—who has
restrained; amarña—of His intolerance; roña—and wrath; vegaù—the force;
lokänäm—of all people on all planets; svastaye—for the welfare;
äste—remains.
TRANSLATION
Lord Saìkarñaëa is the ocean of unlimited spiritual qualities, and thus He is
known as Anantadeva. He is nondifferent from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. For the welfare of all living entities within this material world, He
resides in His abode, restraining His anger and intolerance.
PURPORT
Anantadeva's main mission is to dissolve this material creation, but He
checks His anger and intolerance. This material world is created to give the
conditioned souls another chance to go back home, back to Godhead, but most
of them do not take advantage of this facility. After the creation, they again
exercise their old propensity for lording it over the material world. These
activities of the conditioned souls anger Anantadeva, and He desires to
destroy the entire material world. Yet, because He is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, He is kind toward us and checks His anger and intolerance. Only
at certain times does He express His anger and destroy the material world.
TEXT 7
DYaaYaMaaNa" SauraSauraerGaiSaÖGaNDavRivÛaDarMauiNaGa<aErNavrTaMadMauidTaiv‚
k*-Taivûl/l/aecNa" Saul/il/TaMau%irk-aMa*TaeNaaPYaaYaMaaNa" SvPaazRdivbuDaYaUQa‚
PaTaqNaPairãaNaraGaNavTaul/iSak-aMaaedMaßaSaveNa MaaÛNMaDauk-rv]aTaMaDaurGaqTaié[Ya&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1014
vEJaYaNTaq& Sva& vNaMaal/a& Naql/vaSaa Wk-ku-<@l/ae hl/k-ku-id k*-TaSau‚
>aGaSauNdr>auJaae >aGavaNMaheNd]ae var<aeNd] wv k-aÄNaq& k-+aaMaudarl/Il/ae
ib>aiTaR )) 7 ))
dhyäyamänaù suräsuroraga-siddha-gandharva-vidyädhara-muni-gaëair
anavarata-mada-mudita-vikåta-vihvala-locanaù
sulalita-mukharikämåtenäpyäyamänaù sva-pärñada-vibudha-yütha-patén
aparimläna-räga-nava-tulasikämoda-madhv-äsavena mädyan
madhukara-vräta-madhura-géta-çriyaà vaijayantéà sväà vanamäläà
néla-väsä eka-kuëòalo hala-kakudi kåta-subhaga-sundara-bhujo bhagavän
mahendro väraëendra iva käïcanéà kakñäm udära-lélo bibharti.
SYNONYMS
dhyäyamänaù—being meditated upon; sura—of demigods; asura—demons;
uraga—snakes; siddha—inhabitants of Siddhaloka; gandharva—inhabitants of
Gandharvaloka; vidyädhara—Vidyädharas; muni—and of great sages;
gaëaiù—by groups; anavarata—constantly; mada-mudita—delighted by
intoxication; vikåta—moving to and fro; vihvala—rolling; locanaù—whose
eyes; su-lalita—excellently composed; mukharika—of speech; amåtena—by the
nectar; äpyäyamänaù—pleasing; sva-pärñada—His own associates;
vibudha-yütha-patén—the heads of the different groups of demigods;
aparimläna—never faded; räga—whose luster; nava—ever fresh; tulasikä—of
the tulasé blossoms; ämoda—by the fragrance; madhu-äsavena—and the honey;
mädyan—being intoxicated; madhukara-vräta—of the bees; madhura-géta—by
the sweet singing; çréyam—which is made more beautiful; vaijayantém—the
garland named vaijayanté; sväm—His own; vanamäläm—garland;
néla-väsäù—covered with blue garments; eka-kuëòalaù—wearing only one
earring; hala-kakudi—on the handle of a plow; kåta—placed;
subhaga—auspicious; sundara—beautiful; bhujaù—hands; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahä-indraù—the King of heaven;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1015
väraëa-indraù—the elephant; iva—like; käïcaném—golden; kakñäm—belt;
udära-lélaù—engaged in transcendental pastimes; bibharti—wears.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: The demigods, the demons, the Uragas
[serpentine demigods], the Siddhas, the Gandharvas, the Vidyädharas and many
highly elevated sages constantly offer prayers to the Lord. Because He is
intoxicated, the Lord looks bewildered, and His eyes, appearing like flowers in
full bloom, move to and fro. He pleases His personal associates, the heads of the
demigods, by the sweet vibrations emanating from His mouth. Dressed in bluish
garments and wearing a single earring, He holds a plow on His back with His
two beautiful and well-constructed hands. Appearing as white as the heavenly
King Indra, He wears a golden belt around His waist and a vaijayanté garland of
ever-fresh tulasé blossoms around His neck. Bees intoxicated by the honeylike
fragrance of the tulasé flowers hum very sweetly around the garland, which thus
becomes more and more beautiful. In this way, the Lord enjoys His very
magnanimous pastimes.
TEXT 8
Ya Wz WvMaNaué[uTaae DYaaYaMaaNaae MauMau+aU<aaMaNaaidk-al/k-MaRvaSaNaaGa]iQaTaMa
ivÛaMaYa& ôdYaGa]iNQa& SatvrJaSTaMaaeMaYaMaNTaôRdYa& GaTa AaXau iNai>aRNaita
TaSYaaNau>aavaNa( >aGavaNa( SvaYaM>auvae Naard" Sah TauMbuå<aa Sa>aaYaa& b]ø<a"
Sa&ëaek-YaaMaaSa )) 8 ))
ya eña evam anuçruto dhyäyamäno mumukñüëäm
anädi-käla-karma-väsanä-grathitam avidyämayaà hådaya-granthià
sattva-rajas-tamomayam antar-hådayaà gata äçu nirbhinatti tasyänubhävän
bhagavän sväyambhuvo näradaù saha tumburuëä sabhäyäà brahmaëaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1016
saàçlokayäm äsa.
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; eñaù—this one; evam—thus; anuçrutaù—being heard from a bona
fide spiritual master; dhyäyamänaù—being meditated upon; mumukñüëäm—of
persons desiring liberation from conditioned life; anädi—from immemorial;
käla—time; karma-väsanä—by the desire for fruitive activities;
grathitam—tied tightly; avidyä-mayam—consisting of the illusory energy;
hådaya-granthim—the knot within the heart;
sattva-rajaù-tamaù-mayam—made of the three modes of material nature;
antaù-hådayam—in the core of the heart; gataù—situated; äçu—very soon;
nirbhinatti—cuts; tasya—of Saìkarñaëa; anubhävän—the glories;
bhagavän—the greatly powerful; sväyambhuvaù—the son of Lord Brahmä;
näradaù—the sage Närada; saha—along with; tumburuëä—the stringed
instrument called a Tumburu; sabhäyäm—in the assembly; brahmaëaù—of
Lord Brahmä; saàçlokayäm äsa—described in verses.
TRANSLATION
If persons who are very serious about being liberated from material life hear
the glories of Anantadeva from the mouth of a spiritual master in the chain of
disciplic succession, and if they always meditate upon Saìkarñaëa, the Lord
enters the cores of their hearts, vanquishes all the dirty contamination of the
material modes of nature, and cuts to pieces the hard knot within the heart,
which has been tied tightly since time immemorial by the desire to dominate
material nature through fruitive activities. Närada Muni, the son of Lord
Brahmä, always glorifies Anantadeva in his father's assembly. There he sings
blissful verses of his own composition, accompanied by his stringed instrument
[or a celestial singer] known as Tumburu.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1017
PURPORT
None of these descriptions of Lord Anantadeva are imaginary. They are all
transcendentally blissful and full of actual knowledge. However, unless one
hears them directly from a bona fide spiritual master in the line of disciplic
succession, one cannot understand them. This knowledge is delivered to
Närada by Lord Brahmä, and the great saint Närada, along with his
companion, Tumburu, distributes it all over the universe. Sometimes the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is described as Uttamaçloka, one who is
praised by beautiful poetry. Närada composes various poems to glorify Lord
Ananta, and therefore the word saàçlokayäm äsa (praised by selected poetry)
is used in this verse.
The Vaiñëavas in the Gauòéya-sampradäya belong to the disciplic
succession stemming from Lord Brahmä. Lord Brahmä is the spiritual master of
Närada, Närada is the spiritual master of Vyäsadeva, and Vyäsadeva wrote the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam as a commentary on the Vedänta-sütra. Therefore all
devotees in the Gauòéya-sampradäya accept the activities of Lord Ananta
related in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam as authentic, and they are thus benefited by
going back home, back to Godhead. The contamination in the heart of a
conditioned soul is like a huge accumulation of garbage created by the three
modes of material nature, especially the modes of rajas (passion) and tamas
(ignorance). This contamination becomes manifest in the form of lusty desires
and greed for material possessions. As confirmed herein, unless one receives
transcendental knowledge in disciplic succession, there is no question of his
becoming purified of this contamination.
TEXT 9
oTPaitaiSQaiTal/YaheTavae_SYa k-LPaa"
SatvaÛa" Pa[k*-iTaGau<aa Yadq+aYaaSaNa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1018
Yad]UPa& Da]uvMak*-Ta& Yadek-MaaTMaNa(
NaaNaaDaaTk-QaMau h ved TaSYa vTMaR )) 9 ))
utpatti-sthiti-laya-hetavo 'sya kalpäù
sattvädyäù prakåti-guëä yad-ékñayäsan
yad-rüpaà dhruvam akåtaà yad ekam ätman
nänädhät katham u ha veda tasya vartma
SYNONYMS
utpatti—of creation; sthiti—maintenance; laya—and dissolution; hetavaù—the
original causes; asya—of this material world; kalpäù—capable of acting;
sattva-ädyäù—headed by the sattva-guëa; prakåti-guëäù—the modes of
material nature; yat—of whom; ékñayä—by the glance; äsan—became;
yat-rüpam—the form of whom; dhruvam—unlimited; akåtam—uncreated;
yat—who; ekam—one; ätman—in Himself; nänä—variously; adhät—has
manifested; katham—how; u ha—certainly; veda—can understand;
tasya—His; vartma—path.
TRANSLATION
By His glance, the Supreme Personality of Godhead enables the modes of
material nature to act as the causes of universal creation, maintenance and
destruction. The Supreme Soul is unlimited and beginningless, and although He
is one, He has manifested Himself in many forms. How can human society
understand the ways of the Supreme?
PURPORT
From Vedic literature we learn that when the Supreme Lord glances (sa
aikñata) over the material energy, the three modes of material nature become
manifest and create material variety. Before He glances over the material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1019
energy, there is no possibility of the creation, maintenance and annihilation of
the material world. The Lord existed before the creation, and consequently He
is eternal and unchanging. Therefore how can any human being, however
great a scientist or philosopher he may be, understand the ways of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead?
The following quotations from Caitanya-bhägavata (Ädi-khaëòa, 1.48-52
and 1.58-69) tell of the glories of Lord Ananta:
ki brahmä, ki çiva, ki sanakädi 'kumära'
vyäsa, çuka, näradädi, 'bhakta' näma yäìra
"Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, the four Kumäras [Sanaka, Sanätana, Sanandana
and Sanät-kumära], Vyäsadeva, Çukadeva Gosvämé and Närada are all pure
devotees, eternal servants of the Lord.
sabära püjita çré-ananta-mahäçaya
sahasra-vadana prabhu—bhakti-rasamaya
"Lord Çré Ananta is worshiped by all the uncontaminated devotees mentioned
above. He has thousands of hoods and is the reservoir of all devotional service.
ädideva, mahä-yogé, 'éçvara', 'vaiñëava'
mahimära anta iìhä nä jänaye saba
"Lord Ananta is the original person and the great mystic controller. At the
same time, He is a servant of God, a Vaiñëava. Since there is no end to His
glories, no one can understand Him fully.
sevana çunilä, ebe çuna öhäkuräla
ätma-tantre yena-mate vaisena pätäla
"I have already spoken to you of His service to the Lord. Now hear how the
self-sufficient Anantadeva exists in the lower planetary system of Pätäla.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1020
çré-närada-gosäïi 'tumburu' kari' saìge
se yaça gäyena brahmä-sthäne çloka-vandhe
"Bearing his stringed instrument, the tumburu, on his shoulders, the great sage
Närada Muni always glorifies Lord Ananta. Närada Muni has composed many
transcendental verses in praise of the Lord."
såñöi, sthiti, pralaya, sattvädi yata guëa
yäìra dåñöi-päte haya, yäya punaù punaù
"Simply due to the glance of Lord Ananta, the three material modes of nature
interact and produce creation, maintenance and annihilation. These modes of
nature appear again and again.
advitéya-rüpa, satya anädi mahattva
tathäpi 'ananta' haya, ke bujhe se tattva?
"The Lord is glorified as one without a second and as the supreme truth who
has no beginning. Therefore He is called Anantadeva [unlimited]. Who can
understand Him?
çuddha-sattva-mürti prabhu dharena karuëäya
ye-vigrahe sabära prakäça suléläya
"His form is completely spiritual, and He manifests it only by His mercy. All
the activities in this material world are conducted only in His form.
yäìhära taraìga çikhi' siàha mahävalé
nija-jana-mano raïje haïä kutühalé
"He is very powerful and always prepared to please His personal associates and
devotees.
ye ananta-nämera çravaëa-saìkértane
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1021
ye-te mate kene nähi bole ye-te jane
açeña-janmera bandha chiëòe sei-kñaëe
ataeva vaiñëava nä chäòe kabhu täne
"If we simply try to engage in the congregational chanting of the glories of
Lord Anantadeva, the dirty things in our hearts, accumulated during many
births, will immediately be washed away. Therefore a Vaiñëava never loses an
opportunity to glorify Anantadeva.
'çeña' ba-i saàsärera gati nähi ära
anantera näme sarva-jévera uddhära
"Lord Anantadeva is known as Çeña [the unlimited end] because He ends our
passage through this material world. Simply by chanting His glories, everyone
can be liberated.
ananta påthivé-giri samudra-sahite
ye-prabhu dharena gire pälana karite
"On His head, Anantadeva sustains the entire universe, with its millions of
planets containing enormous oceans and mountains.
sahasra phaëära eka-phaëe 'bindu' yena
ananta vikrama, nä jänena, 'äche' hena
"He is so large and powerful that this universe rests on one of His hoods just
like a drop of water. He does not know where it is.
sahasra-vadane kåñëa-yaça nirantara
gäite ächena ädi-deva mahé-dhara
"While bearing the universe on one of His hoods, Anantadeva chants the
glories of Kåñëa with each of His thousands of mouths.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1022
gäyena ananta, çré-yaçera nähi anta
jaya-bhaìga nähi käru, doìhe—balavanta
"Although He has been chanting the glories of Lord Kåñëa since time
immemorial, He has still not come to their end.
adyäpiha 'çeña'-deva sahasra-çré-mukhe
gäyena caitanya-yaça anta nähi dekhe
"To this very day, Lord Ananta continues to chant the glories of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, and still He finds no end to them."
TEXT 10
MaUiTa| Na" Pauåk*-PaYaa b>aar Satv&
Sa&XauÖ& SadSaidd& iv>aaiTa Ya}a )
YaçIl/a& Ma*GaPaiTaradde_NavÛa‚
MaadaTau& SvJaNaMaNaa&SYaudarvqYaR" )) 10 ))
mürtià naù puru-kåpayä babhära sattvaà
saàçuddhaà sad-asad idaà vibhäti tatra
yal-léläà måga-patir ädade 'navadyäm
ädätuà svajana-manäàsy udära-véryaù
SYNONYMS
mürtim—different forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; naù—unto
us; puru-kåpayä—because of great mercy; babhära—exhibited;
sattvam—existence; saàçuddham—completely transcendental; sat-asat
idam—this material manifestation of cause and effect; vibhäti—shines;
tatra—in whom; yat-léläm—the pastimes of whom; måga-patiù—the master of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1023
all living beings, who is exactly like a lion (the master of all other animals);
ädade—taught; anavadyäm—without material contamination; ädätum—to
conquer; sva-jana-manäàsi—the minds of His devotees; udära-véryaù—who is
most liberal and powerful.
TRANSLATION
This manifestation of subtle and gross matter exists within the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Out of causeless mercy toward His devotees, He
exhibits various forms, which are all transcendental. The Supreme Lord is most
liberal, and He possesses all mystic power. To conquer the minds of His
devotees and give pleasure to their hearts, He appears in different incarnations
and manifests many pastimes.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has translated this verse as follows. "The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the cause of all causes. It is by His will that gross and
subtle ingredients interact. He appears in various incarnations just to please
the hearts of His pure devotees." For example, the Supreme Lord appeared in
the transcendental incarnation of Lord Varäha (the boar) just to please His
devotees by lifting the planet earth from the Garbhodaka Ocean.
TEXT 11
YaàaMa é[uTaMaNauk-ITaRYaedk-SMaa‚
daTaaeR va Yaid PaiTaTa" Pa[l/M>aNaaÜa )
hNTYa&h" SaPaid Na*<aaMaXaezMaNYa&
k&- XaezaÙGavTa Aaé[YaeNMauMau+au" )) 11 ))
yan-näma çrutam anukértayed akasmäd
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1024
ärto vä yadi patitaù pralambhanäd vä
hanty aàhaù sapadi nåëäm açeñam anyaà
kaà çeñäd bhagavata äçrayen mumukñuù
SYNONYMS
yat—of whom; näma—the holy name; çrutam—heard; anukértayet—may
chant or repeat; akasmät—by accident; ärtaù—a distressed person; vä—or;
yadi—if; patitaù—a fallen person; pralambhanät—out of joking; vä—or;
hanti—destroys; aàhaù—sinful; sapadi—that instant; nåëäm—of human
society; açeñam—unlimited; anyam—of other; kam—what; çeñät—than Lord
Çeña; bhagavataù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; äçrayet—should take
shelter of; mumukñuù—anyone desiring liberation.
TRANSLATION
Even if he be distressed or degraded, any person who chants the holy name
of the Lord, having heard it from a bona fide spiritual master, is immediately
purified. Even if he chants the Lord's name jokingly or by chance, he and
anyone who hears him are freed from all sins. Therefore how can anyone
seeking disentanglement from the material clutches avoid chanting the name of
Lord Çeña? Of whom else should one take shelter?
TEXT 12
MaUDaRNYaiPaRTaMa<auvTSahóMaUDNaaeR
>aUGaael&/ SaiGairSairTSaMaud]SatvMa( )
AaNaNTYaadiNaiMaTaiv§-MaSYa >aUMNa"
k-ae vqYaaR<YaiDaGa<aYaeTSahóiJaû" )) 12 ))
mürdhany arpitam aëuvat sahasra-mürdhno
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1025
bhü-golaà sagiri-sarit-samudra-sattvam
änantyäd animita-vikramasya bhümnaù
ko véryäëy adhi gaëayet sahasra-jihvaù
SYNONYMS
mürdhani—on a hood or head; arpitam—fixed; aëu-vat—just like an atom;
sahasra-mürdhnaù—of Ananta, who has thousands of hoods; bhü-golam—this
universe; sa-giri-sarit-samudra-sattvam—with many mountains, trees, oceans
and living entities; änantyät—due to being unlimited;
animita-vikramasya—whose power is immeasurable; bhümnaù—the Supreme
Lord; kaù—who; véryäëi—potencies; adhi—indeed; gaëayet—can count;
sahasra-jihvaù—although having thousands of tongues.
TRANSLATION
Because the Lord is unlimited, no one can estimate His power. This entire
universe, filled with its many great mountains, rivers, oceans, trees and living
entities, is resting just like an atom on one of His many thousands of hoods. Is
there anyone, even with thousands of tongues, who can describe His glories?
TEXT 13
WvMPa[>aavae >aGavaNaNaNTaae
durNTavqYaaeRåGau<aaNau>aav" )
MaUle/ rSaaYaa" iSQaTa AaTMaTaN}aae
Yaae l/Il/Yaa +Maa& iSQaTaYae ib>aiTaR )) 13 ))
evam-prabhävo bhagavän ananto
duranta-véryoru-guëänubhävaù
müle rasäyäù sthita ätma-tantro
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1026
yo lélayä kñmäà sthitaye bibharti
SYNONYMS
evam-prabhävaù—who is so powerful; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; anantaù—Ananta; duranta-vérya—insurmountable prowess;
uru—great; guëa-anubhävaù—possessing transcendental qualities and glories;
müle—at the base; rasäyäù—of the lower planetary systems; sthitaù—existing;
ätma-tantraù—completely self-sufficient; yaù—who; lélayä—easily;
kñmäm—the universe; sthitaye—for its maintenance; bibharti—sustains.
TRANSLATION
There is no end to the great and glorious qualities of that powerful Lord
Anantadeva. Indeed, His prowess is unlimited. Though self-sufficient, He
Himself is the support of everything. He resides beneath the lower planetary
systems and easily sustains the entire universe.
TEXT 14
WTaa ùeveh Na*i>aåPaGaNTaVYaa GaTaYaae YaQaak-MaRiviNaiMaRTaa YaQaaePadeXaMaNau‚
vi<aRTaa" k-aMaaNa( k-aMaYaMaaNaE" )) 14 ))
etä hy eveha nåbhir upagantavyä gatayo yathä-karma-vinirmitä yathopadeçam
anuvarëitäù kämän kämayamänaiù.
SYNONYMS
etäù—all these; hi—indeed; eva—certainly; iha—in this universe; nåbhiù—by
all living entities; upagantavyäù—achievable; gatayaù—destinations;
yathä-karma—according to one's past activities; vinirmitäù—created;
yathä-upadeçam—as instructed; anuvarëitäù—described accordingly;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1027
kämän—material enjoyment; kämayamänaiù—by those who are desiring.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, as I heard of it from my spiritual master, I have fully
described to you the creation of this material world according to the fruitive
activities and desires of the conditioned souls. Those conditioned souls, who are
full of material desires, achieve various situations in different planetary
systems, and in this way they live within this material creation.
PURPORT
In this regard, Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura sings,
anädi karama-phale, paòi' bhavärëava-jale,
taribäre nä dekhi upäya
"My Lord, I do not know when I commenced my material life, but I can
certainly experience that I have fallen in the deep ocean of nescience. Now I
can also see that there is no other way to get out of it than to take shelter of
Your lotus feet." Similarly, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu offers the following
prayer:
ayi nanda-tanuja kiìkaraà
patitaà mäà viñame bhavämbudhau
kåpayä tava päda-paìkajasthita-
dhülé-sadåçaà vicintaya
[Cc. Antya 20.32, Çikñäñöaka 5]
"My dear Lord, son of Nanda Mahäräja, I am Your eternal servant. Somehow
or other, I have fallen into this ocean of nescience. Kindly, therefore, save me
from this horrible condition of materialistic life."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1028
TEXT 15
WTaavTaqihR raJaNa( Pau&Sa" Pa[v*ital/+a<aSYa DaMaRSYa ivPaak-GaTaYa oÀavca
ivSad*Xaa YaQaaPa[én& VYaac:Yae ik-MaNYaTk-QaYaaMa wiTa )) 15 ))
etävatér hi räjan puàsaù pravåtti-lakñaëasya dharmasya vipäka-gataya
uccävacä visadåçä yathä-praçnaà vyäcakhye kim anyat kathayäma iti.
SYNONYMS
etävatéù—of such a kind; hi—certainly; räjan—O King; puàsaù—of the
human being; pravåtti-lakñaëasya—symptomized by inclinations;
dharmasya—of the execution of duties; vipäka-gatayaù—the resultant
destinations; ucca-avacäù—high and low; visadåçäù—different;
yathä-praçnam—as you inquired; vyäcakhye—I have described; kim
anyat—what else; kathayäma—shall I speak; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, I have thus described how people generally act according to
their different desires and, as a result, get different types of bodies in higher or
lower planets. You inquired of these things from me, and I have explained to
you whatever I have heard from authorities. What shall I speak of now?
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-fifth Chapter of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Glories of Lord Ananta."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1029
26. A Description of the Hellish Planets
The Twenty-sixth Chapter describes how a sinful man goes to different
hells, where he is punished in various ways by the assistants of Yamaräja. As
stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (3.27):
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities, which are in actuality
carried out by nature." The foolish person thinks he is independent of any law.
He thinks there is no God or regulative principle and that he can do whatever
he likes. Thus he engages in different sinful activities, and as a result, he is put
into different hellish conditions life after life, to be punished by the laws of
nature. The basic principle of his suffering is that he foolishly thinks himself
independent, although he is strictly under the control of the laws of material
nature. These laws act due to the influence of the three modes of nature, and
therefore each human being also works under three different types of
influence. According to how he acts, he suffers different reactions in his next
life or in this life. Religious persons act differently from atheists, and therefore
they suffer different reactions.
Çukadeva Gosvämé describes the following twenty-eight hells: Tämisra,
Andhatämisra, Raurava, Mahäraurava, Kumbhépäka. Kälasütra, Asi-patravana,
Sükaramukha, Andhaküpa, Kåmibhojana. Sandaàça, Taptasürmi,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1030
Vajrakaëöaka-çälmalé, Vaitaraëé, Püyoda, Präëarodha, Viçasana, Läläbhakña,
Särameyädana, Avéci, Ayaùpäna. Kñärakardama, Rakñogaëa-bhojana,
Çülaprota, Dandaçüka. Avaöa-nirodhana, Paryävartana and Sücémukha.
A person who steals another's money, wife or possessions is put into the hell
known as Tämisra. A man who tricks someone and enjoys his wife is put into
the extremely hellish condition known as Andhatämisra. A foolish person
absorbed in the bodily concept of life, who on the basis of this principle
maintains himself or his wife and children by committing violence against
other living entities, is put into the hell known as Raurava. There the animals
he killed take birth as creatures called rurus and cause great suffering for him.
Those who kill different animals and birds and then cook them are put by the
agents of Yamaräja into the hell known as Kumbhépäka, where they are boiled
in oil. A person who kills a brähmaëa is put into the hell known as Kälasütra,
where the land, perfectly level and made of copper, is as hot as an oven. The
killer of a brähmaëa burns in that land for many years. One who does not
follow scriptural injunctions but who does everything whimsically or follows
some rascal is put into the hell known as Asi-patravana. A government official
who poorly administers justice, or who punishes an innocent man, is taken by
the assistants of Yamaräja to the hell known as Sükaramukha, where he is
mercilessly beaten.
God has given advanced consciousness to the human being. Therefore he
can feel the suffering and happiness of other living beings. The human being
bereft of his conscience, however, is prone to cause suffering for other living
beings. The assistants of Yamaräja put such a person into the hell known as
Andhaküpa, where he receives proper punishment from his victims. Any
person who does not receive or feed a guest properly but who personally enjoys
eating is put into the hell known as Kåmibhojana. There an unlimited number
of worms and insects continuously bite him.
A thief is put into the hell known as Sandaàça. A person who has sexual
relations with a woman who is not to be enjoyed is put into the hell known as
Taptasürmi. A person who enjoys sexual relations with animals is put into the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1031
hell known as Vajrakaëöaka-çälmalé. A person born into an aristocratic or
highly placed family but who does not act accordingly is put into the hellish
trench of blood, pus and urine called the Vaitaraëé River. One who lives like
an animal is put into the hell called Püyoda. A person who mercilessly kills
animals in the forest without sanction is put into the hell called Präëarodha. A
person who kills animals in the name of religious sacrifice is put into the hell
named Viçasana. A man who forces his wife to drink his semen is put into the
hell called Läläbhakña. One who sets a fire or administers poison to kill
someone is put into the hell known as Särameyädana. A man who earns his
livelihood by bearing false witness is put into the hell known as Avéci.
A person addicted to drinking wine is put into the hell named Ayaùpäna.
One who violates etiquette by not showing proper respect to superiors is put
into the hell known as Kñärakardama. A person who sacrifices human beings
to Bhairava is put into the hell called Rakñogaëa-bhojana. A person who kills
pet animals is put into the hell called Çülaprota. A person who gives trouble to
others is put into the hell known as Dandaçüka. One who imprisons a living
entity within a cave is put into the hell known as Avaöa-nirodhana. A person
who shows unwarranted wrath toward a guest in his house is put into the hell
called Paryävartana. A person maddened by possessing riches and thus deeply
absorbed in thinking of how to collect money is put into the hell known as
Sücémukha.
After describing the hellish planets, Çukadeva Gosvämé describes how pious
persons are elevated to the highest planetary system, where the demigods live,
and how they then come back again to this earth when the results of their
pious activities are finished. Finally he describes the universal form of the Lord
and glorifies the Lord's activities.
TEXT 1
raJaaevac
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1032
MahzR WTaÜEic}Ya& l/aek-SYa k-QaiMaiTa )) 1 ))
räjoväca
maharña etad vaicitryaà lokasya katham iti.
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—the King said; maharñe—O great saint (Çukadeva Gosvämé);
etat—this; vaicitryam—variegatedness; lokasya—of the living entities;
katham—how; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé: My dear sir, why are the
living entities put into different material situations? Kindly explain this to me.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the different hellish
planets within this universe are held slightly above the Garbhodaka Ocean
and remain situated there. This chapter describes how all sinful persons go to
these hellish planets and how they are punished there by the assistants of
Yamaräja. Different individuals with different bodily features enjoy or suffer
various reactions according to their past deeds.
TEXT 2
‰izåvac
i}aGau<aTvaTk-TauR" é[ÖYaa k-MaRGaTaYa" Pa*QaiGvDaa" SavaR Wv SavRSYa
TaarTaMYaeNa >aviNTa )) 2 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1033
åñir uväca
tri-guëatvät kartuù çraddhayä karma-gatayaù påthag-vidhäù sarvä eva sarvasya
täratamyena bhavanti.
SYNONYMS
åñiù uväca—the great saint (Çukadeva Gosvämé) said; tri-guëatvät—because of
the three modes of material nature; kartuù—of the worker;
çraddhayä—because of the attitudes; karma-gatayaù—destinations resulting
from activity; påthak—different; vidhäù—varieties; sarväù—all; eva—thus;
sarvasya—of all of them; täratamyena—in different degrees;
bhavanti—become possible.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, in this material world
there are three kinds of activities—those in the mode of goodness, the mode of
passion and the mode of ignorance. Because all people are influenced by the
three modes of material nature, the results of their activities are also divided
into three. One who acts in the mode of goodness is religious and happy, one
who acts in passion achieves mixed misery and happiness, and one who acts
under the influence of ignorance is always unhappy and lives like an animal.
Because of the varying degrees to which the living entities are influenced by the
different modes of nature, their destinations are also of different varieties.
TEXT 3
AQaedaNaq& Pa[iTaizÖl/+a<aSYaaDaMaRSYa TaQaEv k-TauR" é[ÖaYaa vESaad*XYaaTk-‚
MaRf-l&/ ivSad*Xa& >aviTa Yaa ùNaaÛivÛYaa k*-Tak-aMaaNaa& TaTPair<aaMal/+a<aa"
Sa*TaYa" SahóXa" Pa[v*taaSTaaSaa& Pa[acuYaeR<aaNauv<aRiYaZYaaMa" )) 3 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1034
athedänéà pratiñiddha-lakñaëasyädharmasya tathaiva kartuù çraddhäyä
vaisädåçyät karma-phalaà visadåçaà bhavati yä hy anädy-avidyayä
kåta-kämänäà tat-pariëäma-lakñaëäù såtayaù sahasraçaù pravåttäs täsäà
präcuryeëänuvarëayiñyämaù.
SYNONYMS
atha—thus; idäném—now; pratiñiddha—by what is forbidden;
lakñaëasya—symptomized; adharmasya—of impious activities; tathä—so also;
eva—certainly; kartuù—of the performer; çraddhäyäù—of faith;
vaisädåçyät—by the difference; karma-phalam—the reaction of fruitive
activities; visadåçam—different; bhavati—is; yä—which; hi—indeed;
anädi—from time immemorial; avidyayä—by ignorance; kåta—performed;
kämänäm—of persons possessing many lusty desires;
tat-pariëäma-lakñaëäù—the symptoms of the results of such impious desires;
såtayaù—hellish conditions of life; sahasraçaù—by thousands upon thousands;
pravåttäù—resulted; täsäm—them; präcuryeëa—very widely;
anuvarëayiñyämaù—I shall explain.
TRANSLATION
Just as by executing various pious activities one achieves different positions
in heavenly life, by acting impiously one achieves different positions in hellish
life. Those who are activated by the material mode of ignorance engage in
impious activities, and according to the extent of their ignorance, they are
placed in different grades of hellish life. If one acts in the mode of ignorance
because of madness, his resulting misery is the least severe. One who acts
impiously but knows the distinction between pious and impious activities is
placed in a hell of intermediate severity. And for one who acts impiously and
ignorantly because of atheism, the resultant hellish life is the worst. Because of
ignorance, every living entity has been carried by various desires into thousands
of different hellish planets since time immemorial. I shall try to describe them
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1035
as far as possible.
TEXT 4
raJaaevac
Nark-a NaaMa >aGavNa( ik&- deXaivXaeza AQava bihiñl/aeKYaa AahaeiSv‚
dNTaral/ wiTa )) 4 ))
räjoväca
narakä näma bhagavan kià deça-viçeñä athavä bahis tri-lokyä ähosvid antaräla
iti.
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—the King said; narakäù—the hellish regions; näma—named;
bhagavan—O my Lord; kim—whether; deça-viçeñäù—a particular country;
athavä—or; bahiù—outside; tri-lokyäù—the three worlds (the universe);
ähosvit—or; antaräle—in the intermediate spaces within the universe;
iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé: My dear lord, are the
hellish regions outside the universe, within the covering of the universe, or in
different places on this planet?
TEXT 5
‰izåvac
ANTaral/ Wv i}aJaGaTYaaSTau idiXa di+a<aSYaaMaDaSTaad(>aUMaeåPairíaÀ
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1036
Jal/aÛSYaaMaiGanZvataadYa" iPaTa*Ga<aa idiXa SvaNaa& Gaae}aa<aa& ParMae<a
SaMaaiDaNaa SaTYaa WvaiXaz AaXaaSaaNaa iNavSaiNTa )) 5 ))
åñir uväca
antaräla eva tri-jagatyäs tu diçi dakñiëasyäm adhastäd bhümer upariñöäc ca
jaläd yasyäm agniñvättädayaù pitå-gaëä diçi svänäà goträëäà parameëa
samädhinä satyä eväçiña äçäsänä nivasanti.
SYNONYMS
åñiù uväca—the great sage replied; antaräle—in the intermediate space;
eva—certainly; tri-jagatyäù—of the three worlds; tu—but; diçi—in the
direction; dakñiëasyäm—southern; adhastät—beneath; bhümeù—on the earth;
upariñöät—a little above; ca—and; jalät—the Garbhodaka Ocean; yasyäm—in
which; agniñvättä-ädayaù—headed by Agniñvättä; pitå-gaëäù—the persons
known as pitäs; diçi—direction; svänäm—their own; goträëäm—of the
families; parameëa—with great; samädhinä—absorption in thoughts of the
Lord; satyäù—in truth; eva—certainly; äçiñaù—blessings; äçäsänäù—desiring;
nivasanti—they live.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Çukadeva Gosvämé answered: All the hellish planets are
situated in the intermediate space between the three worlds and the
Garbhodaka Ocean. They lie on the southern side of the universe, beneath
Bhü-maëòala, and slightly above the water of the Garbhodaka Ocean. Pitåloka
is also located in this region between the Garbhodaka Ocean and the lower
planetary systems. All the residents of Pitåloka, headed by Agniñvättä, meditate
in great samädhi on the Supreme Personality of Godhead and always wish their
families well.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1037
PURPORT
As previously explained, below our planetary system are seven lower
planetary systems, the lowest of which is called Pätälaloka. Beneath Pätälaloka
are other planets, known as Narakaloka, or the hellish planets. At the bottom
of the universe lies the Garbhodaka Ocean. Therefore the hellish planets lie
between Pätälaloka and the Garbhodaka Ocean.
TEXT 6
Ya}a h vav >aGavaNa( iPaTa*raJaae vEvSvTa" SvivzYa& Pa[aiPaTaezu SvPauåzE‚
JaRNTauzu SaMPareTaezu YaQaak-MaaRvÛ& daezMaevaNauçiºTa>aGavC^aSaNa" SaGa<aae
dMa& =DaarYaiTa )) 6 ))
yatra ha väva bhagavän pitå-räjo vaivasvataù sva-viñayaà präpiteñu
sva-puruñair jantuñu sampareteñu yathä-karmävadyaà doñam
evänullaìghita-bhagavac-chäsanaù sagaëo damaà dhärayati.
SYNONYMS
yatra—where; ha väva—indeed; bhagavän—the most powerful;
pitå-räjaù—Yamaräja, the king of the pitäs; vaivasvataù—the son of the
sun-god; sva-viñayam—his own kingdom; präpiteñu—when caused to reach;
sva-puruñaiù—by his own messengers; jantuñu—the human beings;
sampareteñu—dead; yathä-karma-avadyam—according to how much they have
violated the rules and regulations of conditional life; doñam—the fault;
eva—certainly; anullaìghita-bhagavat-çäsanaù—who never oversteps the
Supreme Personality of Godhead's order; sagaëaù—along with his followers;
damam—punishment; dhärayati—executes.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1038
TRANSLATION
The King of the pitäs is Yamaräja, the very powerful son of the sun-god. He
resides in Pitåloka with his personal assistants and, while abiding by the rules
and regulations set down by the Supreme Lord, has his agents, the Yamadütas,
bring all the sinful men to him immediately upon their death. After bringing
them within his jurisdiction, he properly judges them according to their specific
sinful activities and sends them to one of the many hellish planets for suitable
punishments.
PURPORT
Yamaräja is not a fictitious or mythological character; he has his own abode,
Pitåloka, of which he is king. Agnostics may not believe in hell, but Çukadeva
Gosvämé affirms the existence of the Naraka planets, which lie between the
Garbhodaka Ocean and Pätälaloka. Yamaräja is appointed by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead to see that the human beings do not violate His rules
and regulations. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (4.17):
karmaëo hy api boddhavyaà
boddhavyaà ca vikarmaëaù
akarmaëaç ca boddhavyaà
gahanä karmaëo gatiù
"The intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore one should
know properly what action is, what forbidden action is, and what inaction is.
"One should understand the nature of karma, vikarma and akarma, and one
must act accordingly. This is the law of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The conditioned souls, who have come to this material world for sense
gratification, are allowed to enjoy their senses under certain regulative
principles. If they violate these regulations, they are judged and punished by
Yamaräja. He brings them to the hellish planets and properly chastises them to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1039
bring them back to Kåñëa consciousness. By the influence of mäyä, however,
the conditioned souls remain infatuated with the mode of ignorance. Thus in
spite of repeated punishment by Yamaräja, they do not come to their senses,
but continue to live within the material condition, committing sinful activities
again and again.
TEXT 7
Ta}a hEke- Nark-aNaek-iv&XaiTa& Ga<aYaiNTa AQa Taa&STae raJaàaMaæPal/+a<aTaae
_Nau§-iMaZYaaMaSTaaiMaóae_NDaTaaiMaóae raErvae MaharaErv" ku-M>aqPaak-" k-al/‚
SaU}aMaiSaPa}avNa& SaUk-rMau%MaNDakU-Pa" k*-iMa>aaeJaNa" SaNd&XaSTaáSaUiMaRvRJa]k-<$‚
k-XaaLMal/I vETar<aq PaUYaaed" Pa[a<araeDaae ivXaSaNa& l/al/a>a+a" SaarMaeYaa‚
dNaMavqicrYa"PaaNaiMaiTa ) ik-Ä +aark-dRMaae r+aaeGa<a>aaeJaNa" XaUl/Pa[aeTaae
dNdXaUk-ae_v$=iNaraeDaNa" PaYaaRvTaRNa" SaUcqMau%iMaTYaíaiv&XaiTaNaRrk-a ivivDa‚
YaaTaNaa>aUMaYa" )) 7 ))
tatra haike narakän eka-viàçatià gaëayanti atha täàs te räjan
näma-rüpa-lakñaëato 'nukramiñyämas tämisro 'ndhatämisro rauravo
mahärauravaù kumbhépäkaù kälasütram asipatravanaà sükaramukham
andhaküpaù kåmibhojanaù sandaàças taptasürmir vajrakaëöaka-çälmalé
vaitaraëé püyodaù präëarodho viçasanaà läläbhakñaù särameyädanam avécir
ayaùpänam iti; kiïca kñärakardamo rakñogaëa-bhojanaù çülaproto dandaçüko
'vaöa-nirodhanaù paryävartanaù sücémukham ity añöä-viàçatir narakä
vividha-yätanä-bhümayaù.
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; ha—certainly; eke—some; narakän—the hellish planets;
eka-viàçatim—twenty-one; gaëayanti—count; atha—therefore; tän—them;
te—unto you; räjan—O King; näma-rüpa-lakñaëataù—according to their
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1040
names, forms and symptoms; anukramiñyämaù—we shall outline one after
another; tämisraù—Tämisra; andha-tämisraù—Andhatämisra;
rauravaù—Raurava; mahä-rauravaù—Mahäraurava;
kumbhé-päkaù—Kumbhépäka; käla-sütram—Kälasütra;
asi-patravanam—Asi-patravana; sükara-mukham—Sükaramukha;
andha-küpaù—Andhaküpa; kåmi-bhojanaù—Kåmibhojana;
sandaàçaù—Sandaàça; tapta-sürmiù—Taptasürmi;
vajra-kaëöaka-çälmalé—Vajrakaëöaka-çälmalé; vaitaraëé—Vaitaraëé;
püyodaù—Püyoda; präëa-rodhaù—Präëarodha; viçasanam—Viçasana;
lälä-bhakñaù—Läläbhakña; särameyädanam—Särameyädana; avéciù—Avéci;
ayaù-pänam—Ayaùpäna; iti—thus; kiïca—some more;
kñära-kardamaù—Kñärakardama; rakñaù-gaëa-bhojanaù—Rakñogaëa-bhojana;
çüla-protaù—Çülaprota; danda-çükaù—Dandaçüka;
avaöa-nirodhanaù—Avaöa-nirodhana; paryävartanaù—Paryävartana;
sücé-mukham—Sücémukha; iti—in this way; añöä-viàçatiù—twenty-eight;
narakäù—hellish planets; vividha—various; yätanä-bhümayaù—lands of
suffering in hellish conditions.
TRANSLATION
Some authorities say that there is a total of twenty-one hellish planets, and
some say twenty-eight. My dear King, I shall outline all of them according to
their names, forms and symptoms. The names of the different hells are as
follows: Tämisra, Andhatämisra, Raurava, Mahäraurava, Kumbhépäka,
Kälasütra, Asi-patravana, Sükaramukha, Andhaküpa, Kåmibhojana, Sandaàça,
Taptasürmi, Vajrakaëöaka-çälmalé, Vaitaraëé, Püyoda, Präëarodha, Viçasana,
Läläbhakña, Särameyädana, Avéci, Ayaùpäna, Kñärakardama,
Rakñogaëa-bhojana, Çülaprota, Dandaçüka, Avaöa-nirodhana, Paryävartana and
Sücémukha. All these planets are meant for punishing the living entities.
TEXT 8
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1041
Ta}a YaSTau ParivtaaPaTYak-l/}aa<YaPahriTa Sa ih k-al/PaaXabÖae YaMaPauå‚
zEriTa>aYaaNakE-STaaiMaóe Narke- bl/aiàPaaTYaTae ANaXaNaaNaudPaaNad<@Taa@‚
NaSa&TaJaRNaaidi>aYaaRTaNaai>aYaaRTYaMaaNaae JaNTauYaR}a k-XMal/MaaSaaidTa Wk-dEv
MaUC^aRMauPaYaaiTa TaaiMaóPa[aYae )) 8 ))
tatra yas tu para-vittäpatya-kalaträëy apaharati sa hi käla-päça-baddho
yama-puruñair ati-bhayänakais tämisre narake balän nipätyate
anaçanänudapäna-daëòa-täòana-santarjanädibhir yätanäbhir yätyamäno
jantur yatra kaçmalam äsädita ekadaiva mürcchäm upayäti tämisra-präye.
SYNONYMS
tatra—in those hellish planets; yaù—a person who; tu—but;
para-vitta-apatya-kalaträëi—the money, wife and children of another;
apaharati—takes away; saù—that person; hi—certainly;
käla-päça-baddhaù—being bound by the ropes of time or Yamaräja;
yama-puruñaiù—by the assistants of Yamaräja; ati-bhayänakaiù—who are very
fearful; tämisre narake—into the hell known as Tämisra; balät—by force;
nipätyate—is thrown; anaçana—starvation; anudapäna—without water;
daëòa-täòana—beaten with rods; santarjana-ädibhiù—by scolding and so on;
yätanäbhiù—by severe punishments; yätyamänaù—being punished;
jantuù—the living entity; yatra—where; kaçmalam—misery;
äsäditaù—obtained; ekadä—sometimes; eva—certainly; mürcchäm—fainting;
upayäti—obtains; tämisra-präye—in that condition, which is almost entirely
dark.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, a person who appropriates another's legitimate wife, children
or money is arrested at the time of death by the fierce Yamadütas, who bind
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1042
him with the rope of time and forcibly throw him into the hellish planet known
as Tämisra. On this very dark planet, the sinful man is chastised by the
Yamadütas, who beat and rebuke him. He is starved, and he is given no water
to drink. Thus the wrathful assistants of Yamaräja cause him severe suffering,
and sometimes he faints from their chastisement.
TEXT 9
WvMaevaNDaTaaiMaóe YaSTau vÄiYaTva Pauåz& daradqNauPaYau»e Ya}a Xarqrq
iNaPaaTYaMaaNaae YaaTaNaaSQaae vedNaYaa NaíMaiTaNaRíd*iíê >aviTa YaQaa
vNaSPaiTav*RêyMaaNaMaUl/STaSMaadNDaTaaiMaó& TaMauPaidXaiNTa )) 9 ))
evam evändhatämisre yas tu vaïcayitvä puruñaà därädén upayuìkte yatra
çaréré nipätyamäno yätanä-stho vedanayä nañöa-matir nañöa-dåñöiç ca bhavati
yathä vanaspatir våçcyamäna-mülas tasmäd andhatämisraà tam upadiçanti.
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; eva—certainly; andhatämisre—in the hellish planet known
as Andhatämisra; yaù—the person who; tu—but; vaïcayitvä—cheating;
puruñam—another person; dära-ädén—the wife and children;
upayuìkte—enjoys; yatra—where; çaréré—the embodied person;
nipätyamänaù—being forcibly thrown; yätanä-sthaù—always situated in
extremely miserable conditions; vedanayä—by such suffering; nañöa—lost;
matiù—whose consciousness; nañöa—lost; dåñöiù—whose sight; ca—also;
bhavati—becomes; yathä—as much as; vanaspatiù—the trees;
våçcyamäna—being cut; mülaù—whose root; tasmät—because of this;
andhatämisram—Andhatämisra; tam—that; upadiçanti—they call.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1043
The destination of a person who slyly cheats another man and enjoys his
wife and children is the hell known as Andhatämisra. There his condition is
exactly like that of a tree being chopped at its roots. Even before reaching
Andhatämisra, the sinful living being is subjected to various extreme miseries.
These afflictions are so severe that he loses his intelligence and sight. It is for
this reason that learned sages call this hell Andhatämisra.
TEXT 10
YaiSTvh va WTadhiMaiTa MaMaediMaiTa >aUTad]aehe<a ke-vl&/ Svku-$u=MbMaeva‚
NauidNa& Pa[PauZ<aaiTa Sa Taidh ivhaYa SvYaMaev TadXau>aeNa raErve iNaPaTaiTa )) 10 ))
yas tv iha vä etad aham iti mamedam iti bhüta-droheëa kevalaà sva-kuöumbam
evänudinaà prapuñëäti sa tad iha vihäya svayam eva tad-açubhena raurave
nipatati.
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vä—or; etat—this body; aham—I;
iti—thus; mama—mine; idam—this; iti—thus; bhüta-droheëa—by envy of
other living entities; kevalam—alone; sva-kuöumbam—his family members;
eva—only; anudinam—day to day; prapuñëäti—supports; saù—such a person;
tat—that; iha—here; vihäya—giving up; svayam—personally; eva—certainly;
tat—of that; açubhena—by the sin; raurave—in Raurava; nipatati—he falls
down.
TRANSLATION
A person who accepts his body as his self works very hard day and night for
money to maintain his own body and the bodies of his wife and children. While
working to maintain himself and his family, he may commit violence against
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1044
other living entities. Such a person is forced to give up his body and his family
at the time of death, when he suffers the reaction for his envy of other
creatures by being thrown into the hell called Raurava.
PURPORT
In Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is said:
yasyätma-buddhiù kuëape tri-dhätuke
sva-dhéù kalaträdiñu bhauma-ijya-dhéù
yat-tértha-buddhiù salile na karhicij
janeñv abhijïeñu sa eva go-kharaù
"One who accepts this bodily bag of three elements [bile, mucus and air] as his
self, who has an affinity for an intimate relationship with his wife and
children, who considers his land worshipable, who takes bath in the waters of
the holy places of pilgrimage but never takes advantage of those persons who
are in actual knowledge—he is no better than an ass or a cow." (SB 10.84.13)
There are two classes of men absorbed in the material concept of life. Out of
ignorance, a man in the first class thinks his body to be his self, and therefore
he is certainly like an animal (sa eva go-kharaù). The person in the second
class, however, not only thinks his material body to be his self, but also
commits all kinds of sinful activities to maintain his body. He cheats everyone
to acquire money for his family and his self, and he becomes envious of others
without reason. Such a person is thrown into the hell known as Raurava. If
one simply considers his body to be his self, as do the animals, he is not very
sinful. However, if one needlessly commits sins to maintain his body, he is put
into the hell known as Raurava. This is the opinion of Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura. Although animals are certainly in the bodily concept of
life, they do not commit any sins to maintain their bodies, mates or offspring.
Therefore animals do not go to hell. However, when a human being acts
enviously and cheats others to maintain his body, he is put into a hellish
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1045
condition.
TEXT 11
Yae iTvh YaQaEvaMauNaa ivih&iSaTaa JaNTav" Par}a YaMaYaaTaNaaMauPaGaTa& Ta
Wv årvae >aUTva TaQaa TaMaev ivih&SaiNTa TaSMaad]aErviMaTYaahU ååiriTa
SaPaaRdiTa§U-rSatvSYaaPadeXa" )) 11 ))
ye tv iha yathaivämunä vihiàsitä jantavaù paratra yama-yätanäm upagataà ta
eva ruravo bhütvä tathä tam eva vihiàsanti tasmäd rauravam ity ähü rurur iti
sarpäd ati-krüra-sattvasyäpadeçaù.
SYNONYMS
ye—those who; tu—but; iha—in this life; yathä—as much as; eva—certainly;
amunä—by him; vihiàsitäù—who were hurt; jantavaù—the living entities;
paratra—in the next life; yama-yätanäm upagatam—being subjected to
miserable conditions by Yamaräja; te—those living entities; eva—indeed;
ruravaù—rurus (a kind of envious animal); bhütvä—becoming; tathä—that
much; tam—him; eva—certainly; vihiàsanti—they hurt; tasmät—because of
this; rauravam—Raurava; iti—thus; ähuù—learned scholars say; ruruù—the
animal known as ruru; iti—thus; sarpät—than the snake; ati-krüra—much
more cruel and envious; sattvasya—of the entity; apadeçaù—the name.
TRANSLATION
In this life, an envious person commits violent acts against many living
entities. Therefore after his death, when he is taken to hell by Yamaräja, those
living entities who were hurt by him appear as animals called rurus to inflict
very severe pain upon him. Learned scholars call this hell Raurava. Not
generally seen in this world, the ruru is more envious than a snake.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1046
PURPORT
According to Çrédhara Svämé, the ruru is also known as the bhära-çåìga
(ati-krürasya bhära-çåìgäkhya-sattvasya apadeçaù saàjïä). Çréla Jéva Gosvämé
confirms this in his Sandarbha: ruru-çabdasya svayaà muninaiva öékä-vidhänäl
lokeñv aprasiddha eväyaà jantu-viçeñaù. Thus although rurus are not seen in
this world, their existence is confirmed in the çästras.
TEXT 12
WvMaev MaharaErvae Ya}a iNaPaiTaTa& Pauåz& §-VYaada NaaMa årvSTa& §-VYae<a
gaaTaYaiNTa Ya" ke-vl&/ dehM>ar" )) 12 ))
evam eva mahärauravo yatra nipatitaà puruñaà kravyädä näma ruravas taà
kravyeëa ghätayanti yaù kevalaà dehambharaù.
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; eva—certainly; mahä-rauravaù—the hell known as Mahäraurava;
yatra—where; nipatitam—being thrown; puruñam—a person; kravyädäù
näma—named kravyäda; ruravaù—the ruru animals; tam—him (the
condemned person); kravyeëa—for eating his flesh; ghätayanti—kill;
yaù—who; kevalam—only; dehambharaù—intent upon maintaining his own
body.
TRANSLATION
Punishment in the hell called Mahäraurava is compulsory for a person who
maintains his own body by hurting others. In this hell, ruru animals known as
kravyäda torment him and eat his flesh.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1047
PURPORT
The animalistic person who lives simply in the bodily concept of life is not
excused. He is put into the hell known as Mahäraurava and attacked by ruru
animals known as kravyädas.
TEXT 13
YaiSTvh va oGa]" PaXaUNa( Pai+a<aae va Pa[a<aTa oParNDaYaiTa TaMaPak-å<a&
PauåzadEriPa ivGaihRTaMaMau}a YaMaaNaucra" ku-M>aqPaake TaáTaEle/ oParNDa‚
YaiNTa )) 13 ))
yas tv iha vä ugraù paçün pakñiëo vä präëata uparandhayati tam apakaruëaà
puruñädair api vigarhitam amutra yamänucaräù kumbhépäke tapta-taile
uparandhayanti.
SYNONYMS
yaù—a person who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vä—or; ugraù—very cruel;
paçün—animals; pakñiëaù—birds; vä—or; präëataù—in a live condition;
uparandhayati—cooks; tam—him; apakaruëam—very cruel-hearted;
puruña-ädaiù—by those who eat human flesh; api—even;
vigarhitam—condemned; amutra—in the next life; yama-anucaräù—the
servants of Yamaräja; kumbhépäke—in the hell known as Kumbhépäka;
tapta-taile—in boiling oil; uparandhayanti—cook.
TRANSLATION
For the maintenance of their bodies and the satisfaction of their tongues,
cruel persons cook poor animals and birds alive. Such persons are condemned
even by man-eaters. In their next lives they are carried by the Yamadütas to the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1048
hell known as Kumbhépäka, where they are cooked in boiling oil.
TEXT 14
YaiSTvh b]øDa]uk( Sa k-al/SaU}aSa&jke- Narke- AYauTaYaaeJaNaPairMa<@le/
TaaMa]MaYae Taá%le/ oPaYaRDaSTaadGNYak-aR>YaaMaiTaTaPYaMaaNae_i>aiNaveiXaTa" +auiTPa‚
PaaSaa>Yaa& c dùMaaNaaNTabRih"Xarqr AaSTae XaeTae ceíTae_viTaïiTa PairDaaviTa
c YaaviNTa PaXauraeMaai<a TaavÜzRSahóai<a )) 14 ))
yas tv iha brahma-dhruk sa kälasütra-saàjïake narake
ayuta-yojana-parimaëòale tämramaye tapta-khale upary-adhastäd
agny-arkäbhyäm ati-tapyamäne 'bhiniveçitaù kñut-pipäsäbhyäà ca
dahyamänäntar-bahiù-çaréra äste çete ceñöate 'vatiñöhati paridhävati ca yävanti
paçu-romäëi tävad varña-sahasräëi.
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; tu—but; iha—in this life; brahma-dhruk—the killer of a
brähmaëa; saù—such a person; kälasütra-saàjïake—named Kälasütra;
narake—in the hell; ayuta-yojana-parimaëòale—having a circumference of
eighty thousand miles; tämra-maye—made of copper; tapta—heated; khale—in
a level place; upari-adhastät—above and beneath; agni—by fire;
arkäbhyäm—and by the sun; ati-tapyamäne—which is being heated;
abhiniveçitaù—being made to enter; kñut-pipäsäbhyäm—by hunger and thirst;
ca—and; dahyamäna—being burned; antaù—internally; bahiù—externally;
çaréraù—whose body; äste—remains; çete—sometimes lies; ceñöate—sometimes
moves his limbs; avatiñöhati—sometimes stands; paridhävati—sometimes runs
here and there; ca—also; yävanti—as many; paçu-romäëi—hairs on the body
of an animal; tävat—that long; varña-sahasräëi—thousands of years.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1049
TRANSLATION
The killer of a brähmaëa is put into the hell known as Kälasütra, which has
a circumference of eighty thousand miles and which is made entirely of copper.
Heated from below by fire and from above by the scorching sun, the copper
surface of this planet is extremely hot. Thus the murderer of a brähmaëa
suffers from being burned both internally and externally. Internally he is
burning with hunger and thirst, and externally he is burning from the scorching
heat of the sun and the fire beneath the copper surface. Therefore he sometimes
lies down, sometimes sits, sometimes stands up and sometimes runs here and
there. He must suffer in this way for as many thousands of years as there are
hairs on the body of an animal.
TEXT 15
YaiSTvh vE iNaJavedPaQaadNaaPaÛPaGaTa" Paa%<@& caePaGaTaSTaMaiSaPa}avNa&
Pa[veXYa k-XaYaa Pa[hriNTa Ta}a haSaaivTaSTaTaae DaavMaaNa o>aYaTaae
DaarESTaal/vNaaiSaPa}aEiX^ÛMaaNaSavaR(r)ae ha hTaae_SMaqiTa ParMaYaa vedNaYaa
MaUiC^RTa" Pade Pade iNaPaTaiTa SvDaMaRha Paa%<@aNauGaTa& f-l&/ >au»e )) 15 ))
yas tv iha vai nija-veda-pathäd anäpady apagataù päkhaëòaà copagatas tam
asi-patravanaà praveçya kaçayä praharanti tatra häsäv itas tato dhävamäna
ubhayato dhärais täla-vanäsi-patraiç chidyamäna-sarväìgo hä hato 'sméti
paramayä vedanayä mürcchitaù pade pade nipatati sva-dharmahä
päkhaëòänugataà phalaà bhuìkte.
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed;
nija-veda-pathät—from his own path, recommended by the Vedas;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1050
anäpadi—even without an emergency; apagataù—deviated; päkhaëòam—a
concocted, atheistic system; ca—and; upagataù—gone to; tam—him;
asi-patravanam—the hell known as Asi-patravana; praveçya—making enter;
kaçayä—with a whip; praharanti—they beat; tatra—there; ha—certainly;
asau—that; itaù tataù—here and there; dhävamänaù—running;
ubhayataù—on both sides; dhäraiù—by the edges; täla-vana-asi-patraiù—by
the swordlike leaves of palm trees; chidyamäna—being cut;
sarva-aìgaù—whose entire body; hä—alas; hataù—killed; asmi—I am;
iti—thus; paramayä—with severe; vedanayä—pain; mürcchitaù—fainted; pade
pade—at every step; nipatati—falls down; sva-dharma-hä—the killer of his
own principles of religion; päkhaëòa-anugatam phalam—the result of
accepting an atheistic path; bhuìkte—he suffers.
TRANSLATION
If a person deviates from the path of the Vedas in the absence of an
emergency, the servants of Yamaräja put him into the hell called Asi-patravana,
where they beat him with whips. When he runs hither and thither, fleeing from
the extreme pain, on all sides he runs into palm trees with leaves like sharpened
swords. Thus injured all over his body and fainting at every step, he cries out,
"Oh, what shall I do now! How shall I be saved!" This is how one suffers who
deviates from the accepted religious principles.
PURPORT
There is actually only one religious principle: dharmaà tu säkñäd
bhagavat-praëétam [SB 6.3.19]. The only religious principle is to follow the
orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unfortunately, especially in
this age of Kali, everyone is an atheist, people do not even believe in God,
what to speak of following His words. The words nija-veda-patha can also mean
"one's own set of religious principles." Formerly there was only one veda-patha,
or set of religious principles. Now there are many. It doesn't matter which set
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1051
of religious principles one follows: the only injunction is that he must follow
them strictly. An atheist, or nästika, is one who does not believe in the Vedas.
However, even if one takes up a different system of religion, according to this
verse he must follow the religious principles he has accepted. Whether one is a
Hindu, or a Mohammedan or a Christian, he should follow his own religious
principles. However, if one concocts his own religious path within his mind, or
if one follows no religious principles at all, he is punished in the hell known as
Asi-patravana. In other words, a human being must follow some religious
principles. If he does not follow any religious principles, he is no better than an
animal. As Kali-yuga advances, people are becoming godless and taking up
so-called secularism. They do not know the punishment awaiting them in
Asi-patravana, as described in this verse.
TEXT 16
YaiSTvh vE raJaa raJaPauåzae va Ad<@ye d<@& Pa[<aYaiTa b]aø<ae va
Xarqrd<@& Sa PaaPaqYaaàrke-_Mau}a SaUk-rMau%e iNaPaTaiTa Ta}aaiTablE/ivR‚
iNaiZPaZYaMaa<aavYavae YaQaEvehe+au%<@ AaTaRSvre<a SvNaYaNa( KvicNMaUiC^RTa"
k-XMal/MauPaGaTaae YaQaEvehad*ídaeza oPaåÖa" )) 16 ))
yas tv iha vai räjä räja-puruño vä adaëòye daëòaà praëayati brähmaëe vä
çaréra-daëòaà sa päpéyän narake 'mutra sükaramukhe nipatati taträtibalair
viniñpiñyamäëävayavo yathaivehekñukhaëòa ärta-svareëa svanayan kvacin
mürcchitaù kaçmalam upagato yathaivehä-dåñöa-doñä uparuddhäù.
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed; räjä—a king;
räja-puruñaù—a king's man; vä—or; adaëòye—unto one not punishable;
daëòam—punishment; praëayati—inflicts; brähmaëe—unto a brähmaëa;
vä—or; çaréra-daëòam—corporal punishment; saù—that person, king or
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1052
government officer; päpéyän—the most sinful; narake—in the hell;
amutra—in the next life; sükaramukhe—named Sükaramukha; nipatati—falls
down; tatra—there; ati-balaiù—by very strong assistants of Yamaräja;
viniñpiñyamäëa—being crushed; avayavaù—the different parts of whose body;
yathä—like; eva—certainly; iha—here; ikñu-khaëòaù—sugarcane;
ärta-svareëa—with a pitiable sound; svanayan—crying; kvacit—sometimes;
mürcchitaù—fainted; kaçmalam upagataù—becoming illusioned; yathä—just
like; eva—indeed; iha—here; adåñöa-doñäù—who is not at fault;
uparuddhäù—arrested for punishment.
TRANSLATION
In his next life, a sinful king or governmental representative who punishes
an innocent person, or who inflicts corporal punishment upon a brähmaëa, is
taken by the Yamadütas to the hell named Sükaramukha, where the most
powerful assistants of Yamaräja crush him exactly as one crushes sugarcane to
squeeze out the juice. The sinful living entity cries very pitiably and faints, just
like an innocent man undergoing punishments. This is the result of punishing a
faultless person.
TEXT 17
YaiSTvh vE >aUTaaNaaMaqìraePak-iLPaTav*taqNaaMaiviv¢-ParVYaQaaNaa& SvYa& Pauåzae‚
Pak-iLPaTav*itaivRiv¢-ParVYaQaae VYaQaaMaacriTa Sa Par}aaNDakU-Pae Tadi>ad]aehe<a
iNaPaTaiTa Ta}a haSaaE TaEJaRNTaui>a" PaXauMa*GaPai+aSarqSa*PaEMaRXak-YaUk-aMaTku-<aMa‚
i+ak-aidi>aYaeR ke- cai>ad]uGDaaSTaE" SavRTaae_i>ad]uùMaa<aSTaMaiSa ivhTaiNad]a‚
iNav*RiTarl/BDaavSQaaNa" Pair§-aMaiTa YaQaa ku-Xarqre Jaqv" )) 17 ))
yas tv iha vai bhütänäm éçvaropakalpita-våtténäm avivikta-para-vyathänäà
svayaà puruñopakalpita-våttir vivikta-para-vyatho vyathäm äcarati sa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1053
paraträndhaküpe tad-abhidroheëa nipatati tatra häsau tair jantubhiù
paçu-måga-pakñi-sarésåpair maçaka-yükä-matkuëa-makñikädibhir ye ke
cäbhidrugdhäs taiù sarvato 'bhidruhyamäëas tamasi vihata-nidrä-nirvåtir
alabdhävasthänaù parikrämati yathä kuçarére jévaù.
SYNONYMS
yaù—any person who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed; bhütänäm—to
some living entities; éçvara—by the supreme controller; upakalpita—designed;
våtténäm—whose means of livelihood; avivikta—not understanding;
para-vyathänäm—the pain of others; svayam—himself;
puruña-upakalpita—designed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
våttiù—whose livelihood; vivikta—understanding; para-vyathaù—the painful
conditions of others; vyathäm äcarati—but still causes pain; saù—such a
person; paratra—in his next life; andhaküpe—to the hell named Andhaküpa;
tat—to them; abhidroheëa—by the sin of malice; nipatati—falls down;
tatra—there; ha—indeed; asau—that person; taiù jantubhiù—by those
respective living entities; paçu—animals; måga—wild beasts; pakñi—birds;
sarésåpaiù—snakes; maçaka—mosquitoes; yükä—lice; matkuëa—worms;
makñika-ädibhiù—flies and so on; ye ke—whoever else; ca—and;
abhidrugdhäù—persecuted; taiù—by them; sarvataù—everywhere;
abhidruhyamäëaù—being injured; tamasi—in the darkness; vihata—disturbed;
nidrä-nirvåtiù—whose resting place; alabdha—not being able to obtain;
avasthänaù—a resting place; parikrämati—wanders; yathä—just as;
ku-çarére—in a low-grade body; jévaù—a living entity.
TRANSLATION
By the arrangement of the Supreme Lord, low-grade living beings like bugs
and mosquitoes suck the blood of human beings and other animals. Such
insignificant creatures are unaware that their bites are painful to the human
being. However, first-class human beings—brähmaëas, kñatriyas and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1054
vaiçyas—are developed in consciousness, and therefore they know how painful
it is to be killed. A human being endowed with knowledge certainly commits sin
if he kills or torments insignificant creatures, who have no discrimination. The
Supreme Lord punishes such a man by putting him into the hell known as
Andhaküpa, where he is attacked by all the birds and beasts, reptiles,
mosquitoes, lice, worms, flies, and any other creatures he tormented during his
life. They attack him from all sides, robbing him of the pleasure of sleep.
Unable to rest, he constantly wanders about in the darkness. Thus in
Andhaküpa his suffering is just like that of a creature in the lower species.
PURPORT
From this very instructive verse we learn that lower animals, created by the
laws of nature to disturb the human being, are not subjected to punishment.
Because the human being has developed consciousness, however, he cannot do
anything against the principles of varëäçrama-dharma without being
condemned. Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä (4.13), cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà
guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù: "According to the three modes of material nature and
the work ascribed to them, the four divisions of human society were created by
Me." Thus all men should be divided into four classes—brähmaëas, kñatriyas,
vaiçyas and çüdras—and they should act according to their ordained
regulations. They cannot deviate from their prescribed rules and regulations.
One of these states that they should never trouble any animal, even those that
disturb human beings. Although a tiger is not sinful if he attacks another
animal and eats its flesh, if a man with developed consciousness does so, he
must be punished. In other words, a human being who does not use his
developed consciousness but instead acts like an animal surely undergoes
punishment in many different hells.
TEXT 18
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1055
YaiSTvh va ASa&iv>aJYaaénaiTa YaiTk-ÄNaaePaNaTaMaiNaiMaRTaPaÄYajae vaYaSa‚
Sa&STauTa" Sa Par}a k*-iMa>aaeJaNae Nark-aDaMae iNaPaTaiTa Ta}a XaTaSahóYaaeJaNae
k*-iMaku-<@e k*-iMa>aUTa" SvYa& k*-iMai>arev >a+YaMaa<a" k*-iMa>aaeJaNaae
YaavtadPa[taaPa[huTaadae_iNaveRXaMaaTMaaNa& YaaTaYaTae )) 18 ))
yas tv iha vä asaàvibhajyäçnäti yat kiïcanopanatam anirmita-païca-yajïo
väyasa-saàstutaù sa paratra kåmibhojane narakädhame nipatati tatra
çata-sahasra-yojane kåmi-kuëòe kåmi-bhütaù svayaà kåmibhir eva
bhakñyamäëaù kåmi-bhojano yävat tad aprattäprahütädo 'nirveçam ätmänaà
yätayate.
SYNONYMS
yaù—any person who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vä—or;
asaà-vibhajya—without dividing; açnäti—eats; yat kiïcana—whatever;
upanatam—obtained by Kåñëa's grace; anirmita—not performing;
païca-yajïaù—the five kinds of sacrifice; väyasa—with the crows;
saàstutaù—who is described as equal; saù—such a person; paratra—in the
next life; kåmibhojane—named Kåmibhojana; naraka-adhame—into the most
abominable of all hells; nipatati—falls down; tatra—there;
çata-sahasra-yojane—measuring 100,000 yojanas (800,000 miles);
kåmi-kuëòe—in a lake of worms; kåmi-bhütaù—becoming one of the worms;
svayam—he himself; kåmibhiù—by the other worms; eva—certainly;
bhakñyamäëaù—being eaten; kåmi-bhojanaù—eating worms; yävat—as long as;
tat—that lake is wide; apratta-aprahüta—unshared and unoffered food;
adaù—one who eats; anirveçam—who has not performed atonement;
ätmänam—to himself; yätayate—gives pain.
TRANSLATION
A person is considered no better than a crow if after receiving some food, he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1056
does not divide it among guests, old men and children, but simply eats it
himself, or if he eats it without performing the five kinds of sacrifice. After
death he is put into the most abominable hell, known as Kåmibhojana. In that
hell is a lake 100,000 yojanas [800,000 miles] wide and filled with worms. He
becomes a worm in that lake and feeds on the other worms there, who also feed
on him. Unless he atones for his actions before his death, such a sinful man
remains in the hellish lake of Kåmibhojana for as many years as there are
yojanas in the width of the lake.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (3.13):
yajïa-çiñöäçinaù santo
mucyante sarva-kilbiñaiù
bhuïjate te tv agham päpä
ya pacanty ätma-käraëät
"The devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because they eat
food which is first offered for sacrifice. Others, who prepare food for personal
sense enjoyment, verily eat only sin." All food is given to us by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän: the Lord supplies
everyone with the necessities of life. Therefore we should acknowledge His
mercy by performing yajïa (sacrifice). This is the duty of everyone. Indeed, the
sole purpose of life is to perform yajïa. According to Kåñëa (Bg. 3.9):
yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra
loko 'yam karma-bandhanaù
tad-arthaà karma kaunteya
mukta-saìgaù samäcara
"Work done as a sacrifice for Viñëu has to be performed, otherwise work binds
one to this material world. Therefore, O son of Kunté, perform your prescribed
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1057
duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you will always remain unattached
and free from bondage." If we do not perform yajïa and distribute prasäda to
others, our lives are condemned. Only after performing yajïa and distributing
the prasäda to all dependents—children, brähmaëas and old men—should one
eat. However, one who cooks only for himself or his family is condemned,
along with everyone he feeds. After death he is put into the hell known as
Kåmibhojana.
TEXT 19
YaiSTvh vE STaeYaeNa bl/aÜa ihr<YarÒadqiNa b]aø<aSYa vaPahrTYaNYaSYa
vaNaaPaid PauåzSTaMaMau}a raJaNa( YaMaPauåza AYaSMaYaEriGaniPa<@E" SaNd&XaESTvic
iNaZku-ziNTa )) 19 ))
yas tv iha vai steyena baläd vä hiraëya-ratnädéni brähmaëasya väpaharaty
anyasya vänäpadi puruñas tam amutra räjan yama-puruñä ayasmayair
agni-piëòaiù sandaàçais tvaci niñkuñanti.
SYNONYMS
yaù—any person who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed; steyena—by
thievery; balät—by force; vä—or; hiraëya—gold; ratna—gems; ädéni—and so
on; brähmaëasya—of a brähmaëa; vä—or; apaharati—steals; anyasya—of
others; vä—or; anäpadi—not in a calamity; puruñaù—a person; tam—him;
amutra—in the next life; räjan—O King; yama-puruñäù—the agents of
Yamaräja; ayaù-mayaiù—made of iron; agni-piëòaiù—balls heated in fire;
sandaàçaiù—with tongs; tvaci—on the skin; niñkuñanti—tear to pieces.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, a person who in the absence of an emergency robs a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1058
brähmaëa—or, indeed, anyone else—of his gems and gold is put into a hell
known as Sandaàça. There his skin is torn and separated by red-hot iron balls
and tongs. In this way, his entire body is cut to pieces.
TEXT 20
YaiSTvh va AGaMYaa& iñYaMaGaMYa& va Pauåz& Yaaeizdi>aGaC^iTa TaavMau}a
k-XaYaa Taa@YaNTaiSTaGMaYaa SaUMYaaR l/aehMaYYaa PauåzMaail/(r)YaiNTa iñYa& c
PauåzæPaYaa SaUMYaaR )) 20 ))
yas tv iha vä agamyäà striyam agamyaà vä puruñaà yoñid abhigacchati täv
amutra kaçayä täòayantas tigmayä sürmyä lohamayyä puruñam äliìgayanti
striyaà ca puruña-rüpayä sürmyä.
SYNONYMS
yaù—any person who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vä—or;
agamyäm—unsuitable; striyam—a woman; agamyam—unsuitable; vä—or;
puruñam—a man; yoñit—a woman; abhigacchati—approaches for sexual
intercourse; tau—both of them; amutra—in the next life; kaçayä—by whips;
täòayantaù—beating; tigmayä—very hot; sürmyä—by an image;
loha-mayyä—made of iron; puruñam—the man; äliìgayanti—they embrace;
striyam—the woman; ca—also; puruña-rüpayä—in the form of a man;
sürmyä—by an image.
TRANSLATION
A man or woman who indulges in sexual intercourse with an unworthy
member of the opposite sex is punished after death by the assistants of Yamaräja
in the hell known as Taptasürmi. There such men and women are beaten with
whips. The man is forced to embrace a red-hot iron form of a woman, and the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1059
woman is forced to embrace a similar form of a man. Such is the punishment for
illicit sex.
PURPORT
Generally a man should not have sexual relations with any woman other
than his wife. According to Vedic principles, the wife of another man is
considered one's mother, and sexual relations are strictly forbidden with one's
mother, sister and daughter. If one indulges in illicit sexual relations with
another man's wife, that activity is considered identical with having sex with
one's mother. This act is most sinful. The same principle holds for a woman
also; if she enjoys sex with a man other than her husband, the act is
tantamount to having sexual relations with her father or son. Illicit sex life is
always forbidden, and any man or woman who indulges in it is punished in the
manner described in this verse.
TEXT 21
YaiSTvh vE SavaRi>aGaMaSTaMaMau}a iNarYae vTaRMaaNa& vJa]k-<$=k-XaaLMal/IMaaraePYa
iNaZk-zRiNTa )) 21 ))
yas tv iha vai sarväbhigamas tam amutra niraye vartamänaà
vajrakaëöaka-çälmalém äropya niñkarñanti.
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed;
sarva-abhigamaù—indulges in sex life indiscriminately, with both men and
animals; tam—him; amutra—in the next life; niraye—in the hell;
vartamänam—existing; vajrakaëöaka-çälmalém—a silk-cotton tree with thorns
like thunderbolts; äropya—mounting him on; niñkarñanti—they pull him out.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1060
TRANSLATION
A person who indulges in sex indiscriminately—even with animals—is
taken after death to the hell known as Vajrakaëöaka-çälmalé. In this hell there
is a silk-cotton tree full of thorns as strong as thunderbolts. The agents of
Yamaräja hang the sinful man on that tree and pull him down forcibly so that
the thorns very severely tear his body.
PURPORT
The sexual urge is so strong that sometimes a man indulges in sexual
relations with a cow, or a woman indulges in sexual relations with a dog. Such
men and women are put into the hell known as Vajrakaëöaka-çälmalé. The
Kåñëa consciousness movement forbids illicit sex. From the description of
these verses, we can understand what an extremely sinful act illicit sex is.
Sometimes people disbelieve these descriptions of hell, but whether one
believes or not, everything must be carried out by the laws of nature, which no
one can avoid.
TEXT 22
Yae iTvh vE raJaNYaa raJaPauåza va APaa%<@a DaMaRSaeTaUNa( i>aNdiNTa Tae
SaMPareTYa vETar<Yaa& iNaPaTaiNTa i>aàMaYaaRdaSTaSYaa& iNarYaPair%a>aUTaaYaa& NaÛa&
YaadaeGa<aEirTaSTaTaae >a+YaMaa<aa AaTMaNaa Na ivYauJYaMaaNaaêaSaui>aåùMaaNaa"
SvagaeNa k-MaRPaak-MaNauSMarNTaae iv<MaU}aPaUYaXaaei<aTake-XaNa%aiSQaMaedaeMaa&SavSaa‚
vaihNYaaMauPaTaPYaNTae )) 22 ))
ye tv iha vai räjanyä räja-puruñä vä apäkhaëòä dharma-setün bhindanti te
samparetya vaitaraëyäà nipatanti bhinna-maryädäs tasyäà
niraya-parikhä-bhütäyäà nadyäà yädo-gaëair itas tato bhakñyamäëä ätmanä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1061
na viyujyamänäç cäsubhir uhyamänäù sväghena karma-päkam anusmaranto
vië-mütra-püya-çoëita-keça-nakhästhi-medo-mäàsa-vasä-vähinyäm
upatapyante.
SYNONYMS
ye—persons who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed; räjanyäù—members
of the royal family, or kñatriyas; räja-puruñäù—government servants; vä—or;
apäkhaëòäù—although born in responsible families; dharma-setün—the
bounds of prescribed religious principles; bhindanti—transgress; te—they;
samparetya—after dying; vaitaraëyäm—named Vaitaraëé; nipatanti—fall
down; bhinna-maryädäù—who have broken the regulative principles;
tasyäm—in that; niraya-parikhä-bhütäyäm—the moat surrounding hell;
nadyäm—in the river; yädaù-gaëaiù—by ferocious aquatic animals; itaù
tataù—here and there; bhakñyamäëäù—being eaten; ätmanä—with the body;
na—not; viyujyamänäù—being separated; ca—and; asubhiù—the life airs;
uhyamänäù—being carried; sva-aghena—by his own sinful activities;
karma-päkam—the result of his impious activities;
anusmarantaù—remembering; viö—of stool; mütra—urine; püya—pus;
çoëita—blood; keça—hair; nakha—nails; asthi—bones; medaù—marrow;
mäàsa—flesh; vasä—fat; vähinyäm—in the river; upatapyante—are afflicted
with pain.
TRANSLATION
A person who is born into a responsible family—such as a kñatriya, a
member of royalty or a government servant—but who neglects to execute his
prescribed duties according to religious principles, and who thus becomes
degraded, falls down at the time of death into the river of hell known as
Vaitaraëé. This river, which is a moat surrounding hell, is full of ferocious
aquatic animals. When a sinful man is thrown into the River Vaitaraëé, the
aquatic animals there immediately begin to eat him, but because of his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1062
extremely sinful life, he does not leave his body. He constantly remembers his
sinful activities and suffers terribly in that river, which is full of stool, urine,
pus, blood, hair, nails, bones, marrow, flesh and fat.
TEXT 23
Yae iTvh vE v*zl/IPaTaYaae NaíXaaEcacariNaYaMaaSTYa¢-l/Âa" PaXaucYaa| criNTa
Tae caiPa Pa[eTYa PaUYaiv<MaU}aëeZMaMal/aPaU<aaR<aRve iNaPaTaiNTa TadevaiTabq>aiTSa‚
TaMaéniNTa )) 23 ))
ye tv iha vai våñalé-patayo nañöa-çaucäcära-niyamäs tyakta-lajjäù paçu-caryäà
caranti te cäpi pretya püya-vië-mütra-çleñma-malä-pürëärëave nipatanti tad
evätibébhatsitam açnanti.
SYNONYMS
ye—persons who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed; våñalé-patayaù—the
husbands of the çüdras; nañöa—lost; çauca-äcära-niyamäù—whose cleanliness,
good behavior and regulated life; tyakta-lajjäù—without shame;
paçu-caryäm—the behavior of animals; caranti—they execute; te—they;
ca—also; api—indeed; pretya—dying; püya—of pus; viö—stool; mütra—urine;
çleñma—mucus; malä—saliva; pürëa—full; arëave—in an ocean;
nipatanti—fall; tat—that; eva—only; atibébhatsitam—extremely disgusting;
açnanti—they eat.
TRANSLATION
The shameless husbands of lowborn çüdra women live exactly like animals,
and therefore they have no good behavior, cleanliness or regulated life. After
death, such persons are thrown into the hell called Püyoda, where they are put
into an ocean filled with pus, stool, urine, mucus, saliva and similar things.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1063
Çüdras who could not improve themselves fall into that ocean and are forced to
eat those disgusting things.
PURPORT
Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura has sung,
karma-käëòa, jïäna-käëòa, kevala viñera bäëòa,
amåta baliyä yebä khäya
nänä yoni sadä phire, kadarya bhakñaëa kare,
tära janma adaù-pate yäya
He says that persons following the paths of karma-käëòa and jïäna-käëòa
(fruitive activities and speculative thinking) are missing the opportunities for
human birth and gliding down into the cycle of birth and death. Thus there is
always the chance that he may be put into the Püyoda Naraka, the hell named
Püyoda, where one is forced to eat stool, urine, pus, mucus, saliva and other
abominable things. It is significant that this verse is spoken especially about
çüdras. If one is born a çüdra, he must continually return to the ocean of
Püyoda to eat horrible things. Thus even a born çüdra is expected to become a
brähmaëa; that is the meaning of human life. Everyone should improve
himself. Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.13), cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà
guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù: "According to the three modes of material nature and
the work ascribed to them, four divisions of human society were created by
Me." Even if one is by qualification a çüdra, he must try to improve his position
and become a brähmaëa. No one should try to check a person, no matter what
his present position is, from coming to the platform of a brähmaëa or a
Vaiñëava. Actually, one must come to the platform of a Vaiñëava. Then he
automatically becomes a brähmaëa. This can be done only if the Kåñëa
consciousness movement is spread, for we are trying to elevate everyone to the
platform of Vaiñëava. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.66), sarva-dharmän
parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja: "Abandon all other duties and simply
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1064
surrender unto Me." One must give up the occupational duties of a çüdra,
kñatriya or vaiçya and adopt the occupational duties of a Vaiñëava, which
include the activities of a brähmaëa. Kåñëa explains this in Bhagavad-gétä
(9.32):
mäà hi pärtha vyapäçritya
ye 'pi syuù päpa-yonayaù
striyo vaiçyäs tathä çüdräs
te 'pi yänti paräà gatim
"O son of Påthä, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth—women, vaiçyas [merchants], as well as çüdras [workers]—can approach
the supreme destination." Human life is specifically meant for going back
home, back to Godhead. That facility should be given to everyone, whether
one be a çüdra, a vaiçya, a woman or a kñatriya. This is the purpose of the Kåñëa
consciousness movement. However, if one is satisfied to remain a çüdra, he
must suffer as described in this verse: tad evätibébhatsitam açnanti.
TEXT 24
Yae iTvh vE ìGadR>aPaTaYaae b]aø<aadYaae Ma*GaYaaivhara ATaqQaeR c
Ma*GaaiàganiNTa TaaNaiPa SaMPareTaamç+Ya>aUTaaNa( YaMaPauåza wzui>aivRDYaiNTa )) 24 ))
ye tv iha vai çva-gardabha-patayo brähmaëädayo mågayä vihärä atérthe ca
mågän nighnanti tän api samparetäû lakñya-bhütän yama-puruñä iñubhir
vidhyanti.
SYNONYMS
ye—those who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—or; çva—of dogs;
gardabha—and asses; patayaù—maintainers; brähmaëa-ädayaù—brähmaëas,
kñatriyas and vaiçyas; mågayä vihäräù—taking pleasure in hunting animals in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1065
the forest; atérthe—other than prescribed; ca—also; mågän—animals;
nighnanti—kill; tän—them; api—indeed; samparetän—having died;
lakñya-bhütän—becoming the targets; yama-puruñäù—the assistants of
Yamaräja; iñubhiù—by arrows; vidhyanti—pierce.
TRANSLATION
If in this life a man of the higher classes [brähmaëa, kñatriya and vaiçya] is
very fond of taking his pet dogs, mules or asses into the forest to hunt and kill
animals unnecessarily, he is placed after death into the hell known as
Präëarodha. There the assistants of Yamaräja make him their targets and pierce
him with arrows.
PURPORT
In the Western countries especially, aristocrats keep dogs and horses to
hunt animals in the forest. Whether in the West or the East, aristocratic men
in the Kali-yuga adopt the fashion of going to the forest and unnecessarily
killing animals. Men of the higher classes (the brähmaëas, kñatriyas and
vaiçyas) should cultivate knowledge of Brahman, and they should also give the
çüdras a chance to come to that platform. If instead they indulge in hunting,
they are punished as described in this verse. Not only are they pierced with
arrows by the agents of Yamaräja, but they are also put into the ocean of pus,
urine and stool described in the previous verse.
TEXT 25
Yae iTvh vE daiM>ak-a dM>aYajezu PaXaUNa( ivXaSaiNTa TaaNaMauiZMamçaeke- vEXaSae
Narke- PaiTaTaaiàrYaPaTaYaae YaaTaiYaTva ivXaSaiNTa )) 25 ))
ye tv iha vai dämbhikä dambha-yajïeñu paçün viçasanti tän amuñmiû loke
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1066
vaiçase narake patitän niraya-patayo yätayitvä viçasanti.
SYNONYMS
ye—persons who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed; dämbhikäù—very
proud of wealth and a prestigious position; dambha-yajïeñu—in a sacrifice
performed to increase prestige; paçün—animals; viçasanti—kill; tän—them;
amuñmin loke—in the next world; vaiçase—Vaiçasa or Viçasana; narake—into
the hell; patitän—fallen; niraya-patayaù—assistants of Yamaräja;
yätayitvä—causing sufficient pain; viçasanti—kill.
TRANSLATION
A person who in this life is proud of his eminent position, and who
heedlessly sacrifices animals simply for material prestige, is put into the hell
called Viçasana after death. There the assistants of Yamaräja kill him after
giving him unlimited pain.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (6.41) Kåñëa says, çucénäà çrématäà gehe yoga-bhrañöo
'bhijäyate: "Because of his previous connection with bhakti-yoga, a man is born
into a prestigious family of brähmaëas or aristocrats." Having taken such a
birth, one should utilize it to perfect bhakti-yoga. However, due to bad
association one often forgets that his prestigious position has been given to
him by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and he misuses it by performing
various kinds of so-called yajïas like kälé-püjä or durgä-püjä, in which poor
animals are sacrificed. How such a person is punished is described herein. The
word dambha-yajïeñu in this verse is significant. If one violates the Vedic
instructions while performing yajïa and simply makes a show of sacrifice for
the purpose of killing animals, he is punishable after death. In Calcutta there
are many slaughterhouses where animal flesh is sold that has supposedly been
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1067
offered in sacrifice before the goddess Kälé. The çästras enjoin that one can
sacrifice a small goat before the goddess Kälé once a month. Nowhere is it said
that one can maintain a slaughterhouse in the name of temple worship and
daily kill animals unnecessarily. Those who do so receive the punishments
described herein.
TEXT 26
YaiSTvh vE Sav<aa| >aaYaa| iÜJaae reTa" PaaYaYaiTa k-aMaMaaeihTaSTa& PaaPak*-TaMaMau}a
reTa"ku-LYaaYaa& PaaTaiYaTva reTa" SaMPaaYaYaiNTa )) 26 ))
yas tv iha vai savarëäà bhäryäà dvijo retaù päyayati käma-mohitas taà
päpa-kåtam amutra retaù-kulyäyäà pätayitvä retaù sampäyayanti.
SYNONYMS
yaù—any person who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed; savarëäm—of
the same caste; bhäryäm—his wife; dvijaù—a person of a higher caste (such as
a brähmaëa, kñatriya or vaiçya); retaù—the semen; päyayati—causes to drink;
käma-mohitaù—being deluded by lusty desires; tam—him;
päpa-kåtam—performing sin; amutra—in the next life; retaù-kulyäyäm—in a
river of semen; pätayitvä—throwing; retaù—semen; sampäyayanti—force to
drink.
TRANSLATION
If a foolish member of the twice-born classes [brähmaëa, kñatriya and vaiçya]
forces his wife to drink his semen out of a lusty desire to keep her under
control, he is put after death into the hell known as Läläbhakña. There he is
thrown into a flowing river of semen, which he is forced to drink.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1068
PURPORT
The practice of forcing one's wife to drink one's own semen is a black art
practiced by extremely lusty persons. Those who practice this very abominable
activity say that if a wife is forced to drink her husband's semen, she remains
very faithful to him. Generally only low-class men engage in this black art, but
if a man born in a higher class does so, after death he is put into the hell
known as Läläbhakña. There he is immersed in the river known as Çukra-nadé
and forced to drink semen.
TEXT 27
Yae iTvh vE dSYavae_iGanda Garda Ga]aMaaNa( SaaQaaRNa( va ivlu/MPaiNTa
raJaaNaae raJa>a$=a va Taa&êaiPa ih PareTYa YaMadUTaa vJa]d&í\a" ìaNa"
SaáXaTaaiNa iv&XaiTaê Sar>aSa& %adiNTa )) 27 ))
ye tv iha vai dasyavo 'gnidä garadä grämän särthän vä vilumpanti räjäno
räja-bhaöä vä täàç cäpi hi paretya yamadütä vajra-daàñöräù çvänaù
sapta-çatäni viàçatiç ca sarabhasaà khädanti.
SYNONYMS
ye—persons who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed; dasyavaù—thieves
and plunderers; agni-däù—who set fire; garadäù—who administer poison;
grämän—villages; särthän—the mercantile class of men; vä—or;
vilumpanti—plunder; räjänaù—kings; räja-bhaöäù—government officials;
vä—or; tän—them; ca—also; api—indeed; hi—certainly; paretya—having
died; yamadütäù—the assistants of Yamaräja; vajra-daàñöräù—having mighty
teeth; çvänaù—dogs; sapta-çatäni—seven hundred; viàçatiù—twenty;
ca—and; sarabhasam—voraciously; khädanti—devour.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1069
TRANSLATION
In this world, some persons are professional plunderers who set fire to
others' houses or administer poison to them. Also, members of the royalty or
government officials sometimes plunder mercantile men by forcing them to pay
income tax and by other methods. After death such demons are put into the hell
known as Särameyädana. On that planet there are 720 dogs with teeth as strong
as thunderbolts. Under the orders of the agents of Yamaräja, these dogs
voraciously devour such sinful people.
PURPORT
In the Twelfth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, it is said that in this age of
Kali everyone will be extremely disturbed by three kinds of tribulations:
scarcity of rain, famine, and heavy taxation by the government. Because
human beings are becoming more and more sinful. there will be a scarcity of
rain, and naturally no food grains will be produced. On the plea of relieving
the suffering caused by the ensuing famine, the government will impose heavy
taxes, especially on the wealthy mercantile community. In this verse, the
members of such a government are described as dasyu, thieves. Their main
activity will be to plunder the wealth of the people. Whether a highway robber
or a government thief, such a man will be punished in his next life by being
thrown into the hell known as Särameyädana, where he will suffer greatly
from the bites of ferocious dogs.
TEXT 28
YaiSTvh va ANa*Ta& vdiTa Saa+Yae d]VYaiviNaMaYae daNae va k-QaiÄTSa vE
Pa[eTYa Narke-_vqicMaTYaDa"iXara iNarvk-aXae YaaeJaNaXaTaaeC^\aYaad( iGairMaUDNaR"
SaMPaaTYaTae Ya}a Jal/iMav SQal/MaXMaPa*ïMav>aaSaTae TadvqicMaital/Xaae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1070
ivXaqYaRMaa<aXarqrae Na iMa]YaMaa<a" PauNararaeiPaTaae iNaPaTaiTa )) 28 ))
yas tv iha vä anåtaà vadati säkñye dravya-vinimaye däne vä kathaïcit sa vai
pretya narake 'vécimaty adhaù-çirä niravakäçe yojana-çatocchräyäd
giri-mürdhnaù sampätyate yatra jalam iva sthalam açma-påñöham avabhäsate
tad avécimat tilaço viçéryamäëa-çaréro na mriyamäëaù punar äropito nipatati.
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vä—or; anåtam—a lie;
vadati—speaks; säkñye—giving witness; dravya-vinimaye—in exchange for
goods; däne—in giving charity; vä—or; kathaïcit—somehow; saù—that
person; vai—indeed; pretya—after dying; narake—in the hell;
avécimati—named Avécimat (having no water); adhaù-çiräù—with his head
downward; niravakäçe—without support; yojana-çata—of eight hundred miles;
ucchräyät—having a height; giri—of a mountain; mürdhnaù—from the top;
sampätyate—is thrown; yatra—where; jalam iva—like water; sthalam—land;
açma-påñöham—having a surface of stone; avabhäsate—appears; tat—that;
avécimat—having no water or waves; tilaçaù—in pieces as small as seeds;
viçéryamäëa—being broken; çaréraù—the body; na mriyamäëaù—not dying;
punaù—again; äropitaù—raised to the top; nipatati—falls down.
TRANSLATION
A person who in this life bears false witness or lies while transacting
business or giving charity is severely punished after death by the agents of
Yamaräja. Such a sinful man is taken to the top of a mountain eight hundred
miles high and thrown headfirst into the hell known as Avécimat. This hell has
no shelter and is made of strong stone resembling the waves of water. There is
no water there, however, and thus it is called Avécimat [waterless]. Although
the sinful man is repeatedly thrown from the mountain and his body broken to
tiny pieces, he still does not die but continuously suffers chastisement.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1071
TEXT 29
YaiSTvh vE ivPa[ae raJaNYaae vEXYaae va SaaeMaPaqQaSTaTk-l/}a& va Saura&
v]TaSQaae_iPa va iPabiTa Pa[MaadTaSTaeza& iNarYa& NaqTaaNaaMauriSa Pada§-MYaaSYae
viöNaa d]vMaa<a& k-aZ<aaRYaSa& iNaizÄiNTa )) 29 ))
yas tv iha vai vipro räjanyo vaiçyo vä soma-péthas tat-kalatraà vä suräà
vrata-stho 'pi vä pibati pramädatas teñäà nirayaà nétänäm urasi
padäkramyäsye vahninä dravamäëaà kärñëäyasaà niñiïcanti.
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed; vipraù—a learned
brähmaëa; räjanyaù—a kñatriya; vaiçyaù—a vaiçya; vä—or;
soma-péthaù—drink soma-rasa; tat—his; kalatram—wife; vä—or;
suräm—liquor; vrata-sthaù—being situated in a vow; api—certainly; vä—or;
pibati—drinks; pramädataù—out of illusion; teñäm—of all of them;
nirayam—to hell; nétänäm—being brought; urasi—on the chest; padä—with
the foot; äkramya—stepping; asye—in the mouth; vahninä—by fire;
dravamäëam—melted; kärñëäyasam—iron; niñiïcanti—they pour into.
TRANSLATION
Any brähmaëa or brähmaëa's wife who drinks liquor is taken by the agents
of Yamaräja to the hell known as Ayaùpäna. This hell also awaits any kñatriya,
vaiçya, or person under a vow who in illusion drinks soma-rasa. In Ayaùpäna
the agents of Yamaräja stand on their chests and pour hot melted iron into their
mouths.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1072
One should not be a brähmaëa in name only and engage in all kinds of
sinful activities, especially drinking liquor. Brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas
must behave according to the principles of their order. If they fall down to the
level of çüdras, who are accustomed to drink liquor. they will be punished as
described herein.
TEXT 30
AQa c YaiSTvh va AaTMaSaM>aavNaeNa SvYaMaDaMaae JaNMaTaPaaeivÛacarv‚
<aaRé[MavTaae vrqYaSaae Na bhu MaNYaeTa Sa Ma*Tak- Wv Ma*Tva +aark-dRMae
iNarYae_vak(-iXara iNaPaaiTaTaae durNTaa YaaTaNaa ùénuTae )) 30 ))
atha ca yas tv iha vä ätma-sambhävanena svayam adhamo
janma-tapo-vidyäcära-varëäçramavato varéyaso na bahu manyeta sa måtaka
eva måtvä kñärakardame niraye 'väk-çirä nipätito durantä yätanä hy açnute.
SYNONYMS
atha—furthermore; ca—also; yaù—anyone who; tu—but; iha—in this life;
vä—or; ätma-sambhävanena—by false prestige; svayam—himself;
adhamaù—very degraded; janma—good birth; tapaù—austerities;
vidyä—knowledge; äcära—good behavior; varëa-äçrama-vataù—in terms of
strictly following the principles of varëäçrama; varéyasaù—of one who is more
honorable; na—not; bahu—much; manyeta—respects; saù—he; måtakaù—a
dead body; eva—only; måtvä—after dying; kñärakardame—named
Kñärakardama; niraye—in the hell; aväk-çirä—with his head downward;
nipätitaù—thrown; durantäù yätanäù—severe painful conditions; hi—indeed;
açnute—suffers.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1073
A lowborn and abominable person who in this life becomes falsely proud,
thinking "I am great," and who thus fails to show proper respect to one more
elevated than he by birth, austerity, education, behavior, caste or spiritual
order, is like a dead man even in this lifetime, and after death he is thrown
headfirst into the hell known as Kñärakardama. There he must great suffer
great tribulation at the hands of the agents of Yamaräja.
PURPORT
One should not become falsely proud. One must be respectful toward a
person more elevated than he by birth, education, behavior, caste or spiritual
order. If one does not show respect to such highly elevated persons but
indulges in false pride, he receives punishment in Kñärakardama.
TEXT 31
Yae iTvh vE Pauåza" PauåzMaeDaeNa YaJaNTae Yaaê iñYaae Na*PaXaUNa( %adiNTa Taa&ê
Tae PaXav wv iNahTaa YaMaSadNae YaaTaYaNTaae r+aaeGa<aa" SaaEiNak-a wv
SviDaiTaNaavdaYaaSa*k( iPabiNTa Na*TYaiNTa c GaaYaiNTa c ôZYaMaa<aa YaQaeh
Pauåzada" )) 31 ))
ye tv iha vai puruñäù puruña-medhena yajante yäç ca striyo nå-paçün khädanti
täàç ca te paçava iva nihatä yama-sadane yätayanto rakño-gaëäù saunikä iva
svadhitinävadäyäsåk pibanti nåtyanti ca gäyanti ca håñyamäëä yatheha
puruñädäù.
SYNONYMS
ye—persons who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed; puruñäù—men;
puruña-medhena—by sacrifice of a man; yajante—worship (the goddess Kälé or
Bhadra Kälé); yäù—those who; ca—and; striyaù—women; nå-paçün—the men
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1074
used as sacrifice; khädanti—eat; tän—them; ca—and; te—they; paçavaù
iva—like the animals; nihatäù—being slain; yama-sadane—in the abode of
Yamaräja; yätayantaù—punishing; rakñaù-gaëäù—being Räkñasas;
saunikäù—the killers; iva—like; svadhitinä—by a sword; avadäya—cutting to
pieces; asåk—the blood; pibanti—drink; nåtyanti—dance; ca—and;
gäyanti—sing; ca—also; håñyamäëäù—being delighted; yathä—just like;
iha—in this world; puruña-adäù—the man-eaters.
TRANSLATION
There are men and women in this world who sacrifice human beings to
Bhairava or Bhadra Kälé and then eat their victims' flesh. Those who perform
such sacrifices are taken after death to the abode of Yamaräja, where their
victims, having taken the form of Räkñasas, cut them to pieces with sharpened
swords. Just as in this world the man-eaters drank their victims' blood, dancing
and singing in jubilation, their victims now enjoy drinking the blood of the
sacrificers and celebrating in the same way.
TEXT 32
Yae iTvh va ANaaGaSaae_r<Yae Ga]aMae va vEé[M>akE-åPaSa*TaaNauPaivé[M>aYYa
iJaJaqivzUNa( XaUl/SaU}aaidzUPaPa[aeTaaNa( §-I@Nak-TaYaa YaaTaYaiNTa Tae_iPa c Pa[eTYa
YaMaYaaTaNaaSau XaUl/aidzu Pa[aeTaaTMaaNa" +auta*@(>Yaa& cai>ahTaa" k-ªv$=aidi>aêe‚
TaSTaTaiSTaGMaTau<@ErahNYaMaaNaa AaTMaXaMal&/ SMariNTa )) 32 ))
ye tv iha vä anägaso 'raëye gräme vä vaiçrambhakair upasåtän
upaviçrambhayya jijéviñün çüla-süträdiñüpaprotän kréòanakatayä yätayanti te
'pi ca pretya yama-yätanäsu çülädiñu protätmänaù kñut-tåòbhyäà cäbhihatäù
kaìka-vaöädibhiç cetas tatas tigma-tuëòair ähanyamänä ätma-çamalaà
smaranti.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1075
SYNONYMS
ye—persons who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vä—or; anägasaù—who are
faultless; araëye—in the forest; gräme—in the village; vä—or;
vaiçrambhakaiù—by means of good faith; upasåtän—brought near;
upaviçrambhayya—inspiring with confidence; jijéviñün—who want to be
protected; çüla-sütra-ädiñu—on a lance, thread, and so on; upaprotän—fixed;
kréòanakatayä—like a plaything; yätayanti—cause pain; te—those persons;
api—certainly; ca—and; pretya—after dying; yama-yätanäsu—the
persecutions of Yamaräja; çüla-ädiñu—on lances and so on;
prota-ätmänaù—whose bodies are fixed; kñut-tåòbhyäm—by hunger and thirst;
ca—also; abhihatäù—overwhelmed; kaìka-vaöa-ädibhiù—by birds such as
herons and vultures; ca—and; itaù tataù—here and there;
tigma-tuëòaiù—having pointed beaks; ähanyamänäù—being tortured;
ätma-çamalam—own sinful activities; smaranti—they remember.
TRANSLATION
In this life some people give shelter to animals and birds that come to them
for protection in the village or forest, and after making them believe that they
will be protected, such people pierce them with lances or threads and play with
them like toys, giving them great pain. After death such people are brought by
the assistants of Yamaräja to the hell known as Çülaprota, where their bodies
are pierced with sharp, needlelike lances. They suffer from hunger and thirst,
and sharp-beaked birds such as vultures and herons come at them from all sides
to tear at their bodies. Tortured and suffering, they can then remember the
sinful activities they committed in the past.
TEXT 33
Yae iTvh vE >aUTaaNYauÜeJaYaiNTa Nara oLb<aSv>aava YaQaa dNdXaUk-aSTae_iPa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1076
Pa[eTYa Narke- dNdXaUk-a:Yae iNaPaTaiNTa Ya}a Na*Pa dNdXaUk-a" PaÄMau%a" SaáMau%a
oPaSa*TYa Ga]SaiNTa YaQaa ible/XaYaaNa( )) 33 ))
ye tv iha vai bhütäny udvejayanti narä ulbaëa-svabhävä yathä dandaçükäs te 'pi
pretya narake dandaçükäkhye nipatanti yatra nåpa dandaçükäù païca-mukhäù
sapta-mukhä upasåtya grasanti yathä bileçayän.
SYNONYMS
ye—persons who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed; bhütäni—to living
entities; udvejayanti—cause unnecessary pain; naräù—men;
ulbaëa-svabhäväù—angry by nature; yathä—just like; dandaçükäù—snakes;
te—they; api—also; pretya—after dying; narake—in the hell;
dandaçüka-äkhye—named Dandaçüka; nipatanti—fall down; yatra—where;
nåpa—O King; dandaçükäù—serpents; païca-mukhäù—having five hoods;
sapta-mukhäù—having seven hoods; upasåtya—reaching up; grasanti—eat;
yathä—just like; bileçayän—mice.
TRANSLATION
Those who in this life are like envious serpents, always angry and giving
pain to other living entities, fall after death into the hell known as Dandaçüka.
My dear King, in this hell there are serpents with five or seven hoods. These
serpents eat such sinful persons just as snakes eat mice.
TEXT 34
Yae iTvh va ANDaav$=ku-SaUl/Gauhaidzu >aUTaaiNa iNaåNDaiNTa TaQaaMau}a
TaeZvevaePaveXYa SaGare<a viöNaa DaUMaeNa iNaåNDaiNTa )) 34 ))
ye tv iha vä andhävaöa-kusüla-guhädiñu bhütäni nirundhanti tathämutra teñv
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1077
evopaveçya sagareëa vahninä dhümena nirundhanti.
SYNONYMS
ye—persons who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vä—or; andha-avaöa—a blind well;
kusüla—granaries; guha-ädiñu—and in caves; bhütäni—the living entities;
nirundhanti—confine; tathä—similarly; amutra—in the next life; teñu—in
those same places; eva—certainly; upaveçya—causing to enter; sagareëa—with
poisonous fumes; vahninä—with fire; dhümena—with smoke;
nirundhanti—confine.
TRANSLATION
Those who in this life confine other living entities in dark wells, granaries or
mountain caves are put after death into the hell known as Avaöa-nirodhana.
There they themselves are pushed into dark wells, where poisonous fumes and
smoke suffocate them and they suffer very severely.
TEXT 35
YaiSTvh va AiTaQaqNa>YaaGaTaaNa( va Ga*hPaiTarSak*-duPaGaTaMaNYauidRDa+auirv PaaPaeNa
c+auza iNarq+aTae TaSYa caiPa iNarYae PaaPad*íeri+a<aq vJa]Tau<@a Ga*Da]a" k-ªk-ak-‚
v$=adYa" Pa[Saùaeåbl/aduTPaa$=YaiNTa )) 35 ))
yas tv iha vä atithén abhyägatän vä gåha-patir asakåd upagata-manyur
didhakñur iva päpena cakñuñä nirékñate tasya cäpi niraye päpa-dåñöer akñiëé
vajra-tuëòä gådhräù kaìka-käka-vaöädayaù prasahyoru-baläd utpäöayanti.
SYNONYMS
yaù—a person who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vä—or; atithén—guests;
abhyägatän—visitors; vä—or; gåha-patiù—a householder; asakåt—many times;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1078
upagata—obtaining; manyuù—anger; didhakñuù—one desiring to burn;
iva—like; päpena—sinful; cakñuñä—with eyes; nirékñate—looks at; tasya—of
him; ca—and; api—certainly; niraye—in hell; päpa-dåñöeù—of he whose vision
has become sinful; akñiëé—the eyes; vajra-tuëòäù—those who have powerful
beaks; gådhräù—vultures; kaìka—herons; käka—crows; vaöa-ädayaù—and
other birds; prasahya—violently; uru-balät—with great force;
utpäöayanti—pluck out.
TRANSLATION
A householder who receives guests or visitors with cruel glances, as if to
burn them to ashes, is put into the hell called Paryävartana, where he is gazed
at by hard-eyed vultures, herons, crows and similar birds, which suddenly
swoop down and pluck out his eyes with great force.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic etiquette, even an enemy who comes to a
householder's home should be received in such a gentle way that he forgets
that he has come to the home of an enemy. A guest who comes to one's home
should be received very politely. If he is unwanted, the householder should not
stare at him with blinking eyes, for one who does so will be put into the hell
known as Paryävartana after death, and there many ferocious birds like
vultures, crows, and coknis will suddenly come upon him and pluck out his
eyes.
TEXT 36
YaiSTvh va Aa!yai>aMaiTarhx(k*-iTaiSTaYaRKPa[e+a<a" SavRTaae_i>aivXaªq
AQaRVYaYaNaaXaicNTaYaa PairXauZYaMaa<aôdYavdNaae iNav*RiTaMaNavGaTaae Ga]h
wvaQaRMai>ar+aiTa Sa caiPa Pa[eTYa TaduTPaadNaaeTk-zR<aSa&r+a<aXaMal/Ga]h" SaUcqMau%e
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1079
Narke- iNaPaTaiTa Ya}a h ivtaGa]h& PaaPaPauåz& DaMaRraJaPauåza vaYak-a wv
SavRTaae_(r)ezu SaU}aE" PairvYaiNTa )) 36 ))
yas tv iha vä äòhyäbhimatir ahaìkåtis tiryak-prekñaëaù sarvato 'bhiviçaìké
artha-vyaya-näça-cintayä pariçuñyamäëa-hådaya-vadano nirvåtim anavagato
graha ivärtham abhirakñati sa cäpi pretya
tad-utpädanotkarñaëa-saàrakñaëa-çamala-grahaù sücémukhe narake nipatati
yatra ha vitta-grahaà päpa-puruñaà dharmaräja-puruñä väyakä iva sarvato
'ìgeñu sütraiù parivayanti.
SYNONYMS
yaù—any person who; tu—but; iha—in this world; vä—or;
äòhya-abhimatiù—proud because of wealth; ahaìkåtiù—egotistic;
tiryak-prekñaëaù—whose vision is crooked; sarvataù abhiviçaìké—always
fearful of being cheated by others, even by superiors;
artha-vyaya-näça-cintayä—by the thought of expenditure and loss;
pariçuñyamäëa—dried up; hådaya-vadanaù—his heart and face;
nirvåtim—happiness; anavagataù—not obtaining; grahaù—a ghost; iva—like;
artham—wealth; abhirakñati—protects; saù—he; ca—also; api—indeed;
pretya—after dying; tat—of those riches; utpädana—of the earning;
utkarñaëa—increasing; saàrakñaëa—protecting; çamala-grahaù—accepting
the sinful activities; sücémukhe—named Sücémukha; narake—in the hell;
nipatati—falls down; yatra—where; ha—indeed; vitta-graham—as a
money-grabbing ghost; päpa-puruñam—very sinful man;
dharmaräja-puruñäù—the commanding men of Yamaräja; väyakäù iva—like
expert weavers; sarvataù—all over; aìgeñu—on the limbs of the body;
sütraiù—by threads; parivayanti—stitch.
TRANSLATION
One who in this world or this life is very proud of his wealth always thinks,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1080
"I am so rich. Who can equal me?" His vision is twisted, and he is always afraid
that someone will take his wealth. Indeed, he even suspects his superiors. His
face and heart dry up at the thought of losing his wealth, and therefore he
always looks like a wretched fiend. He is not in any way able to obtain actual
happiness, and he does not know what it is to be free from anxiety. Because of
the sinful things he does to earn money, augment his wealth and protect it, he is
put into the hell called Sücémukha, where the officials of Yamaräja punish him
by stitching thread through his entire body like weavers manufacturing cloth.
PURPORT
When one possesses more wealth than necessary, he certainly becomes very
proud. This is the situation of men in modern civilization. According to the
Vedic culture, brähmaëas do not possess anything, whereas kñatriyas possess
riches, but only for performing sacrifices and other noble activities as
prescribed in the Vedic injunctions. A vaiçya also earns money honestly
through agriculture, cow protection and some trade. If a çüdra gets money,
however, he will spend it lavishly, without discrimination, or simply
accumulate it for no purpose. Because in this age there are no qualified
brähmaëas, kñatriyas or vaiçyas, almost everyone is a çüdra (kalau
çüdra-sambhavaù). Therefore the çüdra mentality is causing great harm to
modern civilization. A çüdra does not know how to use money to render
transcendental loving service to the Lord. Money is also called lakñmé, and
Lakñmé is always engaged in the service of Näräyaëa. Wherever there is
money, it must be engaged in the service of Lord Näräyaëa. Everyone should
use his money to spread the great transcendental movement of Kåñëa
consciousness. If one does not spend money for this purpose but accumulates
more than necessary, he will certainly become proud of the money he illegally
possesses. The money actually belongs to Kåñëa, who says in Bhagavad-gétä
(5.29), bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà sarva-loka-maheçvaram: "I am the true
enjoyer of sacrifices and penances, and I am the owner of all the planets."
Therefore nothing belongs to anyone but Kåñëa. One who possesses more
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1081
money than he needs should spend it for Kåñëa. Unless one does so, he will
become puffed up because of his false possessions, and therefore he will be
punished in the next life, as described herein.
TEXT 37
Wv&ivDaa Nark-a YaMaal/Yae SaiNTa XaTaXa" SahóXaSTaezu SaveRzu c SavR
WvaDaMaRviTaRNaae Yae ke-icidhaeidTaa ANauidTaaêaviNaPaTae PaYaaRYae<a ivXaiNTa
TaQaEv DaMaaRNauviTaRNa wTar}a wh Tau PauNa>aRve Ta o>aYaXaeza>Yaa& iNaivXaiNTa )) 37
))
evaà-vidhä narakä yamälaye santi çataçaù sahasraças teñu sarveñu ca sarva
evädharma-vartino ye kecid ihoditä anuditäç cävani-pate paryäyeëa viçanti
tathaiva dharmänuvartina itaratra iha tu punar-bhave ta ubhaya-çeñäbhyäà
niviçanti.
SYNONYMS
evam-vidhäù—of this sort; narakäù—the many hells; yama-älaye—in the
province of Yamaräja; santi—are; çataçaù—hundreds; sahasraçaù—thousands;
teñu—in those hellish planets; sarveñu—all; ca—also; sarve—all; eva—indeed;
adharma-vartinaù—persons not following the Vedic principles or regulative
principles; ye kecit—whosoever; iha—here; uditäù—mentioned; anuditäù—not
mentioned; ca—and; avani-pate—O King; paryäyeëa—according to the degree
of different kinds of sinful activity; viçanti—they enter; tathä eva—similarly;
dharma-anuvartinaù—those who are pious and act according to the regulative
principles or Vedic injunctions; itaratra—elsewhere; iha—on this planet;
tu—but; punaù-bhave—into another birth; te—all of them;
ubhaya-çeñäbhyäm—by the remainder of the results of piety or vice;
niviçanti—they enter.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1082
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, in the province of Yamaräja there are hundreds and
thousands of hellish planets. The impious people I have mentioned—and also
those I have not mentioned—must all enter these various planets according to
the degree of their impiety. Those who are pious, however, enter other
planetary systems, namely the planets of the demigods. Nevertheless, both the
pious and impious are again brought to earth after the results of their pious or
impious acts are exhausted.
PURPORT
This corresponds to the beginning of Lord Kåñëa's instructions in
Bhagavad-gétä. Tathä dehäntara-präptiù: [Bg. 2.13] within this material world,
one is simply meant to change from one body to another in different planetary
systems. Ürdhvaà gacchanti sattva-sthä: [Bg. 14.18] those in the mode of
goodness are elevated to the heavenly planets. Adho gacchanti tämasäù:
similarly, those too engrossed in ignorance enter the hellish planetary systems.
Both of them, however, are subjected to the repetition of birth and death. In
Bhagavad-gétä it is stated that even one who is very pious returns to earth after
his enjoyment in the higher planetary systems is over (kñéëe puëye
martya-lokaà viçanti [Bg. 9.21]). Therefore, going from one planet to another
does not solve the problems of life. The problems of life will only be solved
when we no longer have to accept a material body. This can be possible if one
simply becomes Kåñëa conscious. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1083
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." This is the perfection of life and the real
solution to life's problems. We should not be eager to go to the higher,
heavenly planetary systems, nor should we act in such a way that we have to go
to the hellish planets. The complete purpose of this material world will be
fulfilled when we resume our spiritual identities and go back home, back to
Godhead. The very simple method for doing this is prescribed by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
[Bg. 18.66]. One should be neither pious nor impious. One should be a devotee
and surrender to the lotus feet of Kåñëa. This surrendering process is also very
easy. Even a child can perform it. Man-manä bhava mad-bhakto mad-yäjé mäà
namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. One must always simply think of Kåñëa by chanting
Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma. Hare Räma,
Räma Räma, Hare Hare. One should become Kåñëa's devotee. worship Him
and offer obeisances to Him. Thus one should engage all the activities of his
life in the service of Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 38
iNav*ital/+a<aMaaGaR Aadavev VYaa:YaaTa" ) WTaavaNaeva<@k-aeXaae YaêTaudRXaDaa
Paura<aezu ivk-iLPaTa oPaGaqYaTae YataÙGavTaae NaaraYa<aSYa Saa+aaNMahaPauåzSYa
SQaivï& æPaMaaTMaMaaYaaGau<aMaYaMaNauvi<aRTaMaad*Ta" Pa#=iTa é*<aaeiTa é[avYaiTa Sa
oPaGaeYa& >aGavTa" ParMaaTMaNaae_Ga[aùMaiPa é[Öa>ai¢-ivXauÖbuiÖveRd )) 38 ))
nivåtti-lakñaëa-märga ädäv eva vyäkhyätaù; etävän eväëòa-koço yaç
caturdaçadhä puräëeñu vikalpita upagéyate yat tad bhagavato näräyaëasya
säkñän mahä-puruñasya sthaviñöhaà rüpam ätmamäyä-guëamayam
anuvarëitam ädåtaù paöhati çåëoti çrävayati sa upageyaà bhagavataù
paramätmano 'grähyam api çraddhä-bhakti-viçuddha-buddhir veda.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1084
SYNONYMS
nivåtti-lakñaëa-märgaù—the path symptomized by renunciation, or the path of
liberation; ädau—in the beginning (the Second and Third Cantos);
eva—indeed; vyäkhyätaù—described; etävän—this much; eva—certainly;
aëòa-koçaù—the universe, which resembles a big egg; yaù—which;
caturdaça-dhä—in fourteen parts; puräëeñu—in the puräëas;
vikalpitaù—divided; upagéyate—is described; yat—which; tat—that;
bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; näräyaëasya—of Lord
Näräyaëa; säkñät—directly; mahä-puruñasya—of the Supreme Person;
sthaviñöham—the gross; rüpam—form; ätma-mäyä—of His own energy;
guëa—of the qualities; mayam—consisting; anuvarëitam—described;
ädåtaù—venerating; paöhati—one reads; çåëoti—or hears; çrävayati—or
explains; saù—that person; upageyam—song; bhagavataù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; paramätmanaù—of the Supersoul;
agrähyam—difficult to understand; api—although; çraddhä—by faith;
bhakti—and devotion; viçuddha—purified; buddhiù—whose intelligence;
veda—understands.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning [the Second and Third Cantos of Çrémad-Bhägavatam] I
have already described how one can progress on the path of liberation. In the
Puräëas the vast universal existence, which is like an egg divided into fourteen
parts, is described. This vast form is considered the external body of the Lord,
created by His energy and qualities. It is generally called the viräö-rüpa. If one
reads the description of this external form of the Lord with great faith, or if one
hears about it or explains it to others to propagate bhägavata-dharma, or Kåñëa
consciousness, his faith and devotion in spiritual consciousness, Kåñëa
consciousness, will gradually increase. Although developing this consciousness
is very difficult, by this process one can purify himself and gradually come to an
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1085
awareness of the Supreme Absolute Truth.
PURPORT
The Kåñëa consciousness movement is pushing forward the publication of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, as explained especially for the understanding of the
modern civilized man, to awaken him to his original consciousness. Without
this consciousness, one melts into complete darkness. Whether one goes to the
upper planetary systems or the hellish planetary systems, he simply wastes his
time. Therefore one should hear of the universal position of the viräö form of
the Lord as described in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. That will help one save himself
from material conditional life and gradually elevate him to the path of
liberation so that he can go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 39
é[uTva SQaUl&/ TaQaa SaU+Ma& æPa& >aGavTaae YaiTa" )
SQaUle/ iNaiJaRTaMaaTMaaNa& XaNaE" SaU+Ma& iDaYaa NaYaeidiTa )) 39 ))
çrutvä sthülaà tathä sükñmaà
rüpaà bhagavato yatiù
sthüle nirjitam ätmänaà
çanaiù sükñmaà dhiyä nayed iti
SYNONYMS
çrutvä—after hearing of (from the disciplic succession); sthülam—gross;
tathä—as well as; sükñmam—subtle; rüpam—form; bhagavataù—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; yatiù—a sannyäsé or devotee; sthüle—the
gross form; nirjitam—conquered; ätmänam—the mind; çanaiù—gradually;
sükñmam—the subtle. spiritual form of the Lord; dhiyä—by intelligence;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1086
nayet—one should lead it to; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
One who is interested in liberation, who accepts the path of liberation and is
not attracted to the path of conditional life, is called yati, or a devotee. Such a
person should first control his mind by thinking of the viräö-rüpa, the gigantic
universal form of the Lord, and then gradually think of the spiritual form of
Kåñëa [sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]] after hearing of both forms. Thus one's
mind is fixed in samädhi. By devotional service one can then realize the
spiritual form of the Lord, which is the destination of devotees. Thus his life
becomes successful.
PURPORT
It is said, mahat-seväà dväram ähur vimukteù: [SB 5.5.2] if one wants to
progress on the path of liberation, he should associate with mahätmäs, or
liberated devotees, because in such association there is a full chance for
hearing, describing and chanting about the name, form, qualities and
paraphernalia of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all of which are
described in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. On the path of bondage, one eternally
undergoes the repetition of birth and death. One who desires liberation from
such bondage should join the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
and thus take advantage of the opportunity to hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam from
devotees and also explain it to propagate Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 40
>aUÜqPavzRSairdid]Na>a"SaMaud]‚
PaaTaal/idx(Nark->aaGa<al/aek-Sa&SQaa )
GaqTaa MaYaa Tav Na*Paad(>auTaMaqìrSYa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1087
SQaUl&/ vPau" Sak-l/JaqviNak-aYaDaaMa )) 40 ))
bhü-dvépa-varña-sarid-adri-nabhaù-samudrapätäla-
diì-naraka-bhägaëa-loka-saàsthä
gétä mayä tava nåpädbhutam éçvarasya
sthülaà vapuù sakala-jéva-nikäya-dhäma
SYNONYMS
bhü—of this planet earth; dvépa—and other different planetary systems;
varña—of tracts of land; sarit—rivers; adri—mountains; nabhaù—the sky;
samudra—oceans; pätäla—lower planets; dik—directions; naraka—the hellish
planets; bhägaëa-loka—the luminaries and higher planets; saàsthä—the
situation; gétä—described; mayä—by me; tava—for you; nåpa—O King;
adbhutam—wonderful; éçvarasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sthülam—gross; vapuù—body; sakala-jéva-nikäya—of all the masses of living
entities; dhäma—which is the place of repose.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, I have now described for you this planet earth, other
planetary systems, and their lands [varñas], rivers and mountains. I have also
described the sky, the oceans, the lower planetary systems, the directions, the
hellish planetary systems and the stars. These constitute the viräö-rüpa, the
gigantic material form of the Lord, on which all living entities repose. Thus I
have explained the wonderful expanse of the external body of the Lord.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-sixth Chapter,
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "A Description of the Hellish Planets."
There is a supplementary note written by His Divine Grace
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Gosvämé Mahäräja Prabhupäda in his
Gauòéya-bhäñya. Its translation is as follows. Learned scholars who have full
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1088
knowledge of all the Vedic scriptures agree that the incarnations of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead are innumerable. These incarnations are
classified into two divisions, called präbhava and vaibhava. According to the
scriptures, präbhava incarnations are also classified in two divisions—those
which are called eternal and those which are not vividly described. In this
Fifth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, in Chapters Three through Six, there is a
description of Åñabhadeva, but there is not an expanded description of His
spiritual activities. Therefore He is considered to belong to the second group of
präbhava incarnations. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam, First Canto, Chapter Three,
verse 13. it is said:
añöame merudevyäà tu
näbher jäta urukramaù
darçayan vartma dhéräëäà
sarväçrama-namaskåtam
"Lord Viñëu appeared in the eighth incarnation as the son of Mahäräja Näbhi
[the son of Ägnédhra] and his wife Merudevé. He showed the path of
perfection, the paramahaàsa stage of life, which is worshiped by all the
followers of varëäçrama-dharma. "Åñabhadeva is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and His body is spiritual (sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]). Therefore
one might ask how it might be possible that he passed stool and urine. The
Gauòéya vedänta äcärya Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa has replied to this question in
his book known as Siddhänta-ratna (First Portion, texts 65-68). Imperfect men
call attention to Åñabhadeva's passing stool and urine as a subject matter for
the study of nondevotees, who do not understand the spiritual position of a
transcendental body. In this Fifth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (5.6.11) the
illusioned and bewildered state of the materialists of this age is fully described.
Elsewhere in Fifth Canto (5.5.19) Åñabhadeva stated, idaà çaréram mama
durvibhävyam: "This body of Mine is inconceivable for materialists." This is
also confirmed by Lord Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä (9.11):
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1089
avajänanti mäà müòhä
mänuñéà tanum äçritam
paraà bhävam ajänanto
mama bhüta-maheçvaram
"Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My
transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be." The human
form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is extremely difficult to
understand, and, in fact, for a common man it is inconceivable. Therefore
Åñabhadeva has directly explained that His own body belongs to the spiritual
platform. This being so. Åñabhadeva did not actually pass stool and urine. Even
though He superficially seemed to pass stool and urine, that was also
transcendental and cannot be imitated by any common man. It is also stated in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam that the stool and urine of Åñabhadeva were full of
transcendental fragrance. One may imitate Åñabhadeva, but he cannot imitate
Him by passing stool that is fragrant.
The activities of Åñabhadeva, therefore, do not support the claims of a
certain class of men known as arhat, who sometimes advertise that they are
followers of Åñabhadeva. How can they be followers of Åñabhadeva while they
act against the Vedic principles? Çukadeva Gosvämé has related that after
hearing about the characteristics of Lord Åñabhadeva, the King of Koìka,
Veìka and Kuöaka initiated a system of religious principles known as arhat.
These principles were not in accord with Vedic principles, and therefore they
are called päñaëòa-dharma. The members of the arhat community considered
Åñabhadeva's activities material. However, Åñabhadeva is an incarnation of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore He is on the transcendental
platform, and no one can compare to Him.
Åñabhadeva personally exhibited the activities of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (5.6.8), dävänalas tad vanam
älelihänaù saha tena dadäha: at the conclusion of Åñabhadeva's pastimes, an
entire forest and the Lord's body were burned to ashes in a great forest fire. In
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1090
the same way, Åñabhadeva burned people's ignorance to ashes. He exhibited
the characteristics of a paramahaàsa in His instructions to His sons. The
principles of the arhat community, however, do not correspond to the
teachings of Åñabhadeva.
Çréla Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa remarks that in the Eighth Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam there is another description of Åñabhadeva, but that
Åñabhadeva is different from the one described in this canto.
END OF THE FIFTH CANTO
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Srimad Bhagavatam
Fifth Canto
“The Creative Impetus”
e-book
This e-book and others are available for download at:
www.e-vedas.com
Hard bound books may be purchased at:
www.thekrishnastore.com
Email comments or questions to:
comments@evedas.com
This e-book was completed on November 6, 2005
e-books copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved
www.krishna.com
Distributed by e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers