"Srimad Bhagavatam Third Canto Part I" by His Divine Grace
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed
version of this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation
copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only, under the
"fair use" guidelines established by international copyright laws.
You may use this electronic file to evaluate the printed version of
this book, for your own private use, or for short excerpts used in
academic works, research, student papers, presentations, and the
like. You can distribute this evaluation copy to others over the
Internet, so long as you keep this copyright information intact and
do not add or subtract anything to this file and its contents. You
may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) of this book in any
medium without the express written permission from the copyright
holders.
Reference any excerpts in the following way: "Excerpted from
"Srimad Bhagavatam Third Canto Part II " by A.C. Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
International, www.Krishna.com."
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2004
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue,
Los Angeles, California 90034, USA. All rights reserved. For any
questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluate dozens of
other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,
www.Krishna.com.

About the Author
His Divine Grace AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most
distinguished teacher of Vedic religion and thought, is the author of
Bhagavad-gita As It Is, Srimad-Bhagavatam, The Sri Isopanisad and many
other English versions of Vedic literature. He is the Founder-Arcarya of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness, which has hundreds of
centers throughout the world.
For more information about His Divine Grace visit:
http://www.krishna.com/newsite/main.php?id=7
1
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Third Canto
The Status Quo
1. Questions by Vidura
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
WvMaeTaTPaura Pa*íae MaE}aeYaae >aGavaNa( ik-l/ )
+aT}aa vNa& Pa[ivíeNa TYa¤-a SvGa*hMa*iÖMaTa( )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evam etat purä påñöo
maitreyo bhagavän kila
kñatträ vanaà praviñöena
tyaktvä sva-gåham åddhimat
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; etat—this; purä—formerly;
påñöaù—being asked; maitreyaù—the great sage Maitreya; bhagavän—His Grace; kila—
certainly; kñatträ—by Vidura; vanam—forest; praviñöena—entering; tyaktvä—
renouncing; sva-gåham—own house; åddhimat—prosperous.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After renouncing his prosperous home and entering the forest,
King Vidura, the great devotee, asked this question of His Grace Maitreya Åñi.
TEXT 2
2
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
YaÜa AYa& MaN}ak*-Üae >aGavaNai%le/ìr" )
PaaErveNd]Ga*h& ihTva Pa[ivveXaaTMaSaaTk*-TaMa( )) 2 ))
yad vä ayaà mantra-kåd vo
bhagavän akhileçvaraù
pauravendra-gåhaà hitvä
praviveçätmasät kåtam
SYNONYMS
yat—the house; vai—what else is there to say; ayam—Çré Kåñëa; mantra-kåt—minister;
vaù—of you people; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; akhila-éçvaraù—the Lord of
everything; pauravendra—Duryodhana; gåham—house; hitvä—giving up; praviveça—
entered; ätmasät—identify with oneself; kåtam—so accepted.
TRANSLATION
What else is there to say about the residential house of the Päëòavas? Çré Kåñëa, the Lord
of everything, acted as your minister. He used to enter that house as if it were His own,
and He did not take any care of Duryodhana's house.
PURPORT
According to the Gauòéya acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva philosophy, anything which
satisfies the senses of the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, is also Çré Kåñëa. For example, Çré
Våndävana-dhäma is nondifferent from Çré Kåñëa (tad-dhäma våndävanam) because at
Våndävana the Lord enjoys the transcendental bliss of His internal potency. Similarly,
the house of the Päëòavas was also the source of transcendental bliss for the Lord. It is
mentioned here that the Lord identified the house with His own Self. Thus the house of
the Päëòavas was as good as Våndävana, and Vidura should not have given up that place
of transcendental bliss. Therefore the reason for his quitting the house was not exactly
family misunderstanding; rather, Vidura took the opportunity to meet Åñi Maitreya and
discuss transcendental knowledge. For a saintly person like Vidura, any disturbance due
to worldly affairs is insignificant. Such disturbances, however, are sometimes favorable
for higher realization, and therefore Vidura took advantage of a family
misunderstanding in order to meet Maitreya Åñi.
3
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 3
raJaaevac
ku-}a +atau>aRGavTaa MaE}aeYae<aaSa Sa(r)Ma" )
k-da va Sah Sa&vad WTaÜ<aRYa Na" Pa[>aae )) 3 ))
räjoväca
kutra kñattur bhagavatä
maitreyeëäsa saìgamaù
kadä vä saha-saàväda
etad varëaya naù prabho
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—the King said; kutra—wherein; kñattuù—with Vidura; bhagavatä—and with
His Grace; maitreyeëa—with Maitreya; äsa—there was; saìgamaù—meeting; kadä—
when; vä—also; saha—with; saàvädaù—discussion; etat—this; varëaya—describe;
naù—unto me; prabho—O my lord.
TRANSLATION
The King asked Çukadeva Gosvämé: Where and when did the meeting and discussion
take place between Saint Vidura and His Grace Maitreya Muni? Kindly oblige, my lord,
and describe this to us.
PURPORT
Exactly as Çaunaka Åñi inquired of Süta Gosvämé and Süta Gosvämé replied, so Çréla
Çukadeva Gosvämé replied to King Parékñit's inquiries. The King was very anxious to
understand the meaningful discussion that took place between the two great souls.
TEXT 4
Na ùLPaaQaaeRdYaSTaSYa ivdurSYaaMal/aTMaNa" )
TaiSMaNa( vrqYaiSa Pa[én" SaaDauvadaePab*&ihTa" )) 4 ))
4
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
na hy alpärthodayas tasya
vidurasyämalätmanaù
tasmin varéyasi praçnaù
sädhu-vädopabåàhitaù
SYNONYMS
na—never; hi—certainly; alpa-artha—small (unimportant) purpose; udayaù—raised;
tasya—his; vidurasya—of Vidura; amala-ätmanaù—of the saintly man; tasmin—in that;
varéyasi—highly purposeful; praçnaù—question; sädhu-väda—things approved by saints
and sages; upabåàhitaù—full with.
TRANSLATION
Saint Vidura was a great and pure devotee of the Lord, and therefore his questions to His
Grace Åñi Maitreya must have been very purposeful, on the highest level, and approved
by learned circles.
PURPORT
Questions and answers among different classes of men have different value. Inquiries by
mercantile men in a business exchange cannot be expected to be highly purposeful in
spiritual values. Questions and answers by different classes of men can be guessed by the
caliber of the persons concerned. In Bhagavad-gétä, the discussion was between Lord Çré
Kåñëa and Arjuna, the Supreme Person and the supreme devotee respectively. The Lord
admitted Arjuna to be His devotee and friend (Bg. 4.3), and therefore any sane man can
guess that the discussion was on the topic of the bhakti-yoga system. Actually the whole
Bhagavad-gétä is based on the principle of bhakti-yoga. There is a difference between
karma and karma-yoga. Karma is regulated action for the enjoyment of the fruit by the
performer, but karma-yoga is action performed by the devotee for the satisfaction of the
Lord. Karma-yoga is based on bhakti, or pleasing the Lord, whereas karma is based on
pleasing the senses of the performer himself. According to Çrémad-Bhägavatam, one is
advised to approach a bona fide spiritual master when one is actually inclined to
question from an elevated level of spiritual understanding. A common man who has no
interest in spiritual values has no need to approach a spiritual master just as a matter of
following fashion.
As a student, Mahäräja Parékñit was serious about learning the science of God, and
5
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Çukadeva Gosvämé was a bona fide spiritual master in the transcendental science. Both
of them knew that the topics discussed by Vidura and Åñi Maitreya were elevated, and
thus Mahäräja Parékñit was very interested in learning from the bona fide spiritual
master.
TEXT 5
SaUTa ovac
Sa WvMa*izvYaaeR_Ya& Pa*íae raja Parqi+aTaa )
Pa[TYaah Ta& SaubhuivTPa[qTaaTMaa é[UYaTaaiMaiTa )) 5 ))
süta uväca
sa evam åñi-varyo 'yaà
påñöo räjïä parékñitä
praty äha taà subahu-vit
prétätmä çrüyatäm iti
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; saù—he; evam—thus; åñi-varyaù—the great åñi;
ayam—Çukadeva Gosvämé; påñöaù—being questioned; räjïä—by the King; parékñitä—
Mahäräja Parékñit; pratiäha—he replied; tam—unto the King; su-bahu-vit—highly
experienced; préta-ätmä—fully satisfied; çrüyatäm—please hear me; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Çré Suta Gosvämé said: The great sage Çukadeva Gosvämé was highly experienced and was
pleased with the King. Thus being questioned by the King, he said to him, "Please hear
the topics attentively."
TEXT 6
é[qéuk- ovac
Yada Tau raJaa SvSauTaaNaSaaDaUNa(
PauZ<aàDaMaeR<a ivNaíd*ií" )
6
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
>a]aTauYaRivïSYa SauTaaNa( ivbNDaUNa(
Pa[veXYa l/a+aa>avNae ddah )) 6 ))
çré-çuka uväca
yadä tu räjä sva-sutän asädhün
puñëan na dharmeëa vinañöa-dåñöiù
bhrätur yaviñöhasya sutän vibandhün
praveçya läkñä-bhavane dadäha
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; yadä—when; tu—but; räjä—King
Dhåtaräñöra; sva-sutän—his own sons; asädhün—dishonest; puñëan—nourishing; na—
never; dharmeëa—on the right path; vinañöa-dåñöiù—one who has lost his insight;
bhrätuù—of his brother; yaviñöhasya—younger; sutän—sons; vibandhün—having no
guardian (father); praveçya—made to enter; läkñä—lacquer; bhavane—in the house;
dadäha—set on fire.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: King Dhåtaräñöra became blind under the influence of
impious desires to nourish his dishonest sons, and thus he set fire to the lacquer house to
burn his fatherless nephews, the Päëòavas.
PURPORT
Dhåtaräñöra was blind from birth, but his blindness in committing impious activities to
support his dishonest sons was a greater blindness than his physical lack of eyesight. The
physical lack of sight does not bar one from spiritual progress. But when one is blind
spiritually, even though physically fit, that blindness is dangerously detrimental to the
progressive path of human life.
TEXT 7
Yada Sa>aaYaa& ku-ådevdeVYaa"
ke-Xaai>aMaXa| SauTak-MaR GaùRMa( )
7
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Na varYaaMaaSa Na*Pa" òuzaYaa"
SvaóEhRrNTYaa" ku-cku-x(ku-MaaiNa )) 7 ))
yadä sabhäyäà kuru-deva-devyäù
keçäbhimarçaà suta-karma garhyam
na värayäm äsa nåpaù snuñäyäù
sväsrair harantyäù kuca-kuìkumäni
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; sabhäyäm—the assembly; kuru-deva-devyäù—of Draupadé, the wife of
godly Yudhiñöhira; keça-abhimarçam—insult by grabbing her hair; suta-karma—action
taken by his son; garhyam—which was abominable; na—did not; värayäm äsa—forbid;
nåpaù—the King; snuñäyäù—of his nephew's wife; sväsraiù—by her tears; harantyäù—of
she who was washing; kuca-kuìkumäni—red dust on her breast.
TRANSLATION
The King did not forbid his son Duùçäsana's abominable action of grabbing the hair of
Draupadé, the wife of the godly King Yudhiñöhira, even though her tears washed the red
dust on her breast.
TEXT 8
ÛUTae TvDaMaeR<a iJaTaSYa SaaDaae"
SaTYaavl/MbSYa vNa& GaTaSYa )
Na YaacTaae_daTSaMaYaeNa daYa&
TaMaaeJauza<aae YadJaaTaXa}aae" )) 8 ))
dyüte tv adharmeëa jitasya sädhoù
satyävalambasya vanaà gatasya
na yäcato 'dät samayena däyaà
tamo-juñäëo yad ajäta-çatroù
8
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
dyüte—by means of gambling; tu—but; adharmeëa—by unfair tricks; jitasya—of the
vanquished; sädhoù—a saintly person; satya-avalambasya—one who embraced truth as
shelter; vanam—forest; gatasya—of the goer; na—never; yäcataù—when asked for;
adät—delivered; samayena—in due course; däyam—right share; tamaù-juñäëaù—
overwhelmed by illusion; yat—as much as; ajäta-çatroù—of one who had no enemy.
TRANSLATION
Yudhiñöhira, who was born without any enemy, was unfairly defeated in gambling. But
because he had taken the vow of truthfulness, he went off to the forest. When he came
back in due course and begged the return of his rightful share of the kingdom, he was
refused by Dhåtaräñöra, who was overwhelmed by illusion.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was the rightful heir to his father's kingdom. But just to favor his
own sons, headed by Duryodhana, Dhåtaräñöra, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira's uncle, adopted
various unfair means to cheat his nephews of their rightful share of the kingdom. At last
the Päëòavas demanded only five villages, one for each of the five brothers, but that was
also refused by the usurpers. This incident led to the War of Kurukñetra. The Battle of
Kurukñetra, therefore, was induced by the Kurus, and not the Päëòavas.
As kñatriyas, the proper livelihood of the Päëòavas was only to rule, and not to accept
any other occupation. A brähmaëa, kñatriya or vaiçya will not accept employment for his
livelihood under any circumstances.
TEXT 9
Yada c PaaQaRPa[ihTa" Sa>aaYaa&
JaGad(GauåYaaRiNa JaGaad k*-Z<a" )
Na TaaiNa Pau&SaaMaMa*TaaYaNaaiNa
raJaaeå MaeNae +aTaPau<Yale/Xa" )) 9 ))
yadä ca pärtha-prahitaù sabhäyäà
jagad-gurur yäni jagäda kåñëaù
9
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
na täni puàsäm amåtäyanäni
räjoru mene kñata-puëya-leçaù
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; ca—also; pärtha-prahitaù—being advised by Arjuna; sabhäyäm—in the
assembly; jagat-guruù—teacher of the world; yäni—those; jagäda—went; kåñëaù—Lord
Kåñëa; na—never; täni—such words; puàsäm—of all men of sense; amåta-ayanäni—as
good as nectar; räjä—the King (Dhåtaräñöra or Duryodhana); uru—very important;
mene—did consider; kñata—dwindling; puëya-leçaù—fragment of pious acts.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa was sent by Arjuna into the assembly as the spiritual master of the whole
world, and although His words were heard by some [like Bhéñma] as pure nectar, it was
not so for the others, who were completely bereft of the last farthing of past pious works.
The King [Dhåtaräñöra or Duryodhana] did not take the words of Lord Kåñëa very
seriously.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa, who is the spiritual master of the entire universe, accepted the duty of a
messenger, and, deputed by Arjuna, went to the assembly of King Dhåtaräñöra on a peace
mission. Kåñëa is everyone's Lord, yet because He was the transcendental friend of
Arjuna, He gladly accepted the role of messenger, exactly like an ordinary friend. That
is the beauty of the Lord's behavior with His pure devotees. He reached the assembly
and spoke about peace, and the message was relished by Bhéñma and other great leaders
because it was spoken by the Lord Himself. But due to the exhaustion of the pious results
of their past deeds, Duryodhana, or his father, Dhåtaräñöra, did not take the message
very seriously. That is the way of persons who have no credit of pious deeds. By past
pious deeds, one may become the king of a country, but because the results of the pious
acts of Duryodhana and company were dwindling, it became evident from their actions
that they were sure to lose the kingdom to the Päëòavas. The message of Godhead is
always like nectar to the devotees, but it is just the opposite to the nondevotees. Sugar
candy is always sweet to a healthy man, but it tastes very bitter to persons suffering from
jaundice.
10
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 10
YadaePahUTaae >avNa& Pa[ivíae
MaN}aaYa Pa*í" ik-l/ PaUvRJaeNa )
AQaah TaNMaN}ad*Xaa& vrqYaaNa(
YaNMaiN}a<aae vEduirk&- vdiNTa )) 10 ))
yadopahüto bhavanaà praviñöo
manträya påñöaù kila pürvajena
athäha tan mantra-dåçäà varéyän
yan mantriëo vaidurikaà vadanti
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; upahütaù—was called by; bhavanam—the palace; praviñöaù—entered;
manträya—for consultation; påñöaù—asked by; kila—of course; pürvajena—by the elder
brother; atha—thus; äha—said; tat—that; mantra—advice; dåçäm—just suitable;
varéyän—excellent; yat—that which; mantriëaù—the ministers of state, or expert
politicians; vaidurikam—instructions by Vidura; vadanti—do they say.
TRANSLATION
When Vidura was invited by his elder brother [Dhåtaräñöra] for consultation, he entered
the house and gave instructions which were exactly to the point. His advice is well
known, and instructions by Vidura are approved by expert ministers of state.
PURPORT
Political suggestions by Vidura are known as expert, just as, in modern times, Paëòita
Cäëakya is considered the authority in good counsel in both political and moral
instructions.
TEXT 11
AJaaTaXa}aae" Pa[iTaYaC^ daYa&
11
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
iTaiTa+aTaae duivRzh& TavaGa" )
SahaNauJaae Ya}a v*k-aedraih"
ìSaNa( åza YatvMal&/ ib>aeiz )) 11 ))
ajäta-çatroù pratiyaccha däyaà
titikñato durviñahaà tavägaù
sahänujo yatra våkodarähiù
çvasan ruñä yat tvam alaà bibheñi
SYNONYMS
ajäta-çatroù—of Yudhiñöhira, who has no enemy; pratiyaccha—return; däyam—
legitimate share; titikñataù—of he who is so forbearing; durviñaham—unbearable; tava—
your; ägaù—offense; saha—along with; anujaù—younger brothers; yatra—wherein;
våkodara—Bhéma; ahiù—revenging snake; çvasan—breathing heavily; ruñä—in anger;
yat—whom; tvam—you; alam—verily; bibheñi—do fear.
TRANSLATION
[Vidura said:] You must now return the legitimate share to Yudhiñöhira, who has no
enemies and who has been forbearing through untold sufferings due to your offenses. He
is waiting with his younger brothers, among whom is the revengeful Bhéma, breathing
heavily like a snake. Surely you are afraid of him.
TEXT 12
PaaQaa|STau devae >aGavaNMauku-Ndae
Ga*hqTavaNa( Sai+aiTadevdev" )
AaSTae SvPauYaa| Yadudevdevae
iviNaiJaRTaaXaezNa*devdev" )) 12 ))
pärthäàs tu devo bhagavän mukundo
gåhétavän sakñiti-deva-devaù
äste sva-puryäà yadu-deva-devo
12
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
vinirjitäçeña-nådeva-devaù
SYNONYMS
pärthän—the sons of Påthä (Kunté); tu—but; devaù—the Lord; bhagavän—the
Personality of Godhead; mukundaù—Çré Kåñëa, who awards liberation; gåhétavän—has
taken up; sa—with; kñiti-deva-devaù—the brähmaëas and the demigods; äste—is
present; sva-puryäm—along with His family; yadu-deva-devaù—worshiped by the royal
order of the Yadu dynasty; vinirjita—who have been conquered; açeña—unlimited;
nådeva—kings; devaù—Lord.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, has accepted the sons of Påthä as His kinsmen,
and all the kings of the world are with Lord Çré Kåñëa. He is present in His home with all
His family members, the kings and princes of the Yadu dynasty, who have conquered an
unlimited number of rulers, and He is their Lord.
PURPORT
Vidura gave Dhåtaräñöra very good counsel regarding political alliance with the sons of
Påthä, the Päëòavas. The first thing he said was that Lord Kåñëa was intimately related
with them as their cousin. Because Lord Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
He is worshipable by all brähmaëas and demigods, who are the controllers of the
universal affairs. Besides that, Lord Kåñëa and His family members, the royal order of
the Yadu dynasty, were the conquerors of all kings of the world.
The kñatriyas used to fight the kings of various dominions and kidnap their beautiful
princess-daughters, after conquering their relatives. This system was laudable because
the kñatriyas and the princesses would be married only on the basis of the chivalry of the
conquering kñatriya. All the young princes of the Yadu dynasty married the daughters of
other kings in this way, by chivalrous force, and thus they were conquerors of all the
kings of the world. Vidura wanted to impress upon his elder brother that fighting with
the Päëòavas was fraught with many dangers because they were supported by Lord
Kåñëa, who had conquered, even in His childhood, demons like Kaàsa and Jaräsandha
and demigods like Brahmä and Indra. Therefore all universal power was behind the
Päëòavas.
13
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 13
Sa Wz daez" PauåziÜ@aSTae
Ga*haNa( Pa[ivíae YaMaPaTYaMaTYaa )
PauZ<aaiSa k*-Z<aaiÜMau%ae GaTaé[q‚
STYaJaaìXaEv& ku-l/k-aEXal/aYa )) 13 ))
sa eña doñaù puruña-dviò äste
gåhän praviñöo yam apatya-matyä
puñëäsi kåñëäd vimukho gata-çrés
tyajäçv açaivaà kula-kauçaläya
SYNONYMS
saù—he; eñaù—this; doñaù—offense personified; puruña-dviö—envious of Lord Kåñëa;
äste—exists; gåhän—household; praviñöaù—entered; yam—whom; apatya-matyä—
thinking to be your son; puñëäsi—maintaining; kåñëät—from Kåñëa; vimukhaù—in
opposition; gata-çréù—devoid of everything auspicious; tyaja—give up; äçu—as soon as
possible; açaivam—inauspicious; kula—family; kauçaläya—for the sake of.
TRANSLATION
You are maintaining offense personified, Duryodhana, as your infallible son, but he is
envious of Lord Kåñëa. And because you are thus maintaining a nondevotee of Kåñëa, you
are devoid of all auspicious qualities. Relieve yourself of this ill fortune as soon as possible
and do good to the whole family!
PURPORT
A good son is called apatya, one who does not allow his father to fall down. The son can
protect the father's soul when the father is dead by offering sacrifices to please the
Supreme Lord, Viñëu. This system is still prevalent in India. After the death of his
father, a son goes to offer sacrifices at the lotus feet of Viñëu at Gayä and thus delivers
the father's soul if the father is fallen. But if the son is already an enemy of Viñëu, how,
in such an inimical mood, can he offer sacrifice unto Lord Viñëu's lotus feet? Lord Kåñëa
14
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
is directly the Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, and Duryodhana was inimical to Him. He
would therefore be unable to protect his father, Dhåtaräñöra, after his death. He himself
was to fall down because of his faithlessness towards Viñëu. How, then, could he protect
his father? Vidura advised Dhåtaräñöra to get rid of such an unworthy son as
Duryodhana as soon as possible if he was at all anxious to see to the good of his family.
According to the moral instructions of Cäëakya Paëòita, "What is the use of a son who
is neither a learned man nor a devotee of the Lord?" If a son is not a devotee of the
Supreme Lord, he is just like blind eyes—a source of trouble. A physician may
sometimes advise the extrication of such useless eyes from their sockets so that one can
be relieved of the constant trouble. Duryodhana was exactly like blind, troubling eyes;
he would be a source of great trouble to the family of Dhåtaräñöra, as foreseen by Vidura.
Vidura therefore rightly advised his eldest brother to get rid of this source of trouble.
Dhåtaräñöra was wrongly maintaining such personified offense under the mistaken
impression that Duryodhana was a good son, able to liberate his father.
TEXT 14
wTYaUicva&STa}a SauYaaeDaNaeNa
Pa[v*Ök-aePaSfu-irTaaDare<a )
ASaTk*-Ta" SaTSPa*h<aqYaXaql/"
+ataa Sak-<aaRNauJaSaaEble/Na )) 14 ))
ity üciväàs tatra suyodhanena
pravåddha-kopa-sphuritädhareëa
asat-kåtaù sat-spåhaëéya-çélaù
kñattä sakarëänuja-saubalena
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; ücivän—while speaking; tatra—there; suyodhanena—by Duryodhana;
pravåddha—swollen with; kopa—anger; sphurita—flapping; adhareëa—lips; asatkåtaù—
insulted; sat—respectable; spåhaëéya-çélaù—desirable qualities; kñattä—Vidura;
sa—with; karëa—Karëa; anuja—younger brothers; saubalena—with Çakuni.
TRANSLATION
15
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
While speaking thus, Vidura, whose personal character was esteemed by respectable
persons, was insulted by Duryodhana, who was swollen with anger and whose lips were
trembling. Duryodhana was in company with Karëa, his younger brothers and his
maternal uncle Çakuni.
PURPORT
It is said that giving good counsel to a foolish person causes the fool to become angry,
just as feeding milk to a snake only increases its venomous poison. Saint Vidura was so
honorable that his character was looked up to by all respectable persons. But
Duryodhana was so foolish that he dared to insult Vidura. This was due to his bad
association with Çakuni, his maternal uncle, as well as with his friend Karëa, who always
encouraged Duryodhana in his nefarious acts.
TEXT 15
k- WNaMa}aaePaJauhav iJaø&
daSYaa" SauTa& YaØil/NaEv Pauí" )
TaiSMaNa( Pa[TaqPa" Park*-TYa AaSTae
iNavaRSYaTaaMaaéu PauraC^(vSaaNa" )) 15 ))
ka enam atropajuhäva jihmaà
däsyäù sutaà yad-balinaiva puñöaù
tasmin pratépaù parakåtya äste
nirväsyatäm äçu puräc chvasänaù
SYNONYMS
kaù—who; enam—this; atra—here; upajuhäva—called for; jihmam—crooked; däsyäù—
of a kept mistress; sutam—son; yat—whose; balinä—by whose subsistence; eva—
certainly; puñöaù—grown up; tasmin—unto him; pratépaù—enmity; parakåtya—enemy's
interest; äste—situated; nirväsyatäm—get him out; äçu—immediately; purät—from the
palace; çvasänaù—let him breathe only.
TRANSLATION
16
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Who asked him to come here, this son of a kept mistress? He is so crooked that he spies
in the interest of the enemy against those on whose support he has grown up. Toss him
out of the palace immediately and leave him with only his breath.
PURPORT
When getting married, the kñatriya kings would take on several other youthful girls
along with the married princess. These girl attendants of the king were known as däsés,
or attendant mistresses. By intimate association with the king, the däsés would get sons.
Such sons were called däsé-putras. They had no claim to a royal position, but they would
get maintenance and other facilities just like princes. Vidura was the son of such a däsé,
and he was thus not counted amongst the kñatriyas. King Dhåtaräñöra was very
affectionate toward his younger däsé-putra brother, Vidura, and Vidura was a great
friend and philosophical advisor to Dhåtaräñöra. Duryodhana knew very well that
Vidura was a great soul and well-wisher, but unfortunately he used strong words to hurt
his innocent uncle. Duryodhana not only attacked Vidura's birth, but also called him an
infidel because he seemed to support the cause of Yudhiñöhira, whom Duryodhana
considered his enemy. He desired that Vidura be immediately put out of the palace and
deprived of all his possessions. If possible, he would have liked him caned until he was
left with nothing but his breath. He charged that Vidura was a spy of the Päëòavas
because he advised King Dhåtaräñöra in their favor. Such is the situation of palace life
and the intricacies of diplomacy that even a faultless person like Vidura could be
charged with something abominable and punished. Vidura was struck with wonder at
such unexpected behavior from his nephew Duryodhana, and before anything actually
happened, he decided to leave the palace for good.
TEXT 16
Sa wTQaMaTYauLb<ak-<aRba<aE‚
>a]aTau" Paurae MaMaRSau Taai@Taae_iPa )
SvYa& DaNauÜaRir iNaDaaYa MaaYaa&
GaRTaVYaQaae_Yaaduå MaaNaYaaNa" )) 16 ))
sa ittham atyulbaëa-karëa-bäëair
bhrätuù puro marmasu täòito 'pi
17
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
svayaà dhanur dväri nidhäya mäyäà
gata-vyatho 'yäd uru mänayänaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Vidura); ittham—like this; ati-ulbaëa—severely; karëa—ear; bäëaiù—by the
arrows; bhrätuù—brother's; puraù—from the palace; marmasu—in the core of the heart;
täòitaù—being afflicted; api—in spite of; svayam—he himself; dhanuù dväri—bow on
the door; nidhäya—keeping; mäyäm—the external nature; gata-vyathaù—without being
sorry; ayät—exited; uru—great; mäna-yänaù—so thinking.
TRANSLATION
Thus being pierced by arrows through his ears and afflicted to the core of his heart,
Vidura placed his bow on the door and quit his brother's palace. He was not sorry, for he
considered the acts of the external energy to be supreme.
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord is never perturbed by an awkward position created by the
external energy of the Lord. In Bhagavad-gétä (3.27) it is stated:
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
A conditioned soul is absorbed in material existence under the influence of different
modes of external energy. Absorbed in the false ego, he thinks that he is doing
everything by himself. The external energy of the Lord, the material nature, is fully
under the control of the Supreme Lord, and the conditioned soul is fully under the grip
of the external energy. Therefore, the conditioned soul is fully under the control of the
law of the Lord. But, due to illusion only, he thinks himself independent in his
activities. Duryodhana was acting under such influence of the external nature, by which
he would be vanquished at the ultimate end. He could not accept the sound advice of
Vidura, but on the contrary he insulted that great soul, who was the well-wisher of his
whole family. Vidura could understand this because he was a pure devotee of the Lord.
18
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
In spite of being very strongly insulted by Duryodhana's words, Vidura could see that
Duryodhana, under the influence of mäyä, the external energy, was making progress on
the path toward his own ruination. He therefore considered the acts of the external
energy to be supreme, yet he also saw how the internal energy of the Lord helped him in
that particular situation. A devotee is always in a renounced temperament because the
worldly attractions can never satisfy him. Vidura was never attracted by the royal palace
of his brother. He was always ready to leave the place and devote himself completely to
the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Now he got the opportunity by the grace
of Duryodhana, and instead of being sorry at the strong words of insult, he thanked him
from within because it gave him the chance to live alone in a holy place and fully engage
in the devotional service of the Lord. The word gata-vyathaù (without being sorry) is
significant here because Vidura was relieved from the tribulations which trouble every
man entangled in material activities. He therefore thought that there was no need to
defend his brother with his bow because his brother was meant for ruination. Thus he
left the palace before Duryodhana could act. Mäyä, the supreme energy of the Lord,
acted here both internally and externally.
TEXT 17
Sa iNaGaRTa" k-aErvPau<Yal/BDaae
GaJaaûYaataqQaRPad" PadaiNa )
ANva§-MaTPau<Yaick-IzRYaaeVYaa|
AiDaiïTaae YaaiNa SahóMaUiTaR" )) 17 ))
sa nirgataù kaurava-puëya-labdho
gajähvayät tértha-padaù padäni
anväkramat puëya-cikérñayorvyäm
adhiñöhito yäni sahasra-mürtiù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Vidura); nirgataù—after having quit; kaurava—the Kuru dynasty; puëya—
piety; labdhaù—so achieved; gaja-ähvayät—from Hastinäpura; tértha-padaù—of the
Supreme Lord; padäni—pilgrimages; anväkramat—took shelter; puëya—piety;
cikérñayä—desiring so; urvyäm—on the Earth; adhiñöhitaù—situated; yäni—all those;
19
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sahasra—thousands; mürtiù—forms.
TRANSLATION
By his piety, Vidura achieved the advantages of the pious Kauravas. After leaving
Hastinäpura, he took shelter of many places of pilgrimages, which are the Lord's lotus
feet. With a desire to gain a high order of pious life, he traveled to holy places where
thousands of transcendental forms of the Lord are situated.
PURPORT
Vidura was undoubtedly a highly elevated and pious soul, otherwise he would not have
taken his birth in the Kaurava family. To have high parentage, to possess wealth, to be
highly learned and to have great personal beauty are all due to past pious acts. But such
pious possessions are not sufficient for obtaining the grace of the Lord and being
engaged in His transcendental loving service. Vidura considered himself less pious, and
therefore he decided to travel to all the great places of pilgrimage in the world in order
to achieve greater piety and advance nearer to the Lord. At that time, Lord Kåñëa was
personally present in the world, and Vidura could have at once approached Him
directly, but he did not do so because he was not sufficiently freed from sin. One cannot
be one hundred percent devoted to the Lord unless and until he is completely free from
all effects of sin. Vidura was conscious that by the association of the diplomatic
Dhåtaräñöra and Duryodhana he had lost his piety and was therefore not fit to associate
at once with the Lord. In Bhagavad-gétä (7.28) this is confirmed in the following verse:
yeñäà tv anta-gataà päpaà
janänäà puëya-karmaëäm
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktä
bhajante mäà dåòha-vratäù
Persons who are sinful asuras like Kaàsa and Jaräsandha cannot think of Lord Kåñëa as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth. Only those who are pure
devotees, those who follow the regulative principles of religious life as prescribed in the
scriptures, are able to engage themselves in karma-yoga and then jïäna-yoga and
thereafter, by pure meditation, can understand pure consciousness. When God
consciousness is developed, one can take advantage of the association of pure devotees.
Syän mahat-sevayä vipräù puëya-tértha-niñevaëät: one is able to associate with the Lord
20
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
even during the existence of this life.
Places of pilgrimages are meant for eradicating the sins of the pilgrims, and they are
distributed all over the universe just to give facility to all concerned for attaining pure
existence and God realization. One should not be satisfied, however, merely by visiting
the places of pilgrimage and performing one's prescribed duties; he should be eager to
meet the great souls who are already there, engaged in the service of the Lord. In each
and every place of pilgrimage, the Lord is present in His various transcendental forms.
These forms are called arcä-mürtis, or forms of the Lord which can be easily appreciated
by the common man. The Lord is transcendental to our mundane senses. He cannot be
seen with our present eyes, nor can He be heard with our present ears. To the degree
that we have entered into the service of the Lord or to the proportion to which our lives
are freed from sins, we can perceive the Lord. But even though we are not free from sins,
the Lord is kind enough to allow us the facility of seeing Him in His arcä-mürtis in the
temple. The Lord is all-powerful, and therefore He is able to accept our service by
presentation of His arcä form. No one, therefore, should foolishly think the arcä in the
temple to be an idol. Such an arcä-mürti is not an idol but the Lord Himself, and to the
proportion to which one is free from sins, he is able to know the significance of the arcämürti.
The guidance of a pure devotee is therefore always required.
In the land of Bhäratavarña there are many hundreds and thousands of places of
pilgrimage distributed all over the country, and by traditional practice the common man
visits such holy places during all seasons of the year. Some of the arcä representations of
the Lord situated in different places of pilgrimage are mentioned herewith. The Lord is
present at Mathurä (the birthplace of Lord Kåñëa) as Ädi-keçava; the Lord is present at
Puré (Orissa) as Lord Jagannätha (also known as Puruñottama); He is present at
Allahabad (Prayäga) as Bindu-mädhava; at Mandara Hill He is present as Madhusüdana.
In the Änandäraëya, He is known as Väsudeva, Padmanäbha and Janärdana; at
Viñëukäïcé, He is known as Viñëu; and at Mäyäpura, He is known as Hari. There are
millions and billions of such arcä forms of the Lord distributed all over the universe. All
these arcä-mürtis are summarized in the Caitanya-caritämåta in the following words:
sarvatra prakäça täìra—bhakte sukha dite
jagatera adharma näçi' dharma sthäpite
"The Lord has so distributed Himself all over the universe just to give pleasure to the
devotees, to give the common man facility to eradicate his sins, and to establish religious
principles in the world."
21
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 18
Paurezu Pau<YaaePavNaaid]ku-Åe‚
ZvPaªTaaeYaezu SairTSar"Sau )
ANaNTail/(r)E" SaMal/x(k*-Taezu
ccar TaqQaaRYaTaNaeZvNaNYa" )) 18 ))
pureñu puëyopavanädri-kuïjeñv
apaìka-toyeñu sarit-saraùsu
ananta-liìgaiù samalaìkåteñu
cacära térthäyataneñv ananyaù
SYNONYMS
pureñu—holy places like Ayodhyä, Dvärakä and Mathurä; puëya—piety; upa-vana—the
parks; adri—hill; kuïjeñu—in the orchards; apaìka—without sin; toyeñu—in the water;
sarit—river; saraùsu—lakes; ananta-liìgaiù—the forms of the Unlimited;
samalaìkåteñu—being so decorated; cacära—executed; tértha—places of pilgrimage;
äyataneñu—holy lands; ananyaù—alone or seeing Kåñëa alone.
TRANSLATION
He began to travel alone, thinking only of Kåñëa, through various holy places like
Ayodhyä, Dvärakä and Mathurä. He traveled where the air, hill, orchard, river and lake
are all pure and sinless and where the forms of the Unlimited decorate the temples. Thus
he performed the pilgrim's progress.
PURPORT
These arcä forms of the Lord may be considered idols by the atheists, but that does not
matter for persons like Vidura or His many other servants. The forms of the Lord are
mentioned here as ananta-liìga. Such forms of the Lord have unlimited potency, the
same as that of the Lord Himself. There is no difference between the potencies of the
arcä and those of the personal forms of the Lord. The example of the postbox and post
office may be applied here. The little postboxes distributed all over the city have the
22
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
same potency as the postal system in general. The duty of the post office is to carry
letters from one place to another. If one puts letters in postboxes authorized by the
general post office, the function of carrying letters is performed without a doubt.
Similarly, the arcä-mürti can also deliver the same unlimited potency of the Lord as
when He is personally present. Vidura, therefore, could see nothing but Kåñëa in the
different arcä forms, and ultimately he was able to realize Kåñëa alone and nothing else.
TEXT 19
Gaa& PaYaR$=NMaeDYaiviv¢-v*ita"
SadaPlu/Taae_Da"XaYaNaae_vDaUTa" )
Al/i+aTa" SvErvDaUTavezae
v]TaaiNa cere hirTaaez<aaiNa )) 19 ))
gäà paryaöan medhya-vivikta-våttiù
sadäpluto 'dhaù çayano 'vadhütaù
alakñitaù svair avadhüta-veño
vratäni cere hari-toñaëäni
SYNONYMS
gäm—earth; paryaöan—traversing; medhya—pure; vivikta-våttiù—independent
occupation for living; sadä—always; äplutaù—sanctified; adhaù—on the earth;
çayanaù—lying; avadhütaù—without dressing (of the hair, etc.); alakñitaù—without
being seen; svaiù—alone; avadhüta-veñaù—dressed like a mendicant; vratäni—vows;
cere—performed; hari-toñaëäni—that pleased the Lord.
TRANSLATION
While so traversing the earth, he simply performed duties to please the Supreme Lord
Hari. His occupation was pure and independent. He was constantly sanctified by taking
his bath in holy places, although he was in the dress of a mendicant and had no hair
dressing nor a bed on which to lie. Thus he was always unseen by his various relatives.
PURPORT
23
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The first and foremost duty of a pilgrim is to satisfy the Supreme Lord Hari. While
traveling as a pilgrim, one should not be worried about pleasing society. There is no need
to depend on social formalities or occupation or dress. One should remain always
absorbed in the function of pleasing the Lord. Thus sanctified by thought and action,
one is able to realize the Supreme Lord by the process of a pilgrim's journey.
TEXT 20
wTQa& v]JaNa( >aarTaMaev vz|
k-ale/Na YaavÓTavaNa( Pa[>aaSaMa( )
TaavC^XaaSa i+aiTaMaek-c§-a‚
Maek-aTaPa}aaMaiJaTaeNa PaaQaR" )) 20 ))
itthaà vrajan bhäratam eva varñaà
kälena yävad gatavän prabhäsam
tävac chaçäsa kñitim eka cakräm
ekätapaträm ajitena pärthaù
SYNONYMS
ittham—like this; vrajan—while traveling; bhäratam—India; eva—only; varñam—the
tract of land; kälena—in due course of time; yävat—when; gatavän—visited;
prabhäsam—the Prabhäsa pilgrimage site; tävat—at that time; çaçäsa—ruled; kñitim—
the world; eka-cakräm—by one military force; eka—one; ätapaträm—flag; ajitena—by
the mercy of the unconquerable Kåñëa; pärthaù—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira.
TRANSLATION
Thus, when he was in the land of Bhäratavarña traveling to all the places of pilgrimage, he
visited Prabhäsakñetra. At that time Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was the emperor and held the
world under one military strength and one flag.
PURPORT
More than five thousand years ago, while Saint Vidura was traveling the earth as a
pilgrim, India was known as Bhäratavarña, as it is known even today. The history of the
24
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
world cannot give any systematic account for more than three thousand years into the
past, but before that the whole world was under the flag and military strength of
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, who was the emperor of the world. At present there are hundreds
and thousands of flags flapping in the United Nations, but during the time of Vidura
there was, by the grace of Ajita, Lord Kåñëa, only one flag. The nations of the world are
very eager to again have one state under one flag, but for this they must seek the favor
of Lord Kåñëa, who alone can help us become one worldwide nation.
TEXT 21
Ta}aaQa éué[av SauôiÜNaií&
vNa& YaQaa ve<auJaviöSa&é[YaMa( )
Sa&SPaDaRYaa dGDaMaQaaNauXaaecNa(
SarSvTaq& Pa[TYaiGaYaaYa TaUZ<aqMa( )) 21 ))
taträtha çuçräva suhåd-vinañöià
vanaà yathä veëuja-vahni-saàçrayam
saàspardhayä dagdham athänuçocan
sarasvatéà pratyag iyäya tüñëém
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; atha—thereafter; çuçräva—heard; suhåt—kinsmen; vinañöim—all dead;
vanam—forest; yathä—as much as; veëuja-vahni—fire due to the bamboos;
saàçrayam—friction with one another; saàspardhayä—by violent passion; dagdham—
burnt; atha—thus; anuçocan—grieving; sarasvatém—the River Sarasvaté; pratyak—
westward; iyäya—went; tüñëém—silently.
TRANSLATION
At the place of pilgrimage at Prabhäsa, it came to his knowledge that all his relatives had
died due to violent passion, just as an entire forest burns due to fire produced by the
friction of bamboos. After this he proceeded west, where the River Sarasvaté flows.
PURPORT
25
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Both the Kauravas and the Yädavas were relatives of Vidura, and Vidura heard of their
extinction due to fratricidal war. The comparison of the friction of forest bamboos to
that of passionate human societies is appropriate. The whole world is compared to a
forest. At any moment there may be a flare-up of fire in the forest due to friction. No
one goes to the forest to set it on fire, but due only to friction between bamboos, fire
takes place and burns an entire forest. Similarly, in the greater forest of worldly
transaction, the fire of war takes place because of the violent passion of the conditioned
souls illusioned by the external energy. Such a worldly fire can be extinguished only by
the water of the mercy cloud of saints, just as a forest fire can be extinguished only by
rains falling from a cloud.
TEXT 22
TaSYaa& i}aTaSYaaeXaNaSaae MaNaaeê
Pa*QaaerQaaGaneriSaTaSYa vaYaae" )
TaqQa| SaudaSaSYa Gava& GauhSYa
YaC^\aÖdevSYa Sa AaiSazeve )) 22 ))
tasyäà tritasyoçanaso manoç ca
påthor athägner asitasya väyoù
térthaà sudäsasya gaväà guhasya
yac chräddhadevasya sa äsiñeve
SYNONYMS
tasyäm—on the bank of the River Sarasvaté; tritasya—the pilgrimage site named Trita;
uçanasaù—the pilgrimage site named Uçanä; manoù ca—as also of the pilgrimage site
named Manu; påthoù—that of Påthu; atha—thereafter; agneù—that of Agni; asitasya—
that of Asita; väyoù—that of Väyu; tértham—places of pilgrimages; sudäsasya—of the
name Sudäsa; gaväm—that of Go; guhasya—that of Guha; yat—thereupon;
çräddhadevasya—of the name Çräddhadeva; saù—Vidura; äsiñeve—duly visited and
performed the rituals.
TRANSLATION
26
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
On the bank of the River Sarasvaté there were eleven places of pilgrimage, namely, (1)
Trita, (2) Uçanä, (3) Manu, (4) Påthu, (5) Agni, (6) Asita, (7) Väyu, (8) Sudäsa, (9)
Go, (10) Guha and (11) Sräddhadeva. Vidura visited all of them and duly performed
rituals.
TEXT 23
ANYaaiNa ceh iÜJadevdevE"
k*-TaaiNa NaaNaaYaTaNaaiNa ivZ<aae" )
Pa[TYa(r)Mau:YaaiªTaMaiNdrai<a
YaÕXaRNaaTk*-Z<aMaNauSMariNTa )) 23 ))
anyäni ceha dvija-deva-devaiù
kåtäni nänäyatanäni viñëoù
pratyaìga-mukhyäìkita-mandiräëi
yad-darçanät kåñëam anusmaranti
SYNONYMS
anyäni—others; ca—also; iha—here; dvija-deva—by the great sages; devaiù—and the
demigods; kåtäni—established by; nänä—various; äyatanäni—various forms; viñëoù—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prati—each and every; aìga—part; mukhya—the
chief; aìkita—marked; mandiräëi—temple s; yat—which; darçanät—by seeing from a
distance; kåñëam—the original Personality of Godhead; anusmaranti—constantly
remembers.
TRANSLATION
There were also many other temples of various forms of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Viñëu, established by great sages and demigods. These temples were marked
with the chief emblems of the Lord, and they reminded one always of the original
Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa.
PURPORT
27
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Human society is divided into four social orders of life and four spiritual divisions,
applying to each and every individual person. This system is called varëäçrama-dharma
and has already been discussed in many places in this great literature. The sages, or
persons who completely devoted themselves to the spiritual upliftment of the entire
human society, were known as dvija-deva, the best amongst the twice-born. The denizens
of superior planets, from the moon planet and upwards, were known as devas. Both the
dvija-devas and the devas always establish temples of Lord Viñëu in His various forms,
such as Govinda, Madhusüdana, Nåsiàha, Mädhava, Keçava, Näräyaëa, Padmanäbha,
Pärtha-särathi and many others. The Lord expands Himself in innumerable forms, but
all of them are nondifferent from one another. Lord Viñëu has four hands, and each
hand holds a particular item—either a conchshell, wheel, club or lotus flower. Of these
four emblems, the cakra, or wheel, is the chief. Lord Kåñëa, being the original Viñëu
form, has only one emblem, namely the wheel, and therefore He is sometimes called the
Cakré. The Lord's cakra is the symbol of the power by which the Lord controls the whole
manifestation. The tops of Viñëu temples are marked with the symbol of the wheel so
that people may have the chance to see the symbol from a very long distance and at
once remember Lord Kåñëa. The purpose of building very high temples is to give people
a chance to see them from a distant place. This system is carried on in India whenever a
new temple is constructed, and it appears that it is coming down from a time before
recorded history. The foolish propaganda by atheists that temples were constructed only
in later days is refuted here because Vidura visited these temples at least five thousand
years ago, and the temples of Viñëu were in existence long, long before Vidura visited
them. The great sages and demigods never established statues of men or demigods, but
they established temples of Viñëu for the benefit of common men, to raise them to the
platform of God consciousness.
TEXT 24
TaTaSTviTav]JYa Sauraí\Ma*Ö&
SaaEvqrMaTSYaaNa( ku-åJaa(r)l/a&ê )
k-ale/Na TaavÛMauNaaMauPaeTYa
Ta}aaeÖv& >aaGavTa& ddXaR )) 24 ))
tatas tv ativrajya suräñöram åddhaà
sauvéra-matsyän kurujäìgaläàç ca
28
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kälena tävad yamunäm upetya
tatroddhavaà bhägavataà dadarça
SYNONYMS
tataù—from there; tu—but; ativrajya—by passing over; suräñöram—the kingdom of
Surat; åddham—very wealthy; sauvéra—the kingdom of Sauvéra; matsyän—the kingdom
of Matsya; kurujäìgalän—the kingdom of western India up to the Delhi province; ca—
also; kälena—in course of time; tävat—as soon as; yamunäm—bank of the River
Yamunä; upetya—reaching; tatra—there; uddhavam—Uddhava, one of the prominent
Yadus; bhägavatam—the great devotee of Lord Kåñëa; dadarça—happened to see.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter he passed through very wealthy provinces like Surat, Sauvéra and Matsya and
through western India, known as Kurujäìgala. At last he reached the bank of the
Yamunä, where he happened to meet Uddhava, the great devotee of Lord Kåñëa.
PURPORT
The tract of land comprising about one hundred square miles from modern Delhi to the
Mathurä district in Uttar Pradesh, including a portion of the Gurgaon district in Punjab
(East India), is considered to be the topmost place of pilgrimage in all of India. This land
is sacred because Lord Kåñëa traveled through it many times. From the very beginning
of His appearance, He was at Mathurä in the house of His maternal uncle Kaàsa, and
He was reared by His foster father Mahäräja Nanda at Våndävana. There are still many
devotees of the Lord lingering there in ecstasy in search of Kåñëa and His childhood
associates, the gopés. It is not that such devotees meet Kåñëa face to face in that tract of
land, but a devotee's eagerly searching after Kåñëa is as good as his seeing Him
personally. How this is so cannot be explained, but it is factually realized by those who
are pure devotees of the Lord. Philosophically, one can understand that Lord Kåñëa and
His remembrance are on the absolute plane and that the very idea of searching for Him
at Våndävana in pure God consciousness gives more pleasure to the devotee than seeing
Him face to face. Such devotees of the Lord see Him face to face at every moment, as
confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.38):
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
29
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
yaà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"Those who are in ecstasy of love with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Çyämasundara [Kåñëa], see Him always in their hearts due to love and devotional service
rendered to the Lord." Both Vidura and Uddhava were such elevated devotees, and
therefore they both came to the bank of the Yamunä and met each other.
TEXT 25
Sa vaSaudevaNaucr& Pa[XaaNTa&
b*hSPaTae" Pa[ak(- TaNaYa& Pa[TaqTaMa( )
Aail/&GYa Gaa!& Pa[<aYaeNa >ad]&
SvaNaaMaPa*C^ÙGavTPa[JaaNaaMa( )) 25 ))
sa väsudevänucaraà praçäntaà
båhaspateù präk tanayaà pratétam
äliìgya gäòhaà praëayena bhadraà
svänäm apåcchad bhagavat-prajänäm
SYNONYMS
saù—he, Vidura; väsudeva—Lord Kåñëa; anucaram—constant companion; praçäntam—
very sober and gentle; båhaspateù—of Båhaspati, the learned spiritual master of the
demigods; präk—formerly; tanayam—son or disciple; pratétam—acknowledged;
äliìgya—embracing; gäòham—very feelingly; praëayena—in love; bhadram—
auspicious; svänäm—his own; apåcchat—asked; bhagavat—of the Personality of
Godhead; prajänäm—family.
TRANSLATION
Then, due to his great love and feeling, Vidura embraced him [Uddhava], who was a
constant companion of Lord Kåñëa and formerly a great student of Båhaspati's. Vidura
then asked him for news of the family of Lord Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead.
30
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Vidura was older than Uddhava, like a father, and therefore when the two met,
Uddhava bowed down before Vidura, and Vidura embraced him because Uddhava was
younger, like a son. Vidura's brother Päëòu was Lord Kåñëa's uncle, and Uddhava was a
cousin to Lord Kåñëa. According to social custom, therefore, Vidura was to be respected
by Uddhava on the level of his father. Uddhava was a great scholar in logic, and he was
known to be a son or disciple of Båhaspati, the greatly learned priest and spiritual master
of the demigods. Vidura asked Uddhava about the welfare of his relatives, although he
already knew that they were no longer in the world. This inquiry appears to be very
queer, but Çréla Jéva Gosvämé states that the news was shocking to Vidura, who therefore
inquired again due to great curiosity. Thus his inquiry was psychological and not
practical.
TEXT 26
k-iÀTPaura<aaE PauåzaE SvNaa>Ya‚
PaaÚaNauv*tYaeh ik-l/avTaq<aaOE )
AaSaaTa oVYaaR" ku-Xal&/ ivDaaYa
k*-Ta+a<aaE ku-Xal&/ éUrGaehe )) 26 ))
kaccit puräëau puruñau svanäbhyapädmänuvåttyeha
kilävatérëau
äsäta urvyäù kuçalaà vidhäya
kåta-kñaëau kuçalaà çüra-gehe
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; puräëau—the original; puruñau—Personalities of Godhead (Kåñëa
and Balaräma); svanäbhya—Brahmä; pädma-anuvåttyä—by the request of the one who is
born from the lotus; iha—here; kila—certainly; avatérëau—incarnated; äsäte—are;
urvyäù—of the world; kuçalam—well-being; vidhäya—for doing so; kåta-kñaëau—the
elevators of everyone's prosperity; kuçalam—all well; çüra-gehe—in the house of
Çürasena.
31
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
[Please tell me] whether the original Personalities of Godhead, who incarnated
Themselves at the request of Brahmä [who is born out of the lotus flower from the Lord]
and who have increased the prosperity of the world by elevating everyone, are doing well
in the house of Çürasena.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa and Balaräma are not two different Personalities of Godhead. God is one
without a second, but He expands Himself in many forms without their being separate
from one another. They are all plenary expansions. The immediate expansion of Lord
Kåñëa is Baladeva, and Brahmä, born from the lotus flower from Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu,
is an expansion of Baladeva. This indicates that Kåñëa and Baladeva are not subjected to
the regulations of the universe; on the contrary, the whole universe is under Their
subjugation. They appeared at the request of Brahmä to liberate the burden of the world,
and They relieved the world by many superhuman activities so that everyone became
happy and prosperous. Without the grace of the Lord, no one can become happy and
prosperous. Because the happiness of the family of the Lord's devotees depends on the
happiness of the Lord, Vidura first of all inquired about the well-being of the Lord.
TEXT 27
k-iÀTku-æ<aa& ParMa" Sauôàae
>aaMa" Sa AaSTae Sau%Ma(r) XaaEir" )
Yaae vE SvSa›<aa& iPaTa*vÕdaiTa
vraNa( vdaNYaae vrTaPaR<aeNa )) 27 ))
kaccit kurüëäà paramaù suhån no
bhämaù sa äste sukham aìga çauriù
yo vai svasèëäà pitåvad dadäti
varän vadänyo vara-tarpaëena
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; kurüëäm—of the Kurus; paramaù—greatest; suhåt—well-wisher;
32
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
naù—our; bhämaù—brother-in-law; saù—he; äste—is; sukham—happy; aìga—O
Uddhava; çauriù—Vasudeva; yaù—one who; vai—certainly; svasèëäm—of the sisters;
pitå-vat—like a father; dadäti—gives; varän—everything desirable; vadänyaù—
munificent; vara—wife; tarpaëena—by pleasing.
TRANSLATION
[Please tell me] whether the best friend of the Kurus, our brother-in-law Vasudeva, is
doing well. He is very munificent. He is like a father to his sisters, and he is always
pleasing to his wives.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa's father, Vasudeva, had sixteen wives, and one of them, named Pauravé or
Rohiëé, the mother of Baladeva, was the sister of Vidura. Vasudeva, therefore, was the
husband of Vidura's sister, and thus they were brothers-in-law. Vasudeva's sister Kunté
was the wife of Päëòu, Vidura's elder brother, and in that sense also, Vasudeva was
brother-in-law to Vidura. Kunté was younger than Vasudeva, and it was the duty of the
elder brother to treat younger sisters as daughters. Whenever anything was needed by
Kunté, it was munificently delivered by Vasudeva, due to his great love for his younger
sister. Vasudeva never dissatisfied his wives, and at the same time he supplied the
objects desired by his sister. He had special attention for Kunté because she became a
widow at an early age. While inquiring about Vasudeva's welfare, Vidura remembered all
about him and the family relationship.
TEXT 28
k-iÀÜæQaaiDaPaiTaYaRdUNaa&
Pa[ÛuMan AaSTae Sau%Ma(r) vqr" )
Ya& åiKMa<aq >aGavTaae_i>ale/>ae
AaraDYa ivPa[aNa( SMarMaaidSaGaeR )) 28 ))
kaccid varüthädhipatir yadünäà
pradyumna äste sukham aìga véraù
yaà rukmiëé bhagavato 'bhilebhe
33
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ärädhya viprän smaram ädi-sarge
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; varütha—of the military; adhipatiù—commander-in-chief; yadünäm—
of the Yadus; pradyumnaù—the son of Kåñëa named Pradyumna; äste—is; sukham—
happy; aìga—O Uddhava; véraù—the great warrior; yam—whom; rukmiëé—the wife of
Kåñëa named Rukmiëé; bhagavataù—from the Personality of Godhead; abhilebhe—got as
a prize; ärädhya—pleasing; viprän—brähmaëas; smaram—Cupid (Kämadeva); ädisarge—
in his previous life.
TRANSLATION
O Uddhava, please tell me how is Pradyumna, the commander-in-chief of the Yadus, who
was Cupid in a former life? Rukmiëé bore him as her son from Lord Kåñëa, by the grace
of brähmaëas whom she pleased.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, Smara (Cupid, or Kämadeva) is one of the eternal
associates of Lord Kåñëa. Jéva Gosvämé has explained this very elaborately in his treatise
Kåñëa-sandarbha.
TEXT 29
k-iÀTSau%& SaaTvTav*iZ<a>aaeJa‚
daXaahRk-a<aaMaiDaPa" Sa AaSTae )
YaMa>YaizÄC^TaPa}aNae}aae
Na*PaaSaNaaXaa& PairôTYa dUraTa( )) 29 ))
kaccit sukhaà sätvata-våñëi-bhojadäçärhakäëäm
adhipaù sa äste
yam abhyañiïcac chata-patra-netro
nåpäsanäçäà parihåtya dürät
SYNONYMS
34
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kaccit—whether; sukham—is all well; sätvata—the Sätvata race; våñëi—the Våñëi
dynasty; bhoja—the Bhoja dynasty; däçärhakäëäm—the Däçärha race; adhipaù—King
Ugrasena; saù—he; äste—does exist; yam—whom; abhyañiïcat—installed; çata-patranetraù—
Lord Çré Kåñëa; nåpa-äsana-äçäm—hope of the royal throne; parihåtya—giving
up; dürät—at a distant place.
TRANSLATION
O my friend, [tell me] whether Ugrasena, the King of the Sätvatas, Våñëis, Bhojas and
Däçärhas, is now doing well. He went far away from his kingdom, leaving aside all hopes
of his royal throne, but Lord Kåñëa again installed him.
TEXT 30
k-iÀÖre" SaaEMYa SauTa" Sad*+a
AaSTae_Ga]<aq riQaNaa& SaaDau SaaMb" )
ASaUTa Ya& JaaMbvTaq v]Taa!ya
dev& Gauh& Yaae_iMbk-Yaa Da*Taae_Ga]e )) 30 ))
kaccid dhareù saumya sutaù sadåkña
äste 'graëé rathinäà sädhu sämbaù
asüta yaà jämbavaté vratäòhyä
devaà guhaà yo 'mbikayä dhåto 'gre
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; hareù—of the Personality of Godhead; saumya—O grave one; sutaù—
son; sadåkñaù—similar; äste—fares well; agraëéù—foremost; rathinäm—of the warriors;
sädhu—well behaved; sämbaù—Sämba; asüta—gave birth; yam—whom; jämbavaté—
Jämbavaté, a queen of Lord Kåñëa's; vratäòhyä—enriched by vows; devam—the demigod;
guham—of the name Kärttikeya; yaù—whom; ambikayä—unto the wife of Çiva;
dhåtaù—born; agre—in the previous birth.
TRANSLATION
35
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
O gentle one, does Sämba fare well? He exactly resembles the son of the Personality of
Godhead. In a previous birth he was born as Kärttikeya in the womb of the wife of Lord
Çiva, and now he has been born in the womb of Jämbavaté, the most enriched wife of
Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva, one of the three qualitative incarnations of the Personality of Godhead, is
the plenary expansion of the Lord. Kärttikeya, born of him, is on the level of
Pradyumna, another son of Lord Kåñëa. When Lord Çré Kåñëa descends into the
material world, all His plenary portions also appear with Him to exhibit different
functions of the Lord. But for the pastimes at Våndävana, all functions are performed by
the Lord's different plenary expansions. Väsudeva is a plenary expansion of Näräyaëa.
When the Lord appeared as Väsudeva before Devaké and Vasudeva, He appeared in His
capacity as Näräyaëa. Similarly, all the demigods of the heavenly kingdom appeared as
associates of the Lord in the forms of Pradyumna, Sämba, Uddhava, etc. It is learned
here that Kämadeva appeared as Pradyumna, Kärttikeya as Sämba, and one of the Vasus
as Uddhava. All of them served in their different capacities in order to enrich the
pastimes of Kåñëa.
TEXT 31
+aeMa& Sa k-iÀÛuYauDaaNa AaSTae
Ya" f-aLGauNaaçBDaDaNaUrhSYa" )
le/>ae_ÅSaaDaae+aJaSaevYaEv
GaiTa& TadqYaa& YaiTai>aduRraPaaMa( )) 31 ))
kñemaà sa kaccid yuyudhäna äste
yaù phälgunäl labdha-dhanü-rahasyaù
lebhe 'ïjasädhokñaja-sevayaiva
gatià tadéyäà yatibhir duräpäm
SYNONYMS
kñemam—all good; saù—he; kaccit—whether; yuyudhänaù—Sätyaki; äste—is there;
yaù—one who; phälgunät—from Arjuna; labdha—has achieved; dhanuù-rahasyaù—one
36
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
who understands the intricacies of military art; lebhe—also achieved; aïjasä—easily;
adhokñaja—of the Transcendence; sevayä—by service; eva—certainly; gatim—
destination; tadéyäm—transcendental; yatibhiù—by great renouncers; duräpäm—very
difficult to achieve.
TRANSLATION
O Uddhava, does Yuyudhäna fare well? He learned the intricacies of the military art from
Arjuna and attained the transcendental destination which is very difficult to reach even
for great renouncers.
PURPORT
The destination of transcendence is to become the personal associate of the Personality
of Godhead, who is known as adhokñaja, He who is beyond the reach of the senses. The
renouncers of the world, the sannyäsés, give up all worldly connections, namely, family,
wife, children, friends, home, wealth—everything—to attain the transcendental bliss of
Brahman happiness. But adhokñaja happiness is beyond Brahman happiness. The
empiric philosophers enjoy a transcendental quality of bliss by philosophical speculation
on the Supreme Truth, but beyond that pleasure is the pleasure enjoyed by Brahman in
His eternal form of the Personality of Godhead. Brahman bliss is enjoyed by living
entities after liberation from material bondage. But Parabrahman, the Personality of
Godhead, enjoys eternally a bliss of His own potency, which is called the hlädiné
potency. The empiric philosopher who studies Brahman by negation of the external
features has not yet learned the quality of the hlädiné potency of Brahman. Out of many
potencies of the Omnipotent, there are three features of His internal potency—namely
saàvit, sandhiné and hlädiné. And in spite of their strict adherence to the principles of
yama, niyama, äsana, dhyäna, dhäraëä and präëäyäma, the great yogés and jïänés are
unable to enter into the internal potency of the Lord. This internal potency is, however,
easily realized by the devotees of the Lord by dint of devotional service. Yuyudhäna
achieved this stage of life, just as he achieved expert knowledge in military science from
Arjuna. Thus his life was successful to the fullest extent from both the material and
spiritual angles of vision. That is the way of devotional service to the Lord.
TEXT 32
37
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
k-iÀd( buDa" SvSTYaNaMaqv AaSTae
ìf-Lk-Pau}aae >aGavTPa[Paà" )
Ya" k*-Z<aPaadaiªTaMaaGaRPaa&Sau‚
ZvceíTa Pa[eMaivi>aàDaEYaR" )) 32 ))
kaccid budhaù svasty anaméva äste
çvaphalka-putro bhagavat-prapannaù
yaù kåñëa-pädäìkita-märga-päàsuñv
aceñöata prema-vibhinna-dhairyaù
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; budhaù—very learned; svasti—well; anamévaù—faultless; äste—does
exist; çvaphalka-putraù—the son of Çvaphalka, Akrüra; bhagavat—regarding the
Personality of Godhead; prapannaù—surrendered; yaù—one who; kåñëa—the Lord;
päda-aìkita—marked with footprints; märga—path; päàsuñu—in the dust; aceñöata—
exhibited; prema-vibhinna—lost in transcendental love; dhairyaù—mental equilibrium.
TRANSLATION
Please tell me whether Akrüra, the son of Çvaphalka, is doing well. He is a faultless soul
surrendered unto the Personality of Godhead. He once lost his mental equilibrium due to
his ecstasy of transcendental love and fell down on the dust of a road which was marked
with the footprints of Lord Kåñëa.
PURPORT
When Akrüra came to Våndävana in search of Kåñëa, he saw the footprints of the Lord
on the dust of Nanda-gräma and at once fell on them in ecstasy of transcendental love.
This ecstasy is possible for a devotee who is fully absorbed in incessant thoughts of
Kåñëa. Such a pure devotee of the Lord is naturally faultless because he is always
associated with the supremely pure Personality of Godhead. Constant thought of the
Lord is the antiseptic method for keeping oneself free from the infectious
contamination of the material qualities. The pure devotee of the Lord is always in
company with the Lord by thinking of Him. Yet, in the particular context of time and
38
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
place, the transcendental emotions take a different turn, and this breaks the mental
equilibrium of the devotee. Lord Caitanya displayed the typical example of
transcendental ecstasy, as we can understand from the life of this incarnation of God.
TEXT 33
k-iÀiC^v& devk->aaeJaPau}Yaa
ivZ<auPa[JaaYaa wv devMaaTau" )
Yaa vE SvGa>aeR<a dDaar dev&
}aYaq YaQaa YajivTaaNaMaQaRMa( )) 33 ))
kaccic chivaà devaka-bhoja-putryä
viñëu-prajäyä iva deva-mätuù
yä vai sva-garbheëa dadhära devaà
trayé yathä yajïa-vitänam artham
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; çivam—everything well; devaka-bhoja-putryäù—of the daughter of
King Devaka-bhoja; viñëu-prajäyäù—of she who gave birth to the Personality of
Godhead; iva—like that of; deva-mätuù—of the mother of the demigods (Aditi); yä—
one who; vai—indeed; sva-garbheëa—by her own womb; dadhära—conceived; devam—
the Supreme Lord; trayé—the Vedas; yathä—as much as; yajïa-vitänam—of spreading
the sacrifice; artham—purpose.
TRANSLATION
As the Vedas are the reservoir of sacrificial purposes, so the daughter of King Devakabhoja
conceived the Supreme Personality of Godhead in her womb, as did the mother of
the demigods. Is she [Devaké] doing well?
PURPORT
The Vedas are full of transcendental knowledge and spiritual values, and thus Devaké,
the mother of Lord Kåñëa, conceived the Lord in her womb as the personified meaning
of the Vedas. There is no difference between the Vedas and the Lord. The Vedas aim at
39
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the understanding of the Lord, and the Lord is the Vedas personified. Devaké is
compared to the meaningful Vedas and the Lord to their purpose personified.
TEXT 34
AiPaiSvdaSTae >aGavaNa( Sau%& vae
Ya" SaaTvTaa& k-aMadugaae_iNaåÖ" )
YaMaaMaNaiNTa SMa ih XaBdYaaeiNa&
MaNaaeMaYa& SatvTaurqYaTatvMa( )) 34 ))
apisvid äste bhagavän sukhaà vo
yaù sätvatäà käma-dugho 'niruddhaù
yam ämananti sma hi çabda-yonià
mano-mayaà sattva-turéya-tattvam
SYNONYMS
api—as also; svit—whether; äste—does He; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
sukham—all happiness; vaù—of you; yaù—one who; sätvatäm—of the devotees; kämadughaù—
source of all desires; aniruddhaù—the plenary expansion Aniruddha; yam—
whom; ämananti—they accept; sma—from yore; hi—certainly; çabda-yonim—the cause
of the Åg Veda; manaù-mayam—creator of the mind; sattva—transcendental; turéya—
the fourth expansion; tattvam—principle.
TRANSLATION
May I inquire whether Aniruddha is doing well? He is the fulfiller of all the desires of the
pure devotees and has been considered from yore to be the cause of the Åg Veda, the
creator of the mind and the fourth Plenary expansion of Viñëu.
PURPORT
Ädi-caturbhuja, the original expansions from Baladeva, are Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa,
Pradyumna and Aniruddha. All of Them are viñëu-tattvas, or nondifferent Personalities
of Godhead. In the incarnation of Çré Räma, all these different expansions appeared for
particular pastimes. Lord Räma is the original Väsudeva, and His brothers were
40
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. Aniruddha is also the cause of Mahä-Viñëu,
from whose breathing the Åg Veda appeared. All this is nicely explained in the
Märkaëòeya Puräëa. In the incarnation of Lord Kåñëa, Aniruddha appeared as the son
of the Lord. Lord Kåñëa in Dvärakä is the Väsudeva expansion of the original group.
The original Lord Kåñëa never leaves Goloka Våndävana. All the plenary expansions
are one and the same viñëu-tattva, and there is no difference in Their potency.
TEXT 35
AiPaiSvdNYae c iNaJaaTMadEv‚
MaNaNYav*tYaa SaMaNauv]Taa Yae )
ôdqk-SaTYaaTMaJacaådeZ<a‚
GadadYa" SviSTa criNTa SaaEMYa )) 35 ))
apisvid anye ca nijätma-daivam
ananya-våttyä samanuvratä ye
hådéka-satyätmaja-cärudeñëagadädayaù
svasti caranti saumya
SYNONYMS
api—as also; svit—whether; anye—others; ca—and; nija-ätma—of one's own self;
daivam—Çré Kåñëa; ananya—absolutely; våttyä—faith; samanuvratäù—followers; ye—
all those who; hådéka—Hådéka; satya-ätmaja—the son of Satyabhämä; cärudeñëa—
Cärudeñëa; gada—Gada; ädayaù—and others; svasti—all well; caranti—pass time;
saumya—O sober one.
TRANSLATION
O sober one, others, such as Hådéka, Cärudeñëa, Gada and the son of Satyabhämä, who
accept Lord Çré Kåñëa as the soul of the self and thus follow His path without
deviation—are they well?
TEXT 36
41
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
AiPa Svdae>Yaa| ivJaYaaCYauTaa>Yaa&
DaMaeR<a DaMaR" PairPaaiTa SaeTauMa( )
duYaaeRDaNaae_TaPYaTa YaTSa>aaYaa&
SaaMa]aJYal/+MYaa ivJaYaaNauv*tYaa )) 36 ))
api sva-dorbhyäà vijayäcyutäbhyäà
dharmeëa dharmaù paripäti setum
duryodhano 'tapyata yat-sabhäyäà
sämräjya-lakñmyä vijayänuvåttyä
SYNONYMS
api—as also; sva-dorbhyäm—own arms; vijaya—Arjuna; acyutä-bhyäm—along with Çré
Kåñëa; dharmeëa—on religious principles; dharmaù—King Yudhiñöhira; paripäti—
maintains; setum—the respect of religion; duryodhanaù—Duryodhana; atapyata—
envied; yat—whose; sabhäyäm—royal assembly; sämräjya—imperial; lakñmyä—
opulence; vijaya-anuvåttyä—by the service of Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
Also let me inquire whether Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira is now maintaining the kingdom
according to religious principles and with respect for the path of religion. Formerly
Duryodhana was burning with envy because Yudhiñöhira was being protected by the arms
of Kåñëa and Arjuna as if they were his own arms.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was the emblem of religion. When he was ruling his kingdom with
the help of Lord Kåñëa and Arjuna, the opulence of his kingdom surpassed all
imaginations of the opulence of the kingdom of heaven. His actual arms were Lord
Kåñëa and Arjuna, and thus he surpassed everyone's opulence. Duryodhana, being
envious of this opulence, planned so many schemes to put Yudhiñöhira into difficulty,
and at last the Battle of Kurukñetra was brought about. After the Battle of Kurukñetra,
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was again able to rule his legitimate kingdom, and he reinstated
the principles of honor and respect for religion. That is the beauty of a kingdom ruled by
42
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
a pious king like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira.
TEXT 37
ik&- va k*-TaagaeZvgaMaTYaMazs
>aqMaae_ihvÕqgaRTaMa& VYaMauÄTa( )
YaSYaax(iga]PaaTa& r<a>aUNaR Saehe
MaaGa| GadaYaaêrTaae ivic}aMa( )) 37 ))
kià vä kåtägheñv agham atyamarñé
bhémo 'hivad dérghatamaà vyamuïcat
yasyäìghri-pätaà raëa-bhür na sehe
märgaà gadäyäç carato vicitram
SYNONYMS
kim—whether; vä—either; kåta—performed; agheñu—unto the sinners; agham—anger;
ati-amarñé—unconquerable; bhémaù—Bhéma; ahi-vat—like a cobra; dérgha-tamam—
long-cherished; vyamuïcat—has released; yasya—whose; aìghri-pätam—putting on the
steps; raëa-bhüù—the field of battle; na—could not; sehe—tolerate; märgam—the path;
gadäyäù—by the clubs; carataù—playing; vicitram—wonderful.
TRANSLATION
[Please tell me] whether the unconquerable Bhéma, who is like a cobra, has released his
long-cherished anger upon the sinners? The field of battle could not tolerate even the
wonderful playing of his club when he stepped on the path.
PURPORT
Vidura knew the strength of Bhéma. Whenever Bhéma was on the battlefield, his steps
on the path and the wonderful playing of his club were unbearable for the enemy.
Powerful Bhéma did not take steps against the sons of Dhåtaräñöra for a long time.
Vidura's inquiry was whether he had yet released his anger, which was like that of a
suffering cobra. When a cobra releases its venom after long-cherished anger, its victim
cannot survive.
43
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.1.38
TEXT 38
k-iÀÛXaaeDaa rQaYaUQaPaaNaa&
Gaa<@qvDaNvaeParTaairraSTae )
Al/i+aTaae YaC^rkU-$=GaU!ae
MaaYaaik-raTaae iGairXaSTauTaaez )) 38 ))
kaccid yaçodhä ratha-yüthapänäà
gäëòéva-dhanvoparatärir äste
alakñito yac-chara-küöa-güòho
mäyä-kiräto giriças tutoña
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; yaçaù-dhä—famous; ratha-yüthapänäm—amongst the great chariot
warriors; gäëòéva—dhanvä—carrying the Gäëòéva bow, Arjuna; uparata-ariù—one who
has vanquished the enemies; äste—doing well; alakñitaù—without being identified;
yat—whose; çara-küöa-güòhaù—being covered by arrows; mäyä-kirätaù—false hunter;
giriçaù—Lord Çiva; tutoña—was satisfied.
TRANSLATION
[Please tell me] whether Arjuna, whose bow bears the name Gäëòéva and who is always
famous amongst the chariot warriors for vanquishing his enemies, is doing well. He once
satisfied Lord Çiva by covering him with arrows when Çiva came as an unidentified false
hunter.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva tested Arjuna's strength by picking a quarrel with him over a hunted boar. He
confronted Arjuna in the false dress of a hunter, and Arjuna covered him with arrows
until Lord Çiva was satisfied with Arjuna's fighting. He offered Arjuna the Päçupati
weapon and blessed him. Here Vidura inquired about the great warrior's well-being.
TEXT 39
44
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
YaMaavuTaiSvtaNaYaaE Pa*QaaYaa"
PaaQaOEv*RTaaE Pa+Mai>ari+a<aqv )
reMaaTa oÕaYa Ma*Dae SvirKQa&
ParaTSauPa<aaRivv viJa]v£-aTa( )) 39 ))
yamäv utasvit tanayau påthäyäù
pärthair våtau pakñmabhir akñiëéva
remäta uddäya mådhe sva-rikthaà
parät suparëäv iva vajri-vakträt
SYNONYMS
yamau—twins (Nakula and Sahadeva); utasvit—whether; tanayau—sons; påthäyäù—of
Påthä; pärthaiù—by the sons of Påthä; våtau—protected; pakñmabhiù—by the eyelids;
akñiëé—of the eyes; iva—like; remäte—playing carelessly; uddäya—snatching; mådhe—
in the fight; sva-riktham—own property; parät—from the enemy Duryodhana;
suparëau—Garuòa, the carrier of Lord Viñëu; iva—like; vajri-vakträt—from the mouth
of Indra.
TRANSLATION
Are the twin brothers who are protected by their brothers doing well? Just as the eye is
always protected by the eyelid, they are protected by the sons of Påthä, who snatched
back their rightful kingdom from the hands of their enemy Duryodhana, just as Garuòa
snatched nectar from the mouth of Indra, the thunderbolt carrier.
PURPORT
Indra, the King of heaven, carries a thunderbolt in his hand and is very strong, yet
Garuòa, the carrier of Lord Viñëu, was able to snatch nectar from his mouth. Similarly,
Duryodhana was as strong as the King of heaven, and still the sons of Påthä, the
Päëòavas, were able to snatch away their kingdom from Duryodhana. Both Garuòa and
the Pärthas are pet devotees of the Lord, and thus it was possible for them to face such
strong enemies.
Vidura's inquiry was about the youngest brothers of the Päëòavas, namely Nakula and
45
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Sahadeva. These twin brothers were sons of Mädré, the stepmother of the other
Päëòavas. But although they were stepbrothers, because Kunté took charge of them after
the departure of Mädré with her husband Mahäräja Päëòu, Nakula and Sahadeva were
as good as the other three Päëòavas, Yudhiñöhira, Bhéma and Arjuna. The five brothers
are known in the world as regular brothers. The three elder Päëòavas took care of the
younger brothers, just as the eyelid takes care of the eye. Vidura was anxious to know
whether, after winning back their own kingdom from the hands of Duryodhana, the
younger brothers were still living happily under the care of the elder brothers.
TEXT 40
Ahae Pa*QaaiPa iDa]YaTae_>aRk-aQaeR
raJaizRvYaeR<a ivNaaiPa TaeNa )
YaSTvek-vqrae_iDarQaae iviJaGYae
DaNauiÜRTaqYa" k-ku->aêTaó" )) 40 ))
aho påthäpi dhriyate 'rbhakärthe
räjarñi-varyeëa vinäpi tena
yas tv eka-véro 'dhiratho vijigye
dhanur dvitéyaù kakubhaç catasraù
SYNONYMS
aho—O my lord; påthä—Kunté; api—also; dhriyate—bears her life; arbhaka-arthe—for
the sake of fatherless children; räjarñi—King Päëòu; varyeëa—the best; vinä api—
without him; tena—him; yaù—one who; tu—but; eka—alone; véraù—the warrior;
adhirathaù—commander; vijigye—could conquer; dhanuù—the bow; dvitéyaù—the
second; kakubhaù—directions; catasraù—four.
TRANSLATION
O my lord, is Påthä still living? She lived only for the sake of her fatherless children;
otherwise it was impossible for her to live without King Päëòu, who was the greatest
commander and who alone conquered the four directions simply with the help of a second
bow.
46
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
A faithful wife cannot live without her lord, the husband, and therefore all widows used
to voluntarily embrace the burning fire which consumed the dead husband. This system
was very common in India because all the wives were chaste and faithful to their
husbands. Later on, with the advent of the age of Kali, the wives gradually began to be
less adherent to their husbands, and the voluntary embrace of the fire by the widows
became a thing of the past. Very recently the system was abolished, since the voluntary
system had become a forcible social custom.
When Mahäräja Päëòu died, both his wives, namely Kunté and Mädré, were prepared to
embrace the fire, but Mädré requested Kunté to live for the sake of the younger children,
the five Päëòavas. This was agreed upon by Kunté at the added request of Vyäsadeva. In
spite of her great bereavement, Kunté decided to live, not to enjoy life in the absence of
her husband, but only to give protection to the children. This incident is referred to
here by Vidura because he knew all the facts about his sister-in-law Kuntédevé. It is
understood that Mahäräja Päëòu was a great warrior and that he alone, with the help of
bow and arrow, could conquer the world's four directions. In the absence of such a
husband, it was almost impossible for Kunté to live on even as a widow, but she had to do
it for the sake of the five children.
TEXT 41
SaaEMYaaNauXaaece TaMaDa"PaTaNTa&
>a]a}ae PareTaaYa ivdud]uhe Ya" )
iNaYaaRiPaTaae YaeNa SauôTSvPauYaaR
Ah& SvPau}aaNa( SaMaNauv]TaeNa )) 41 ))
saumyänuçoce tam adhaù-patantaà
bhrätre paretäya vidudruhe yaù
niryäpito yena suhåt sva-puryä
ahaà sva-puträn samanuvratena
SYNONYMS
saumya—O gentle one; anuçoce—I lament; tam—him; adhaù-patantam—gliding down;
bhrätre—on his brother's; paretäya—death; vidudruhe—revolted against; yaù—one who;
47
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
niryäpitaù—driven out; yena—by whom; suhåt—well-wisher; sva-puryäù—from his own
house; aham—myself; sva-puträn—with his own sons; samanu-vratena—accepting the
same line of action.
TRANSLATION
O gentle one, I simply lament for he [Dhåtaräñöra] who rebelled against his brother after
death. By him I was driven out of my own house, although I am his sincere well-wisher,
because he accepted the line of action adopted by his own sons.
PURPORT
Vidura did not ask about the welfare of his elder brother because there was no chance of
his well-being, only news of his gliding down to hell. Vidura was a sincere well-wisher
for Dhåtaräñöra, and he had a thought about him in the corner of his heart. He lamented
that Dhåtaräñöra could rebel against the sons of his dead brother Päëòu and that he
could drive him (Vidura) out of his own house on the dictation of his crooked sons. In
spite of these actions, Vidura never became an enemy of Dhåtaräñöra but continued to
be his well-wisher, and at the last stage of Dhåtaräñöra's life, it was Vidura only who
proved to be his real friend. Such is the behavior of a Vaiñëava like Vidura: he desires all
good, even for his enemies.
SB 3.1.42
TEXT 42
Saae_h& hreMaRTYaRiv@MbNaeNa
d*Xaae Na*<aa& cal/YaTaae ivDaaTau" )
NaaNYaaePal/+Ya" Padvq& Pa[Saada‚
ÀraiMa PaXYaNa( GaTaivSMaYaae_}a )) 42 ))
so 'haà harer martya-viòambanena
dåço nåëäà cälayato vidhätuù
nänyopalakñyaù padavéà prasädäc
carämi paçyan gata-vismayo 'tra
SYNONYMS
48
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
saù aham—therefore, I; hareù—of the Personality of Godhead; martya—in this mortal
world; viòambanena—without being recognized; dåçaù—on sight; nåëäm—of the people
in general; cälayataù—bewildering; vidhätuù—in order to do it; na—not; anya—other;
upalakñyaù—seen by others; padavém—glories; prasädät—by the grace of; carämi—do
travel; paçyan—by seeing; gata-vismayaù—without doubt; atra—in this matter.
TRANSLATION
I am not astonished at this, having traveled over the world without being seen by others.
The activities of the Personality of Godhead, which are like those of a man in this mortal
world, are bewildering to others, but I know of His greatness by His grace, and thus I am
happy in all respects.
PURPORT
Although he was the brother of Dhåtaräñöra, Vidura was completely different. By the
grace of Lord Kåñëa, he was not foolish like his brother, and thus his brother's
association could not influence him. Dhåtaräñöra and his materialistic sons wanted to
falsely lord it over the world by dint of their own strength. The Lord encouraged them
in this, and thus they became more and more bewildered. But Vidura wanted to achieve
sincere devotional service of the Lord and therefore became a soul absolutely
surrendered to the Absolute Personality of Godhead. He could realize this in the
progress of his pilgrim's journey, and thus he was freed from all doubts. He was not at all
sorry to be bereft of his hearth and home because he now had experience that
dependence on the mercy of the Lord is a greater freedom than so-called freedom at
home. A person should not be in the renounced order of life unless he is firmly
convinced of being protected by the Lord. This stage of life is explained in Bhagavad-gétä
as abhayaà sattva-saàçuddhiù: every living entity is factually completely dependent on
the mercy of the Lord, but unless one is in the pure state of existence, he cannot be
established in this position. This stage of dependence is called sattva-saàçuddhiù, or
purification of one's existence. The result of such purification is exhibited in
fearlessness. A devotee of the Lord, who is called näräyaëa-para, is never afraid of
anything because he is always aware of the fact that the Lord protects him in all
circumstances. With this conviction, Vidura traveled alone, and he was not seen or
recognized by any friend or foe. Thus he enjoyed freedom of life without obligation to
the many duties of the world.
49
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
When Lord Çré Kåñëa was personally present in the mortal world in His eternal, blissful
form of Çyämasundara, those who were not pure devotees of the Lord could not
recognize Him or know His glories. Avajänänti mäà müòhä mänuñéà tanum äçritam (Bg.
9.11): He is always bewildering to the nondevotees, but He is always seen by the devotees
by dint of their pure devotional service to Him.
TEXT 43
NaUNa& Na*Paa<aa& i}aMadaeTPaQaaNaa&
Mahq& Mauhuêal/YaTaa& cMaUi>a" )
vDaaTPa[PaàaiTaRiJahqzRYaeXaae‚
_PYauPaE+aTaaga& >aGavaNa( ku-æ<aaMa( )) 43 ))
nünaà nåpäëäà tri-madotpathänäà
mahéà muhuç cälayatäà camübhiù
vadhät prapannärti-jihérñayeço
'py upaikñatäghaà bhagavän kurüëäm
SYNONYMS
nünam—of course; nåpäëäm—of the kings; tri—three; mada-utpathänäm—going astray
out of false pride; mahém—earth; muhuù—constantly; cälayatäm—agitating;
camübhiù—by movement of soldiers; vadhät—from the act of killing; prapanna—
surrendered; ärti-jihérñaya—willing to relieve the distress of the sufferers; éçaù—the
Lord; api—in spite of; upaikñata—waited; agham—offenses; bhagavän—the Supreme
Lord; kurüëäm—of the Kurus.
TRANSLATION
Despite His being the Lord and being always willing to relieve the distress of sufferers,
He [Kåñëa] refrained from killing the Kurus, although they committed all sorts of sins
and although He saw other kings constantly agitating the earth by their strong military
movements carried out under the dictation of three kinds of false pride.
PURPORT
50
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
As declared in Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord appears in the mortal world to execute His
much-needed mission of killing the miscreants and giving protection to the suffering
faithful. In spite of that mission, Lord Kåñëa tolerated the insult to Draupadé by the
Kurus and the injustices perpetrated against the Päëòavas, as well as insults to Himself.
The question may be raised, "Why did He tolerate such injustices and insults in His
presence? Why did He not chastise the Kurus immediately?" When Draupadé was
insulted in the assembly by the Kurus by their attempt to see her naked in the presence
of all, the Lord protected Draupadé by supplying an unlimited length of clothing. But He
did not chastise the insulting party immediately. This silence of the Lord did not mean,
however, that He excused the offenses of the Kurus. There were many other kings on
earth who had become very proud of three kinds of possessions—wealth, education and
followers—and they were constantly agitating the earth by movements of military
strength. The Lord was just waiting to get them together on the Battlefield of
Kurukñetra and kill them all at one time, just to make a short-cut in His killing mission.
Godless kings or heads of state, when puffed up by advancement of material wealth,
education and increase of population, always make a show of military strength and give
trouble to the innocent. When Lord Kåñëa was personally present, there were many
such kings all over the world, and He thus arranged for the Battle of Kurukñetra. In His
manifestation of viçva-rüpa, the Lord expressed His mission of killing as follows: "I have
willingly descended on the earth in My capacity of inexorable Time in order to decrease
the unwanted population. I shall finish all those who have assembled here except you,
the Päëòavas. This killing does not wait for you to take part in it. It is already arranged:
all will be killed by Me. If you want to become famous as the hero of the battlefield and
thus enjoy the booty of war, then, O Savyasäcé, just become the immediate cause of this
killing and thus take the credit. I have already killed all the great warriors—Bhéñma,
Droëa, Jayadratha, Karëa and many other great generals. Do not worry. Fight the battle
and be famous as a great hero." (Bg. 11.32-34)
The Lord always wants to see His devotee as the hero of some episode which He Himself
performs. He wanted to see His devotee and friend Arjuna as the hero of the Battle of
Kurukñetra, and thus He waited for all the miscreants of the world to assemble. That,
and nothing else, is the explanation of His waiting.
TEXT 44
AJaSYa JaNMaaeTPaQaNaaXaNaaYa
51
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
k-MaaR<Yak-TauRGa]Rh<aaYa Pau&SaaMa( )
NaNvNYaQaa k-ae_hRiTa dehYaaeGa&
Parae Gau<aaNaaMauTa k-MaRTaN}aMa( )) 44 ))
ajasya janmotpatha-näçanäya
karmäëy akartur grahaëäya puàsäm
nanv anyathä ko 'rhati deha-yogaà
paro guëänäm uta karma-tantram
SYNONYMS
ajasya—of the unborn; janma—appearance; utpatha-näçanäya—f or the sake of
annihilating the upstarts; karmäëi—works; akartuù—of one who has nothing to do;
grahaëäya—to take up; puàsäm—of all persons; nanu anyathä—otherwise; kaù—who;
arhati—may deserve; deha-yogam—contact of the body; paraù—transcendental;
guëänäm—of the three modes of nature; uta—what to speak of; karma-tantram—the
law of action and reaction.
TRANSLATION
The appearance of the Lord is manifested for the annihilation of the upstarts. His
activities are transcendental and are enacted for the understanding of all persons.
Otherwise, since the Lord is transcendental to all material modes, what purpose could He
serve by coming to earth?
PURPORT
Éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù (Bs. 5.1): the form of the Lord is
eternal, blissful, and all-satisfying. His so-called birth is therefore an appearance only,
like the birth of the sun on the horizon. His birth does not, like that of the living
entities, take place under the influence of material nature and the bondage of the
reactions of past deeds. His works and activities are independent pastimes and are not
subject to the reactions of material nature. In Bhagavad-gétä (4.14) it is said:
na mäà karmäëi limpanti
na me karma-phale spåhä
52
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
iti mäà yo 'bhijänäti
karmabhir na sa badhyate
The law of karma enacted by the Supreme Lord for the living entities cannot be
applicable to Him, nor has the Lord any desire to improve Himself by activities like
those of ordinary living beings. Ordinary living beings work for the improvement of
their conditional lives. But the Lord is already full of all opulence, all strength, all fame,
all beauty, all knowledge and all renunciation. Why should He desire improvement? No
one can excel Him in any opulence, and therefore the desire for improvement is
absolutely useless for Him. One should always discriminate between the activities of the
Lord and those of ordinary living beings. Thus one may come to the right conclusion
regarding the Lord's transcendental position. One who can come to the conclusion of
the Lord's transcendence can become a devotee of the Lord and can at once be free from
all reactions of past deeds. It is said, karmäëi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhäjäm: the Lord
minimizes or nullifies the reactionary influence of the devotee's past deeds. (Bs. 5.54)
The activities of the Lord are to be accepted and relished by all living entities. His
activities are to attract the ordinary man towards the Lord. The Lord always acts in
favor of the devotees, and therefore ordinary men who are fruitive actors or seekers of
salvation may be attracted to the Lord when He acts as protector of the devotees. The
fruitive actors can attain their goals by devotional service, and the salvationists can also
attain their goal in life by devotional service to the Lord. The devotees do not want the
fruitive results of their work, nor do they want any kind of salvation. They relish the
glorious superhuman activities of the Lord, such as His lifting Govardhana Hill and His
killing the demon Pütanä in infancy. His activities are enacted to attract all kinds of
men—karmés, jïänés and bhaktas. Because He is transcendental to all laws of karma,
there is no possibility of His accepting a form of mäyä as is forced on the ordinary living
entities who are bound by the actions and reactions of their own deeds.
The secondary purpose of His appearance is to annihilate the upstart asuras and to stop
the nonsense of atheistic propaganda by less intelligent persons. By the Lord's causeless
mercy, the asuras who are killed personally by the Personality of Godhead get salvation.
The meaningful appearance of the Lord is always distinct from ordinary birth. Even the
pure devotees have no connection with the material body, and certainly the Lord, who
appears as He is, in His sac-cid-änanda [Bs. 5.1] form, is not limited by a material form.
TEXT 45
53
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TaSYa Pa[Paàai%l/l/aek-PaaNaa‚
MaviSQaTaaNaaMaNauXaaSaNae Sve )
AQaaRYa JaaTaSYa YaduZvJaSYa
vaTaa| Sa%e k-ITaRYa TaqQaRk-ITaeR" )) 45 ))
tasya prapannäkhila-lokapänäm
avasthitänäm anuçäsane sve
arthäya jätasya yaduñv ajasya
värtäà sakhe kértaya tértha-kérteù
SYNONYMS
tasya—His; prapanna—surrendered; akhila-loka-pänäm—all rulers of the entire
universe; avasthitänäm—situated in; anuçäsane—under the control of; sve—own self;
arthäya—for the interest of; jätasya—of the born; yaduñu—in the family of the Yadus;
ajasya—of the unborn; värtäm—topics; sakhe—O my friend; kértaya—please narrate;
tértha-kérteù—of the Lord, whose glories are chanted in the places of pilgrimage.
TRANSLATION
O my friend, please, therefore, chant the glories of the Lord, who is meant to be glorified
in the places of pilgrimage. He is unborn, and yet He appears by His causeless mercy
upon the surrendered rulers of all parts of the universe. Only for their interest did He
appear in the family of His unalloyed devotees the Yadus.
PURPORT
There are innumerable rulers all over the universe in different varieties of planets: the
sun-god in the sun planet, the moon-god in the moon planet, Indra in the heavenly
planet, Väyu, Varuëa, and those in the Brahmaloka planet, where Lord Brahmä is living.
All are obedient servants of the Lord. Whenever there is any trouble in the
administration of the innumerable planets in different universes, the rulers pray for an
appearance, and the Lord appears. The Bhägavatam (1.3.28) has already confirmed this
in the following verse:
ete cäàça-kaläù puàsaù
54
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam
indräri-vyäkulaà lokaà
måòayanti yuge yuge
In every millennium, whenever there is any trouble for the obedient rulers, the Lord
appears. He also appears for the sake of His pure unalloyed devotees. The surrendered
rulers and the pure devotees are always strictly under the control of the Lord, and they
are never disobedient to the desires of the Lord. The Lord is therefore always attentive
to them.
The purpose of pilgrimages is to remember the Lord constantly, and therefore the Lord
is known as tértha-kérti. The purpose of going to a place of pilgrimage is to get the chance
to glorify the Lord. Even today, although times have changed, there are still pilgrimage
sites in India. For example, in Mathurä and Våndävana, where we had a chance to stay,
people are awake from early in the morning at 4 A.M. up until nighttime and are
constantly engaged, some way or other, in chanting the holy glories of the Lord. The
beauty of such a pilgrimage site is that automatically one remembers the holy glories of
the Lord. His name, fame, quality, form, pastimes and entourage are all identical to the
Lord, and therefore chanting the glories of the Lord invokes the personal presence of
the Lord. Any time or anywhere pure devotees meet and chant the glories of the Lord,
the Lord is present without any doubt. It is said by the Lord Himself that He always stays
where His pure devotees chant His glories.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, First Chapter, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "Questions by Vidura."
2. Remembrance of Lord Kåñëa
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
wiTa >aaGavTa" Pa*í" +aT}aa vaTaa| iPa[Yaaé[YaaMa( )
55
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Pa[iTav¢u-& Na caeTSaeh AaETk-<#yaTSMaairTaeìr" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti bhägavataù påñöaù
kñatträ värtäà priyäçrayäm
prativaktuà na cotseha
autkaëöhyät smäriteçvaraù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva said; iti—thus; bhägavataù—the great devotee; påñöaù—
being asked; kñatträ—by Vidura; värtäm—message; priya-äçrayäm—regarding the
dearest; prativaktum—to reply; na—not; ca—also; utsehe—became eager; autkaëöhyät—
by excessive anxiety; smärita—remembrance; éçvaraù—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: When the great devotee Uddhava was asked by Vidura to
speak on the messages of the dearest [Lord Kåñëa], Uddhava was unable to answer
immediately due to excessive anxiety at the remembrance of the Lord.
TEXT 2
Ya" PaÄhaYaNaae Maa}aa Pa[aTaraXaaYa YaaicTa" )
TaàEC^d]cYaNa( YaSYa SaPaYaa| bal/l/Il/Yaa )) 2 ))
yaù païca-häyano mäträ
prätar-äçäya yäcitaù
tan naicchad racayan yasya
saparyäà bäla-lélayä
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; païca—five; häyanaù—years old; mäträ—by his mother; prätaù-äçäya—
for breakfast; yäcitaù—called for; tat—that; na—not; aicchat—liked; racayan—playing;
yasya—whose; saparyäm—service; bäla-lélayä—childhood.
56
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
He was one who even in his childhood, at the age of five years, was so absorbed in the
service of Lord Kåñëa that when he was called by his mother for morning breakfast, he
did not wish to have it.
PURPORT
From his very birth, Uddhava was a natural devotee of Lord Kåñëa, or a nitya-siddha, a
liberated soul. From natural instinct he used to serve Lord Kåñëa, even in his childhood.
He used to play with dolls in the form of Kåñëa, he would serve the dolls by dressing,
feeding and worshiping them, and thus he was constantly absorbed in the play of
transcendental realization. These are the signs of an eternally liberated soul. An
eternally liberated soul is a devotee of the Lord who never forgets Him. Human life is
meant for reviving one's eternal relation with the Lord, and all religious injunctions are
meant for awakening this dormant instinct of the living entity. The sooner this
awakening is brought about, the quicker the mission of human life is fulfilled. In a good
family of devotees, the child gets the opportunity to serve the Lord in many ways. A soul
who is already advanced in devotional service has the opportunity to take birth in such
an enlightened family. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (6.41). Çucénäà çrématäà
gehe yoga-bhrañöo 'bhijäyate: even the fallen devotee gets the opportunity to take his
birth in the family of a well-situated brähmaëa or in a rich, well-to-do mercantile family.
In both these families there is a good opportunity to revive one's sense of God
consciousness automatically because particularly in these families the worship of Lord
Kåñëa is regularly performed and the child gets the opportunity to imitate the process of
worship called arcanä.
The päïcarätriké formula for training persons in devotional service is temple worship,
whereby the neophytes get the opportunity to learn devotional service to the Lord.
Mahäräja Parékñit also used to play with Kåñëa dolls in his childhood. In India the
children in good families are still given dolls of the Lord like Räma and Kåñëa, or
sometimes the demigods, so that they may develop the aptitude of service to the Lord.
By the grace of the Lord we were given the same opportunity by our parents, and the
beginning of our life was based on this principle.
TEXT 3
57
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Sa k-Qa& SaevYaa TaSYa k-ale/Na JarSa& GaTa" )
Pa*íae vaTaa| Pa[iTab]UYaaÙTauR" PaadavNauSMarNa( )) 3 ))
sa kathaà sevayä tasya
kälena jarasaà gataù
påñöo värtäà pratibrüyäd
bhartuù pädäv anusmaran
SYNONYMS
saù—Uddhava; katham—how; sevayä—by such service; tasya—his; kälena—in course
of time; jarasam—invalidity; gataù—undergone; påñöaù—asked for; värtäm—message;
pratibrüyät—just to reply; bhartuù—of the Lord; pädau—His lotus feet; anusmaran—
remembering.
TRANSLATION
Uddhava thus served the Lord continually from childhood, and in his old age that attitude
of service never slackened. As soon as he was asked about the message of the Lord, he at
once remembered all about Him.
PURPORT
Transcendental service to the Lord is not mundane. The service attitude of the devotee
gradually increases and never becomes slackened. Generally, in old age a person is
allowed retirement from mundane service. But in the transcendental service of the Lord
there is no retirement at all; on the contrary, the service attitude increases more and
more with the progress of age. In the transcendental service there is no satiation, and
therefore there is no retirement. Materially, when a man becomes tired by rendering
service in his physical body, he is allowed retirement, but in the transcendental service
there is no feeling of fatigue because it is spiritual service and is not on the bodily plane.
Service on the bodily plane dwindles as the body grows older, but the spirit is never old,
and therefore on the spiritual plane the service is never tiresome.
Uddhava undoubtedly became old, but that does not mean that his spirit became old.
His service attitude matured on the transcendental plane, and therefore as soon as he
was questioned by Vidura about Lord Kåñëa, he at once remembered his Lord by
58
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
reference to the context and forgot himself on the physical plane. That is the sign of
pure devotional service to the Lord, as will be explained later on (lakñaëaà bhaktiyogasya,
etc.) in Lord Kapila's instructions to His mother, Devahüti.
TEXT 4
Sa MauhUTaRMa>aUtaUZ<aq& k*-Z<aax(iga]SauDaYaa >a*XaMa( )
Taqv]e<a >ai¢-YaaeGaeNa iNaMaGan" SaaDau iNav*RTa" )) 4 ))
sa muhürtam abhüt tüñëéà
kåñëäìghri-sudhayä bhåçam
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
nimagnaù sädhu nirvåtaù
SYNONYMS
saù—Uddhava; muhürtam—for a moment; abhüt—became; tüñëém—dead silent; kåñëaaìghri—
the lotus feet of the Lord; sudhayä—by the nectar; bhåçam—well matured;
tévreëa—by very strong; bhakti-yogena—devotional service; nimagnaù—absorbed in;
sädhu—good; nirvåtaù—fully in love.
TRANSLATION
For a moment he remained dead silent, and his body did not move. He became absorbed in
the nectar of remembering the Lord's lotus feet in devotional ecstasy, and he appeared to
be going increasingly deeper into that ecstasy.
PURPORT
On the inquiry by Vidura about Kåñëa, Uddhava appeared to be awakened from
slumber. He appeared to regret that he had forgotten the lotus feet of the Lord. Thus he
again remembered the lotus feet of the Lord and remembered all his transcendental
loving service unto Him, and by so doing he felt the same ecstasy that he used to feel in
the presence of the Lord. Because the Lord is absolute, there is no difference between
His remembrance and His personal presence. Thus Uddhava remained completely silent
for a moment, but then he appeared to be going deeper and deeper into ecstasy. Feelings
59
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of ecstasy are displayed by highly advanced devotees of the Lord. There are eight kinds
of transcendental changes in the body—tears, shivering of the body, perspiration,
restlessness, throbbing, choking of the throat, etc.—and all were manifested by
Uddhava in the presence of Vidura.
TEXT 5
Paul/k-aeiÙàSavaR(r)ae MauÄNMaql/d(d*Xaa éuc" )
PaU<aaRQaaeR l/i+aTaSTaeNa òehPa[SarSaMPlu/Ta" )) 5 ))
pulakodbhinna-sarväìgo
muïcan mélad-dåçä çucaù
pürëärtho lakñitas tena
sneha-prasara-samplutaù
SYNONYMS
pulaka-udbhinna—bodily changes of transcendental ecstasy; sarva-aìgaù—every part of
the body; muïcan—smearing; mélat—opening; dåçä—by the eyes; çucaù—tears of grief;
pürëa-arthaù—complete achievement; lakñitaù—thus observed; tena—by Vidura; snehaprasara—
extensive love; samplutaù—thoroughly assimilated.
TRANSLATION
It was so observed by Vidura that Uddhava had all the transcendental bodily changes due
to total ecstasy, and he was trying to wipe away tears of separation from his eyes. Thus
Vidura could understand that Uddhava had completely assimilated extensive love for the
Lord.
PURPORT
The symptoms of the highest order of devotional life were observed by Vidura, an
experienced devotee of the Lord, and he confirmed Uddhava's perfectional stage of love
of Godhead. Ecstatic bodily changes are manifested from the spiritual plane and are not
artificial expressions developed by practice. There are three different stages of
development in devotional service. The first stage is that of following the regulative
60
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
principles prescribed in the codes of devotional service, the second stage is that of
assimilation and realization of the steady condition of devotional service, and the last
stage is that of ecstasy symptomized by transcendental bodily expression. The nine
different modes of devotional service, such as hearing, chanting and remembering, are
the beginning of the process. By regular hearing of the glories and pastimes of the Lord,
the impurities in the student's heart begin to be washed off. The more one is cleansed of
impurities, the more one becomes fixed in devotional service. Gradually the activities
take the forms of steadiness, firm faith, taste, realization and assimilation, one after
another. These different stages of gradual development increase love of God to the
highest stage, and in the highest stage there are still more symptoms, such as affection,
anger and attachment, gradually rising in exceptional cases to the mahä-bhäva stage,
which is generally not possible for the living entities. All these were manifested by Lord
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, the personification of love of God.
In the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, the chief disciple of Lord Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu, these transcendental symptoms displayed by pure devotees like
Uddhava are systematically described. We have written a summary study of Bhaktirasämåta-
sindhu entitled The Nectar of Devotion, and one may consult this book for
more detailed information on the science of devotional service.
TEXT 6
XaNakE->aRGavçaek-aà*l/aek&- PauNaraGaTa" )
ivMa*JYa Nae}ae ivdur& Pa[qTYaahaeÖv oTSMaYaNa( )) 6 ))
çanakair bhagaval-lokän
nålokaà punar ägataù
vimåjya netre viduraà
prétyähoddhava utsmayan
SYNONYMS
çanakaiù—gradually; bhagavat—the Lord; lokät—from the abode; nålokam—the planet
of the human beings; punaù ägataù—coming again; vimåjya—wiping; netre—eyes;
viduram—unto Vidura; prétyä—in affection; äha—said; uddhavaù—Uddhava;
utsmayan—by all those remembrances.
61
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The great devotee Uddhava soon came back from the abode of the Lord to the human
plane, and wiping his eyes, he awakened his reminiscence of the past and spoke to Vidura
in a pleasing mood.
PURPORT
When Uddhava was fully absorbed in the transcendental ecstasy of love of God, he
actually forgot all about the external world. The pure devotee lives constantly in the
abode of the Supreme Lord, even in the present body, which apparently belongs to this
world. The pure devotee is not exactly on the bodily plane, since he is absorbed in the
transcendental thought of the Supreme. When Uddhava wanted to speak to Vidura, he
came down from the abode of the Lord, Dvärakä, to the material plane of human beings.
Even though a pure devotee is present on this mortal planet, he is here in relation to the
Lord for engagement in transcendental loving service, and not for any material cause. A
living entity can live either on the material plane or in the transcendental abode of the
Lord, in accordance with his existential condition. The conditional changes of the
living entity are explained in the Caitanya-caritämåta in the instructions given to Çréla
Rüpa Gosvämé by Lord Çré Caitanya: "The living entities all over the universes are
enjoying the effects of the respective fruitive results of their own work, life after life.
Out of all of them, some may be influenced by the association of pure devotees and thus
get the chance to execute devotional service by attainment of taste. This taste is the
seed of devotional service, and one who is fortunate enough to have received such a seed
is advised to sow it in the core of his heart. As one cultivates a seed by pouring water to
fructify it, the seed of devotional service sown in the heart of the devotee may be
cultured by pouring water in the form of hearing and chanting of the holy name and
pastimes of the Lord. The creeper of devotional service, so nourished, gradually grows,
and the devotee, acting as a gardener, goes on pouring the water of constant hearing and
chanting. The creeper of devotional service gradually grows so high that it passes
through the entire material universe and enters into the spiritual sky, growing still
higher and higher until it reaches the planet Goloka Våndävana. The devotee-gardener
is in touch with the abode of the Lord even from the material plane by dint of
performing devotional service to the Lord simply by hearing and chanting. As a creeper
takes shelter of another, stronger tree, similarly the creeper of devotional service,
nourished by the devotee, takes shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord and thus becomes
fixed. When the creeper is fixed, then the fruit of the creeper comes into existence, and
62
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the gardener who nourished it is able to enjoy this fruit of love, and his life becomes
successful." That Uddhava attained this stage is evident from his dealings. He could
simultaneously reach the supreme planet and still appear in this world.
SB 3.2.7
TEXT 7
oÖv ovac
k*-Z<aÛuMai<aiNaãaece Gaq<aeRZvJaGare<a h )
ik&- Nau Na" ku-Xal&/ b]UYaa& GaTaé[qzu Ga*heZvhMa( )) 7 ))
uddhava uväca
kåñëa-dyumaëi nimloce
gérëeñv ajagareëa ha
kià nu naù kuçalaà brüyäà
gata-çréñu gåheñv aham
SYNONYMS
uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; kåñëa-dyumaëi—the Kåñëa sun; nimloce—having
set; gérëeñu—being swallowed; ajagareëa—by the great snake; ha—in the past; kim—
what; nu—else; naù—our; kuçalam—welfare; brüyäm—may I say; gata—gone away;
çréñu gåheñu—in the house; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Vidura, the sun of the world, Lord Kåñëa, has set, and our
house has now been swallowed by the great snake of time. What can I say to you about
our welfare?
PURPORT
The disappearance of the Kåñëa sun may be explained as follows, according to the
commentary of Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura. Vidura was struck with great
sorrow when he got the hint of the annihilation of the great Yadu dynasty as well as of
his own family, the Kuru dynasty. Uddhava could understand the grief of Vidura, and
therefore he first of all wanted to sympathize with him by saying that after the sunset
63
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
everyone is in darkness. Since the entire world was merged in the darkness of grief,
neither Vidura nor Uddhava nor anyone else could be happy. Uddhava was as much
aggrieved as Vidura, and there was nothing further to be said about their welfare.
The comparison of Kåñëa to the sun is very appropriate. As soon as the sun sets,
darkness automatically appears. But the darkness experienced by the common man does
not affect the sun itself either at the time of sunrise or of sunset. Lord Kåñëa's
appearance and disappearance are exactly like that of the sun. He appears and
disappears in innumerable universes, and as long as He is present in a particular
universe there is all transcendental light in that universe, but the universe from which
He passes away is put into darkness. His pastimes, however, are everlasting. The Lord is
always present in some universe, just as the sun is present in either the eastern or the
western hemisphere. The sun is always present either in India or in America, but when
the sun is present in India, the American land is in darkness, and when the sun is
present in America, the Indian hemisphere is in darkness.
As the sun appears in the morning and gradually rises to the meridian and then again
sets in one hemisphere while simultaneously rising in the other, so Lord Kåñëa's
disappearance in one universe and the beginning of His different pastimes in another
take place simultaneously. As soon as one pastime is finished here, it is manifested in
another universe. And thus His nitya-lélä, or eternal pastimes, are going on without
ending. As the sunrise takes place once in twenty-four hours, similarly the pastimes of
Lord Kåñëa take place in a universe once in a daytime of Brahmä, the account of which
is given in the Bhagavad-gétä as 4,300,000,000 solar years. But wherever the Lord is
present, all His different pastimes as described in the revealed scriptures take place at
regular intervals.
As at sunset the snakes become powerful, thieves are encouraged, ghosts become active,
the lotus becomes disfigured and the cakraväké laments, so with the disappearance of
Lord Kåñëa, the atheists feel enlivened, and the devotees become sorry.
TEXT 8
du>aRGaae bTa l/aek-ae_Ya& Yadvae iNaTaraMaiPa )
Yae Sa&vSaNTaae Na ivduhRir„& MaqNaa wvae@uPaMa( )) 8 ))
durbhago bata loko 'yaà
yadavo nitaräm api
64
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ye saàvasanto na vidur
harià ménä ivoòupam
SYNONYMS
durbhagaù—unfortunate; bata—certainly; lokaù—universe; ayam—this; yadavaù—the
Yadu dynasty; nitaräm—more specifically; api—also; ye—those; saàvasantaù—living
together; na—did not; viduù—understand; harim—the Personality of Godhead;
ménäù—the fishes; iva uòupam—like the moon.
TRANSLATION
This universe with all its planets is most unfortunate. And even more unfortunate are the
members of the Yadu dynasty because they could not identify Lord Hari as the
Personality of Godhead, any more than the fish could identify the moon.
PURPORT
Uddhava lamented for the unfortunate persons of the world who could not recognize
Lord Çré Kåñëa in spite of seeing all His transcendental godly qualities. From the very
beginning of His appearance within the prison bars of King Kaàsa up to His mausalalélä,
although He exhibited His potencies as the Personality of Godhead in the six
opulences of wealth, strength, fame, beauty, knowledge and renunciation, the foolish
persons of the world could not understand that He was the Supreme Lord, Foolish
persons might have thought Him an extraordinary historic figure because they had no
intimate touch with the Lord, but more unfortunate were the family members of the
Lord, the members of the Yadu dynasty, who were always in company with the Lord but
were unable to recognize Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Uddhava
lamented his own fortune also because although he knew Kåñëa to be the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he could not properly use the opportunity to render devotional
service to the Lord. He regretted everyone's misfortune, including his own. The pure
devotee of the Lord thinks himself most unfortunate. That is due to excessive love for
the Lord and is one of the transcendental perceptions of viraha, the suffering of
separation.
It is learned from the revealed scriptures that the moon was born from the milk ocean.
There is a milk ocean in the upper planets, and there Lord Viñëu, who controls the
heart of every living being as Paramätmä (the Supersoul), resides as the Kñérodakaçäyé
65
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Viñëu. Those who do not believe in the existence of the ocean of milk because they have
experience only of the salty water in the ocean should know that the world is also called
the go, which means the cow. The urine of a cow is salty, and according to Äyur-vedic
medicine the cow's urine is very effective in treating patients suffering from liver
trouble. Such patients may not have any experience of the cow's milk because milk is
never given to liver patients. But the liver patient may know that the cow has milk also,
although he has never tasted it. Similarly, men who have experience only of this tiny
planet where the saltwater ocean exists may take information from the revealed
scriptures that there is also an ocean of milk, although we have never seen it. From this
ocean of milk the moon was born, but the fish in the milk ocean could not recognize
that the moon. was not another fish and was different from them. The fish took the
moon to be one of them or maybe something illuminating, but nothing more. The
unfortunate persons who do not recognize Lord Kåñëa are like such fish. They take Him
to be one of them, although a little extraordinary in opulence, strength, etc. The
Bhagavad-gétä (9.11) confirms such foolish persons to be most unfortunate: avajänanti
mäà müòhä mänuñéà tanum äçritam.
TEXT 9
wi(r)Taja" PauåPa[aE!a Wk-araMaaê SaaTvTaa" )
SaaTvTaaMa*z>a& SaveR >aUTaavaSaMaMa&SaTa )) 9 ))
iìgita-jïäù puru-prauòhä
ekärämäç ca sätvatäù
sätvatäm åñabhaà sarve
bhütäväsam amaàsata
SYNONYMS
iìgita-jïäù—expert in psychic study; puru-prauòhäù—highly experienced; eka—one;
ärämäù—relaxation; ca—also; sätvatäù—devotees, or own men; sätvatäm åñabham—
head of the family; sarve—all; bhüta-äväsam—all-pervading; amaàsata—could think.
TRANSLATION
The Yadus were all experienced devotees, learned and expert in psychic study. Over and
66
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
above this, they were always with the Lord in all kinds of relaxations, and still they were
only able to know Him as the one Supreme who dwells everywhere.
PURPORT
In the Vedas it is said that the Supreme Lord or the Paramätmä cannot be understood
simply by the strength of one's erudition or power of mental speculation: näyam ätmä
pravacanena labhyo na medhayä na bahunä çrutena (Kaöha Upaniñad 1.2.23). He can be
known only by one who has the mercy of the Lord. The Yädavas were all exceptionally
learned and experienced, but in spite of their knowing the Lord as the one who lives in
everyone's heart, they could not understand that He is the original Personality of
Godhead. This lack of knowledge was not due to their insufficient erudition; it was due
to their misfortune. In Våndävana, however, the Lord was not even known as the
Paramätmä because the residents of Våndävana were pure unconventional devotees of
the Lord and could think of Him only as their object of love. They did not know that He
is the Personality of Godhead. The Yadus, or the residents of Dvärakä, however, could
know Lord Kåñëa as Väsudeva, or the Supersoul living everywhere, but not as the
Supreme Lord. As scholars of the Vedas, they verified the Vedic hymns: eko devaù. ..
sarva-bhütädhiväsaù... antaryämé... and våñëénäà para-devatä. ... The Yadus, therefore,
accepted Lord Kåñëa as the Supersoul incarnated in their family, and not more than
that.
TEXT 10
devSYa MaaYaYaa SPa*ía Yae caNYadSadaié[Taa" )
>a]aMYaTae DaqNaR TaÜaKYaEraTMaNYauáaTMaNaae hraE )) 10 ))
devasya mäyayä spåñöä
ye cänyad asad-äçritäù
bhrämyate dhér na tad-väkyair
ätmany uptätmano harau
SYNONYMS
devasya—of the Personality of Godhead; mäyayä—by the influence of external energy;
spåñöäù—infected; ye—all those; ca—and; anyat—others; asat—illusory; äçritäù—being
67
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
taken to; bhrämyate—bewilder; dhéù—intelligence; na—not; tat—of them; väkyaiù—by
those words; ätmani—in the Supreme Self; upta-ätmanaù—surrendered souls; harau—
unto the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Under no circumstances can the words of persons bewildered by the illusory energy of the
Lord deviate the intelligence of those who are completely surrendered souls.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead according to all the evidences of
the Vedas. He is accepted by all äcäryas, including Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya. But when He
was present in the world, different classes of men accepted Him differently, and
therefore their calculations of the Lord were also different. Generally, persons who had
faith in the revealed scriptures accepted the Lord as He is, and all of them merged into
great bereavement when the Lord disappeared from the world. In the First Canto we
have already discussed the lamentation of Arjuna and Yudhiñöhira, to whom the
disappearance of Lord Kåñëa was almost intolerable up to the end of their lives.
The Yädavas were only partially cognizant of the Lord, but they are also glorious because
they had the opportunity to associate with the Lord, who acted as the head of their
family, and they also rendered the Lord intimate service. The Yädavas and other
devotees of the Lord are different from those who wrongly calculated Him to be an
ordinary human personality. Such persons are certainly bewildered by the illusory
energy. They are hellish and are envious of the Supreme Lord. The illusory energy acts
very powerfully on them because in spite of their elevated mundane education, such
persons are faithless and are infected by the mentality of atheism. They are always very
eager to establish that Lord Kåñëa was an ordinary man who was killed by a hunter due
to His many impious acts in plotting to kill the sons of Dhåtaräñöra and Jaräsandha, the
demoniac kings of the earth. Such persons have no faith in the statement of the
Bhagavad-gétä that the Lord is unaffected by the reactions of work: na mäà karmäëi
limpanti [Bg. 4.14]. According to the atheistic point of view, Lord Kåñëa's family, the
Yadu dynasty, was vanquished due to being cursed by the brähmaëas for the sins
committed by Kåñëa in killing the sons of Dhåtaräñöra, etc. All these blasphemies do not
touch the heart of the devotees of the Lord because they know perfectly well what is
what. Their intelligence regarding the Lord is never disturbed. But those who are
68
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
disturbed by the statements of the asuras are also condemned. That is what Uddhava
meant in this verse.
TEXT 11
Pa[dXYaaRTaáTaPaSaaMaivTa*ád*Xaa& Na*<aaMa( )
AadaYaaNTarDaaÛSTau SvibMb& l/aek-l/aecNaMa( )) 11 ))
pradarçyätapta-tapasäm
avitåpta-dåçäà nåëäm
ädäyäntar adhäd yas tu
sva-bimbaà loka-locanam
SYNONYMS
pradarçya—by exhibiting; atapta—without undergoing; tapasäm—penances; avitåptadåçäm—
without fulfillment of vision; nåëäm—of persons; ädäya—taking; antaù—
disappearance; adhät—performed; yaù—He who; tu—but; sva-bimbam—His own form;
loka-locanam—public vision.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çré Kåñëa, who manifested His eternal form before the vision of all on the earth,
performed His disappearance by removing His form from the sight of those who were
unable to see Him [as He is] due to not executing required penance.
PURPORT
In this verse the word avitåpta-dåçäm is most significant. The conditioned souls in the
material world are all trying to satisfy their senses in various ways, but they have failed
to do so because it is impossible to be satisfied by such efforts. The example of the fish
on land is very appropriate. If one takes a fish from the water and puts it on the land, it
cannot be made happy by any amount of offered pleasure. The spirit soul can be happy
only in the association of the supreme living being, the Personality of Godhead, and
nowhere else. The Lord, by His unlimited causeless mercy, has innumerable Vaikuëöha
planets in the brahmajyoti sphere of the spiritual world, and in that transcendental
69
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
world there is an unlimited arrangement for the unlimited pleasure of the living entities.
The Lord Himself comes to display His transcendental pastimes, typically represented at
Våndävana, Mathurä and Dvärakä. He appears just to attract the conditioned souls back
to Godhead, back home to the eternal world. But for want of sufficient piety, the
onlookers are not attracted by such pastimes of the Lord. In Bhagavad-gétä it is said that
only those who have completely surpassed the way of sinful reaction can engage
themselves in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. The entire Vedic way of
ritualistic performances is to put every conditioned soul on the path of piety. By strict
adherence to the prescribed principles for all orders of social life, one can attain the
qualities of truthfulness, control of the mind, control of the senses, forbearance, etc.,
and can be elevated to the plane of rendering pure devotional service to the Lord. Only
by such a transcendental vision are one's material hankerings fully satisfied.
When the Lord was present, persons who were able to satisfy their material hankerings
by seeing Him in true perspective were thus able to go back with Him to His kingdom.
But those persons who were unable to see the Lord as He is remained attached to
material hankerings and were not able to go back home, back to Godhead. When the
Lord passed beyond the vision of all, He did so in His original eternal form, as stated in
this verse. The Lord left in His own body; He did not leave His body as is generally
misunderstood by the conditioned souls. This statement defeats the false propaganda of
the faithless nondevotees that the Lord passed away like an ordinary conditioned soul.
The Lord appeared in order to release the world from the undue burden of the
nonbelieving asuras, and after doing this, He disappeared from the world's eyes.
TEXT 12
YaNMaTYaRl/Il/aEPaiYak&- SvYaaeGa‚
MaaYaabl&/ dXaRYaTaa Ga*hqTaMa( )
ivSMaaPaNa& SvSYa c SaaE>aGaÖeR"
Par& Pad& >aUz<a>aUz<aa(r)Ma( )) 12 ))
yan martya-lélaupayikaà sva-yogamäyä-
balaà darçayatä gåhétam
vismäpanaà svasya ca saubhagarddheù
paraà padaà bhüñaëa-bhüñaëäìgam
70
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
yat—His eternal form which; martya—mortal world; lélä-upayikam—just suitable for
the pastimes; sva-yoga-mäyä-balam—potency of the internal energy; darçayatä—for
manifestation; gåhétam—discovered; vismäpanam—wonderful; svasya—of His own; ca—
and; saubhaga-åddheù—of the opulent; param—supreme; padam—ultimate stand;
bhüñaëa—ornament; bhüñaëa-aìgam—of the ornaments.
TRANSLATION
The Lord appeared in the mortal world by His internal potency, yoga-mäyä. He came in
His eternal form, which is just suitable for His pastimes. These pastimes were wonderful
for everyone, even for those proud of their own opulence, including the Lord Himself in
His form as the Lord of Vaikuëöha. Thus His [Çré Kåñëa's] transcendental body is the
ornament of all ornaments.
PURPORT
In conformity with the Vedic hymns (nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm (Kaöha
Upaniñad 2.2.13)), the Personality of Godhead is more excellent than all other living
beings within all the universes in the material world. He is the chief of all living entities;
no one can surpass Him or be equal to Him in wealth, strength, fame, beauty, knowledge
or renunciation. When Lord Kåñëa was within this universe, He seemed to be a human
being because He appeared in a manner just suitable for His pastimes in the mortal
world. He did not appear in human society in His Vaikuëöha feature with four hands
because that would not have been suitable for His pastimes. But in spite of His appearing
as a human being, no one was or is equal to Him in any respect in any of the six
different opulences. Everyone is more or less proud of his opulence in this world, but
when Lord Kåñëa was in human society, He excelled all His contemporaries within the
universe.
When the Lord's pastimes are visible to the human eye, they are called prakaöa, and
when they are not visible they are called aprakaöa. In fact, the Lord's pastimes never
stop, just as the sun never leaves the sky. The sun is always in its right orbit in the sky,
but it is sometimes visible and sometimes invisible to our limited vision. Similarly, the
pastimes of the Lord are always current in one universe or another, and when Lord
Kåñëa disappeared from the transcendental abode of Dvärakä, it was simply a
disappearance from the eyes of the people there. It should not be misunderstood that His
71
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
transcendental body, which is just suitable for the pastimes in the mortal world, is in any
way inferior to His different expansions in the Vaikuëöhalokas. His body manifested in
the material world is transcendental par excellence in the sense that His pastimes in the
mortal world excel His mercy displayed in the Vaikuëöhalokas. In the Vaikuëöhalokas
the Lord is merciful toward the liberated or nitya-mukta living entities, but in His
pastimes in the mortal world He is merciful even to the fallen souls who are nityabaddha,
or conditioned forever. The six excellent opulences which He displayed in the
mortal world by the agency of His internal potency, yoga-mäyä, are rare even in the
Vaikuëöhalokas. All His pastimes were manifested not by the material energy but by His
spiritual energy. The excellence of His räsa-lélä at Våndävana and His householder life
with sixteen thousand wives is wonderful even for Näräyaëa in Vaikuëöha and is
certainly so for other living entities within this mortal world. His pastimes are
wonderful even for other incarnations of the Lord, such as Çré Räma, Nåsiàha and
Varäha. His opulence was so superexcellent that His pastimes were adored even by the
Lord of Vaikuëöha, who is not different from Lord Kåñëa Himself.
TEXT 13
YaÖMaRSaUNaaebRTa raJaSaUYae
iNarq+Ya d*KSvSTYaYaNa& i}al/aek-" )
k-aTSNYaeRNa caÛeh GaTa& ivDaaTau‚
rvaRKSa*TaaE k-aEXal/iMaTYaMaNYaTa )) 13 ))
yad dharma-sünor bata räjasüye
nirékñya dåk-svastyayanaà tri-lokaù
kärtsnyena cädyeha gataà vidhätur
arväk-såtau kauçalam ity amanyata
SYNONYMS
yat—the form which; dharma-sünoù—of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira; bata—certainly;
räjasüye—in the arena of the räjasüya sacrifice; nirékñya—by observing; dåk—sight;
svastyayanam—pleasing; tri-lokaù—the three worlds; kärtsnyena—in sum total; ca—
thus; adya—today; iha—within the universe; gatam—surpassed; vidhätuù—of the
creator (Brahmä); arväk—recent mankind; såtau—in the material world; kauçalam—
72
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
dexterity; iti—thus; amanyata—contemplated.
TRANSLATION
All the demigods from the upper, lower and middle universal planetary systems assembled
at the altar of the räjasüya sacrifice performed by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. After seeing the
beautiful bodily features of Lord Kåñëa, they all contemplated that He was the ultimate
dexterous creation of Brahmä, the creator of human beings.
PURPORT
There was nothing comparable to the bodily features of Lord Kåñëa when He was
present in this world. The most beautiful object in the material world may be compared
to the blue lotus flower or the full moon in the sky, but even the lotus flower and the
moon were defeated by the beauty of the bodily features of Lord Kåñëa, and this was
certified by the demigods, the most beautiful living creatures in the universe. The
demigods thought that Lord Kåñëa, like themselves, was also created by Lord Brahmä,
but in fact Brahmä was created by Lord Kåñëa. It was not within the power of Brahmä to
create the transcendental beauty of the Supreme Lord. No one is the creator of Kåñëa;
rather, He is the creator of everyone. As He says in Bhagavad-gétä (10.8), ahaà sarvasya
prabhavo mattaù sarvaà pravartate.
SB 3.2.14
TEXT 14
YaSYaaNauraGaPlu/TahaSaraSa‚
l/Il/avl/aek-Pa[iTal/BDaMaaNaa" )
v]JaiñYaae d*iG>arNauPa[v*ta‚
iDaYaae_vTaSQau" ik-l/ k*-TYaXaeza" )) 14 ))
yasyänuräga-pluta-häsa-räsalélävaloka-
pratilabdha-mänäù
vraja-striyo dågbhir anupravåttadhiyo
'vatasthuù kila kåtya-çeñäù
SYNONYMS
73
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yasya—whose; anuräga—attachment; pluta—enhanced by; häsa—laughter; räsa—
humors; lélä—pastimes; avaloka—glancing; pratilabdha—obtained thereof; mänäù—
anguished; vraja-striyaù—damsels of Vraja; dågbhiù—with the eyes; anupravåtta—
following; dhiyaù—by intelligence; avatasthuù—sat silently; kila—indeed; kåtya-çeñäù—
without finishing household duties.
TRANSLATION
The damsels of Vraja, after pastimes of laughter, humor and exchanges of glances, were
anguished when Kåñëa left them. They used to follow Him with their eyes, and thus they
sat down with stunned intelligence and could not finish their household duties.
PURPORT
In His boyhood at Våndävana, Lord Kåñëa was notorious as a teasing friend in
transcendental love to all the girls His age. His love for them was so intense that there is
no comparison to that ecstasy, and the damsels of Vraja were so much attached to Him
that their affection excelled that of the great demigods like Brahmä and Çiva. Lord
Kåñëa finally admitted His defeat before the transcendental affection of the gopés and
declared that He was unable to repay them for their unalloyed affection. Although the
gopés were seemingly anguished by the Lord's teasing behavior, when Kåñëa would leave
them they could not tolerate the separation and used to follow Him with their eyes and
minds. They were so stunned by the situation that they could not finish their household
duties. No one could excel Him even in the dealing of love exchanged between boys and
girls. It is said in the revealed scriptures that Lord Kåñëa personally never goes beyond
the boundary of Våndävana. He remains there eternally because of the transcendental
love of the inhabitants. Thus even though He is not visible at present, He is not away
from Våndävana for a moment.
TEXT 15
SvXaaNTaæPaeiZvTarE" SvæPaE‚
r>YaÛRMaaNaeZvNauk-iMPaTaaTMaa )
ParavreXaae Mahd&XaYau¢-ae
ùJaae_iPa JaaTaae >aGavaNa( YaQaaiGan" )) 15 ))
74
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sva-çänta-rüpeñv itaraiù sva-rüpair
abhyardyamäneñv anukampitätmä
parävareço mahad-aàça-yukto
hy ajo 'pi jäto bhagavän yathägniù
SYNONYMS
sva-çänta-rüpeñu—unto the peaceful devotees of the Lord; itaraiù—others, nondevotees;
sva-rüpaiù—according to their own modes of nature; abhyardyamäneñu—being harassed
by; anukampita-ätmä—the all-compassionate Lord; para-avara—spiritual and material;
éçaù—controller; mahat-aàça-yuktaù—accompanied by the plenary portion of mahattattva;
hi—certainly; ajaù—the unborn; api—although; jätaù—is born; bhagavän—the
Personality of Godhead; yathä—as if; agniù—the fire.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, the all-compassionate controller of both the spiritual and
material creations, is unborn, but when there is friction between His peaceful devotees
and persons who are in the material modes of nature, He takes birth just like fire,
accompanied by the mahat-tattva.
PURPORT
The devotees of the Lord are by nature peaceful because they have no material
hankering. A liberated soul has no hankering, and therefore he has no lamentation.
One who wants to possess also laments when he loses his possession. Devotees have no
hankerings for material possessions and no hankerings for spiritual salvation. They are
situated in the transcendental loving service of the Lord as a matter of duty, and they do
not mind where they are or how they have to act. Karmés, jïänés and yogés all hanker to
possess some material or spiritual assets. Karmés want material possessions, jïänés and
yogés want spiritual possessions, but devotees do not want any material or spiritual assets.
They want only to serve the Lord anywhere in the material or spiritual worlds that the
Lord desires, and the Lord is always specifically compassionate towards such devotees.
The karmés, jïänés and yogés have their particular mentalities in the modes of nature,
and therefore they are called itara or nondevotees. These itaras, including even the
yogés, sometimes harass the devotees of the Lord. Durväsä Muni, a great yogé, harassed
Mahäräja Ambaréña because the latter was a great devotee of the Lord. And the great
75
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
karmé and jïäné Hiraëyakaçipu even harassed his own Vaiñëava son, Prahläda Mahäräja.
There are many instances of such harassment of the peaceful devotees of the Lord by
the itaras. When such friction takes place, the Lord, out of His great compassion towards
His pure devotees, appears in person, accompanied by His plenary portions controlling
the mahat-tattva.
The Lord is everywhere, in both the material and spiritual domains, and He appears for
the sake of His devotees when there is friction between His devotee and the
nondevotee. As electricity is generated by friction of matter anywhere and everywhere,
the Lord, being all-pervading, appears because of the friction of devotees and
nondevotees. When Lord Kåñëa appears on a mission, all His plenary portions
accompany Him. When He appeared as the son of Vasudeva, there were differences of
opinion about His incarnation. Some said, "He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead."
Some said, "He is an incarnation of Näräyaëa," and others said, "He is the incarnation of
Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu." But actually He is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead—
kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam [SB 1.3.28]—and Näräyaëa, the puruñas and all other
incarnations accompany Him to function as different parts of His pastimes. Mahadaàça-
yuktaù indicates that He is accompanied by the puruñas, who create the mahattanva.
It is confirmed in the Vedic hymns, mahäntaà vibhum ätmänam.
Lord Kåñëa appeared, just like electricity, when there was friction between Kaàsa and
Vasudeva and Ugrasena. Vasudeva and Ugrasena were the Lord's devotees, and Kaàsa,
a representative of the karmés and jïänés, was a nondevotee. Kåñëa, as He is, is compared
to the sun. He first appeared from the ocean of the womb of Devaké, and gradually He
satisfied the inhabitants of the places surrounding Mathurä, just as the sun enlivens the
lotus flower in the morning. After gradually rising to the meridian of Dvärakä, the Lord
set like the sun, placing everything in darkness, as described by Uddhava.
TEXT 16
Maa& %edYaTYaeTadJaSYa JaNMa‚
iv@MbNa& YaÜSaudevGaehe )
v]Jae c vaSaae_ir>aYaaidv SvYa&
Paurad( VYavaTSaqÛdNaNTavqYaR" )) 16 ))
mäà khedayaty etad ajasya janmaviòambanaà
yad vasudeva-gehe
76
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
vraje ca väso 'ri-bhayäd iva svayaà
puräd vyavätséd yad-ananta-véryaù
SYNONYMS
mäm—to me; khedayati—gives me distress; etat—this; ajasya—of the unborn; janma—
birth; viòambanam—bewildering; yat—that; vasudeva-gehe—in the home of Vasudeva;
vraje—in Våndävana; ca—also; väsaù—inhabitation; ari—enemy; bhayät—because of
fear; iva—as if; svayam—Himself; purät—from Mathurä Puré; vyavätsét—fled; yat—one
who is; ananta-véryaù—unlimitedly powerful.
TRANSLATION
When I think of Lord Kåñëa-how He was born in the prison house of Vasudeva although
He is unborn, how He went away from His father's protection to Vraja and lived there
incognito out of fear of the enemy, and how, although unlimitedly powerful, He fled from
Mathurä in fear—all these bewildering incidents give me distress.
PURPORT
Because Lord Çré Kåñëa is the original person from whom everything and everyone has
emanated—ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù (Bg. 10.8), janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1] (Vedäntasütra
1.1.2)—nothing can be equal to or greater than Him. The Lord is supremely
perfect, and whenever He enacts His transcendental pastimes as a son, a rival or an
object of enmity, He plays the part so perfectly that even pure devotees like Uddhava
are bewildered. For example, Uddhava knew perfectly well that Lord Çré Kåñëa is
eternally existent and can neither die nor disappear for good, yet he lamented for Lord
Kåñëa. All these events are perfect arrangements to give perfection to His supreme
glories. It is for enjoyment's sake. When a father plays with his little son and the father
lies down on the floor as if defeated by the son, it is just to give the little son pleasure,
and nothing more. Because the Lord is all-powerful, it is possible for Him to adjust
opposites such as birth and no birth, power and defeat, fear and fearlessness. A pure
devotee knows very well how it is possible for the Lord to adjust opposite things, but he
laments for the nondevotees who, not knowing the supreme glories of the Lord, think of
Him as imaginary simply because there are so many apparently contradictory statements
in the scriptures. Factually there is nothing contradictory; everything is possible when
we understand the Lord as the Lord and not as one of us, with all our imperfection.
77
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 17
duNaaeiTa ceTa" SMarTaae MaMaETad(
Yadah Paadavi>avNÛ iPa}aae" )
TaaTaaMb k&-SaaduåXaiªTaaNaa&
Pa[SaqdTa& Naae_k*-TaiNaZk*-TaqNaaMa( )) 17 ))
dunoti cetaù smarato mamaitad
yad äha pädäv abhivandya pitroù
tätämba kaàsäd uru-çaìkitänäà
prasédataà no 'kåta-niñkåténäm
SYNONYMS
dunoti—it gives me pain; cetaù—heart; smarataù—while thinking of; mama—my;
etat—this; yat—as much as; äha—said; pädau—feet; abhivandya—worshiping; pitroù—
of the parents; täta—My dear father; amba—My dear mother; kaàsät—out of Kaàsa's;
uru—great; çaìkitänäm—of those who are afraid; prasédatam—be pleased with; naù—
Our; akåta—not executed; niñkåténäm—duties to serve you.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa begged pardon from His parents for Their [Kåñëa's and Balaräma's] inability
to serve their feet, due to being away from home because of great fear of Kaàsa. He said,
"O mother, O father, please excuse Us for this inability." All this behavior of the Lord
gives me pain at heart.
PURPORT
It appears that Lord Kåñëa and Baladeva were both very greatly afraid of Kaàsa, and
therefore They had to hide Themselves. But if Lord Kåñëa and Baladeva are the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, how was it possible that They were afraid of Kaàsa? Is
there any contradiction in such statements? Vasudeva, due to his great appreciation for
Kåñëa, wanted to give Him protection. He never thought that Kåñëa was the Supreme
Lord and could protect Himself; he thought of Kåñëa as his son. Because Vasudeva was a
78
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
great devotee of the Lord, he did not like to think that Kåñëa might be killed like his
other children. Morally, Vasudeva was bound to deliver Kåñëa to the hands of Kaàsa
because he had promised to turn over all his children. But out of his great love for Kåñëa
he broke his promise, and the Lord was very pleased with Vasudeva for his
transcendental mentality. He did not want to disturb the intense affection of Vasudeva,
and thus He agreed to be carried by His father to the house of Nanda and Yaçodä. And
just to test the intense love of Vasudeva, Lord Kåñëa fell down in the waters of the
Yamunä while His father was crossing the river. Vasudeva became mad after his child as
he tried to recover Him in the midst of the rising river.
These are all glorified pastimes of the Lord, and there is no contradiction in such
manifestations. Since Kåñëa is the Supreme Lord, He was never afraid of Kaàsa, but to
please His father He agreed to be so. And the most brilliant part of His supreme
character was that He begged pardon from His parents for being unable to serve their
feet while absent from home because of fear of Kaàsa. The Lord, whose lotus feet are
worshiped by demigods like Brahmä and Çiva, wanted to worship the feet of Vasudeva.
Such instruction by the Lord to the world is quite appropriate. Even if one is the
Supreme Lord, one must serve his parents. A son is indebted to his parents in so many
ways, and it is the duty of the son to serve his parents, however great the son may be.
Indirectly, Kåñëa wanted to teach the atheists who do not accept the supreme
fatherhood of God, and they may learn from this action how much the Supreme Father
has to be respected. Uddhava was simply struck with wonder by such glorious behavior
of the Lord, and he was very sorry that he was unable to go with Him.
TEXT 18
k-ae va AMauZYaax(iga]SaraeJare<au&
ivSMaTauRMaqXaqTa PauMaaNa( iviJaga]Na( )
Yaae ivSfu-rd(>a]Uiv$=PaeNa >aUMae‚
>aaRr& k*-TaaNTaeNa iTarêk-ar )) 18 ))
ko vä amuñyäìghri-saroja-reëuà
vismartum éçéta pumän vijighran
yo visphurad-bhrü-viöapena bhümer
bhäraà kåtäntena tiraçcakära
79
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
kaù—who else; vä—either; amuñya—the Lord's; aìghri—feet; saroja-reëum—dust of
the lotus; vismartum—to forget; éçéta—may be able; pumän—person; vijighran—
smelling; yaù—one who; visphurat—expanding; bhrü-viöapena—by the leaves of the
eyebrows; bhümeù—of the earth; bhäram—burden; kåta-antena—by death-blows;
tiraçcakära—executed.
TRANSLATION
Who, after smelling the dust of His lotus feet even once, could ever forget it? Simply by
expanding the leaves of His eyebrows, Kåñëa has given the deathblow to those who were
burdening the earth.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa cannot be accepted as one of the human beings, even though He played the
role of an obedient son. His actions were so extraordinary that by the simple raising of
His eyebrows He could deliver death-blows to those who were burdening the earth.
TEXT 19
d*ía >aviÙNaRNau raJaSaUYae
cEÛSYa k*-Z<a& iÜzTaae_iPa iSaiÖ" )
Yaa& YaaeiGaNa" Sa&SPa*hYaiNTa SaMYaGa(
YaaeGaeNa k-STaiÜrh& SaheTa )) 19 ))
dåñöä bhavadbhir nanu räjasüye
caidyasya kåñëaà dviñato 'pi siddhiù
yäà yoginaù saàspåhayanti samyag
yogena kas tad-virahaà saheta
SYNONYMS
dåñöä—it has been seen; bhavadbhiù—by your good self; nanu—of course; räjasüye—in
the assembly of the räjasüya sacrifice performed by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira; caidyasya—of
80
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the King of Cedi (Çiçupäla); kåñëam—unto Kåñëa; dviñataù—envying; api—in spite of;
siddhiù—success; yäm—which; yoginaù—the yogés; saàspåhayanti—verily desire;
samyak—fully; yogena—by performance of yoga; kaù—who; tat—His; viraham—
separation; saheta—can tolerate.
TRANSLATION
You have personally seen how the King of Cedi [Çiçupäla] achieved success in yoga
practice, although he hated Lord Kåñëa. Even the actual yogés aspire after such success
with great interest by performance of their various practices. Who can tolerate separation
from Him?
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa's causeless mercy was exhibited in the great assembly of Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira. He was merciful even to His enemy the King of Cedi, who always tried to
be an envious rival of the Lord. Because it is not possible to be a bona fide rival of the
Lord, the King of Cedi was extremely malicious toward Lord Kåñëa. In this he was like
many other asuras, such as Kaàsa and Jaräsandha. In the open assembly of the räjasüya
sacrifice performed by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, Çiçupäla insulted Lord Kåñëa, and he was
finally killed by the Lord. But it was seen by everyone in the assembly that a light
flashed out of the body of the King of Cedi and merged into the body of Lord Kåñëa.
This means that Cediräja achieved the salvation of attaining oneness with the Supreme,
which is a perfection most desired by the jïänés and yogés and for which they execute
their different types of transcendental activities.
It is a fact that persons who are trying to understand the Supreme Truth by their
personal endeavors of mental speculation or mystic powers of yoga achieve the same goal
as others who are personally killed by the Lord. Both achieve the salvation of merging in
the brahmajyoti rays of the transcendental body of the Lord. The Lord was merciful even
to His enemy, and the success of the King of Cedi was observed by everyone who was
present in the assembly. Vidura was also present there, and therefore Uddhava referred
the incident to his memory.
TEXT 20
TaQaEv caNYae Narl/aek-vqra
81
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Ya Aahve k*-Z<aMau%arivNdMa( )
Nae}aE" iPabNTaae NaYaNaai>araMa&
PaaQaaRñPaUTa" PadMaaPaurSYa )) 20 ))
tathaiva cänye nara-loka-vérä
ya ähave kåñëa-mukhäravindam
netraiù pibanto nayanäbhirämaà
pärthästra-pütaù padam äpur asya
SYNONYMS
tathä—as also; eva ca—and certainly; anye—others; nara-loka—human society; véräù—
fighters; ye—those; ähave—on the battlefield (of Kurukñetra); kåñëa—Lord Kåñëa's;
mukha-aravindam—face like a lotus flower; netraiù—with the eyes; pibantaù—while
seeing; nayana-abhirämam—very pleasing to the eyes; pärtha—Arjuna; astra-pütaù—
purified by arrows; padam—abode; äpuù—achieved; asya—of Him.
TRANSLATION
Certainly others who were fighters on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra were purified by the
onslaught of Arjuna's arrows, and while seeing the lotuslike face of Kåñëa, so pleasing to
the eyes, they achieved the abode of the Lord.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, appears in this world for two
missionary purposes: to deliver the faithful and to annihilate the miscreants. But
because the Lord is absolute, His two different kinds of actions, although apparently
different, are ultimately one and the same. His annihilation of a person like Çiçupäla is
as auspicious as His actions for the protection of the faithful. All the warriors who
fought against Arjuna but who were able to see the lotuslike face of the Lord on the
battlefront achieved the abode of the Lord, exactly as the devotees of the Lord do. The
words "pleasing to the eyes of the seer" are very significant. When the warriors from the
other side of the battlefield saw Lord Kåñëa at the front, they appreciated His beauty,
and their dormant instinct of love of God was awakened. Çiçupäla saw the Lord also, but
he saw Him as his enemy, and his love was not awakened. Therefore Çiçupäla achieved
82
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
oneness with the Lord by merging in the impersonal glare of His body, called the
brahmajyoti. Others, who were in the marginal position, being neither friends nor
enemies but slightly in love of Godhead by appreciating the beauty of His face, were at
once promoted to the spiritual planets, the Vaikuëöhas. The Lord's personal abode is
called Goloka Våndävana, and the abodes where His plenary expansions reside are
called the Vaikuëöhas, where the Lord is present as Näräyaëa. Love of Godhead is
dormant in every living entity, and the entire process of devotional service unto the
Lord is meant for awakening this dormant, eternal love of Godhead. But there are
degrees of such transcendental awakening. Those whose love of God is awakened to the
fullest extent go back to the Goloka Våndävana planet in the spiritual sky, whereas
persons who have just awakened to love of Godhead by accident or association are
transferred to the Vaikuëöha planets. Essentially there is no material difference between
Goloka and Vaikuëöha, but in the Vaikuëöhas the Lord is served in unlimited opulence,
whereas in Goloka the Lord is served in natural affection.
This love of God is awakened by the association of pure devotees of the Lord. Here the
word pärthästra-pütaù is significant. Those who saw the beautiful face of the Lord on the
Battlefield of Kurukñetra were purified first by Arjuna when he made his onslaught with
arrows. The Lord appeared for the mission of diminishing the burden of the world, and
Arjuna was assisting the Lord by fighting on His behalf. Arjuna personally declined to
fight, and the whole instruction of the Bhagavad-gétä was given to Arjuna to engage him
in the fight. As a pure devotee of the Lord, Arjuna agreed to fight in preference to his
own decision, and thus Arjuna fought to assist the Lord in His mission of diminishing
the burden of the world. All the activities of a pure devotee are executed on behalf of
the Lord because a pure devotee of the Lord has nothing to do for his personal interest.
Arjuna's killing was as good as killing by the Lord Himself. As soon as Arjuna shot an
arrow at an enemy, that enemy became purified of all material contaminations and
became eligible to be transferred to the spiritual sky. Those warriors who appreciated
the lotus feet of the Lord and saw His face at the front had their dormant love of God
awakened, and thus they were transferred at once to Vaikuëöhaloka not to the
impersonal state of brahmajyoti as was Çiçupäla. Çiçupäla died without appreciating the
Lord, while others died with appreciation of the Lord. Both were transferred to the
spiritual sky, but those who awakened to love of God were transferred to the planets of
the transcendental sky.
Uddhava seemingly lamented that his own position was less than that of the warriors on
the Battlefield of Kurukñetra because they had attained to Vaikuëöha whereas he
remained to lament the disappearance of the Lord.
83
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 21
SvYa& TvSaaMYaaiTaXaYaS}YaDaqXa"
SvaraJYal/+MYaaáSaMaSTak-aMa" )
bil&/ hriÙiêrl/aek-PaalE/"
ik-rq$=k-ae$yei@TaPaadPaq#=" )) 21 ))
svayaà tv asämyätiçayas tryadhéçaù
sväräjya-lakñmy-äpta-samasta-kämaù
balià haradbhiç cira-loka-pälaiù
kiréöa-koöy-eòita-päda-péöhaù
SYNONYMS
svayam—Himself; tu—but; asämya—unique; atiçayaù—greater; tri-adhéçaù—Lord of
the three; sväräjya—independent supremacy; lakñmé—fortune; äpta—achieved;
samasta-kämaù—all desires; balim—worshiping paraphernalia; haradbhiù—offered by;
cira-loka-pälaiù—by the eternal maintainers of the order of creation; kiréöa-koöi—
millions of helmets; eòita-päda-péöhaù—feet honored by prayers.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çré Kåñëa is the Lord of all kinds of threes and is independently supreme by
achievement of all kinds of fortune. He is worshiped by the eternal maintainers of the
creation, who offer Him the paraphernalia of worship by touching their millions of
helmets to His feet.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa is so mild and merciful, as described in the above verses, and yet He is
the Lord of all kinds of threes. He is the Supreme Lord of the three worlds, the three
qualities of material nature and the three puruñas (Käraëodakaçäyé, Garbhodakaçäyé and
Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu). There are innumerable universes, and in each and every universe
there are different manifestations of Brahmä, Viñëu and Rudra. Besides that, there is
the Çeña-mürti who bears all the universes on His hoods. And Lord Kåñëa is the Lord of
84
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
all of them. As the incarnation of Manu, He is the original source of all Manus in
innumerable universes. Each universe has manifestations of 504,000 Manus. He is the
Lord of the three principal potencies, namely cit-çakti, mäyä-çakti and taöastha-çakti, and
He is the complete master of six kinds of fortune—wealth, strength, fame, beauty,
knowledge and renunciation. There is none who can excel Him in any matter of
enjoyment, and certainly there is no one greater than Him. No one is equal to or greater
than Him. It is the duty of everyone, whoever and wherever one may be, to surrender
completely unto Him. It is not wonderful, therefore, that all the transcendental
controllers surrender to Him and make all offerings of worship.
TEXT 22
TataSYa kE-ªYaRMal&/ >a*Taaàae
ivGl/aPaYaTYa(r) YaduGa]SaeNaMa( )
iTaïiàz<<a& ParMaeiïiDaZ<Yae
NYabaeDaYaÕev iNaDaarYaeiTa )) 22 ))
tat tasya kaiìkaryam alaà bhåtän no
vigläpayaty aìga yad ugrasenam
tiñöhan niñaëëaà parameñöhi-dhiñëye
nyabodhayad deva nidhärayeti
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; tasya—His; kaiìkaryam—service; alam—of course; bhåtän—the
servitors; naù—us; vigläpayati—gives pain; aìga—O Vidura; yat—as much as;
ugrasenam—unto King Ugrasena; tiñöhan—being seated; niñaëëam—waiting upon Him;
parameñöhi-dhiñëye—on the royal throne; nyabodhayat—submitted; deva—addressing
my Lord; nidhäraya—please know it; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Vidura, does it not pain us, His servitors, when we remember that He
[Lord Kåñëa] used to stand before King Ugrasena, who was sitting on the royal throne,
and used to submit explanations before him, saying, "O My lord, please let it be known to
85
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
you"?
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa's gentle behavior before His so-called superiors such as His father,
grandfather and elder brother, His amiable behavior with His so-called wives, friends
and contemporaries, His behavior as a child before His mother Yaçodä, and His naughty
dealings with His young girl friends cannot bewilder a pure devotee like Uddhava.
Others, who are not devotees, are bewildered by such behavior of the Lord, who acted
just like a human being. This bewilderment is explained by the Lord Himself in the
Bhagavad-gétä (9.11) as follows:
avajänanti mäà müòhä
mänuñéà tanum äçritam
paraà bhävam ajänanto
mama bhüta-maheçvaram
Persons with a poor fund of knowledge belittle the Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa,
not knowing His exalted position as the Lord of everything. In Bhagavad-gétä the Lord
has explained His position clearly, but the demoniac atheistic student squeezes out an
interpretation to suit his own purpose and misleads unfortunate followers into the same
mentality. Such unfortunate persons merely pick up some slogans from the great book of
knowledge, but are unable to estimate the Lord as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Pure devotees like Uddhava, however, are never misled by such atheistic opportunists.
TEXT 23
Ahae bk-I Ya& STaNak-al/kU-$&=
iJagaa&SaYaaPaaYaYadPYaSaaßq )
le/>ae GaiTa& Daa}YauicTaa& TaTaae_NYa&
k&- va dYaalu/& Xar<a& v]JaeMa )) 23 ))
aho baké yaà stana-käla-küöaà
jighäàsayäpäyayad apy asädhvé
lebhe gatià dhätry-ucitäà tato 'nyaà
kaà vä dayäluà çaraëaà vrajema
86
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; baké—the she-demon (Pütanä); yam—whom; stana—of her breast; käla—
deadly; küöam—poison; jighäàsayä—out of envy; apäyayat—nourished; api—although;
asädhvé—unfaithful; lebhe—achieved; gatim—destination; dhätré-ucitäm—just suitable
for the nurse; tataù—beyond whom; anyam—other; kam—who else; vä—certainly;
dayälum—merciful; çaraëam—shelter; vrajema—shall I take.
TRANSLATION
Alas, how shall I take shelter of one more merciful than He who granted the position of
mother to a she-demon [Pütanä] although she was unfaithful and she prepared deadly
poison to be sucked from her breast?
PURPORT
Here is an example of the extreme mercy of the Lord, even to His enemy. It is said that a
noble man accepts the good qualities of a person of doubtful character, just as one
accepts nectar from a stock of poison. In His babyhood, He was administered deadly
poison by Pütanä, a she-demon who tried to kill the wonderful baby. And because she
was a demon, it was impossible for her to know that the Supreme Lord, even though
playing the part of a baby, was no one less than the same Supreme Personality of
Godhead. His value as the Supreme Lord did not diminish upon His becoming a baby to
please His devotee Yaçodä. The Lord may assume the form of a baby or a shape other
than that of a human being, but it doesn't make the slightest difference; He is always the
same Supreme. A living creature, however powerful he may become by dint of severe
penance, can never become equal to the Supreme Lord.
Lord Kåñëa accepted the motherhood of Pütanä because she pretended to be an
affectionate mother, allowing Kåñëa to suck her breast. The Lord accepts the least
qualification of the living entity and awards him the highest reward. That is the
standard of His character. Therefore, who but the Lord can be the ultimate shelter?
TEXT 24
MaNYae_SauraNa( >aaGavTaa&S}YaDaqXae
Sa&rM>aMaaGaaRi>aiNaivíictaaNa( )
87
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Yae Sa&YauGae_c+aTa Taa+YaRPau}a‚
Ma&Sae SauNaa>aaYauDaMaaPaTaNTaMa( )) 24 ))
manye 'surän bhägavatäàs tryadhéçe
saàrambha-märgäbhiniviñöa-cittän
ye saàyuge 'cakñata tärkñya-putram
aàse sunäbhäyudham äpatantam
SYNONYMS
manye—I think; asurän—the demons; bhägavatän—great devotees; tri-adhéçe—unto the
Lord of the threes; saàrambha—enmity; märga—by the way of; abhiniviñöa-cittän—
absorbed in thought; ye—those; saàyuge—in the fight; acakñata—could see; tärkñyaputram—
Garuòa, the carrier of the Lord; aàse—on the shoulder; sunäbha—the wheel;
äyudham—one who carries the weapon; äpatantam—coming forward.
TRANSLATION
I consider the demons, who are inimical toward the Lord, to be more than the devotees
because while fighting with the Lord, absorbed in thoughts of enmity, they are able to see
the Lord carried on the shoulder of Garuòa, the son of Tärkñya [Kaçyapa], and carrying
the wheel weapon in His hand.
PURPORT
The asuras who fought against the Lord face to face got salvation due to their being
killed by the Lord. This salvation of the demons is not due to their being devotees of the
Lord; it is because of the Lord's causeless mercy. Anyone who is slightly in touch with
the Lord, somehow or other, is greatly benefited, even to the point of salvation, due to
the excellence of the Lord. He is so kind that He awards salvation even to His enemies
because they come into contact with Him and are indirectly absorbed in Him by their
inimical thoughts. Actually, the demons can never be equal to the pure devotees, but
Uddhava was thinking in that way because of his feelings of separation. He was thinking
that at the last stage of his life he might not be able to see the Lord face to face as did
the demons. The fact is that the devotees who are always engaged in the devotional
service of the Lord in transcendental love are rewarded many hundreds and thousands
88
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of times more than the demons by being elevated to the spiritual planets, where they
remain with the Lord in eternal, blissful existence. The demons and impersonalists are
awarded the facility of merging in the brahmajyoti effulgence of the Lord, whereas the
devotees are admitted into the spiritual planets. For comparison, one can just imagine
the difference between floating in space and residing in one of the planets in the sky.
The pleasure of the living entities on the planets is greater than that of those who have
no body and who merge with the molecules of the sun's rays. The impersonalists,
therefore, are no more favored than the enemies of the Lord; rather, they are both on
the same level of spiritual salvation.
TEXT 25
vSaudevSYa devKYaa& JaaTaae >aaeJaeNd]bNDaNae )
ick-IzuR>aRGavaNaSYaa" XaMaJaeNaai>aYaaicTa" )) 25 ))
vasudevasya devakyäà
jäto bhojendra-bandhane
cikérñur bhagavän asyäù
çam ajenäbhiyäcitaù
SYNONYMS
vasudevasya—of the wife of Vasudeva; devakyäm—in the womb of Devaké; jätaù—born
of; bhoja-indra—of the King of the Bhojas; bandhane—in the prison house; cikérñuù—
for doing; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; asyäù—of the earth; çam—welfare;
ajena—by Brahmä; abhiyäcitaù—being prayed for.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, being prayed to by Brahmä to bring welfare
to the earth, was begotten by Vasudeva in the womb of his wife Devaké in the prison of
the King of Bhoja.
PURPORT
Although there is no difference between the Lord's pastimes of appearance and
89
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
disappearance, the devotees of the Lord do not generally discuss the subject matter of
His disappearance. Vidura inquired indirectly from Uddhava about the incident of the
Lord's disappearance by asking him to relate kåñëa-kathä, or topics on the history of
Lord Kåñëa. Thus Uddhava began the topics from the very beginning of His appearance
as the son of Vasudeva and Devaké in the prison of Kaàsa, the King of the Bhojas, at
Mathurä. The Lord has no business in this world, but when He is so requested by
devotees like Brahmä, He descends on the earth for the welfare of the entire universe.
This is stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.8): pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm/
dharma-saàsthäpanärthäya sambhavämi yuge yuge.
TEXT 26
TaTaae NaNdv]JaiMaTa" iPa}aa k&-SaaiÜib>YaTaa )
Wk-adXa SaMaaSTa}a GaU!aicR" Sabl/ae_vSaTa( )) 26 ))
tato nanda-vrajam itaù
piträ kaàsäd vibibhyatä
ekädaça samäs tatra
güòhärciù sa-balo 'vasat
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; nanda-vrajam—cow pastures of Nanda Mahäräja; itaù—being
brought up; piträ—by His father; kaàsät—from Kaàsa; vibibhyatä—being afraid of;
ekädaça—eleven; samäù—years; tatra—therein; güòha-arciù—covered fire; sa-balaù—
with Baladeva; avasat—resided.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, His father, being afraid of Kaàsa, brought Him to the cow pastures of
Mahäräja Nanda, and there He lived for eleven years like a covered flame with His elder
brother, Baladeva.
PURPORT
There was no necessity of the Lord's being dispatched to the house of Nanda Mahäräja
90
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
out of fear of Kaàsa's determination to kill Him as soon as He appeared. It is the
business of the asuras to try to kill the Supreme Personality of Godhead or to prove by
all means that there is no God or that Kåñëa is an ordinary human being and not God.
Lord Kåñëa is not affected by such determination of men of Kaàsa's class, but in order to
play the role of a child He agreed to be carried by His father to the cow pastures of
Nanda Mahäräja because Vasudeva was afraid of Kaàsa. Nanda Mahäräja was due to
receive Him as his child, and Yaçodämayé was also to enjoy the childhood pastimes of
the Lord, and therefore to fulfill everyone's desire, He was carried from Mathurä to
Våndävana just after His appearance in the prison house of Kaàsa. He lived there for
eleven years and completed all His fascinating pastimes of childhood, boyhood and
adolescence with His elder brother, Lord Baladeva, His first expansion. Vasudeva's
thought of protecting Kåñëa from the wrath of Kaàsa is part of a transcendental
relationship. The Lord enjoys more when someone takes Him as his subordinate son who
needs the protection of a father than He does when someone accepts Him as the
Supreme Lord. He is the father of everyone, and He protects everyone, but when His
devotee takes it for granted that the Lord is to be protected by the devotee's care, it is a
transcendental joy for the Lord. Thus when Vasudeva, out of fear of Kaàsa, carried Him
to Våndävana, the Lord enjoyed it; otherwise, He had no fear from Kaàsa or anyone
else.
TEXT 27
ParqTaae vTSaPaEvRTSaa&êarYaNa( VYahriÜ>au" )
YaMauNaaePavNae kU-Jad(iÜJaSax(ku-il/Taax(iga]Pae )) 27 ))
paréto vatsapair vatsäàç
cärayan vyaharad vibhuù
yamunopavane küjaddvija-
saìkulitäìghripe
SYNONYMS
parétaù—surrounded by; vatsapaiù—cowherd boys; vatsän—calves; cärayan—herding,
tending; vyaharat—enjoyed by traveling; vibhuù—the Almighty; yamunä—the Yamunä
River; upavane—gardens on the shore; küjat—vibrated by the voice; dvija—the twiceborn
birds; saìkulita—densely situated; aìghripe—in the trees.
91
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
In His childhood, the Almighty Lord was surrounded by cowherd boys and calves, and
thus He traveled on the shore of the Yamunä River, through gardens densely covered
with trees and filled with vibrations of chirping birds.
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja was a landholder for King Kaàsa, but because by caste he was a vaiçya,
a member of the mercantile and agricultural community, he maintained thousands of
cows. It is the duty of the vaiçyas to give protection to the cows, just as the kñatriyas are
to give protection to the human beings. Because the Lord was a child, He was put in
charge of the calves with His cowherd boy friends. These cowherd boys were great åñis
and yogés in their previous births, and after many such pious births, they gained the
association of the Lord and could play with Him on equal terms. Such cowherd boys
never cared to know who Kåñëa was, but they played with Him as a most intimate and
lovable friend. They were so fond of the Lord that at night they would only think of the
next morning when they would be able to meet the Lord and go together to the forests
for cowherding.
The forests on the shore of the Yamunä are all beautiful gardens full of trees of mango,
jackfruit, apples, guava, oranges, grapes, berries, palmfruit and so many other plants and
fragrant flowers. And because the forest was on the bank of the Yamunä, naturally there
were ducks, cranes and peacocks on the branches of the trees. All these trees and birds
and beasts were pious living entities born in the transcendental abode of Våndävana just
to give pleasure to the Lord and His eternal associates, the cowherd boys.
While playing like a small child with His associates, the Lord killed many demons,
including Aghäsura, Bakäsura, Pralambäsura and Gardabhäsura. Although He appeared
at Våndävana just as a boy, He was actually like the covered flames of a fire. As a small
particle of fire can kindle a great fire with fuel, so the Lord killed all these great demons,
beginning from His babyhood in the house of Nanda Mahäräja. The land of Våndävana,
the Lord's childhood playground, still remains today, and anyone who visits these places
enjoys the same transcendental bliss, although the Lord is not physically visible to our
imperfect eyes. Lord Caitanya recommended this land of the Lord as identical with the
Lord and therefore worshipable by the devotees. This instruction is taken up especially
by the followers of Lord Caitanya known as the Gauòéya Vaiñëavas. And because the
land is identical with the Lord, devotees like Uddhava and Vidura visited these places
five thousand years ago in order to have direct contact with the Lord, visible or not
92
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
visible, Thousands of devotees of the Lord are still wandering in these sacred places of
Våndävana, and all of them are preparing themselves to go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 28
k-aEMaarq& dXaRYa&êeía& Pa[e+a<aqYaa& v]JaaEk-SaaMa( )
ådiàv hSaNMauGDabal/iSa&havl/aek-Na" )) 28 ))
kaumäréà darçayaàç ceñöäà
prekñaëéyäà vrajaukasäm
rudann iva hasan mugdhabäla-
siàhävalokanaù
SYNONYMS
kaumärém—just suitable to childhood; darçayan—while showing; ceñöäm—activities;
prekñaëéyäm—worthy to be seen; vraja-okasäm—by the inhabitants of the land of
Våndävana; rudan—crying; iva—just like; hasan—laughing; mugdha—struck with
wonder; bäla-siàha—lion cub; avalokanaù—looking like that.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord displayed His activities just suitable for childhood, He was visible only to
the residents of Våndävana. Sometimes He would cry and sometimes laugh, just like a
child, and while so doing He would appear like a lion cub.
PURPORT
If anyone wants to enjoy the childhood pastimes of the Lord, then he has to follow in
the footsteps of the residents of Vraja like Nanda, Upananda and other parental
inhabitants. A child may insist on having something and cry like anything to get it,
disturbing the whole neighborhood, and then immediately after achieving the desired
thing, he laughs. Such crying and laughing is enjoyable to the parents and elderly
members of the family, so the Lord would simultaneously cry and laugh in this way and
merge His devotee-parents in the humor of transcendental pleasure. These incidents are
enjoyable only by the residents of Vraja like Nanda Mahäräja, and not by the
93
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
impersonalist worshipers of Brahman or Paramätmä. Sometimes when attacked in the
forest by demons, Kåñëa would appear struck with wonder, but He looked on them like
the cub of a lion and killed them. His childhood companions would also be struck with
wonder, and when they came back home they would narrate the story to their parents,
and everyone would appreciate the qualities of their Kåñëa. Child Kåñëa did not belong
only to His parents, Nanda and Yaçodä; He was the son of all the elderly inhabitants of
Våndävana and the friend of all contemporary boys and girls. Everyone loved Kåñëa. He
was the life and soul of everyone, including the animals, the cows and the calves.
TEXT 29
Sa Wv GaaeDaNa& l/+MYaa iNake-Ta& iSaTaGaaev*zMa( )
carYaàNauGaaNa( GaaePaaNa( r<aÜe<aurrqrMaTa( )) 29 ))
sa eva go-dhanaà lakñmyä
niketaà sita-go-våñam
cärayann anugän gopän
raëad-veëur aréramat
SYNONYMS
saù—He (Lord Kåñëa); eva—certainly; go-dhanam—the treasure of cows; lakñmyäù—by
opulence; niketam—reservoir; sita-go-våñam—beautiful cows and bulls; cärayan—
herding; anugän—the followers; gopän—cowherd boys; raëat—blowing; veëuù—flute;
aréramat—enlivened.
TRANSLATION
While herding the very beautiful bulls, the Lord, who was the reservoir of all opulence
and fortune, used to blow His flute, and thus He enlivened His faithful followers, the
cowherd boys.
PURPORT
As He grew to six and seven years old, the Lord was given charge of looking after the
cows and bulls in the grazing grounds. He was the son of a well-to-do landholder who
94
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
owned hundreds and thousands of cows, and according to Vedic economics, one is
considered to be a rich man by the strength of his store of grains and cows. With only
these two things, cows and grain, humanity can solve its eating problem. Human society
needs only sufficient grain and sufficient cows to solve its economic problems. All other
things but these two are artificial necessities created by man to kill his valuable life at
the human level and waste his time in things which are not needed. Lord Kåñëa, as the
teacher of human society, personally showed by His acts that the mercantile community,
or the vaiçyas, should herd cows and bulls and thus give protection to the valuable
animals. According to småti regulation, the cow is the mother and the bull the father of
the human being. The cow is the mother because just as one sucks the breast of one's
mother, human society takes cow's milk. Similarly, the bull is the father of human
society because the father earns for the children just as the bull tills the ground to
produce food grains. Human society will kill its spirit of life by killing the father and the
mother. It is mentioned herein that the beautiful cows and bulls were of various
checkered colors—red, black, green, yellow, ash, etc. And because of their colors and
healthy smiling features, the atmosphere was enlivening.
Over and above all, the Lord used to play His celebrated flute. The sound vibrated by
His flute would give His friends such transcendental pleasure that they would forget all
the talks of the brahmänanda which is so praised by the impersonalists. These cowherd
boys, as will be explained by Çukadeva Gosvämé, were living entities who had
accumulated heaps of pious acts and thus were enjoying with the Lord in person and
were hearing His transcendental flute. The Brahma-saàhitä (5.30) confirms the Lord's
blowing His transcendental flute.
veëuà kvaëantam aravinda-daläyatäkñaà
barhävataàsam asitämbuda-sundaräìgam
kandarpa-koöi-kaminéya-viçeña-çobhaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
Brahmäjé said, "I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who plays on His transcendental
flute. His eyes are like lotus flowers, He is decorated with peacock plumes, and His
bodily color resembles a fresh black cloud although His bodily features are more
beautiful than millions of cupids." These are the special features of the Lord.
SB 3.2.30
TEXT 30
95
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Pa[Yau¢-aNa( >aaeJaraJaeNa MaaiYaNa" k-aMaæiPa<a" )
l/Il/Yaa VYaNaudtaa&STaaNa( bal/" §-I@Nak-aiNav )) 30 ))
prayuktän bhoja-räjena
mäyinaù käma-rüpiëaù
lélayä vyanudat täàs tän
bälaù kréòanakän iva
SYNONYMS
prayuktän—engaged; bhoja-räjena—by King Kaàsa; mäyinaù—great wizards; kämarüpiëaù—
who could assume any form they liked; lélayä—in the course of the pastimes;
vyanudat—killed; tän—them; tän—as they came there; bälaù—the child; kréòanakän—
dolls; iva—like that.
TRANSLATION
The great wizards who were able to assume any form were engaged by the King of Bhoja,
Kaàsa, to kill Kåñëa, but in the course of His pastimes the Lord killed them as easily as a
child breaks dolls.
PURPORT
The atheist Kaàsa wanted to kill Kåñëa just after His birth. He failed to do so, but later
on he got information that Kåñëa was living in Våndävana at the house of Nanda
Mahäräja. He therefore engaged many wizards who could perform wonderful acts and
assume any form they liked. All of them appeared before the child-Lord in various
forms, like Agha, Baka, Pütanä, Çakaöa, Tåëävarta, Dhenuka and Gardabha, and they
tried to kill the Lord at every opportunity. But one after another, all of them were killed
by the Lord as if He were only playing with dolls. Children play with toy lions,
elephants, boars and many similar dolls, which are broken by the children in the course
of their playing with them. Before the Almighty Lord, any powerful living being is just
like a toy lion in the hands of a playing child. No one can excel God in any capacity,
and therefore no one can be equal to or greater than Him, nor can anyone attain the
stage of equality with God by any kind of endeavor. Jïäna, yoga and bhakti are three
recognized processes of spiritual realization. The perfection of such processes can lead
96
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
one to the desired goal of life in spiritual value, but that does not mean that one can
attain a perfection equal to the Lord's by such endeavors. The Lord is the Lord at every
stage. When He was playing just like a child on the lap of His mother Yaçodämayé or just
like a cowherd boy with His transcendental friends, He continued to remain God,
without the slightest diminution of His six opulences. Thus He is always unrivaled.
TEXT 31
ivPaàaNa( ivzPaaNaeNa iNaGa*ù >auJaGaaiDaPaMa( )
oTQaaPYaaPaaYaYaÓavSTataaeYa& Pa[k*-iTaiSQaTaMa( )) 31 ))
vipannän viña-pänena
nigåhya bhujagädhipam
utthäpyäpäyayad gävas
tat toyaà prakåti-sthitam
SYNONYMS
vipannän—perplexed in great difficulties; viña-pänena—by drinking poison; nigåhya—
subduing; bhujaga-adhipam—the chief of the reptiles; utthäpya—after coming out;
apäyayat—caused to drink; gävaù—the cows; tat—that; toyam—water; prakåti—natural;
sthitam—situated.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Våndävana were perplexed by great difficulties because a certain
portion of the Yamunä was poisoned by the chief of the reptiles [Käliya]. The Lord
chastised the snake-king within the water and drove him away, and after coming out of
the river, He caused the cows to drink the water and proved that the water was again in
its natural state.
TEXT 32
AYaaJaYaÓaeSaveNa GaaeParaJa& iÜJaaetaMaE" )
ivtaSYa caeå>aarSYa ick-IzRNa( SaÜyYa& iv>au" )) 32 ))
97
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ayäjayad go-savena
gopa-räjaà dvijottamaiù
vittasya coru-bhärasya
cikérñan sad-vyayaà vibhuù
SYNONYMS
ayäjayat—made to perform; go-savena—by worship of the cows; gopa-räjam—the king
of the cowherds; dvija-uttamaiù—by the learned brähmaëas; vittasya—of the wealth;
ca—also; uru-bhärasya—great opulence; cikérñan—desiring to act; sat-vyayam—proper
utilization; vibhuù—the great.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, desired to utilize the opulent financial strength of Mahäräja
Nanda for worship of the cows, and also He wanted to give a lesson to Indra, the King of
heaven. Thus He advised His father to perform worship of go, or the pasturing land and
the cows, with the help of learned brähmaëas.
PURPORT
Since He is the teacher of everyone, the Lord also taught His father, Nanda Mahäräja.
Nanda Mahäräja was a well-to-do landholder and owner of many cows, and, as was the
custom, he used to perform yearly worship of Indra, the King of heaven, with great
opulence. This worship of demigods by the general populace is also advised in the Vedic
literature just so people can accept the superior power of the Lord. The demigods are
servants of the Lord deputed to look after the management of various activities of
universal affairs. Therefore it is advised in the Vedic scriptures that one should perform
yajïas to appease the demigods. But one who is devoted to the Supreme Lord has no
need to appease the demigods. Worship of the demigods by common people is an
arrangement for acknowledging the supremacy of the Supreme Lord, but it is not
necessary. Such appeasement is generally recommended for material gains only. As we
have already discussed in the Second Canto of this literature, one who admits the
supremacy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not need to worship the
secondary demigods. Sometimes, being worshiped and adored by less intelligent living
beings, the demigods become puffed up with power and forget the supremacy of the
Lord. This happened when Lord Kåñëa was present in the universe, and thus the Lord
98
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
wanted to give a lesson to the King of heaven, Indra. He therefore asked Mahäräja
Nanda to stop the sacrifice offered to Indra and to use the money properly by
performing a ceremony worshiping the cows and the pasturing ground on the hill of
Govardhana. By this act Lord Kåñëa taught human society, as He has instructed in the
Bhagavad-gétä also, that one should worship the Supreme Lord by all acts and by all their
results. That will bring about the desired success. The vaiçyas are specifically advised to
give protection to the cows and their pasturing ground or agricultural land instead of
squandering their hard-earned money. That will satisfy the Lord. The perfection of one's
occupational duty, whether in the sphere of duty to oneself, one's community or one's
nation, is judged by the degree to which the Lord is satisfied.
SB 3.2.33
TEXT 33
vzRTaqNd]e v]Ja" k-aePaaÙGanMaaNae_iTaivûl/" )
Gaae}al/Il/aTaPa}ae<a }aaTaae >ad]aNauGa*õTaa )) 33 ))
varñaténdre vrajaù kopäd
bhagnamäne 'tivihvalaù
gotra-lélätapatreëa
träto bhadränugåhëatä
SYNONYMS
varñati—in pouring water; indre—by the King of heaven, Indra; vrajaù—the land of
cows (Våndävana); kopät bhagnamäne—having been in anger on being insulted; ati—
highly; vihvalaù—perturbed; gotra—the hill for the cows; lélä-ätapatreëa—by the
pastime umbrella; trätaù—were protected; bhadra—O sober one; anugåhëatä—by the
merciful Lord.
TRANSLATION
O sober Vidura, King Indra, his honor having been insulted, poured water incessantly on
Våndävana, and thus the inhabitants of Vraja, the land of cows, were greatly distressed.
But the compassionate Lord Kåñëa saved them from danger with His pastime umbrella,
the Govardhana Hill.
99
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 34
XarC^iXak-rEMa*Rí& MaaNaYaNa( rJaNaqMau%Ma( )
GaaYaNa( k-l/Pad& reMae ñq<aa& Ma<@l/Ma<@Na" )) 34 ))
çarac-chaçi-karair måñöaà
mänayan rajané-mukham
gäyan kala-padaà reme
stréëäà maëòala-maëòanaù
SYNONYMS
çarat—autumn; çaçi—of the moon; karaiù—by the shining; måñöam—brightened;
mänayan—thinking so; rajané-mukham—the face of the night; gäyan—singing; kalapadam—
pleasing songs; reme—enjoyed; stréëäm—of the women; maëòala-maëòanaù—
as the central beauty of the assembly of women.
TRANSLATION
In the third season of the year, the Lord enjoyed as the central beauty of the assembly of
women by attracting them with His pleasing songs in an autumn night brightened by
moonshine.
PURPORT
Before leaving the land of cows, Våndävana, the Lord pleased His young girl friends, the
transcendental gopés, in His räsa-lélä pastimes. Here Uddhava stopped his description of
the Lord's activities.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Second Chapter, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "Remembrance of Lord Kåñëa."
3. The Lord's Pastimes Out of Våndävana
100
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 1
oÖv ovac
TaTa" Sa AaGaTYa Paur& SviPa}aae‚
iêk-IzRYaa Xa& bl/devSa&YauTa" )
iNaPaaTYa Tau(r)aid]PauYaUQaNaaQa&
hTa& VYak-zRd( VYaSauMaaeJaSaaeVYaaRMa( )) 1 ))
uddhava uväca
tataù sa ägatya puraà sva-pitroç
cikérñayä çaà baladeva-saàyutaù
nipätya tuìgäd ripu-yütha-näthaà
hataà vyakarñad vyasum ojasorvyäm
SYNONYMS
uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; tataù—thereafter; saù—the Lord; ägatya—coming;
puram—to the city of Mathurä; sva-pitroù—own parents; cikérñayä—wishing well;
çam—well-being; baladeva-saàyutaù—with Lord Baladeva; nipätya—dragging down;
tuìgät—from the throne; ripu-yütha-nätham—leader of public enemies; hatam—killed;
vyakarñat—pulled; vyasum—dead; ojasä—by strength; urvyäm—on the ground.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: Thereafter Lord Kåñëa went to Mathurä City with Çré Baladeva, and
to please Their parents They dragged Kaàsa, the leader of public enemies, down from his
throne and killed him, pulling him along the ground with great strength.
PURPORT
King Kaàsa's death is only briefly described here because such pastimes are vividly and
elaborately described in the Tenth Canto. The Lord proved to be a worthy son of His
parents even at the age of sixteen years. Both brothers, Lord Kåñëa and Lord Baladeva,
went to Mathurä from Våndävana and killed Their maternal uncle, who had given so
much trouble to Their parents, Vasudeva and Devaké. Kaàsa was a great giant, and
101
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Vasudeva and Devaké never thought that Kåñëa and Balaräma (Baladeva) would be able
to kill such a great and strong enemy. When the two brothers attacked Kaàsa on the
throne, Their parents feared that now Kaàsa would finally get the opportunity to kill
their sons, whom they had hidden for so long in the house of Nanda Mahäräja. The
parents of the Lord, due to parental affection, felt extreme danger, and they almost
fainted. Just to convince them that They had actually killed Kaàsa, Kåñëa and Baladeva
pulled Kaàsa's dead body along the ground to encourage them.
TEXT 2
SaaNdqPaNae" Sak*-TPa[ae¢&- b]øaDaqTYa SaivSTarMa( )
TaSMaE Pa[adaÜr& Pau}a& Ma*Ta& PaÄJaNaaedraTa( )) 2 ))
sändépaneù sakåt proktaà
brahmädhétya sa-vistaram
tasmai prädäd varaà putraà
måtaà païca-janodarät
SYNONYMS
sändépaneù—of Sändépani Muni; sakåt—once only; proktam—instructed; brahma—all
the Vedas with their different branches of knowledge; adhétya—after studying; savistaram—
in all details; tasmai—unto him; prädät—rewarded; varam—a benediction;
putram—his son; måtam—who was already dead; païca-jana—the region of the
departed souls; udarät—from within.
TRANSLATION
The Lord learned all the Vedas with their different branches simply by hearing them once
from His teacher, Sändépani Muni, whom He rewarded by bringing back his dead son
from the region of Yamaloka.
PURPORT
No one but the Supreme Lord can become well versed in all the branches of Vedic
wisdom simply by hearing once from his teacher. Nor can anyone bring a dead body
102
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
back to life after the soul has already gone to the region of Yamaräja. But Lord Kåñëa
ventured to the planet of Yamaloka and found the dead son of His teacher and brought
him back to his father as a reward for the instructions received. The Lord is
constitutionally well versed in all the Vedas, and yet to teach by example that everyone
must go to learn the Vedas from an authorized teacher and must satisfy the teacher by
service and reward, He Himself adopted this system. The Lord offered His services to
His teacher, Sändépani Muni, and the muni, knowing the power of the Lord, asked
something which was impossible to be done by anyone else. The teacher asked that his
beloved son, who had died, be brought back to him, and the Lord fulfilled the request.
The Lord is not, therefore, an ingrate to anyone who renders Him some sort of service.
The devotees of the Lord who always engage in His loving service are never to be
disappointed in the progressive march of devotional service.
TEXT 3
SaMaahuTaa >aqZMak-k-NYaYaa Yae
ié[Ya" Sav<aeRNa bu>aUzYaEzaMa( )
GaaNDavRv*tYaa iMazTaa& Sv>aaGa&
JahPad& MaUiDanR dDaTSauPa<aR" )) 3 ))
samähutä bhéñmaka-kanyayä ye
çriyaù savarëena bubhüñayaiñäm
gändharva-våttyä miñatäà sva-bhägaà
jahre padaà mürdhni dadhat suparëaù
SYNONYMS
samähutäù—invited; bhéñmaka—of King Bhéñmaka; kanyayä—by the daughter; ye—all
those; çriyaù—fortune; sa-varëena—by a similar sequence; bubhüñayä—expecting to be
so; eñäm—of them; gändharva—in marrying; våttyä—by such a custom; miñatäm—
carrying so; sva-bhägam—own share; jahre—took away; padam—feet; mürdhni—on the
head; dadhat—placed; suparëaù—Garuòa.
TRANSLATION
103
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Attracted by the beauty and fortune of Rukmiëé, the daughter of King Bhéñmaka, many
great princes and kings assembled to marry her. But Lord Kåñëa, stepping over the other
hopeful candidates, carried her away as His own share, as Garuòa carried away nectar.
PURPORT
Princess Rukmiëé, the daughter of King Bhéñmaka, was actually as attractive as fortune
itself because she was as valuable as gold both in color and in value. Since the goddess of
fortune, Lakñmé, is the property of the Supreme Lord, Rukmiëé was actually meant for
Lord Kåñëa. But Çiçupäla was selected as her bridegroom by Rukmiëé's elder brother,
although King Bhéñmaka wanted his daughter to be married to Kåñëa. Rukmiëé invited
Kåñëa to take her away from the clutches of Çiçupäla, so when the bridegroom, Çiçupäla,
came there with his party with the desire to marry Rukmiëé, Kåñëa all of a sudden swept
her from the scene, stepping over the heads of all the princes there, just as Garuòa
carried away nectar from the hands of the demons. This incident will be clearly
explained in the Tenth Canto.
TEXT 4
k-ku-iÚNaae_ivÖNaSaae diMaTva
SvYa&vre NaaGaniJaTaqMauvah )
TaÙGanMaaNaaNaiPa Ga*DYaTaae_ja‚
Ågane_+aTa" Xañ>a*Ta" SvXañE" )) 4 ))
kakudmino 'viddha-naso damitvä
svayaàvare nägnajitém uväha
tad-bhagnamänän api gådhyato 'jïäï
jaghne 'kñataù çastra-bhåtaù sva-çastraiù
SYNONYMS
kakudminaù—bulls whose noses were not pierced; aviddha-nasaù—pierced by the nose;
damitvä—subduing; svayaàvare—in the open competition to select the bridegroom;
nägnajitém—Princess Nägnijité; uväha—married; tat-bhagnamänän—in that way all who
were disappointed; api—even though; gådhyataù—wanted; ajïän—the fools; jaghne—
killed and wounded; akñataù—without being wounded; çastra-bhåtaù—equipped with all
104
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
weapons; sva-çastraiù—by His own weapons.
TRANSLATION
By subduing seven bulls whose noses were not pierced, the Lord achieved the hand of
Princess Nägnijité in the open competition to select her bridegroom. Although the Lord
was victorious, His competitors asked the hand of the princess, and thus there was a
fight. Well equipped with weapons, the Lord killed or wounded all of them, but He was
not hurt Himself.
TEXT 5
iPa[Ya& Pa[>auGa]aRMYa wv iPa[YaaYaa
iviDaTSauraC^Rd( ÛuTaå& YadQaeR )
vJa[(Yaad]vta& SaGa<aae åzaNDa"
§-I@aMa*Gaae NaUNaMaYa& vDaUNaaMa( )) 5 ))
priyaà prabhur grämya iva priyäyä
vidhitsur ärcchad dyutaruà yad-arthe
vajry ädravat taà sa-gaëo ruñändhaù
kréòä-mågo nünam ayaà vadhünäm
SYNONYMS
priyam—of the dear wife; prabhuù—the Lord; grämyaù—ordinary living being; iva—in
the manner of; priyäyäù—just to please; vidhitsuù—wishing; ärcchat—brought about;
dyutarum—the pärijäta flower tree; yat—for which; arthe—in the matter of; vajré—
Indra, the King of heaven; ädravat tam—went forward to fight with Him; sa-gaëaù—
with full strength; ruñä—in anger; andhaù—blind; kréòä-mågaù—henpecked; nünam—
of course; ayam—this; vadhünäm—of the wives.
TRANSLATION
Just to please His dear wife, the Lord brought back the pärijäta tree from heaven, just as
an ordinary husband would do. But Indra, the King of heaven, induced by his wives
105
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
(henpecked as he was), ran after the Lord with full force to fight Him.
PURPORT
The Lord once went to the heavenly planet to present an earring to Aditi, the mother of
the demigods, and His wife Satyabhämä also went with Him. There is a special flowering
tree called the pärijäta, which grows only in the heavenly planets, and Satyabhämä
wanted this tree. Just to please His wife, like an ordinary husband, the Lord brought
back the tree, and this enraged Vajré, or the controller of the thunderbolt. Indra's wives
inspired him to run after the Lord to fight, and Indra, because he was a henpecked
husband and also a fool, listened to them and dared to fight with Kåñëa. He was a fool on
this occasion because he forgot that everything belongs to the Lord.
There was no fault on the part of the Lord, even though He took away the tree from the
heavenly kingdom, but because Indra was henpecked, dominated by his beautiful wives
like Çacé, he became a fool, just as all persons who are dominated by their wives are
generally foolish. Indra thought that Kåñëa was a henpecked husband who only by the
will of His wife Satyabhämä took away the property of heaven, and therefore he thought
that Kåñëa could be punished. He forgot that the Lord is the proprietor of everything
and cannot be henpecked. The Lord is fully independent, and by His will only He can
have hundreds and thousands of wives like Satyabhämä. He was not, therefore, attached
to Satyabhämä because she was a beautiful wife, but He was pleased with her devotional
service and thus wanted to reciprocate the unalloyed devotion of His devotee.
TEXT 6
SauTa& Ma*Dae %& vPauza Ga]SaNTa&
d*îa SauNaa>aaeNMaiQaTa& Dair}Yaa )
AaMaiN}aTaSTataNaYaaYa Xaez&
dtva TadNTa"PaurMaaivveXa )) 6 ))
sutaà mådhe khaà vapuñä grasantaà
dåñövä sunäbhonmathitaà dharitryä
ämantritas tat-tanayäya çeñaà
dattvä tad-antaù-puram äviveça
106
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
sutam—son; mådhe—in the fight; kham—the sky; vapuñä—by his body; grasantam—
while devouring; dåñövä—seeing; sunäbha—by the Sudarçana wheel; unmathitam—
killed; dharitryä—by the earth; ämantritaù—being prayed for; tat-tanayäya—to the son
of Narakäsura; çeñam—that which was taken from; dattvä—returning it; tat—his; antaùpuram—
inside the house; äviveça—entered.
TRANSLATION
Narakäsura, the son of Dharitré, the earth, tried to grasp the whole sky, and for this he
was killed by the Lord in a fight. His mother then prayed to the Lord. This led to the
return of the kingdom to the son of Narakäsura, and thus the Lord entered the house of
the demon.
PURPORT
It is said in other puräëas that Narakäsura was the son of Dharitré, the earth, by the
Lord Himself. But he became a demon due to the bad association of Bäëa, another
demon. An atheist is called a demon, and it is a fact that even a person born of good
parents can turn into a demon by bad association. Birth is not always the criterion of
goodness; unless and until one is trained in the culture of good association, one cannot
become good.
TEXT 7
Ta}aaôTaaSTaa Nardevk-NYaa"
ku-JaeNa d*îa hirMaaTaRbNDauMa( )
oTQaaYa SaÛae JaGa*hu" Pa[hzR‚
v]q@aNauraGaPa[ihTaavl/aekE-" )) 7 ))
taträhåtäs tä nara-deva-kanyäù
kujena dåñövä harim ärta-bandhum
utthäya sadyo jagåhuù praharñavréòänuräga-
prahitävalokaiù
107
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
tatra—inside the house of Narakäsura; ähåtäù—kidnapped; täù—all those; nara-devakanyäù—
daughters of many kings; kujena—by the demon; dåñövä—by seeing; harim—
the Lord; ärta-bandhum—the friend of the distressed; utthäya—at once got up; sadyaù—
then and there; jagåhuù—accepted; praharña—joyfully; vréòa—shyness; anuräga—
attachment; prahita-avalokaiù—by eager glances.
TRANSLATION
There in the house of the demon, all the princesses kidnapped by Narakäsura at once
became alert upon seeing the Lord, the friend of the distressed. They looked upon Him
with eagerness, joy and shyness and offered to be His wives.
PURPORT
Narakäsura kidnapped many daughters of great kings and kept them imprisoned in his
palace. But when he was killed by the Lord and the Lord entered the house of the
demon, all the princesses were enlivened with joy and offered to become His wives
because the Lord is the only friend of the distressed. Unless the Lord accepted them,
there would be no chance of their being married because the demon kidnapped them
from their fathers' custody and therefore no one would agree to marry them. According
to Vedic society, girls are transferred from the custody of the father to the custody of the
husband. Since these princesses had already been taken away from the custody of their
fathers, it would have been difficult for them to have any husband other than the Lord
Himself.
TEXT 8
AaSaa& MauhUTaR Wk-iSMaàaNaaGaarezu YaaeizTaaMa( )
SaivDa& JaGa*he Paa<aqNaNauæPa" SvMaaYaYaa )) 8 ))
äsäà muhürta ekasmin
nänägäreñu yoñitäm
sa-vidhaà jagåhe päëén
anurüpaù sva-mäyayä
108
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
äsäm—all those; muhürte—at one time; ekasmin—simultaneously; nänä-ägäreñu—in
different compartments; yoñitäm—of the women; sa-vidham—with perfect rituals;
jagåhe—accepted; päëén—hands; anurüpaù—exactly to match; sva-mäyayä—by His
internal potency.
TRANSLATION
All those princesses were lodged in different apartments, and the Lord simultaneously
assumed different bodily expansions exactly matching each and every princess. He
accepted their hands in perfect rituals by His internal potency.
PURPORT
In the Brahma-saàhitä (5.33) the Lord is described as follows in regard to His
innumerable plenary expansions:
advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam
ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà nava-yauvanaà ca
vedeñu durlabham adurlabham ätma-bhaktau
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"The Lord, Govinda, whom I worship, is the original Personality of Godhead. He is
nondifferent from His innumerable plenary expansions, who are all infallible, original
and unlimited and who have eternal forms. Although He is primeval, the oldest
personality, He is always fresh and young." By His internal potency the Lord can expand
Himself into various personalities of svayaà-prakäça and again into präbhava and
vaibhava forms, and all of them are nondifferent from one another. The forms into
which the Lord expanded to marry the princesses in different apartments were all
slightly different just to match each and every one of them. They are called vaibhavaviläsa
forms of the Lord and are effected by His internal potency, yoga-mäyä.
TEXT 9
TaaSvPaTYaaNYaJaNaYadaTMaTauLYaaiNa SavRTa" )
WkE-k-SYaa& dXa dXa Pa[k*-TaeivRbu>aUzYaa )) 9 ))
109
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
täsv apatyäny ajanayad
ätma-tulyäni sarvataù
ekaikasyäà daça daça
prakåter vibubhüñayä
SYNONYMS
täsu—unto them; apatyäni—offspring; ajanayat—begot; ätma-tulyäni—all like Himself;
sarvataù—in all respects; eka-ekasyäm—in each and every one of them; daça—ten;
daça—ten; prakåteù—for expanding Himself; vibubhüñayä—so desiring.
TRANSLATION
Just to expand Himself according to His transcendental features, the Lord begot in each
and every one of them ten offspring with exactly His own qualities.
TEXT 10
k-al/MaaGaDaXaaLvadqNaNaqkE- åNDaTa" PaurMa( )
AJaqgaNaTSvYa& idVYa& SvPau&Saa& TaeJa AaidXaTa( )) 10 ))
käla-mägadha-çälvädén
anékai rundhataù puram
ajéghanat svayaà divyaà
sva-puàsäà teja ädiçat
SYNONYMS
käla—Kälayavana; mägadha—the King of Magadha (Jaräsandha); çälva—King Çälva;
ädén—and others; anékaiù—by the soldiers; rundhataù—being encircled; puram—the
city of Mathurä; ajéghanat—killed; svayam—personally; divyam—transcendental; svapuàsäm—
of His own men; tejaù—prowess; ädiçat—exhibited.
TRANSLATION
Kälayavana, the King of Magadha and Sälva attacked the city of Mathurä, but when the
110
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
city was encircled by their soldiers, the Lord refrained from killing them personally, just
to show the power of His own men.
PURPORT
After the death of Kaàsa, when Mathurä was encircled by the soldiers of Kälayavana,
Jaräsandha and Sälva, the Lord seemingly fled from the city, and thus He is known as
Ranchor, or one who fled from fighting. Actually, the fact was that the Lord wanted to
kill them through the agency of His own men, devotees like Mucukunda and Bhéma.
Kälayavana and the King of Magadha were killed by Mucukunda and Bhéma
respectively, who acted as agents of the Lord. By such acts the Lord wanted to exhibit
the prowess of His devotees, as if He were personally unable to fight but His devotees
could kill them. The relationship of the Lord with His devotees is a very happy one.
Actually, the Lord descended at the request of Brahmä in order to kill all the
undesirables of the world, but to divide the share of glory He sometimes engaged His
devotees to take the credit. The Battle of Kurukñetra was designed by the Lord Himself,
but just to give credit to His devotee Arjuna (nimitta-mätraà bhava savyasäcin), He
played the part of the charioteer, while Arjuna was given the chance to play the fighter
and thus become the hero of the Battle of Kurukñetra. What He wants to do Himself by
His transcendental plans, He executes through His confidential devotees. That is the
way of the Lord's mercy towards His pure unalloyed devotees.
TEXT 11
XaMbr& iÜivd& ba<a& Maur& bLvl/Maev c )
ANYaa&ê dNTav§-adqNavDaqTk-a&ê gaaTaYaTa( )) 11 ))
çambaraà dvividaà bäëaà
muraà balvalam eva ca
anyäàç ca dantavakrädén
avadhét käàç ca ghätayat
SYNONYMS
çambaram—Çambara; dvividam—Dvivida; bäëam—Bäëa; muram—Mura; balvalam—
Balvala; eva ca—as also; anyän—others; ca—also; dantavakra-ädén—like Dantavakra
111
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
and others; avadhét—killed; kän ca—and many others; ghätayat—caused to be killed.
TRANSLATION
Of kings like Çambara, Dvivida, Bäëa, Mura, Balvala and many other demons, such as
Dantavakra, some He killed Himself, and some He caused to be killed by others [Çré
Baladeva, etc.].
TEXT 12
AQa Tae >a]aTa*Pau}aa<aa& Pa+aYaae" PaiTaTaaà*PaaNa( )
ccal/ >aU" ku-å+ae}a& YaezaMaaPaTaTaa& blE/" )) 12 ))
atha te bhrätå-puträëäà
pakñayoù patitän nåpän
cacäla bhüù kurukñetraà
yeñäm äpatatäà balaiù
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; te—your; bhrätå-puträëäm—of the nephews; pakñayoù—of both sides;
patitän—killed; nåpän—kings; cacäla—shook; bhüù—the earth; kurukñetram—the
Battle of Kurukñetra; yeñäm—of whom; äpatatäm—traversing; balaiù—by strength.
TRANSLATION
Then, O Vidura, the Lord caused all the kings, both the enemies and those on the side of
your fighting nephews, to be killed in the Battle of Kurukñetra. All those kings were so
great and strong that the earth seemed to shake as they traversed the warfield.
TEXT 13
Sak-<aRdu"XaaSaNaSaaEbl/aNaa&
ku-MaN}aPaake-Na hTaié[YaaYauzMa( )
SauYaaeDaNa& SaaNaucr& XaYaaNa&
112
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
>aGanaeåMaUVYaa| Na NaNaNd PaXYaNa( )) 13 ))
sa karëa-duùçäsana-saubalänäà
kumantra-päkena hata-çriyäyuñam
suyodhanaà sänucaraà çayänaà
bhagnorum ürvyäà na nananda paçyan
SYNONYMS
saù—He (the Lord); karëa—Karëa; duùçäsana—Duùçäsana; saubalänäm—Saubala;
kumantra-päkena—by the intricacy of ill advice; hata-çriya—bereft of fortune;
äyuñam—duration of life; suyodhanam—Duryodhana; sa-anucaram—with followers;
çayänam—lying down; bhagna—broken; ürum—thighs; ürvyäm—very powerful; na—
did not; nananda—take pleasure; paçyan—seeing like that.
TRANSLATION
Duryodhana was bereft of his fortune and duration of life because of the intricacy of ill
advice given by Karëa, Duùçäsana and Saubala. When he lay on the ground with his
followers, his thighs broken although he was powerful, the Lord was not happy to see the
scene.
PURPORT
The fall of Duryodhana, the leading son of Dhåtaräñöra, was not pleasing to the Lord,
although He was on the side of Arjuna and it was He who advised Bhéma how to break
the thighs of Duryodhana while the fight was going on. The Lord is constrained to
award punishment upon the wrongdoer, but He is not happy to award such punishments
because the living entities are originally His parts and parcels. He is harder than the
thunderbolt for the wrongdoer and softer than the rose for the faithful. The wrongdoer
is misled by bad associates and by ill advice, which is against the established principles of
the Lord's order, and thus he becomes subject to punishment. The surest path to
happiness is to live by the principles laid down by the Lord and not disobey His
established laws, which are enacted in the Vedas and the Puräëas for the forgetful living
entities.
SB 3.3.14
113
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 14
ik-YaaNa( >auvae_Ya& +aiPaTaaeå>aarae
YaO_ae<a>aqZMaaJauRNa>aqMaMaUlE/" )
AíadXaa+aaEihi<ak-ae Mad&XaE‚
raSTae bl&/ duivRzh& YadUNaaMa( )) 14 ))
kiyän bhuvo 'yaà kñapitoru-bhäro
yad droëa-bhéñmärjuna-bhéma-mülaiù
añöädaçäkñauhiëiko mad-aàçair
äste balaà durviñahaà yadünäm
SYNONYMS
kiyän—what is this; bhuvaù—of the earth; ayam—this; kñapita—abated; uru—very
great; bhäraù—burden; yat—which; droëa—Droëa; bhéñma—Bhéñma; arjuna—Arjuna;
bhéma—Bhéma; mülaiù—with the help; añöädaça—eighteen; akñauhiëikaù—phalanxes
of military strength (vide SB 1.16.34); mat-aàçaiù—with My descendants; äste—are still
there; balam—great strength; durviñaham—unbearable; yadünäm—of the Yadu dynasty.
TRANSLATION
[After the end of the Battle of Kurukñetra, the Lord said:] The abatement of the earth's
great burden, eighteen akñauhiëés, has now been effected with the help of Droëa, Bhéñma,
Arjuna and Bhéma. But what is this? There is still the great strength of the Yadu dynasty,
born of Myself, which may be a more unbearable burden.
PURPORT
It is a wrong theory that due to an increase in population the world becomes
overburdened and therefore there are wars and other annihilating processes. The earth
is never overburdened. The heaviest mountains and oceans on the face of the earth hold
more living entities than there are human beings, and they are not overburdened. If a
census were taken of all the living beings on the surface of the earth, certainly it would
be found that the number of humans is not even five percent of the total number of
living beings. If the birthrate of human beings is increasing, then the birthrate of other
114
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
living beings is increasing proportionately. The birthrate of lower animals-beasts,
aquatics, birds, etc.-is far greater than that of human beings. There is an adequate
arrangement for food for all the living beings all over the earth by the order of the
Supreme Lord, and He can arrange more and more if there is actually a disproportionate
increase of living beings.
Therefore, there is no question of an increase in population causing a burden. The earth
became overburdened due to dharma-gläni, or irregular discharge of the Lord's desire.
The Lord appeared on the earth to curb the increase in miscreants, and not the increase
in population, as is wrongly put forward by the mundane economist. When Lord Kåñëa
appeared, there had been a sufficient increase in miscreants who had violated the desire
of the Lord. The material creation is meant for fulfilling the desire of the Lord, and His
desire is that the conditioned souls who are unfit to enter into the kingdom of God have
a chance to improve their conditions for entering. The entire process of cosmic
arrangement is intended just to give a chance to the conditioned souls to enter the
kingdom of God, and there is an adequate arrangement for their maintenance by the
nature of the Lord.
Therefore, although there may be a great increase in population on the surface of the
earth, if the people are exactly in line with God consciousness and are not miscreants,
such a burden on the earth is a source of pleasure for her. There are two kinds of
burdens. There is the burden of the beast and the burden of love. The burden of the
beast is unbearable, but the burden of love is a source of pleasure. Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté describes the burden of love very practically. He says that the burden of the
husband on the young wife, the burden of the child on the lap of the mother, and the
burden of wealth on the businessman, although actually burdens from the viewpoint of
heaviness, are sources of pleasure, and in the absence of such burdensome objects, one
may feel the burden of separation, which is heavier to bear than the actual burden of
love. When Lord Kåñëa referred to the burden of the Yadu dynasty on the earth, He
referred to something different than the burden of the beast. The large numbers of
family members born of Lord Kåñëa counted to some millions and were certainly a great
increase in the population of the earth, but because all of them were expansions of the
Lord Himself by His transcendental plenary expansions, they were a source of great
pleasure for the earth. When the Lord referred to them in connection with the burden
on the earth, He had in mind their imminent disappearance from the earth. All the
members of the family of Lord Kåñëa were incarnations of different demigods, and they
were to disappear from the surface of the earth along with the Lord. When He referred
to the unbearable heaviness on the earth in connection with the Yadu dynasty, He was
115
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
referring to the burden of their separation. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé confirms this inference.
TEXT 15
iMaQaae YadEza& >aivTaa ivvadae
MaßaMadaTaaMa]ivl/aecNaaNaaMa( )
NaEza& vDaaePaaYa wYaaNaTaae_NYaae
MaYYauÛTae_NTadRDaTae SvYa& SMa )) 15 ))
mitho yadaiñäà bhavitä vivädo
madhv-ämadätämra-vilocanänäm
naiñäà vadhopäya iyän ato 'nyo
mayy udyate 'ntardadhate svayaà sma
SYNONYMS
mithaù—one another; yadä—when; eñäm—of them; bhavitä—will take place; vivädaù—
quarrel; madhu-ämada—intoxication by drinking; ätämra-vilocanänäm—of their eyes
being copper-red; na—not; eñäm—of them; vadha-upäyaù—means of disappearance;
iyän—like this; ataù—besides this; anyaù—alternative; mayi—on My; udyate—
disappearance; antaù-dadhate—will disappear; svayam—themselves; sma—certainly.
TRANSLATION
When they quarrel among themselves, influenced by intoxication, with their eyes red like
copper because of drinking [madhu], then only will they disappear; otherwise, it will not
be possible. On My disappearance, this incident will take place.
PURPORT
The Lord and His associates appear and disappear by the will of the Lord. They are not
subjected to the laws of material nature. No one was able to kill the family of the Lord,
nor was there any possibility of their natural death by the laws of nature. The only
means, therefore, for their disappearance was the make-show of a fight amongst
themselves, as if brawling in intoxication due to drinking. That so-called fighting would
also take place by the will of the Lord, otherwise there would be no cause for their
116
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
fighting. Just as Arjuna was made to be illusioned by family affection and thus the
Bhagavad-gétä was spoken, so the Yadu dynasty was made to be intoxicated by the will of
the Lord, and nothing more. The devotees and associates of the Lord are completely
surrendered souls. Thus they are transcendental instruments in the hands of the Lord
and can be used in any way the Lord desires. The pure devotees also enjoy such pastimes
of the Lord because they want to see Him happy. Devotees of the Lord never assert
independent individuality; on the contrary, they utilize their individuality in pursuit of
the desires of the Lord, and this cooperation of the devotees with the Lord makes a
perfect scene of the Lord's pastimes.
TEXT 16
Wv& SaiÄNTYa >aGavaNa( SvraJYae SQaaPYa DaMaRJaMa( )
NaNdYaaMaaSa Sauôd" SaaDaUNaa& vTMaR dXaRYaNa( )) 16 ))
evaà saïcintya bhagavän
sva-räjye sthäpya dharmajam
nandayäm äsa suhådaù
sädhünäà vartma darçayan
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; saïcintya—thinking within Himself; bhagavän—the Personality of
Godhead; sva-räjye—in his own kingdom; sthäpya—installing; dharmajam—Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira; nandayäm äsa—gladdened; suhådaù—the friends; sädhünäm—of the saints;
vartma—the path; darçayan—by indicating.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çré Kåñëa, thus thinking to Himself, established Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira in the
position of supreme control of the world in order to show the ideal of administration on
the path of piety.
TEXT 17
117
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
otaraYaa& Da*Ta" PaUraev|Xa" Saaßi>aMaNYauNaa )
Sa vE d]aE<YañSaMPlu/í" PauNa>aRGavTaa Da*Ta" )) 17 ))
uttaräyäà dhåtaù püror
vaàçaù sädhv-abhimanyunä
sa vai drauëy-astra-sampluñöaù
punar bhagavatä dhåtaù
SYNONYMS
uttaräyäm—unto Uttarä; dhåtaù—conceived; püroù—of Püru; vaàçaù—descendant;
sädhu-abhimanyunä—by the hero Abhimanyu; saù—he; vai—certainly; drauëi-astra—
by the weapon of Drauëi, the son of Droëa; sampluñöaù—being burnt; punaù—again, for
the second time; bhagavatä—by the Personality of Godhead; dhåtaù—was protected.
TRANSLATION
The embryo of Püru's descendant begotten by the great hero Abhimanyu in the womb of
Uttarä, his wife, was burnt by the weapon of the son of Droëa, but later he was again
protected by the Lord.
PURPORT
The embryonic body of Parékñit which was in formation after Uttarä's pregnancy by
Abhimanyu, the great hero, was burned by the brahmästra of Açvatthämä, but a second
body was given by the Lord within the womb, and thus the descendant of Püru was
saved. This incident is the direct proof that the body and the living entity, the spiritual
spark, are different. When the living entity takes shelter in the womb of a woman
through the injection of the semen of a man, there is an emulsification of the man's and
woman's discharges, and thus a body is formed the size of a pea, gradually developing
into a complete body. But if the developing embryo is destroyed in some way or other,
the living entity has to take shelter in another body or in the womb of another woman.
The particular living entity who was selected to be the descendant of Mahäräja Püru, or
the Päëòavas, was not an ordinary living entity, and by the superior will of the Lord he
was destined to be the successor to Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. Therefore, when Açvatthämä
destroyed the embryo of Mahäräja Parékñit, the Lord, by His own internal potency,
118
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
entered into the womb of Uttarä by His plenary portion just to give audience to the
would-be Mahäräja Parékñit, who was in great danger. By His appearance within the
womb, the Lord encouraged the child and gave him complete protection in a new body
by His omnipotency. By His power of omnipresence He was present both inside and
outside of Uttarä and other members of the Päëòava family.
TEXT 18
AYaaJaYaÖMaRSauTaMaìMaeDaEiñi>aivR>au" )
Saae_iPa +MaaMaNauJaE r+aNa( reMae k*-Z<aMaNauv]Ta" )) 18 ))
ayäjayad dharma-sutam
açvamedhais tribhir vibhuù
so 'pi kñmäm anujai rakñan
reme kåñëam anuvrataù
SYNONYMS
ayäjayat—made to perform; dharma-sutam—by the son of Dharma (Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira); açvamedhaiù—by horse sacrifices; tribhiù—three; vibhuù—the Supreme
Lord; saù—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira; api—also; kñmäm—the earth; anujaiù—assisted by
his younger brothers; rakñan—protecting; reme—enjoyed; kåñëam—Kåñëa, the
Personality of Godhead; anuvrataù—constant follower.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord induced the son of Dharma to perform three horse sacrifices, and
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, constantly following Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, protected
and enjoyed the earth, assisted by his younger brothers.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was the ideal monarchical representative on the earth because he
was a constant follower of the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa. As stated in the Vedas
(Éçopaniñad), the Lord is the proprietor of the entire manifested cosmic creation, which
presents a chance for the conditioned souls to revive their eternal relationship with the
119
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Lord and thus go back to Godhead, back home. The whole system of the material world
is arranged with that program and plan. Anyone who violates the plan is punished by
the law of nature, which is acting by the direction of the Supreme Lord. Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira was installed on the throne of the earth as a representative of the Lord. The
king is always expected to be the representative of the Lord. Perfect monarchy
necessitates representation of the supreme will of the Lord, and Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira
was the ideal monarch on this supreme principle. both the King and the subjects were
happy in the discharge of worldly duties, and thus protection of the citizens and
enjoyment of natural life, with full cooperation of material nature, followed in the reign
of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and his worthy descendants like Mahäräja Parékñit.
TEXT 19
>aGavaNaiPa ivìaTMaa l/aek-vedPaQaaNauGa" )
k-aMaaNa( iSazeve ÜavRTYaaMaSa¢-" Saa&:YaMaaiSQaTa" )) 19 ))
bhagavän api viçvätmä
loka-veda-pathänugaù
kämän siñeve dvärvatyäm
asaktaù säìkhyam ästhitaù
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; api—also; viçva-ätmä—the Supersoul of the
universe; loka—customary; veda—Vedic principles; patha-anugaù—follower of the path;
kämän—the necessities of life; siñeve—enjoyed; dvärvatyäm—in the city of Dvärakä;
asaktaù—without being attached; säìkhyam—knowledge in Säìkhya philosophy;
ästhitaù—being situated.
TRANSLATION
Simultaneously, the Personality of Godhead enjoyed life in the city of Dvärakä, strictly in
conformity with the Vedic customs of society. He was situated in detachment and
knowledge, as enunciated by the Säìkhya system of philosophy.
PURPORT
120
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
While Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was the Emperor of the earth, Lord Çré Kåñëa was the King
of Dvärakä and was known as Dvärakädhéça. Like other subordinate kings, He was under
the regime of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. Although Lord Çré Kåñëa is the supreme emperor of
the entire creation, while He was on this earth He never violated the principles of the
Vedic injunctions because they are the guide for human life. Regulated human life
according to the Vedic principles, which are based on the system of knowledge called
Säìkhya philosophy, is the real way of enjoyment of the necessities of life. Without such
knowledge, detachment and custom, the so-called human civilization is no more than an
animal society of eat, drink, be merry and enjoy. The Lord was acting freely, as He
willed, yet by His practical example He taught not to lead a life which goes against the
principles of detachment and knowledge. Attainment of knowledge and detachment, as
very elaborately discussed in Säìkhya philosophy, is the real perfection of life.
Knowledge means to know that the mission of the human form of life is to end all the
miseries of material existence and that in spite of having to fulfill the bodily necessities
in a regulated way, one must be detached from such animal life. Fulfilling the demands
of the body is animal life, and fulfilling the mission of spirit soul is the human mission.
TEXT 20
iòGDaiSMaTaavl/aeke-Na vaca PaqYaUzk-LPaYaa )
cir}ae<aaNavÛeNa é[qiNake-TaeNa caTMaNaa )) 20 ))
snigdha-smitävalokena
väcä péyüña-kalpayä
caritreëänavadyena
çré-niketena cätmanä
SYNONYMS
snigdha—gentle; smita-avalokena—by a glance with a sweet smile; väcä—by words;
péyüña-kalpayä—compared to nectar; caritreëa—by character; anavadyena—without
flaw; çré—fortune; niketena—residence; ca—and; ätmanä—by His transcendental body.
TRANSLATION
He was there in His transcendental body, the residence of the goddess of fortune, with
121
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
His usual gentle and sweetly smiling face, His nectarean words and His flawless
character.
PURPORT
In the previous verse it is described that Lord Kåñëa, being situated in the truths of
Säìkhya philosophy, is detached from all kinds of matter. In the present verse it is
described that He is the residence of the goddess of fortune. These two things are not at
all contradictory. Lord Kåñëa is detached from the variegatedness of the inferior nature,
but He is in eternal, blissful enjoyment of the spiritual nature, or His internal potency.
One who has a poor fund of knowledge cannot understand this distinction between the
external and internal potencies. In Bhagavad-gétä, the internal potency is described as
the parä prakåti. In the Viñëu Puräëa also, the internal potency of Viñëu is described as
parä çakti. The Lord is never detached from the association of parä çakti. This parä çakti
and her manifestations are described in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.37) as änanda-cinmayarasa-
pratibhävitäbhiù. The Lord is eternally joyful and cognizant in the taste derived
from such transcendental bliss. Negation of the variegatedness of the inferior energy
does not necessitate negation of the positive transcendental bliss of the spiritual world.
Therefore the Lord's gentleness, His smile, His character and everything related to Him
are all transcendental. Such manifestations of the internal potency are the reality, of
which the material shadow is only a temporary representation from which everyone
with proper knowledge must be detached.
TEXT 21
wMa& l/aek-MaMau& cEv rMaYaNa( SauTara& YadUNa( )
reMae +a<adYaa dta+a<añq+a<aSaaEôd" )) 21 ))
imaà lokam amuà caiva
ramayan sutaräà yadün
reme kñaëadayä dattakñaëa-
stré-kñaëa-sauhådaù
SYNONYMS
imam—this; lokam—earth; amum—and the other worlds; ca—also; eva—certainly;
122
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ramayan—pleasing; sutaräm—specifically; yadün—the Yadus; reme—enjoyed;
kñaëadayä—by night; datta—given by; kñaëa—leisure; stré—with women; kñaëa—
conjugal love; sauhådaù—friendship.
TRANSLATION
The Lord enjoyed His pastimes, both in this world and in other worlds [higher planets],
specifically in the association of the Yadu dynasty. At leisure hours offered by night, He
enjoyed the friendship of conjugal love with women.
PURPORT
The Lord enjoyed in this world with His pure devotees. Although He is the Personality
of Godhead and is transcendental to all material attachment, He nevertheless exhibited
much attachment for His pure devotees on the earth, as well as for the demigods who
engage in His service in the heavenly planets as powerful delegated directors in the
management of all material activities. He displayed special attachment for His family
members, the Yadus, as well as for His sixteen thousand wives, who had the opportunity
to meet Him in the leisure hours of night. All these attachments of the Lord are
manifestations of His internal potency, of which the external potency is only a shadow
representation. In the Skanda Puräëa, Prabhäsa-khaëòa, in the topics between Lord Çiva
and Gauré, there is confirmation of His internal potential manifestations. There is
mention of the Lord's meeting with sixteen thousand cowherd damsels although He is
the Haàsa (transcendental) Supersoul and maintainer of all living entities. The sixteen
thousand cowherd damsels are a display of sixteen varieties of internal potencies. This
will be more elaborately explained in the Tenth Canto. It is said there that Lord Kåñëa
is just like the moon and the internal potential damsels are like the stars around the
moon.
TEXT 22
TaSYaEv& rMaMaa<aSYa Sa&vTSarGa<aaNa( bhUNa( )
Ga*hMaeDaezu YaaeGaezu ivraGa" SaMaJaaYaTa )) 22 ))
tasyaivaà ramamäëasya
saàvatsara-gaëän bahün
123
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
gåhamedheñu yogeñu
virägaù samajäyata
SYNONYMS
tasya—His; evam—thus; ramamäëasya—enjoying; saàvatsara—years; gaëän—many;
bahün—great many; gåhamedheñu—in household life; yogeñu—in sex life; virägaù—
detachment; samajäyata—awakened.
TRANSLATION
The Lord was thus engaged in household life for many, many years, but at last His
detachment from ephemeral sex life was fully manifested.
PURPORT
Even though the Lord is never attached to any kind of material sex life, as the universal
teacher He remained a householder for many, many years, just to teach others how one
should live in householder life. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the
word samajäyata means "fully exhibited." In all His activities while present on the earth,
the Lord exhibited detachment. This was fully displayed when He wanted to teach by
example that one should not remain attached to household life for all the days of one's
life. One should naturally develop detachment as a matter of course. The Lord's
detachment from household life does not indicate detachment from His eternal
associates, the transcendental cowherd damsels. But the Lord desired to end His socalled
attachment to the three modes of material nature. He can never be detached from
the service of His transcendental associates like Rukmiëé and other goddesses of fortune,
as described in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.29): lakñmé-sahasra-çata-sambhrama-sevyamänam.
TEXT 23
dEvaDaqNaezu k-aMaezu dEvaDaqNa" SvYa& PauMaaNa( )
k-ae ivé[M>aeTa YaaeGaeNa YaaeGaeìrMaNauv]Ta" )) 23 ))
daivädhéneñu kämeñu
daivädhénaù svayaà pumän
124
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ko viçrambheta yogena
yogeçvaram anuvrataù
SYNONYMS
daiva—supernatural; adhéneñu—being controlled; kämeñu—in sense enjoyment; daivaadhénaù—
controlled by supernatural force; svayam—himself; pumän—living entity;
kaù—whoever; viçrambheta—can have faith in; yogena—by devotional service;
yogeçvaram—the Supreme Lord; anuvrataù—serving.
TRANSLATION
Every living entity is controlled by a supernatural force, and thus his sense enjoyment is
also under the control of that supernatural force. No one, therefore, can put his faith in
Lord Kåñëa's transcendental sense activities but one who has become a devotee of the
Lord by rendering devotional service.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä no one can understand the transcendental birth and
activities of the Lord. The same fact is herein corroborated: no one but one who is
enlightened by the devotional service of the Lord can understand the difference
between the Lord's activities and those of others, who are controlled by the supernatural
force. The sense enjoyment of all animals, men and demigods within the purview of the
material universe is controlled by the supernatural force called the prakåti, or daivémäyä.
No one is independent in obtaining sense enjoyment, and everyone in this
material world is after sense enjoyment. Persons who are themselves under the control
of supernatural power cannot believe that Lord Kåñëa is not under any control beyond
Himself in the matter of sense enjoyment. They cannot understand that His senses are
transcendental. In the Brahma-saàhitä the Lord's senses are described as omnipotent;
i.e., with any sense He can perform the activities of the other senses. One who has
limited senses cannot believe that the Lord can eat by His transcendental power of
hearing and can perform the act of sex life simply by seeing. The controlled living entity
cannot even dream of such sense activities in his conditional life. But simply by the
activities of bhakti-yoga, he can understand that the Lord and His activities are always
transcendental. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.55), bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän
yaç cäsmi tattvataù: one cannot know even a fraction of the activities of the Lord if he is
125
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
not a pure devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 24
PauYaa| k-daicT§-I@iÙYaRdu>aaeJaku-MaarkE-" )
k-aeiPaTaa MauNaYa" XaePau>aRGavNMaTak-aeivda" )) 24 ))
puryäà kadäcit kréòadbhir
yadu-bhoja-kumärakaiù
kopitä munayaù çepur
bhagavan-mata-kovidäù
SYNONYMS
puryäm—in the city of Dvärakä; kadäcit—once upon a time; kréòadbhiù—by sporting
activities; yadu—the descendants of Yadu; bhoja—the descendants of Bhoja;
kumärakaiù—princes; kopitäù—became angry; munayaù—the great sages; çepuù—
cursed; bhagavat—the Personality of Godhead; mata—desire; kovidäù—cognizant.
TRANSLATION
Once upon a time, great sages were made angry by the sporting activities of the princely
descendants of the Yadu and Bhoja dynasties, and thus, as desired by the Lord, the sages
cursed them.
PURPORT
The associates of the Lord who were playing the part of princely descendants of the
Yadu and Bhoja dynasties were not ordinary living entities. It is not possible that they
could offend any saintly man or sage, nor could the sages, who were all pure devotees of
the Lord, be influenced to anger by any of the sporting activities of the princes born in
the holy dynasties of Yadu or Bhoja, wherein the Lord Himself appeared as a
descendant. The cursing of the princes by the sages was another transcendental pastime
of the Lord to make a show of anger. The princes were cursed in order that one may
know that even the descendants of the Lord, who could never be vanquished by any act
of material nature, were subjected to the reactions of anger by great devotees of the
126
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Lord. One should therefore take great care and attention not to commit an offense at
the feet of a devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 25
TaTa" k-iTaPaYaEMaaRSaEv*RiZ<a>aaeJaaNDak-adYa" )
YaYau" Pa[>aaSa& Sa&ôía rQaEdeRvivMaaeihTaa" )) 25 ))
tataù katipayair mäsair
våñëi-bhojändhakädayaù
yayuù prabhäsaà saàhåñöä
rathair deva-vimohitäù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; katipayaiù—a few; mäsaiù—months passing; våñëi—the descendants
of Våñëi; bhoja—the descendants of Bhoja; andhaka-ädayaù—and others, like the sons
of Andhaka; yayuù—went; prabhäsam—the place of pilgrimage named Prabhäsa;
saàhåñöäù—with great pleasure; rathaiù—on their chariots; deva—by Kåñëa;
vimohitäù—bewildered.
TRANSLATION
A few months passed, and then, bewildered by Kåñëa, all the descendants of Våñëi, Bhoja
and Andhaka who were incarnations of demigods went to Prabhäsa, while those who were
eternal devotees of the Lord did not leave but remained in Dvärakä.
TEXT 26
Ta}a òaTva iPaTa›NdevaNa*zq&êEv TadM>aSaa )
TaPaRiYaTvaQa ivPa[e>Yaae Gaavae bhuGau<aa ddu" )) 26 ))
tatra snätvä pitèn devän
åñéàç caiva tad-ambhasä
tarpayitvätha viprebhyo
127
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
gävo bahu-guëä daduù
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; snätvä—by taking bath; pitèn—forefathers; devän—demigods; åñén—great
sages; ca—also; eva—certainly; tat—of that; ambhasä—by the water; tarpayitvä—by
pleasing; atha—thereupon; viprebhyaù—unto the brähmaëas; gävaù—cows; bahuguëäù—
greatly useful; daduù—gave in charity.
TRANSLATION
After arriving there, all of them took bath, and with the water of this place of pilgrimage
they offered their respects to the forefathers, demigods and great sages and thus satisfied
them. They gave cows to the brähmaëas in royal charity.
PURPORT
Amongst the devotees of the Lord there are several divisions, mainly nitya-siddhas and
sädhana-siddhas. The nitya-siddha devotees never fall down to the region of the material
atmosphere, even though they sometimes come onto the material plane to execute the
mission of the Lord. The sädhana-siddha devotees are chosen from the conditioned
souls. Out of the sädhana devotees, there are mixed and pure devotees. The mixed
devotees are sometimes enthusiastic about fruitive activities and are habituated to
philosophical speculation. The pure devotees are free from all these mixtures and are
completely absorbed in the service of the Lord, regardless of how and where they are
situated. Pure devotees of the Lord are not enthusiastic to put aside their service to the
Lord in order to go visit holy places of pilgrimage. A great devotee of the Lord in
modern times, Çré Narottama däsa Öhäkura, has sung like this: "To visit holy places of
pilgrimage is another bewilderment of the mind because devotional service to the Lord
at any place is the last word in spiritual perfection."
For pure devotees of the Lord who are completely satisfied with the transcendental
loving service of the Lord, there is hardly any necessity to visit the various places of
pilgrimage. But those who are not so advanced have the prescribed duties of visiting
pilgrimage sites and regularly performing the rituals. The part of the princely order of
the Yadu dynasty who went to Prabhäsa performed all duties to be done in a place of
pilgrimage and offered their pious actions to their forefathers and others.
As a rule, every human being is indebted to God, the demigods, great sages, other living
128
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
entities, people in general, forefathers, etc., for various contributions received from
them. Thus everyone is obliged to repay the debt of gratitude. The Yadus who went to
the Prabhäsa pilgrimage site performed their duties by distributing land, gold, and wellnourished
cows in royal charity, as described in the following verse.
TEXT 27
ihr<Ya& rJaTa& XaYYaa& vaSaa&SYaiJaNak-Mbl/aNa( )
YaaNa& rQaaiNa>aaNa( k-NYaa Dara& v*itak-rqMaiPa )) 27 ))
hiraëyaà rajataà çayyäà
väsäàsy ajina-kambalän
yänaà rathän ibhän kanyä
dharäà våtti-karém api
SYNONYMS
hiraëyam—gold; rajatam—gold coins; çayyäm—bedding; väsäàsi—clothing; ajina—
animal skin for seats; kambalän—blankets; yänam—horses; rathän—chariots; ibhän—
elephants; kanyäù—girls; dharäm—land; våtti-karém—to provide livelihood; api—also.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëas were not only given well-fed cows in charity, but also gold, gold coins,
bedding, clothing, animal-skin seats, blankets, horses, elephants, girls and sufficient land
for maintenance.
PURPORT
All these charities were meant for the brähmaëas, whose lives were devoted entirely to
the welfare of society, both spiritually and materially. The brähmaëas were not giving
their services as paid servants, but the society provided them with all necessities. It was
arranged for some of the brähmaëas, who were in difficulty for marriage, to be given
girls. The brähmaëas, therefore, had no economic problems. The kñatriya kings and rich
mercantile men would provide them with all that they needed, and in exchange the
brähmaëas were completely devoted to the elevation of society. That was the way of
129
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
social cooperation between the different castes. When the brähmaëa class or caste
gradually became easygoing, being fed by the society although they had no brahminical
qualifications, they degraded themselves into brahma-bandhus, or disqualified
brähmaëas, and thus other members of society also gradually fell down from the social
standard of progressive life. As described in Bhagavad-gétä, the caste system is the
creation of the Lord and is arranged according to the quality of work rendered to society
and not in terms of birthright, as falsely claimed in the present degraded society.
TEXT 28
Aà& caeårSa& Tae>Yaae dtva >aGavdPaR<aMa( )
GaaeivPa[aQaaRSav" éUra" Pa[<aeMau>auRiv MaUDaRi>a" )) 28 ))
annaà coru-rasaà tebhyo
dattvä bhagavad-arpaëam
go-viprärthäsavaù çüräù
praëemur bhuvi mürdhabhiù
SYNONYMS
annam—foodstuff; ca—also; uru-rasam—highly delicious; tebhyaù—unto the
brähmaëas; dattvä—after supplying; bhagavat-arpaëam—which was first offered to the
Personality of Godhead; go—cows; vipra—brähmaëas; artha—purpose; asavaù—purpose
of living; çüräù—all the valiant kñatriyas; praëemuù—offered obeisances; bhuvi—
touching the ground; mürdhabhiù—with their heads.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter they offered the brähmaëas highly delicious foodstuffs first offered to the
Personality of Godhead and offered their respectful obeisances by touching their heads to
the ground. They lived perfectly by protecting the cows and the brähmaëas.
PURPORT
The behavior exhibited by the descendants of Yadu in the pilgrimage site of Prabhäsa
was highly cultured and exactly to the point of human perfection. The perfection of
130
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
human life is attained by following three principles of civilization: protecting the cows,
maintaining the brahminical culture and, above all, becoming a pure devotee of the
Lord. Without becoming a devotee of the Lord, one cannot perfect one's human life.
The perfection of human life is to be elevated to the spiritual world, where there is no
birth, no death, no disease and no old age. That is the highest perfectional aim of human
life. Without this aim, any amount of material advancement in so-called comforts can
only bring the defeat of the human form of life.
Brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas do not accept any foodstuff which is not first offered to the
Personality of Godhead. Foodstuff offered to the Lord is accepted by the devotees as the
mercy of the Lord. After all, the Lord supplies all kinds of foodstuff, both to the human
being and to other animals. A human being must be conscious of the fact that all
foodstuffs, namely grains, vegetables, milk, water, etc.—the prime necessities of life—
are supplied for mankind by the Lord, and such foodstuffs cannot be manufactured by
any scientist or materialist in a laboratory or factory established by human effort. The
intelligent class of men are called brähmaëas, and those who have realized the Absolute
Truth in His supreme personal feature are called Vaiñëavas. But both of them accept
foodstuffs which are the remnants of sacrifice. Sacrifice is ultimately meant to satisfy
the yajïa-puruña, Viñëu. In Bhagavad-gétä (3.13) it is said that one who accepts foodstuffs
as the remnants of sacrifice is freed from all sinful reactions, and one who cooks
foodstuffs for maintenance of his body takes in all kinds of sins, which lead only to
suffering. The foodstuffs prepared by the Yadus at the Prabhäsa pilgrimage site to offer
to the bona fide brähmaëas there were all offered to the Personality of Godhead, Viñëu.
The Yadus offered their sincere obeisances by touching their heads to the ground. The
Yadus or any enlightened family in Vedic culture are trained for attainment of human
perfection by total cooperation of service between the different divisions of social
orders.
The word uru-rasam is also significant here. Hundreds of delicacies can be prepared
simply by the combination of grains, vegetables and milk. All such preparations are in
the mode of goodness and therefore may be offered to the Personality of Godhead. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä (9.26), the Lord accepts only foodstuffs which are within the
range of fruits, flowers, leaves and liquids, provided they are offered in complete
devotional service. Devotional service is the only criterion for a bona fide offering to
the Lord. The Lord assures that He positively eats such foodstuffs offered by the
devotees. So, judging from all sides, the Yadus were perfectly trained civilized persons,
and their being cursed by the brähmaëa sages was only by the desire of the Lord; the
whole incident was a warning to all concerned that no one should behave lightly with
131
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Third Chapter, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "The Lord's pastimes Out of Våndävana."
4. Vidura Approaches Maitreya
TEXT 1
oÖv ovac
AQa Tae TadNaujaTaa >au¤-a PaqTva c vaå<aqMa( )
TaYaa iv>a]&iXaTajaNaa duå¢E-MaRMaR PaSPa*éu" )) 1 ))
uddhava uväca
atha te tad-anujïätä
bhuktvä pétvä ca väruëém
tayä vibhraàçita-jïänä
duruktair marma paspåçuù
SYNONYMS
uddhavaù uväca—Uddhava said; atha—thereafter; te—they (the Yädavas); tat—by the
brähmaëas; anujïätäù—being permitted; bhuktvä—after partaking; pétvä—drinking;
ca—and; väruëém—liquor; tayä—by that; vibhraàçita-jïänäù—being bereft of
knowledge; duruktaiù—with harsh words; marma—the core of the heart; paspåçuù—
touched.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, all of them [the descendants of Våñëi and Bhoja], being permitted by the
brähmaëas, partook of the remnants of prasäda and also drank liquor made of rice. By
132
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
drinking they all became delirious, and, bereft of knowledge, they touched the cores of
each other's hearts with harsh words.
PURPORT
In ceremonies when brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas are sumptuously fed, the host partakes of
the remnants of foodstuff after the guest has given permission. So the descendants of
Våñëi and Bhoja formally took permission from the brähmaëas and ate the prepared
foodstuff. Kñatriyas are permitted to drink at certain occasions, so they all drank a kind
of light liquor made of rice. By such drinking they became delirious and bereft of sense,
so much so that they forgot their relationship with one another and used harsh words
which touched the cores of each other's hearts. Drinking is so harmful that even such a
highly cultured family becomes affected by intoxication and can forget themselves in a
drunken state. The descendants of Våñëi and Bhoja were not expected to forget
themselves in this way, but by the will of the Supreme it happened, and thus they
became harsh towards one another.
TEXT 2
Taeza& MaEreYadaeze<a ivzMaqk*-TaceTaSaaMa( )
iNaãaeciTa rvavaSaqÜe<aUNaaiMav MadRNaMa( )) 2 ))
teñäà maireya-doñeëa
viñamékåta-cetasäm
nimlocati raväv äséd
veëünäm iva mardanam
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of them; maireya—of intoxication; doñeëa—by the faults; viñamékåta—became
unbalanced; cetasäm—of those of whom the minds; nimlocati—sets; ravau—the sun;
äsét—takes place; veëünäm—of the bamboos; iva—as; mardanam—destruction.
TRANSLATION
As by the friction of bamboos destruction takes place, so also, at sunset, by the
133
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
interaction of the faults of intoxication, all their minds became unbalanced, and
destruction took place.
PURPORT
When there is need of fire in the forest, by the will of the Supreme it takes place due to
friction among the bamboos. Similarly, the descendants of Yadu were all destroyed by
the will of the Lord by the process of self-destruction. Just as there is no possibility of a
fire's occurring deep in the forest due to human effort, so also there was no power in the
universe which could vanquish the descendants of Yadu, who were protected by the
Lord. The Lord wanted them to be so destroyed, and thus they obeyed His order, as
indicated by the word tad-anujïäta.
TEXT 3
>aGavaNa( SvaTMaMaaYaaYaa GaiTa& TaaMavl/aeKYa Sa" )
SarSvTaqMauPaSPa*XYa v*+aMaUl/MauPaaivXaTa( )) 3 ))
bhagavän svätma-mäyäyä
gatià täm avalokya saù
sarasvatém upaspåçya
våkña-mülam upäviçat
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; sva-ätma-mäyäyäù—by His internal potency;
gatim—the end; täm—that; avalokya—foreseeing; saù—He (Kåñëa); sarasvatém—the
River Sarasvaté; upaspåçya—after sipping water; våkña-mülam—at the foot of a tree;
upäviçat—sat down.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, after foreseeing the end [of His family] by
His internal potency, went to the bank of the River Sarasvaté, sipped water, and sat down
underneath a tree.
134
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
All the above-mentioned activities of the Yadus and Bhojas were executed by the
internal potency of the Lord because He wanted them to be dispatched to their
respective abodes after He had finished His mission of descent. They were all His sons
and grandsons and were given complete protection by the paternal affection of the
Lord. How they could be vanquished in the presence of the Lord is answered in this
verse: everything was done by the Lord Himself (svätma-mäyäyäù). The Lord's family
members were either incarnations of His plenary expansions or demigods from the
heavenly planets, and thus before His departure He separated them by His internal
potency. Before being dispatched to their respective abodes, they were sent to the holy
place of Prabhäsa, where they performed pious activities and took food and drink to
their heart's content. It was then arranged for them to be sent back to their abodes so
that others could see that the powerful Yadu dynasty was no longer in the world. In the
previous verse, the word anujïäta, indicating that the whole sequence of events was
arranged by the Lord, is significant. These particular pastimes of the Lord are not a
manifestation of His external energy, or material nature. Such an exhibition of His
internal potency is eternal, and therefore one should not conclude that the Yadus and
Bhojas died in a drunken state in an ordinary fratricidal war. Çré Jéva Gosvämé
comments on these incidents as magical performances.
TEXT 4
Ah& cae¢-ae >aGavTaa Pa[PaàaiTaRhre<a h )
bdrq& Tv& Pa[YaahqiTa Svku-l&/ SaiÅhqzuR<aa )) 4 ))
ahaà cokto bhagavatä
prapannärti-hareëa ha
badaréà tvaà prayähéti
sva-kulaà saïjihérñuëä
SYNONYMS
aham—I; ca—and; uktaù—was told; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Lord; prapanna—of
the surrendered; ärti-hareëa—by He who is the vanquisher of the distresses; ha—
indeed; badarém—to Badaré; tvam—you; prayähi—should go; iti—thus; sva-kulam—His
135
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
own family; saïjihérñuëä—who desired to destroy.
TRANSLATION
The Lord is the vanquisher of the distresses of one who is surrendered unto Him. Thus
He who desired to destroy His family told me previously to go to Badarikäçrama.
PURPORT
While at Dvärakä, Uddhava was warned to avoid the distresses which were to follow the
disappearance of the Lord and the destruction of the Yadu dynasty. He was advised to
proceed to Badarikäçrama because there he could associate with the devotees of Nara-
Näräyaëa, and in their association of devotional service he could increase his eagerness
for chanting, hearing, knowledge and detachment.
TEXT 5
TaQaaiPa Tadi>aPa[eTa& JaaNaàhMairNdMa )
Pa*ïTaae_NvGaMa& >aTauR" Paadivëez<aa+aMa" )) 5 ))
tathäpi tad-abhipretaà
jänann aham arindama
påñöhato 'nvagamaà bhartuù
päda-viçleñaëäkñamaù
SYNONYMS
tathä api—yet, in spite of; tat-abhipretam—His desire; jänan—knowing; aham—I; arimdama—
O subduer of the enemy (Vidura); påñöhataù—behind; anvagamam—followed;
bhartuù—of the master; päda-viçleñaëa—separation from His lotus feet; akñamaù—not
being able.
TRANSLATION
Yet in spite of my knowing His desire [to destroy the dynasty], O Arindama [Vidura], I
followed Him because it was impossible for me to bear separation from the lotus feet of
136
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the master.
TEXT 6
Ad]a+aMaek-MaaSaqNa& ivicNvNa( diYaTa& PaiTaMa( )
é[qiNake-Ta& SarSvTYaa& k*-Take-TaMake-TaNaMa( )) 6 ))
adräkñam ekam äsénaà
vicinvan dayitaà patim
çré-niketaà sarasvatyäà
kåta-ketam aketanam
SYNONYMS
adräkñam—I saw; ekam—alone; äsénam—sitting; vicinvan—deeply thinking; dayitam—
patron; patim—master; çré-niketam—the shelter of the goddess of fortune;
sarasvatyäm—on the bank of the Sarasvaté; kåta-ketam—taking shelter; aketanam—
being situated without a shelter.
TRANSLATION
Thus following, I saw my patron and master [Lord Çré Kåñëa] sitting alone and deeply
thinking, taking shelter on the bank of the River Sarasvaté although He is the shelter of
the goddess of fortune.
PURPORT
Those who are in the renounced order of life often take shelter underneath a tree. The
Lord was found by Uddhava in that condition of taking shelter as do persons who have
no shelter. Because He is the proprietor of everything, everywhere is His shelter, and
everywhere is under His shelter. The entire material and spiritual cosmic manifestation
is sustained by Him, and therefore He is the shelter of everything. So there was nothing
astonishing in His taking shelter in the way of the unsheltered who are in the
renounced order of life.
TEXT 7
137
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
XYaaMaavdaTa& ivrJa& Pa[XaaNTaaå<al/aecNaMa( )
daei>aRêTaui>aRivRidTa& PaqTak-aEXaaMbre<a c )) 7 ))
çyämävadätaà virajaà
praçäntäruëa-locanam
dorbhiç caturbhir viditaà
péta-kauçämbareëa ca
SYNONYMS
çyäma-avadätam—beautiful with black color; virajam—formed of pure goodness;
praçänta—peaceful; aruëa—reddish; locanam—eyes; dorbhiù—by the arms; caturbhiù—
four; viditam—being recognized; péta—yellow; kauça—silken; ambareëa—with
garments; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The Lord's body is blackish, but is eternal, full of bliss and knowledge, and very, very
beautiful. His eyes are always peaceful, and they are reddish like the rising morning sun.
I could immediately recognize Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead by His four
hands, different symbolic representations, and yellow silk garments.
TEXT 8
vaMa OraviDaié[TYa di+a<aax(iga]SaraeåhMa( )
APaaié[Taa>aRk-aìTQaMak*-Xa& TYa¢-iPaPPal/Ma( )) 8 ))
väma üräv adhiçritya
dakñiëäìghri-saroruham
apäçritärbhakäçvattham
akåçaà tyakta-pippalam
SYNONYMS
väme—on the left; ürau—thigh; adhiçritya—placed on; dakñiëa-aìghri-saroruham—the
138
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
right lotus foot; apäçrita—taking rest against; arbhaka—young; açvattham—banyan tree;
akåçam—cheerful; tyakta—having left; pippalam—household comforts.
TRANSLATION
The Lord was sitting, taking rest against a young banyan tree, with His right lotus foot
on His left thigh, and although He had left all household comforts, He looked quite
cheerful in that posture.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the Lord's sitting posture—keeping
His back against the newly grown banyan tree—is also meaningful. Açvattha, the
banyan tree, is so called because the tree does not die very quickly; it continues to live
for many, many years. His legs and their energies are the material ingredients, which are
five in all: earth, water, fire, air and sky. The material energies represented by the
banyan tree are all products of His external potency and are therefore kept to His back.
And because this particular universe is the smallest of all, the banyan tree is therefore
designated as small, or as a child. Tyakta-pippalam indicates that He had now finished
His pastimes in this particular small universe, but since the Lord is absolute and
eternally blissful, there is no difference between His leaving or accepting something.
The Lord was now prepared to leave this particular universe and go into another, just as
the sun rises on one particular planet and sets in another simultaneously but does not
change its own situation.
TEXT 9
TaiSMaNMaha>aaGavTaae ÜEPaaYaNaSauôTSa%a )
l/aek-aNaNaucrNa( iSaÖ AaSaSaad Yad*C^Yaa )) 9 ))
tasmin mahä-bhägavato
dvaipäyana-suhåt-sakhä
lokän anucaran siddha
äsasäda yadåcchayä
SYNONYMS
139
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tasmin—then; mahä-bhägavataù—a great devotee of the Lord; dvaipäyana—of Kåñëadvaipäyana
Vyäsa; suhåt—a well-wisher; sakhä—a friend; lokän—the three worlds;
anucaran—traveling; siddhe—in that äçrama; äsasäda—arrived; yadåcchayä—by his
own perfect accord.
TRANSLATION
At that time, after traveling in many parts of the world, Maitreya, a great devotee of the
Lord and a friend and well-wisher of the great sage Kåñëa-dvaipäyana Vyäsa, reached that
spot out of his own perfect accord.
PURPORT
Maitreya was one of the disciples of Maharñi Paräçara, the father of Vyäsadeva. Thus
Vyäsadeva and Maitreya were friends and mutual well-wishers. By some fortunate
accident, Maitreya reached the place where Lord Çré Kåñëa was resting. To meet the
Lord is not an ordinary incident. Maitreya was a great sage and a learned scholarphilosopher
but not a pure devotee of the Lord, and therefore his meeting with the Lord
at that time may have been due to ajïäta-sukåti, or some unknown devotional service.
Pure devotees always engage in pure devotional activities, and therefore their meeting
with the Lord is natural. But when those who are not up to that standard meet the Lord,
it is due to the unforeseen fortune of accidental devotional service.
TEXT 10
TaSYaaNaur¢-SYa MauNaeMauRku-Nd"
Pa[Maaed>aavaNaTak-NDarSYa )
Aaé*<vTaae MaaMaNauraGahaSa‚
SaMaq+aYaa ivé[MaYaàuvac )) 10 ))
tasyänuraktasya muner mukundaù
pramoda-bhävänata-kandharasya
äçåëvato mäm anuräga-häsasamékñayä
viçramayann uväca
140
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
tasya—his (Maitreya's); anuraktasya—although attached; muneù—of the sage;
mukundaù—the Lord who awards salvation; pramoda-bhäva—in a pleasing attitude;
änata—lowered; kandharasya—of the shoulder; äçåëvataù—while thus hearing; mäm—
unto me; anuräga-häsa—with kind smiling; samékñayä—particularly seeing me; viçramayan—
allowing me complete rest; uväca—said.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya Muni was greatly attached to Him [the Lord], and he was listening in a pleasing
attitude, with his shoulder lowered. With a smile and a particular glance upon me, having
allowed me to rest, the Lord spoke as follows.
PURPORT
Although both Uddhava and Maitreya were great souls, the Lord's attention was more
on Uddhava because he was a spotlessly pure devotee. A jïäna-bhakta, or one whose
devotion is mixed with the monistic viewpoint, is not a pure devotee. Although
Maitreya was a devotee, his devotion was mixed. The Lord reciprocates with His
devotees on the basis of transcendental love and not on the basis of philosophical
knowledge or fruitive activities. In the transcendental loving service of the Lord, there
is no place for monistic knowledge or fruitive activities. The gopés in Våndävana were
neither highly learned scholars nor mystic yogés. They had spontaneous love for the
Lord, and thus He became their heart and soul, and the gopés also became the heart and
soul of the Lord. Lord Caitanya approved the relationship of the gopés with the Lord as
supreme. Herein the Lord's attitude towards Uddhava was more intimate than with
Maitreya Muni.
SB 3.4.11
TEXT 11
é[q>aGavaNauvac
vedahMaNTaMaRNaSaqiPSaTa& Tae
ddaiMa Yatad( durvaPaMaNYaE" )
Sa}ae Paura ivìSa*Jaa& vSaUNaa&
141
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
MaiTSaiÖk-aMaeNa vSaae TvYaeí" )) 11 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
vedäham antar manasépsitaà te
dadämi yat tad duraväpam anyaiù
satre purä viçva-såjäà vasünäà
mat-siddhi-kämena vaso tvayeñöaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Personality of Godhead said; veda—know; aham—I; antaù—
within; manasi—the mind; épsitam—what you desired; te—your; dadämi—I give you;
yat—which is; tat—that; duraväpam—very difficult to achieve; anyaiù—by others;
satre—in the sacrifice; purä—in the days of yore; viçva-såjäm—of those who expanded
this creation; vasünäm—of the Vasus; mat-siddhi-kämena—with a desire to achieve My
association; vaso—O Vasu; tvayä—by you; iñöaù—ultimate goal of life.
TRANSLATION
O Vasu, I know from within your mind what you desired in the days of yore when the
Vasus and other demigods responsible for expanding the universal affairs performed
sacrifices. You particularly desired to achieve My association. This is very difficult to
obtain for others, but I award it unto you.
PURPORT
Uddhava is one of the eternal associates of the Lord, and a plenary portion of Uddhava
was one of the eight Vasus in the days of yore. The eight Vasus and the demigods in the
upper planetary system, who are responsible for the management of the universal affairs,
performed a sacrifice in the days of yore, desiring to fulfill their respective ultimate goals
in life. At that time an expansion of Uddhava, acting as one of the Vasus, desired to
become an associate of the Lord. The Lord knew this because He is present in the heart
of every living entity as Paramätmä, the Superconsciousness. In everyone's heart there is
the representation of the Superconsciousness, who gives memory to the partial
consciousness of every living entity. The living entity, as partial consciousness, forgets
incidents of his past life, but the Superconsciousness reminds him how to act in terms of
142
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
his past cultivation of knowledge. Bhagavad-gétä confirms this fact in various ways: ye
yathä mäà prapadyante täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham (Bg. 4.11), sarvasya cähaà hådi
sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca (Bg. 15.15).
Everyone is at liberty to desire as he likes, but the desire is fulfilled by the Supreme
Lord. Everyone is independent to think or desire, but the fulfillment of one's desire
depends on the supreme will. This law is expressed as "Man proposes, God disposes." In
the days of yore, when the demigods and Vasus performed sacrifice, Uddhava, as one of
the Vasus, desired to enter into the association of the Lord, which is very difficult for
those busy in empiric philosophical speculation or fruitive activities. Such persons have
practically no information of the facts about becoming an associate of the Lord. Only
the pure devotees can know, by the mercy of the Lord, that the personal association of
the Lord is the highest perfection of life. The Lord assured Uddhava that He would
fulfill his desire. It appears that when the Lord informed him by His indication to
Uddhava, the great sage Maitreya finally became aware of the importance of entering
into the association of the Lord.
TEXT 12
Sa Wz SaaDaae crMaae >avaNaa‚
MaaSaaidTaSTae MadNauGa]hae YaTa( )
YaNMaa& Na*l/aek-aNa( rh oTSa*JaNTa&
idíya dd*ìaNa( ivXadaNauv*tYaa )) 12 ))
sa eña sädho caramo bhavänäm
äsäditas te mad-anugraho yat
yan mäà nålokän raha utsåjantaà
diñöyä dadåçvän viçadänuvåttyä
SYNONYMS
saù—that; eñaù—of those; sädho—O honest one; caramaù—the ultimate; bhavänäm—
of all your incarnations (as Vasu); äsäditaù—now achieved; te—unto you; mat—My;
anugrahaù—mercy; yat—as it is; yat—because; mäm—Me; nå-lokän—the planets of the
conditioned souls; rahaù—in seclusion; utsåjantam—while quitting; diñöyä—by seeing;
dadåçvän—what you have seen; viçada-anuvåttyä—by unflinching devotion.
143
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
O honest one, your present life is the last and the supermost because in this term of life
you have been awarded My ultimate favor. Now you can go to My transcendental abode,
Vaikuëöha, by leaving this universe of conditioned living entities. Your visit to Me in this
lonely place because of your pure and unflinching devotional service is a great boon for
you.
PURPORT
When a person is fully conversant with knowledge of the Lord as far as can be known by
a perfect living entity in the liberated state, he is allowed to enter into the spiritual sky,
where the Vaikuëöha planets exist. The Lord was sitting in a lonely place just about to
disappear from the vision of the inhabitants of this universe, and Uddhava was
fortunate to see Him even at that time and thus receive the Lord's permission to enter
Vaikuëöha. The Lord is everywhere at all times, and His appearance and disappearance
are merely the experience of the inhabitants of a particular universe. He is just like the
sun. The sun does not appear or disappear in the sky; it is only in the experience of men
that in the morning the sun rises and in the evening the sun sets. The Lord is
simultaneously both in Vaikuëöha and everywhere within and without Vaikuëöha.
TEXT 13
Paura MaYaa Pa[ae¢-MaJaaYa Naa>Yae
PaÚe iNaz<<aaYa MaMaaidSaGaeR )
jaNa& Par& MaNMaihMaav>aaSa&
YaTSaUrYaae >aaGavTa& vdiNTa )) 13 ))
purä mayä proktam ajäya näbhye
padme niñaëëäya mamädi-sarge
jïänaà paraà man-mahimävabhäsaà
yat sürayo bhägavataà vadanti
SYNONYMS
purä—in the days of yore; mayä—by Me; proktam—was said; ajäya—unto Brahmä;
144
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
näbhye—out of the navel; padme—on the lotus; niñaëëäya—unto the one situated on;
mama—My; ädi-sarge—in the beginning of creation; jïänam—knowledge; param—
sublime; mat-mahimä—My transcendental glories; avabhäsam—that which clarifies;
yat—which; sürayaù—the great learned sages; bhägavatam—Çrémad-Bhägavatam;
vadanti—do say.
TRANSLATION
O Uddhava, in the lotus millennium in the days of yore, at the beginning of the creation,
I spoke unto Brahmä, who is situated on the lotus that grows out of My navel, about My
transcendental glories, which the great sages describe as Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
PURPORT
The explanation of the Supreme Self, as given to Brahmä and already explained in the
Second Canto of this great literature, is further clarified herein. The Lord said that the
concise form of Çrémad-Bhägavatam as explained to Brahmä was meant to elucidate His
personality. The impersonal explanation of those four verses in the Second Canto is
nullified herewith. Çrédhara Svämé also explains in this connection that the same
concise form of the Bhägavatam concerned the pastimes of Lord Kåñëa and was never
meant for impersonal indulgence.
SB 3.4.14
TEXT 14
wTYaad*Taae¢-" ParMaSYa Pau&Sa"
Pa[iTa+a<aaNauGa]h>aaJaNaae_hMa( )
òehaeTQaraeMaa S%il/Taa+arSTa&
MauÄH^uc" Pa[aÅil/rab>aaze )) 14 ))
ity ädåtoktaù paramasya puàsaù
pratikñaëänugraha-bhäjano 'ham
snehottha-romä skhalitäkñaras taà
muïcaï chucaù präïjalir äbabhäñe
SYNONYMS
145
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
iti—thus; ädåta—being favored; uktaù—addressed; paramasya—of the Supreme;
puàsaù—Personality of Godhead; pratikñaëa—every moment; anugraha-bhäjanaù—
object of favor; aham—myself; sneha—affection; uttha—eruption; romä—hairs on the
body; skhalita—slackened; akñaraù—of the eyes; tam—that; muïcan—smearing;
çucaù—tears; präïjaliù—with folded hands; äbabhäñe—said.
TRANSLATION
Uddhava said: O Vidura, when I was thus favored at every moment by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and addressed by Him with great affection, my words failed in
tears, and the hairs on my body erupted. After smearing my tears, I, with folded hands,
spoke like this.
TEXT 15
k-ae NvqXa Tae PaadSaraeJa>aaJaa&
SaudulR/>aae_QaeRzu cTauZvRPaqh )
TaQaaiPa Naah& Pa[v*<aaeiMa >aUMaNa(
>avTPadaM>aaeJaiNazev<aaeTSauk-" )) 15 ))
ko nv éça te päda-saroja-bhäjäà
sudurlabho 'rtheñu caturñv apéha
tathäpi nähaà pravåëomi bhüman
bhavat-padämbhoja-niñevaëotsukaù
SYNONYMS
kaù nu éça—O my Lord; te—Your; päda-saroja-bhäjäm—of the devotees engaged in the
transcendental loving service of Your lotus feet; su-durlabhaù—very difficult to obtain;
artheñu—in the matter of; caturñu—in the four objectives; api—in spite of; iha—in this
world; tathä api—yet; na—do not; aham—I; pravåëomi—prefer; bhüman—O great one;
bhavat—Your; pada-ambhoja—lotus feet; niñevaëa-utsukaù—anxious to serve.
TRANSLATION
146
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
O my Lord, devotees who engage in the transcendental loving service of Your lotus feet
have no difficulty in achieving anything within the realm of the four principles of
religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and liberation. But, O great one, as
far as I am concerned, I have preferred only to engage in the loving service of Your lotus
feet.
PURPORT
Those who are associated with the Lord in the Vaikuëöha planets achieve all the bodily
features of the Lord and appear to be the same as Lord Viñëu. Such liberation is called
särüpya-mukti, which is one of the five kinds of liberation. The devotees engaged in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord never accept the säyujya-mukti, or merging in
the rays of the Lord called the brahmajyoti. The devotees can achieve not only liberation
but any success in the realm of religiosity, economic development or sense gratification
up to the standard of the demigods in the heavenly planets. But such a pure devotee as
Uddhava refuses to accept all such facilities. A pure devotee wants simply to engage in
the service of the Lord and does not consider his own personal benefit.
TEXT 16
k-MaaR<YaNaqhSYa >avae_>avSYa Tae
duGaaRé[Yaae_Qaair>aYaaTPal/aYaNaMa( )
k-al/aTMaNaae YaTPa[MadaYauTaaé[Ma"
SvaTMaNa]Tae" i%ÛiTa DaqivRdaiMah )) 16 ))
karmäëy anéhasya bhavo 'bhavasya te
durgäçrayo 'thäri-bhayät paläyanam
kälätmano yat pramadä-yutäçramaù
svätman-rateù khidyati dhér vidäm iha
SYNONYMS
karmäëi—activities; anéhasya—of one who has no desire; bhavaù—birth; abhavasya—of
one who is never born; te—your; durga-äçrayaù—taking shelter of the fort; atha—
thereafter; ari-bhayät—out of fear of the enemies; paläyanam—flee; käla-ätmanaù—of
He who is the controller of eternal time; yat—that; pramadä-äyuta—in the association
147
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of women; äçramaù—household life; sva-ätman—in Your own Self; rateù—one who
enjoys; khidyati—is disturbed; dhéù—intelligence; vidäm—of the learned; iha—in this
world.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, even the learned sages become disturbed in their intelligence when they see
that Your Greatness engages in fruitive work although You are free from all desires, that
You take birth although You are unborn, that You flee out of fear of the enemy and take
shelter in a fort although You are the controller of invincible time, and that You enjoy
householder life surrounded by many women although You enjoy in Your Self.
PURPORT
Pure devotees of the Lord are not very much concerned with philosophical speculation
in regard to transcendental knowledge of the Lord. Nor is it possible to acquire complete
knowledge of the Lord. Whatever little knowledge they have about the Lord is sufficient
for them because devotees are simply satisfied in hearing and chanting about the
transcendental pastimes of the Lord. This gives them all transcendental bliss. But some
of the pastimes of the Lord appear contradictory, even to such pure devotees, and thus
Uddhava asked the Lord about some of the contradictory incidents in His pastimes. The
Lord is described as having nothing to do personally, and it is actually so because even in
the creation and sustenance of the material world, the Lord has nothing to do. It seems
contradictory, then, to hear that the Lord personally lifts the Govardhana Hill for the
protection of His unalloyed devotees. The Lord is the Supreme Brahman, the Absolute
Truth, the Personality of Godhead appearing like a man, but Uddhava had doubts
whether He could have so many transcendental activities.
There is no difference between the Personality of Godhead and the impersonal
Brahman. How then can the Lord have so many things to do, whereas the impersonal
Brahman is stated to have nothing to do either materially or spiritually? If the Lord is
ever unborn, how then is He born as the son of Vasudeva and Devaké? He is fearful even
to käla, the supreme fear, and yet the Lord is afraid of fighting Jaräsandha and takes
shelter in a fort. How can one who is full in Himself take pleasure in the association of
many women? How can He take wives and, just like a householder, take pleasure in the
association of family members, children, relatives and parents? All these apparently
contradictory happenings bewilder even the greatest learned scholars, who, thus
148
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bewildered, cannot understand whether inactivity is a fact or whether His activities are
only imitations.
The solution is that the Lord has nothing to do with anything mundane. All His
activities are transcendental. This cannot be understood by the mundane speculators.
For the mundane speculators there is certainly a kind of bewilderment, but for the
transcendental devotees there is nothing astonishing in this. The Brahman conception
of the Absolute Truth is certainly the negation of all mundane activities, but the
Parabrahman conception is full with transcendental activities. One who knows the
distinctions between the conception of Brahman and the conception of Supreme
Brahman is certainly the real transcendentalist. There is no bewilderment for such
transcendentalists. The Lord Himself also declares in Bhagavad-gétä (10.2), "Even the
great sages and demigods can know hardly anything about My activities and
transcendental potencies." The right explanation of the Lord's activities is given by
Grandfather Bhéñmadeva (SB 1.9.16) as follows:
na hy asya karhicid räjan
pumän veda vidhitsitam
yad-vijijïäsayä yuktä
muhyanti kavayo 'pi hi
TEXT 17
MaN}aezu Maa& va oPahUYa Yatv‚
Maku-i<#=Taa%<@SadaTMabaeDa" )
Pa*C^e" Pa[>aae MauGDa wvaPa[Mata‚
STaàae MaNaae MaaehYaTaqv dev )) 17 ))
mantreñu mäà vä upahüya yat tvam
akuëöhitäkhaëòa-sadätma-bodhaù
påccheù prabho mugdha iväpramattas
tan no mano mohayatéva deva
SYNONYMS
mantreñu—in consultations; mäm—unto me; vai—as either; upahüya—by calling; yat—
149
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
as much as; tvam—Your Lordship; akuëöhita—without hesitation; akhaëòa—without
being separated; sadä—eternally; ätma—self; bodhaù—intelligent; påccheù—asked;
prabho—O my Lord; mugdhaù—bewildered; iva—as if it were so; apramattaù—although
never bewildered; tat—that; naù—our; manaù—mind; mohayati—bewilders; iva—as it
is so; deva—O my Lord.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, Your eternal Self is never divided by the influence of time, and there is no
limitation to Your perfect knowledge. Thus You were sufficiently able to consult with
Yourself, yet You called upon me for consultation, as if bewildered, although You are
never bewildered. And this act of Yours bewilders me.
PURPORT
Uddhava was never actually bewildered, but he says that all these contradictions appear
to be bewildering. The whole discussion between Kåñëa and Uddhava was meant for the
benefit of Maitreya, who was sitting nearby. The Lord used to call Uddhava for
consultation when the city was attacked by Jaräsandha and others and when He
executed great sacrifices as part of His routine royal work as Lord of Dvärakä. The Lord
has no past, present and future because He is unhampered by the influence of eternal
time and thus nothing is hidden from Him. He is eternally self-intelligent. Therefore
His calling for Uddhava to give Him enlightenment is certainly astonishing. All these
actions of the Lord appear to be contradictory, although there is no contradiction in the
routine activities of the Lord. Therefore it is better to see them as they are and not
attempt to explain them.
TEXT 18
jaNa& Par& SvaTMarh"Pa[k-aXa&
Pa[aevac k-SMaE >aGavaNa( SaMaGa]Ma( )
AiPa +aMa& Naae Ga]h<aaYa >aTaR‚
vRdaÅSaa Yad( v*iJaNa& TareMa )) 18 ))
jïänaà paraà svätma-rahaù-prakäçaà
150
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
proväca kasmai bhagavän samagram
api kñamaà no grahaëäya bhartar
vadäïjasä yad våjinaà tarema
SYNONYMS
jïänam—knowledge; param—supreme; sva-ätma—own self; rahaù—mystery;
prakäçam—enlightening; proväca—said; kasmai—unto Ka (Brahmäjé); bhagavän—the
Personality of Godhead; samagram—in sum total; api—if so; kñamam—able; naù—unto
me; grahaëäya—acceptable; bhartaù—O my Lord; vada—say; aïjasä—in detail; yat—
that which; våjinam—miseries; tarema—can cross over.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, kindly explain to us, if You think us competent to receive it, that
transcendental knowledge which gives enlightenment about Yourself and which You
explained before to Brahmäjé.
PURPORT
A pure devotee like Uddhava has no material afflictions because he engages constantly
in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. A devotee feels afflicted without the
association of the Lord. Constant remembrance of the Lord's activities keeps the
devotee alive, and therefore Uddhava requested that the Lord please enlighten him with
the knowledge of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, as previously instructed to Brahmäjé.
TEXT 19
wTYaaveidTahadaRYa Maù& Sa >aGavaNa( Par" )
AaiddeXaarivNda+a AaTMaNa" ParMaa& iSQaiTaMa( )) 19 ))
ity ävedita-härdäya
mahyaà sa bhagavän paraù
ädideçäravindäkña
ätmanaù paramäà sthitim
151
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
iti ävedita—thus being prayed to by me; härdäya—from the core of my heart; mahyam—
unto me; saù—He; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; paraù—Supreme; ädideça—
instructed; aravinda-akñaù—the lotus-eyed; ätmanaù—of Himself; paramäm—
transcendental; sthitim—situation.
TRANSLATION
When I thus expressed my heartfelt desires unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the lotus-eyed Lord instructed me about His transcendental situation.
PURPORT
The words paramäà sthitim are significant in this verse. The Lord's transcendental
situation was not even spoken of to Brahmä when the four verses of Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(2.9.33-36) were explained. This transcendental situation comprises His dealings with
devotees engaged in transcendental loving service, as exhibited at Dvärakä and
Våndävana. When the Lord explained His specific transcendental situation, it was
meant for Uddhava only, and therefore Uddhava particularly said mahyam ("unto me"),
although the great sage Maitreya was also sitting there. Such a transcendental situation
is hardly understood by those whose devotion is mixed with speculative knowledge or
fruitive activities. The Lord's activities in confidential love are very rarely disclosed to
the general devotees who are attracted by devotion mixed with knowledge and
mysticism. Such activities are the inconceivable pastimes of the Lord.
TEXT 20
Sa WvMaaraiDaTaPaadTaqQaaR‚
dDaqTaTatvaTMaivbaeDaMaaGaR" )
Pa[<aMYa PaadaE Pairv*TYa dev‚
iMahaGaTaae_h& ivrhaTauraTMaa )) 20 ))
sa evam ärädhita-päda-térthäd
adhéta-tattvätma-vibodha-märgaù
praëamya pädau parivåtya devam
152
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ihägato 'haà virahäturätmä
SYNONYMS
saù—so myself; evam—thus; ärädhita—worshiped; päda-térthät—from the Personality of
Godhead; adhéta—studied; tattva-ätma—self-knowledge; vibodha—understanding;
märgaù—path; praëamya—after saluting; pädau—at His lotus feet; parivåtya—after
circumambulating; devam—the Lord; iha—at this place; ägataù—reached; aham—I;
viraha—separation; ätura-ätmä—aggrieved in self.
TRANSLATION
I have studied the path of understanding self-knowledge from my spiritual master, the
Personality of Godhead, and thus after circumambulating Him I have come to this place,
very much aggrieved due to separation.
PURPORT
Çré Uddhava's actual life is the direct symbol of the catuù-çloké Bhägavatam enunciated
first to Brahmäjé by the Personality of Godhead [SB 2.9.33/34/35/36]. These four very
great and important verses from Çrémad-Bhägavatam are particularly taken out by the
Mäyävädé speculators, who construe a different purport to suit their impersonal view of
monism. Here is the proper answer to such unauthorized speculators. The verses of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam are purely theistic science understandable by the postgraduate
students of Bhagavad-gétä, The unauthorized dry speculators are offenders at the lotus
feet of the Lord Çré Kåñëa because they distort the purports of Bhagavad-gétä and
Çrémad-Bhägavatam to mislead the public and prepare a direct path to the hell known as
Andha-tämisra. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (16.20) such envious speculators are
without knowledge and are surely condemned life after life. They unnecessarily take
shelter of Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya, but he was not so drastic as to commit an offense at the
lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa. According to Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, Çrépäda
Çaìkaräcärya preached the Mäyäväda philosophy for a particular purpose. Such a
philosophy was necessary to defeat the Buddhist philosophy of the nonexistence of the
spirit soul, but it was never meant for perpetual acceptance. It was an emergency. Thus
Lord Kåñëa was accepted by Çaìkaräcärya as the Supreme Personality of Godhead in his
commentation on Bhagavad-gétä. Since he was a great devotee of Lord Kåñëa, he did not
dare write any commentary on Çrémad-Bhägavatam because that would have been a
153
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
direct offense at the lotus feet of the Lord. But later speculators, in the name of
Mäyäväda philosophy, unnecessarily make their commentary on the catuù-çloké
Bhägavatam [SB 2.9.33/34/35/36] without any bona fide intent.
The monistic dry speculators have no business in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam because this
particular Vedic literature is forbidden for them by the great author himself. Çréla
Vyäsadeva has definitely forbidden persons engaged in religiosity, economic
development, sense gratification and, finally, salvation, from trying to understand
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is not meant for them (SB 1.1.2). Çrépäda Çrédhara Svämé,
the great commentator on Çrémad-Bhägavatam, has definitely forbidden the salvationists
or monists to deal in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. It is not for them. Yet such unauthorized
persons perversely try to understand Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and thus they commit offenses
at the feet of the Lord, which even Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya dared not do. Thus they
prepare for their continuation of miserable life. It should be particularly noted herein
that Uddhava studied the catuù-çloké Bhägavatam [SB 2.9.33/34/35/36] directly from the
Lord, who spoke them first to Brahmäjé, and this time the Lord explained more
confidentially the self-knowledge mentioned as the paramäà sthitim. Upon learning
such self-knowledge of love, Uddhava felt very much aggrieved by feelings of separation
from the Lord. Unless one is awakened to the stage of Uddhava—everlastingly feeling
the separation of the Lord in transcendental love, as exhibited by Lord Caitanya also—
one cannot understand the real import of the four essential verses of Çrémad-
Bhägavatam. One should not indulge in the unauthorized act of twisting the meaning
and thereby putting himself on the dangerous path of offense.
SB 3.4.21
TEXT 21
Saae_h& TaÕXaRNaaúadivYaaeGaaiTaRYauTa" Pa[>aae )
GaiMaZYae diYaTa& TaSYa bdYaaRé[MaMa<@l/Ma( )) 21 ))
so 'haà tad-darçanählädaviyogärti-
yutaù prabho
gamiñye dayitaà tasya
badaryäçrama-maëòalam
SYNONYMS
saù aham—thus myself; tat—His; darçana—audience; ähläda—pleasure; viyoga—
154
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
without that; ärti-yutaù—afflicted by distress; prabho—my dear sir; gamiñye—shall go;
dayitam—so instructed; tasya—His; badaryäçrama—Badarikäçrama, in the Himalayas;
maëòalam—association.
TRANSLATION
My dear Vidura, now I am mad for want of the pleasure of seeing Him, and just to
mitigate this I am now proceeding to Badarikäçrama in the Himalayas for association, as I
have been instructed by Him.
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord of the standard of Uddhava constantly associates with the
Lord in the double perception of simultaneous separation and meeting. The pure
devotee is not for a moment unengaged in the transcendental service of the Lord.
Execution of the Lord's service is the main occupation of the pure devotee. Uddhava's
separation from the Lord was unbearable, and therefore he started to Badarikäçrama in
obedience to the Lord's order because the order of the Lord and the Lord Himself are
identical. As long as one is engaged in the execution of the order of the Lord, there is no
factual separation from Him.
TEXT 22
Ya}a NaaraYa<aae devae Narê >aGavaNa*iz" )
Ma*du Taqv]& TaPaae dqga| TaePaaTae l/aek->aavNaaE )) 22 ))
yatra näräyaëo devo
naraç ca bhagavän åñiù
mådu tévraà tapo dérghaà
tepäte loka-bhävanau
SYNONYMS
yatra—where; näräyaëaù—the Personality of Godhead; devaù—by incarnation;
naraù—human being; ca—also; bhagavän—the Lord; åñiù—great sage; mådu—amiable
to everyone; tévram—severe; tapaù—penance; dérgham—very long; tepäte—performing;
155
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
loka-bhävanau—welfare of all living entities.
TRANSLATION
There in Badarikäçrama the Personality of Godhead, in His incarnation as the sages Nara
and Näräyaëa, has been undergoing great penance since time immemorial for the welfare
of all amiable living entities.
PURPORT
Badarikäçrama in the Himalayas, the abode of the Nara-Näräyaëa sages, is a great place
of pilgrimage for the Hindus. Even up to the present, hundreds and thousands of pious
Hindus go to pay respects to the incarnation of Godhead Nara-Näräyaëa. It appears that
even five thousand years ago this holy place was being visited by such a holy being as
Uddhava, and even at that time the place was known to be very, very old. This
particular pilgrimage site is very difficult to visit for ordinary men because of its difficult
situation in the Himalayas in a place which is covered by ice almost all year. A few
months during the summer season people can visit this place at great personal
inconvenience. There are four dhämas, or kingdoms of God, which represent the planets
of the spiritual sky, which consists of the brahmajyoti and the Vaikuëöhas. These are
Badarikäçrama, Rameçvara, Jagannätha Puré and Dvärakä. Faithful Hindus still visit all
these holy places for perfection of spiritual realization, following in the footsteps of
devotees like Uddhava.
TEXT 23
é[qéuk- ovac
wTYauÖvaduPaak-<YaR Sauôda& du"Sah& vDaMa( )
jaNaeNaaXaMaYaT+ataa Xaaek-MauTPaiTaTa& buDa" )) 23 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ity uddhaväd upäkarëya
suhådäà duùsahaà vadham
jïänenäçamayat kñattä
çokam utpatitaà budhaù
156
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çuka Gosvämé said; iti—thus; uddhavät—from Uddhava;
upäkarëya—hearing; suhådäm—of friends and relatives; duùsaham—unbearable;
vadham—annihilation; jïänena—by transcendental knowledge; açamayat—pacified
himself; kñattä—Vidura; çokam—bereavement; utpatitam—arisen; budhaù—the
learned.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After hearing from Uddhava all about the annihilation of his
friends and relatives, the learned Vidura pacified his overwhelming bereavement by dint
of his transcendental knowledge.
PURPORT
Vidura was informed that the result of the Battle of Kurukñetra was the annihilation of
his friends and relatives as well as the destruction of the Yadu dynasty and also the
passing away of the Lord. All these hurled him into bereavement for the time being, but
because he was highly advanced in transcendental knowledge, he was quite competent
to pacify himself by enlightenment. As it is stated in Bhagavad-gétä due to our long
association with bodily relationships, bereavement on account of the annihilation of
friends and relatives is not at all astonishing, but one has to learn the art of subduing
such bereavement with higher, transcendental knowledge. The talks between Uddhava
and Vidura on the topic of Kåñëa began at sunset, and Vidura was now further advanced
in knowledge due to his association with Uddhava.
TEXT 24
Sa Ta& Maha>aaGavTa& v]JaNTa& k-aErvzR>a" )
ivé[M>aad>YaDataed& Mau:Ya& k*-Z<aPairGa]he )) 24 ))
sa taà mahä-bhägavataà
vrajantaà kauravarñabhaù
viçrambhäd abhyadhattedaà
mukhyaà kåñëa-parigrahe
157
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
saù—Vidura; tam—unto Uddhava; mahä-bhägavatam—the great devotee of the Lord;
vrajantam—while going; kaurava-åñabhaù—the best amongst the Kauravas;
viçrambhät—out of confidence; abhyadhatta—submitted; idam—this; mukhyam—unto
the chief; kåñëa—Lord Kåñëa; parigrahe—in devotional service to the Lord.
TRANSLATION
While Uddhava, the chief and most confidential amongst the devotees of the Lord, was
going away, Vidura, in affection and confidence, questioned him.
PURPORT
Vidura was much older than Uddhava. By family relationship Uddhava was a
contemporary brother of Kåñëa's, while Vidura was as elderly as Kåñëa's father Vasudeva.
But although junior by age, Uddhava was much advanced in the devotional service of
the Lord, and therefore he is described herein as the chief amongst the devotees of the
Lord. Vidura was confident about this, and thus he addressed Uddhava in that higher
category. That is the way of courteous dealings between two devotees.
TEXT 25
ivdur ovac
jaNa& Par& SvaTMarh"Pa[k-aXa&
Yadah YaaeGaeìr wRìrSTae )
v¢u-& >avaàae_hRiTa YaiÖ ivZ<aae‚
>aR*TYaa" Sv>a*TYaaQaRk*-TaêriNTa )) 25 ))
vidura uväca
jïänaà paraà svätma-rahaù-prakäçaà
yad äha yogeçvara éçvaras te
vaktuà bhavän no 'rhati yad dhi viñëor
bhåtyäù sva-bhåtyärtha-kåtaç caranti
158
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
viduraù uväca—Vidura said; jïänam—knowledge; param—transcendental; sva-ätma—
regarding the self; rahaù—mystery; prakäçam—enlightening; yat—that which; äha—
said; yoga-éçvaraù—the master of all mystics; éçvaraù—the Lord; te—unto you; vaktum—
to narrate; bhavän—your good self; naù—unto me; arhati—deserve; yat—for; hi—
reason of; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; bhåtyäù—servants; sva-bhåtya-artha-kåtaù—for the
interest of their servants; caranti—do wander.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: O Uddhava, because the servants of Viñëu, the Lord, wander in the interest
of serving others, it is quite fit that you kindly describe the self-knowledge with which
you have been enlightened by the Lord Himself.
PURPORT
The servants of the Lord are actually the servants of society. They have no interest in
human society other than to enlighten it in transcendental knowledge; they are
interested in imparting knowledge of the relationship of the living being with the
Supreme Lord, the activities in that transcendental relationship, and the ultimate goal
of human life. That is the real knowledge which can help society achieve the real aim of
human welfare. Knowledge in the matter of the bodily necessities of eating, sleeping,
mating and fearing, transformed into various branches of advancement of knowledge, is
all temporary. A living being is not the material body but an eternal part and parcel of
the Supreme Being, and thus revival of his self-knowledge is essential. Without this
knowledge, the human life is baffled. The servants of the Lord, Viñëu, are entrusted
with this responsible work, and so they wander over the earth and to all other planets in
the universe. Thus the knowledge which was received by Uddhava directly from the
Lord deserves to be distributed in human society, especially to persons like Vidura, who
are highly advanced in the devotional service of the Lord.
Real transcendental knowledge descends in the disciplic succession from the Lord to
Uddhava, from Uddhava to Vidura and so on. Such supreme transcendental knowledge
is not possible to achieve by the process of imperfect speculation as performed by the socalled
learned mundane wranglers. Vidura was anxious to know from Uddhava that
confidential knowledge known as paramäà sthitim, in which the Lord is known by His
transcendental pastimes. Although Vidura was older than Uddhava, he was anxious to
159
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
become a servant of Uddhava in the transcendental relationship. This formula of
transcendental disciplic succession is taught by Lord Caitanya also. Lord Caitanya
advises that one receive transcendental knowledge from anyone—whether a brähmaëa
or a çüdra, a householder or a sannyäsé—provided that person is factually conversant
with the science of Kåñëa. A person who knows the science of Kåñëa is factually a bona
fide spiritual master.
TEXT 26
oÖv ovac
NaNau Tae TatvSa&raDYa ‰iz" k-aEzarvae_iNTake- )
Saa+aaÙGavTaaidíae MaTYaRl/aek&- iJahaSaTaa )) 26 ))
uddhava uväca
nanu te tattva-saàrädhya
åñiù kauñäravo 'ntike
säkñäd bhagavatädiñöo
martya-lokaà jihäsatä
SYNONYMS
uddhavaù uväca—Uddhava said; nanu—however; te—of yourself; tattva-saàrädhyaù—
one who is worshipable for reception of transcendental knowledge; åñiù—learned
scholar; kauñäravaù—unto the son of Kuñäru (Maitreya); antike—staying nearby;
säkñät—directly; bhagavatä—by the Personality of Godhead; ädiñöaù—instructed;
martya-lokam—mortal world; jihäsatä—while quitting.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: You may take lessons from the great learned sage Maitreya, who is
nearby and who is worshipable for reception of transcendental knowledge. He was
directly instructed by the Personality of Godhead while He was about to quit this mortal
world.
PURPORT
160
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Although one may be well versed in the transcendental science, one should be careful
about the offense of maryädä-vyatikrama, or impertinently surpassing a greater
personality. According to scriptural injunction one should be very careful of
transgressing the law of maryädä-vyatikrama because by so doing one loses his duration
of life, his opulence, fame and piety and the blessings of all the world. To be well versed
in the transcendental science necessitates awareness of the techniques of spiritual
science. Uddhava, being well aware of all these technicalities of transcendental science,
advised Vidura to approach Maitreya Åñi to receive transcendental knowledge. Vidura
wanted to accept Uddhava as his spiritual master, but Uddhava did not accept the post
because Vidura was as old as Uddhava's father and therefore Uddhava could not accept
him as his disciple, especially when Maitreya was present nearby. The rule is that in the
presence of a higher personality one should not be very eager to impart instructions,
even if one is competent and well versed. So Uddhava decided to send an elderly person
like Vidura to Maitreya, another elderly person, but he was well versed also because he
was directly instructed by the Lord while He was about to quit this mortal world. Since
both Uddhava and Maitreya were directly instructed by the Lord, both had the
authority to become the spiritual master of Vidura or anyone else, but Maitreya, being
elderly, had the first claim to becoming the spiritual master, especially for Vidura, who
was much older than Uddhava. One should not be eager to become a spiritual master
cheaply for the sake of profit and fame, but should become a spiritual master only for the
service of the Lord. The Lord never tolerates the impertinence of maryädä-vyatikrama.
One should never pass over the honor due to an elderly spiritual master in the interests
of one's own personal gain and fame. Impertinence on the part of the pseudo spiritual
master is very risky to progressive spiritual realization.
TEXT 27
é[qéuk- ovac
wiTa Sah ivdure<a ivìMaUTaeR‚
GauR<ak-QaYaa SauDaYaa âaivTaaeåTaaPa" )
+a<aiMav Pauil/Nae YaMaSvSauSTaa&
SaMauizTa AaEPaGaiviNaRXaa& TaTaae_GaaTa( )) 27 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti saha vidureëa viçva-mürter
161
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
guëa-kathayä sudhayä plävitorutäpaù
kñaëam iva puline yamasvasus täà
samuñita aupagavir niçäà tato 'gät
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; saha—along with; vidureëa—
Vidura; viçva-mürteù—of the Universal Person; guëa-kathayä—in the discourse of
transcendental qualities; sudhayä—nectarean; plävita-uru-täpaù—overwhelmed by great
affliction; kñaëam—moment; iva—like that; puline—on the bank of; yamasvasuù täm—
River Yamunä; samuñitaù—passed on; aupagaviù—the son of Aupagava (Uddhava);
niçäm—the night; tataù—thereafter; agät—went away.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, after thus discussing with Vidura the transcendental
name, fame, qualities, etc., on the bank of the Yamunä, Uddhava was overwhelmed with
great affliction. He passed the night as if it were a moment, and thereafter he went away.
PURPORT
The word used here for Kåñëa is viçva-mürti. Both Uddhava and Vidura were in great
affliction because of Lord Kåñëa's departure, and the more they discussed the
transcendental name, fame and qualities of the Lord, the more the picture of the Lord
became visible to them everywhere. Such visualization of the transcendental form of the
Lord is neither false nor imaginary but is factual Absolute Truth. When the Lord is
perceived as viçva-mürti, it is not that He loses His personality or transcendental eternal
form, but He becomes visible in the same form everywhere.
TEXT 28
raJaaevac
iNaDaNaMauPaGaTaezu v*iZ<a>aaeJae‚
ZviDarQaYaUQaPaYaUQaPaezu Mau:Ya" )
Sa Tau k-QaMaviXaí oÖvae YaÖir‚
162
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
riPa TaTYaJa Aak*-iTa& }YaDaqXa" )) 28 ))
räjoväca
nidhanam upagateñu våñëi-bhojeñv
adhiratha-yüthapa-yüthapeñu mukhyaù
sa tu katham avaçiñöa uddhavo yad
dharir api tatyaja äkåtià tryadhéçaù
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—the King inquired; nidhanam—destruction; upagateñu—having overtaken;
våñëi—of the Våñëi dynasty; bhojeñu—the Bhoja dynasty; adhiratha—great commander;
yütha-pa—commander in chief; yütha-peñu—amongst them; mukhyaù—prominent;
saù—he; tu—only; katham—how; avaçiñöaù—remained; uddhavaù—Uddhava; yat—
whereas; hariù—the Personality of Godhead; api—also; tatyaje—finished; äkåtim—
complete pastimes; tri-adhéçaù—the Lord of the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
The King inquired: At the end of the pastimes of the Lord of the three worlds, Çré Kåñëa,
and after the disappearance of the members of the Våñëi and Bhoja dynasties, who were
the best of the great commanders, why did Uddhava alone remain?
PURPORT
According to Çré Jéva Gosvämé, nidhanam means the transcendental abode of the Lord.
Ni means the highest, and dhanam means opulence. And because the abode of the Lord
is the highest manifestation of transcendental opulence, His abode can therefore be
called nidhanam. Apart from the grammatical elucidation, the real purpose of the word
nidhanam is to indicate that all the members of the Våñëi and Bhoja dynasties were
direct associates of the Lord, and after the end of His pastimes, all the associates were
dispatched to their respective positions in the transcendental abode.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura elucidates the meaning of äkåtim as pastimes. A
means complete, and kåtim means transcendental pastimes. Since the Lord is identical
with His transcendental body, there is no question of His changing or quitting His body.
To act in accordance with the rules and customs of the material world, the Lord seems
163
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
to take His birth or leave His body, but the pure devotees of the Lord know well the
actual fact. It is necessary, therefore, for the serious students of Çrémad-Bhägavatam to
follow the notes and comments of the great äcäryas like Jéva Gosvämé and Viçvanätha
Cakravarté. To others, who are not devotees of the Lord, the comments and
explanations of such äcäryas may appear to he grammatical jugglery, but to the students
who are in the line of disciplic succession, the explanations of the great äcäryas are quite
fit.
The word upagateñu is also significant. All the members of Våñëi and Bhoja directly
reached the abode of the Lord. Other devotees do not reach the abode of the Lord
directly, but the pure associates of the Lord have no attraction for the opulence of any
planets of the material world. Sometimes, due to inquisitiveness, devotees who are to be
promoted to the abode of the Lord have some attraction for the opulence of the higher
material planets above the earth, and thus they desire to see them while going up to the
perfection. But the Våñëis and Bhojas were directly dispatched because they had no
attraction for material planets. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura also suggests that
according to the Amara-koça dictionary, äkåti also means "signal." Lord Kåñëa ordered
Uddhava by signal to go to Badarikäçrama after His departure, and Uddhava, as a pure
devotee of the Lord, carried out the order more faithfully than going back to Godhead,
or the abode of the Lord. That was the cause of his remaining alone even after the
departure of the Lord from the face of the earth.
TEXT 29
é[qéuk- ovac
b]øXaaPaaPadeXaeNa k-ale/NaaMaaegavaiH^Ta" )
Sa&ôTYa Svku-l&/ Sf-ITa& TYa+YaNdehMaicNTaYaTa( )) 29 ))
çré-çuka uväca
brahma-çäpäpadeçena
kälenämogha-väïchitaù
saàhåtya sva-kulaà sphétaà
tyakñyan deham acintayat
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; brahma-çäpa—cursing by the brähmaëas;
164
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
apadeçena—on the plea, by such a show; kälena—by the eternal time; amogha—
unfailing; väïchitaù—one who so desires; saàhåtya—closing; sva-kulam—own family;
sphétam—excessively numerous; tyakñyan—after giving up; deham—the universal form;
acintayat—thought to Himself.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé replied: My dear King, the cursing of the brähmaëas was only a plea,
but the actual fact was the supreme desire of the Lord. He wanted to disappear from the
face of the earth after dispatching His excessively numerous family members. He thought
to Himself as follows.
PURPORT
In this verse the word tyakñyan is very significant in relation to Lord Çré Kåñëa's leaving
His body. Since He is the eternal form of existence, knowledge and bliss, His body and
His Self are identical. Therefore how is it possible that He would leave His body and
then disappear from the vision of the world? There is a great controversy amongst the
nondevotees or Mäyävädés about the mysterious disappearance of the Lord, and the
doubts of those men with a poor fund of knowledge have been very elaborately cleared
by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé in his Kåñëa-sandarbha.
According to Brahma-saàhitä, the Lord has many forms. It is stated therein that the
Lord has innumerable forms, and when He appears within the vision of the living
entities, as Lord Kåñëa actually appeared, all such forms amalgamate with Him. Besides
all these infallible forms, He has His universal form, as manifested before Arjuna on the
Battlefield of Kurukñetra. Here in this verse the word sphétam is also used, which
indicates that He left His gigantic universal form called the viräö-rüpa, not His primeval,
eternal form, because there is hardly any possibility of His changing His form of sac-cidänanda
[Bs. 5.1]. This simple understanding is at once realized by the devotees of the
Lord, but those who are nondevotees, who perform hardly any devotional service to the
Lord, either do not understand this simple fact or purposely raise a controversy to defeat
the eternity of the transcendental body of the Lord. This is due to the defect called the
cheating propensity of the imperfect living entities.
By practical experience also, it is seen, up to the present day, that the Lord's
transcendental form is worshiped by devotees in different temples, and all the devotees
of the Lord factually realize that the form of the Deity in the temple is nondifferent
165
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
from the form of the Lord. This inconceivable performance of the internal potency of
the Lord is described in Bhagavad-gétä (7.25): nähaà prakäçaù sarvasya yoga-mäyäsamävåtaù.
The Lord reserves the right of not being exposed to everyone. In the Padma
Puräëa it is said, ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù [Cc. Madhya 17.136].
The name and form of the Lord cannot be perceived by the material senses, but when
He appears within the vision of the mundane people He assumes the form of the viräörüpa.
This is an additional material exhibition of form and is supported by the logic of a
subject and its adjectives. In grammar, when an adjective is taken away from the subject,
the subject it modifies does not change. Similarly, when the Lord quits His viräö-rüpa,
His eternal form does not change, although there is no material difference between
Himself and any one of His innumerable forms. In the Fifth Canto it will be seen how
the Lord is worshiped in different planets in His different forms, even now, and how He
is worshiped in different temples of this earth also.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé and Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura have very elaborately
explained this incident of the Lord's disappearance in their commentaries, quoting
various authentic versions of Vedic literatures. We purposely do not include them all
here to avoid an increase in the volume of this book. The entire matter is explained in
Bhagavad-gétä, as quoted above: the Lord reserves the right of not being exposed to
everyone. He always keeps Himself out of the vision of the nondevotees, who are devoid
of love and devotion, and thus He puts them still further away from the Lord. The Lord
appeared on the invitation of Brahmä, who prayed before the Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, and
therefore when the Lord appeared, all the forms of Viñëu amalgamated with Him, and
when the mission was fulfilled, all of them disintegrated from Him in the usual course.
TEXT 30
ASMaaçaek-aduParTae MaiYa jaNa& Madaé[YaMa( )
AhRTYauÖv WvaÖa SaMPa[TYaaTMavTaa& vr" )) 30 ))
asmäl lokäd uparate
mayi jïänaà mad-äçrayam
arhaty uddhava eväddhä
sampraty ätmavatäà varaù
SYNONYMS
166
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
asmät—from this (universe); lokät—earth; uparate—having disappeared; mayi—of
Myself; jïänam—knowledge; mat-äçrayam—concerning Myself; arhati—deserves;
uddhavaù—Uddhava; eva—certainly; addhä—directly; samprati—at the present
moment; ätmavatäm—of the devotees; varaù—foremost.
TRANSLATION
Now I shall leave the vision of this mundane world, and I see that Uddhava, the foremost
of My devotees, is the only one who can be directly entrusted with knowledge about Me.
PURPORT
Jïänaà mad-äçrayam is significant in this verse. Transcendental knowledge has three
departmental divisions, namely knowledge of impersonal Brahman, knowledge of the
all-pervading Supersoul and knowledge of the Personality of Godhead. Out of the three,
transcendental knowledge of the Personality of Godhead has special significance and is
known as bhagavat-tattva-vijïäna, specific knowledge of the Personality of Godhead.
This specific knowledge is realized by pure devotional service and no other means.
Bhagavad-gétä (18.55) confirms this: bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù.
"Only persons engaged in devotional service can factually know the transcendental
position of the Lord." Uddhava was considered to be the best amongst all devotees of
that time, and therefore he was directly instructed by the Lord's grace, so that people
might take advantage of Uddhava's knowledge after the disappearance of the Lord from
the vision of the world. This is one of the reasons why Uddhava was advised to go to
Badarikäçrama, where the Lord is personally represented by the Nara-Näräyaëa Deity.
One who is transcendentally advanced can gain direct inspiration from the temple
Deity, and thus a devotee of the Lord always takes shelter of a recognized temple of the
Lord in order to make tangible advancement in transcendental knowledge by the grace
of the Lord.
TEXT 31
NaaeÖvae_<viPa MaNNYaUNaae Yad(Gau<aENaaRidRTa" Pa[>au" )
ATaae MaÜYauNa& l/aek&- Ga]ahYaiàh iTaïTau )) 31 ))
noddhavo 'ëv api man-nyüno
167
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yad guëair närditaù prabhuù
ato mad-vayunaà lokaà
grähayann iha tiñöhatu
SYNONYMS
na—not; uddhavaù—Uddhava; aëu—slightly; api—also; mat—to Myself; nyünaù—
inferior; yat—because; guëaiù—by the modes of material nature; na—nor; arditaù—
affected; prabhuù—master; ataù—therefore; mat-vayunam—knowledge of Me (the
Personality of Godhead); lokam—the world; grähayan—just to disseminate; iha—in this
world; tiñöhatu—may remain.
TRANSLATION
Uddhava is not inferior to Me in any way because he is never affected by the modes of
material nature. Therefore he may remain in this world in order to disseminate specific
knowledge of the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The specific qualification for becoming the representative of the Lord is to be
unaffected by the material modes of nature. The highest qualification of a person in the
material world is to be a brähmaëa. But since a brähmaëa is in the mode of goodness, to
be a brähmaëa is not sufficient for becoming a representative of the Lord. One has to
transcend the mode of goodness also and be situated in unalloyed goodness, unaffected
by any of the qualities of material nature. This stage of transcendental qualification is
called çuddha-sattva, or vasudeva, and in this stage the science of God can be realized. As
the Lord is not affected by the modes of material nature, so a pure devotee of the Lord is
also not affected by the modes of nature. That is the primary qualification for being one
with the Lord. A person who is able to attain this transcendental qualification is called
jévan-mukta, or liberated, even though he is apparently in material conditions. This
liberation is achieved by one who constantly engages in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord. In Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.2.187) it is stated:
éhä yasya harer däsye
karmaëä manasä girä
nikhiläsv apy avasthäsu
168
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
jévan-muktaù sa ucyate
"Anyone who, by his actions, mind and words, lives only for the transcendental loving
service of the Lord, is certainly a liberated soul, even though he may appear to be in a
condition of material existence." Uddhava was in such a transcendental position, and
thus he was selected to be the factual representative of the Lord in His bodily absence
from the vision of the world. Such a devotee of the Lord is never affected by material
strength, intelligence or even renunciation. Such a devotee of the Lord can withstand
all onslaughts of material nature, and therefore he is known as gosvämé. Only such
gosvämés can penetrate the mysteries of the Lord's transcendental loving relationships.
TEXT 32
Wv& i}al/aek-Gauå<aa SaiNdí" XaBdYaaeiNaNaa )
bdYaaRé[MaMaaSaaÛ hirMaqJae SaMaaiDaNaa )) 32 ))
evaà tri-loka-guruëä
sandiñöaù çabda-yoninä
badaryäçramam äsädya
harim éje samädhinä
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; tri-loka—three worlds; guruëä—by the spiritual master; sandiñöaù—being
perfectly taught; çabda-yoninä—by one who is the source of all Vedic knowledge;
badaryäçramam—in the pilgrimage site of Badarikäçrama; äsädya—reaching; harim—
unto the Lord; éje—satisfied; samädhinä—by trance.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé informed the King that Uddhava, being thus instructed by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the source of all Vedic knowledge and the
spiritual master of the three worlds, reached the pilgrimage site of Badarikäçrama and
engaged himself there in trance to satisfy the Lord.
PURPORT
169
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Lord Çré Kåñëa is factually the spiritual master of the three worlds, and He is the original
source of all Vedic knowledge. It is very difficult, however, to understand the personal
feature of the Absolute Truth, even from the Vedas. His personal instructions are
needed in order to understand the Personality of Godhead as the Supreme Absolute
Truth. Bhagavad-gétä is the evidence of such transcendental knowledge in gist. One
cannot know the Supreme Lord unless one is graced by the Lord Himself. Lord Kåñëa
exhibited this specific mercy towards Arjuna and Uddhava while He was in the material
world.
Undoubtedly Bhagavad-gétä was spoken by the Lord on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra just
to encourage Arjuna to fight, and yet to complete the transcendental knowledge of
Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord instructed Uddhava. The Lord wanted Uddhava to fulfill His
mission and disseminate knowledge which He had not spoken even in Bhagavad-gétä.
Persons who are attached to the words of the Vedas may also know from this verse that
the Lord is the source of all Vedic knowledge. One who is unable to understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by going through the pages of the Vedas may take
shelter of one of the Lord's devotees, such as Uddhava, in order to advance further in
knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Brahma-saàhitä says that it is
very difficult to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead from the Vedas, but
He is easily understood from a pure devotee like Uddhava. Taking mercy on the great
sages who lived at Badarikäçrama, the Lord authorized Uddhava to speak on His behalf.
Unless one has such authorization, one cannot understand or preach the devotional
service of the Lord.
While present on this earth, the Lord executed many uncommon activities, even
traveling in space to bring down the pärijäta from heaven and recovering the son of His
teacher (Sändépani Muni) from the regions of death. Uddhava was certainly informed of
the conditions of life on other planets, and all the sages were anxious to know of them,
just as we are anxious to know about the planets in space. Uddhava was particularly
deputed to carry a message to Badarikäçrama, not only to the sages of that place of
pilgrimage but also to the Nara-Näräyaëa Deities. Such a message must have been more
confidential than the knowledge described in the pages of the Vedas.
The Lord is undoubtedly the source of all knowledge, and the messages dispatched
through Uddhava to Nara-Näräyaëa and other sages were also part of the Vedic
knowledge, but they were more confidential and could be sent or understood only
through such a pure devotee as Uddhava. Since such confidential knowledge was known
only to the Lord and Uddhava, it is said that Uddhava was as good as the Lord Himself.
Every living entity can, like Uddhava, also become a confidential messenger on the same
170
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
level as the Lord, provided he becomes confidential himself by dint of loving devotional
service. Such confidential knowledge is entrusted, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä only to
pure devotees like Uddhava and Arjuna, and one has to learn the mystery through
them, and not otherwise. One cannot understand Bhagavad-gétä or Çrémad-Bhägavatam
without the help of such confidential devotees of the Lord. According to Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, that confidential message must have concerned the
mystery of His departure and the annihilation of His dynasty after the end of His
appearance in the mundane world for one hundred years. Everyone must have been very
anxious to know about the mystery of the annihilation of the Yadu dynasty, and that
message must have been explained by the Lord to Uddhava and dispatched to
Badarikäçrama for the information of Nara-Näräyaëa and other pure devotees of the
Lord.
TEXT 33
ivdurae_PYauÖvaC^]uTva k*-Z<aSYa ParMaaTMaNa" )
§-I@YaaePaatadehSYa k-MaaRi<a ëaigaTaaiNa c )) 33 ))
viduro 'py uddhaväc chrutvä
kåñëasya paramätmanaù
kréòayopätta-dehasya
karmäëi çläghitäni ca
SYNONYMS
viduraù—Vidura; api—also; uddhavät—from the source of Uddhava; çrutvä—having
heard; kåñëasya—of Lord Kåñëa; parama-ätmanaù—of the Supersoul; kréòayä—for the
sake of pastimes in the mortal world; upätta—extraordinarily accepted; dehasya—of the
body; karmäëi—transcendental activities; çläghitäni—most glorious; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Vidura also heard from Uddhava about the appearance and disappearance of Lord Kåñëa,
the Supersoul, in the mortal world, which is a subject matter sought after with great
perseverance by the great sages.
171
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The subject matter of the appearance and disappearance of the Supersoul, Lord Çré
Kåñëa, is a mystery even for the great sages. The word paramätmanaù is significant in
this verse. An ordinary living being is generally called the ätmä, but Lord Kåñëa is never
an ordinary living being because He is paramätmä, the Supersoul. Yet His appearance as
one of the human beings and His disappearance again from the mortal world are subject
matters for the research workers who execute research work with great perseverance.
Such subject matters are certainly of increasing interest because the researchers have to
search out the transcendental abode of the Lord, which He enters after finishing His
pastimes in the mortal world. But even the great sages have no information that beyond
the material sky is the spiritual sky where Çré Kåñëa eternally resides with His associates,
although at the same time He exhibits His pastimes in the mortal world in all the
universes one after another. This fact is confirmed in Brahma-saàhitä (5.37): goloka eva
nivasaty akhilätma-bhütaù. "The Lord, by His inconceivable potency, resides in His
eternal abode, Goloka, yet at the same time, as the Supersoul, He is present
everywhere—in both the spiritual and material skies—by His multivarieties of
manifestation." Therefore His appearance and disappearance are simultaneously going
on, and no one can say definitely which of them is the beginning and which is the end.
His eternal pastimes have no beginning or end, and one has to learn of them from the
pure devotee only and not waste valuable time in so-called research work.
TEXT 34
dehNYaaSa& c TaSYaEv& Daqra<aa& DaEYaRvDaRNaMa( )
ANYaeza& duZk-rTar& PaéUNaa& iv(c)-vaTMaNaaMa( )) 34 ))
deha-nyäsaà ca tasyaivaà
dhéräëäà dhairya-vardhanam
anyeñäà duñkarataraà
paçünäà viklavätmanäm
SYNONYMS
deha-nyäsam—entering the body; ca—also; tasya—His; evam—also; dhéräëäm—of great
sages; dhairya—perseverance; vardhanam—increasing; anyeñäm—for others; duñkara172
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
taram—very difficult to ascertain; paçünäm—of the beasts; viklava—disturbed;
ätmanäm—of such a mind.
TRANSLATION
The Lord's glorious acts and His acceptance of various transcendental forms for the
performance of extraordinary pastimes in the mortal world are very difficult for anyone
other than His devotees to understand, and for the beasts they are simply a mental
disturbance.
PURPORT
The transcendental forms and pastimes of the Lord, as described in Bhagavad-gétä, are
difficult subject matters for those who are not devotees to understand. The Lord never
reveals Himself to persons like the jïänés and yogés. And there are others who, because
of their envying the Lord from the bottom of their hearts, are classified amongst the
beasts, and for such envious beasts the subject matter of the Lord's appearance and
disappearance is simply a mental disturbance. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (7.15), the
miscreants who are simply concerned with material enjoyment, who work very hard like
beasts of burden, can hardly know the Personality of Godhead at any stage due to
äsurika-bhäva, or a spirit of revolt against the Supreme Lord.
The transcendental bodily expansions manifested by the Lord for His pastimes in the
mortal world, and the appearance and disappearance of such transcendental expansions,
are difficult subject matters, and those who are not devotees are advised not to discuss
the Lord's appearance and disappearance, lest they commit further offenses at the lotus
feet of the Lord. The more they discuss the transcendental appearance and
disappearance of the Lord in the asuric spirit, the more they enter into the darkest
region of hell, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (16.20). Anyone who is against the
transcendental loving service of the Lord is more or less a beastly creature, as confirmed
in this verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 35
AaTMaaNa& c ku-åé[eï k*-Z<aeNa MaNaSaei+aTaMa( )
DYaaYaNa( GaTae >aaGavTae åraed Pa[eMaivûl/" )) 35 ))
173
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ätmänaà ca kuru-çreñöha
kåñëena manasekñitam
dhyäyan gate bhägavate
ruroda prema-vihvalaù
SYNONYMS
ätmänam—himself; ca—also; kuru-çreñöha—O best amongst the Kurus; kåñëena—by
Kåñëa; manasä—by the mind; ékñitam—remembered; dhyäyan—thus thinking of; gate—
having gone; bhägavate—of the devotee; ruroda—cried loudly; prema-vihvalaù—
overwhelmed by the ecstasy of love.
TRANSLATION
Understanding that he was remembered by Lord Kåñëa [while quitting this world],
Vidura began to cry loudly, overwhelmed by the ecstasy of love.
PURPORT
Vidura was overwhelmed by the ecstasy of love when he understood that Lord Kåñëa,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, thought of him at the last moment. Although he
thought of himself as insignificant, he was remembered by the Lord, by His causeless
mercy. Vidura accepted this as a great favor, and thus he cried. This crying is the last
word in the progressive path of devotional service. One who can cry for the Lord in love
is certainly successful in the line of devotional service.
TEXT 36
k-ail/NÛa" k-iTai>a" iSaÖ Ahaei>a>aRrTazR>a )
Pa[aPaÛTa Sv"SairTa& Ya}a iMa}aaSauTaae MauiNa" )) 36 ))
kälindyäù katibhiù siddha
ahobhir bharatarñabha
präpadyata svaù-saritaà
yatra miträ-suto muniù
174
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
kälindyäù—on the bank of the Yamunä; katibhiù—a few; siddhe—being so passed;
ahobhiù—days; bharata-åñabha—O best of the Bharata dynasty; präpadyata—reached;
svaù-saritam—the celestial water of the Ganges; yatra—where; miträ-sutaù—the son of
Mitra-; muniù—sage.
TRANSLATION
After passing a few days on the bank of the River Yamunä, Vidura, the self-realized soul,
reached the bank of the Ganges, where the great sage Maitreya was situated.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Chapter, Third Canto, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "Vidura Approaches Maitreya."
5. Vidura's Talks with Maitreya
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
Üair ÛuNaÛa ‰z>a" ku-æ<aa&
MaE}aeYaMaaSaqNaMaGaaDabaeDaMa( )
+ataaePaSa*TYaaCYauTa>aaviSaÖ"
PaPa[C^ SaaEXaqLYaGau<aai>aTa*á" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
dväri dyu-nadyä åñabhaù kurüëäà
maitreyam äsénam agädha-bodham
kñattopasåtyäcyuta-bhäva-siddhaù
papraccha sauçélya-guëäbhitåptaù
175
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; dväri—at the source of; dyu-nadyäù—the
celestial River Ganges; åñabhaù—the best of the Kurus; kurüëäm—of the Kurus;
maitreyam—unto Maitreya; äsénam—sitting; agädha-bodham—of unfathomed
knowledge; kñattä—Vidura; upasåtya—having approached nearer; acyuta—the infallible
Lord; bhäva—character; siddhaù—perfect; papraccha—inquired; sauçélya—gentleness;
guëa-abhitåptaù—satisfied in transcendental qualities.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Vidura, the best amongst the Kuru dynasty, who was perfect in
devotional service to the Lord, thus reached the source of the celestial Ganges River
[Hardwar], where Maitreya, the great, fathomless learned sage of the world, was seated.
Vidura, who was perfect in gentleness and satisfied in transcendence, inquired from him.
PURPORT
Vidura was already perfect due to his unalloyed devotion to the infallible Lord. The
Lord and the living entities are all qualitatively the same by nature, but the Lord is
quantitatively much greater than any individual living entity. He is ever infallible,
whereas the living entities are prone to fall under the illusory energy. Vidura had
already surpassed the fallible nature of the living entity in conditional life due to his
being acyuta-bhäva, or legitimately absorbed in the devotional service of the Lord. This
stage of life is called acyuta-bhäva-siddha, or perfection by dint of devotional service.
Anyone, therefore, who is absorbed in the devotional service of the Lord is a liberated
soul and has all admirable qualities. The learned sage Maitreya was sitting in a solitary
place on the bank of the Ganges at Hardwar, and Vidura, who was a perfect devotee of
the Lord and possessed all good transcendental qualities, approached him for inquiry.
TEXT 2
ivdur ovac
Sau%aYa k-MaaRi<a k-raeiTa l/aek-ae
Na TaE" Sau%& vaNYaduPaarMa& va )
ivNdeTa >aUYaSTaTa Wv du"%&
176
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Yad}a Yau¢&- >aGavaNa( vdeà" )) 2 ))
vidura uväca
sukhäya karmäëi karoti loko
na taiù sukhaà vänyad-upäramaà vä
vindeta bhüyas tata eva duùkhaà
yad atra yuktaà bhagavän vaden naù
SYNONYMS
viduraù uväca—Vidura said; sukhäya—for attaining happiness; karmäëi—fruitive
activities; karoti—everyone does so; lokaù—in this world; na—never; taiù—by those
activities; sukham—any happiness; vä—or; anyat—differently; upäramam—satiation;
vä—either; vindeta—achieves; bhüyaù—on the contrary; tataù—by such activities;
eva—certainly; duùkham—miseries; yat—that which; atra—under the circumstances;
yuktam—right course; bhagavän—O great one; vadet—may kindly enlighten; naù—us.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: O great sage, everyone in this world engages in fruitive activities to attain
happiness, but one finds neither satiation nor the mitigation of distress. On the contrary,
one is only aggravated by such activities. Please, therefore, give us directions on how one
should live for real happiness.
PURPORT
Vidura asked Maitreya some common questions, which was not originally his intention.
Uddhava asked Vidura to approach Maitreya Muni and inquire into all the truths
concerning the Lord, His name, fame, quality, form, pastimes, entourage, etc., and thus
when Vidura approached Maitreya, he should have asked only about the Lord. But out
of natural humility he did not immediately ask about the Lord, but inquired into a
subject which would be of great importance to the common man. A common man
cannot understand the Lord. He must first know the real position of his life under the
influence of the illusory energy. In illusion one thinks that he can be happy only by
fruitive activities, but what actually happens is that one becomes more and more
entangled in the network of action and reaction and does not find any solution to the
177
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
problem of life. There is a nice song in this connection: "Because of a great desire to
have all happiness in life, I built this house. But unfortunately the whole scheme has
turned to ashes because the house was unexpectedly set on fire." The law of nature is
like that. Everyone tries to become happy by planning in the material world, but the law
of nature is so cruel that it sets fire to one's schemes; the fruitive worker is not happy in
his schemes, nor is there any satiation of his continuous hankering for happiness.
TEXT 3
JaNaSYa k*-Z<aaiÜMau%SYa dEva‚
dDaMaRXaql/SYa Saudu"i%TaSYa )
ANauGa]haYaeh criNTa NaUNa&
>aUTaaiNa >aVYaaiNa JaNaadRNaSYa )) 3 ))
janasya kåñëäd vimukhasya daiväd
adharma-çélasya suduùkhitasya
anugrahäyeha caranti nünaà
bhütäni bhavyäni janärdanasya
SYNONYMS
janasya—of the common man; kåñëät—from the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa; vimukhasya—of
the one who has turned his face against the Lord; daivät—by the influence of external
energy; adharma-çélasya—of one who is engaged in irreligion; su-duùkhitasya—of one
who is always unhappy; anugrahäya—due to being compassionate towards them; iha—in
this world; caranti—wander; nünam—certainly; bhütäni—persons; bhavyäni—great
philanthropic souls; janärdanasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
O my lord, great philanthropic souls travel on the earth on behalf of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead to show compassion to the fallen souls who are averse to the sense
of subordination to the Lord.
PURPORT
178
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
To be obedient to the wishes of the Supreme Lord is the natural position of every living
entity. But due only to past misdeeds, a living being becomes averse to the sense of
subordination to the Lord and suffers all the miseries of material existence. No one has
anything to do but render devotional service to the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa. Therefore
any activity other than transcendental loving service to the Lord is more or less a
rebellious action against the supreme will. All fruitive activity, empirical philosophy and
mysticism are more or less against the sense of subordination to the Lord, and any living
entity engaged in such rebellious activity is more or less condemned by the laws of
material nature, which work under the subordination of the Lord. Great unalloyed
devotees of the Lord are compassionate towards the fallen, and therefore they travel all
over the world with the mission of bringing souls back to Godhead, back to home. Such
pure devotees of the Lord carry the message of Godhead in order to deliver the fallen
souls, and therefore the common man who is bewildered by the influence of the external
energy of the Lord should avail himself of their association.
TEXT 4
TaTSaaDauvYaaRidXa vTMaR Xa& Na"
Sa&raiDaTaae >aGavaNa( YaeNa Pau&SaaMa( )
ôid iSQaTaae YaC^iTa >ai¢-PaUTae
jaNa& SaTatvaiDaGaMa& Paura<aMa( )) 4 ))
tat sädhu-varyädiça vartma çaà naù
saàrädhito bhagavän yena puàsäm
hådi sthito yacchati bhakti-püte
jïänaà sa-tattvädhigamaà puräëam
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; sädhu-varya—O great one amongst the saints; ädiça—please instruct;
vartma—the path; çam—auspicious; naù—for us; saàrädhitaù—being perfectly served;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; yena—by which; puàsäm—of the living entity;
hådi sthitaù—residing in the heart; yacchati—awards; bhakti-püte—unto the unalloyed
devotee; jïänam—knowledge; sa—that; tattva—truth; adhigamam—by which one
learns; puräëam—authorized, old.
179
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O great sage, please give me instruction on the transcendental devotional
service of the Lord, so that He who is situated in the heart of everyone can be pleased to
impart, from within, knowledge of the Absolute Truth in terms of the ancient Vedic
principles delivered only to those who are purified by the process of devotional service.
PURPORT
As already explained in the First Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the Absolute Truth is
realized in three different phases—although they are one and the same—in terms of the
knower's capacity to understand. The most capable transcendentalist is the pure devotee
of the Lord, who is without any tinge of fruitive actions or philosophical speculation. By
devotional service only does one's heart become completely purified from all material
coverings like karma, jïäna and yoga. Only in such a purified stage does the Lord, who is
seated in everyone's heart with the individual soul, give instruction so that the devotee
can reach the ultimate destination of going back home, back to Godhead. This is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (10.10): teñäà satata-yuktänäà bhajatäm. Only when the
Lord is satisfied with the devotional service of the devotee does He impart knowledge, as
He did for Arjuna and Uddhava.
The jïänés, yogés and karmés cannot expect this direct cooperation of the Lord. They are
not able to satisfy the Lord by transcendental loving service, nor do they believe in such
service to the Lord. The bhakti process, as performed under the regulative principles of
vaidhé-bhakti, or devotional service following the prescribed rules and regulations, is
defined by the revealed scriptures and confirmed by great äcäryas. This practice can
help the neophyte devotee to rise to the stage of räga-bhakti, in which the Lord responds
from within as the caitya-guru, or the spiritual master as Superconsciousness. All
transcendentalists other than devotees make no distinction between the individual soul
and the Supersoul because they miscalculate the Superconsciousness and the individual
consciousness to be one and the same. Such miscalculation by the nondevotees makes
them unfit to receive any direction from within, and therefore they are bereft of the
direct cooperation of the Lord. After many, many births, when such a nondualist comes
to sense that the Lord is worshipable and that the devotee is simultaneously one with
and different from the Lord, then only can he surrender unto the Lord, Väsudeva. Pure
devotional service begins from that point. The process of understanding the Absolute
Truth adopted by the misguided nondualist is very difficult, whereas the devotee's way
of understanding the Absolute Truth comes directly from the Lord, who is pleased by
180
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
devotional service. On behalf of many neophyte devotees, Vidura, at the very first
instance, inquired from Maitreya about the path of devotional service, by which the
Lord, who is seated within the heart, can be pleased.
TEXT 5
k-raeiTa k-MaaRi<a k*-TaavTaarae
YaaNYaaTMaTaN}aae >aGava&S}YaDaqXa" )
YaQaa SaSaJaaRGa] wd& iNarqh"
Sa&SQaaPYa v*ita& JaGaTaae ivDatae )) 5 ))
karoti karmäëi kåtävatäro
yäny ätma-tantro bhagaväàs tryadhéçaù
yathä sasarjägra idaà niréhaù
saàsthäpya våttià jagato vidhatte
SYNONYMS
karoti—does them; karmäëi—transcendental activities; kåta—by accepting; avatäraù—
incarnations; yäni—all those; ätma-tantraù—Self-independent; bhagavän—the
Personality of Godhead; tri-adhéçaù—the Lord of the three worlds; yathä—as much as;
sasarja—created; agre—at first; idam—this cosmic manifestation; niréhaù—although
desireless; saàsthäpya—by establishing; våttim—means of livelihood; jagataù—of the
universes; vidhatte—as He regulates.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, kindly narrate how the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the
independent, desireless Lord of the three worlds and the controller of all energies, accepts
incarnations and creates the cosmic manifestation with perfectly arranged regulative
principles for its maintenance.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa is the original Personality of Godhead from whom the three creative
incarnations, namely the puruña-avatäras—Käraëärëavaçäyé Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé
181
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Viñëu and Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu—expand. The whole material creation is conducted by
the three puruñas in successive stages under the external energy of the Lord, and thus
material nature is controlled by Him. Thinking material nature to be independent is like
seeking milk from the nipplelike bags on the neck of a goat. The Lord is independent
and desireless. He does not create the material world for His own satisfaction as we
create our household affairs to fulfill our material desires. Actually the material world is
created for the illusory enjoyment of the conditioned souls, who have been against the
transcendental service of the Lord since time immemorial. But the material universes
are full in themselves. There is no scarcity for maintenance in the material world.
Because of their poor fund of knowledge, the materialists are disturbed when there is an
apparent increase of population on the earth. Whenever there is a living being on the
earth, however, his subsistence is immediately arranged by the Lord. The other species
of living entities, who far outnumber human society, are never disturbed for
maintenance; they are never seen dying of starvation. It is only human society that is
disturbed about the food situation and, to cover up the real fact of administrative
mismanagement, takes shelter in the plea that the population is excessively increasing.
If there is any scarcity in the world, it is the scarcity of God consciousness, otherwise, by
the grace of the Lord, there is no scarcity of anything.
TEXT 6
YaQaa PauNa" Sve % wd& iNaveXYa
XaeTae GauhaYaa& Sa iNav*tav*ita" )
YaaeGaeìraDaqìr Wk- WTa‚
dNauPa[ivíae bhuDaa YaQaaSaqTa( )) 6 ))
yathä punaù sve kha idaà niveçya
çete guhäyäà sa nivåtta-våttiù
yogeçvarädhéçvara eka etad
anupraviñöo bahudhä yathäsét
SYNONYMS
yathä—as much as; punaù—again; sve—in His; khe—form of space (viräö-rüpa); idam—
this; niveçya—entering into; çete—lies down; guhäyäm—within the universe; saù—He
182
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
(the Personality of Godhead); nivåtta—without endeavor; våttiù—means of livelihood;
yoga-éçvara—the master of all mystic powers; adhéçvaraù—proprietor of everything;
ekaù—one without a second; etat—this; anupraviñöaù—entering afterwards; bahudhä—
by innumerable; yathä—as much as; äsét—exists.
TRANSLATION
He lies down on His own heart spread in the form of the sky, and thus placing the whole
creation in that space, He expands Himself into many living entities, which are
manifested as different species of life. He does not have to endeavor for His maintenance,
because He is the master of all mystic powers and the proprietor of everything. Thus He
is distinct from the living entities.
PURPORT
The questions regarding creation, maintenance and destruction, which are mentioned
in many parts of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, are in relation to different millenniums
(kalpas), and therefore they are differently described by different authorities when
questioned by different students. There is no difference regarding the creative
principles and the Lord's control over them, yet there are some differences in the
minute details because of different kalpas. The gigantic sky is the material body of the
Lord, called the viräö-rüpa, and all material creations are resting on the sky, or the heart
of the Lord. Therefore, beginning from the sky, the first material manifestation to the
gross vision, down to the earth, everything is called Brahman. Sarvaà khalv idaà
brahma: "There is nothing but the Lord, and He is one without a second." The living
entities are the superior energies, whereas matter is the inferior energy, and the
combination of these energies brings about the manifestation of this material world,
which is in the heart of the Lord.
TEXT 7
§-I@Na( ivDatae iÜJaGaaeSaura<aa&
+aeMaaYa k-MaaR<YavTaar>aedE" )
MaNaae Na Ta*PYaTYaiPa é*<vTaa& Na"
Sauëaek-MaaEle/êirTaaMa*TaaiNa )) 7 ))
183
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kréòan vidhatte dvija-go-suräëäà
kñemäya karmäëy avatära-bhedaiù
mano na tåpyaty api çåëvatäà naù
suçloka-mauleç caritämåtäni
SYNONYMS
kréòan—manifesting pastimes; vidhatte—He performs; dvija—twice-born; go—cows;
suräëäm—of the demigods; kñemäya—welfare; karmäëi—transcendental activities;
avatära—incarnations; bhedaiù—differently; manaù—mind; na—never; tåpyati—
satisfies; api—in spite of; çåëvatäm—continuously hearing; naù—our; su-çloka—
auspicious; mauleù—of the Lord; carita—characteristics; amåtäni—undying.
TRANSLATION
You may narrate also about the auspicious characteristics of the Lord in His different
incarnations for the welfare of the twice-born, the cows and the demigods. Our minds are
never satisfied completely, although we continuously hear of His transcendental
activities.
PURPORT
The Lord appears in this universe in different incarnations like Matsya, Kürma, Varäha
and Nåsiàha, and He manifests His different transcendental activities for the welfare of
the twice-born, the cows and the demigods. The Lord is directly concerned with the
twice-born or civilized men. A civilized man is one who has taken his birth twice. A
living entity takes birth in this mundane world due to the union of male and female. A
human being is born due to union of the father and mother, but a civilized human being
has another birth by contact with a spiritual master, who becomes the actual father. The
father and mother of the material body are so only in one birth, and in the next birth
the father and mother may be a different couple. But the bona fide spiritual master, as
the representative of the Lord, is the eternal father because the spiritual master has the
responsibility to lead the disciple to spiritual salvation, or the ultimate goal of life.
Therefore, a civilized man must be twice-born, otherwise he is no more than the lower
animals.
The cow is the most important animal for developing the human body to perfection.
The body can be maintained by any kind of foodstuff, but cow's milk is particularly
184
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
essential for developing the finer tissues of the human brain so that one can understand
the intricacies of transcendental knowledge. A civilized man is expected to live on
foodstuffs comprising fruits, vegetables, grains, sugar and milk. The bull helps in the
agricultural process of producing grain, etc., and thus in one sense the bull is the father
of humankind, whereas the cow is the mother, for she supplies milk to human society. A
civilized man is therefore expected to give all protection to the bulls and cows.
The demigods, or the living entities who live in the higher planets, are far superior to
human beings. Since they have better arrangements for living conditions, they live far
more luxuriously than human beings, yet they are all devotees of the Lord. The Lord
incarnates in different forms, such as those of a fish, a tortoise, a hog, and a combined
lion and man, just to give protection to civilized man, the cow and the demigods, who
are directly responsible for the regulative life of progressive self-realization. The whole
system of the material creation is planned so that the conditioned souls may have the
opportunity for self-realization. One who takes advantage of such an arrangement is
called a demigod or civilized man. The cow is meant to help maintain such a high
standard of living.
The Lord's pastimes for the protection of the twice-born civilized men, the cows and the
demigods are all transcendental. A human being is inclined to hear good narrations and
stories, and therefore there are so many books, magazines and newspapers on the market
to satisfy the interests of the developed soul. But the pleasure in such literature, after it
is read once, becomes stale, and people do not take any interest in reading such
literature repeatedly. In fact, newspapers are read for less than an hour and then thrown
in the dustbins as rubbish. The case is similar with all other mundane literatures. But the
beauty of transcendental literatures like Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam is that
they never become old. They have been read in the world by civilized man for the last
five thousand years, and they have never become old. They are ever fresh to the learned
scholars and devotees, and even by daily repetition of the verses of Bhagavad-gétä and
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, there is no satiation for devotees like Vidura. Vidura might have
heard the pastimes of the Lord many, many times before he met Maitreya, but still he
wanted the same narrations to be repeated because he was never satiated by hearing
them. That is the transcendental nature of the Lord's glorious pastimes.
TEXT 8
YaESTatv>aedEriDal/aek-NaaQaae
185
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
l/aek-aNal/aek-aNa( Sah l/aek-Paal/aNa( )
AcqoePaÛ}a ih SavRSatv‚
iNak-aYa>aedae_iDak*-Ta" Pa[TaqTa" )) 8 ))
yais tattva-bhedair adhiloka-nätho
lokän alokän saha lokapälän
acékÿpad yatra hi sarva-sattvanikäya-
bhedo 'dhikåtaù pratétaù
SYNONYMS
yaiù—by whom; tattva—truth; bhedaiù—by differentiation; adhiloka-näthaù—the King
of the kings; lokän—planets; alokän—planets of the lower region; saha—along with;
loka-pälän—respective kings; acékÿpat—planned; yatra—wherein; hi—certainly;
sarva—all; sattva—existence; nikäya—living entities; bhedaù—difference; adhikåtaù—
occupied; pratétaù—it so appears.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme King of all kings has created different planets and places of habitation
where living entities are situated in terms of the modes of nature and work, and He has
created their different kings and rulers.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa is the chief King of all kings, and He has created different planets for all
kinds of living entities. Even on this planet there are different places for inhabitation by
different types of men. There are places like deserts, ice lands, and valleys in
mountainous countries, and in each of them there are different kinds of men born of
different modes of nature according to their past deeds. There are people in the Arabian
deserts and in the valleys of the Himalayan Mountains, and the inhabitants of these two
places differ from one another, just as the inhabitants of the ice lands also differ from
them. Similarly, there are also different planets. The planets below the earth down to
the Pätäla planet are full of various kinds of living beings; no planet is vacant, as
wrongly imagined by the modern so-called scientist. In Bhagavad-gétä we find it said by
the Lord that the living entities are sarva-gata, or present in every sphere of life. So
186
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
there is no doubt that on other planets there are also inhabitants like us, sometimes with
greater intelligence and greater opulence. The living conditions for those of greater
intelligence are more luxurious than on this earth. There are also planets where no
sunlight reaches, and there are living entities who must live there due to their past
deeds. All such plans for living conditions are made by the Supreme Lord, and Vidura
requested Maitreya to describe this for the sake of further enlightenment.
TEXT 9
YaeNa Pa[JaaNaaMauTa AaTMak-MaR‚
æPaai>aDaaNaa& c i>ada& VYaData )
NaaraYa<aae ivìSa*GaaTMaYaaeiNa‚
reTaÀ Naae v<aRYa ivPa[vYaR )) 9 ))
yena prajänäm uta ätma-karmarüpäbhidhänäà
ca bhidäà vyadhatta
näräyaëo viçvasåg ätma-yonir
etac ca no varëaya vipra-varya
SYNONYMS
yena—by which; prajänäm—of those who are born; uta—as also; ätma-karma—destined
engagement; rüpa—form and feature; abhidhänäm—endeavors; ca—also; bhidäm—
differentiation; vyadhatta—dispersed; näräyaëaù—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; viçvasåk—the creator of the universe; ätma-yoniù—self-sufficient; etat—all
these; ca—also; naù—unto us; varëaya—describe; vipra-varya—O chief amongst the
brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
O chief amongst the brähmaëas, please also describe how Näräyaëa, the creator of the
universe and the self-sufficient Lord, has differently created the natures, activities, forms,
features and names of the different living creatures.
PURPORT
187
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Every living being is under the plan of his natural inclinations in terms of the modes of
material nature. His work is manifested in terms of the nature of the three modes, his
form and bodily features are designed according to his work, and his name is designated
according to his bodily features. For example, the higher classes of men are white
(çukla), and the lower classes of men are black. This division of white and black is in
terms of one's white and black duties of life. Pious acts lead one to take birth in a good
and highly placed family, to become rich, to become learned, and to acquire beautiful
bodily features. Impious acts lead one to become poor by parentage, to be always in want,
to become a fool or illiterate and to acquire ugly bodily features. Vidura requested
Maitreya to explain these differences between all the living creatures made by
Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 10
Paravreza& >aGavNa( v]TaaiNa
é[uTaaiNa Mae VYaaSaMau%ad>aq+<aMa( )
ATa*PNauMa +auçSau%avhaNaa&
TaezaMa*Tae k*-Z<ak-QaaMa*TaaEgaaTa( )) 10 ))
parävareñäà bhagavan vratäni
çrutäni me vyäsa-mukhäd abhékñëam
atåpnuma kñulla-sukhävahänäà
teñäm åte kåñëa-kathämåtaughät
SYNONYMS
para—higher; avareñäm—of these lower; bhagavan—O my lord, O great one; vratäni—
occupations; çrutäni—heard; me—by me; vyäsa—Vyäsa; mukhät—from the mouth;
abhékñëam—repeatedly; atåpnuma—I am satisfied; kñulla—little; sukha-ävahänäm—that
which causes happiness; teñäm—out of that; åte—without; kåñëa-kathä—talks about the
Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa; amåta-oghät—from the nectar.
TRANSLATION
O my lord, I have repeatedly heard about these higher and lower statuses of human
188
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
society from the mouth of Vyäsadeva, and I am quite satiated with all these lesser subject
matters and their happiness. They have not satisfied me with the nectar of topics about
Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Because people are very much interested in hearing social and historical presentations,
Çréla Vyäsadeva has compiled many books such as the Puräëas and Mahäbhärata. These
books are reading matter for the mass of people, and they were compiled with a view to
reviving their God consciousness, now forgotten in the conditional life of material
existence. The real purpose of such literatures is not so much to present topics of
historical references, but to revive the people's sense of God consciousness. For example,
Mahäbhärata is the history of the Battle of Kurukñetra, and common people read it
because it is full of topics regarding the social, political and economic problems of
human society. But factually the most important part of Mahäbhärata is Bhagavad-gétä,
which is automatically taught to readers along with the historical narrations of the
Battle of Kurukñetra.
Vidura explained to Maitreya his position of being fully satiated with the knowledge of
mundane social and political topics and having no more interest in them. He was
anxious to hear transcendental topics regarding Lord Çré Kåñëa. Because there were
insufficient topics directly concerning Kåñëa in the Puräëas, Mahäbhärata, etc., he was
not satisfied and wanted to know more about Kåñëa. Kåñëa-kathä, or topics regarding
Kåñëa, are transcendental, and there is no satiation in hearing such topics. Bhagavadgétä
is important on account of its being kåñëa-kathä, or speeches delivered by Lord
Kåñëa. The story of the Battle of Kurukñetra may be interesting for the mass of people,
but to a person like Vidura, who is highly advanced in devotional service, only kåñëakathä
and that which is dovetailed with kåñëa-kathä is interesting. Vidura wanted to
hear of everything from Maitreya, and so he inquired from him, but he desired that all
the topics be in relationship with Kåñëa. As fire is never satisfied in its consumption of
firewood, so a pure devotee of the Lord never hears enough about Kåñëa. Historical
events and other narrations concerning social and political incidents all become
transcendental as soon as they are in relationship with Kåñëa. That is the way to
transform mundane things into spiritual identity. The whole world can be transformed
into Vaikuëöha if all worldly activities are dovetailed with kåñëa-kathä.
There are two important kåñëa-kathäs current in the world—Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-
Bhägavatam. Bhagavad-gétä is kåñëa-kathä because it is spoken by Kåñëa, whereas Çrémad189
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Bhägavatam is kåñëa-kathä because it narrates about Kåñëa. Lord Caitanya advised all
His disciples to preach kåñëa-kathä all over the world without discrimination because
the transcendental value of kåñëa-kathä can purify one and all from material
contamination.
TEXT 11
k-STa*PNauYaataqQaRPadae_i>aDaaNaaTa(
Sa}aezu v" SaUiri>arq@yMaaNaaTa( )
Ya" k-<aRNaa@q& PauåzSYa YaaTaae
>avPa[da& GaehriTa& i^Naita )) 11 ))
kas tåpnuyät tértha-pado 'bhidhänät
satreñu vaù süribhir éòyamänät
yaù karëa-näòéà puruñasya yäto
bhava-pradäà geha-ratià chinatti
SYNONYMS
kaù—who is that man; tåpnuyät—that can be satisfied; tértha-padaù—whose lotus feet
are all the places of pilgrimage; abhidhänät—from the talks of; satreñu—in human
society; vaù—one who is; süribhiù—by great devotees; éòyamänät—one who is so
worshiped; yaù—who; karëa-näòém—in the holes of the ears; puruñasya—of a man;
yätaù—entering; bhava-pradäm—that which awards births and deaths; geha-ratim—
family affection; chinatti—is cut off.
TRANSLATION
Who in human society can be satisfied without hearing sufficient talk of the Lord, whose
lotus feet are the sum total of all places of pilgrimage and who is worshiped by great sages
and devotees? Such topics can cut off one's bondage to family affection simply by entering
the holes of one's ears.
PURPORT
190
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Kåñëa-kathä is so powerful that simply by entering into a person's ear it can at once give
deliverance from the bondage of family affection. Family affection is an illusory
manifestation of the external energy, and it is the only impetus for all mundane
activities. As long as there is mundane activity and the mind is absorbed in such
engagement, one has to undergo the repetition of birth and death in the current
material nescience. People are most influenced by the mode of ignorance, and some are
influenced by the passionate mode of material nature, and under the spell of these two
modes a living being is actuated by the material conception of life. The mundane
qualities do not allow a living entity to understand his real position. The qualities of
both ignorance and passion strongly bind one to the illusory bodily conception of the
self. The best among the fools who are thus deluded are those who engage in altruistic
activities under the spell of the material mode of passion. Bhagavad-gétä, which is direct
kåñëa-kathä, gives humanity the elementary lesson that the body is perishable and that
the consciousness which is spread throughout the body is imperishable. The conscious
being, the imperishable self, is eternally existent and cannot be killed under any
circumstances, even after the dissolution of the body. Anyone who misunderstands this
perishable body to be the self and who works for it in the name of sociology, politics,
philanthropy, altruism, nationalism or internationalism, under the false plea of the
bodily conception of life, is certainly a fool and does not know the implications of reality
and unreality. Some of them are above the modes of ignorance and passion and are
situated in the mode of goodness, but mundane goodness is always contaminated by
tinges of ignorance and passion. Mundane goodness can enlighten one that the body
and the self are different, and one in goodness is concerned with the self and not the
body. But due to being contaminated, those in mundane goodness cannot understand
the real nature of the self as a person. Their impersonal conception of the self as distinct
from the body keeps them in the mode of goodness within material nature, and unless
they are attracted by kåñëa-kathä, they will never be liberated from the bondage of
material existence. Kåñëa-kathä is the only remedy for all people of the world because it
can situate one in pure consciousness of the self and liberate one from material bondage.
To preach kåñëa-kathä all over the world, as recommended by Lord Caitanya, is the
greatest missionary activity, and all sensible men and women of the world may join in
this great movement started by Lord Caitanya.
TEXT 12
MauiNaivRv+au>aRGavd(Gau<aaNaa&
191
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Sa%aiPa Tae >aarTaMaah k*-Z<a" )
YaiSMaà*<aa& Ga]aMYaSau%aNauvadE‚
MaRiTaGa*RhqTaa Nau hre" k-QaaYaaMa( )) 12 ))
munir vivakñur bhagavad-guëänäà
sakhäpi te bhäratam äha kåñëaù
yasmin nåëäà grämya-sukhänuvädair
matir gåhétä nu hareù kathäyäm
SYNONYMS
muniù—the sage; vivakñuù—described; bhagavat—of the Personality of Godhead;
guëänäm—transcendental qualities; sakhä—friend; api—also; te—your; bhäratam—the
Mahäbhärata; äha—has described; kåñëaù—Kåñëa-dvaipäyana Vyäsa; yasmin—in
which; nåëäm—of the people; grämya—worldly; sukha-anuvädaiù—pleasure derived
from mundane topics; matiù—attention; gåhétä nu—just to draw towards; hareù—of the
Lord; kathäyäm—speeches of (Bhagavad-gétä).
TRANSLATION
Your friend the great sage Kåñëa-dvaipäyana Vyäsa has already described the
transcendental qualities of the Lord in his great work the Mahäbhärata. But the whole
idea is to draw the attention of the mass of people to kåñëa-kathä [Bhagavad-gétä] through
their strong affinity for hearing mundane topics.
PURPORT
The great sage Kåñëa-dvaipäyana Vyäsa is the author of all Vedic literature, of which his
works Vedänta-sütra, Çrémad-Bhägavatam and Mahäbhärata are very popular readings.
As stated in Bhägavatam (1.4.25), Çréla Vyäsadeva compiled the Mahäbhärata for the less
intelligent class of men, who take more interest in mundane topics than in the
philosophy of life. The Vedänta-sütra was compiled for persons already above the
mundane topics, who might already have tasted the bitterness of the so-called happiness
of mundane affairs. The first aphorism of Vedänta-sütra is athäto brahma jijïäsä, i.e.,
only when one has finished the business of mundane inquiries in the marketplace of
sense gratification can one make relevant inquiries regarding Brahman, the
192
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Transcendence. Those persons who are busy with the mundane inquiries which fill the
newspapers and other such literatures are classified as stré-çüdra-dvija-bandhus, or
women, the laborer class and unworthy sons of the higher classes (brähmaëa, kñatriya
and vaiçya). Such less intelligent men cannot understand the purpose of Vedänta-sütra,
although they may make a show of studying the sütras in a perverted way. The real
purpose of Vedänta-sütra is explained by the author himself in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
and anyone trying to understand Vedänta-sütra without reference to Çrémad-
Bhägavatam is certainly misguided. Such misguided persons, who are interested in the
mundane affairs of philanthropic and altruistic work under the misconception of the
body as the self, could better take advantage of the Mahäbhärata, which was specifically
compiled by Çréla Vyäsadeva for their benefit. The great author has compiled the
Mahäbhärata in such a way that the less intelligent class of men, who are more
interested in mundane topics, may read the Mahäbhärata with great relish and in the
course of such mundane happiness can also take advantage of Bhagavad-gétä, the
preliminary study of Çrémad-Bhägavatam or the Vedänta-sütra. Çréla Vyäsadeva had no
interest in writing a history of mundane activities other than to give less intelligent
persons a chance for transcendental realization through Bhagavad-gétä. Vidura's
reference to the Mahäbhärata indicates that he had heard of the Mahäbhärata from
Vyäsadeva, his real father, while he was away from home and was touring the places of
pilgrimage.
TEXT 13
Saa é[ÕDaaNaSYa ivvDaRMaaNaa
ivri¢-MaNYa}a k-raeiTa Pau&Sa" )
hre" PadaNauSMa*iTaiNav*RTaSYa
SaMaSTadu"%aPYaYaMaaéu Datae )) 13 ))
sä çraddadhänasya vivardhamänä
viraktim anyatra karoti puàsaù
hareù padänusmåti-nirvåtasya
samasta-duùkhäpyayam äçu dhatte
SYNONYMS
193
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sä—those topics of Kåñëa, or kåñëa-kathä; çraddadhänasya—of one who is anxious to
hear; vivardhamänä—gradually increasing; viraktim—indifference; anyatra—in other
things (than such topics); karoti—does; puàsaù—of one who is so engaged; hareù—of
the Lord; pada-anusmåti—constant remembrance of the lotus feet of the Lord;
nirvåtasya—one who has achieved such transcendental bliss; samasta-duùkha—all
miseries; apyayam—vanquished; äçu—without delay; dhatte—executes.
TRANSLATION
For one who is anxious to engage constantly in hearing such topics, kåñëa-kathä gradually
increases his indifference towards all other things. Such constant remembrance of the
lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa by the devotee who has achieved transcendental bliss vanquishes
all his miseries without delay.
PURPORT
We must certainly know that on the absolute plane kåñëa-kathä and Kåñëa are one and
the same. The Lord is the Absolute Truth, and therefore His name, form, quality, etc.,
which are all understood to be kåñëa-kathä, are nondifferent from Him. Bhagavad-gétä,
being spoken by the Lord, is as good as the Lord Himself. When a sincere devotee reads
Bhagavad-gétä, this is as good as seeing the Lord face to face in his personal presence, but
this is not so for the mundane wrangler. All the potencies of the Lord are there when
one reads Bhagavad-gétä, provided it is read in the way recommended in the Gétä by the
Lord Himself. One cannot foolishly manufacture an interpretation of Bhagavad-gétä and
still bring about transcendental benefit. Anyone who tries to squeeze some artificial
meaning or interpretation from Bhagavad-gétä for an ulterior motive is not çraddadhänapuàsaù
(one engaged anxiously in bona fide hearing of kåñëa-kathä). Such a person
cannot derive any benefit from reading Bhagavad-géta, however great a scholar he may
be in the estimation of a layman. The çraddadhäna, or faithful devotee, can actually
derive all the benefits of Bhagavad-gétä because by the omnipotency of the Lord he
achieves the transcendental bliss which vanquishes attachment and nullifies all
concomitant material miseries. Only the devotee, by his factual experience, can
understand the import of this verse spoken by Vidura. The pure devotee of the Lord
enjoys life by constantly remembering the lotus feet of the Lord by hearing kåñëa-kathä.
For such a devotee there is no such thing as material existence, and the much advertised
bliss of brahmänanda is like a fig for the devotee who is in the midst of the
194
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
transcendental ocean of bliss.
TEXT 14
TaaH^aeCYaXaaeCYaaNaivdae_NauXaaece
hre" k-QaaYaa& ivMau%aNagaeNa )
i+a<aaeiTa devae_iNaiMazSTau Yaeza‚
MaaYauv*RQaavadGaiTaSMa*TaqNaaMa( )) 14 ))
täï chocya-çocyän avido 'nuçoce
hareù kathäyäà vimukhän aghena
kñiëoti devo 'nimiñas tu yeñäm
äyur våthä-väda-gati-småténäm
SYNONYMS
tän—all those; çocya—pitiable; çocyän—of the pitiable; avidaù—ignorant; anuçoce—I
pity; hareù—of the Lord; kathäyäm—to the topics of; vimukhän—averse; aghena—
because of sinful activities; kñiëoti—decaying; devaù—the Lord; animiñaù—eternal time;
tu—but; yeñäm—of whom; äyuù—duration of life; våthä—uselessly; väda—philosophical
speculations; gati—ultimate goal; småténäm—of those following different rituals.
TRANSLATION
O sage, persons who because of their sinful activities are averse to the topics of
Transcendence and thus ignorant of the purpose of the Mahäbhärata [Bhagavad-gétä] are
pitied by the pitiable. I also pity them because I see how their duration of life is spoiled by
eternal time while they involve themselves in presentations of philosophical speculation,
theoretical ultimate goals of life, and different modes of ritual.
PURPORT
According to the modes of material nature, there are three kinds of relationships
between human beings and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Those who are in the
modes of ignorance and passion are averse to the existence of God, or else they formally
195
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
accept the existence of God in the capacity of an order supplier. Above them are those
who are in the mode of goodness. This second class of men believe the Supreme
Brahman to be impersonal. They accept the cult of bhakti, in which hearing of kåñëakathä
is the first item, as a means and not the end. Above them are those who are pure
devotees. They are situated in the transcendental stage above the mode of material
goodness. Such persons are decidedly convinced that the name, form, fame, qualities,
etc., of the Personality of Godhead are nondifferent from one another on the absolute
plane. For them, hearing of the topics of Kåñëa is equal to meeting with Him face to
face. According to this class of men, who are situated in pure devotional service to the
Lord, the highest goal of human life is puruñärtha, devotional service to the Lord, the
real mission of life. The impersonalists, because they engage in mental speculation and
have no faith in the Personality of Godhead, have no business hearing the topics of
Kåñëa. Such persons are pitiable for the first-class pure devotees of the Lord. The
pitiable impersonalists pity those who are influenced by the modes of ignorance and
passion, but the pure devotees of the Lord take pity on them both because both waste
their most valuable time in the human form of life in false pursuits, sense enjoyment and
mental speculative presentations of different theories and goals of life.
TEXT 15
TadSYa k-aEzarv XaMaRdaTau‚
hRre" k-QaaMaev k-QaaSau SaarMa( )
od(Da*TYa PauZPae>Ya wvaTaRbNDaae
iXavaYa Na" k-ITaRYa TaqQaRk-ITaeR" )) 15 ))
tad asya kauñärava çarma-dätur
hareù kathäm eva kathäsu säram
uddhåtya puñpebhya ivärta-bandho
çiväya naù kértaya tértha-kérteù
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; asya—His; kauñärava—O Maitreya; çarma-dätuù—of one who awards
good fortune; hareù—of the Lord; kathäm—topics; eva—only; kathäsu—of all topics;
säram—the essence; uddhåtya—by quoting; puñpebhyaù—from the flowers; iva—like
196
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
that; ärta-bandho—O friend of the distressed; çiväya—for welfare; naù—of us; kértaya—
kindly describe; tértha—pilgrimage; kérteù—of glorious.
TRANSLATION
O Maitreya, O friend of the distressed, the glories of the Supreme Lord can alone do good
for people all over the world. Therefore, just as bees collect honey from flowers, kindly
describe the essence of all topics—the topics of the Lord.
PURPORT
There are many topics for different persons in different modes of material nature, but
the essential topics are those in relationship with the Supreme Lord. Unfortunately,
materially affected conditioned souls are all more or less averse to topics of the Supreme
Lord because some of them do not believe in the existence of God and some of them
believe only in the impersonal feature of the Lord. In both cases there is nothing for
them to say of God. Both the nonbelievers and the impersonalists deny the essence of all
topics; therefore, they engage in topics of relativity in various ways, either in sense
gratification or in mental speculation. For the pure devotees like Vidura, the topics of
both the mundaners and the mental speculators are useless in all respects. Thus Vidura
requested Maitreya to talk of the essence only, the talks of Kåñëa, and nothing else.
TEXT 16
Sa ivìJaNMaiSQaiTaSa&YaMaaQaeR
k*-TaavTaar" Pa[Ga*hqTaXai¢-" )
ck-ar k-MaaR<YaiTaPaUåzai<a
YaaNaqìr" k-ITaRYa TaaiNa MaùMa( )) 16 ))
sa viçva-janma-sthiti-saàyamärthe
kåtävatäraù pragåhéta-çaktiù
cakära karmäëy atipüruñäëi
yänéçvaraù kértaya täni mahyam
SYNONYMS
197
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
saù—the Personality of Godhead; viçva—universe; janma—creation; sthiti—
maintenance; saàyama-arthe—with a view to perfect control; kåta—accepted;
avatäraù—incarnation; pragåhéta—accomplished with; çaktiù—potency; cakära—
performed; karmäëi—transcendental activities; ati-püruñäëi—superhuman; yäni—all
those; éçvaraù—the Lord; kértaya—please chant; täni—all those; mahyam—unto me.
TRANSLATION
Kindly chant all those superhuman transcendental activities of the supreme controller,
the Personality of Godhead, who accepted incarnations fully equipped with all potency for
the full manifestation and maintenance of the cosmic creation.
PURPORT
Vidura was undoubtedly very eager to hear about Lord Kåñëa in particular, but he was
overwhelmed because Lord Kåñëa had just passed away from the visible world. He
therefore wanted to hear about Him in His puruña incarnations, which He manifests
with full potencies for the creation and maintenance of the cosmic world. The activities
of the puruña incarnations are but an extension of the activities of the Lord. This hint
was given by Vidura to Maitreya because Maitreya could not decide which part of the
activities of Lord Kåñëa should he chanted.
TEXT 17
é[qéuk- ovac
Sa Wv& >aGavaNa( Pa*í" +aT}aa k-aEzarvae MauiNa" )
Pau&Saa& iNa"é[eYaSaaQaeRNa TaMaah bhuMaaNaYaNa( )) 17 ))
çré-çuka uväca
sa evaà bhagavän påñöaù
kñatträ kauñäravo muniù
puàsäà niùçreyasärthena
tam äha bahu-mänayan
SYNONYMS
198
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; saù—he; evam—thus; bhagavän—the
great sage; påñöaù—being requested; kñatträ—by Vidura; kauñäravaù—Maitreya;
muniù—the great sage; puàsäm—for all people; niùçreyasa—for the greatest welfare;
arthena—for that; tam—unto him; äha—narrated; bahu—greatly; mänayan—honoring.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: The great sage Maitreya Muni, after honoring Vidura very
greatly, began to speak, at Vidura's request, for the greatest welfare of all people.
PURPORT
The great sage Maitreya Muni is described here as bhagavän because he surpassed all
ordinary human beings in learning and experience. Thus his selection of the greatest
welfare service for the world is considered authoritative. The all-inclusive welfare
service for the entire human society is devotional service to the Lord, and, as requested
by Vidura, the sage described the same very appropriately.
TEXT 18
MaE}aeYa ovac
SaaDau Pa*í& TvYaa SaaDaae l/aek-aNa( SaaßNauGa*õTaa )
k-IiTa| ivTaNvTaa l/aeke- AaTMaNaae_Daae+aJaaTMaNa" )) 18 ))
maitreya uväca
sädhu påñöaà tvayä sädho
lokän sädhv anugåhëatä
kértià vitanvatä loke
ätmano 'dhokñajätmanaù
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Çré Maitreya said; sädhu—all good; påñöam—I am asked; tvayä—by
you; sädho—O good one; lokän—all the people; sädhu anugåhëatä—showing mercy in
goodness; kértim—glories; vitanvatä—broadcasting; loke—in the world; ätmanaù—of the
self; adhokñaja—the Transcendence; ätmanaù—mind.
199
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: O Vidura, all glory unto you. You have inquired from me of the
greatest of all goodness, and thus you have shown your mercy both to the world and to me
because your mind is always absorbed in thoughts of the Transcendence.
PURPORT
Maitreya Muni, who was experienced in the science of Transcendence, could
understand that Vidura's mind was fully absorbed in Transcendence. Adhokñaja means
that which transcends the limits of sense perception or sensuous experience. The Lord is
transcendental to our sense experience, but He reveals Himself to the sincere devotee.
Because Vidura was always absorbed in thought of the Lord, Maitreya could estimate
Vidura's transcendental value. He appreciated the valuable inquiries of Vidura and thus
thanked him with great honor.
TEXT 19
NaETaiÀ}a& TviYa +atabaRdraYa<avqYaRJae )
Ga*hqTaae_NaNYa>aaveNa YatvYaa hirrqìr" )) 19 ))
naitac citraà tvayi kñattar
bädaräyaëa-véryaje
gåhéto 'nanya-bhävena
yat tvayä harir éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
na—never; etat—such inquiries; citram—very wonderful; tvayi—in you; kñattaù—O
Vidura; bädaräyaëa—of Vyäsadeva; vérya-je—born from the semen; gåhétaù—accepted;
ananya-bhävena—without deviation from the thought; yat—because; tvayä—by you;
hariù—the Personality of Godhead; éçvaraù—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, it is not at all wonderful that you have so accepted the Lord without deviation
200
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of thought, for you were born from the semen of Vyäsadeva.
PURPORT
The value of great parentage and noble birth is evaluated here in connection with the
birth of Vidura. The culture of a human being begins when the father invests his semen
in the womb of the mother. According to his status of work, a living entity is placed in a
particular father's semen, and because Vidura was not an ordinary living entity, he was
given the chance to be born from the semen of Vyäsa. The birth of a human being is a
great science, and therefore reformation of the act of impregnation according to the
Vedic ritual called Garbhädhäna-saàskära is very important for generating good
population. The problem is not to check the growth of the population, but to generate
good population on the level of Vidura, Vyäsa and Maitreya. There is no need to check
the growth of population if the children are born as human beings with all precautions
regarding their birth. So-called birth control is not only vicious but also useless.
TEXT 20
Maa<@VYaXaaPaaÙGavaNa( Pa[JaaSa&YaMaNaae YaMa" )
>a]aTau" +ae}ae >auiJaZYaaYaa& JaaTa" SaTYavTaqSauTaaTa( )) 20 ))
mäëòavya-çäpäd bhagavän
prajä-saàyamano yamaù
bhrätuù kñetre bhujiñyäyäà
jätaù satyavaté-sutät
SYNONYMS
mäëòavya—the great åñi Mäëòavya Muni; çäpät—by his curse; bhagavän—the greatly
powerful; prajä—one who is born; saàyamanaù—controller of death; yamaù—known as
Yamaräja; bhrätuù—of the brother; kñetre—in the wife; bhujiñyäyäm—kept; jätaù—
born; satyavaté—Satyavaté (the mother of both Vicitravérya and Vyäsadeva); sutät—by
the son (Vyäsadeva).
TRANSLATION
201
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
I know that you are now Vidura due to the cursing of Mäëòavya Muni and that formerly
you were King Yamaräja, the great controller of living entities after their death. You were
begotten by the son of Satyavaté, Vyäsadeva, in the kept wife of his brother.
PURPORT
Mäëòavya Muni was a great sage (cf. SB 1.13.1), and Vidura was formerly the controller
Yamaräja, who takes charge of the living entities after death. Birth, maintenance and
death are three conditional states of the living entities who are within the material
world. As the appointed controller after death, Yamaräja once tried Mäëòavya Muni for
his childhood profligacy and ordered him to be pierced with a lance. Mäëòavya, being
angry at Yamaräja for awarding him undue punishment, cursed him to become a çüdra
(member of the less intelligent laborer class). Thus Yamaräja took birth in the womb of
the kept wife of Vicitravérya from the semen of Vicitravérya's brother, Vyäsadeva.
Vyäsadeva is the son of Satyavaté by the great King Çäntanu, the father of Bhéñmadeva.
This mysterious history of Vidura was known to Maitreya Muni because he happened to
be a contemporary friend of Vyäsadeva's. In spite of Vidura's birth from the womb of a
kept wife, because he had otherwise high parentage and great connection he inherited
the highest talent of becoming a great devotee of the Lord. To take birth in such a great
family is understood to be an advantage for attaining devotional life. Vidura was given
this chance due to his previous greatness.
TEXT 21
>avaNa( >aGavTaae iNaTYa& SaMMaTa" SaaNauGaSYa h )
YaSYa jaNaaePadeXaaYa MaaidXaÙGavaNa( v]JaNa( )) 21 ))
bhavän bhagavato nityaà
sammataù sänugasya ha
yasya jïänopadeçäya
mädiçad bhagavän vrajan
SYNONYMS
bhavän—your good self; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; nityam—eternal;
sammataù—recognized; sa-anugasya—one of the associates; ha—have been; yasya—of
202
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
whom; jïäna—knowledge; upadeçäya—for instructing; mä—unto me; ädiçat—so
ordered; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; vrajan—while returning to His abode.
TRANSLATION
Your good self is one of the eternal associates of the Supreme Personality of Godhead for
whose sake the Lord, while going back to His abode, left instructions with me.
PURPORT
Yamaräja, the great controller of life after death, decides the living entities' destinies in
their next lives. He is surely among the most confidential representatives of the Lord.
Such confidential posts are offered to great devotees of the Lord who are as good as His
eternal associates in the spiritual sky. And because Vidura happened to be among them,
the Lord, while returning to Vaikuëöha, left instructions for Vidura with Maitreya
Muni. Generally the eternal associates of the Lord in the spiritual sky do not come to
the material world. Sometimes they come, however, by the order of the Lord—not to
hold any administrative post, but to associate with the Lord in person or to propagate
the message of God in human society. Such empowered representatives are called
çaktyäveça-avatäras, or incarnations invested with transcendental power of attorney.
TEXT 22
AQa Tae >aGavçIl/a YaaeGaMaaYaaeåb*&ihTaa" )
ivìiSQaTYauÙvaNTaaQaaR v<aRYaaMYaNauPaUvRXa" )) 22 ))
atha te bhagaval-lélä
yoga-mäyorubåàhitäù
viçva-sthity-udbhaväntärthä
varëayämy anupürvaçaù
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; te—unto you; bhagavat—pertaining to the Personality of Godhead;
léläù—pastimes; yoga-mäyä—energy of the Lord; uru—greatly; båàhitäù—extended by;
viçva—of the cosmic world; sthiti—maintenance; udbhava—creation; anta—dissolution;
203
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
arthäù—purpose; varëayämi—I shall describe; anupürvaçaù—systematically.
TRANSLATION
I shall therefore describe to you the pastimes by which the Personality of Godhead
extends His transcendental potency for the creation, maintenance and dissolution of the
cosmic world as they occur one after another.
PURPORT
The omnipotent Lord, by His different energies, can perform anything and everything
He likes. The creation of the cosmic world is done by His yogamäyä energy.
TEXT 23
>aGavaNaek- AaSaedMaGa] AaTMaaTMaNaa& iv>au" )
AaTMaeC^aNauGaTaavaTMaa NaaNaaMaTYauPal/+a<a" )) 23 ))
bhagavän eka äsedam
agra ätmätmanäà vibhuù
ätmecchänugatäv ätmä
nänä-maty-upalakñaëaù
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; ekaù—one without a second; äsa—was there;
idam—this creation; agre—prior to the creation; ätmä—in His own form; ätmanäm—of
the living entities; vibhuù—master; ätmä—Self; icchä—desire; anugatau—being merged
in; ätmä—Self; nänä-mati—different vision; upalakñaëaù—symptoms.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, the master of all living entities, existed prior to the creation
as one without a second. It is by His will only that creation is made possible and again
everything merges in Him. This Supreme Self is symptomized by different names.
204
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The great sage here begins to explain the purpose of the four original verses of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Although they have no access to the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the
followers of the Mäyäväda (impersonalist) school sometimes screw out an imaginary
explanation of the original four verses, but we must accept the actual explanation given
herein by Maitreya Muni because he, along with Uddhava, personally heard it directly
from the Lord. The first line of the original four verses runs, aham eväsam evägre. The
word aham is misinterpreted by the Mäyäväda school into meanings which no one but
the interpreter can understand. Here aham is explained as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, not the individual living entities. Before the creation, there was only the
Personality of Godhead; there were no puruña incarnations and certainly no living
entities, nor was there the material energy, by which the manifested creation is effected.
The puruña incarnations and all the different energies of the Supreme Lord were merged
in Him only.
The Personality of Godhead is described herein as the master of all other living entities.
He is like the sun disc, and the living entities are like the molecules of the sun's rays.
This existence of the Lord before the creation is confirmed by the çrutis: väsudevo vä
idaà agra äsét na brahmä na ca çaìkaraù, eko vai näräyaëa äsén na brahmä neçänäù.
Because everything that be is an emanation from the Personality of Godhead, He always
exists alone without a second. He can so exist because He is all-perfect and omnipotent.
Everything other than Him, including His plenary expansions, the viñëu-tattvas, is His
part and parcel. Before the creation there were no Käraëärëavaçäyé or Garbhodakaçäyé
or Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëus, or was there Brahmä nor Çaìkara. The Viñëu plenary
expansion and the living entities beginning from Brahmä are separated parts and
parcels. Although the spiritual existence was there with the Lord, the material existence
was dormant in Him. By His will only is the material manifestation done and undone.
The diversity of the Vaikuëöhaloka is one with the Lord, just as the diversity of soldiers
is one with and the same as the king. As explained in Bhagavad-gétä (9.7), the material
creation takes place at intervals by the will of the Lord, and in the periods between
dissolution and creation, the living entities and the material energy remain dormant in
Him.
TEXT 24
Sa va Wz Tada d]ía NaaPaXYad( d*XYaMaek-ra$( )
205
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
MaeNae_SaNTaiMavaTMaaNa& SauáXai¢-rSauád*k(- )) 24 ))
sa vä eña tadä drañöä
näpaçyad dåçyam ekaräö
mene 'santam ivätmänaà
supta-çaktir asupta-dåk
SYNONYMS
saù—the Personality of Godhead; vä—either; eñaù—all these; tadä—at that time;
drañöä—the seer; na—did not; apaçyat—see; dåçyam—the cosmic creation; eka-räö—
undisputed proprietor; mene—thought like this; asantam—nonexistent; iva—like that;
ätmänam—plenary manifestations; supta—unmanifested; çaktiù—material energy;
asupta—manifested; dåk—internal potency.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, the undisputed proprietor of everything, was the only seer. The cosmic
manifestation was not present at that time, and thus He felt imperfect without His
plenary and separated parts and parcels. The material energy was dormant, whereas the
internal potency was manifested.
PURPORT
The Lord is the supreme seer because only by His glance did the material energy become
active for cosmic manifestation. At that time the seer was there, but the external
energy, over which the glance of the Lord is cast, was not present. He felt somewhat
insufficient, like a husband feeling lonely in the absence of his wife. This is a poetic
simile. The Lord wanted to create the cosmic manifestation to give another chance to
the conditioned souls who were dormant in forgetfulness. The cosmic manifestation
gives the conditioned souls a chance to go back home, back to Godhead, and that is its
main purpose. The Lord is so kind that in the absence of such a manifestation He feels
something wanting, and thus the creation takes place. Although the creation of the
internal potency was manifested, the other potency appeared to be sleeping, and the
Lord wanted to awaken her to activity, just as a husband wants to awaken his wife from
the sleeping state for enjoyment. It is the compassion of the Lord for the sleeping energy
206
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
that He wants to see her awaken for enjoyment like the other wives who are awake. The
whole process is to enliven the sleeping conditioned souls to the real life of spiritual
consciousness so that they may thus become as perfect as the ever-liberated souls in the
Vaikuëöhalokas. Since the Lord is sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], He likes every part
and parcel of His different potencies to take part in the blissful rasa because
participation with the Lord in His eternal räsa-lélä is the highest living condition,
perfect in spiritual bliss and eternal knowledge.
TEXT 25
Saa va WTaSYa Sa&d]íu" Xai¢-" SadSadaiTMak-a )
MaaYaa NaaMa Maha>aaGa YaYaed& iNaMaRMae iv>au" )) 25 ))
sä vä etasya saàdrañöuù
çaktiù sad-asad-ätmikä
mäyä näma mahä-bhäga
yayedaà nirmame vibhuù
SYNONYMS
sä—that external energy; vä—is either; etasya—of the Lord; saàdrañöuù—of the perfect
seer; çaktiù—energy; sat-asat-ätmikä—as both the cause and the effect; mäyä näma—
called by the name mäyä; mahä-bhäga—O fortunate one; yayä—by which; idam—this
material world; nirmame—constructed; vibhuù—the Almighty.
TRANSLATION
The Lord is the seer, and the external energy, which is seen, works as both cause and
effect in the cosmic manifestation. O greatly fortunate Vidura, this external energy is
known as mäyä or illusion, and through her agency only is the entire material
manifestation made possible.
PURPORT
The material nature, known as mäyä, is both the material and efficient cause of the
cosmos, but in the background the Lord is the consciousness for all activities. As in the
207
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
individual body the consciousness is the source of all energies of the body, so the
supreme consciousness of the Lord is the source of all energies in material nature. This is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10) as follows:
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"Throughout all the energies of material nature there is the hand of the Supreme Lord
as the final superintendent. Due to this supreme cause only, the activities of material
nature appear planned and systematic, and all thing regularly evolve."
TEXT 26
k-al/v*tYaa Tau MaaYaaYaa& Gau<aMaYYaaMaDaae+aJa" )
Pauåze<aaTMa>aUTaeNa vqYaRMaaData vqYaRvaNa( )) 26 ))
käla-våttyä tu mäyäyäà
guëa-mayyäm adhokñajaù
puruñeëätma-bhütena
véryam ädhatta véryavän
SYNONYMS
käla—the eternal time; våttyä—by the influence of; tu—but; mäyäyäm—in the external
energy; guëa-mayyäm—in the qualitative modes of nature; adhokñajaù—the
Transcendence; puruñeëa—by the puruña incarnation; ätma-bhütena—who is the
plenary expansion of the Lord; véryam—the seeds of the living entities; ädhatta—
impregnated; véryavän—the Supreme Living Being.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Living Being in His feature as the transcendental puruña incarnation, who
is the Lord's plenary expansion, impregnates the material nature of three modes, and thus
by the influence of eternal time the living entities appear.
208
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The offspring of any living being is born after the father impregnates the mother with
semen, and the living entity floating in the semen of the father takes the shape of the
mother's form. Similarly, mother material nature cannot produce any living entity from
her material elements unless and until she is impregnated with living entities by the
Lord Himself. That is the mystery of the generation of the living entities. This
impregnating process is performed by the first puruña incarnation, Käraëärëavaçäyé
Viñëu. Simply by His glance over material nature, the whole matter is accomplished.
We should not understand the process of impregnation by the Personality of Godhead
in terms of our conception of sex. The omnipotent Lord can impregnate just by His eyes,
and therefore He is called all-potent. Each and every part of His transcendental body
can perform each and every function of the other parts. This is confirmed in the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.32): aìgäni yasya sakalendriya-våttimanti. In Bhagavad-gétä (14.3) also,
the same principle is confirmed: mama yonir mahad-brahma tasmin garbhaà dadhämy
aham. When the cosmic creation is manifested, the living entities are directly supplied
from the Lord; they are never products of material nature. Thus, no scientific
advancement of material science can ever produce a living being. That is the whole
mystery of the material creation. The living entities are foreign to matter, and thus they
cannot be happy unless they are situated in the same spiritual life as the Lord. The
mistaken living being, out of forgetfulness of this original condition of life,
unnecessarily wastes time trying to become happy in the material world. The whole
Vedic process is to remind one of this essential feature of life. The Lord offers the
conditioned soul a material body for his so-called enjoyment, but if one does not come to
his senses and enter into spiritual consciousness, the Lord again puts him in the
unmanifested condition as it existed in the beginning of the creation. The Lord is
described here as véryavän, or the greatest potent being, because He impregnates
material nature with innumerable living entities who are conditioned from time
immemorial.
TEXT 27
TaTaae_>avNa( MahtatvMaVYa¢-aTk-al/caeidTaaTa( )
ivjaNaaTMaaTMadehSQa& ivì& VYaÅ&STaMaaeNaud" )) 27 ))
tato 'bhavan mahat-tattvam
209
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
avyaktät käla-codität
vijïänätmätma-deha-sthaà
viçvaà vyaïjaàs tamo-nudaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; abhavat—came into existence; mahat—supreme; tattvam—sum total;
avyaktät—from the unmanifested; käla-codität—by the interaction of time; vijïänaätmä—
unalloyed goodness; ätma-deha-stham—situated on the bodily self; viçvam—
complete universes; vyaïjan—manifesting; tamaù-nudaù—the supreme light.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, influenced by the interactions of eternal time, the supreme sum total of
matter called the mahat-tattva became manifested, and in this mahat-tattva the unalloyed
goodness, the Supreme Lord, sowed the seeds of universal manifestation out of His own
body.
PURPORT
In due course of time, the impregnated material energy was manifested first as the total
material ingredients. Everything takes its own time to fructify, and therefore the word
käla-codität, "influenced by time," is used herein. The mahat-tattva is the total
consciousness because a portion of it is represented in everyone as the intellect. The
mahat-tattva is directly connected with the supreme consciousness of the Supreme
Being, but still it appears as matter. The mahat-tattva, or shadow of pure consciousness,
is the germinating place of all creation. It is pure goodness with the slight addition of the
material mode of passion, and therefore activity is generated from this point.
TEXT 28
Saae_PYa&XaGau<ak-al/aTMaa >aGavd(d*iíGaaecr" )
AaTMaaNa& VYak-raedaTMaa ivìSYaaSYa iSaSa*+aYaa )) 28 ))
so 'py aàça-guëa-kälätmä
bhagavad-dåñöi-gocaraù
210
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ätmänaà vyakarod ätmä
viçvasyäsya sisåkñayä
SYNONYMS
saù—mahat-tattva; api—also; aàça—puruña plenary expansion; guëa—chiefly the
quality of ignorance; käla—the duration of time; ätmä—full consciousness; bhagavat—
the Personality of Godhead; dåñöi-gocaraù—range of sight; ätmänam—many different
forms; vyakarot—differentiated; ätmä—reservoir; viçvasya—the would-be entities;
asya—of this; sisåkñayä—generates the false ego.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the mahat-tattva differentiated itself into many different forms as the
reservoir of the would-be entities. The mahat-tattva is chiefly in the mode of ignorance,
and it generates the false ego. It is a plenary expansion of the Personality of Godhead,
with full consciousness of creative principles and time for fructification.
PURPORT
The mahat-tattva is the via medium between pure spirit and material existence. It is the
junction of matter and spirit wherefrom the false ego of the living entity is generated.
All living entities are differentiated parts and parcels of the Personality of Godhead.
Under the pressure of false ego, the conditioned souls, although parts and parcels of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, claim to be the enjoyers of material nature. This false
ego is the binding force of material existence. The Lord again and again gives a chance
to the bewildered conditioned souls to get free from this false ego, and that is why the
material creation takes place at intervals. He gives the conditioned souls all facilities for
rectifying the activities of the false ego, but He does not interfere with their small
independence as parts and parcels of the Lord.
TEXT 29
MahtatvaiÜku-vaR<aadh&Tatv& VYaJaaYaTa )
k-aYaRk-ar<ak-}aaRTMaa >aUTaeiNd]YaMaNaaeMaYa" )
vEk-airk-STaEJaSaê TaaMaSaêeTYah& i}aDaa )) 29 ))
211
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mahat-tattväd vikurväëäd
ahaà-tattvaà vyajäyata
kärya-käraëa-karträtmä
bhütendriya-mano-mayaù
vaikärikas taijasaç ca
tämasaç cety ahaà tridhä
SYNONYMS
mahat—the great; tattvät—from the causal truth; vikurväëät—being transformed;
aham—false ego; tattvam—material truth; vyajäyata—became manifested; kärya—
effects; käraëa—cause; kartå—doer; ätmä—soul or source; bhüta—material ingredients;
indriya—senses; manaù-mayaù—hovering on the mental plane; vaikärikaù—the mode
of goodness; taijasaù—the mode of passion; ca—and; tämasaù—the mode of ignorance;
ca—and; iti—thus; aham—false ego; tridhä—three kinds.
TRANSLATION
Mahat-tattva, or the great causal truth, transforms into false ego, which is manifested in
three phases—cause, effect and the doer. All such activities are on the mental plane and
are based on the material elements, gross senses and mental speculation. The false ego is
represented in three different modes—goodness, passion and ignorance.
PURPORT
A pure living entity in his original spiritual existence is fully conscious of his
constitutional position as an eternal servitor of the Lord. All souls who are situated in
such pure consciousness are liberated, and therefore they eternally live in bliss and
knowledge in the various Vaikuëöha planets in the spiritual sky. When the material
creation is manifested, it is not meant for them. The eternally liberated souls are called
nitya-muktas, and they have nothing to do with the material creation. The material
creation is meant for rebellious souls who are not prepared to accept subordination
under the Supreme Lord. This spirit of false lordship is called false ego. It is manifested
in three modes of material nature, and it exists in mental speculation only. Those who
are in the mode of goodness think that each and every person is God, and thus they
laugh at the pure devotees, who try to engage in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord. Those who are puffed up by the mode of passion try to lord it over material nature
212
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
in various ways. Some of them engage in altruistic activities as if they were agents
appointed to do good to others by their mental speculative plans. Such men accept the
standard ways of mundane altruism, but their plans are made on the basis of false ego.
This false ego extends to the limit of becoming one with the Lord. The last class of
egoistic conditioned souls—those in the mode of ignorance—are misguided by
identification of the gross body with the self. Thus, all their activities are centered
around the body only. All these persons are given the chance to play with false egoistic
ideas, but at the same time the Lord is kind enough to give them a chance to take help
from scriptures like Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam so that they may understand
the science of Kåñëa and thus make their lives successful. The entire material creation,
therefore, is meant for the falsely egoistic living entities hovering on the mental plane
under different illusions in the modes of material nature.
TEXT 30
Ah&TatvaiÜku-vaR<aaNMaNaae vEk-airk-ad>aUTa( )
vEk-airk-aê Yae deva AQaaRi>aVYaÅNa& YaTa" )) 30 ))
ahaà-tattväd vikurväëän
mano vaikärikäd abhüt
vaikärikäç ca ye devä
arthäbhivyaïjanaà yataù
SYNONYMS
aham-tattvät—from the principle of false ego; vikurväëät—by transformation; manaù—
the mind; vaikärikät—by interaction with the mode of goodness; abhüt—generated;
vaikärikäù—by interaction with goodness; ca—also; ye—all these; deväù—demigods;
artha—the phenomenon; abhivyaïjanam—physical knowledge; yataù—the source.
TRANSLATION
The false ego is transformed into mind by interaction with the mode of goodness. All the
demigods who control the phenomenal world are also products of the same principle,
namely the interaction of false ego and the mode of goodness.
213
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
False ego interacting with the different modes of material nature is the source of all
materials in the phenomenal world.
TEXT 31
TaEJaSaaNaqiNd]Yaa<Yaev jaNak-MaRMaYaaiNa c )) 31 ))
taijasänéndriyäëy eva
jïäna-karma-mayäni ca
SYNONYMS
taijasäni—the mode of passion; indriyäëi—the senses; eva—certainly; jïäna—
knowledge, philosophical speculations; karma—fruitive activities; mayäni—
predominating; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The senses are certainly products of the mode of passion in false ego, and therefore
philosophical speculative knowledge and fruitive activities are predominantly products of
the mode of passion.
PURPORT
The chief function of the false ego is godlessness. When a person forgets his
constitutional position as an eternally subordinate part and parcel of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and wants to be happy independently, he functions mainly in
two ways. He first attempts to act fruitively for personal gain or sense gratification, and
after attempting such fruitive activities for a considerable time, when he is frustrated he
becomes a philosophical speculator and thinks himself to be on the same level as God.
This false idea of becoming one with the Lord is the last snare of the illusory energy,
which traps a living entity into the bondage of forgetfulness under the spell of false ego.
The best means of liberation from the clutches of false ego is to give up the habit of
philosophical speculation regarding the Absolute Truth. One should know definitely
that the Absolute Truth is never realized by the philosophical speculations of the
214
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
imperfect egoistic person. The Absolute Truth, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
is realized by hearing about Him in all submission and love from a bona fide authority
who is a representative of the twelve great authorities mentioned in the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam. By such an attempt only can one conquer the illusory energy of the Lord,
although for others she is unsurpassable, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14).
TEXT 32
TaaMaSaae >aUTaSaU+MaaidYaRTa" %& il/(r)MaaTMaNa" )) 32 ))
tämaso bhüta-sükñmädir
yataù khaà liìgam ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
tämasaù—from the mode of passion; bhüta-sükñma-ädiù—subtle sense objects; yataù—
from which; kham—the sky; liìgam—symbolic representation; ätmanaù—of the
Supreme Soul.
TRANSLATION
The sky is a product of sound, and sound is the transformation of egoistic passion. In
other words, the sky is the symbolic representation of the Supreme Soul.
PURPORT
In the Vedic hymns it is said, etasmäd ätmanaù äkäçaù sambhütaù. The sky is the
symbolic representation of the Supreme Soul. Those who are egoistic in passion and
ignorance cannot conceive of the Personality of Godhead. For them the sky is the
symbolic representation of the Supreme Soul.
TEXT 33
k-al/MaaYaa&XaYaaeGaeNa >aGavÜqi+aTa& Na>a" )
Na>aSaae_NauSa*Ta& SPaXa| ivku-vRiàMaRMae_iNal/Ma( )) 33 ))
215
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
käla-mäyäàça-yogena
bhagavad-vékñitaà nabhaù
nabhaso 'nusåtaà sparçaà
vikurvan nirmame 'nilam
SYNONYMS
käla—time; mäyä—external energy; aàça-yogena—partly mixed; bhagavat—the
Personality of Godhead; vékñitam—glanced over; nabhaù—the sky; nabhasaù—from the
sky; anusåtam—being so contacted; sparçam—touch; vikurvat—being transformed;
nirmame—was created; anilam—the air.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the Personality of Godhead glanced over the sky, partly mixed with eternal
time and external energy, and thus developed the touch sensation, from which the air in
the sky was produced.
PURPORT
All material creations take place from subtle to gross. The entire universe has developed
in that manner. From the sky developed the touch sensation, which is a mixture of
eternal time, the external energy and the glance of the Personality of Godhead. The
touch sensation developed into the air in the sky. Similarly, all other gross matter also
developed from subtle to gross: sound developed into sky, touch developed into air, form
developed into fire, taste developed into water, and smell developed into earth.
TEXT 34
AiNal/ae_iPa ivku-vaR<aae Na>aSaaeåbl/aiNvTa" )
SaSaJaR æPaTaNMaa}a& JYaaeiTal/aeRk-SYa l/aecNaMa( )) 34 ))
anilo 'pi vikurväëo
nabhasoru-balänvitaù
sasarja rüpa-tanmätraà
jyotir lokasya locanam
216
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
anilaù—air; api—also; vikurväëaù—being transformed; nabhasä—sky; uru-balaanvitaù—
extremely powerful; sasarja—created; rüpa—form; tat-mätram—sense
perception; jyotiù—electricity; lokasya—of the world; locanam—light to see.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the extremely powerful air, interacting with the sky, generated the form of
sense perception, and the perception of form transformed into electricity, the light to see
the world.
TEXT 35
AiNale/NaaiNvTa& JYaaeiTaivRku-vRTParvqi+aTaMa( )
AaDataaM>aae rSaMaYa& k-al/MaaYaa&XaYaaeGaTa" )) 35 ))
anilenänvitaà jyotir
vikurvat paravékñitam
ädhattämbho rasa-mayaà
käla-mäyäàça-yogataù
SYNONYMS
anilena—by the air; anvitam—interacted; jyotiù—electricity; vikurvat—being
transformed; paravékñitam—being glanced over by the Supreme; ädhatta—created;
ambhaù rasa-mayam—water with taste; käla—of eternal time; mäyä-aàça—and
external energy; yogataù—by a mixture.
TRANSLATION
When electricity was surcharged in the air and was glanced over by the Supreme, at that
time, by a mixture of eternal time and external energy, there occurred the creation of
water and taste.
TEXT 36
217
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
JYaaeiTazaM>aae_NauSa&Sa*í& ivku-vRd(b]øvqi+aTaMa( )
Mahq& GaNDaGau<aaMaaDaaTk-al/MaaYaa&XaYaaeGaTa" )) 36 ))
jyotiñämbho 'nusaàsåñöaà
vikurvad brahma-vékñitam
mahéà gandha-guëäm ädhät
käla-mäyäàça-yogataù
SYNONYMS
jyotiñä—electricity; ambhaù—water; anusaàsåñöam—thus created; vikurvat—due to
transformation; brahma—the Supreme; vékñitam—so glanced over; mahém—the earth;
gandha—smell; guëäm—qualification; ädhät—was created; käla—eternal time; mäyä—
external energy; aàça—partially; yogataù—by intermixture.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the water produced from electricity was glanced over by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and mixed with eternal time and external energy. Thus it was
transformed into the earth, which is qualified primarily by smell.
PURPORT
From the descriptions of the physical elements in the above verses it is clear that in all
stages the glance of the Supreme is needed with the other additions and alterations. In
every transformation, the last finishing touch is the glance of the Lord, who acts as a
painter does when he mixes different colors to transform them into a particular color.
When one element mixes with another, the number of its qualities increases. For
example, the sky is the cause of air. The sky has only one quality, namely sound, but by
the interaction of the sky with the glance of the Lord, mixed with eternal time and
external nature, the air is produced, which has two qualities—sound and touch.
Similarly after the air is created, interaction of sky and air, touched by time and the
external energy of the Lord, produces electricity. And after the interaction of electricity
with air and sky, mixed with time, external energy and the Lord's glance over them, the
water is produced. In the final stage of sky there is one quality, namely sound; in the air
218
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
two qualities, sound and touch; in the electricity three qualities, namely sound, touch
and form; in the water four qualities, sound, touch, form and taste; and in the last stage
of physical development the result is earth, which has all five qualities—sound, touch,
form, taste and smell. Although they are different mixtures of different materials, such
mixtures do not take place automatically, just as a mixture of colors does not take place
automatically without the touch of the living painter. The automatic system is factually
activated by the glancing touch of the Lord. Living consciousness is the final word in all
physical changes. This fact is mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10) as follows:
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
The conclusion is that the physical elements may work very wonderfully to the laymen's
eyes, but their workings actually take place under the supervision of the Lord. Those
who can mark only the changes of the physical elements and cannot perceive the
hidden hands of the Lord behind them are certainly less intelligent persons, although
they may be advertised as great material scientists.
TEXT 37
>aUTaaNaa& Na>a AadqNaa& YaÛÙVYaavravrMa( )
Taeza& ParaNauSa&SaGaaRÛQaaSa&:Ya& Gau<aaNa( ivdu" )) 37 ))
bhütänäà nabha-ädénäà
yad yad bhavyävarävaram
teñäà paränusaàsargäd
yathä saìkhyaà guëän viduù
SYNONYMS
bhütänäm—of all the physical elements; nabhaù—the sky; ädénäm—beginning from;
yat—as; yat—and as; bhavya—O gentle one; avara—inferior; varam—superior; teñäm—
all of them; para—the Supreme; anusaàsargät—last touch; yathä—as many;
saìkhyam—number; guëän—qualities; viduù—you may understand.
219
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
O gentle one, of all the physical elements, beginning from the sky down to the earth, all
the inferior and superior qualities are due only to the final touch of the glance of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 38
WTae deva" k-l/a ivZ<aae" k-al/MaaYaa&Xail/i(r)Na" )
NaaNaaTvaTSvi§-YaaNaqXaa" Pa[aecu" Pa[aÅl/Yaae iv>auMa( )) 38 ))
ete deväù kalä viñëoù
käla-mäyäàça-liìginaù
nänätvät sva-kriyänéçäù
procuù präïjalayo vibhum
SYNONYMS
ete—of all these physical elements; deväù—the controlling demigods; kaläù—parts and
parcels; viñëoù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; käla—time; mäyä—external
energy; aàça—part and parcel; liìginaù—so embodied; nänätvät—because of various;
sva-kriyä—personal duties; anéçäù—not being able to perform; procuù—uttered;
präïjalayaù—fascinating; vibhum—unto the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The controlling deities of all the above-mentioned physical elements are empowered
expansions of Lord Viñëu. They are embodied by eternal time under the external energy,
and they are His parts and parcels. Because they were entrusted with different functions
of universal duties and were unable to perform them, they offered fascinating prayers to
the Lord as follows.
PURPORT
The conception of various controlling demigods who inhabit the higher planetary
systems for the management of universal affairs is not imaginary, as proposed by persons
220
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
with a poor fund of knowledge. The demigods are expanded parts and parcels of the
Supreme Lord Viñëu, and they are embodied by time, external energy and partial
consciousness of the Supreme. Human beings, animals, birds, etc., are also parts and
parcels of the Lord and have different material bodies, but they are not the controlling
deities of material affairs. They are, rather, controlled by such demigods. Such control is
not superfluous; it is as necessary as the controlling departments in the affairs of a
modern state. The demigods should not be despised by the controlled living beings. They
are all great devotees of the Lord entrusted to execute certain functions of universal
affairs. One may be angry with Yamaräja for his thankless task of punishing sinful souls,
but Yamaräja is one of the authorized devotees of the Lord, and so are all the other
demigods. A devotee of the Lord is never controlled by such deputed demigods, who
function as assistants of the Lord, but he shows them all respects on account of the
responsible positions to which they have been appointed by the Lord. At the same time,
a devotee of the Lord does not foolishly mistake them to be the Supreme Lord. Only
foolish persons accept the demigods as being on the same level as Viñëu; actually they
are all appointed as servants of Viñëu.
Anyone who places the Lord and the demigods on the same level is called a päñaëòé, or
atheist. The demigods are worshiped by persons who are more or less adherents of the
processes of jïäna, yoga and karma, i.e., the impersonalists, meditators and fruitive
workers. The devotees, however, worship only the Supreme Lord Viñëu. This worship is
not for any material benefit, as desired by all the materialists, even up to the
salvationists, mystics and fruitive workers. Devotees worship the Supreme Lord to attain
unalloyed devotion to the Lord. The Lord, however, is not worshiped by others, who
have no program for attaining love of God, which is the essential aim of human life.
Persons averse to a loving relationship with God are more or less condemned by their
own actions.
The Lord is equal to every living entity, just like the flowing Ganges. The Ganges water
is meant for the purification of everyone, yet the trees on the banks of the Ganges have
different values. A mango tree on the bank of the Ganges drinks the water, and the
nimba tree also drinks the same water. But the fruits of both trees are different. One is
celestially sweet, and the other is hellishly bitter. The condemned bitterness of the
nimba is due to its own past work, just as the sweetness of the mango is also due to its
own karma. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (16.19):
tän ahaà dviñataù krürän
saàsäreñu narädhamän
221
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kñipämy ajasram açubhän
äsuréñv eva yoniñu
"The envious, the mischievous, the lowest of mankind, these do I ever put back into the
ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of life." Demigods like
Yamaräja and other controllers are there for the unwanted conditioned souls who
always engage in threatening the tranquillity of the kingdom of God. Since all the
demigods are confidential devotee-servitors of the Lord, they are never to be
condemned.
TEXT 39
deva Ocu"
NaMaaMa Tae dev PadarivNd&
Pa[PaàTaaPaaePaXaMaaTaPa}aMa( )
YaNMaUl/ke-Taa YaTaYaae_ÅSaaeå‚
Sa&Saardu"%& bihåiT+aPaiNTa )) 39 ))
devä ücuù
namäma te deva padäravindaà
prapanna-täpopaçamätapatram
yan-müla-ketä yatayo 'ïjasorusaàsära-
duùkhaà bahir utkñipanti
SYNONYMS
deväù ücuù—the demigods said; namäma—we offer our respectful obeisances; te—Your;
deva—O Lord; pada-aravindam—lotus feet; prapanna—surrendered; täpa—distress;
upaçama—suppresses; ätapatram—umbrella; yat-müla-ketäù—shelter of the lotus feet;
yatayaù—great sages; aïjasä—totally; uru—great; saàsära-duùkham—miseries of
material existence; bahiù—out; utkñipanti—forcibly throw.
TRANSLATION
The demigods said: O Lord, Your lotus feet are like an umbrella for the surrendered
222
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
souls, protecting them from all the miseries of material existence. All the sages under that
shelter throw off all material miseries. We therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto
Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
There are many sages and saints who engage in trying to conquer rebirth and all other
material miseries. But of all of them, those who take shelter under the lotus feet of the
Lord can completely throw off all such miseries without difficulty. Others, who are
engaged in transcendental activities in different ways, cannot do so. For them it is very
difficult. They may artificially think of becoming liberated without accepting the shelter
of the lotus feet of the Lord, but that is not possible. One is sure to fall again to material
existence from such false liberation, even though one may have undergone severe
penances and austerities. This is the opinion of the demigods, who are not only well
versed in Vedic knowledge but are also seers of the past, present and future. The
opinions of the demigods are valuable because the demigods are authorized to hold
positions in the affairs of universal management. They are appointed by the Lord as His
confidential servants.
TEXT 40
DaaTaYaRdiSMaNa( >av wRXa Jaqva‚
STaaPa}aYae<aai>ahTaa Na XaMaR )
AaTMaNl/>aNTae >aGav&STavax(iga]‚
C^aYaa& SaivÛaMaTa Aaé[YaeMa )) 40 ))
dhätar yad asmin bhava éça jéväs
täpa-trayeëäbhihatä na çarma
ätman labhante bhagavaàs taväìghricchäyäà
sa-vidyäm ata äçrayema
SYNONYMS
dhätaù—O father; yat—because; asmin—in this; bhave—material world; éça—O Lord;
jéväù—the living entities; täpa—miseries; trayeëa—by the three; abhihatäù—always
embarrassed; na—never; çarma—in happiness; ätman—self; labhante—do gain;
223
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bhagavan—O Personality of Godhead; tava—Your; aìghri-chäyäm—shade of Your feet;
sa-vidyäm—full of knowledge; ataù—obtain; äçrayema—shelter.
TRANSLATION
O Father, O Lord, O Personality of Godhead, the living entities in the material world can
never have any happiness because they are overwhelmed by the three kinds of miseries.
Therefore they take shelter of the shade of Your lotus feet, which are full of knowledge,
and we also thus take shelter of them.
PURPORT
The way of devotional service is neither sentimental nor mundane. It is the path of
reality by which the living entity can attain the transcendental happiness of being freed
from the three kinds of material miseries—miseries arising from the body and mind,
from other living entities and from natural disturbances. Everyone who is conditioned
by material existence—whether he be a man or beast or demigod or bird—must suffer
from ädhyätmika (bodily or mental) pains, ädhibhautika pains (those offered by living
creatures), and ädhidaivika pains (those due to supernatural disturbances). His happiness
is nothing but a hard struggle to get free from the miseries of conditional life. But there
is only one way he can be rescued, and that is by accepting the shelter of the lotus feet of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The argument that unless one has proper knowledge one cannot be freed from material
miseries is undoubtedly true. But because the lotus feet of the Lord are full of
transcendental knowledge, acceptance of His lotus feet completes that necessity. We
have already discussed this point in the First Canto (1.2.7):
väsudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogaù prayojitaù
janayaty äçu vairägyaà
jïänaà ca yad ahaitukam
There is no want of knowledge in the devotional service of Väsudeva, the Personality of
Godhead. He, the Lord, personally takes charge of dissipating the darkness of ignorance
from the heart of a devotee. He confirms this in Bhagavad-gétä (10.10):
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
224
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
Empiric philosophical speculation cannot give one relief from the threefold miseries of
material existence. Simply to endeavor for knowledge without devoting oneself to the
Lord is a waste of valuable time.
TEXT 41
MaaGaRiNTa Yatae Mau%PaÚNaq@E‚
X^Nd"SauPa<aOE‰RzYaae iviv¢e- )
YaSYaagaMazaeRdSairÜraYaa"
Pad& Pad& TaqQaRPad" Pa[Paàa" )) 41 ))
märganti yat te mukha-padma-néòaiç
chandaù-suparëair åñayo vivikte
yasyägha-marñoda-sarid-varäyäù
padaà padaà tértha-padaù prapannäù
SYNONYMS
märganti—searching after; yat—as; te—Your; mukha-padma—lotuslike face; néòaiù—by
those who have taken shelter of such a lotus flower; chandaù—Vedic hymns;
suparëaiù—by the wings; åñayaù—the sages; vivikte—in clear mind; yasya—whose;
agha-marña-uda—that which offers freedom from all reactions to sin; sarit—rivers;
varäyäù—in the best; padam padam—in every step; tértha-padaù—one whose lotus feet
are as good as a place of pilgrimage; prapannäù—taking shelter.
TRANSLATION
The lotus feet of the Lord are by themselves the shelter of all places of pilgrimage. The
great clear-minded sages, carried by the wings of the Vedas, always search after the nest
of Your lotuslike face. Some of them surrender to Your lotus feet at every step by taking
shelter of the best of rivers [the Ganges], which can deliver one from all sinful reactions.
225
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The paramahaàsas are compared to royal swans who make their nests on the petals of
the lotus flower. The Lord's transcendental bodily parts are always compared to the lotus
flower because in the material world the lotus flower is the last word in beauty. The
most beautiful thing in the world is the Vedas, or Bhagavad-gétä, because therein
knowledge is imparted by the Personality of Godhead Himself. The paramahaàsa makes
his nest in the lotuslike face of the Lord and always seeks shelter at His lotus feet, which
are reached by the wings of Vedic wisdom. Since the Lord is the original source of all
emanations, intelligent persons, enlightened by Vedic knowledge, seek the shelter of the
Lord, just as birds who leave the nest again search out the nest to take complete rest. All
Vedic knowledge is meant for understanding the Supreme Lord, as stated by the Lord in
Bhagavad-gétä (15.15): vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù. Intelligent persons, who are like
swans, take shelter of the Lord by all means and do not hover on the mental plane by
fruitlessly speculating on different philosophies.
The Lord is so kind that He has spread the River Ganges throughout the universe so
that by taking bath in that holy river everyone can get release from the reactions of sins,
which occur at every step. There are many rivers in the world which are able to evoke
one's sense of God consciousness simply by one's bathing in them, and the River Ganges
is chief amongst them. In India there are five sacred rivers, but the Ganges is the most
sacred. The River Ganges and Bhagavad-gétä are chief sources of transcendental
happiness for mankind, and intelligent persons can take shelter of them to go back
home, back to Godhead. Even Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya recommends that a little
knowledge in Bhagavad-gétä and the drinking of a little quantity of Ganges water can
save one from the punishment of Yamaräja.
TEXT 42
YaC^\ÖYaa é[uTavTYaa c >a¢-ya
SaMMa*JYaMaaNae ôdYae_vDaaYa )
jaNaeNa vEraGYable/Na Daqra
v]JaeMa Tatae_x(iga]SaraeJaPaq#=Ma( )) 42 ))
yac chraddhayä çrutavatyä ca bhaktyä
sammåjyamäne hådaye 'vadhäya
226
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
jïänena vairägya-balena dhérä
vrajema tat te 'ìghri-saroja-péöham
SYNONYMS
yat—that which; çraddhayä—by eagerness; çrutavatyä—simply by hearing; ca—also;
bhaktyä—in devotion; sammåjyamäne—being cleansed; hådaye—in the heart;
avadhäya—meditation; jïänena—by knowledge; vairägya—detachment; balena—by the
strength of; dhéräù—the pacified; vrajema—must go to; tat—that; te—Your; aìghri—
feet; saroja-péöham—lotus sanctuary.
TRANSLATION
Simply by hearing about Your lotus feet with eagerness and devotion and by meditating
upon them within the heart, one at once becomes enlightened with knowledge, and on the
strength of detachment one becomes pacified. We must therefore take shelter of the
sanctuary of Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
The miracles of meditating on the lotus feet of the Lord with eagerness and devotion are
so great that no other process can compare to it. The minds of materialistic persons are
so disturbed that it is almost impossible for them to search after the Supreme Truth by
personal regulative endeavors. But even such materialistic men, with a little eagerness
for hearing about the transcendental name, fame, qualities, etc., can surpass all other
methods of attaining knowledge and detachment. The conditioned soul is attached to
the bodily conception of the self, and therefore he is in ignorance. Culture of selfknowledge
can bring about detachment from material affection, and without such
detachment there is no meaning to knowledge. The most stubborn attachment for
material enjoyment is sex life. One who is attached to sex life is to be understood as
devoid of knowledge. Knowledge must be followed by detachment. That is the way of
self-realization. These two essentials for self-realization—knowledge and detachment—
become manifest very quickly if one performs devotional service to the lotus feet of the
Lord. The word dhéra is very significant in this connection. A person who is not
disturbed even in the presence of cause of disturbance is called dhéra. Çré Yämunäcärya
says, "Since my heart has been overwhelmed by the devotional service of Lord Kåñëa, I
cannot even think of sex life, and if thoughts of sex come upon me I at once feel
227
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
disgust." A devotee of the Lord becomes an elevated dhéra by the simple process of
meditating in eagerness on the lotus feet of the Lord.
Devotional service entails being initiated by a bona fide spiritual master and following
his instruction in regard to hearing about the Lord. Such a bona fide spiritual master is
accepted by regularly hearing from him about the Lord. The improvement in knowledge
and detachment can be perceived by devotees as an actual experience. Lord Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu strongly recommended this process of hearing from a bona fide
devotee, and by following this process one can achieve the highest result, conquering all
other methods.
TEXT 43
ivìSYa JaNMaiSQaiTaSa&YaMaaQaeR
k*-TaavTaarSYa PadaMbuJa& Tae )
v]JaeMa SaveR Xar<a& YadqXa
SMa*Ta& Pa[YaC^TYa>aYa& SvPau&SaaMa( )) 43 ))
viçvasya janma-sthiti-saàyamärthe
kåtävatärasya padämbujaà te
vrajema sarve çaraëaà yad éça
småtaà prayacchaty abhayaà sva-puàsäm
SYNONYMS
viçvasya—of the cosmic universe; janma—creation; sthiti—maintenance; saàyamaarthe—
for the dissolution also; kåta—accepted or assumed; avatärasya—of the
incarnations; pada-ambujam—lotus feet; te—Your; vrajema—let us take shelter of;
sarve—all of us; çaraëam—shelter; yat—that which; éça—O Lord; småtam—
remembrance; prayacchati—awarding; abhayam—courage; sva-puàsäm—of the
devotees.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You assume incarnations for the creation, maintenance and dissolution of the
cosmic manifestation, and therefore we all take shelter of Your lotus feet because they
228
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
always award remembrance and courage to Your devotees.
PURPORT
For the creation, maintenance and dissolution of the cosmic manifestations there are
three incarnations: Brahmä, Viñëu and Maheçvara (Lord Çiva). They are the controllers
or masters of the three modes of material nature, which cause the phenomenal
manifestation. Viñëu is the master of the mode of goodness, Brahmä is the master of the
mode of passion, and Maheçvara is the master of the mode of ignorance. There are
different kinds of devotees according to the modes of nature. Persons in the mode of
goodness worship Lord Viñëu, those in the mode of passion worship Lord Brahmä, and
those in the mode of ignorance worship Lord Çiva. All three of these deities are
incarnations of the Supreme Lord Kåñëa because He is the original Supreme Personality
of Godhead. The demigods directly refer to the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord and not
to the different incarnations. The incarnation of Viñëu in the material world is,
however, directly worshiped by the demigods. It is learned from various scriptures that
the demigods approach Lord Viñëu in the ocean of milk and submit their grievances
whenever there is some difficulty in the administration of universal affairs. Although
they are incarnations of the Lord, Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva worship Lord Viñëu, and
thus they are also counted amongst the demigods and not as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Persons who worship Lord Viñëu are called demigods, and persons who do not
do so are called asuras, or demons. Viñëu always takes the part of the demigods, but
Brahmä and Çiva sometimes take the side of the demons; it is not that they become one
in interest with them, but sometimes they do something in order to gain control over
the demons.
TEXT 44
YaTSaaNaubNDae_SaiTa dehGaehe
MaMaahiMaTYaU!duraGa]ha<aaMa( )
Pau&Saa& SaudUr& vSaTaae_iPa PauYaa|
>aJaeMa Tatae >aGavNa( PadaBJaMa( )) 44 ))
yat sänubandhe 'sati deha-gehe
mamäham ity üòha-durägrahäëäm
229
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
puàsäà sudüraà vasato 'pi puryäà
bhajema tat te bhagavan padäbjam
SYNONYMS
yat—because; sa-anubandhe—due to becoming entangled; asati—thus being; deha—the
gross material body; gehe—in the home; mama—mine; aham—I; iti—thus; üòha—great,
deep; durägrahäëäm—undesirable eagerness; puàsäm—of persons; su-düram—far away;
vasataù—dwelling; api—although; puryäm—within the body; bhajema—let us worship;
tat—therefore; te—Your; bhagavan—O Lord; pada-abjam—lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, persons who are entangled by undesirable eagerness for the temporary body and
kinsmen, and who are bound by thoughts of "mine" and "I," are unable to see Your lotus
feet, although Your lotus feet are situated within their own bodies. But let us take shelter
of Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
The whole Vedic philosophy of life is that one should get rid of the material encagement
of gross and subtle bodies, which only cause one to continue in a condemned life of
miseries. This material body continues as long as one is not detached from the false
conception of lording it over material nature. The impetus for lording it over material
nature is the sense of "mine" and "I." "I am the lord of all that I survey. So many things I
possess, and I shall possess more and more. Who can be richer than I in wealth and
education? I am the master, and I am God. Who else is there but me?" All these ideas
reflect the philosophy of ahaà mama, the conception that "I am everything." Persons
conducted by such a conception of life can never get liberation from material bondage.
But even a person perpetually condemned to the miseries of material existence can get
relief from bondage if he simply agrees to hear only kåñëa-kathä. In this age of Kali, the
process of hearing kåñëa-kathä is the most effective means to gain release from
unwanted family affection and thus find permanent freedom in life. The age of Kali is
full of sinful reactions, and people are more and more addicted to the qualities of this
age, but simply by hearing and chanting of kåñëa-kathä one is sure to go back to
Godhead. Therefore, people should be trained to hear only kåñëa-kathä—by all means—
in order to get relief from all miseries.
230
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 45
TaaNa( vE ùSad(v*itai>ari+ai>aYaeR
ParaôTaaNTaMaRNaSa" PareXa )
AQaae Na PaXYaNTYauåGaaYa NaUNa&
Yae Tae PadNYaaSaivl/aSal/+Yaa" )) 45 ))
tän vai hy asad-våttibhir akñibhir ye
parähåtäntar-manasaù pareça
atho na paçyanty urugäya nünaà
ye te padanyäsa-viläsa-lakñyäù
SYNONYMS
tän—the lotus feet of the Lord; vai—certainly; hi—for; asat—materialistic; våttibhiù—
by those who are influenced by external energy; akñibhiù—by the senses; ye—those;
parähåta—missing at a distance; antaù-manasaù—of the internal mind; pareça—O
Supreme; atho—therefore; na—never; paçyanti—can see; urugäya—O great; nünam—
but; ye—those who; te—Your; padanyäsa—activities; viläsa—transcendental
enjoyment; lakñyäù—those who see.
TRANSLATION
O great Supreme Lord, offensive persons whose internal vision has been too affected by
external materialistic activities cannot see Your lotus feet, but they are seen by Your pure
devotees, whose one and only aim is to transcendentally enjoy Your activities.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (18.61), the Lord is situated in everyone's heart. It is natural
that one should he able to see the Lord at least within himself. But that is not possible
for those whose internal vision has been covered by external activities. The pure soul,
which is symptomized by consciousness, can be easily perceived even by a common man
because consciousness is spread all over the body. The yoga system as recommended in
Bhagavad-gétä is to concentrate the mental activities internally and thus see the lotus
231
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
feet of the Lord within oneself. But there are many so-called yogés who have no concern
with the Lord but are only concerned with consciousness, which they accept as the final
realization. Such realization of consciousness is taught by Bhagavad-gétä within only a
few minutes, whereas the so-called yogés take continuous years to realize it because of
their offenses at the lotus feet of the Lord. The greatest offense is to deny the existence
of the Lord as separate from the individual souls or to accept the Lord and the
individual soul as one and the same. The impersonalists misinterpret the theory of
reflection, and thus they wrongly accept the individual consciousness as the supreme
consciousness.
The theory of the reflection of the Supreme can be clearly understood without difficulty
by any sincere common man. When there is a reflection of the sky on the water, both
the sky and the stars are seen within the water, but it is understood that the sky and the
stars are not to be accepted on the same level. The stars are parts of the sky, and
therefore they cannot be equal to the whole. The sky is the whole, and the stars are
parts. They cannot be one and the same. Transcendentalists who do not accept the
supreme consciousness as separate from the individual consciousness are as offensive as
the materialists who deny even the existence of the Lord.
Such offenders cannot actually see the lotus feet of the Lord within themselves, nor are
they even able to see the devotees of the Lord. The devotees of the Lord are so kind that
they roam to all places to enlighten people in God consciousness. The offenders,
however, lose the chance to receive the Lord's devotees, although the offenseless
common man is at once influenced by the devotees' presence. In this connection there is
an interesting story of a hunter and Devarñi Närada. A hunter in the forest, although a
great sinner, was not an intentional offender. He was at once influenced by the presence
of Närada, and he agreed to take the path of devotion, leaving aside his hearth and
home. But the offenders Nalaküvara and Maëigréva, even though living amongst the
demigods, had to undergo the punishment of becoming trees in their next lives,
although by the grace of a devotee they were later delivered by the Lord. Offenders have
to wait until they receive the mercy of devotees, and then they can become eligible to
see the lotus feet of the Lord within themselves. But due to their offenses and their
extreme materialism, they cannot see even the devotees of the Lord. Engaged in
external activities, they kill the internal vision. The Lord's devotees, however, do not
mind the offenses of the foolish in their many gross and subtle bodily endeavors. The
Lord's devotees continue to bestow the blessings of devotion upon all such offenders
without hesitation. That is the nature of devotees.
SB 3.5.46
232
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 46
PaaNaeNa Tae dev k-QaaSauDaaYaa"
Pa[v*Ö>a¢-ya ivXadaXaYaa Yae )
vEraGYaSaar& Pa[iTal/>Ya baeDa&
YaQaaÅSaaNvqYaurku-<#=iDaZ<YaMa( )) 46 ))
pänena te deva kathä-sudhäyäù
pravåddha-bhaktyä viçadäçayä ye
vairägya-säraà pratilabhya bodhaà
yathäïjasänvéyur akuëöha-dhiñëyam
SYNONYMS
pänena—by drinking; te—of You; deva—O Lord; kathä—topics; sudhäyäù—of the
nectar; pravåddha—highly enlightened; bhaktyä—by devotional service; viçadaäçayäù—
with a greatly serious attitude; ye—those who; vairägya-säram—the entire
purport of renunciation; pratilabhya—achieving; bodham—intelligence; yathä—as much
as; aïjasä—quickly; anvéyuù—achieve; akuëöha-dhiñëyam—Vaikuëöhaloka in the
spiritual sky.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, persons who, because of their serious attitude, attain the stage of enlightened
devotional service achieve the complete meaning of renunciation and knowledge and
attain the Vaikuëöhaloka in the spiritual sky simply by drinking the nectar of Your
topics.
PURPORT
The difference between the impersonalistic mental speculators and the pure devotees of
the Lord is that the former pass through a miserable understanding of the Absolute
Truth at every stage, whereas the devotees enter into the kingdom of all pleasures even
from the beginning of their attempt. The devotee has only to hear about devotional
activities, which are as simple as anything in ordinary life, and he also acts very simply,
whereas the mental speculator has to pass through a jugglery of words, which are
233
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
partially facts and partially a make-show for the maintenance of an artificial impersonal
status. In spite of his strenuous efforts to attain perfect knowledge, the impersonalist
attains merging into the impersonal oneness of the brahmajyoti of the Lord, which is also
attained by the enemies of the Lord simply because of their being killed by Him. The
devotees, however, attain to the highest stage of knowledge and renunciation and
achieve the Vaikuëöhalokas, the planets in the spiritual sky. The impersonalist attains
only the sky, and does not achieve any tangible transcendental bliss, whereas the
devotee attains to the planets where real spiritual life prevails. With a serious attitude,
the devotee throws away all achievements like so much dust, and he accepts only
devotional service, the transcendental culmination.
TEXT 47
TaQaaPare caTMaSaMaaiDaYaaeGa‚
ble/Na iJaTva Pa[k*-iTa& bil/ïaMa( )
TvaMaev Daqra" Pauåz& ivXaiNTa
Taeza& é[Ma" SYaaà Tau SaevYaa Tae )) 47 ))
tathäpare cätma-samädhi-yogabalena
jitvä prakåtià baliñöhäm
tväm eva dhéräù puruñaà viçanti
teñäà çramaù syän na tu sevayä te
SYNONYMS
tathä—as far as; apare—others; ca—also; ätma-samädhi—transcendental selfrealization;
yoga—means; balena—by the strength of; jitvä—conquering; prakåtim—
acquired nature or modes of nature; baliñöhäm—very powerful; tväm—You; eva—only;
dhéräù—pacified; puruñam—person; viçanti—enters into; teñäm—for them; çramaù—
much labor; syät—has to be taken; na—never; tu—but; sevayä—by serving; te—of You.
TRANSLATION
Others, who are pacified by means of transcendental self-realization and have conquered
over the modes of nature by dint of strong power and knowledge, also enter into You, but
234
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
for them there is much pain, whereas the devotee simply discharges devotional service
and thus feels no such pain.
PURPORT
In terms of a labor of love and its returns, the bhaktas, or devotees of the Lord, always
have priority over persons who are addicted to the association of jïänés, or
impersonalists, and yogés, or mystics. The word apare (others) is very significant in this
connection. "Others" refers to the jïänés and the yogés, whose only hope is to merge into
the existence of the impersonal brahmajyoti. Although their destination is not so
important in comparison to the destination of the devotees, the labor of the
nondevotees is far greater than that of the bhaktas. One may suggest that there is
sufficient labor for the devotees also in the matter of discharging devotional service. But
that labor is compensated by the enhancement of transcendental pleasure. The devotees
derive more transcendental pleasure while engaged continuously in the service of the
Lord than when they have no such engagement. In the family combination of a man and
a woman there is much labor and responsibility for both of them, yet when they are
single they feel more trouble for want of their united activities.
The union of the impersonalists and the union of the devotees are not on a par. The
impersonalists try to fully stop their individuality by attaining säyujya-mukti, or
unification by merging into oneness, whereas the devotees keep their individuality to
exchange feelings in relationship with the supreme individual Lord. Such reciprocation
of feelings takes place in the transcendental Vaikuëöha planets, and therefore the
liberation sought by the impersonalists is already achieved in devotional service. The
devotees attain mukti automatically, while continuing the transcendental pleasure of
maintaining individuality. As explained in the previous verse, the destination of the
devotees is Vaikuëöha, or akuëöha-dhiñëya, the place where anxieties are completely
eradicated. One should not mistake the destination of the devotees and that of the
impersonalists to be one and the same. The destinations are distinctly different, and the
transcendental pleasure derived by the devotee is also distinct from cin-mätra, or
spiritual feelings alone.
TEXT 48
Tatae vYa& l/aek-iSaSa*+aYaaÛ
TvYaaNauSa*íaiñi>araTMai>a" SMa )
235
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SaveR ivYau¢-a" SvivharTaN}a&
Na Xa¥u-MaSTaTPa[iTahTaRve Tae )) 48 ))
tat te vayaà loka-sisåkñayädya
tvayänusåñöäs tribhir ätmabhiù sma
sarve viyuktäù sva-vihära-tantraà
na çaknumas tat pratihartave te
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; te—Your; vayam—all of us; loka—world; sisåkñayä—for the sake of
creation; ädya—O Original person; tvayä—by You; anusåñöäù—being created one after
another; tribhiù—by the three modes of nature; ätmabhiù—by one's own; sma—in the
past; sarve—all; viyuktäù—separated; sva-vihära-tantram—the network of activities for
one's own pleasure; na—not; çaknumaù—could do it; tat—that; pratihartave—to award;
te—unto Your.
TRANSLATION
O Original Person, we are therefore but Yours only. Although we are Your creatures, we
are born one after another under the influence of the three modes of nature, and for this
reason we are separated in action. Therefore, after the creation we could not act
concertedly for Your transcendental pleasure.
PURPORT
The cosmic creation is working under the influence of the three modes of the external
potency of the Lord. Different creatures are also under the same influence, and
therefore they cannot act concertedly in satisfying the Lord. Because of this diverse
activity, there cannot be any harmony in the material world. The best policy, therefore,
is to act for the sake of the Lord. That will bring about the desired harmony.
TEXT 49
YaavØil&/ Tae_Ja hraMa k-ale/
YaQaa vYa& caàMadaMa Ya}a )
236
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
YaQaae>aYaeza& Ta wMae ih l/aek-a
bil&/ hrNTaae_àMadNTYaNaUha" )) 49 ))
yävad balià te 'ja haräma käle
yathä vayaà cännam adäma yatra
yathobhayeñäà ta ime hi lokä
balià haranto 'nnam adanty anühäù
SYNONYMS
yävat—as it may be; balim—offerings; te—Your; aja—O unborn one; haräma—shall
offer; käle—at the right time; yathä—as much as; vayam—we; ca—also; annam—food
grains; adäma—shall partake; yatra—whereupon; yathä—as much as; ubhayeñäm—both
for You and for us; te—all; ime—these; hi—certainly; lokäù—living entities; balim—
offerings; harantaù—while offering; annam—grains; adanti—eat; anühäù—without
disturbance.
TRANSLATION
O unborn one, please enlighten us regarding the ways and means by which we can offer
You all enjoyable grains and commodities so that both we and all other living entities in
this world can maintain ourselves without disturbance and can easily accumulate the
necessities of life both for You and for ourselves.
PURPORT
Developed consciousness begins from the human form of life and further increases in
the forms of the demigods living in higher planets. The earth is situated almost in the
middle of the universe, and the human form of life is the via medium between the life of
the demigods and that of the demons. The planetary systems above the earth are
especially meant for the higher intellectuals, called demigods. They are called demigods
because although their standard of life is far more advanced in culture, enjoyment,
luxury, beauty, education and duration of life, they are always fully God conscious. Such
demigods are always ready to render service to the Supreme Lord because they are
perfectly aware of the fact that every living entity is constitutionally an eternal
subordinate servitor of the Lord. They also know that it is the Lord only who can
237
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
maintain all living entities with all the necessities of life. The Vedic hymns, eko
bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän, tä enam abruvann äyatanaà naù prajänéhi yasmin
pratiñöhitä annam adäme, etc., confirm this truth. In Bhagavad-gétä also, the Lord is
mentioned as bhüta-bhåt, or the maintainer of all living creatures.
The modern theory that starvation is due to an increase in population is not accepted by
the demigods or the devotees of the Lord. The devotees or demigods are fully aware that
the Lord can maintain any number of living entities, provided they are conscious of how
to eat. If they want to eat like ordinary animals, who have no God consciousness, then
they must live in starvation, poverty and want, like the jungle animals in the forest. The
jungle animals are also maintained by the Lord with their respective foodstuffs, but they
are not advanced in God consciousness. Similarly, human beings are provided with food
grains, vegetables, fruits and milk by the grace of the Lord, but it is the duty of human
beings to acknowledge the mercy of the Lord. As a matter of gratitude, they should feel
obliged to the Lord for their supply of foodstuff, and they must first offer Him food in
sacrifice and then partake of the remnants.
In Bhagavad-gétä (3.13) it is confirmed that one who takes foodstuff after a performance
of sacrifice eats real food for proper maintenance of the body and soul, but one who
cooks for himself and does not perform any sacrifice eats only lumps of sin in the shape
of foodstuffs. Such sinful eating can never make one happy or free from scarcity. Famine
is not due to an increase in population, as less intelligent economists think. When
human society is grateful to the Lord for all His gifts for the maintenance of the living
entities, then there is certainly no scarcity or want in society. But when men are
unaware of the intrinsic value of such gifts from the Lord, surely they are in want. A
person who has no God consciousness may live in opulence for the time being due to his
past virtuous acts, but if one forgets his relationship with the Lord, certainly he must
await the stage of starvation by the law of the powerful material nature. One cannot
escape the vigilance of the powerful material nature unless he leads a God conscious or
devotional life.
TEXT 50
Tv& Na" Saura<aaMaiSa SaaNvYaaNaa&
kU-$=SQa AaÛ" Pauåz" Paura<a" )
Tv& dev Xa¢-ya& Gau<ak-MaRYaaeNaaE
reTaSTvJaaYaa& k-ivMaadDae_Ja" )) 50 ))
238
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tvaà naù suräëäm asi sänvayänäà
küöa-stha ädyaù puruñaù puräëaù
tvaà deva çaktyäà guëa-karma-yonau
retas tv ajäyäà kavim ädadhe 'jaù
SYNONYMS
tvam—Your Lordship; naù—of us; suräëäm—of the demigods; asi—You are; saanvayänäm—
with different gradations; küöa-sthaù—one who is unchanged; ädyaù—
without any superior; puruñaù—the founder person; puräëaù—the oldest, who has no
other founder; tvam—You; deva—O Lord; çaktyäm—unto the energy; guëa-karmayonau—
unto the cause of the material modes and activities; retaù—semen of birth; tu—
indeed; ajäyäm—for begetting; kavim—the total living entities; ädadhe—initiated;
ajaù—one who is unborn.
TRANSLATION
You are the original personal founder of all the demigods and the orders of different
gradations, yet You are the oldest and are unchanged. O Lord, You have no source or
superior. You have impregnated the external energy with the semen of the total living
entities, yet You are unborn.
PURPORT
The Lord, the Original Person, is the father of all other living entities, beginning from
Brahmä, the personality from whom all other living entities in different gradations of
species are generated. Yet the supreme father has no other father. Every one of the
living entities of all grades, up to Brahmä, the original creature of the universe, is
begotten by a father, but He, the Lord, has no father. When He descends on the
material plane, out of Mis causeless mercy He accepts one of His great devotees as His
father to keep pace with the rules of the material world. But since He is the Lord, He is
always independent in choosing who will become His father. For example, the Lord
came out of a pillar in His incarnation as Nåsiàhadeva, and by the Lord's causeless
mercy, Ahalyä came out of a stone by the touch of the lotus feet of His incarnation as
Lord Çré Räma. He is also the companion of every living entity as the Supersoul, but He
is unchanged. The living entity changes his body in the material world, but even when
the Lord is in the material world, He is ever unchanged. That is His prerogative.
239
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (14.3), the Lord impregnates the external or material
energy, and thus the total living entities later come out in different gradations,
beginning from Brahmä, the first demigod, down to the insignificant ant. All gradations
of living entities are manifested by Brahmä and the external energy, but the Lord is the
original father of everyone. The relationship of every living being with the Supreme
Lord is certainly one of son and father and not one of equality. Sometimes in love the
son is more than the father, but the relationship of father and son is one of the superior
and the subordinate. Every living entity, however great he may be, even up to demigods
like Brahmä and Indra, is an eternally subordinate servitor of the supreme father. The
mahat-tattva principle is the generating source of all the modes of material nature, and
the living entities take birth in the material world in bodies supplied by the mother,
material nature, in terms of their previous work. The body is a gift of material nature,
but the soul is originally part and parcel of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 51
TaTaae vYa& MaTPa[Mau%a YadQaeR
b>aUivMaaTMaNa( k-rvaMa ik&- Tae )
Tv& Na" Svc+au" Pairdeih Xa¢-ya
dev i§-YaaQaeR YadNauGa]ha<aaMa( )) 51 ))
tato vayaà mat-pramukhä yad-arthe
babhüvimätman karaväma kià te
tvaà naù sva-cakñuù paridehi çaktyä
deva kriyärthe yad-anugrahäëäm
SYNONYMS
tataù—therefore; vayam—all of us; mat-pramukhäù—coming from the total cosmos, the
mahat-tattva; yat-arthe—for the purpose of which; babhüvima—created; ätman—O
Supreme Self; karaväma—shall do; kim—what; te—Your service; tvam—Yourself;
naù—to us; sva-cakñuù—personal plan; paridehi—specifically grant us; çaktyä—with
potency to work; deva—O Lord; kriyä-arthe—for acting; yat—from which;
anugrahäëäm—of those who are specifically favored.
240
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Self, please give us, who are created in the beginning from the mahat-tattva,
the total cosmic energy, Your kind directions on how we shall act. Kindly award us Your
perfect knowledge and potency so that we can render You service in the different
departments of subsequent creation.
PURPORT
The Lord creates this material world and impregnates the material energy with the
living entities who will act in the material world. All these actions have a divine plan
behind them. The plan is to give the conditioned souls who so desire a chance to enjoy
sense gratification. But there is another plan behind the creation: to help the living
entities realize that they are created for the transcendental sense gratification of the
Lord and not for their individual sense gratification. This is the constitutional position
of the living entities. The Lord is one without a second, and He expands Himself into
many for His transcendental pleasure. All the expansions—the viñëu-tattvas, the jévatattvas
and the çakti-tattvas (the Personalities of Godhead, the living entities and the
different potential energies)—are different offshoots from the same one Supreme Lord.
The jéva-tattvas are separated expansions of the viñëu-tattvas, and although there are
potential differences between them, they are all meant for the transcendental sense
gratification of the Supreme Lord. Some of the jévas, however, wanted to lord it over
material nature in imitation of the lordship of the Personality of Godhead. Regarding
when and why such propensities overcame the pure living entities, it can only be
explained that the jéva-tattvas have infinitesimal independence and that due to misuse
of this independence some of the living entities have become implicated in the
conditions of cosmic creation and are therefore called nitya-baddhas, or eternally
conditioned souls.
The expansions of Vedic wisdom also give the nitya-baddhas, the conditioned living
entities, a chance to improve, and those who take advantage of such transcendental
knowledge gradually regain their lost consciousness of rendering transcendental loving
service to the Lord. The demigods are amongst the conditioned souls who have
developed this pure consciousness of service to the Lord but who at the same time
continue to desire to lord it over the material energy. Such mixed consciousness puts a
conditioned soul in the position of managing the affairs of this creation. The demigods
are entrusted leaders of the conditioned souls. As some of the old prisoners in
government jails are entrusted with some responsible work of prison management, so
241
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the demigods are improved conditioned souls acting as representatives of the Lord in the
material creation. Such demigods are devotees of the Lord in the material world, and
when completely free from all material desire to lord it over the material energy they
become pure devotees and have no desire but to serve the Lord. Therefore any living
entity who desires a position in the material world may desire so in the service of the
Lord and may seek power and intelligence from the Lord, as exemplified by the
demigods in this particular verse. One cannot do anything unless he is enlightened and
empowered by the Lord. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), mattaù småtir jïänam
apohanaà ca. All recollections, knowledge, etc., as well as all forgetfulness, are
engineered by the Lord, who is sitting within the heart of everyone. The intelligent man
seeks the help of the Lord, and the Lord helps the sincere devotees engaged in His
multifarious services.
The demigods are entrusted by the Lord to create different species of living entities
according to their past deeds. They are herein asking the favor of the Lord for the
intelligence and power to carry out their task. Similarly, any conditioned soul may also
engage in the service of the Lord under the guidance of an expert spiritual master and
thus gradually become freed from the entanglement of material existence. The spiritual
master is the manifested representative of the Lord, and anyone who puts himself under
the guidance of a spiritual master and acts accordingly is said to be acting in terms of
buddhi-yoga, as explained in Bhagavad-gétä (2.41):
vyavasäyätmikä buddhir
ekeha kuru-nandana
bahu-çäkhä hy anantäç ca
buddhayo 'vyavasäyinäm
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Fifth Chapter, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "Vidura's Talks with Maitreya."
6. Creation of the Universal Form
242
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 1
‰izåvac
wiTa TaaSaa& SvXa¢-INaa& SaTaqNaaMaSaMaeTYa Sa" )
Pa[Sauál/aek-TaN}aa<aa& iNaXaaMYa GaiTaMaqìr" )) 1 ))
åñir uväca
iti täsäà sva-çakténäà
saténäm asametya saù
prasupta-loka-tanträëäà
niçämya gatim éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
åñiù uväca—the Åñi Maitreya said; iti—thus; täsäm—their; sva-çakténäm—own potency;
saténäm—so situated; asametya—without combination; saù—He (the Lord); prasupta—
suspended; loka-tanträëäm—in the universal creations; niçämya—hearing; gatim—
progress; éçvaraù—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The Åñi Maitreya said: The Lord thus heard about the suspension of the progressive
creative functions of the universe due to the noncombination of His potencies, such as
the mahat-tattva.
PURPORT
There is nothing wanting in the creation of the Lord; all the potencies are there in a
dormant state. But unless they are combined by the will of the Lord, nothing can
progress. The suspended progressive work of creation can only be revived by the
direction of the Lord.
TEXT 2
k-al/Sa&ja& Tada devq& ib>a]C^i¢-Mauå§-Ma" )
}aYaaeiv&XaiTaTatvaNaa& Ga<a& YauGaPadaivXaTa( )) 2 ))
243
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
käla-saïjïäà tadä devéà
bibhrac-chaktim urukramaù
trayoviàçati tattvänäà
gaëaà yugapad äviçat
SYNONYMS
käla-saïjïäm—known as Kälé; tadä—at that time; devém—the goddess; bibhrat—
destructive; çaktim—potency; urukramaù—the supreme powerful; trayaù-viàçati—
twenty-three; tattvänäm—of the elements; gaëam—all of them; yugapat—
simultaneously; äviçat—entered.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Powerful Lord then simultaneously entered into the twenty-three elements
with the goddess Kälé, His external energy, who alone amalgamates all the different
elements.
PURPORT
The ingredients of matter are counted as twenty-three: the total material energy, false
ego, sound, touch, form, taste, smell, earth, water, fire, air, sky, eye, ear, nose, tongue,
skin, hand, leg, evacuating organ, genitals, speech and mind. All are combined together
by the influence of time and are again dissolved in the course of time. Time, therefore, is
the energy of the Lord and acts in her own way by the direction of the Lord. This energy
is called Kälé and is represented by the dark destructive goddess generally worshiped by
persons influenced by the mode of darkness or ignorance in material existence. In the
Vedic hymn this process is described as müla-prakåtir avikåtir mahadädyäù prakåtivikåtayaù
sapta ñoòaçakas tu vikäro na prakåtir na vikåtiù puruñaù. The energy which acts
as material nature in a combination of twenty-three ingredients is not the final source
of creation. The Lord enters into the elements and applies His energy, called Kälé. In all
other Vedic scriptures the same principle is accepted. In Brahma-saàhitä (5.35) it is
stated:
eko 'py asau racayituà jagad-aëòa-koöià
yac-chaktir asti jagad-aëòa-cayä yad-antaù
aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-sthaà
244
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is the original Personality of Godhead. By
His partial plenary expansion [Mahä-Viñëu], He enters into material nature, and then
into each and every universe [as Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu], and then [as Kñérodakaçäyé
Viñëu] into all the elements, including every atom of matter. Such manifestations of
cosmic creation are innumerable, both in the universes and in the individual atoms."
Similarly, this is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (10.42):
athavä bahunaitena
kià jïätena tavärjuna
viñöabhyäham idaà kåtsnam
ekäàçena sthito jagat
"O Arjuna, there is no necessity of your knowing about My innumerable energies, which
act in various ways. I enter into the material creation by My partial plenary expansion
[Paramätmä, or the Supersoul] in all the universes and in all the elements thereof, and
thus the work of creation goes on." The wonderful activities of material nature are due
to Lord Kåñëa, and thus He is the final cause, or the ultimate cause of all causes.
TEXT 3
Saae_NauPa[ivíae >aGava&êeíaæPae<a Ta& Ga<aMa( )
i>aà& Sa&YaaeJaYaaMaaSa Sauá& k-MaR Pa[baeDaYaNa( )) 3 ))
so 'nupraviñöo bhagaväàç
ceñöärüpeëa taà gaëam
bhinnaà saàyojayäm äsa
suptaà karma prabodhayan
SYNONYMS
saù—that; anupraviñöaù—thus entering later on; bhagavän—the Personality of
Godhead; ceñöä-rüpeëa—by His representation of attempt, Kälé; tam—them; gaëam—all
the living entities, including the demigods; bhinnam—separately; saàyojayäm äsa—
engaged to work; suptam—sleeping; karma—work; prabodhayan—enlightening.
245
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Thus when the Personality of Godhead entered into the elements by His energy, all the
living entities were enlivened into different activities, just as one is engaged in his work
after awakening from sleep.
PURPORT
Every individual soul remains unconscious after the dissolution of the creation and thus
enters into the Lord with His material energy. These individual living entities are
conditioned souls everlastingly, but in each and every material creation they are given a
chance to liberate themselves and become free souls. They are all given a chance to take
advantage of the Vedic wisdom and find out what is their relationship with the Supreme
Lord, how they can be liberated, and what the ultimate profit is in such liberation. By
properly studying the Vedas one becomes conscious of his position and thus takes to the
transcendental devotional service of the Lord and is gradually promoted to the spiritual
sky. The individual souls in the material world engage in different activities according
to their past unfinished desires. After the dissolution of a particular body, the individual
soul forgets everything, but the all-merciful Lord, who is situated in everyone's heart as
the witness, the Supersoul, awakens him and reminds him of his past desires, and thus he
begins to act accordingly in his next life. This unseen guidance is described as fate, and a
sensible man can understand that this continues his material bondage in the three
modes of nature.
The unconscious sleeping stage of the living entity just after the partial or total
dissolution of the creation is wrongly accepted as the final stage of life by some less
intelligent philosophers. After the dissolution of the partial material body, a living
entity remains unconscious for only a few months, and after the total dissolution of the
material creation, he remains unconscious for many millions of years. But when the
creation is again revived, he is awakened to his work by the Lord. The living entity is
eternal, and the wakeful state of his consciousness, manifested by activities, is his
natural condition of life. He cannot stop acting while awake, and thus he acts according
to his diverse desires. When his desires are trained in the transcendental service of the
Lord, his life becomes perfect, and he is promoted to the spiritual sky to enjoy eternal
awakened life.
TEXT 4
246
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Pa[buÖk-MaaR dEveNa }aYaaeiv&XaiTak-ae Ga<a" )
Pa[eirTaae_JaNaYaTSvai>aMaaR}aai>ariDaPaUåzMa( )) 4 ))
prabuddha-karmä daivena
trayoviàçatiko gaëaù
prerito 'janayat sväbhir
mäträbhir adhipüruñam
SYNONYMS
prabuddha—awakened; karmä—activities; daivena—by the will of the Supreme; trayaùviàçatikaù—
by the twenty-three principal ingredients; gaëaù—the combination;
preritaù—induced by; ajanayat—manifested; sväbhiù—by His personal; mäträbhiù—
plenary expansion; adhipüruñam—the gigantic universal form (viçva-rüpa).
TRANSLATION
When the twenty-three principal elements were set in action by the will of the Supreme,
the gigantic universal form, or the viçvarüpa body of the Lord, came into existence.
PURPORT
The viräö-rüpa or viçva-rüpa, the gigantic universal form of the Lord, which is very much
appreciated by the impersonalist, is not an eternal form of the Lord. It is manifested by
the supreme will of the Lord after the ingredients of material creation. Lord Kåñëa
exhibited this viräö or viçva-rüpa to Arjuna just to convince the impersonalists that He is
the original Personality of Godhead. Kåñëa exhibited the viräö-rüpa; it is not that Kåñëa
was exhibited by the viräö-rüpa. The viräö-rüpa is not, therefore, an eternal form of the
Lord exhibited in the spiritual sky; it is a material manifestation of the Lord. The arcävigraha,
or the worshipable Deity in the temple, is a similar manifestation of the Lord for
the neophytes. But in spite of their material touch, such forms of the Lord as the viräö
and arcä are all nondifferent from His eternal form as Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 5
Pare<a ivXaTaa SviSMaNMaa}aYaa ivìSa*GGa<a" )
247
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
cu+aae>aaNYaaeNYaMaaSaaÛ YaiSMaNl/aek-aêracra" )) 5 ))
pareëa viçatä svasmin
mätrayä viçva-såg-gaëaù
cukñobhänyonyam äsädya
yasmin lokäç caräcaräù
SYNONYMS
pareëa—by the Lord; viçatä—thus entering; svasmin—by His own self; mätrayä—by a
plenary portion; viçva-såk—the elements of universal creation; gaëaù—all; cukñobha—
transformed; anyonyam—one another; äsädya—having obtained; yasmin—in which;
lokäù—the planets; cara-acaräù—movable and immovable.
TRANSLATION
As the Lord, in His plenary portion, entered into the elements of the universal creation,
they transformed into the gigantic form in which all the planetary systems and all
movable and immovable creations rest.
PURPORT
The elements of cosmic creation are all matter and have no potency to increase in
volume unless entered into by the Lord in His plenary portion. This means that matter
does not increase or decrease unless it is spiritually touched. Matter is a product of spirit
and increases only by the touch of spirit. The entire cosmic manifestation has not
assumed its gigantic form by itself, as wrongly calculated by less intelligent persons. As
long as spirit is within matter, matter can increase as needed; but without the spirit,
matter stops increasing. For example, as long as there is spiritual consciousness within
the material body of a living entity, the body increases to the required size, but a dead
material body, which has no spiritual consciousness, stops increasing. In Bhagavad-gétä
(Chapter Two) importance is given to the spiritual consciousness, not the body. The
entire cosmic body increased by the same process that we experience in our small bodies.
One should not, however, foolishly think that the individual infinitesimal soul is the
cause of the gigantic manifestation of the universal form. The universal form is called
the viräö-rüpa because the Supreme Lord is within it in His plenary portion.
248
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 6
ihr<MaYa" Sa Pauåz" SahóPairvTSaraNa( )
Aa<@k-aeXa ovaSaaPSau SavRSatvaePab*&ihTa" )) 6 ))
hiraëmayaù sa puruñaù
sahasra-parivatsarän
äëòa-koça uväsäpsu
sarva-sattvopabåàhitaù
SYNONYMS
hiraëmayaù—the Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, who also assumes the viräö-rüpa; saù—He;
puruñaù—incarnation of Godhead; sahasra—one thousand; parivatsarän—celestial
years; äëòa-koçe—within the global universe; uväsa—resided; apsu—on the water;
sarva-sattva—all living entities lying with Him; upabåàhitaù—so spread.
TRANSLATION
The gigantic viräö-puruña, known as Hiraëmaya, lived for one thousand celestial years on
the water of the universe, and all the living entities lay with Him.
PURPORT
After the Lord entered each and every universe as the Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, half of
the universe was filled with water. The cosmic manifestation of the planetary systems,
outer space, etc., which are visible to us, is only one half of the complete universe.
Before the manifestation takes place and after the entrance of Viñëu within the
universe, there is a period of one thousand celestial years. All the living entities injected
within the womb of the mahat-tattva are divided in all universes with the incarnation of
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, and all of them lie down with the Lord until Brahmä is born.
Brahmä is the first living being within the universe, and from him all other demigods
and living creatures are born. Manu is the original father of mankind, and therefore, in
Sanskrit, mankind is called mänuñya. Humanity in different bodily qualities is
distributed throughout the various planetary systems.
249
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 7
Sa vE ivìSa*Jaa& Ga>aaeR devk-MaaRTMaXai¢-MaaNa( )
ivb>aaJaaTMaNaaTMaaNaMaek-Daa dXaDaa i}aDaa )) 7 ))
sa vai viçva-såjäà garbho
deva-karmätma-çaktimän
vibabhäjätmanätmänam
ekadhä daçadhä tridhä
SYNONYMS
saù—that; vai—certainly; viçva-såjäm—of the gigantic viräö form; garbhaù—total
energy; deva—living energy; karma—activity of life; ätma—self; çaktimän—full with
potencies; vibabhäja—divided; ätmanä—by Himself; ätmänam—Himself; ekadhä—in
oneness; daçadhä—in ten; tridhä—and in three.
TRANSLATION
The total energy of the mahat-tattva, in the form of the gigantic viräö-rüpa, divided
Himself by Himself into the consciousness of the living entities, the life of activity, and
self-identification, which are subdivided into one, ten and three respectively.
PURPORT
Consciousness is the sign of the living entity, or the soul. The existence of the soul is
manifest in the form of consciousness, called jïäna-çakti. The total consciousness is that
of the gigantic viräö-rüpa, and the same consciousness is exhibited in individual persons.
The activity of consciousness is performed through the air of life, which is of ten
divisions. The airs of life are called präëa, apäna, udäna, vyäna and samäna and are also
differently qualified as näga, kürma, kåkara, devadatta and dhanaïjaya. The
consciousness of the soul becomes polluted by the material atmosphere, and thus various
activities are exhibited in the false ego of bodily identification. These various activities
are described in Bhagavad-gétä (2.41) as bahu-çäkhä hy anantäç ca buddhayo
'vyavasäyinäm. The conditioned soul is bewildered into various activities for want of
pure consciousness. In pure consciousness the activity is one. The consciousness of the
250
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
individual soul becomes one with the supreme consciousness when there is complete
synthesis between the two.
The monist believes that there is only one consciousness, whereas the sätvatas, or the
devotees, believe that although there is undoubtedly one consciousness, they are one
because there is agreement. The individual consciousness is advised to dovetail with the
supreme consciousness, as instructed by the Lord in Bhagavad-gétä (18.66): sarvadharmän
parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja. The individual consciousness (Arjuna) is
advised to dovetail with the supreme consciousness and thus maintain his conscious
purity. It is foolish to try to stop the activities of consciousness, but they can be purified
when they are dovetailed with the Supreme. This consciousness is divided into three
modes of self-identification according to the proportion of purity: ädhyätmika, or selfidentification
with the body and mind, ädhibhautika, or self-identification with the
material products, and ädhidaivika, or self-identification as a servant of the Lord. Of the
three, ädhidaivika self-identification is the beginning of purity of consciousness in
pursuance of the desire of the Lord.
TEXT 8
Wz ùXaezSatvaNaaMaaTMaa&Xa" ParMaaTMaNa" )
AaÛae_vTaarae Ya}aaSaaE >aUTaGa]aMaae iv>aaVYaTae )) 8 ))
eña hy açeña-sattvänäm
ätmäàçaù paramätmanaù
ädyo 'vatäro yaträsau
bhüta-grämo vibhävyate
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; hi—certainly; açeña—unlimited; sattvänäm—living entities; ätmä—Self;
aàçaù—part; parama-ätmanaù—of the Supersoul; ädyaù—the first; avatäraù—
incarnation; yatra—whereupon; asau—all those; bhüta-grämaù—the aggregate
creations; vibhävyate—flourish.
TRANSLATION
The gigantic universal form of the Supreme Lord is the first incarnation and plenary
251
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
portion of the Supersoul. He is the Self of an unlimited number of living entities, and in
Him rests the aggregate creation, which thus flourishes.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord expands Himself in two ways, by personal plenary expansions and
separated minute expansions. The personal plenary expansions are viñëu-tattvas, and the
separated expansions are living entities. Since the living entities are very small, they are
sometimes described as the marginal energy of the Lord. But the mystic yogés consider
the living entities and the Supersoul, Paramätmä, to be one and the same. It is, however,
a minor point of controversy; after all, everything created rests on the gigantic viräö or
universal form of the Lord.
TEXT 9
SaaDYaaTMa" SaaiDadEvê SaaiDa>aUTa wiTa i}aDaa )
ivra$( Pa[a<aae dXaivDa Wk-Daa ôdYaeNa c )) 9 ))
sädhyätmaù sädhidaivaç ca
sädhibhüta iti tridhä
viräö präëo daça-vidha
ekadhä hådayena ca
SYNONYMS
sa-ädhyätmaù—the body and mind with all the senses; sa-ädhidaivaù—and the
controlling demigods of the senses; ca—and; sa-ädhibhütaù—the present objectives;
iti—thus; tridhä—three; viräö—gigantic; präëaù—moving force; daça-vidhaù—ten
kinds; ekadhä—one only; hådayena—living energy; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The gigantic universal form is represented by three, ten and one in the sense that He is
the body and the mind and the senses, He is the dynamic force for all movements by ten
kinds of life energy, and He is the one heart where life energy is generated.
252
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (7.4-5) it is stated that the eight elements earth, water, fire, air, sky,
mind, intelligence and false ego are all products of the Lord's inferior energy, whereas
the living entities, who are seen to utilize the inferior energy, originally belong to the
superior energy, the internal potency of the Lord. The eight inferior energies work
grossly and subtly, whereas the superior energy works as the central generating force.
This is experienced in the human body. The gross elements, namely, earth, etc., form
the external gross body and are like a coat, whereas the subtle mind and false ego act like
the inner clothing of the body.
The movements of the body are first generated from the heart, and all the activities of
the body are made possible by the senses, powered by the ten kinds of air within the
body. The ten kinds of air are described as follows: The main air passing through the
nose in breathing is called präëa. The air which passes through the rectum as evacuated
bodily air is called apäna. The air which adjusts the foodstuff within the stomach and
which sometimes sounds as belching is called samäna. The air which passes through the
throat and the stoppage of which constitutes suffocation is called the udäna air. And the
total air which circulates throughout the entire body is called the vyäna air. Subtler than
these five airs, there are others also. That which facilitates the opening of the eyes,
mouth, etc., is called näga air. The air which increases appetite is called kåkara air. The
air which helps contraction is called kürma air. The air which helps relaxation by
opening the mouth wide (in yawning) is called devadatta air, and the air which helps
sustenance is called dhanaïjaya air.
All these airs are generated from the center of the heart, which is one only. This central
energy is superior energy of the Lord, who is seated within the heart with the soul of the
body, who acts under the guidance of the Lord. This is explained in Bhagavad-gétä
(15.15) as follows:
sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo
mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca
vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
vedänta-kåd veda-vid eva cäham
The complete central force is generated from the heart by the Lord, who is seated there
and who helps the conditioned soul in remembering and forgetting. The conditioned
state is due to the soul's forgetfulness of his relationship of subordination to the Lord.
One who wants to continue to forget the Lord is helped by the Lord to forget Him birth
253
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
after birth, but one who remembers Him, by dint of association with a devotee of the
Lord, is helped to remember Him more and more. Thus the conditioned soul can
ultimately go back home, back to Godhead.
This process of transcendental help by the Lord is described in Bhagavad-gétä (10.10) as
follows:
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
The buddhi-yoga process of self-realization with intelligence transcendental to the mind
(devotional service) can alone elevate one from the conditioned state of material
entanglement in the cosmic construction. The conditioned state of the living entity is
like that of a person who is within the depths of a huge mechanical arrangement. The
mental speculators can reach the point of buddhi-yoga after many, many lifetimes of
speculation, but the intelligent person who begins from the platform of intelligence
above the mind makes rapid progress in self-realization. Because the buddhi-yoga process
entails no fear of deterioration or retrogression at any time, it is the guaranteed path to
self-realization, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (2.40). The mental speculators cannot
understand that the two birds (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad) sitting in one tree are the soul
and the Supersoul. The individual soul eats the fruit of the tree, while the other bird
does not eat the fruit but only observes the activities of the eating bird. Without
attachment, the witnessing bird helps the fruit-eating bird perform fruitful activities.
One who cannot understand this difference between the soul and the Supersoul, or God
and the living entities, is certainly still in the entanglement of the cosmic machinery
and thus must still await the time when he will be free from bondage.
TEXT 10
SMarNa( ivìSa*JaaMaqXaae ivjaiPaTaMaDaae+aJa" )
ivraJaMaTaPaTSveNa TaeJaSaEza& ivv*taYae )) 10 ))
smaran viçva-såjäm éço
vijïäpitam adhokñajaù
viräjam atapat svena
254
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tejasaiñäà vivåttaye
SYNONYMS
smaran—remembering; viçva-såjäm—of the demigods entrusted with the task of cosmic
construction; éçaù—the Supreme Lord; vijïäpitam—as He was prayed for; adhokñajaù—
the Transcendence; viräjam—the gigantic universal form; atapat—considered thus;
svena—by His own; tejasä—energy; eñäm—for them; vivåttaye—for understanding.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord is the Supersoul of all the demigods entrusted with the task of
constructing the cosmic manifestation. Being thus prayed to [by the demigods], He
thought to Himself and thus manifested the gigantic form for their understanding.
PURPORT
The impersonalists are captivated by the gigantic universal form of the Supreme. They
think that the control behind this gigantic manifestation is imagination. Intelligent
persons, however, can estimate the value of the cause by observing the wonders of the
effects. For example, the individual human body does not develop from the womb of the
mother independently but because the living entity, the soul, is within the body.
Without the living entity, a material body cannot automatically take shape or develop.
When any material object displays development, it must be understood that there is a
spiritual soul within the manifestation. The gigantic universe has developed gradually,
just as the body of a child develops. The conception that the Transcendence enters
within the universe is, therefore, logical. As the materialists cannot find the soul and
the Supersoul within the heart, similarly, for want of sufficient knowledge, they cannot
see that the Supreme Soul is the cause of the universe. The Lord is therefore described
in the Vedic language as aväì-mänasa-gocaraù, beyond the conception of words and
minds.
Due to a poor fund of knowledge, the mental speculators try to bring the Supreme
within the purview of words and minds, but the Lord refuses to be so intelligible; the
speculator has no adequate words or mind to gauge the infinity of the Lord. The Lord is
called adhokñaja, or the person who is beyond perception by the blunt, limited potency
of our senses. One cannot perceive the transcendental name or form of the Lord by
mental speculation. The mundane Ph.D.'s are completely unable to speculate on the
255
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Supreme with their limited senses. Such attempts by the puffed up Ph.D's are compared
to the philosophy of the frog in the well. A frog in a well was informed of the gigantic
Pacific Ocean, and he began to puff himself up in order to understand or measure the
length and breadth of the Pacific Ocean. Ultimately the frog burst and died. The title
Ph.D. can also be interpreted as Plough Department, a title meant for the tillers in the
paddy field. The attempt of the tillers in the paddy field to understand the cosmic
manifestation and the cause behind such wonderful work can be compared to the
endeavor of the frog in the well to calculate the measurement of the Pacific Ocean.
The Lord can reveal Himself only to a person who is submissive and who engages in His
transcendental loving service. The demigods controlling the elements and ingredients of
universal affairs prayed to the Lord for guidance, and thus He manifested His gigantic
form, as He did at the request of Arjuna.
TEXT 11
AQa TaSYaai>aTaáSYa k-iTaDaaYaTaNaaiNa h )
iNari>aÛNTa devaNaa& TaaiNa Mae GadTa" é*<au )) 11 ))
atha tasyäbhitaptasya
katidhäyatanäni ha
nirabhidyanta devänäà
täni me gadataù çåëu
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; tasya—His; abhitaptasya—in terms of His contemplation; katidhä—
how many; äyatanäni—embodiments; ha—there were; nirabhidyanta—by separated
parts; devänäm—of the demigods; täni—all those; me gadataù—described by me; çåëu—
just hear.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya said: You may now hear from me how the Supreme Lord separated Himself into
the diverse forms of the demigods after the manifestation of the gigantic universal form.
PURPORT
256
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The demigods are separated parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, as are all other living
entities. The only difference between the demigods and the ordinary living entities is
that when the living entities are rich in pious acts of devotional service to the Lord, and
when their desire to lord it over material energy has vanished, they are promoted to the
posts of demigods, who are entrusted by the Lord with executing the management of the
universal affairs.
TEXT 12
TaSYaaiGanraSYa& iNai>aRà& l/aek-Paal/ae_ivXaTPadMa( )
vaca Sva&XaeNa v¢-VYa& YaYaaSaaE Pa[iTaPaÛTae )) 12 ))
tasyägnir äsyaà nirbhinnaà
loka-pälo 'viçat padam
väcä sväàçena vaktavyaà
yayäsau pratipadyate
SYNONYMS
tasya—His; agniù—fire; äsyam—mouth; nirbhinnam—thus separated; loka-pälaù—the
directors of material affairs; aviçat—entered; padam—respective positions; väcä—by
words; sva-aàçena—by one's own part; vaktavyam—speeches; yayä—by which; asau—
they; pratipadyate—express.
TRANSLATION
Agni, or heat, separated from His mouth, and all the directors of material affairs entered
into it in their respective positions. By that energy the living entity expresses himself in
words.
PURPORT
The mouth of the gigantic universal form of the Lord is the source of the speaking
power. The director of the fire element is the controlling deity, or the ädhidaiva. The
speeches delivered are ädhyätma, or bodily functions, and the subject matter of the
speeches is material productions, or the ädhibhüta principle.
257
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 13
iNai>aRà& Taalu/ vå<aae l/aek-Paal/ae_ivXaÖre" )
iJaûYaa&XaeNa c rSa& YaYaaSaaE Pa[iTaPaÛTae )) 13 ))
nirbhinnaà tälu varuëo
loka-pälo 'viçad dhareù
jihvayäàçena ca rasaà
yayäsau pratipadyate
SYNONYMS
nirbhinnam—separated; tälu—palate; varuëaù—the deity controlling water; lokapälaù—
director of the planets; aviçat—entered; hareù—of the Lord; jihvayä aàçena—
with the part of the tongue; ca—also; rasam—tastes; yayä—by which; asau—the living
entity; pratipadyate—expresses.
TRANSLATION
When the palate of the gigantic form was separately manifested, Varuëa, the director of
water in the planetary systems, entered therein, and thus the living entity has the facility
to taste everything with his tongue.
TEXT 14
iNai>aRàe AiìNaaE NaaSae ivZ<aaeraivXaTaa& PadMa( )
ga]a<aeNaa&XaeNa GaNDaSYa Pa[iTaPaitaYaRTaae >aveTa( )) 14 ))
nirbhinne açvinau näse
viñëor äviçatäà padam
ghräëenäàçena gandhasya
pratipattir yato bhavet
SYNONYMS
258
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nirbhinne—thus being separated; açvinau—the dual Açvinés; näse—of the two nostrils;
viñëoù—of the Lord; äviçatäm—entering; padam—post; ghräëena aàçena—by partially
smelling; gandhasya—aroma; pratipattiù—experience; yataù—whereupon; bhavet—
becomes.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord's two nostrils separately manifested themselves, the dual Açviné-kumäras
entered them in their proper positions, and because of this the living entities can smell
the aromas of everything.
TEXT 15
iNai>aRàe Ai+a<aq Tvía l/aek-Paal/ae_ivXaiÜ>aae" )
c+auza&XaeNa æPaa<aa& Pa[iTaPaitaYaRTaae >aveTa( )) 15 ))
nirbhinne akñiëé tvañöä
loka-pälo 'viçad vibhoù
cakñuñäàçena rüpäëäà
pratipattir yato bhavet
SYNONYMS
nirbhinne—thus being separated; akñiëé—the eyes; tvañöä—the sun; loka-pälaù—
director of light; aviçat—entered; vibhoù—of the great; cakñuñä aàçena—by the part of
the eyesight; rüpäëäm—of the forms; pratipattiù—experience; yataù—by which;
bhavet—becomes.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the two eyes of the gigantic form of the Lord were separately manifested. The
sun, the director of light, entered them with the partial representation of eyesight, and
thus the living entities can have vision of forms.
TEXT 16
259
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
iNai>aRàaNYaSYa cMaaRi<a l/aek-Paal/ae_iNal/ae_ivXaTa( )
Pa[a<aeNaa&XaeNa Sa&SPaXa| YaeNaaSaaE Pa[iTaPaÛTae )) 16 ))
nirbhinnäny asya carmäëi
loka-pälo 'nilo 'viçat
präëenäàçena saàsparçaà
yenäsau pratipadyate
SYNONYMS
nirbhinnäni—being separated; asya—of the gigantic form; carmäëi—skin; loka-pälaù—
the director; anilaù—air; aviçat—entered; präëena aàçena—the part of the breathing;
saàsparçam—touch; yena—by which; asau—the living entity; pratipadyate—can
experience.
TRANSLATION
When there was a manifestation of skin separated from the gigantic form, Anila, the deity
directing the wind, entered with partial touch, and thus the living entities can realize
tactile knowledge.
TEXT 17
k-<aaRvSYa iviNai>aRàaE iDaZ<Ya& Sv& ivivéuidRXa" )
é[ae}ae<aa&XaeNa XaBdSYa iSaiÖ& YaeNa Pa[PaÛTae )) 17 ))
karëäv asya vinirbhinnau
dhiñëyaà svaà viviçur diçaù
çrotreëäàçena çabdasya
siddhià yena prapadyate
SYNONYMS
karëau—the ears; asya—of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnau—being thus separated;
dhiñëyam—the controlling deity; svam—own; viviçuù—entered; diçaù—of the
260
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
directions; çrotreëa aàçena—with the hearing principles; çabdasya—of the sound;
siddhim—perfection; yena—by which; prapadyate—is experienced.
TRANSLATION
When the ears of the gigantic form became manifested, all the controlling deities of the
directions entered into them with the hearing principles, by which all the living entities
hear and take advantage of sound.
PURPORT
The ear is the most important instrument in the body of the living entity. Sound is the
most important medium for carrying the message of distant and unknown things. The
perfection of all sound or knowledge enters through the ear and makes one's life perfect.
The entire Vedic system of knowledge is received by aural reception only, and thus
sound is the most important source of knowledge.
TEXT 18
TvcMaSYa iviNai>aRàa& ivivéuiDaRZ<YaMaaezDaq" )
A&XaeNa raeMai>a" k-<@U& YaErSaaE Pa[iTaPaÛTae )) 18 ))
tvacam asya vinirbhinnäà
viviçur dhiñëyam oñadhéù
aàçena romabhiù kaëòüà
yair asau pratipadyate
SYNONYMS
tvacam—skin; asya—of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnäm—being separately manifested;
viviçuù—entered; dhiñëyam—the controlling deity; oñadhéù—sensations; aàçena—with
parts; romabhiù—through the hairs on the body; kaëòüm—itching; yaiù—by which;
asau—the living entity; pratipadyate—experiences.
TRANSLATION
261
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
When there was a separate manifestation of skin, the controlling deities of sensations and
their different parts entered into it, and thus the living entities feel itching and happiness
due to touch.
PURPORT
For sense perception there are two principal items, touch and itching, and both of them
are controlled by the skin and hairs on the body. According to Çré Viçvanätha
Cakravarté, the controlling deity of touch is the air passing within the body, and the
controlling deity of the hairs on the body is Oñadhya. For the skin the object of
perception is touch, and for the hairs on the body the object of perception is itching.
TEXT 19
Mae!\& TaSYa iviNai>aRà& SviDaZ<Ya& k- oPaaivXaTa( )
reTaSaa&XaeNa YaeNaaSaavaNaNd& Pa[iTaPaÛTae )) 19 ))
meòhraà tasya vinirbhinnaà
sva-dhiñëyaà ka upäviçat
retasäàçena yenäsäv
änandaà pratipadyate
SYNONYMS
meòhram—genitals; tasya—of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnam—being separated; svadhiñëyam—
own position; kaù—Brahmä, the original living creature; upäviçat—entered;
retasä aàçena—with the part of the semen; yena—by which; asau—the living entity;
änandam—sex pleasure; pratipadyate—experiences.
TRANSLATION
When the genitals of the gigantic form separately became manifest, then Prajäpati, the
original living creature, entered into them with his partial semen, and thus the living
entities can enjoy sex pleasure.
TEXT 20
262
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Gaud& Pau&Saae iviNai>aRà& iMa}aae l/aeke-Xa AaivXaTa( )
PaaYauNaa&XaeNa YaeNaaSaaE ivSaGa| Pa[iTaPaÛTae )) 20 ))
gudaà puàso vinirbhinnaà
mitro lokeça äviçat
päyunäàçena yenäsau
visargaà pratipadyate
SYNONYMS
gudam—evacuating outlet; puàsaù—of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnam—being
separately manifested; mitraù—the sun-god; loka-éçaù—the director named Mitra;
äviçat—entered; päyunä aàçena—with the partial evacuation process; yena—by which;
asau—the living entity; visargam—evacuation; pratipadyate—performs.
TRANSLATION
The evacuating channel separately became manifest, and the director named Mitra
entered into it with partial organs of evacuation. Thus the living entities are able to pass
stool and urine.
TEXT 21
hSTaavSYa iviNai>aRàaivNd]" SvPaRiTaraivXaTa( )
vaTaRYaa&XaeNa Pauåzae YaYaa v*ita& Pa[PaÛTae )) 21 ))
hastäv asya vinirbhinnäv
indraù svar-patir äviçat
värtayäàçena puruño
yayä våttià prapadyate
SYNONYMS
hastau—hands; asya—of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnau—being separately manifested;
indraù—the King of heaven; svaù-patiù—the ruler of heavenly planets; äviçat—entered
263
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
into it; värtayä aàçena—with partial mercantile principles; puruñaù—the living entity;
yayä—by which; våttim—business of livelihood; prapadyate—transacts.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, when the hands of the gigantic form separately became manifested, Indra, the
ruler of the heavenly planets, entered into them, and thus the living entity is able to
transact business for his livelihood.
TEXT 22
PaadavSYa iviNai>aRàaE l/aeke-Xaae ivZ<auraivXaTa( )
GaTYaa Sva&XaeNa Pauåzae YaYaa Pa[aPYa& Pa[PaÛTae )) 22 ))
pädäv asya vinirbhinnau
lokeço viñëur äviçat
gatyä sväàçena puruño
yayä präpyaà prapadyate
SYNONYMS
pädau—the legs; asya—of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnau—being manifested separately;
loka-éçaù viñëuù—the demigod Viñëu (not the Personality of Godhead); äviçat—
entered; gatyä—by the power of movement; sva-aàçena—with his own parts; puruñaù—
living entity; yayä—by which; präpyam—destination; prapadyate—reaches.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the legs of the gigantic form separately became manifest, and the demigod
named Viñëu [not the Personality of Godhead] entered with partial movement. This helps
the living entity move to his destination.
TEXT 23
buiÖ& caSYa iviNai>aRàa& vaGaqXaae iDaZ<YaMaaivXaTa( )
264
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
baeDaeNaa&XaeNa baeÖVYaMa( Pa[iTaPaitaYaRTaae >aveTa( )) 23 ))
buddhià cäsya vinirbhinnäà
väg-éço dhiñëyam äviçat
bodhenäàçena boddhavyam
pratipattir yato bhavet
SYNONYMS
buddhim—intelligence; ca—also; asya—of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnäm—being
separately manifested; väk-éçaù—Brahmä, lord of the Vedas; dhiñëyam—the controlling
power; äviçat—entered in; bodhena aàçena—with his part of intelligence;
boddhavyam—the matter of understanding; pratipattiù—understood; yataù—by which;
bhavet—so becomes.
TRANSLATION
When the intelligence of the gigantic form separately became manifest, Brahmä, the lord
of the Vedas, entered into it with the partial power of understanding, and thus an object
of understanding is experienced by the living entities.
TEXT 24
ôdYa& caSYa iNai>aRà& cNd]Maa iDaZ<YaMaaivXaTa( )
MaNaSaa&XaeNa YaeNaaSaaE ivi§-Yaa& Pa[iTaPaÛTae )) 24 ))
hådayaà cäsya nirbhinnaà
candramä dhiñëyam äviçat
manasäàçena yenäsau
vikriyäà pratipadyate
SYNONYMS
hådayam—heart; ca—also; asya—of the gigantic form; nirbhinnam—being manifested
separately; candramä—the moon demigod; dhiñëyam—with controlling power; äviçat—
entered into; manasä aàçena—partly with mental activity; yena—by which; asau—the
265
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
living entity; vikriyäm—resolution; pratipadyate—transacts.
TRANSLATION
After that, the heart of the gigantic form separately manifested itself, and into it entered
the moon demigod with partial mental activity. Thus the living entity can conduct his
mental speculations.
TEXT 25
AaTMaaNa& caSYa iNai>aRàMai>aMaaNaae_ivXaTPadMa( )
k-MaR<aa&XaeNa YaeNaaSaaE k-TaRVYa& Pa[iTaPaÛTae )) 25 ))
ätmänaà cäsya nirbhinnam
abhimäno 'viçat padam
karmaëäàçena yenäsau
kartavyaà pratipadyate
SYNONYMS
ätmänam—false ego; ca—also; asya—of the gigantic form; nirbhinnam—being
separately manifested; abhimänaù—false identification; aviçat—entered; padam—in
position; karmaëä—activities; aàçena—by the part; yena—by which; asau—the living
entity; kartavyam—objective activities; pratipadyate—takes in.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the materialistic ego of the gigantic form separately manifested itself, and into
it entered Rudra, the controller of false ego, with his own partial activities, by which the
living entity transacts his objective actions.
PURPORT
The false ego of materialistic identity is controlled by the demigod Rudra, an
incarnation of Lord Çiva. Rudra is the incarnation of the Supreme Lord who controls
the mode of ignorance within material nature. The activities of the false ego are based
266
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
on the objective of the body and mind. Most persons conducted by the false ego are
controlled by Lord Çiva. When one reaches a finer version of ignorance, he falsely
thinks of himself as the Supreme Lord. That egoistic conviction of the conditioned soul
is the last snare of the illusory energy which controls the entire material world.
TEXT 26
Satv& caSYa iviNai>aRà& MahaiNDaZ<YaMauPaaivXaTa( )
ictaeNaa&XaeNa YaeNaaSaaE ivjaNa& Pa[iTaPaÛTae )) 26 ))
sattvaà cäsya vinirbhinnaà
mahän dhiñëyam upäviçat
cittenäàçena yenäsau
vijïänaà pratipadyate
SYNONYMS
sattvam—consciousness; ca—also; asya—of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnam—being
separately manifested; mahän—the total energy, mahat-tattva; dhiñëyam—with control;
upäviçat—entered into; cittena aàçena—along with His part of consciousness; yena—by
which; asau—the living entity; vijïänam—specific knowledge; pratipadyate—cultivates.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, when His consciousness separately manifested itself, the total energy, mahattattva,
entered with His conscious part. Thus the living entity is able to conceive specific
knowledge.
TEXT 27
XaqZ<aaeR_SYa ÛaEDaRra PaÙya& %& Naa>aeådPaÛTa )
Gau<aaNaa& v*taYaae Yaezu Pa[TaqYaNTae SauradYa" )) 27 ))
çérñëo 'sya dyaur dharä padbhyäà
khaà näbher udapadyata
267
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
guëänäà våttayo yeñu
pratéyante surädayaù
SYNONYMS
çérñëaù—head; asya—of the gigantic form; dyauù—the heavenly planets; dharä—
earthly planets; padbhyäm—on His legs; kham—the sky; näbheù—from the abdomen;
udapadyata—became manifested; guëänäm—of the three modes of nature; våttayaù—
reactions; yeñu—in which; pratéyante—manifest; sura-ädayaù—the demigods and
others.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, from the head of the gigantic form, the heavenly planets were manifested, and
from His legs the earthly planets and from His abdomen the sky separately manifested
themselves. Within them the demigods and others also were manifested in terms of the
modes of material nature.
TEXT 28
AaTYaiNTake-Na SatveNa idv& deva" Pa[Paeidre )
Dara& rJa"Sv>aaveNa Pa<aYaae Yae c TaaNaNau )) 28 ))
ätyantikena sattvena
divaà deväù prapedire
dharäà rajaù-svabhävena
paëayo ye ca tän anu
SYNONYMS
ätyantikena—excessive; sattvena—by the mode of goodness; divam—in the higher
planets; deväù—the demigods; prapedire—have been situated; dharäm—on the earth;
rajaù—the mode of passion; svabhävena—by nature; paëayaù—the human being; ye—
all those; ca—also; tän—their; anu—subordinate.
TRANSLATION
268
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The demigods, qualified by the superexcellent quality of the mode of goodness, are
situated in the heavenly planets, whereas the human beings, because of their nature in
the mode of passion, live on the earth in company with their subordinates.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (14.14-15) it is said that those who are highly developed in the mode of
goodness are promoted to the higher, heavenly planetary system, and those who are
overpowered by the mode of passion are situated in the middle planetary systems—the
earth and similar planets. But those who are surcharged with the mode of ignorance are
degraded to the lower planetary systems or to the animal kingdom. The demigods are
highly developed in the mode of goodness, and thus they are situated in the heavenly
planets. Below human beings are the animals, although some of them mingle with
human society; cows, horses, dogs, etc., are habituated to living under the protection of
human beings.
The word ätyantikena is very significant in this verse. By development of the mode of
goodness of material nature one can become situated in the heavenly planets. But by
excessive development of the modes of passion and ignorance, the human being indulges
in killing the animals who are meant to be protected by mankind. Persons who indulge
in unnecessary animal killing have excessively developed in the modes of passion and
ignorance and have no hope of advancing to the mode of goodness; they are destined to
be degraded to lower statuses of life. The planetary systems are calculated as upper and
lower in terms of the classes of living entities who live there.
TEXT 29
TaaTasYaeNa Sv>aaveNa >aGavàai>aMaaié[Taa" )
o>aYaaerNTar& VYaaeMa Yae åd]PaazRda& Ga<aa" )) 29 ))
tärtéyena svabhävena
bhagavan-näbhim äçritäù
ubhayor antaraà vyoma
ye rudra-pärñadäà gaëäù
SYNONYMS
269
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tärtéyena—by excessive development of the third mode of material nature, the mode of
ignorance; svabhävena—by such nature; bhagavat-näbhim—the abdominal navel of the
gigantic form of the Personality of Godhead; äçritäù—those who are so situated;
ubhayoù—between the two; antaram—in between; vyoma—the sky; ye—all of whom;
rudra-pärñadäm—associates of Rudra; gaëäù—population.
TRANSLATION
Living entities who are associates of Rudra develop in the third mode of material nature,
or ignorance. They are situated in the sky between the earthly planets and the heavenly
planets.
PURPORT
This middle portion of the sky is called Bhuvarloka, as confirmed by both Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté and Çréla Jéva Gosvämé. In Bhagavad-gétä it is stated that those
who develop in the mode of passion are situated in the middle region. Those who are
situated in the mode of goodness are promoted to the regions of the demigods, those who
are situated in the mode of passion are placed in human society, and those who are
situated in the mode of ignorance are placed in the society of animals or ghosts. There
are no contradictions in this conclusion. Numerous living entities are distributed all
over the universe in different planets and are so situated in terms of their own qualities
in the modes of material nature.
TEXT 30
Mau%Taae_vTaRTa b]ø PauåzSYa ku-æÜh )
YaSTaUNMau%TvaÜ<aaRNaa& Mau:Yaae_>aUd(b]aø<aae Gauå" )) 30 ))
mukhato 'vartata brahma
puruñasya kurüdvaha
yas tünmukhatväd varëänäà
mukhyo 'bhüd brähmaëo guruù
SYNONYMS
270
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mukhataù—from the mouth; avartata—generated; brahma—the Vedic wisdom;
puruñasya—of the viräö-puruña, the gigantic form; kuru-udvaha—O chief of the Kuru
dynasty; yaù—who are; tu—due to; unmukhatvät—inclined to; varëänäm—of the orders
of society; mukhyaù—the chief; abhüt—so became; brähmaëaù—called the brähmaëas;
guruù—the recognized teacher or spiritual master.
TRANSLATION
O chief of the Kuru dynasty, the Vedic wisdom became manifested from the mouth of the
viräö, the gigantic form. Those who are inclined to this Vedic knowledge are called
brähmaëas, and they are the natural teachers and spiritual masters of all the orders of
society.
PURPORT
As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (4.13), the four orders of human society developed with
the order of the body of the gigantic form. The bodily divisions are the mouth, arms,
waist and legs. Those who are situated on the mouth are called brähmaëas, those who
are situated on the arms are called kñatriyas, those who are situated on the waist are
called vaiçyas, and those who are situated on the legs are called çüdras. Everyone is
situated in the body of the Supreme in His gigantic viçva-rüpa form. In terms of the four
orders, therefore, no caste is to be considered degraded because of being situated on a
particular part of the body. In our own bodies we do not show any actual difference in
our treatment towards the hands or legs. Each and every part of the body is important,
although the mouth is the most important of the bodily parts. If other parts are cut off
from the body, a man can continue his life, but if the mouth is cut off, one cannot live.
Therefore, this most important part of the body of the Lord is called the sitting place of
the brähmaëas, who are inclined to the Vedic wisdom. One who is not inclined to the
Vedic wisdom but to mundane affairs cannot be called a brähmaëa, even if he is born of
a brähmaëa family or father. To have a brähmaëa father does not qualify one as a
brähmaëa. The main qualification of a brähmaëa is to be inclined to the Vedic wisdom.
The Vedas are situated on the mouth of the Lord, and therefore anyone who is inclined
to the Vedic wisdom is certainly situated on the mouth of the Lord, and he is a
brähmaëa. This inclination towards Vedic wisdom is also not restricted to any particular
caste or community. Anyone from any family and from any part of the world may
become inclined to the Vedic wisdom, and that will qualify him as a real brähmaëa.
271
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
A real brähmaëa is the natural teacher or spiritual master. Unless one has Vedic
knowledge, one cannot become a spiritual master. The perfect knowledge of the Vedas is
to know the Lord, the Personality of Godhead, and that is the end of Vedic knowledge,
or Vedänta. One who is situated in the impersonal Brahman and has no information of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead may become a brähmaëa, but he cannot become a
spiritual master. It is said in the Padma Puräëa:
ñaö-karma-nipuëo vipro
mantra-tantra-viçäradaù
avaiñëavo gurur na syäd
vaiñëavaù çva-paco guruù
An impersonalist can become a qualified brähmaëa, but he cannot become a spiritual
master unless and until he is promoted to the stage of a Vaiñëava, or a devotee of the
Personality of Godhead. Lord Caitanya, the great authority of Vedic wisdom in the
modern age, stated:
kibä vipra, kibä nyäsé, çüdra kene naya
yei kåñëa-tattva-vettä, sei 'guru' haya
A person may be a brähmaëa or a çüdra or a sannyäsé, but if he happens to be well versed
in the science of Kåñëa, then he is fit to become a spiritual master. (Cc. Madhya 8.128)
The qualification, then, of a spiritual master is not to be a qualified brähmaëa, but to be
well versed in the science of Kåñëa.
One who is conversant with Vedic wisdom is a brähmaëa. And only a brähmaëa who is a
pure Vaiñëava and knows all the intricacies of the science of Kåñëa can become a
spiritual master.
TEXT 31
bahu>Yaae_vTaRTa +a}a& +ai}aYaSTadNauv]Ta" )
Yaae JaaTañaYaTae v<aaRNa( PaaEåz" k-<$=k-+aTaaTa( )) 31 ))
bähubhyo 'vartata kñatraà
kñatriyas tad anuvrataù
yo jätas träyate varëän
272
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
pauruñaù kaëöaka-kñatät
SYNONYMS
bähubhyaù—from the arms; avartata—generate d; kñatram—the power of protection;
kñatriyaù—in relation to the power of protection; tat—that; anuvrataù—followers;
yaù—one who; jätaù—so becomes; träyate—delivers; varëän—the other occupations;
pauruñaù—representative of the Personality of Godhead; kaëöaka—of disturbing
elements like thieves and debauchees; kñatät—from the mischief.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the power of protection was generated from the arms of the gigantic viräö
form, and in relation to such power the kñatriyas also came into existence by following
the kñatriya principle of protecting society from the disturbance of thieves and
miscreants.
PURPORT
As the brähmaëas are recognized by their particular qualification of inclination towards
the transcendental knowledge of Vedic wisdom, so also the kñatriyas are recognized by
the power to protect society from the disturbing elements of thieves and miscreants. The
word anuvrataù is significant. A person who follows the kñatriya principles by protecting
society from thieves and miscreants is called a kñatriya, not the one who is simply born a
kñatriya. The conception of the caste system is always based on quality and not on the
qualification of birth. Birth is an extraneous consideration; it is not the main feature of
the orders and divisions. In Bhagavad-gétä (18.41-44) the qualifications of the brähmaëas,
kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras are specifically mentioned, and it is understood that all such
qualifications are needed before one can be designated as belonging to a particular
group.
Lord Viñëu is always mentioned as the puruña in all Vedic scriptures. Sometimes the
living entities are also mentioned as puruñas, although they are essentially puruña-çakti
(parä çakti or parä prakåti), the superior energy of the puruña. Illusioned by the external
potency of the puruña (the Lord), the living entities falsely think of themselves as the
puruña although they actually have no qualifications. The Lord has the power to protect.
Of the three deities Brahmä, Viñëu and Maheçvara, the first has the power to create, the
second has the power to protect, and the third has the power to destroy. The word
273
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
puruña is significant in this verse because the kñatriyas are expected to represent the
puruña Lord in giving protection to the prajäs, or all those who are born in the land and
water. Protection is therefore meant for both man and the animals. in modern society
the prajäs are not protected from the hands of thieves and miscreants. The modern
democratic state, which has no kñatriyas, is a government of the vaiçyas and çüdras, and
not of brähmaëas and kñatriyas as formerly. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and his grandson,
Mahäräja Parékñit, were typical kñatriya kings, for they gave protection to all men and
animals. When the personification of Kali attempted to kill a cow, Mahäräja Parékñit at
once prepared himself to kill the miscreant, and the personification of Kali was banished
from his kingdom. That is the sign of puruña, or the representative of Lord Viñëu.
According to Vedic civilization, a qualified kñatriya monarch is given the respect of the
Lord because he represents the Lord by giving protection to the prajäs. Modern elected
presidents cannot even give protection from theft cases, and therefore one has to take
protection from an insurance company. The problems of modern human society are due
to the lack of qualified brähmaëas and kñatriyas and the overinfluence of the vaiçyas and
çüdras by so-called general franchise.
TEXT 32
ivXaae_vTaRNTa TaSYaaevaeRl/aeRk-v*itak-rqivR>aae" )
vEXYaSTaduÙvae vaTaa| Na*<aa& Ya" SaMavTaRYaTa( )) 32 ))
viço 'vartanta tasyorvor
loka-våttikarér vibhoù
vaiçyas tad-udbhavo värtäà
nåëäà yaù samavartayat
SYNONYMS
viçaù—means of living by production and distribution; avartanta—generated; tasya—
His (the gigantic form's); ürvoù—from the thighs; loka-våttikaréù—means of livelihood;
vibhoù—of the Lord; vaiçyaù—the mercantile community; tat—their; udbhavaù—
orientation; värtäm—means of living; nåëäm—of all men; yaù—one who;
samavartayat—executed.
274
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The means of livelihood of all persons, namely production of grains and their distribution
to the prajäs, was generated from the thighs of the Lord's gigantic form. The mercantile
men who take charge of such execution are called vaiçyas.
PURPORT
Human society's means of living is clearly mentioned here as viça, or agriculture and the
business of distributing agricultural products, which involves transport, banking, etc.
Industry is an artificial means of livelihood, and large-scale industry especially is the
source of all the problems of society. In Bhagavad-gétä also the duties of the vaiçyas, who
are engaged in viça, are stated as cow protection, agriculture and business. We have
already discussed that the human being can safely depend on the cow and agricultural
land for his livelihood.
The exchange of produce by banking and transportation is a branch of this type of
living. The vaiçyas are divided into many subsections: some of them are called kñetré, or
landowners, some are called kåñaëa, or land tillers, some of them are called tila-vaëik, or
grain raisers, some are called gandha-vaëik, or merchants in spices, and some are called
suvarëa-vaëik, or merchants in gold and banking. The brähmaëas are the teachers and
spiritual masters, the kñatriyas protect the citizens from the hands of thieves and
miscreants, and the vaiçyas are in charge of production and distribution. The çüdras, the
unintelligent class of men who cannot act independently in any of the above-mentioned
activities, are meant for serving the three higher classes for their livelihood.
Formerly, the brähmaëas were given all the necessities of life by the kñatriyas and vaiçyas
because they had no time to spend making a living. The kñatriyas would collect taxes
from the vaiçyas and çüdras, but the brähmaëas were exempt from paying income tax or
land revenue. That system of human society was so nice that there were no political,
social and economic upheavals. The different castes, or varëa classifications, are
therefore essential for maintaining a peaceful human society.
TEXT 33
PaÙya& >aGavTaae Jaje éué[Uza DaMaRiSaÖYae )
TaSYaa& JaaTa" Paura éUd]ae Yad(v*tYaa TauZYaTae hir" )) 33 ))
275
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
padbhyäà bhagavato jajïe
çuçrüñä dharma-siddhaye
tasyäà jätaù purä çüdro
yad-våttyä tuñyate hariù
SYNONYMS
padbhyäm—from the legs; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; jajïe—became
manifested; çuçrüñä—service; dharma—occupational duty; siddhaye—for the matter of;
tasyäm—in that; jätaù—being generated; purä—formerly; çüdraù—the servitors; yatvåttyä—
the occupation by which; tuñyate—becomes satisfied; hariù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, service was manifested from the legs of the Personality of Godhead for the
sake of perfecting the religious function. Situated on the legs are the çüdras, who satisfy
the Lord by service.
PURPORT
Service is the real constitutional occupation of all living entities. The living entities are
meant to render service to the Lord, and they can attain religious perfection by this
service attitude. One cannot attain religious perfection simply by speculating to attain
theoretical knowledge. The jïäné division of spiritualists go on speculating only to
distinguish the soul from matter, but they have no information of the activities of the
soul after being liberated by knowledge. It is said that persons who only mentally
speculate to know things as they are and who do not engage in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord are simply wasting their time.
It is clearly said here that the principle of service was generated from the legs of the
Lord for the sake of perfecting the religious process, but this transcendental service is
different from the idea of service in the material world. In the material world, no one
wants to be a servant; everyone wants to become the master because false mastership is
the basic disease of the conditioned soul. The conditioned soul in the material world
wants to lord it over others. Illusioned by the external energy of the Lord, he is forced to
become a servant of the material world. That is the real position of the conditioned soul.
The last snare of the illusory, external energy is the conception of becoming one with
276
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the Lord, and due to this conception the illusioned soul remains in the bondage of
material energy, falsely thinking himself a liberated soul and "as good as Näräyaëa."
It is actually better to be a çüdra than to be a brähmaëa and not develop the service
attitude, because that attitude alone satisfies the Lord. Every living being—even if he be
a brähmaëa by qualification—must take to the transcendental service of the Lord. Both
Bhagavad-gétä and the Çrémad-Bhägavatam support that this service attitude is the
perfection of the living entity. A brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya or çüdra can perfect his
occupational duties only by rendering service unto the Lord. A brähmaëa is supposed to
know this fact due to his perfection in Vedic wisdom. The other sections are supposed to
follow the direction of the brähmaëa Vaiñëava (one who is a brähmaëa by qualification
and a Vaiñëava by action). That will make the entire society perfect in regard to the
order of its social construction. A disordered society cannot satisfy either the members
of the society or the Lord. Even if one is not a perfect brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya or çüdra
but takes to the service of the Lord, not caring for the perfection of his social position,
he becomes a perfect human being simply by developing the attitude of service to the
Supreme Lord.
TEXT 34
WTae v<aaR" SvDaMaeR<a YaJaiNTa SvGauå& hirMa( )
é[ÖYaaTMaivéuÖyQa| YaÂaTaa" Sah v*itai>a" )) 34 ))
ete varëäù sva-dharmeëa
yajanti sva-guruà harim
çraddhayätma-viçuddhy-arthaà
yaj-jätäù saha våttibhiù
SYNONYMS
ete—all these; varëäù—orders of society; sva-dharmeëa—by one's own occupational
duties; yajanti—worship; sva-gurum—with the spiritual master; harim—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; çraddhayä—with faith and devotion; ätma—self; viçuddhiartham—
for purifying; yat—from whom; jätäù—born; saha—along with; våttibhiù—
occupational duty.
277
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
All these different social divisions are born, with their occupational duties and living
conditions, from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus for unconditional life and
self-realization one has to worship the Supreme Lord under the direction of the spiritual
master.
PURPORT
Since they are born from different parts of the body of the Supreme Lord in His gigantic
form, all living entities in all parts of the entire universe are supposed to be eternal
servitors of the supreme body. Every part of our own body, such as the mouth, hands,
thighs and legs, is meant to render service to the whole. That is their constitutional
position. In subhuman life the living entities are not conscious of this constitutional
position, but in the human form of life they are supposed to know this through the
system of the varëas, the social orders. As above mentioned, the brähmaëa is the
spiritual master of all the orders of society, and thus brahminical culture, culminating in
the transcendental service of the Lord, is the basic principle for purifying the soul.
In conditioned life the soul is under the impression that he can become the lord of the
universe, and the last point of this misconception is to think oneself the Supreme. The
foolish conditioned soul does not take into account that the Supreme cannot be
conditioned by mäyä, or illusion. If the Supreme were to become conditioned by illusion,
where would be His supremacy? In that case, mäyä, or illusion, would be the Supreme.
Therefore, because the living entities are conditioned, they cannot be supreme. The
actual position of the conditioned soul is explained in this verse: all the conditioned
souls are impure due to contact with the material energy in three modes of nature.
Therefore it is necessary that they purify themselves under the guidance of the bona
fide spiritual master, who not only is a brähmaëa by qualification but must also be a
Vaiñëava. The only self-purifying process mentioned herein is to worship the Lord
under the recognized method—under the guidance of the bona fide spiritual master.
That is the natural way of purification, and no other method is recommended as bona
fide. The other methods of purification may be helpful to come to this stage of life, but
ultimately one has to come to this last point before he attains actual perfection.
Bhagavad-gétä (7.19) confirms this truth as follows:
bahünäà janmanäm ante
jïänavän mäà prapadyate
278
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
väsudevaù sarvam iti
sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù
TEXT 35
WTaT+ata>aRGavTaae dEvk-MaaRTMaæiPa<a" )
k-" é[ÕDYaaduPaak-Tau| YaaeGaMaaYaabl/aedYaMa( )) 35 ))
etat kñattar bhagavato
daiva-karmätma-rüpiëaù
kaù çraddadhyäd upäkartuà
yogamäyä-balodayam
SYNONYMS
etat—this; kñattaù—O Vidura; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
daiva-karma-ätma-rüpiëaù—of the gigantic form of transcendental work, time and
nature; kaù—who else; çraddadhyät—can aspire; upäkartum—measure in totality;
yogamäyä—internal potency; bala-udayam—manifested by the strength of.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, who can estimate or measure the transcendental time, work and potency of the
gigantic form manifested by the internal potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead?
PURPORT
The froggish philosophers may go on with their mental speculations on the subject
matter of the viräö, the gigantic form exhibited by the yogamäyä internal potency of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but factually no one can measure such a vast
exhibition. In Bhagavad-gétä (11.16), Arjuna, the recognized devotee of the Lord, says:
aneka-bähüdara-vaktra-netraà
paçyämi tväà sarvato 'nanta-rüpam
näntaà na madhyaà na punas tavädià
paçyämi viçveçvara viçva-rüpa
279
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
"O my Lord, O gigantic viçva-rüpa form, O master of the universe, I see innumerable
hands, bodies, mouths and eyes in all directions, and they are all unlimited. I cannot
find the end of this manifestation, nor do I see the middle, nor the beginning."
Bhagavad-gétä was specifically spoken to Arjuna, and the viçva-rüpa was exhibited before
him at his request. He was awarded the specific eyes to see this viçva-rüpa, yet although
he was able to see the Lord's innumerable hands and mouths, he was unable to see Him
completely. Since Arjuna was unable to estimate the length and breadth of the potency
of the Lord, who else would be able to do so? One may only indulge in miscalculation
like the frog-philosopher. The frog-philosopher wanted to estimate the length and
breadth of the Pacific Ocean by his experience of a well three cubic feet large, and thus
he began to puff himself up to become as big as the Pacific Ocean, but at last he burst
and died by this process. This story is applicable to the mental philosophers who, under
the illusion of the Lord's external energy, indulge in estimating the length and breadth
of the Supreme Lord. The best path is to become a cool-headed, submissive devotee of
the Lord, try to hear about the Lord from the bona fide spiritual master, and thus serve
the Lord in transcendental loving service, as suggested in the previous verse.
TEXT 36
TaQaaiPa k-ITaRYaaMYa(r) YaQaaMaiTa YaQaaé[uTaMa( )
k-IiTa| hre" Sva& SaTk-Tau| iGarMaNYaai>aDaaSaTaqMa( )) 36 ))
tathäpi kértayämy aìga
yathä-mati yathä-çrutam
kértià hareù sväà sat-kartuà
giram anyäbhidhäsatém
SYNONYMS
tathä—therefore; api—although it is so; kértayämi—I do describe; aìga—O Vidura;
yathä—as much as; mati—intelligence; yathä—as much as; çrutam—heard; kértim—
glories; hareù—of the Lord; sväm—own; sat-kartum—just purify; giram—speeches;
anyäbhidhä—otherwise; asatém—unchaste.
TRANSLATION
280
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
In spite of my inability, whatever I have been able to hear [from the spiritual master] and
whatever I could assimilate I am now describing in glorification of the Lord by pure
speech, for otherwise my power of speaking would remain unchaste.
PURPORT
The purification of the conditioned soul necessitates purification of his consciousness.
By the presence of consciousness, the presence of the transcendental soul is verified, and
as soon as consciousness leaves the body, the material body is not active. Consciousness
is perceived, therefore, by activities. The theory put forward by empiric philosophers
that consciousness can remain in an inactive state is the proof of their poor fund of
knowledge. One should not become unchaste by stopping the activities of pure
consciousness. If the activities of pure consciousness are stopped, certainly the conscious
living force will be otherwise engaged because unless engaged the consciousness has no
standing. Consciousness cannot be silent, even for a moment. When the body does not
act, the consciousness acts in the form of dreams. Unconsciousness is artificial; by
induced extraneous help it remains for a limited period, but when the intoxication of
the drug is finished or when one is awake, the consciousness again acts earnestly.
Maitreya's statement is that in order to avoid unchaste conscious activities, he was
trying to describe the unlimited glories of the Lord, although he did not have the ability
to describe them perfectly. This glorification of the Lord is not a product of research,
but the result of hearing submissively from the authority of the spiritual master. It is also
not possible to repeat all that one has heard from his spiritual master, but one can
narrate as far as possible by one's honest endeavor. It does not matter whether the Lord's
glories are fully explained or not. One must attempt to engage one's bodily, mental and
verbal activities in the transcendental glorification of the Lord, otherwise such activities
will remain unchaste and impure. The existence of the conditioned soul can be purified
only by the method of engaging mind and speech in the service of the Lord. The
tridaëòi-sannyäsé of the Vaiñëava school accepts three rods, representing the vow to
engage in the service of the Lord with body, mind and speech, whereas the ekadaëòisannyäsé
takes the vow to become one with the Supreme. Since the Lord is the Absolute,
there is no distinction between Him and His glories. The glories of the Lord as chanted
by the Vaiñëava sannyäsé are as substantial as the Lord Himself, and thus while
glorifying the Lord the devotee becomes one with Him in transcendental interest,
although he remains eternally a transcendental servitor. This simultaneously one and
different position of the devotee makes him eternally purified, and thus his life becomes
281
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
a complete success.
TEXT 37
Wk-aNTal/a>a& vcSaae Nau Pau&Saa&
Sauëaek-MaaEle/GauR<avadMaahu" )
é[uTaeê ivÜiÙåPaak*-TaaYaa&
k-QaaSauDaaYaaMauPaSaMPa[YaaeGaMa( )) 37 ))
ekänta-läbhaà vacaso nu puàsäà
suçloka-mauler guëa-vädam ähuù
çruteç ca vidvadbhir upäkåtäyäà
kathä-sudhäyäm upasamprayogam
SYNONYMS
eka-anta—the one which has no comparison; läbham—gain; vacasaù—by discussions;
nu puàsäm—after the Supreme Person; suçloka—pious; mauleù—activities; guëavädam—
glorification; ähuù—it is so said; çruteù—of the ear; ca—also; vidvadbhiù—by
the learned; upäkåtäyäm—being so edited; kathä-sudhäyäm—in the nectar of such a
transcendental message; upasamprayogam—serves the real purpose, being nearer to.
TRANSLATION
The highest perfectional gain of humanity is to engage in discussions of the activities and
glories of the Pious Actor. Such activities are so nicely arranged in writing by the greatly
learned sages that the actual purpose of the ear is served just by being near them.
PURPORT
The impersonalists are very much afraid of hearing the activities of the Lord because
they think that the happiness derived from the transcendental situation of Brahman is
the ultimate goal of life; they think that anyone's activity, even that of the Personality
of Godhead, is mundane. But the idea of happiness indicated in this verse is different
because it relates to the activities of the Supreme Personality, who has transcendental
qualities. The word guëa-vädam is significant because the qualities of the Lord and His
282
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
activities and pastimes are the subject matter for the discussions of devotees. A åñi like
Maitreya is certainly not interested in discussing anything pertaining to mundane
qualities, yet he says that the highest perfectional stage of transcendental realization is
to discuss the Lord's activities. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, therefore, concludes that topics
regarding the transcendental activities of the Lord are far beyond the transcendental
realization of kaivalya happiness. These transcendental activities of the Lord are so
arranged in writing by the great sages that simply by hearing of those narrations one
becomes perfectly self-realized, and the proper use of the ear and the tongue is also
achieved. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is one of such great literatures, and the highest
perfectional state of life is attained simply by hearing and reciting its contents.
TEXT 38
AaTMaNaae_viSaTaae vTSa MaihMaa k-ivNaaidNaa )
Sa&vTSarSahóaNTae iDaYaa YaaeGaivPa¡-Yaa )) 38 ))
ätmano 'vasito vatsa
mahimä kavinädinä
saàvatsara-sahasränte
dhiyä yoga-vipakkayä
SYNONYMS
ätmanaù—of the Supreme Soul; avasitaù—known; vatsa—O my dear son; mahimä—
glories; kavinä—by the poet Brahmä; ädinä—original; saàvatsara—celestial years;
sahasra-ante—at the end of one thousand; dhiyä—by intelligence; yoga-vipakkayä—by
matured meditation.
TRANSLATION
O my son, the original poet, Brahmä, after mature meditation for one thousand celestial
years, could know only that the glories of the Supreme Soul are inconceivable.
PURPORT
There are some froggish philosophers who want to know the Supreme Soul by means of
283
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
philosophy and mental speculation. And when the devotees, who are to some extent in
knowledge of the Supreme Lord, admit that the glories of the Lord are inestimable or
inconceivable, the froggish philosophers adversely criticize them. These philosophers,
like the frog in the well who tried to estimate the measurement of the Pacific Ocean,
like to take trouble over fruitless mental speculation instead of taking instructions from
devotees like the original poet, namely, Brahmä. Lord Brahmä underwent a severe type
of meditation for one thousand celestial years, yet he said that the glories of the Lord are
inconceivable. Therefore what can the froggish philosophers hope to gain from their
mental speculations?
It is said in the Brahma-saàhitä that the mental speculator may fly through the sky of
speculation with the velocity of the mind or the wind for thousands of millions of years,
and still he will find it inconceivable. The devotees, however, do not waste time in such
vain searching after knowledge of the Supreme, but they submissively hear the glories of
the Lord from bona fide devotees. Thus they transcendentally enjoy the process of
hearing and chanting. The Lord approves of the devotional activities of the devotees or
mahätmäs, and He says:
mahätmänas tu mäà pärtha
daivéà prakåtim äçritäù
bhajanty ananya-manaso
jïätvä bhütädim avyayam
satataà kértayanto mäà
yatantaç ca dåòha-vratäù
namasyantaç ca mäà bhaktyä
nitya-yuktä upäsate
(Bg. 9.13-14)
The pure devotees of the Lord take shelter of the parä prakåti, the internal potency of
the Lord called Lakñmédevé, Sétädevé, Çrématé Rädhäräëé or Çrématé Rukmiëédevé, and
thus they become actual mahätmäs, or great souls. Mahätmä are not fond of indulging in
mental speculations, but they actually take to the devotional service of the Lord,
without the slightest deviation. Devotional service is manifested by the primary process
of hearing and chanting about the activities of the Lord. This transcendental method
practiced by the mahätmäs gives them sufficient knowledge of the Lord because if the
Lord can at all be known to some extent, it is only through the means of devotional
service and no other way. One may go on speculating and waste the valuable time of his
284
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
human life, but that will not help anyone to enter into the precincts of the Lord. The
mahätmäs, however, are not concerned with knowing the Lord by mental speculation
because they enjoy hearing about His glorious activities in His transcendental dealings
with His devotees or with the demons. The devotees take pleasure in both and are happy
in this life and the life after.
TEXT 39
ATaae >aGavTaae MaaYaa MaaiYaNaaMaiPa MaaeihNaq )
YaTSvYa& caTMavTMaaRTMaa Na ved ik-MauTaaPare )) 39 ))
ato bhagavato mäyä
mäyinäm api mohiné
yat svayaà cätma-vartmätmä
na veda kim utäpare
SYNONYMS
ataù—therefore; bhagavataù—godly; mäyä—potencies; mäyinäm—of the jugglers; api—
even; mohiné—enchanting; yat—that which; svayam—personally; ca—also; ätmavartma—
self-sufficient; ätmä—self; na—does not; veda—know; kim—what; uta—to
speak of; apare—others.
TRANSLATION
The wonderful potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is bewildering even to the
jugglers. That potential power is unknown even to the self-sufficient Lord, so it is
certainly unknown to others.
PURPORT
The froggish philosophers and mundane wranglers in science and mathematical
calculation may not believe in the inconceivable potency of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but they are sometimes puzzled by the wonderful jugglery of man and nature.
Such jugglers and magicians of the mundane world are actually puzzled by the jugglery of
the Lord in His transcendental activities, but they try to adjust their bewilderment by
285
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
saying that it is all mythology. There is, however, nothing impossible or mythological in
the Supreme Omnipotent Person. The most wonderful puzzle for the mundane
wranglers is that while they remain calculating the length and breadth of the unlimited
potency of the Supreme Person, His faithful devotees are set free from the bondage of
material encagement simply by appreciating the wonderful jugglery of the Supreme in
the practical field. The devotees of the Lord see the wonderful dexterity in everything
with which they come in contact in all circumstances of eating, sleeping, working, etc. A
small banyan fruit contains thousands of small seeds, and each seed holds the potency of
another tree, which again holds the potency of many millions of such fruits as causes
and effects. So the trees and seeds engage the devotees in meditation about the activities
of the Lord, while the mundane wranglers waste time in dry speculation and mental
concoction, which are fruitless in both this life and the next. In spite of their pride in
speculation, they can never appreciate the simple potential activities of the banyan tree.
Such speculators are poor souls destined to remain in matter perpetually.
TEXT 40
YaTaae_Pa[aPYa NYavTaRNTa vacê MaNaSaa Sah )
Ah& caNYa wMae devaSTaSMaE >aGavTae NaMa" )) 40 ))
yato 'präpya nyavartanta
väcaç ca manasä saha
ahaà cänya ime deväs
tasmai bhagavate namaù
SYNONYMS
yataù—from whom; apräpya—being unable to measure; nyavartanta—cease to try;
väcaù—words; ca—also; manasä—with the mind; saha—with; aham ca—also the ego;
anye—other; ime—all these; deväù—demigods; tasmai—unto Him; bhagavate—unto the
Personality of Godhead; namaù—offer obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Words, mind and ego, with their respective controlling demigods, have failed to achieve
success in knowing the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, we simply have to
286
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
offer our respectful obeisances unto Him as a matter of sanity.
PURPORT
The froggish calculator may raise the objection that if the Absolute is unknowable even
by the controlling deities of speech, mind and ego, namely the Vedas, Brahmä, Rudra
and all the demigods headed by Båhaspati, then why should the devotees be so interested
in this unknown object? The answer is that the transcendental ecstasy enjoyed by the
devotees in delineating the pastimes of the Lord is certainly unknown to nondevotees
and mental speculators. Unless one relishes transcendental joy, naturally one will come
back from his speculations and concocted conclusions because he will see them as
neither factual nor enjoyable. The devotees can at least know that the Absolute Truth is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead Viñëu, as the Vedic hymns confirm: oà tad viñëoù
paramaà padaà sadä paçyanti sürayaù. Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) also confirms this fact:
vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù. By culture of Vedic knowledge one must know Lord
Kåñëa and should not falsely speculate on the word aham, or "I." The only method for
understanding the Supreme Truth is devotional service, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(18.55): bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù. Only by devotional service
can one know that the ultimate truth is the Personality of Godhead and that Brahman
and Paramätmä are only His partial features. This is confirmed in this verse by the great
sage Maitreya. With devotion he offers his sincere surrender, namaù, to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, bhagavate. One has to follow in the footsteps of great sages and
devotees like Maitreya and Vidura, Mahäräja Parékñit and Çukadeva Gosvämé, and
engage in the transcendental devotional service of the Lord if one would know His
ultimate feature, which is above Brahman and Paramätmä.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "Creation of the Universal Form."
7. Further Inquires by Vidura
TEXT 1
287
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
é[qéuk- ovac
Wv& b]uva<a& MaE}aeYa& ÜEPaaYaNaSauTaae buDa" )
Pa[q<aYaiàv >aarTYaa ivdur" Pa[TYa>aazTa )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evaà bruväëaà maitreyaà
dvaipäyana-suto budhaù
préëayann iva bhäratyä
viduraù pratyabhäñata
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; bruväëam—speaking;
maitreyam—unto the sage. Maitreya; dvaipäyana-sutaù—the son of Dvaipäyana;
budhaù—learned; préëayan—in a pleasing manner; iva—as it was; bhäratyä—in the
manner of a request; viduraù—Vidura; pratyabhäñata—expressed.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, while Maitreya, the great sage, was thus speaking,
Vidura, the learned son of Dvaipäyana Vyäsa, expressed a request in a pleasing manner
by asking this question.
TEXT 2
ivdur ovac
b]øNa( k-Qa& >aGavTaiêNMaa}aSYaaivk-air<a" )
l/Il/Yaa caiPa YauJYaeriàGauR<aSYa Gau<aa" ik[-Yaa" )) 2 ))
vidura uväca
brahman kathaà bhagavataç
cin-mätrasyävikäriëaù
lélayä cäpi yujyeran
nirguëasya guëäù kriyäù
288
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
viduraù uväca—Vidura said; brahman—O brähmaëa; katham—how; bhagavataù—of the
Personality of Godhead; cit-mätrasya—of the complete spiritual whole; avikäriëaù—of
the unchangeable; lélayä—by His pastime; ca—either; api—even though it is so;
yujyeran—take place; nirguëasya—who is without the modes of nature; guëäù—modes
of nature; kriyäù—activities.
TRANSLATION
Çré Vidura said: O great brähmaëa, since the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
complete spiritual whole and is unchangeable, how is He connected with the material
modes of nature and their activities? If this is His pastime, how do the activities of the
unchangeable take place and exhibit qualities without the modes of nature?
PURPORT
As described in the previous chapter, the difference between the Supersoul, the
Supreme Lord, and the living entities is that the activities of the Lord in creating the
cosmic manifestation are performed by the Lord through the agency of His multifarious
energies, but this manifestation is bewildering to the living entities. The Lord is
therefore the master of the energies, whereas the living entities are subjugated by them.
By asking various questions about transcendental activities, Vidura is clearing the
misconception that when the Lord either descends on the earth in His incarnation or
appears Himself with all His potencies, He too is subjected to the influence of mäyä, just
like an ordinary living entity. This is generally the calculation of less intelligent
philosophers who consider the position of the Lord and that of the living entities to be
on the same level. Vidura is hearing the great sage Maitreya refute these arguments. The
Lord is described in this verse as cin-mätra, or completely spiritual. The Personality of
Godhead has unlimited potencies to create and manifest many wonderful things, both
temporary and permanent. Because this material world is the creation of His external
energy, it thus appears to be temporary; it is manifested at certain intervals, maintained
for some time, and again dissolved and conserved in His own energy. As described in
Bhagavad-gétä (8.19), bhütvä bhütvä praléyate. But the creation of His internal potency,
the spiritual world, is not a temporary manifestation like the material world, but is
eternal and full of transcendental knowledge, opulence, energy, strength, beauties and
glories. Such manifestations of the Lord's potencies are eternal and are therefore called
289
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nirguëa, or free from all tinges of the modes of material nature, even up to the mode of
material goodness. The spiritual world is transcendental even to material goodness and
thus is unchangeable. Since the Supreme Lord of such eternal and unchangeable
qualities is never subjugated by anything like material influence, how can His activities
and form be conceived to be under the influence of illusory mäyä, as is the case with the
living entities?
A juggler or magician displays many wonders with his acts and arts. He can become a
cow by his magical tactics, and yet he is not that cow; but at the same time, the cow
displayed by the magician is not different from him. Similarly, the material potency is
not different from the Lord because it is an emanation from Him, but at the same time,
that manifestation of potency is not the Supreme Lord. The Lord's transcendental
knowledge and potency always remain the same; they do not change, even when
displayed in the material world. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord descends on the
earth by His own internal potency, and therefore there is no question of His becoming
materially contaminated, changed or otherwise affected by the modes of material nature.
The Lord is saguëa by His own internal potency, but at the same time He is nirguëa,
since He is not in touch with the material energy. The restrictions of the prison house
are applicable to prisoners who are condemned by the king's law, but the king is never
affected by such implications, although he may visit the prison house out of his good
will. In the Viñëu Puräëa the six opulences of the Lord are stated to be nondifferent
from Him. The opulences of transcendental knowledge, strength, opulence, potency,
beauty and renunciation are all identical with the Personality of Godhead. When He
personally displays such opulences in the material world, they have no connection with
the modes of material nature. The very word cin-mätratva is the guarantee that the
Lord's activities are always transcendental, even when displayed in the material world.
His activities are as good as the Supreme Personality Himself, otherwise liberated
devotees like Çukadeva Gosvämé would not have been attracted by them. Vidura
inquired how the Lord's activities can be in the modes of material nature, as is
sometimes miscalculated by persons with a poor fund of knowledge. The inebriety of the
material qualities is due to the difference between the material body and the spirit soul.
The conditioned soul's activities are displayed through the medium of the modes of
material nature and are therefore perverted in appearance. However, the Lord's body
and the Lord Himself are one and the same, and when the Lord's activities are displayed,
they are certainly nondifferent from the Lord in all respects. The conclusion is that
persons who consider the Lord's activities material are certainly mistaken.
290
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 3
§-I@aYaaMauÛMaae_>aRSYa k-aMaiê§-Ii@zaNYaTa" )
SvTaSTa*áSYa c k-Qa& iNav*taSYa SadaNYaTa" )) 3 ))
kréòäyäm udyamo 'rbhasya
kämaç cikréòiñänyataù
svatas-tåptasya ca kathaà
nivåttasya sadänyataù
SYNONYMS
kréòäyäm—in the matter of playing; udyamaù—enthusiasm; arbhasya—of the boys;
kämaù—desire; cikréòiñä—willingness to play; anyataù—with other boys; svataùtåptasya—
for one who is self-satisfied; ca—also; katham—what for; nivåttasya—one who
is detached; sadä—at all times; anyataù—otherwise.
TRANSLATION
Boys are enthusiastic to play with other boys or with various diversions because they are
encouraged by desire. But there is no possibility of such desire for the Lord because He is
self-satisfied and detached from everything at all times.
PURPORT
Since the Supreme Personality of Godhead is one without a second, there is no
possibility that anything besides Him can exist. He expands Himself by His energies in
multiforms of self-expansions and separated expansions as well, just as fire expands itself
by heat and light. Since there is no other existence besides the Lord Himself, the Lord's
association with anything manifests His association with Himself. In Bhagavad-gétä (9.4)
the Lord says:
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
291
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
"The complete manifestation of the cosmic situation is an expansion of the Lord Himself
in His impersonal feature. All things are situated in Him only, yet He is not in them."
That is the opulence of the Lord's attachment and detachment. He is attached to
everything, yet He is detached from all.
TEXT 4
Aóa+aqÙGavaNa( ivì& Gau<aMaYYaaTMaMaaYaYaa )
TaYaa Sa&SQaaPaYaTYaeTad(>aUYa" Pa[TYaiPaDaaSYaiTa )) 4 ))
asräkñéd bhagavän viçvaà
guëa-mayyätma-mäyayä
tayä saàsthäpayaty etad
bhüyaù pratyapidhäsyati
SYNONYMS
asräkñét—caused to create; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; viçvam—the
universe; guëa-mayyä—endowed with three modes of material nature; ätma—self;
mäyayä—by the potency; tayä—by her; saàsthäpayati—maintains; etat—all these;
bhüyaù—then again; praty-apidhäsyati—conversely dissolves also.
TRANSLATION
By His self-sheltered potency of the three modes of material nature, the Lord has caused
the creation of this universe. By her He maintains the creation and conversely dissolves
it, again and again.
PURPORT
This cosmic universe is created by the Lord for those living entities who are carried
away by the illusory thought of becoming one with Him by imitation. The three modes
of material nature are for the further bewilderment of the conditioned souls. The
conditioned living entity, bewildered by the illusory energy, considers himself a part of
the material creation due to forgetfulness of his spiritual identity, and thus he becomes
entangled in material activities life after life. This material world is not for the purpose
292
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of the Lord Himself, but is for the conditioned souls who wanted to be controllers due to
misuse of their God-gifted minute independence. Thus the conditioned souls are
subjected to repeated birth and death.
TEXT 5
deXaTa" k-al/Taae Yaae_SaavvSQaaTa" SvTaae_NYaTa" )
Aivlu/áavbaeDaaTMaa Sa YauJYaeTaaJaYaa k-QaMa( )) 5 ))
deçataù kälato yo 'säv
avasthätaù svato 'nyataù
aviluptävabodhätmä
sa yujyetäjayä katham
SYNONYMS
deçataù—circumstantial; kälataù—by the influence of time; yaù—one who; asau—the
living entity; avasthätaù—by situation; svataù—by dream; anyataù—by others;
avilupta—extinct; avabodha—consciousness; ätmä—pure self; saù—he; yujyeta—
engaged; ajayä—with nescience; katham—how is it so.
TRANSLATION
The pure soul is pure consciousness and is never out of consciousness, either due to
circumstances, time, situations, dreams or other causes. How then does he become
engaged in nescience?
PURPORT
The consciousness of the living being is always present and never changes under any
circumstances, as above mentioned. When a living man moves from one place to
another, he is conscious that he has changed his position. He is always present in the
past, present and future, like electricity. One can remember incidents from his past and
can conjecture about his future also on the basis of past experience. He never forgets his
personal identity, even though he is placed in awkward circumstances. How then can
the living entity become forgetful of his real identity as pure spirit soul and identify with
293
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
matter unless influenced by something beyond himself? The conclusion is that the living
entity is influenced by the avidyä potency, as confirmed in both the Viñëu Puräëa and
the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The living entity is mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä
(7.5) as parä prakåti, and in the Viñëu Puräëa he is mentioned as the parä çakti. He is
part and parcel of the Supreme Lord as potency and not as the potent. The potent can
exhibit many potencies, but the potency cannot equal the potent at any stage. One
potency may be overcome by another potency, but to the potent, all potencies are under
control. The jéva potency, or the kñetrajïa-çakti of the Lord, has the tendency to be
overpowered by the external potency, avidyä-karma-saàjïä, and in this way he is placed
in the awkward circumstances of material existence. The living entity cannot be
forgetful of his real identity unless influenced by the avidyä potency. Because the living
entity is prone to the influence of the avidyä potency, he can never equal the supreme
potent.
TEXT 6
>aGavaNaek- WvEz SavR+ae}aeZvviSQaTa" )
AMauZYa du>aRGaTv& va (c)e-Xaae va k-MaRi>a" ku-Ta" )) 6 ))
bhagavän eka evaiña
sarva-kñetreñv avasthitaù
amuñya durbhagatvaà vä
kleço vä karmabhiù kutaù
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ekaù—alone; eva eñaù—all these;
sarva—all; kñetreñu—in the living entities; avasthitaù—situated; amuñya—of the living
entities; durbhagatvam—misfortune; vä—either; kleçaù—miseries; vä—or; karmabhiù—
by activities; kutaù—what for.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, as the Supersoul, is situated in every living being's heart. Why then do the
living entities' activities result in misfortune and misery?
294
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The next question put forward by Vidura to Maitreya is, "Why are the living entities
subjected to so many miseries and misfortunes in spite of the Lord's presence in their
hearts as the Supersoul?" The body is considered a fruitful tree, and the living entity and
the Lord as Supersoul are like two birds seated in that tree. The individual soul is eating
the fruit of the tree, but the Supersoul, the Lord, is witnessing the activities of the other
bird. A citizen of the state may be in miseries for want of sufficient supervision by the
state authority, but how can it be possible that a citizen suffers from other citizens while
the chief of the state is personally present? From another point of view, it is understood
that the jéva living entity is qualitatively one with the Lord, and thus his knowledge in
the pure state of life cannot be covered by nescience, especially in the presence of the
Supreme Lord. How then does the living entity become subjected to ignorance and
covered by the influence of mäyä? The Lord is the father and protector of every living
entity, and He is known as the bhüta-bhåt, or the maintainer of the living entities. Why
then should the living entity he subjected to so many sufferings and misfortunes? It
should not be so, but actually we see that it happens everywhere. This question is
therefore put forward by Vidura for solution.
TEXT 7
WTaiSMaNMae MaNaae ivÜNa( i%ÛTae_jaNaSaª$e= )
Taà" Para<aud iv>aae k-XMal&/ MaaNaSa& MahTa( )) 7 ))
etasmin me mano vidvan
khidyate 'jïäna-saìkaöe
tan naù paräëuda vibho
kaçmalaà mänasaà mahat
SYNONYMS
etasmin—in this; me—my; manaù—mind; vidvan—O learned one; khidyate—is
troubling; ajïäna—nescience; saìkaöe—in distress; tat—therefore; naù—my;
paräëuda—clear up; vibho—O great one; kaçmalam—illusion; mänasam—relating to
the mind; mahat—great.
295
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
O great and learned one, my mind is greatly illusioned by the distress of this nescience,
and I therefore request you to clear it up.
PURPORT
Such mental bewilderment as represented here by Vidura takes place for some living
entities, but not for everyone, for if everyone were bewildered there would be no
possibility of a solution by higher personalities.
TEXT 8
é[qéuk- ovac
Sa wTQa& caeidTa" +aT}aa TatviJajaSauNaa MauiNa" )
Pa[TYaah >aGaviÀta" SMaYaiàv GaTaSMaYa" )) 8 ))
çré-çuka uväca
sa itthaà coditaù kñatträ
tattva-jijïäsunä muniù
pratyäha bhagavac-cittaù
smayann iva gata-smayaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; saù—he (Maitreya Muni); ittham—in this
way; coditaù—being agitated; kñatträ—by Vidura; tattva-jijïäsunä—by one who was
anxious to inquire to know the truth; muniù—the great sage; pratyäha—replied;
bhagavat-cittaù—God conscious; smayan—wondering; iva—as if; gata-smayaù—without
hesitation.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, Maitreya, being thus agitated by the inquisitive
Vidura, at first seemed astonished, but then he replied to him without hesitation, since he
was fully God conscious.
296
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Since the great sage Maitreya was filled with God consciousness, he had no reason to be
astonished at such contradictory questions by Vidura. Therefore, although as a devotee
he externally expressed surprise, as if he did not know how to reply to those questions,
he immediately became perfectly settled and properly replied to Vidura. Yasmin vijïäte
sarvam evaà vijïätaà bhavati (Muëòaka Upaniñad 1.3). Anyone who is a devotee of the
Lord knows about the Lord to some extent, and devotional service to the Lord makes
him able to know everything by the grace of the Lord. Although a devotee may
apparently express himself to be ignorant, he is full of knowledge in every intricate
matter.
TEXT 9
MaE}aeYa ovac
SaeYa& >aGavTaae MaaYaa YaàYaeNa ivåDYaTae )
wRìrSYa ivMau¢-SYa k-aPaR<YaMauTa bNDaNaMa( )) 9 ))
maitreya uväca
seyaà bhagavato mäyä
yan nayena virudhyate
éçvarasya vimuktasya
kärpaëyam uta bandhanam
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; sä iyam—such a statement; bhagavataù—of the
Personality of Godhead; mäyä—illusion; yat—that which; nayena—by logic;
virudhyate—becomes contradictory; éçvarasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vimuktasya—of the ever liberated; kärpaëyam—insufficiency; uta—as also, what to
speak of; bandhanam—bondage.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: Certain conditioned souls put forward the theory that the Supreme
Brahman, or the Personality of Godhead, is overcome by illusion, or mäyä, and at the
297
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
same time they maintain that He is unconditioned. This is against all logic.
PURPORT
Sometimes it appears that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is one hundred
percent spiritual, cannot be the cause of the illusory potency which covers the
knowledge of the individual soul. But factually there is no doubt that the illusory,
external energy is also part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. When Vyäsadeva realized
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he saw the Lord along with His external potency,
which covers the pure knowledge of the individual living entities. Why the external
energy acts in this way may be considered as follows, as analyzed by great commentators
like Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura and Çréla Jéva Gosvämé. Although the material,
illusory energy is distinct from the spiritual energy, it is one of the many energies of the
Lord, and thus the material modes of nature (the mode of goodness, etc.) are surely
qualities of the Lord. The energy and the energetic Personality of Godhead are not
different, and although such energy is one with the Lord, He is never overpowered by it.
Although the living entities are also parts and parcels of the Lord, they are overcome by
the material energy. The inconceivable yogam aiçvaram of the Lord, as mentioned in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.5), is misunderstood by the froggish philosophers. In order to support a
theory that Näräyaëa (the Lord Himself) becomes a daridra-näräyaëa, a poor man, they
propose that the material energy overcomes the Supreme Lord. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé and
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, however, offer a very nice example in
explanation. They say that although the sun is all light, the clouds, darkness and
snowfall are all part and parcel of the sun. Without the sun there is no possibility of the
sky's being overcast with clouds or darkness, nor can there be snowfall on the earth.
Although life is sustained by the sun, life is also disturbed by darkness and snowfall
produced by the sun. But it is also a fact that the sun itself is never overcome by
darkness, clouds or snowfall; the sun is far, far away from such disturbances. Only those
who have a poor fund of knowledge say that the sun is covered by a cloud or by darkness.
Similarly, the Supreme Brahman, or the Parabrahman, the Personality of Godhead, is
always unaffected by the influence of the material energy, although it is one of His
energies (paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]).
There is no reason to assert that the Supreme Brahman is overpowered by the illusory
energy. The clouds, darkness and snowfall can cover only a very insignificant portion of
the sun's rays. Similarly, the modes of material nature may react upon the raylike living
entities. It is the misfortune of the living entity, certainly not without reason, that the
298
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
influence of the material energy acts on his pure consciousness and eternal bliss. This
covering up of pure consciousness and eternal bliss is due to avidyä-karmä-saàjïä, the
energy which acts on the infinitesimal living entities who misuse their minute
independence. According to Viñëu Puräëa, Bhagavad-gétä and all other Vedic
literatures, the living entities are generated from the taöasthä energy of the Lord, and
thus they are always the energy of the Lord and are not the energetic. The living
entities are like the sun's rays. Although, as explained above, there is no qualitative
difference between the sun and its rays, the sun's rays are sometimes overpowered by
another energy of the sun, namely by clouds or by snowfall. Similarly, although the
living entities are qualitatively one with the superior energy of the Lord, they have the
tendency to be overpowered by the inferior, material energy. In the Vedic hymns it is
said that the living entities are like the sparks of a fire. The sparks of fire also are fire,
but the burning potency of the sparks is different from that of the original fire. When
the sparks fly out of touch with the original fire, they come under the influence of a
nonfiery atmosphere; thus they maintain the potency to be again one with the fire as
sparks, but not as the original fire. The sparks can everlastingly remain within the
original fire as its parts and parcels, but the moment the sparks become separated from
the original fire, their misfortunes and miseries begin. The clear conclusion is that the
Supreme Lord, who is the original fire, is never overpowered, but the infinitesimal
sparks of the fire can become overpowered by the illusory effect of mäyä. It is a most
ludicrous argument to say that the Supreme Lord is overpowered by His own material
energy. The Lord is the master of the material energy, but the living entities are in the
conditioned state, controlled by the material energy. That is the version of Bhagavadgétä.
The froggish philosophers who put forward the argument that the Supreme Lord is
overpowered by the material mode of goodness are themselves illusioned by the same
material energy, although they think of themselves as liberated souls. They support their
arguments by a false and laborious jugglery of words, which is a gift of the same illusory
energy of the Lord. But the poor froggish philosophers, due to a false sense of knowledge,
cannot understand the situation.
In the Sixth Canto, Ninth Chapter, thirty-fourth verse, of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is
stated:
duravabodha iva taväyaà vihära-yogo yad açaraëo 'çaréra idam anavekñitäsmatsamaväya
ätmanaivävikriyamäëena saguëam aguëaù såjasi päsi harasi.
Thus the demigods prayed to the Supreme Lord that although His activities are very
difficult to understand, they can still be understood to some extent by those who
299
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sincerely engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. The demigods
admitted that although the Lord is apart from the material influence or creation, He
nevertheless creates, maintains and annihilates the complete cosmic manifestation by
the agency of the demigods.
TEXT 10
YadQaeRNa ivNaaMauZYa Pau&Sa AaTMaivPaYaRYa" )
Pa[TaqYaTa oPad]íu" SviXarX^edNaaidk-" )) 10 ))
yad arthena vinämuñya
puàsa ätma-viparyayaù
pratéyata upadrañöuù
sva-çiraç chedanädikaù
SYNONYMS
yat—thus; arthena—a purpose or meaning; vinä—without; amuñya—of such a one;
puàsaù—of the living entity; ätma-viparyayaù—upset about self-identification;
pratéyate—so appear; upadrañöuù—of the superficial onlooker; sva-çiraù—own head;
chedana-ädikaù—cutting off.
TRANSLATION
The living entity is in distress regarding his self-identity. He has no factual background,
like a man who dreams that he sees his head cut off.
PURPORT
A teacher in school once threatened his pupil that he would cut off the pupil's head and
hang it on the wall so that the child could see how his head had been cut off. The child
became frightened and stopped his mischief. Similarly, the miseries of the pure soul and
the disruption of his self-identification are managed by the external energy of the Lord,
which controls those mischievous living entities who want to go against the will of the
Lord. Actually there is no bondage or misery for the living entity, nor does he ever lose
his pure knowledge. In his pure consciousness, when he thinks a little seriously about his
300
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
position, he can understand that he is eternally subordinate to the mercy of the
Supreme and that his attempt to become one with the Supreme Lord is a false illusion.
Life after life the living entity falsely tries to lord it over material nature and become
the lord of the material world, but there is no tangible result. At last, when frustrated,
he gives up his material activities and tries to become one with the Lord and speculate
with much jugglery of words, but without success.
These activities are performed under the dictation of the illusory energy. The
experience is compared to the experience of one's having his head cut off in a dream.
The man whose head has been cut off also sees that his head has been cut off. If a
person's head is severed he loses his power to see. Therefore if a man sees that his head
has been cut off, it means that he thinks like that in hallucination. Similarly a living
entity is eternally subordinate to the Supreme Lord, and he has this knowledge with
him, but, artificially, he thinks that he is God himself and that although he is God he
has lost his knowledge due to mäyä. This conception has no meaning, just as there is no
meaning to seeing one's head being cut off. This is the process by which knowledge is
covered. And because this artificial rebellious condition of the living entity gives him all
troubles, it is to be understood that he should take to his normal life as a devotee of the
Lord and be relieved from the misconception of being God. The so-called liberation of
thinking oneself God is that last reaction of avidyä by which the living entity is
entrapped. The conclusion is that a living entity deprived of eternal transcendental
service to the Lord becomes illusioned in many ways. Even in his conditional life he is
the eternal servant of the Lord. His servitude under the spell of illusory mäyä is also a
manifestation of his eternal condition of service. Because he has rebelled against the
service of the Lord, he is therefore put in the service of the mäyä. He is still serving, but
in a perverted manner. When he wants to get out of service under material bondage, he
next desires to become one with the Lord. This is another illusion. The best course,
therefore, is to surrender unto the Lord and thus get rid of the illusory mäyä for good, as
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14):
daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé
mama mäyä duratyayä
mäm eva ye prapadyante
mäyäm etäà taranti te
TEXT 11
301
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
YaQaa Jale/ cNd]MaSa" k-MPaaidSTaTk*-Taae Gau<a" )
d*XYaTae_SaàiPa d]íuraTMaNaae_NaaTMaNaae Gau<a" )) 11 ))
yathä jale candramasaù
kampädis tat-kåto guëaù
dåçyate 'sann api drañöur
ätmano 'nätmano guëaù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; jale—in the water; candramasaù—of the moon; kampa-ädiù—quivering, etc.;
tat-kåtaù—done by the water; guëaù—quality; dåçyate—it is so seen; asan api—without
existence; drañöuù—of the seer; ätmanaù—of the self; anätmanaù—of other than the
self; guëaù—quality.
TRANSLATION
As the moon reflected on water appears to the seer to tremble due to being associated
with the quality of the water, so the self associated with matter appears to be qualified as
matter.
PURPORT
The Supreme Soul, the Personality of Godhead, is compared to the moon in the sky, and
the living entities are compared to the reflection of the moon on water. The moon in
the sky is fixed and does not appear to quiver like the moon on the water. Actually, like
the original moon in the sky, the moon reflected on the water should also not quiver,
but because of being associated with water, the reflection appears to be quivering,
although in actual fact the moon is fixed. The water moves, but the moon does not
move. Similarly, the living entities appear to be tainted by material qualities like
illusion, lamentation and miseries, although in the pure soul such qualities are
completely absent. The word pratéyate, which means "apparently" and "not actually" (like
the experience of having one's head cut off in a dream), is significant here. The
reflection of the moon on the water is the separated rays of the moon and not the actual
moon. The separated parts and parcels of the Lord entangled in the water of material
existence have the quivering quality, whereas the Lord is like the actual moon in the
302
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sky, which is not at all in touch with water. The light of the sun and moon reflected on
matter makes the matter bright and praiseworthy. The living symptoms are compared to
the light of the sun and the moon illuminating material manifestations like trees and
mountains. The reflection of the sun or moon is accepted as the real sun or moon by less
intelligent men, and the pure monistic philosophy develops from these ideas. In fact, the
light of the sun and the moon are actually different from the sun and moon themselves,
although they are always connected. The light of the moon spread throughout the sky
appears to be impersonal, but the moon planet, as it is, is personal, and the living entities
on the moon planet are also personal. In the rays of the moon, different material entities
appear to be comparatively more or less important. The light of the moon on the Taj
Mahal appears to be more beautiful than the same light in the wilderness. Although the
light of the moon is the same everywhere, due to being differently appreciated it appears
different. Similarly, the light of the Lord is equally distributed everywhere, but due to
being differently received, it appears to be different. One should not, therefore, accept
the reflection of the moon on the water as actual and misunderstand the whole situation
through monistic philosophy. The quivering quality of the moon is also variable. When
the water is standing still, there is no quivering. A more settled conditioned soul quivers
less, but due to material connection the quivering quality is more or less present
everywhere.
TEXT 12
Sa vE iNav*itaDaMaeR<a vaSaudevaNauk-MPaYaa )
>aGavÙi¢-YaaeGaeNa iTaraeDatae XaNaEirh )) 12 ))
sa vai nivåtti-dharmeëa
väsudevänukampayä
bhagavad-bhakti-yogena
tirodhatte çanair iha
SYNONYMS
saù—that; vai—also; nivåtti—detachment; dharmeëa—by engagement; väsudeva—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; anukampayä—by the mercy of; bhagavat—in relation
with the Personality of Godhead; bhakti-yogena—by linking up; tirodhatte—diminishes;
çanaiù—gradually; iha—in this existence.
303
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
But that misconception of self-identity can be diminished gradually by the mercy of the
Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, through the process of devotional service to the Lord
in the mode of detachment.
PURPORT
The quivering quality of material existence, which comes from identification with
matter or from thinking oneself, under the material influence of philosophical
speculation, to be God, can be eradicated by devotional service to the Lord, by the
mercy of the Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva. As discussed in the First Canto,
because the application of devotional service to Lord Väsudeva invites pure knowledge,
it quickly detaches one from the material conception of life and thus revives one's
normal condition of spiritual existence, even in this life, and frees one from the material
winds which cause one to quiver. Only knowledge in devotional service can elevate one
towards the path of liberation. The development of knowledge for the purpose of
knowing everything, without rendering devotional service, is considered fruitless labor,
and one cannot get the desired result by such labor of love. Lord Väsudeva is pleased by
devotional service only, and thus His mercy is realized by association with pure devotees
of the Lord. Pure devotees of the Lord are transcendental to all material desires,
including the desire for the results of fruitive activities and philosophical speculation. If
one wants to acquire the mercy of the Lord, he has to associate with pure devotees. Such
association alone can, by degrees, release one from the quivering elements.
TEXT 13
YadeiNd]YaaeParaMaae_Qa d]í\aTMaiNa Pare hraE )
ivl/IYaNTae Tada (c)e-Xaa" Sa&SauáSYaev k*-TòXa" )) 13 ))
yadendriyoparämo 'tha
drañörätmani pare harau
viléyante tadä kleçäù
saàsuptasyeva kåtsnaçaù
SYNONYMS
304
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yadä—when; indriya—senses; uparämaù—satiated; atha—thus; drañöå-ätmani—unto
the seer, the Supersoul; pare—in the Transcendence; harau—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; viléyante—become merged in; tadä—at that time; kleçäù—
miseries; saàsuptasya—one who has enjoyed sound sleep; iva—like; kåtsnaçaù—
completely.
TRANSLATION
When the senses are satisfied in the seer-Supersoul, the Personality of Godhead, and
merge in Him, all miseries are completely vanquished, as after a sound sleep.
PURPORT
The quivering of the living entity as described above is due to the senses. Since the
entire material existence is meant for sense gratification, the senses are the medium of
material activities, and they cause the quivering of the steady soul. Therefore, these
senses are to be detached from all such material activities. According to the
impersonalists the senses are stopped from work by merging the soul in the Supersoul
Brahman. The devotees, however, do not stop the material senses from acting, but they
engage their transcendental senses in the service of the Transcendence, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In either case, the activities of the senses in the material field
are to be stopped by cultivation of knowledge, and, if possible, they can be engaged in
the service of the Lord. The senses are transcendental in nature, but their activities
become polluted when contaminated by matter. We have to treat the senses to cure
them of the material disease, not stop them from acting, as suggested by the
impersonalist. In Bhagavad-gétä (2.59) it is said that one ceases all material activities
only when satisfied by contact with a better engagement. Consciousness is active by
nature and cannot be stopped from working. Artificially stopping a mischievous child is
not the real remedy. The child must be given some better engagement so that he will
automatically stop causing mischief. In the same way, the mischievous activities of the
senses can be stopped only by better engagement in relation with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. When the eyes are engaged in seeing the beautiful form of the
Lord, the tongue engaged in tasting prasäda, or remnants of foodstuff offered to the
Lord, the ears are engaged in hearing His glories, the hands engaged in cleaning the
temple of the Lord, the legs engaged in visiting His temples—or when all the senses are
engaged in transcendental variegatedness—then only can the transcendental senses
305
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
become satiated and eternally free from material engagement. The Lord, as the
Supersoul residing in everyone's heart and as the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
the transcendental world far beyond the material creation, is the seer of all our
activities. Our activities must be so transcendentally saturated that the Lord will be kind
enough to look upon us favorably and engage us in His transcendental service; then only
can the senses be satisfied completely and be no longer troubled by material attraction.
TEXT 14
AXaezSa&(c)e-XaXaMa& ivDatae Gau<aaNauvadé[v<a& Maurare" )
ik&- va PauNaSTaÀr<aarivNd ParaGaSaevariTaraTMal/BDaa )) 14 ))
açeña-saìkleça-çamaà vidhatte
guëänuväda-çravaëaà muräreù
kià vä punas tac-caraëäravindaparäga-
sevä-ratir ätma-labdhä
SYNONYMS
açeña—unlimited; saìkleça—miserable conditions; çamam—cessation; vidhatte—can
perform; guëa-anuväda—of the transcendental name, form, qualities, pastimes,
entourage and paraphernalia, etc.; çravaëam—hearing and chanting; muräreù—of
Muräri (Çré Kåñëa), the Personality of Godhead; kim vä—what to speak of; punaù—
again; tat—His; caraëa-aravinda—lotus feet; paräga-sevä—to the service of the flavorful
dust; ratiù—attraction; ätma-labdhä—those who have gained such self-achievement.
TRANSLATION
Simply by chanting and hearing of the transcendental name, form, etc., of the Personality
of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, one can achieve the cessation of unlimited miserable conditions.
Therefore what to speak of those who have attained attraction for serving the flavor of
the dust of the Lord's lotus feet?
PURPORT
Two different methods for controlling the material senses are recommended in the
306
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Vedic scriptural wisdom. One of them is the process of jïäna, or the path of
philosophical understanding of the Supreme—Brahma, Paramätmä and Bhagavän. The
other is that of direct engagement in the transcendental loving devotional service of the
Lord. Of these two most popular methods, the path of devotional service is
recommended here as the best because one on the path of devotional service does not
have to wait for the attainment of the fruitive results of pious activities or for the results
of knowledge. The two stages of executing devotional service are, first, the stage of
practicing devotional service with our present senses under the regulations of the
recognized scriptures and, second, attaining sincere attachment for serving the particles
of the dust of the lotus feet of the Lord. The first stage is called sädhana-bhakti, or
devotional service for the neophyte, which is rendered under the direction of a pure
devotee, and the second stage is called räga-bhakti, in which the mature devotee
automatically takes to the various services of the Lord out of sincere attachment. The
great sage Maitreya now gives the final answer to all the questions of Vidura: devotional
service to the Lord is the ultimate means to mitigate all the miserable conditions of
material existence. The path of knowledge or that of mystic gymnastics may be adopted
as a means for the purpose, but unless mixed with bhakti, or devotional service, they are
unable to award the desired result. By practicing sädhana-bhakti one may gradually rise
to the point of räga-bhakti, and by performing räga-bhakti in loving transcendental
service one can even control the Supreme Powerful Lord.
TEXT 15
ivdur ovac
SaiH^à" Sa&XaYaae Maù& Tav SaU¢-aiSaNaa iv>aae )
o>aYa}aaiPa >aGavNMaNaae Mae SaMPa[DaaviTa )) 15 ))
vidura uväca
saïchinnaù saàçayo mahyaà
tava süktäsinä vibho
ubhayaträpi bhagavan
mano me sampradhävati
SYNONYMS
viduraù uväca—Vidura said; saïchinnaù—cut off; saàçayaù—doubts; mahyam—unto
307
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
me; tava—your; sükta-asinä—by the weapon of convincing words; vibho—O my lord;
ubhayatra api—both in God and in the living entity; bhagavan—O powerful one;
manaù—mind; me—my; sampradhävati—perfectly entering.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: O powerful sage, my lord, all my doubts about the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and the living entities have now been removed by your convincing words. My
mind is now perfectly entering into them.
PURPORT
The science of Kåñëa, or the science of God and the living entities, is so subtle that even
a personality like Vidura has to consult persons like the sage Maitreya. Doubts about the
eternal relationship of the Lord and the living entity are created by mental speculators
in different ways, but the conclusive fact is that the relationship of God and the living
entity is one of the predominator and the predominated. The Lord is the eternal
predominator, and the living entities are eternally predominated. Real knowledge of this
relationship entails reviving the lost consciousness to this standard, and the process for
such revival is devotional service to the Lord. By clearly understanding from authorities
like the sage Maitreya, one can become situated in real knowledge, and the disturbed
mind can thus be fixed on the progressive path.
TEXT 16
SaaßeTad( VYaaôTa& ivÜàaTMaMaaYaaYaNa& hre" )
Aa>aaTYaPaaQa| iNaMaURl&/ ivìMaUl&/ Na YaØih" )) 16 ))
sädhv etad vyähåtaà vidvan
nätma-mäyäyanaà hareù
äbhäty apärthaà nirmülaà
viçva-mülaà na yad bahiù
SYNONYMS
sädhu—as good as it should be; etat—all these explanations; vyähåtam—thus spoken;
308
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
vidvan—O learned one; na—not; ätma—the self; mäyä—energy; ayanam—movement;
hareù—of the Personality of Godhead; äbhäti—appears; apärtham—without meaning;
nirmülam—without basis; viçva-mülam—the origin is the Supreme; na—not; yat—
which; bahiù—outside.
TRANSLATION
O learned sage, your explanations are very good, as they should be. Disturbances to the
conditioned soul have no other basis than the movement of the external energy of the
Lord.
PURPORT
A living entity's unlawful desire to become one with the Lord in every respect is the root
cause of the entire material manifestation, for otherwise the Lord has no need to create
such a manifestation, even for His pastimes. The conditioned soul, under the spell of the
external energy of the Lord, falsely suffers many unfortunate incidents in material life.
The Lord is the predominator of the external energy, mäyä, whereas the living entity is
predominated by the same mäyä under the material condition. The false attempt of the
living entity to occupy the predominating post of the Lord is the cause of his material
bondage, and the conditioned soul's attempt to become one with the Lord is the last
snare of mäyä.
TEXT 17
Yaê MaU!TaMaae l/aeke- Yaê buÖe" Par& GaTa" )
Taavu>aaE Sau%MaeDaeTae i(c)-XYaTYaNTairTaae JaNa" )) 17 ))
yaç ca müòhatamo loke
yaç ca buddheù paraà gataù
täv ubhau sukham edhete
kliçyaty antarito janaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who is; ca—also; müòha-tamaù—the lowest of the fools; loke—in the world;
309
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yaù ca—and one who is; buddheù—of intelligence; param—transcendental; gataù—
gone; tau—of them; ubhau—both; sukham—happiness; edhete—enjoy; kliçyati—suffer;
antaritaù—situated between; janaù—persons.
TRANSLATION
Both the lowest of fools and he who is transcendental to all intelligence enjoy happiness,
whereas persons between them suffer the material pangs.
PURPORT
The lowest of fools do not understand material miseries; they pass their lives merrily and
do not inquire into the miseries of life. Such persons are almost on the level of the
animals, who, although in the eyes of superiors are always miserable in life, are unaware
of material distresses. A hog's life is degraded in its standard of happiness, which entails
living in a filthy place, engaging in sex enjoyment at every opportune moment, and
laboring hard in a struggle for existence, but this is unknown to the hog. Similarly,
human beings who are unaware of the miseries of material existence and are happy in
sex life and hard labor are the lowest of fools. Yet because they have no sense of
miseries, they supposedly enjoy so-called happiness. The other class of men, those who
are liberated and are situated in the transcendental position above intelligence, are
really happy and are called paramahaàsas. But persons who are neither like hogs and
dogs nor on the level of the paramahaàsas feel the material pangs, and for them inquiry
about the Supreme Truth is necessary. The Vedänta-sütra states, athäto brahma jijïäsä:
"Now one should inquire about Brahman." This inquiry is necessary for those who are
between the paramahaàsas and the fools who have forgotten the question of selfrealization
in the midst of life in sense gratification.
TEXT 18
AQaaR>aav& iviNaiêTYa Pa[TaqTaSYaaiPa NaaTMaNa" )
Taa& caiPa YauZMaÀr<aSaevYaah& Para<aude )) 18 ))
arthäbhävaà viniçcitya
pratétasyäpi nätmanaù
täà cäpi yuñmac-caraëa310
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sevayähaà paräëude
SYNONYMS
artha-abhävam—without substance; viniçcitya—being ascertained; pratétasya—of the
apparent values; api—also; na—never; ätmanaù—of the self; täm—that; ca—also; api—
thus; yuñmat—your; caraëa—feet; sevayä—by service; aham—myself; paräëude—shall
be able to give up.
TRANSLATION
But, my dear sir, I am obliged to you because now I can understand that this material
manifestation is without substance, although it appears real. I am confident that by
serving your feet it will be possible for me to give up the false idea.
PURPORT
The sufferings of the conditioned soul are superficial and have no intrinsic value, like
the cutting off of one's head in a dream. Yet although this statement is theoretically very
true, it is very difficult for the common man or the neophyte on the transcendental path
to realize practically. However, by serving the feet of great transcendentalists like
Maitreya Muni and by constantly associating with them, one is enabled to give up the
false idea that the soul suffers from material pangs.
TEXT 19
YaTSaevYaa >aGavTa" kU-$=SQaSYa MaDauiÜz" )
riTaraSaae >avetaqv]" PaadYaaeVYaRSaNaadRNa" )) 19 ))
yat-sevayä bhagavataù
küöa-sthasya madhu-dviñaù
rati-räso bhavet tévraù
pädayor vyasanärdanaù
SYNONYMS
yat—to whom; sevayä—by service; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; küöa311
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sthasya—of the unchangeable; madhu-dviñaù—the enemy of the Madhu asura; ratiräsaù—
attachment in different relationships; bhavet—develops; tévraù—highly ecstatic;
pädayoù—of the feet; vyasana—distresses; ardanaù—vanquishing.
TRANSLATION
By serving the feet of the spiritual master, one is enabled to develop transcendental
ecstasy in the service of the Personality of Godhead, who is the unchangeable enemy of
the Madhu demon and whose service vanquishes one's material distresses.
PURPORT
The association of a bona fide spiritual master like the sage Maitreya can be of absolute
help in achieving transcendental attachment for the direct service of the Lord. The
Lord is the enemy of the Madhu demon, or in other words He is the enemy of the
suffering of His pure devotee. The word rati-räsaù is significant in this verse. Service to
the Lord is rendered in different transcendental mellows (relationships): neutral, active,
friendly, parental and nuptial. A living entity in the liberated position of transcendental
service to the Lord becomes attracted to one of the above-mentioned mellows, and when
one is engaged in transcendental loving service to the Lord, one's service attachment in
the material world is automatically vanquished. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.59), rasavarjaà
raso 'py asya paraà dåñövä nivartate.
TEXT 20
duraPaa ùLPaTaPaSa" Saeva vEku-<#=vTMaRSau )
Ya}aaePaGaqYaTae iNaTYa& devdevae JaNaadRNa" )) 20 ))
duräpä hy alpa-tapasaù
sevä vaikuëöha-vartmasu
yatropagéyate nityaà
deva-devo janärdanaù
SYNONYMS
duräpä—rarely obtainable; hi—certainly; alpa-tapasaù—of one whose austerity is
312
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
meager; sevä—service; vaikuëöha—the transcendental kingdom of God; vartmasu—on
the path of; yatra—wherein; upagéyate—is glorified; nityam—always; deva—of the
demigods; devaù—the Lord; jana-ardanaù—the controller of the living entities.
TRANSLATION
Persons whose austerity is meager can hardly obtain the service of the pure devotees who
are progressing on the path back to the kingdom of Godhead, the Vaikuëöhas. Pure
devotees engage one hundred percent in glorifying the Supreme Lord, who is the Lord of
the demigods and the controller of all living entities.
PURPORT
The path of liberation, as recommended by all authorities, is to serve the mahätmä
transcendentalists. As far as Bhagavad-gétä is concerned, the mahätmäs are the pure
devotees who are on the path to Vaikuëöha, the kingdom of God, and who always chant
and hear the glories of the Lord rather than talk of dry, profitless philosophy. This
system of association has been recommended since time immemorial, but in this age of
quarrel and hypocrisy it is especially recommended by Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
Even if one has no assets of favorable austerity, if he nevertheless takes shelter of the
mahätmäs, who are engaged in chanting and hearing the glories of the Lord, he is sure to
make progress on the path back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 21
Sa*îaGa]e MahdadqiNa Saivk-ara<YaNau§-MaaTa( )
Tae>Yaae ivraJaMaud(Da*TYa TaMaNau Pa[aivXaiÜ>au" )) 21 ))
såñövägre mahad-ädéni
sa-vikäräëy anukramät
tebhyo viräjam uddhåtya
tam anu präviçad vibhuù
SYNONYMS
såñövä—after creating; agre—in the beginning; mahat-ädéni—the total material energy;
313
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sa-vikäräëi—along with the sense organs; anukramät—by a gradual process of
differentiation; tebhyaù—out of that; viräjam—the gigantic universal form; uddhåtya—
manifesting; tam—unto that; anu—later; präviçat—entered; vibhuù—the Supreme.
TRANSLATION
After creating the total material energy, the mahat-tattva, and thereby manifesting the
gigantic universal form with senses and sense organs, the Supreme Lord entered within it.
PURPORT
Fully satisfied by the answers of the sage Maitreya, Vidura wanted to understand the
remaining portions of the creative function of the Lord, and he took the clue from the
previous topics.
TEXT 22
YaMaahuraÛ& Pauåz& Sahóax(g...Y„aUåbahuk-Ma( )
Ya}a ivì wMae l/aek-a" Saivk-aXa& Ta AaSaTae )) 22 ))
yam ähur ädyaà puruñaà
sahasräìghry-üru-bähukam
yatra viçva ime lokäù
sa-vikäçaà ta äsate
SYNONYMS
yam—who; ähuù—is called; ädyam—original; puruñam—incarnation for cosmic
manifestation; sahasra—thousand; aìghri—legs; üru—thighs; bähukam—hands; yatra—
wherein; viçvaù—the universe; ime—all these; lokäù—planets; sa-vikäçam—with
respective developments; te—all of them; äsate—living.
TRANSLATION
The puruña incarnation lying on the Causal Ocean is called the original puruña in the
material creations, and in His viräö form, in whom all the planets and their inhabitants
314
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
live, He has many thousands of legs and hands.
PURPORT
The first puruña is Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, the second puruña is Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu,
and the third puruña is Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, in whom is contemplated the viräö-puruña,
the gigantic form in which all the planets with their different developments and
inhabitants are floating.
TEXT 23
YaiSMaNa( dXaivDa" Pa[a<a" SaeiNd]YaaQaeRiNd]Yaiñv*Ta( )
TvYaeirTaae YaTaae v<aaRSTaiÜ>aUTaqvRdSv Na" )) 23 ))
yasmin daça-vidhaù präëaù
sendriyärthendriyas tri-våt
tvayerito yato varëäs
tad-vibhütér vadasva naù
SYNONYMS
yasmin—in which; daça-vidhaù—ten kinds of; präëaù—air of life; sa—with; indriya—
senses; artha—interest; indriyaù—of the senses; tri-våt—three kinds of life vigor;
tvayä—by you; éritaù—explained; yataù—wherefrom; varëäù—four specific divisions;
tat-vibhütéù—prowess; vadasva—please describe; naù—unto me.
TRANSLATION
O great brähmaëa, you have told me that the gigantic viräö form and His senses, sense
objects and ten kinds of life air exist with three kinds of life vigor. Now, if you will,
kindly explain to me the different powers of the specific divisions.
TEXT 24
Ya}a Pau}aEê PaaE}aEê Naá*i>a" Sah Gaae}aJaE" )
315
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Pa[Jaa ivic}aak*-TaYa AaSaNa( Yaai>aird& TaTaMa( )) 24 ))
yatra putraiç ca pautraiç ca
naptåbhiù saha gotrajaiù
prajä viciträkåtaya
äsan yäbhir idaà tatam
SYNONYMS
yatra—wherein; putraiù—along with sons; ca—and; pautraiù—along with grandsons;
ca—also; naptåbhiù—with grandsons from daughters; saha—along with; gotra-jaiù—of
the same family; prajäù—generations; vicitra—of different kinds; äkåtayaù—so done;
äsan—exist; yäbhiù—by whom; idam—all these planets; tatam—spread.
TRANSLATION
O my lord, I think that the process manifest in the forms of sons, grandsons and family
members has spread all over the universe in different varieties and species.
TEXT 25
Pa[JaaPaTaqNaa& Sa PaiTaêoePae k-aNa( Pa[JaaPaTaqNa( )
SaGaa|êEvaNauSaGaa|ê MaNaUNMaNvNTaraiDaPaaNa( )) 25 ))
prajäpaténäà sa patiç
cakÿpe kän prajäpatén
sargäàç caivänusargäàç ca
manün manvantarädhipän
SYNONYMS
prajä-paténäm—of the demigods like Brahmä and others; saù—he; patiù—leader;
cakÿpe—decided; kän—whomsoever; prajäpatén—fathers of the living entities; sargän—
generations; ca—also; eva—certainly; anusargän—later generations; ca—and; manün—
the Manus; manvantara-adhipän—and the changes of such.
316
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
O learned brähmaëa, please describe how the leader of all the demigods, namely Prajäpati,
Brahmä, decided to establish the various Manus, the heads of the ages. Please describe the
Manus also, and please describe the descendants of those Manus.
PURPORT
The human race, or manuñya-sara, descends from the Manus, sons and grandsons of the
Prajäpati, Brahmä. The descendants of Manu reside in all the different planets and rule
all the universe.
TEXT 26
oPaYaRDaê Yae l/aek-a >aUMaeiMaR}aaTMaJaaSaTae )
Taeza& Sa&SQaa& Pa[Maa<a& c >aUl/aeRk-SYa c v<aRYa )) 26 ))
upary adhaç ca ye lokä
bhümer miträtmajäsate
teñäà saàsthäà pramäëaà ca
bhür-lokasya ca varëaya
SYNONYMS
upari—on the head; adhaù—underneath; ca—also; ye—which; lokäù—planets;
bhümeù—of the earth; mitra-ätmaja—O son of Miträ (Maitreya Muni); äsate—do exist;
teñäm—their; saàsthäm—situation; pramäëam ca—also their measurement; bhüùlokasya—
of the earthly planets; ca—also; varëaya—please describe.
TRANSLATION
O son of Miträ, kindly describe how the planets are situated above the earth as well as
underneath it, and also please mention their measurement as well as that of the earthly
planets.
PURPORT
317
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Yasmin vijïäte sarvam evaà vijïätaà bhavati (Muëòaka Upaniñad 1.3). This Vedic hymn
declares emphatically that the devotee of the Lord knows everything material and
spiritual in relationship with the Lord. Devotees are not simply emotional, as is ill
conceived by certain less intelligent men. Their direction is practical. They know
everything that is and all the details of the Lord's domination over the different
creations.
TEXT 27
iTaYaRx(MaaNauzdevaNaa& SarqSa*PaPaTaiT}a<aaMa( )
vd Na" SaGaRSa&VYaUh& Gaa>aRSvediÜJaaeiÙdaMa( )) 27 ))
tiryaì-mänuña-devänäà
sarésåpa-patattriëäm
vada naù sarga-saàvyühaà
gärbha-sveda-dvijodbhidäm
SYNONYMS
tiryak—subhuman; mänuña—human beings; devänäm—of the superhuman beings, or
demigods; sarésåpa—reptiles; patattriëäm—of the birds; vada—kindly describe; naù—
unto me; sarga—generation; saàvyüham—specific divisions; gärbha—embryonic;
sveda—perspiration; dvija—twice-born; udbhidäm—of the planets, etc.
TRANSLATION
Also please describe the living beings under different classifications: subhumans, humans,
those born of the embryo, those born of perspiration, those who are twice-born [birds],
and the plants and vegetables. Kindly describe their generations and subdivisions also.
TEXT 28
Gau<aavTaarEivRìSYa SaGaRiSQaTYaPYaYaaé[YaMa( )
Sa*JaTa" é[qiNavaSaSYa VYaac+vaedariv§-MaMa( )) 28 ))
318
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
guëävatärair viçvasya
sarga-sthity-apyayäçrayam
såjataù çréniväsasya
vyäcakñvodära-vikramam
SYNONYMS
guëa—modes of material nature; avatäraiù—of the incarnations; viçvasya—of the
universe; sarga—creation; sthiti—maintenance; apyaya—destruction; äçrayam—and
ultimate rest; såjataù—of the one who creates; çréniväsasya—of the Personality of
Godhead; vyäcakñva—kindly describe; udära—magnanimous; vikramam—specific
activities.
TRANSLATION
Please also describe the incarnations of the material modes of nature—Brahmä, Viñëu
and Maheçvara—and please describe the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and His magnanimous activities.
PURPORT
Although Brahmä, Viñëu and Maheçvara, the three incarnations of the material modes
of nature, are the principal deities for the creation, maintenance and destruction of the
cosmic manifestation, they are not the final authority. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead Lord Kåñëa is the ultimate goal, the cause of all causes. He is the äçraya, or the
final rest of everything.
TEXT 29
v<aaRé[Maiv>aaGaa&ê æPaXaql/Sv>aavTa" )
‰zq<aa& JaNMak-MaaRi<a vedSYa c ivk-zR<aMa( )) 29 ))
varëäçrama-vibhägäàç ca
rüpa-çéla-svabhävataù
åñéëäà janma-karmäëi
vedasya ca vikarñaëam
319
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
varëa-äçrama—the four divisions of social statuses and orders of spiritual culture;
vibhägän—respective divisions; ca—also; rüpa—personal feature s; çéla-svabhävataù—
personal character; åñéëäm—of the sages; janma—birth; karmäëi—activities; vedasya—
of the Vedas; ca—and; vikarñaëam—categorical divisions.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, kindly describe the divisions and orders of human society in terms of
symptoms, behavior and the characteristics of mental equilibrium and sense control. Also
please describe the births of the great sages and the categorical divisions of the Vedas.
PURPORT
The four statuses and orders of human society—brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras,
as wall as brahmacärés, gåhasthas, vänaprasthas and sannyäsés—are all divisions of
quality, education, culture and spiritual advancement attained by practicing control of
the mind and the senses. All these divisions are based on the particular nature of each
individual person, not on the principle of birth. Birth is not mentioned in this verse
because birth is immaterial. Vidura is famous in history as born of a çüdräëé mother, yet
he is more than a brähmaëa by qualification because he is seen here to be the disciple of
a great sage, Maitreya Muni. Unless one achieves at least the brahminical qualifications,
one cannot understand the Vedic hymns. Mahäbhärata is also a division of the Vedas,
but it is meant for women, çüdras and dvija-bandhus, the worthless children of the
higher section. The less intelligent section of society can avail themselves of the Vedic
instructions simply by studying the Mahäbhärata.
TEXT 30
YajSYa c ivTaaNaaiNa YaaeGaSYa c PaQa" Pa[>aae )
NaEZk-MYaRSYa c Saa&:YaSYa TaN}a& va >aGavTSMa*TaMa( )) 30 ))
yajïasya ca vitänäni
yogasya ca pathaù prabho
naiñkarmyasya ca säìkhyasya
320
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tantraà vä bhagavat-småtam
SYNONYMS
yajïasya—of sacrifices; ca—also; vitänäni—expansions; yogasya—of the mystic powers;
ca—also; pathaù—ways; prabho—O my lord; naiñkarmyasya—of knowledge; ca—and;
säìkhyasya—of analytical studies; tantram—the path of devotional service; vä—as well
as; bhagavat—in relation with the Personality of Godhead; småtam—regulative
principles.
TRANSLATION
Please also describe the expansions of different sacrifices and the paths of mystic powers,
analytical study of knowledge, and devotional service, all with their respective
regulations.
PURPORT
The word tantram is significant herein. Sometimes tantram is misunderstood to be the
black spiritual science of materialistic persons engaged in sense gratification, but here
tantram means the science of devotional service compiled by Çréla Närada Muni. One
can take advantage of such regulative explanations of the path of devotional service and
make progressive advancement in the devotional service of the Lord. Säìkhya
philosophy is the basic principle of acquiring knowledge, as will be explained by the sage
Maitreya. The Säìkhya philosophy enunciated by Kapiladeva, the son of Devahüti, is
the real source of knowledge about the Supreme Truth. Knowledge not based on the
Säìkhya philosophy is mental speculation and can yield no tangible profit.
TEXT 31
Paaz<@PaQavEzMYa& Pa[iTal/aeMaiNaveXaNaMa( )
JaqvSYa GaTaYaae Yaaê YaavTaqGauR<ak-MaRJaa" )) 31 ))
päñaëòa-patha-vaiñamyaà
pratiloma-niveçanam
jévasya gatayo yäç ca
321
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yävatér guëa-karmajäù
SYNONYMS
päñaëòa-patha—the path of the faithless; vaiñamyam—imperfection by contradiction;
pratiloma—crossbreeding; niveçanam—situation; jévasya—of the living entities;
gatayaù—movements; yäù—as they are; ca—also; yävatéù—as many as; guëa—modes of
material nature; karma-jäù—generated by different work.
TRANSLATION
Please also describe the imperfections and contradictions of the faithless atheists, the
situation of crossbreeding, and the movements of the living entities in various species of
life according to their particular modes of nature and work.
PURPORT
The combination of living entities in different modes of material nature is called
crossbreeding. The faithless atheists do not believe in the existence of God, and thus
their paths of philosophy are contradictory. Atheistic philosophies never agree with one
another. Different species of life are evidence of varieties of mixtures of the modes of
material nature.
TEXT 32
DaMaaRQaRk-aMaMaae+aa<aa& iNaiMataaNYaivraeDaTa" )
vaTaaRYaa d<@NaqTaeê é[uTaSYa c iviDa& Pa*Qak(- )) 32 ))
dharmärtha-käma-mokñäëäà
nimittäny avirodhataù
värtäyä daëòa-néteç ca
çrutasya ca vidhià påthak
SYNONYMS
dharma—religiosity; artha—economic development; käma—sense gratification;
mokñäëäm—salvation; nimittäni—causes; avirodhataù—without being contradictory;
322
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
värtäyäù—on the principles of the means of livelihood; daëòa-néteù—of law and order;
ca—also; çrutasya—of the codes of scriptures; ca—also; vidhim—regulations; påthak—
different.
TRANSLATION
You may also describe the noncontradictory causes of religiosity, economic development,
sense gratification and salvation and also the different means of livelihood and different
processes of law and order as mentioned in the revealed scriptures.
TEXT 33
é[aÖSYa c iviDa& b]øNa( iPaTa›<aa& SaGaRMaev c )
Ga]hNa+a}aTaara<aa& k-al/avYavSa&iSQaiTaMa( )) 33 ))
çräddhasya ca vidhià brahman
pitèëäà sargam eva ca
graha-nakñatra-täräëäà
kälävayava-saàsthitim
SYNONYMS
çräddhasya—of the periodical offerings of respects; ca—also; vidhim—regulations;
brahman—O brähmaëa; pitèëäm—of the forefathers; sargam—creation; eva—as; ca—
also; graha—planetary system; nakñatra—the stars; täräëäm—luminaries; käla—time;
avayava—duration; saàsthitim—situations.
TRANSLATION
Please also explain the regulations for offering respects to the forefathers, the creation of
the Pitåloka, the time schedule in the planets, stars and luminaries, and their respective
situations.
PURPORT
The time durations of day and night as well as months and years are different in the
323
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
different planets, stars and luminaries. The higher planets like the moon and Venus
have time measurements different from those of the earth. It is said that six months of
this planet earth equal one day of the higher planets. In Bhagavad-gétä the duration of
one day in years multiplied by 1,000. And the month and year in Brahmaloka are
calculated in that measure.
TEXT 34
daNaSYa TaPaSaae vaiPa YaÀeíaPaUTaRYaae" f-l/Ma( )
Pa[vaSaSQaSYa Yaae DaMaaeR Yaê Pau&Sa oTaaPaid )) 34 ))
dänasya tapaso väpi
yac ceñöä-pürtayoù phalam
praväsa-sthasya yo dharmo
yaç ca puàsa utäpadi
SYNONYMS
dänasya—of charity; tapasaù—of penance; väpi—lake; yat—that which; ca—and; iñöä—
endeavor; pürtayoù—of reservoirs of water; phalam—fruitive result; praväsa-sthasya—
one who is away from home; yaù—that which; dharmaù—duty; yaù ca—and which;
puàsaù—of man; uta—described; äpadi—in danger.
TRANSLATION
Please also describe the fruitive results of charity and penance and of digging reservoirs of
water. Please describe the situation of persons who are away from home and also the duty
of a man in an awkward position.
PURPORT
The digging of reservoirs of water for public use is a great work of charity, and retiring
from family life after fifty years of age is a great act of penance performed by the sober
human being.
TEXT 35
324
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
YaeNa va >aGava&STauZYaeÖMaRYaaeiNaJaRNaadRNa" )
SaMPa[SaqdiTa va YaezaMaeTada:Yaaih Mae_Naga )) 35 ))
yena vä bhagaväàs tuñyed
dharma-yonir janärdanaù
samprasédati vä yeñäm
etad äkhyähi me 'nagha
SYNONYMS
yena—by which; vä—either; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; tuñyet—is
satisfied; dharma-yoniù—the father of all religion; janärdanaù—the controller of all
living being; samprasédati—completely satisfied; vä—either, or; yeñäm—of those; etat—
all these; äkhyähi—kindly describe; me—unto me; anagha—O sinless one.
TRANSLATION
O sinless one, because the Personality of Godhead, the controller of all living entities, is
the father of all religion and all those who are candidates for religious activities, kindly
describe how He can be completely satisfied.
PURPORT
All religious activities are meant ultimately to satisfy the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The Lord is the father of all religious principles. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(7.16), four kinds of pious men—the needy, the distressed, the enlightened and the
inquisitive—approach the Lord in devotional service, and their devotion is mixed with
material affection. But above them are the pure devotees, whose devotion is not tainted
by any material tinges of fruitive work or speculative knowledge. Those who are only
miscreants throughout their lives are compared to demons (Bg. 7.15). They are bereft of
all knowledge, in spite of any academic educational career they may pursue. Such
miscreants are never candidates for satisfying the Lord.
TEXT 36
325
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ANauv]TaaNaa& iXaZYaa<aa& Pau}aa<aa& c iÜJaaetaMa )
ANaaPa*íMaiPa b]UYauGauRrvae dqNavTSal/a" )) 36 ))
anuvratänäà çiñyäëäà
puträëäà ca dvijottama
anäpåñöam api brüyur
guravo déna-vatsaläù
SYNONYMS
anuvratänäm—the followers; çiñyäëäm—of the disciples; puträëäm—of the sons; ca—
also; dvija-uttama—O best amongst the brähmaëas; anäpåñöam—that which is not asked
for; api—in spite of; brüyuù—please describe; guravaù—the spiritual masters; dénavatsaläù—
who are kind to the needy.
TRANSLATION
O best among the brähmaëas, those who are spiritual masters are very kind to the needy.
They are always kind to their followers, disciples and sons, and without being asked by
them, the spiritual master describes all that is knowledge.
PURPORT
There are many subjects to be known from the bona fide spiritual master. The followers,
disciples and sons are all on one level for the bona fide spiritual master, and he is always
kind to them and always speaks to them on transcendental subjects, even though he is
not asked by them. That is the nature of the bona fide spiritual master. Vidura appealed
to Maitreya Muni to speak on subjects about which he might not have asked.
TEXT 37
TatvaNaa& >aGav&STaeza& k-iTaDaa Pa[iTaSax(k]-Ma" )
Ta}aeMa& k- oPaaSaqrNa( k- o iSvdNauXaerTae )) 37 ))
tattvänäà bhagavaàs teñäà
katidhä pratisaìkramaù
326
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tatremaà ka upäséran
ka u svid anuçerate
SYNONYMS
tattvänäm—of the elements of nature; bhagavan—O great sage; teñäm—of them;
katidhä—how many; pratisaìkramaù—dissolutions; tatra—thereupon; imam—unto the
Supreme Lord; ke—who are they; upäséran—being saved; ke—who are they; u—who;
svit—may; anuçerate—serve the Lord while He sleeps.
TRANSLATION
Please describe how many dissolutions there are for the elements of material nature and
who survives after the dissolutions to serve the Lord while He is asleep.
PURPORT
In the Brahma-saàhitä (5.47-48) it is said that all the material manifestations with
innumerable universes appear and disappear with the breathing of Mahä-Viñëu lying in
yoga-nidrä, or mystic sleep.
yaù käraëärëava-jale bhajati sma yoganidräm
ananta-jagad-aëòa-saroma-küpaù
ädhära-çaktim avalambya paräà sva-mürtià
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
yasyaika-niçvasita-kälam athävalambya
jévanti loma-vilajä jagad-aëòa-näthäù
viñëur mahän sa iha yasya kalä-viçeño
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"Govinda, the ultimate and Supreme Personality of Godhead [Lord Kåñëa], lies sleeping
unlimitedly on the Causal Ocean in order to create unlimited numbers of universes
during that sleep. He lies on the water by His own internal potency, and I worship that
original Supreme Godhead.
"Due to His breathing, innumerable universes come into existence, and when He
withdraws His breath there occurs the dissolution of all the lords of the universes. That
327
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
plenary portion of the Supreme Lord is called Mahä-Viñëu, and He is a part of the part
of Lord Kåñëa. I worship Govinda, the original Lord."
After the dissolution of the material manifestations, the Lord and His kingdom beyond
the Causal Ocean do not disappear, nor do the inhabitants, the Lord's associates. The
associates of the Lord are far more numerous than the living entities who have forgotten
the Lord due to material association. The impersonalist's explanation of the word aham
in the four verses of the original Bhägavatam—aham eväsam evägre etc.—is refuted
here. The Lord and His eternal associates remain after the dissolution. Vidura's inquiry
about such persons is a clear indication of the existence of all the paraphernalia of the
Lord. This is also confirmed in the Käçé-khaëòa, as quoted by both Jéva Gosvämé and
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté, who follow in the footsteps of Çréla Çrédhara Svämé.
na cyavante hi yad-bhaktä
mahatyäà pralayäpadi
ato 'cyuto 'khile loke
sa ekaù sarva-go 'vyayaù
"The devotees of the Lord never annihilate their individual existences even after the
dissolution of the entire cosmic manifestation. The Lord and the devotees who associate
with Him are always eternal, in both the material and spiritual worlds."
TEXT 38
PauåzSYa c Sa&SQaaNa& SvæPa& va ParSYa c )
jaNa& c NaEGaMa& Yatad(GauåiXaZYaPa[YaaeJaNaMa( )) 38 ))
puruñasya ca saàsthänaà
svarüpaà vä parasya ca
jïänaà ca naigamaà yat tad
guru-çiñya-prayojanam
SYNONYMS
puruñasya—of the living entity; ca—also; saàsthänam—existence; svarüpam—identity;
vä—either, or; parasya—of the Supreme; ca—also; jïänam—knowledge; ca—also;
naigamam—in the matter of the Upaniñads; yat—that; tat—the same; guru—spiritual
328
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
master; çiñya—disciple; prayojanam—necessity.
TRANSLATION
What are the truths regarding the living entities and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead? What are their identities ? What are the specific values in the knowledge in the
Vedas, and what are the necessities for the spiritual master and his disciples?
PURPORT
The living entities are constitutionally servitors of the Lord, who can accept all kinds of
service from everyone. It is clearly declared (Bg. 5.29) that the Lord is the supreme
enjoyer of the benefits of all sacrifices and penances, the proprietor of all that is
manifested and the friend of all living entities. That is His real identity. Therefore,
when the living entity accepts this supreme proprietorship of the Lord and acts in that
attitude, he resumes his real identity. In order to elevate the living entity to this
standard of knowledge, there is the necessity of spiritual association. The bona fide
spiritual master desires that his disciples know the process of rendering transcendental
service to the Lord, and the disciples also know that they have to learn about the eternal
relationship between God and the living entity from a self-realized soul. To disseminate
transcendental knowledge one must retire from mundane activities on the strength of
enlightenment in knowledge in terms of Vedic wisdom. That is the sum and substance
of all the questions in this verse.
TEXT 39
iNaiMataaiNa c TaSYaeh Pa[ae¢-aNYaNagaSaUiri>a" )
SvTaae jaNa& ku-Ta" Pau&Saa& >ai¢-vOEraGYaMaev va )) 39 ))
nimittäni ca tasyeha
proktäny anagha-süribhiù
svato jïänaà kutaù puàsäà
bhaktir vairägyam eva vä
SYNONYMS
329
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nimittäni—the source of knowledge; ca—also; tasya—of such knowledge; iha—in this
world; proktäni—mentioned; anagha—spotless; süribhiù—by devotees; svataù—selfsufficient;
jïänam—knowledge; kutaù—how; puàsäm—of the living entity; bhaktiù—
devotional service; vairägyam—detachment; eva—certainly; vä—also.
TRANSLATION
Spotless devotees of the Lord have mentioned the source of such knowledge. How could
one have knowledge of devotional service and detachment without the help of such
devotees?
PURPORT
There are many inexperienced persons who advocate self-realization without the help of
a spiritual master. They decry the necessity of the spiritual master and try themselves to
take his place by propagating the theory that a spiritual master is not necessary. Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, however, does not approve this viewpoint. Even the great transcendental
scholar Vyäsadeva had need of a spiritual master, and under the instruction of his
spiritual master, Närada, he prepared this sublime literature, Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Even
Lord Caitanya, although He is Kåñëa Himself, accepted a spiritual master; even Lord
Kåñëa accepted a spiritual master, Sändépani Muni, in order to be enlightened; and all
the äcäryas and saints of the world had spiritual masters. In Bhagavad-gétä Arjuna
accepted Lord Kåñëa as his spiritual master, although there was no necessity of such a
formal declaration. So, in all cases, there is no question about the necessity of accepting
a spiritual master. The only stipulation is that the spiritual master should be bona fide;
i.e., the spiritual master must be in the proper chain of disciplic succession, called the
paramparä system.
Süris are great scholars, but they may not always be anagha, or spotless. The anagha-süri
is one who is a pure devotee of the Lord. Those who are not pure devotees of the Lord,
or who want to be on an equal level with Him, are not anagha-süri. Pure devotees have
prepared many books of knowledge on the basis of authorized scriptures. Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé and his assistants, under the instructions of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu,
have all written various literatures for the guidance of prospective devotees, and anyone
who is very serious about raising himself to the standard of a pure devotee of the Lord
must take advantage of those literatures.
330
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 40
WTaaNMae Pa*C^Ta" Pa[énaNa( hre" k-MaRivivTSaYaa )
b]Uih Mae_jSYa iMa}aTvadJaYaa Naíc+auz" )) 40 ))
etän me påcchataù praçnän
hareù karma-vivitsayä
brühi me 'jïasya mitratväd
ajayä nañöa-cakñuñaù
SYNONYMS
etän—all these; me—my; påcchataù—of one who inquires; praçnän—questions; hareù—
of the Supreme Lord; karma—pastimes; vivitsayä—desiring to know; brühi—kindly
describe; me—unto me; ajïasya—of one who is ignorant; mitratvät—because of
friendship; ajayä—by the external energy; nañöa-cakñuñaù—those who have lost their
vision.
TRANSLATION
My dear sage, I have put all these questions before you with a view to knowing the
pastimes of Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You are the friend of all, so
kindly describe them for all those who have lost their vision.
PURPORT
Vidura put forward many varieties of questions with a view to understanding the
principles of transcendental loving service to the Lord. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(2.41), devotional service to the Lord is one, and the mind of the devotee is not diverted
to the many branches of uncertainties. Vidura's purpose was to be situated in that
service to the Lord, wherein one merges undivertedly. He claimed the friendship of
Maitreya Muni, not because he was Maitreya's son but because Maitreya was actually the
friend of all who have lost their spiritual vision due to material influence.
TEXT 41
331
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SaveR vedaê Yajaê TaPaae daNaaiNa caNaga )
Jaqva>aYaPa[daNaSYa Na ku-vsrNa( k-l/aMaiPa )) 41 ))
sarve vedäç ca yajïäç ca
tapo dänäni cänagha
jéväbhaya-pradänasya
na kurvéran kaläm api
SYNONYMS
sarve—all kinds of; vedäù—divisions of the Vedas; ca—also; yajïäù—sacrifices; ca—
also; tapaù—penances; dänäni—charities; ca—and; anagha—O spotless one; jéva—the
living entity; abhaya—immunity from material pangs; pradänasya—of one who gives
such assurance; na—not; kurvéran—can he equalized; kaläm—even partially; api—
certainly.
TRANSLATION
O spotless one, your answers to all these questions will grant immunity from all material
miseries. Such charity is greater than all Vedic charities, sacrifices, penances, etc.
PURPORT
The highest perfectional work of charity is to give people in general immunity from the
anxieties of material existence. This can be done only by performing activities in
devotional service to the Lord. Such knowledge is incomparable. Cultivation of the
knowledge in the Vedas, performance of sacrifice, and distribution of munificent
charities all together cannot form even a part of the immunity from the pangs of
material existence that is gained from devotional service. The charity of Maitreya not
only will help Vidura, but, due to its universal nature, will deliver all others in all times.
Thus Maitreya is immortal.
TEXT 42
é[qéuk- ovac
Sa wTQaMaaPa*íPaura<ak-LPa" ku-åPa[DaaNaeNa MauiNaPa[DaaNa" )
332
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Pa[v*ÖhzaeR >aGavTk-QaaYaa& SaÄaeidTaSTa& Pa[hSaiàvah )) 42 ))
çré-çuka uväca
sa ittham äpåñöa-puräëa-kalpaù
kuru-pradhänena muni-pradhänaù
pravåddha-harño bhagavat-kathäyäà
saïcoditas taà prahasann iväha
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; saù—he; ittham—thus; äpåñöa—being
questioned; puräëa-kalpaù—one who knows how to explain the supplements of the
Vedas (the Puräëas); kuru-pradhänena—by the chief of the Kurus; muni-pradhänaù—
the chief amongst the sages; pravåddha—sufficiently enriched; harñaù—satisfaction;
bhagavat—the Personality of Godhead; kathäyäm—in the topics of; saïcoditaù—being
so infused; tam—unto Vidura; prahasan—with smiles; iva—like that; äha—replied.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus the chief of the sages, who was always enthusiastic
about describing topics regarding the Personality of Godhead, began to narrate the
descriptive explanation of the Puräëas, being so infused by Vidura. He was very much
enlivened by speaking on the transcendental activities of the Lord.
PURPORT
Great learned sages like Maitreya Muni are always very enthusiastic about describing
the transcendental activities of the Lord. Maitreya Muni, being thus invited by Vidura
to speak, appeared to be smiling because he actually felt transcendental bliss.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Seventh Chapter, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "Further Inquiries by Vidura."
333
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
8. Manifestation of Brahmä from Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu
TEXT 1
MaE}aeYa ovac
SaTSaevNaqYaae bTa PaUåv&Xaae
Yaçaek-Paal/ae >aGavTPa[DaaNa" )
b>aUivQaehaiJaTak-IiTaRMaal/a&
Pade Pade NaUTaNaYaSYa>aq+<aMa( )) 1 ))
maitreya uväca
sat-sevanéyo bata püru-vaàço
yal loka-pälo bhagavat-pradhänaù
babhüvithehäjita-kérti-mäläà
pade pade nütanayasy abhékñëam
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Çré Maitreya Muni said; sat-sevanéyaù—worthy to serve the pure
devotees; bata—oh, certainly; püru-vaàçaù—the descendants of King Püru; yat—
because; loka-pälaù—the kings are; bhagavat-pradhänaù—chiefly devoted to the
Personality of Godhead; babhüvitha—you are also born; iha—in this; ajita—the Lord,
who is unconquerable; kérti-mäläm—chain of transcendental activities; pade pade—step
by step; nütanayasi—becoming newer and newer; abhékñëam—always.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya Muni said to Vidura: The royal dynasty of King Püru is worthy
to serve the pure devotees because all the descendants of that family are devoted to the
Personality of Godhead. You are also born in that family, and it is wonderful that because
of your attempt the transcendental pastimes of the Lord are becoming newer and newer at
every moment.
334
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The great sage Maitreya thanked Vidura and praised him by reference to his family
glories. The Püru dynasty was full of devotees of the Personality of Godhead and was
therefore glorious. Because they were not attached to impersonal Brahman or to the
localized Paramätmä but were directly attached to Bhagavän, the Personality of
Godhead, they were worthy to render service to the Lord and His pure devotees.
Because Vidura was one of the descendants of that family, naturally he engaged in
spreading wide the ever-new glories of the Lord. Maitreya felt happy to have such
glorious company as Vidura. He considered the company of Vidura most desirable
because such association can accelerate one's dormant propensities for devotional
service.
TEXT 2
Saae_h& Na*<aa& +auçSau%aYa du"%&
MahÓTaaNaa& ivrMaaYa TaSYa )
Pa[vTaRYae >aaGavTa& Paura<a&
Yadah Saa+aaÙGavaNa*iz>Ya" )) 2 ))
so 'haà nåëäà kñulla-sukhäya duùkhaà
mahad gatänäà viramäya tasya
pravartaye bhägavataà puräëaà
yad äha säkñäd bhagavän åñibhyaù
SYNONYMS
saù—that; aham—I; nåëäm—of the human being; kñulla—very little; sukhäya—for
happiness; duùkham—distress; mahat—great; gatänäm—entered into; viramäya—for
mitigation; tasya—his; pravartaye—in beginning; bhägavatam—Çrémad-Bhägavatam;
puräëam—Vedic supplement; yat—which; äha—said; säkñät—directly; bhagavän—the
Personality of Godhead; åñibhyaù—unto the sages.
TRANSLATION
Let me now begin speaking on the Bhägavata Puräëa, which was directly spoken to the
335
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
great sages by the Personality of Godhead for the benefit of those who are entangled in
extreme miseries for the sake of very little pleasure.
PURPORT
The sage Maitreya proposed to speak on Çrémad-Bhägavatam because it was especially
compiled, and traditionally comes down in the disciplic succession, for the solution of all
the problems of human society. Only one who is fortunate can have the opportunity to
hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam in the association of pure devotees of the Lord. Under the spell
of material energy, the living entities are entrapped in the bondage of many difficulties
simply for the sake of a little bit of material happiness. They engage in fruitive activities,
not knowing the implications. Under the false impression that the body is the self, the
living entities foolishly relate to so many false attachments. They think that they can
engage with materialistic paraphernalia forever. This gross misconception of life is so
strong that a person suffers continually, life after life, under the external energy of the
Lord. If one comes in contact with the book Bhägavatam as well as with the devotee
bhägavata, who knows what the Bhägavatam is, then such a fortunate man gets out of
the material entanglement. Therefore Çré Maitreya Muni, out of compassion for the
suffering men in the world, proposes to speak on the Çrémad-Bhägavatam first and last.
TEXT 3
AaSaqNaMauVYaa| >aGavNTaMaaÛ&
SaªzR<a& devMaku-<#=SatvMa( )
ivivTSavSTatvMaTa" ParSYa
ku-MaarMau:Yaa MauNaYaae_NvPa*C^Na( )) 3 ))
äsénam urvyäà bhagavantam ädyaà
saìkarñaëaà devam akuëöha-sattvam
vivitsavas tattvam ataù parasya
kumära-mukhyä munayo 'nvapåcchan
SYNONYMS
äsénam—seated; urvyäm—in the bottom of the universe; bhagavantam—unto the Lord;
ädyam—the original; saìkarñaëam—Saìkarñaëa; devam—the Personality of Godhead;
336
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
akuëöha-sattvam—undeterred knowledge; vivitsavaù—being inquisitive to know; tattvam
ataù—truth like this; parasya—regarding the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
kumära—the boy-saint; mukhyäù—headed by; munayaù—great sages; anvapåcchan—
inquired like this.
TRANSLATION
Some time ago, being inquisitive to know, Sanat-kumära, the chief of the boy-saints,
accompanied by other great sages, inquired exactly like you about the truths regarding
Väsudeva, the Supreme, from Lord Saìkarñaëa, who is seated at the bottom of the
universe.
PURPORT
This is in clarification of the statement that the Lord spoke directly on the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam. When and unto whom the Bhägavatam was spoken is explained herewith.
Questions similar to those put forward by Vidura were asked by great sages like Sanatkumära,
and Lord Saìkarñaëa, the plenary expansion of the Supreme Lord Väsudeva,
answered them.
TEXT 4
SvMaev iDaZ<Ya& bhu MaaNaYaNTa&
YaÜaSaudevai>aDaMaaMaNaiNTa )
Pa[TYaGDa*Taa+aaMbuJak-aeXaMaqz‚
duNMaql/YaNTa& ivbuDaaedYaaYa )) 4 ))
svam eva dhiñëyaà bahu mänayantaà
yad väsudeväbhidham ämananti
pratyag-dhåtäkñämbuja-koçam éñad
unmélayantaà vibudhodayäya
SYNONYMS
svam—Himself; eva—thus; dhiñëyam—situated; bahu—greatly; mänayantam—
esteemed; yat—that which; väsudeva—Lord Väsudeva; abhidham—by the name;
337
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ämananti—acknowledge; pratyak-dhåta-akña—eyes settled for introspection; ambujakoçam—
lotuslike eye; éñat—slightly; unmélayantam—opened; vibudha—of the greatly
learned sages; udayäya—for the sake of advancement.
TRANSLATION
At that time Lord Saìkarñaëa was meditating upon His Supreme Lord, whom the learned
esteem as Lord Väsudeva, but for the sake of the advancement of the great learned sages
He slightly opened His lotus like eyes and began to speak.
TEXT 5
SvDauRNYaudad]OE" SvJa$=ak-l/aPaE‚
åPaSPa*XaNTaêr<aaePaDaaNaMa( )
PaÚ& YadcRNTYaihraJak-NYaa"
SaPa[eMaNaaNaabil/i>avRraQaaR" )) 5 ))
svardhuny-udärdraiù sva-jaöä-kaläpair
upaspåçantaç caraëopadhänam
padmaà yad arcanty ahi-räja-kanyäù
sa-prema nänä-balibhir varärthäù
SYNONYMS
svardhuné-uda—by the water of the Ganges; ärdraiù—being moistened; sva-jaöä—bunch
of hairs; kaläpaiù—situated on the head; upaspåçantaù—by so touching; caraëaupadhänam—
the shelter of His feet; padmam—the lotus shelter; yat—that which;
arcanti—worships; ahi-räja—the serpent-king; kanyäù—daughters; sa-prema—with
great devotion; nänä—various; balibhiù—paraphernalia; vara-arthäù—being desirous of
husbands.
TRANSLATION
The sages came from the highest planets down to the lower region through the water of
the Ganges, and therefore the hair on their heads was wet. They touched the lotus feet of
338
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the Lord, which are worshiped with various paraphernalia by the daughters of the
serpent-king when they desire good husbands.
PURPORT
The Ganges water flows directly from the lotus feet of Viñëu, and its course runs from
the highest planet of the universe down to the lowest. The sages came down from
Satyaloka by taking advantage of the flowing water, a process of transportation made
possible by the power of mystic yoga. If a river flows thousands and thousands of miles, a
perfect yogé can at once transport himself from one place to another simply by dipping
in its water. The Ganges is the only celestial river which flows throughout the universe,
and great sages travel all over the universe via this sacred river. The statement that
their hair was wet indicates that it was directly moistened by the water originating from
the lotus feet of Viñëu (the Ganges). Whoever touches the water of the Ganges to his
head surely touches the lotus feet of the Lord directly and can become free from all
effects of sinful acts. If after taking a bath in the Ganges or being washed of all sins, a
man guards himself against committing further sinful acts, then certainly he is
delivered. But if he again takes up sinful activities, his bath in the Ganges is as good as
that of the elephant, who nicely takes his bath in a river but later spoils the whole thing
by covering himself with dust on the land.
TEXT 6
MauhuGa*R<aNTaae vcSaaNauraGa‚
S%l/TPadeNaaSYa k*-TaaiNa TaJja" )
ik-rq$=SaahóMai<aPa[vek-‚
Pa[ÛaeiTaTaaeÕaMaf-<aaSahóMa( )) 6 ))
muhur gåëanto vacasänurägaskhalat-
padenäsya kåtäni taj-jïäù
kiréöa-sähasra-maëi-pravekapradyotitoddäma-
phaëä-sahasram
SYNONYMS
muhuù—again and again; gåëantaù—glorifying; vacasä—by words; anuräga—with great
339
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
affection; skhalat-padena—with symmetrical rhythm; asya—of the Lord; kåtäni—
activities; tat-jïäù—those who know the pastimes; kiréöa—helmets; sähasra—thousands;
maëi-praveka—glowing effulgence of the valuable stones; pradyotita—emanating from;
uddäma—raised; phaëä—hoods; sahasram—thousands.
TRANSLATION
The four Kumäras, headed by Sanat-kumära, who all knew the transcendental pastimes of
the Lord, glorified the Lord in rhythmic accents with selected words full of affection and
love. At that time Lord Saìkarñaëa, with His thousands of raised hoods, began to radiate
an effulgence from the glowing stones on His head.
PURPORT
The Lord is sometimes addressed as uttamaçloka, which means "one who is worshiped
with selected words by devotees." A profusion of such selected words comes from a
devotee who is fully absorbed in affection and love for the devotional service of the
Lord. There are many instances in which even a small boy who was a great devotee of
the Lord could offer excellent prayers in the choicest words for glorification of the
pastimes of the Lord. In other words, without the development of fine affection and
love, one cannot offer prayers to the Lord very suitably.
TEXT 7
Pa[ae¢&- ik-lE/TaÙGavtaMaeNa
iNav*itaDaMaaRi>arTaaYa TaeNa )
SaNaTku-MaaraYa Sa cah Pa*í"
Saa&:YaaYaNaaYaa(r) Da*Tav]TaaYa )) 7 ))
proktaà kilaitad bhagavattamena
nivåtti-dharmäbhiratäya tena
sanat-kumäräya sa cäha påñöaù
säìkhyäyanäyäìga dhåta-vratäya
SYNONYMS
340
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
proktam—was said; kila—certainly; etat—this; bhagavattamena—by Lord Saìkarñaëa;
nivåtti—renunciation; dharma-abhiratäya—unto one who has taken this religious vow;
tena—by Him; sanat-kumäräya—unto Sanat-kumära; saù—he; ca—also; äha—said;
påñöaù—when inquired of; säìkhyäyanäya—unto the great sage Säìkhyäyana; aìga—
my dear Vidura; dhåta-vratäya—unto one who has taken such a vow.
TRANSLATION
Lord Saìkarñaëa thus spoke the purport of Çrémad-Bhägavatam to the great sage Sanatkumära,
who had already taken the vow of renunciation. Sanat-kumära also, in his turn,
when inquired of by Säìkhyäyana Muni, explained Çrémad-Bhägavatam as he had heard it
from Saìkarñaëa.
PURPORT
This is the way of the paramparä system. Although Sanat-kumära, the well-known great
saintly Kumära, was in the perfect stage of life, still he heard the message of Çrémad-
Bhägavatam from Lord Saìkarñaëa. Similarly, when he was questioned by Säìkhyäyana
Åñi, he spoke to him the same message he had heard from Lord Saìkarñaëa. In other
words, unless one hears from the proper authority one cannot become a preacher. In
devotional service, therefore, two items out of the nine, namely hearing and chanting,
are most important. Without hearing nicely, one cannot preach the message of Vedic
knowledge.
TEXT 8
Saa&:YaaYaNa" PaarMah&SYaMau:Yaae
ivv+aMaa<aae >aGaviÜ>aUTaq" )
JaGaad Saae_SMad(Gaurve_iNvTaaYa
ParaXaraYaaQa b*hSPaTaeê )) 8 ))
säìkhyäyanaù päramahaàsya-mukhyo
vivakñamäëo bhagavad-vibhütéù
jagäda so 'smad-gurave 'nvitäya
paräçaräyätha båhaspateç ca
341
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
säìkhyäyanaù—the great sage Säìkhyäyana; päramahaàsya-mukhyaù—the chief of all
transcendentalists; vivakñamäëaù—while reciting; bhagavat-vibhütéù—the glories of the
Lord; jagäda—explained; saù—he; asmat—of me; gurave—unto the spiritual master;
anvitäya—followed; paräçaräya—unto the sage Paräçara; atha båhaspateù ca—also to
Båhaspati.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Säìkhyäyana was the chief amongst the transcendentalists, and when he
was describing the glories of the Lord in terms of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, it so happened that
my spiritual master, Paräçara, and Båhaspati both heard him.
TEXT 9
Pa[aevac Maù& Sa dYaalu/å¢-ae
MauiNa" Paul/STYaeNa Paura<aMaaÛMa( )
Saae_h& TavETaTk-QaYaaiMa vTSa
é[Öal/ve iNaTYaMaNauv]TaaYa )) 9 ))
proväca mahyaà sa dayälur ukto
muniù pulastyena puräëam ädyam
so 'haà tavaitat kathayämi vatsa
çraddhälave nityam anuvratäya
SYNONYMS
proväca—said; mahyam—unto me; saù—he; dayäluù—kindhearted; uktaù—
aforementioned; muniù—sage; pulastyena—by the sage Pulastya; puräëam ädyam—the
foremost of all the Puräëas; saù aham—that also I; tava—unto you; etat—this;
kathayämi—shall speak; vatsa—my dear son; çraddhälave—unto one who is faithful;
nityam—always; anuvratäya—unto one who is a follower.
TRANSLATION
342
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The great sage Paräçara, as aforementioned, being so advised by the great sage Pulastya,
spoke unto me the foremost of the Puräëas [Bhägavatam]. I shall also describe this before
you, my dear son, in terms of my hearing, because you are always my faithful follower.
PURPORT
The great sage of the name Pulastya is the father of all demoniac descendants. Once
upon a time Paräçara began a sacrifice in which all the demons were to be burnt to death
because his father had been killed and devoured by one of them. The great sage Vasiñöha
Muni arrived at the sacrifice and requested Paräçara to stop the deadly action, and
because of Vasiñöha's position and respect in the community of sages, Paräçara could not
deny the request. Paräçara having stopped the sacrifice, Pulastya, the father of the
demons, appreciated his brahminical temperament and gave the blessing that in the
future he would be a great speaker on the Vedic literatures called the Puräëas, the
supplements of the Vedas. Paräçara's action was appreciated by Pulastya because Paräçara
had forgiven the demons out of his brahminical power of forgiveness. Paräçara was able
to demolish all the demons in the sacrifice, but he considered, "Demons are so made that
they devour living creatures, men and animals, but why on that account should I
withdraw my brahminical qualification of forgiveness?" As the great speaker of the
Puräëas, Paräçara first of all spoke on the Çrémad-Bhägavata Puräëa because it is the
foremost of all the Puräëas. Maitreya Muni desired to narrate the same Bhägavatam be
had heard from Paräçara, and Vidura was qualified to hear it because of his faithfulness
and his following the instructions received from superiors. So Çrémad-Bhägavatam was
being narrated from time immemorial by the disciplic succession, even before the time
of Vyäsadeva. The so-called historians calculate the Puräëas to be only a few hundred
years old, but factually the Puräëas existed from time immemorial, before all historical
calculations by the mundaners and speculative philosophers.
TEXT 10
odaPlu/Ta& ivìiMad& TadaSaqd(
Yaiàd]YaaMaqil/Tad*x( NYaMaql/YaTa( )
AhqNd]TaLPae_iDaXaYaaNa Wk-"
k*-Ta+a<a" SvaTMarTaaE iNarqh" )) 10 ))
343
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
udäplutaà viçvam idaà tadäséd
yan nidrayämélita-dåì nyamélayat
ahéndra-talpe 'dhiçayäna ekaù
kåta-kñaëaù svätma-ratau niréhaù
SYNONYMS
uda—water; äplutam—submerged in; viçvam—the three worlds; idam—this; tadä—at
that time; äsét—it so remained; yat—in which; nidrayä—in slumber; amélita—closed;
dåk—eyes; nyamélayat—not completely closed; ahi-indra—the great snake Ananta;
talpe—on the bed of; adhiçayänaù—lying on; ekaù—alone; kåta-kñaëaù—being engaged;
sva-ätma-ratau—enjoying in His internal potency; niréhaù—without any part of
external energy.
TRANSLATION
At that time when the three worlds were submerged in water, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu was
alone, lying on His bedstead, the great snake Ananta, and although He appeared to be in
slumber in His own internal potency, free from the action of the external energy, His
eyes were not completely closed.
PURPORT
The Lord is eternally enjoying transcendental bliss by His internal potency, whereas the
external potency is suspended during the time of the dissolution of the cosmic
manifestation.
TEXT 11
Saae_NTa"Xarqre_iPaRTa>aUTaSaU+Ma"
k-al/aiTMak-a& Xai¢-MaudqrYaa<a" )
ovaSa TaiSMaNa( Sail/le/ Pade Sve
YaQaaNal/ae daåi<a åÖvqYaR" )) 11 ))
so 'ntaù çarére 'rpita-bhüta-sükñmaù
kälätmikäà çaktim udérayäëaù
344
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
uväsa tasmin salile pade sve
yathänalo däruëi ruddha-véryaù
SYNONYMS
saù—the Supreme Lord; antaù—within; çarére—in the transcendental body; arpita—
kept; bhüta—material elements; sükñmaù—subtle; käla-ätmikäm—the form of time;
çaktim—energy; udérayäëaù—invigorating; uväsa—resided; tasmin—therein; salile—in
the water; pade—in the place; sve—His own; yathä—as much as; analaù—fire; däruëi—
in the fuel wood; ruddha-véryaù—submerged strength.
TRANSLATION
Just like the strength of fire within fuel wood, the Lord remained within the water of
dissolution, submerging all the living entities in their subtle bodies. He lay in the selfinvigorated
energy called käla.
PURPORT
After the three worlds—the upper, lower and middle planetary systems—merged into
the water of dissolution, the living entities of all the three worlds remained in their
subtle bodies by dint of the energy called käla. In this dissolution, the gross bodies
became unmanifest, but the subtle bodies existed, just like the water of the material
creation. Thus the material energy was not completely wound up, as is the case in the
full dissolution of the material world.
TEXT 12
cTauYauRGaaNaa& c SahóMaPSau
SvPaNa( SvYaaedqirTaYaa SvXa¢-ya )
k-al/a:YaYaaSaaidTak-MaRTaN}aae
l/aek-aNaPaqTaaNdd*Xae Svdehe )) 12 ))
catur-yugänäà ca sahasram apsu
svapan svayodéritayä sva-çaktyä
käläkhyayäsädita-karma-tantro
345
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
lokän apétän dadåçe sva-dehe
SYNONYMS
catuù—four; yugänäm—of the millenniums; ca—also; sahasram—one thousand; apsu—
in the water; svapan—dreaming in sleep; svayä—with His internal potency; udéritayä—
for further development; sva-çaktyä—by His own energy; käla-äkhyayä—by the name
käla; äsädita—being so engaged; karma-tantraù—in the matter of fruitive activities;
lokän—the total living entities; apétän—bluish; dadåçe—saw it so; sva-dehe—in His own
body.
TRANSLATION
The Lord lay down for four thousand yuga cycles in His internal potency, and by His
external energy He appeared to be sleeping within the water. When the living entities
were coming out for further development of their fruitive activities, actuated by the
energy called käla-çakti, He saw His transcendental body as bluish.
PURPORT
In the Viñëu Puräëa, käla-çakti is mentioned as avidyä. The symptom of the influence of
the käla-çakti is that one has to work in the material world for fruitive results. The
fruitive workers are described in Bhagavad-gétä as müòhas, or foolish. Such foolish living
entities are very enthusiastic to work for some temporary benefit within perpetual
bondage. One thinks himself very clever throughout his life if he is able to leave behind
him a great asset of wealth for his children, and to achieve this temporary benefit he
takes the risk of all sinful activities, without knowledge that such activities will keep
him perpetually bound by the shackles of material bondage. Due to this polluted
mentality and due to material sins, the aggregate combination of living entities appeared
to be bluish. Such an impetus of activity for fruitive result is made possible by the
dictation of the external energy of the Lord, käla.
TEXT 13
TaSYaaQaRSaU+Maai>aiNaivíd*íe‚
rNTaGaRTaae_QaaeR rJaSaa TaNaqYaaNa( )
346
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Gau<aeNa k-al/aNauGaTaeNa ivÖ"
SaUZYa&STadai>aÛTa Naai>adeXaaTa( )) 13 ))
tasyärtha-sükñmäbhiniviñöa-dåñöer
antar-gato 'rtho rajasä tanéyän
guëena kälänugatena viddhaù
süñyaàs tadäbhidyata näbhi-deçät
SYNONYMS
tasya—His; artha—subject; sükñma—subtle; abhiniviñöa-dåñöeù—of one whose attention
was fixed; antaù-gataù—internal; arthaù—purpose; rajasä—by the mode of passion of
material nature; tanéyän—very subtle; guëena—by the qualities; käla-anugatena—in due
course of time; viddhaù—agitated; süñyan—generating; tadä—then; abhidyata—pierced
through; näbhi-deçät—from the abdomen.
TRANSLATION
The subtle subject matter of creation, on which the Lord's attention was fixed, was
agitated by the material mode of passion, and thus the subtle form of creation pierced
through His abdomen.
TEXT 14
Sa PaÚk-aeXa" SahSaaediTaïTa(
k-ale/Na k-MaRPa[iTabaeDaNaeNa )
Svraeicza TaTSail/l&/ ivXaal&/
ivÛaeTaYaàkR- wvaTMaYaaeiNa" )) 14 ))
sa padma-koçaù sahasodatiñöhat
kälena karma-pratibodhanena
sva-rociñä tat salilaà viçälaà
vidyotayann arka ivätma-yoniù
347
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
saù—that; padma-koçaù—bud of a lotus flower; sahasä—suddenly; udatiñöhat—
appeared; kälena—by time; karma—fruitive activities; pratibodhanena—awakening; svarociñä—
by its own effulgence; tat—that; salilam—water of devastation; viçälam—vast;
vidyotayan—illuminating; arkaù—the sun; iva—like; ätma-yoniù—generating from the
Personality of Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
Piercing through, this sum total form of the fruitive activity of the living entities took the
shape of the bud of a lotus flower generated from the Personality of Viñëu, and by His
supreme will it illuminated everything, like the sun, and dried up the vast waters of
devastation.
TEXT 15
Taçaek-PaÚ& Sa o Wv ivZ<au"
Pa[avqivXaTSavRGau<aav>aaSaMa( )
TaiSMaNa( SvYa& vedMaYaae ivDaaTaa
SvYaM>auv& Ya& SMa vdiNTa Saae_>aUTa( )) 15 ))
tal loka-padmaà sa u eva viñëuù
prävéviçat sarva-guëävabhäsam
tasmin svayaà vedamayo vidhätä
svayambhuvaà yaà sma vadanti so 'bhüt
SYNONYMS
tat—that; loka—universal; padmam—lotus flower; saù—He; u—certainly; eva—
factually; viñëuù—the Lord; prävéviçat—entered into; sarva—all; guëa-avabhäsam—
reservoir of all modes of nature; tasmin—in which; svayam—in person; veda-mayaù—
the personality of Vedic wisdom; vidhätä—controller of the universe; svayam-bhuvam—
self-born; yam—whom; sma—in the past; vadanti—do say; saù—he; abhüt—generated.
348
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Into that universal lotus flower Lord Viñëu personally entered as the Supersoul, and
when it was thus impregnated with all the modes of material nature, the personality of
Vedic wisdom, whom we call the self-born, was generated.
PURPORT
This lotus flower is the universal viräö form, or the gigantic form of the Lord in the
material world. It becomes amalgamated in the Personality of Godhead Viñëu, in His
abdomen, at the time of dissolution, and it becomes manifest at the time of creation.
This is due to Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, who enters into each of the universes. In this form
is the sum total of all the fruitive activities of the living entities conditioned by material
nature, and the first of them, namely Brahmä, or the controller of the universe, is
generated from this lotus flower. This first-born living being, unlike all the others, has
no material father, and thus he is called self-born, or svayambhü. He goes to sleep with
Näräyaëa at the time of devastation, and when there is another creation, he is born in
this way. From this description we have the conception of three—the gross viräö form,
the subtle Hiraëyagarbha and the material creative force, Brahmä.
TEXT 16
TaSYaa& Sa caM>aaeåhk-i<aRk-aYaa‚
MaviSQaTaae l/aek-MaPaXYaMaaNa" )
Pair§-MaNa( VYaaeiMan ivv*taNae}a‚
êTvair le/>ae_NauidXa& Mau%aiNa )) 16 ))
tasyäà sa cämbho-ruha-karëikäyäm
avasthito lokam apaçyamänaù
parikraman vyomni vivåtta-netraç
catväri lebhe 'nudiçaà mukhäni
SYNONYMS
tasyäm—in that; saù—Brahmä; ca—and; ambhaù—water; ruha-karëikäyäm—whorl of
the lotus; avasthitaù—being situated; lokam—the world; apaçyamänaù—without being
349
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
able to see; parikraman—circumambulating; vyomni—in space; vivåtta-netraù—while
moving the eyes; catväri—four; lebhe—achieved; anudiçam—in terms of direction;
mukhäni—heads.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä, born out of the lotus flower, could not see the world, although he was situated in
the whorl. He therefore circumambulated all of space, and while moving his eyes in all
directions he achieved four heads in terms of the four directions.
TEXT 17
TaSMaaÛuGaaNTaìSaNaavgaU<aR‚
Jal/aeiMaRc§-aTSail/l/aiÜæ!Ma( )
oPaaié[Ta" k-ÅMau l/aek-Tatv&
NaaTMaaNaMaÖaivddaiddev" )) 17 ))
tasmäd yugänta-çvasanävaghürëajalormi-
cakrät saliläd virüòham
upäçritaù kaïjam u loka-tattvaà
nätmänam addhävidad ädi-devaù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—from there; yuga-anta—at the end of the millennium; çvasana—the air of
devastation; avaghürëa—because of movement; jala—water; ürmi-cakrät—out of the
circle of waves; salilät—from the water; virüòham—situated on them; upäçritaù—having
the shelter of; kaïjam—lotus flower; u—in astonishment; loka-tattvam—the mystery of
creation; na—not; ätmänam—himself; addhä—perfectly; avidat—could understand;
ädi-devaù—the first demigod.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, situated in that lotus, could not perfectly understand the creation, the lotus
or himself. At the end of the millennium the air of devastation began to move the water
350
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
and the lotus in great circular waves.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä was perplexed about his creation, the lotus and the world, even though he
tried to understand them for one millennium, which is beyond calculation in the solar
years of human beings. No one, therefore, can know the mystery of the creation and
cosmic manifestation simply by mental speculation. The human being is so limited in his
capacity that without the help of the Supreme he can hardly understand the mystery of
the will of the Lord in terms of creation, continuance and destruction.
TEXT 18
k- Wz Yaae_SaavhMaBJaPa*ï
WTaTku-Taae vaBJaMaNaNYadPSau )
AiSTa ùDaSTaaidh ik-ÄNaETa‚
diDaiïTa& Ya}a SaTaa Nau >aaVYaMa( )) 18 ))
ka eña yo 'säv aham abja-påñöha
etat kuto väbjam ananyad apsu
asti hy adhastäd iha kiïcanaitad
adhiñöhitaà yatra satä nu bhävyam
SYNONYMS
kaù—who; eñaù—this; yaù asau aham—that I am; abja-påñöhe—on top of the lotus;
etat—this; kutaù—wherefrom; vä—either; abjam—lotus flower; ananyat—otherwise;
apsu—in the water; asti—there is; hi—certainly; adhastät—from below; iha—in this;
kiïcana—anything; etat—this; adhiñöhitam—situated; yatra—wherein; satä—
automatically; nu—or not; bhävyam—must be.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, in his ignorance, contemplated: Who am I that am situated on the top of
this lotus? Wherefrom has it sprouted? There must be something downwards, and that
from which this lotus has grown must be within the water.
351
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The subject matter of the speculations of Brahmä in the beginning regarding the
creation of the cosmic manifestation is still a subject matter for mental speculators. The
most intelligent man is he who tries to find the cause of his personal existence and that
of the whole cosmic creation and thus tries to find the ultimate cause. If his attempt is
properly executed with penances and perseverance, it is sure to be crowned with success.
TEXT 19
Sa wTQaMauÜq+Ya TadBJaNaal/‚
Naa@qi>arNTaJaRl/MaaivveXa )
NaavaRGGaTaSTaT%rNaal/Naal/‚
Naai>a& ivicNv&STadivNdTaaJa" )) 19 ))
sa ittham udvékñya tad-abja-nälanäòébhir
antar-jalam äviveça
närväg-gatas tat-khara-näla-nälanäbhià
vicinvaàs tad avindatäjaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Brahmä); ittham—in this way; udvékñya—contemplating; tat—that; abja—
lotus; näla—stem; näòébhiù—by the pipe; antaù-jalam—within the water; äviveça—
entered into; na—not; arväk-gataù—in spite of going inside; tat-khara-näla—the stem
of the lotus; näla—pipe; näbhim—of the navel; vicinvan—thinking much of it; tat—
that; avindata—understood; ajaù—the self-born.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, thus contemplating, entered the water through the channel of the stem of
the lotus. But in spite of entering the stem and going nearer to the navel of Viñëu, he
could not trace out the root.
PURPORT
352
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
By dint of one's personal endeavor one may go nearer to the Lord, but without the Lord's
mercy one cannot reach the ultimate point. Such understanding of the Lord is possible
only by devotional service, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (18.55): bhaktyä mäm
abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù.
TEXT 20
TaMaSYaPaare ivduraTMaSaGa|
ivicNvTaae_>aUTSauMaha&iñ<aeiMa" )
Yaae deh>aaJaa& >aYaMaqrYaa<a"
Pairi+a<aaeTYaaYaurJaSYa heiTa" )) 20 ))
tamasy apäre vidurätma-sargaà
vicinvato 'bhüt sumahäàs tri-ëemiù
yo deha-bhäjäà bhayam érayäëaù
parikñiëoty äyur ajasya hetiù
SYNONYMS
tamasi apäre—because of an ignorant way of searching; vidura—O Vidura; ätmasargam—
the cause of his creation; vicinvataù—while contemplating; abhüt—it so
became; su-mahän—very great; tri-nemiù—time of three dimensions; yaù—which; dehabhäjäm—
of the embodied; bhayam—fearfulness; érayäëaù—generating; parikñiëoti—
diminishing the one hundred years; äyuù—duration of life; ajasya—of the self-born;
hetiù—the wheel of eternal time.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, while searching in that way about his existence, Brahmä reached his ultimate
time, which is the eternal wheel in the hand of Viñëu and which generates fear in the
mind of the living entity like the fear of death.
TEXT 21
TaTaae iNav*taae_Pa[iTal/BDak-aMa"
353
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SviDaZ<YaMaaSaaÛ PauNa" Sa dev" )
XaNaEiJaRTaìaSaiNav*taictaae
NYazqddaæ!SaMaaiDaYaaeGa" )) 21 ))
tato nivåtto 'pratilabdha-kämaù
sva-dhiñëyam äsädya punaù sa devaù
çanair jita-çväsa-nivåtta-citto
nyañédad ärüòha-samädhi-yogaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; nivåttaù—retired from that endeavor; apratilabdha-kämaù—without
achievement of the desired destination; sva-dhiñëyam—own seat; äsädya—reaching;
punaù—again; saù—he; devaù—the demigod; çanaiù—without delay; jita-çväsa—
controlling the breathing; nivåtta—retired; cittaù—intelligence; nyañédat—sat down;
ärüòha—in confidence; samädhi-yogaù—in meditation on the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, being unable to achieve the desired destination, he retired from such
searching and came back again to the top of the lotus. Thus, controlling all objectives, he
concentrated his mind on the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Samädhi involves concentrating the mind upon the supreme cause of all, even if one is
unaware of whether His actual nature is personal, impersonal or localized.
Concentration of the mind on the Supreme is certainly a form of devotional service. To
cease from personal sense endeavors and to concentrate on the supreme cause is a sign
of self-surrender, and when self-surrender is present, that is a sure sign of devotional
service. Each and every living entity needs to engage in devotional service to the Lord if
he wishes to understand the ultimate cause of his existence.
TEXT 22
k-ale/Na Saae_Ja" PauåzaYauzai>a‚
354
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Pa[v*taYaaeGaeNa ivæ!baeDa" )
SvYa& TadNTaôRdYae_v>aaTa‚
MaPaXYaTaaPaXYaTa Yaà PaUvRMa( )) 22 ))
kälena so 'jaù puruñäyuñäbhipravåtta-
yogena virüòha-bodhaù
svayaà tad antar-hådaye 'vabhätam
apaçyatäpaçyata yan na pürvam
SYNONYMS
kälena—in due course of time; saù—he; ajaù—the self-born Brahmä; puruña-äyuñä—by
the duration of his age; abhipravåtta—being engaged; yogena—in meditation; virüòha—
developed; bodhaù—intelligence; svayam—automatically; tat antaù-hådaye—in the
heart; avabhätam—manifested; apaçyata—saw; apaçyata—did see; yat—which; na—not;
pürvam—before.
TRANSLATION
At the end of Brahmä's one hundred years, when his meditation was complete, he
developed the required knowledge, and as a result he could see in his heart the Supreme
within himself, whom he could not see before with the greatest endeavor.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord can be experienced only through the process of devotional service
and not by one's personal endeavor in mental speculation. The age of Brahmä is
calculated in terms of divya years, which are distinct from the solar years of human
beings. The divya years are calculated in Bhagavad-gétä (8.17): sahasra-yuga-paryantam
ahar yad brahmaëo viduù. Brahmä's one day is equal to one thousand times the aggregate
of the four yugas (calculated to be 4,300,000 years). On that basis, Brahmä meditated for
one hundred years before he could understand the supreme cause of all causes, and then
he wrote the Brahma-saàhitä, which is approved and recognized by Lord Caitanya and
in which he sings, govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi **. One has to wait for the
mercy of the Lord before one can either render service unto Him or know Him as He is.
355
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 23
Ma*<aal/GaaEraYaTaXaez>aaeGa‚
PaYaRª Wk&- Pauåz& XaYaaNaMa( )
f-<aaTaPa}aaYauTaMaUDaRrÒ‚
Ûui>ahRTaßaNTaYauGaaNTaTaaeYae )) 23 ))
måëäla-gauräyata-çeña-bhogaparyaìka
ekaà puruñaà çayänam
phaëätapaträyuta-mürdha-ratnadyubhir
hata-dhvänta-yugänta-toye
SYNONYMS
måëäla—lotus flower; gaura—white all over; äyata—gigantic; çeña-bhoga—body of Çeñanäga;
paryaìke—on the bed; ekam—alone; puruñam—the Supreme Person; çayänam—
was lying; phaëa-ätapatra—umbrella of a serpent hood; äyuta—bedecked with;
mürdha—head; ratna—jewels; dyubhiù—by the rays; hata-dhvänta—darkness dissipated;
yuga-anta—devastation; toye—in the water.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä could see that on the water there was a gigantic lotuslike white bedstead, the
body of Çeña-näga, on which the Personality of Godhead was lying alone. The whole
atmosphere was illuminated by the rays of the jewels bedecking the hood of Çeña-näga,
and that illumination dissipated all the darkness of those regions.
TEXT 24
Pa[e+aa& i+aPaNTa& hirTaaePal/ad]e"
SaNDYaa>a]NaqveåååKMaMaUDanR" )
rÒaedDaaraEziDaSaaEMaNaSYa
vNaóJaae ve<au>auJaax(iga]Paax(ga]e" )) 24 ))
356
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
prekñäà kñipantaà haritopalädreù
sandhyäbhra-néver uru-rukma-mürdhnaù
ratnodadhärauñadhi-saumanasya
vana-srajo veëu-bhujäìghripäìghreù
SYNONYMS
prekñäm—the panorama; kñipantam—deriding; harita—green; upala—coral; adreù—of
the hell; sandhyä-abhra-néveù—of the dress of the evening sky; uru—great; rukma—
gold; mürdhnaù—on the summit; ratna—jewels; udadhära—waterfalls; auñadhi—herbs;
saumanasya—of the scenery; vana-srajaù—flower garland; veëu—dress; bhuja—hands;
aìghripa—trees; aìghreù—legs.
TRANSLATION
The luster of the transcendental body of the Lord mocked the beauty of the coral
mountain. The coral mountain is very beautifully dressed by the evening sky, but the
yellow dress of the Lord mocked its beauty. There is gold on the summit of the mountain,
but the Lord's helmet, bedecked with jewels, mocked it. The mountain's waterfalls,
herbs, etc., with a panorama of flowers, seem like garlands, but the Lord's gigantic body,
and His hands and legs, decorated with jewels, pearls, tulasé leaves and flower garlands,
mocked the scene on the mountain.
PURPORT
The panoramic beauty of nature, which strikes one with wonder, may be taken as a
perverted reflection of the transcendental body of the Lord. One who is therefore
attracted by the beauty of the Lord is no longer attracted by the beauty of material
nature, although he does not minimize its beauty. In Bhagavad-gétä (2.59) it is described
that one who is attracted by param, the Supreme, is no longer attracted by anything
inferior.
TEXT 25
AaYaaMaTaae ivSTarTa" SvMaaNa‚
deheNa l/aek-}aYaSa°he<a )
357
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ivic}aidVYaa>ar<aa&éuk-aNaa&
k*-Taié[YaaPaaié[TavezdehMa( )) 25 ))
äyämato vistarataù sva-mänadehena
loka-traya-saìgraheëa
vicitra-divyäbharaëäàçukänäà
kåta-çriyäpäçrita-veña-deham
SYNONYMS
äyämataù—by length; vistarataù—by breadth; sva-mäna—by His own measurement;
dehena—by the transcendental body; loka-traya—the three (upper, middle and lower)
planetary systems; saìgraheëa—by total absorption; vicitra—variegated; divya—
transcendental; äbharaëa-aàçukänäm—rays of the ornaments; kåta-çriyä apäçrita—
beauty created by those dresses and ornaments; veña—dressed; deham—transcendental
body.
TRANSLATION
His transcendental body, unlimited in length and breadth, occupied the three planetary
systems, upper, middle and lower. His body was self-illuminated by unparalleled dress and
variegatedness and was properly ornamented.
PURPORT
The length and breadth of the transcendental body of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead could only be measured by His own measurement because He is all-pervading
throughout the complete cosmic manifestation. The beauty of material nature is due to
His personal beauty, yet He is always magnificently dressed and ornamented to prove
His transcendental variegatedness, which is so important in the advancement of
spiritual knowledge.
TEXT 26
Pau&Saa& Svk-aMaaYa iviv¢-MaaGaOE‚
r>YacRTaa& k-aMadugaax(iga]PaÚMa( )
358
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Pa[dXaRYaNTa& k*-PaYaa Na%eNdu‚
MaYaU%i>aàax(Gauil/caåPa}aMa( )) 26 ))
puàsäà sva-kämäya vivikta-märgair
abhyarcatäà käma-dughäìghri-padmam
pradarçayantaà kåpayä nakhendumayükha-
bhinnäìguli-cäru-patram
SYNONYMS
puàsäm—of the human being; sva-kämäya—according to the desire; vivikta-märgaiù—
by the path of devotional service; abhyarcatäm—worshiped; käma-dugha-aìghripadmam—
the lotus feet of the Lord, which can award all desired fruits;
pradarçayantam—while showing them; kåpayä—by causeless mercy; nakha—nails;
indu—moonlike; mayükha—rays; bhinna—divided; aìguli—figures; cäru-patram—very
beautiful.
TRANSLATION
The Lord showed His lotus feet by raising them. His lotus feet are the source of all
awards achieved by devotional service free from material contamination. Such awards are
for those who worship Him in pure devotion. The splendor of the transcendental rays
from His moonlike toenails and fingernails appeared like the petals of a flower.
PURPORT
The Lord fulfills the desires of everyone just as one desires. Pure devotees are interested
in achieving the transcendental service of the Lord, which is nondifferent from Him.
Therefore, the Lord is the only desire of the pure devotees, and devotional service is the
only spotless process for achieving His favor. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé says in his Bhaktirasämåta-
sindhu (1.1.11) that pure devotional service is jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam: [Cc.
Madhya 19.167] pure devotional service is without any tinge of speculative knowledge
and fruitive activities. Such devotional service is able to award the pure devotee the
highest result, namely direct association with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Kåñëa. According to the Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad, the Lord showed one of the many
thousands of petals of His lotus feet. It is said: brähmaëo'säv anavarataà me dhyätaù
359
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
stutaù parärdhänte so 'budhyata gopa-veço me purastät ävirbabhüva. After penetrating for
millions of years, Lord Brahmä could understand the transcendental form of the Lord as
Çré Kåñëa, in the dress of a cowherd boy, and thus he recorded his experience in the
Brahma-saàhitä in the famous prayer, govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi **.
TEXT 27
Mau%eNa l/aek-aiTaRhriSMaTaeNa
PairSfu-rTku-<@l/Mai<@TaeNa )
Xaae<aaiYaTaeNaaDaribMb>aaSaa
Pa[TYahRYaNTa& SauNaSaeNa Sau>...va )) 27 ))
mukhena lokärti-hara-smitena
parisphurat-kuëòala-maëòitena
çoëäyitenädhara-bimba-bhäsä
pratyarhayantaà sunasena subhrvä
SYNONYMS
mukhena—by a gesture of the face; loka-ärti-hara—vanquisher of the distress of the
devotees; smitena—by smiling; parisphurat—dazzling; kuëòala—earrings; maëòitena—
decorated with; çoëäyitena—acknowledging; adhara—of His lips; bimba—reflection;
bhäsä—rays; pratyarhayantam—reciprocating; su-nasena—by His pleasing nose; subhrvä—
and pleasing eyebrows.
TRANSLATION
He also acknowledged the service of the devotees and vanquished their distress by His
beautiful smile. The reflection of His face, decorated with earrings, was so pleasing
because it dazzled with the rays from His lips and the beauty of His nose and eyebrows.
PURPORT
Devotional service to the Lord is very much obliging to Him. There are many
transcendentalists in different fields of spiritual activities, but devotional service to the
Lord is unique. Devotees do not ask anything from the Lord in exchange for their
360
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
service. Even the most desirable liberation is refused by devotees, although offered by
the Lord. Thus the Lord becomes a kind of debtor to the devotees, and He can only try
to repay the devotees, service with His ever-enchanting smile. The devotees are ever
satisfied by the smiling face of the Lord, and they become enlivened. And by seeing the
devotees so enlivened, the Lord Himself is further satisfied. So there is continuous
transcendental competition between the Lord and His devotees by such reciprocation of
service and acknowledgement.
TEXT 28
k-dMbik-ÅLk-iPaXa(r)vaSaSaa
Svl/x(k*-Ta& Mae%l/Yaa iNaTaMbe )
hare<a caNaNTaDaNaeNa vTSa
é[qvTSav+a"SQal/vç>aeNa )) 28 ))
kadamba-kiïjalka-piçaìga-väsasä
svalaìkåtaà mekhalayä nitambe
häreëa cänanta-dhanena vatsa
çrévatsa-vakñaù-sthala-vallabhena
SYNONYMS
kadamba-kiïjalka—saffron dust of the kadamba flower; piçaìga—dress of the color;
väsasä—by clothing; su-alaìkåtam—well decorated; mekhalayä—by the belt; nitambe—
on the waist; häreëa—by the garland; ca—also; ananta—highly; dhanena—valuable;
vatsa—my dear Vidura; çrévatsa—of the transcendental marking; vakñaù-sthala—on the
chest; vallabhena—very pleasing.
TRANSLATION
O my dear Vidura, the Lord's waist was covered with yellow cloth resembling the saffron
dust of the kadamba flower, and it was encircled by a well-decorated belt. His chest was
decorated with the çrévatsa marking and a necklace of unlimited value.
TEXT 29
361
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ParaDYaRke-YaUrMai<aPa[vek-‚
PaYaRSTadaedR<@SahóXaa%Ma( )
AVYa¢-MaUl&/ >auvNaax(iga]PaeNd]‚
MahqNd]>aaeGaEriDavqTavLXaMa( )) 29 ))
parärdhya-keyüra-maëi-pravekaparyasta-
dordaëòa-sahasra-çäkham
avyakta-mülaà bhuvanäìghripendram
ahéndra-bhogair adhivéta-valçam
SYNONYMS
parärdhya—very valuable; keyüra—ornaments; maëi-praveka—highly valuable jewels;
paryasta—disseminating; dordaëòa—arms; sahasra-çäkham—with thousands of
branches; avyakta-mülam—self-situated; bhuvana—universal; aìghripa—trees;
indram—the Lord; ahi-indra—Anantadeva; bhogaiù—by hoods; adhivéta—surrounded;
valçam—shoulders.
TRANSLATION
As a sandalwood tree is decorated with fragrant flowers and branches, the Lord's body
was decorated with valuable jewels and pearls. He was the self-situated tree, the Lord of
all others in the universe. And as a sandalwood tree is covered with many snakes, so the
Lord's body was also covered by the hoods of Ananta.
PURPORT
The word avyakta-mülam is significant here. Generally, no one can see the roots of a
tree. But as far as the Lord is concerned, He is the root of Himself because there is no
other separate cause of His standing but He Himself. In the Vedas it is said that the Lord
is sväçrayäçraya; He is His own support, and there is no other support for Him.
Therefore, avyakta means the Supreme Lord Himself and no one else.
TEXT 30
362
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
cracraEk-ae >aGavNMahqDa]‚
MahqNd]bNDau& Sail/l/aePaGaU!Ma( )
ik-rq$=Saahóihr<Yaé*(r)‚
Maaiv>aRvTk-aESTau>arÒGa>aRMa( )) 30 ))
caräcarauko bhagavan-mahédhram
ahéndra-bandhuà salilopagüòham
kiréöa-sähasra-hiraëya-çåìgam
ävirbhavat kaustubha-ratna-garbham
SYNONYMS
cara—moving animals; acara—nonmoving trees; okaù—the place or situation;
bhagavat—the Personality of Godhead; mahédhram—the mountain; ahi-indra—Çré
Anantadeva; bandhum—friend; salila—water; upagüòham—submerged; kiréöa—
helmets; sähasra—thousands; hiraëya—gold; çåìgam—peaks; ävirbhavat—manifested;
kaustubha—the Kaustubha jewel; ratna-garbham—ocean.
TRANSLATION
Like a great mountain, the Lord stands as the abode for all moving and nonmoving living
entities. He is the friend of the snakes because Lord Ananta is His friend. As a mountain
has thousands of golden peas, so the Lord was seen with the thousands of goldenhelmeted
hoods of Ananta-näga; and as a mountain is sometimes filled with jewels, so also
His transcendental body was fully decorated with valuable jewels. As a mountains is
sometimes submerged in the ocean water, so the Lord is sometimes submerged in the
water of devastation.
TEXT 31
iNavqTaMaaManaYaMaDauv]Taié[Yaa
Svk-IiTaRMaYYaa vNaMaal/Yaa hirMa( )
SaUYaeRNduvaYvGNYaGaMa& i}aDaaMai>a"
Pair§-MaTPa[aDaiNakE-duRraSadMa( )) 31 ))
363
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nivétam ämnäya-madhu-vrata-çriyä
sva-kérti-mayyä vana-mälayä harim
süryendu-väyv-agny-agamaà tri-dhämabhiù
parikramat-prädhanikair duräsadam
SYNONYMS
nivétam—so being enclosed; ämnäya—Vedic wisdom; madhu-vrata-çriyä—sweet sound
in beauty; sva-kérti-mayyä—by His own glories; vana-mälayä—flower garland; harim—
unto the Lord; sürya—the sun; indu—the moon; väyu—the air; agni—the fire;
agamam—unapproachable; tri-dhämabhiù—by the three planetary systems;
parikramat—circumambulating; prädhanikaiù—for fighting; duräsadam—very difficult
to reach.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, thus looking upon the Lord in the shape of a mountain, concluded that He
was Hari, the Personality of Godhead. He saw that the garland of flowers on His chest
glorified Him with Vedic wisdom in sweet songs and looked very beautiful. He was
protected by the Sudarçana wheel for fighting, and even the sun, moon, air, fire, etc.,
could not have access to Him.
TEXT 32
TaùeRv Taàai>aSar"SaraeJa‚
MaaTMaaNaMaM>a" ìSaNa& ivYaÀ )
ddXaR devae JaGaTaae ivDaaTaa
NaaTa" Par& l/aek-ivSaGaRd*ií" )) 32 ))
tarhy eva tan-näbhi-saraù-sarojam
ätmänam ambhaù çvasanaà viyac ca
dadarça devo jagato vidhätä
nätaù paraà loka-visarga-dåñöiù
SYNONYMS
364
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tarhi—therefore; eva—certainly; tat—His; näbhi—navel; saraù—lake; sarojam—lotus
flower; ätmänam—Brahmä; ambhaù—the devastating water; çvasanam—the drying air;
viyat—the sky; ca—also; dadarça—looked upon; devaù—demigod; jagataù—of the
universe; vidhätä—maker of the destination; na—not; ataù param—beyond; lokavisarga—
creation of the cosmic manifestation; dåñöiù—glance.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Brahmä, the maker of the universal destination, thus saw the Lord, he
simultaneously glanced over creation. Lord Brahmä saw the lake in Lord Viñëu's navel,
and the lotus flower, as well as the devastating water, the drying air and the sky. All
became visible to him.
TEXT 33
Sa k-MaRbqJa& rJaSaaePar¢-"
Pa[Jaa" iSaSa*+aiàYadev d*îa )
ASTaaEiÜSaGaaRi>aMau%STaMaq@y‚
MaVYa¢-vTMaRNYai>aveiXaTaaTMaa )) 33 ))
sa karma-béjaà rajasoparaktaù
prajäù sisåkñann iyad eva dåñövä
astaud visargäbhimukhas tam éòyam
avyakta-vartmany abhiveçitätmä
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Brahmä); karma-béjam—seed of worldly activities; rajasä uparaktaù—initiated
by the mode of passion; prajäù—living entities; sisåkñan—willing to create progeny;
iyat—all the five causes of creation; eva—thus; dåñövä—looking on; astaut—prayed for;
visarga—creation after the creation by the Lord; abhimukhaù—towards; tam—that;
éòyam—worshipable; avyakta—transcendental; vartmani—on the path of; abhiveçita—
fixed; ätmä—mind.
365
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, thus being surcharged with the mode of passion, became inclined to create,
and after seeing the five causes of creation indicated by the Personality of Godhead, he
began to offer his respectful prayers on the path of the creative mentality.
PURPORT
Even if one is in the material mode of passion, to create something in the world he has
to take shelter of the Supreme for the necessary energy. That is the path of the
successful termination of any attempt.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Eighth Chapter, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "Manifestation of Brahmä from Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu."
SB 3.9: Brahmä's Prayers for Creative Energy
9. Brahmä's Prayers for Creative Energy
TEXT 1
b]øaevac
jaTaae_iSa Mae_Û SauicraàNau deh>aaJaa&
Na jaYaTae >aGavTaae GaiTairTYavÛMa( )
NaaNYatvdiSTa >aGavàiPa Taà éuÖ&
MaaYaaGau<aVYaiTak-raÛduåivR>aaiSa )) 1 ))
brahmoväca
jïäto 'si me 'dya sucirän nanu deha-bhäjäà
na jïäyate bhagavato gatir ity avadyam
nänyat tvad asti bhagavann api tan na çuddhaà
mäyä-guëa-vyatikaräd yad urur vibhäsi
366
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; jïätaù—known; asi—You are; me—by me; adya—
today; sucirät—after a long time; nanu—but; deha-bhäjäm—of one who has a material
body; na—not; jïäyate—is known; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; gatiù—
course; iti—so it is; avadyam—great offense; na anyat—none beyond; tvat—You; asti—
there is; bhagavan—O my Lord; api—even though there is; tat—anything that may be;
na—never; çuddham—absolute; mäyä—material energy; guëa-vyatikarät—because of
the mixture of the modes of; yat—to which; uruù—transcendental; vibhäsi—You are.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: O my Lord, today, after many, many years of penance, I have come to
know about You. Oh, how unfortunate the embodied living entities are that they are
unable to know Your personality! My Lord, You are the only knowable object because
there is nothing supreme beyond You. If there is anything supposedly superior to You, it
is not the Absolute. You exist as the Supreme by exhibiting the creative energy of matter.
PURPORT
The highest peak of the ignorance of the living entities who are conditioned by material
bodies is that they are unaware of the supreme cause of the cosmic manifestation.
Different people have different theories regarding the supreme cause, but none of them
are genuine. The only supreme cause is Viñëu, and the intervening impediment is the
illusory energy of the Lord. The Lord has employed His wonderful material energy in
manifesting many, many wonderful distractions in the material world, and the
conditioned souls, illusioned by the same energy, are thus unable to know the supreme
cause. The most stalwart scientists and philosophers, therefore, cannot be accepted as
wonderful. They only appear wonderful because they are instruments in the hands of
the illusory energy of the Lord. Under illusion, the general mass of people deny the
existence of the Supreme Lord and accept the foolish products of illusory energy as
supreme.
One can know the supreme cause, the Personality of Godhead, by the causeless mercy of
the Lord, which is bestowed upon the Lord's pure devotees like Brahmä and those in his
disciplic succession. By acts of penance only was Lord Brahmä able to see the
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, and by realization only could he understand the Lord as He is.
Brahmä was extremely satisfied upon observing the magnificent beauty and opulence of
367
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the Lord, and he admitted that nothing can be comparable to Him. Only by penance
can one appreciate the beauty and opulence of the Lord, and when one is acquainted
with that beauty and opulence, he is no longer attracted by any other. This is confirmed
in Bhagavad-gétä (2.59): paraà dåñövä nivartate.
Foolish human beings who do not endeavor to investigate the supreme beauty and
opulence of the Lord are here condemned by Brahmä. It is imperative that every human
being try for such knowledge, and if anyone does not do so, his life is spoiled. Anything
that is beautiful and opulent in the material sense is enjoyed by those living entities who
are like crows. Crows always engage in picking at rejected garbage, whereas the white
ducks do not mix with the crows. Rather, they take pleasure in transparent lakes with
lotus flowers, surrounded by beautiful orchards. Both crows and ducks are undoubtedly
birds by birth, but they are not of the same feather.
TEXT 2
æPa& YadeTadvbaeDarSaaedYaeNa
Xaìiàv*taTaMaSa" SadNauGa]haYa )
AadaE Ga*hqTaMavTaarXaTaEk-bqJa&
Yaàai>aPaÚ>avNaadhMaaivraSaMa( )) 2 ))
rüpaà yad etad avabodha-rasodayena
çaçvan-nivåtta-tamasaù sad-anugrahäya
ädau gåhétam avatära-çataika-béjaà
yan-näbhi-padma-bhavanäd aham äviräsam
SYNONYMS
rüpam—form; yat—which; etat—that; avabodha-rasa—of Your internal potency;
udayena—with the manifestation; çaçvat—forever; nivåtta—freed from; tamasaù—
material contamination; sat-anugrahäya—for the sake of the devotees; ädau—original
in the creative energy of matter; gåhétam—accepted; avatära—of incarnations; çata-ekabéjam—
the root cause of hundreds; yat—that which; näbhi-padma—the navel lotus
flower; bhavanät—from the home; aham—myself; äviräsam—generated.
TRANSLATION
368
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The form which I see is eternally freed from material contamination and has advented to
show mercy to the devotees as a manifestation of internal potency. This incarnation is the
origin of many other incarnations, and I am born from the lotus flower grown from Your
navel home.
PURPORT
The three deities Brahmä, Viñëu and Maheçvara (Çiva), the executive heads of the three
modes of material nature (passion, goodness and ignorance), are all generated from
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, who is described herein by Brahmä. From the Kñérodakaçäyé
Viñëu, many Viñëu incarnations expand at different ages in the duration of the cosmic
manifestation. They are expanded only for the transcendental happiness of the pure
devotees. The incarnations of Viñëu, who appear at different ages and times, are never
to be compared to the conditioned souls. The viñëu-tattvas are not to be compared to
deities like Brahmä and Çiva, nor are they on the same level. Anyone who compares
them is called a päñaëòé, or infidel. Tamasaù, mentioned herein, is the material nature,
and the spiritual nature has a completely separate existence from tamaù. Therefore,
spiritual nature is called avabodha-rasa, or avarodha-rasa. Avarodha means "that which
completely nullifies." In the Transcendence there is no chance of material contact by
any means. Brahmä is the first living being, and therefore he mentions his birth from
the lotus flower generated from the abdomen of Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu.
TEXT 3
NaaTa" Par& ParMa YaÙvTa" SvæPa‚
MaaNaNdMaa}aMaivk-LPaMaivÖvcR" )
PaXYaaiMa ivìSa*JaMaek-MaivìMaaTMaNa(
>aUTaeiNd]YaaTMak-MadSTa oPaaié[Taae_iSMa )) 3 ))
nätaù paraà parama yad bhavataù svarüpam
änanda-mätram avikalpam aviddha-varcaù
paçyämi viçva-såjam ekam aviçvam ätman
bhütendriyätmaka-madas ta upäçrito 'smi
SYNONYMS
369
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
na—do not; ataù param—hereafter; parama—O Supreme; yat—that which; bhavataù—
of Your Lordship; svarüpam—eternal form; änanda-mätram—impersonal Brahman
effulgence; avikalpam—without changes; aviddha-varcaù—without deterioration of
potency; paçyämi—do I see; viçva-såjam—creator of the cosmic manifestation; ekam—
one without a second; aviçvam—and yet not of matter; ätman—O Supreme Cause;
bhüta—body; indriya—senses; ätmaka—on such identification; madaù—pride; te—unto
You; upäçritaù—surrendered; asmi—I am.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, I do not see a form superior to Your present form of eternal bliss and
knowledge. In Your impersonal Brahman effulgence in the spiritual sky, there is no
occasional change and no deterioration of internal potency. I surrender unto You because
whereas I am proud of my material body and senses, Your Lordship is the cause of the
cosmic manifestation and yet You are untouched by matter.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (18.55), bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù: the
Supreme Personality of Godhead can only be partially known, and only by the process of
devotional service to the Lord. Lord Brahmä became aware that the Supreme Lord
Kåñëa has many, many eternal, blissful forms of knowledge. He has described such
expansions of the Supreme Lord, Govinda, in his Brahma-saàhitä (5.33), as follows:
advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam
ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà nava-yauvanaà ca
vedeñu durlabham adurlabham ätma-bhaktau
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is nondual and infallible. He is the original
cause of all causes, even though He expands in many, many forms. Although He is the
oldest personality, He is ever youthful, unaffected by old age. The Supreme Personality
of Godhead cannot be known by the academic wisdom of the Vedas; one has to
approach the devotee of the Lord to understand Him."
The only way to understand the Lord as He is, is by devotional service to the Lord, or by
approaching the devotee of the Lord who always has the Lord in his heart. By
devotional perfection one can understand that the impersonal brahmajyoti is only a
370
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
partial representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, and that the
three puruña expansions in the material creation are His plenary portions. In the
spiritual sky of the brahmajyoti there is no change of various kalpas or millenniums, and
there are no creative activities in the Vaikuëöha worlds. The influence of time is
conspicuous by its absence. The rays of the transcendental body of the Lord, the
unlimited brahmajyoti, are undeterred by the influence of material energy. In the
material world also, the initial creator is the Lord Himself. He brings about the creation
of Brahmä, who becomes the subsequent creator, empowered by the Lord.
TEXT 4
TaÜa wd& >auvNaMa(r)l/ Ma(r)l/aYa
DYaaNae SMa Naae diXaRTa& Ta oPaaSak-aNaaMa( )
TaSMaE NaMaae >aGavTae_NauivDaeMa Tau>Ya&
Yaae_Naad*Taae Nark->aaiG>arSaTPa[Sa(r)E" )) 4 ))
tad vä idaà bhuvana-maìgala maìgaläya
dhyäne sma no darçitaà ta upäsakänäm
tasmai namo bhagavate 'nuvidhema tubhyaà
yo 'nädåto naraka-bhägbhir asat-prasaìgaiù
SYNONYMS
tat—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa; vä—or; idam—this present form;
bhuvana-maìgala—O You who are all-auspicious for all the universes; maìgaläya—for
the sake of all prosperity; dhyäne—in meditation; sma—as it were; naù—unto us;
darçitam—manifested; te—Your; upäsakänäm—of the devotees; tasmai—unto Him;
namaù—my respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Personality of Godhead;
anuvidhema—I perform; tubhyam—unto You; yaù—which; anädåtaù—is neglected;
naraka-bhägbhiù—by persons destined for hell; asat-prasaìgaiù—by material topics.
TRANSLATION
This present form, or any transcendental form expanded by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, is equally auspicious for all the universes. Since You have
371
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
manifested this eternal personal form upon whom Your devotees meditate, I therefore
offer my respectful obeisances unto You. Those who are destined to be dispatched to the
path of hell neglect Your personal form because of speculating on material topics.
PURPORT
Regarding the personal and impersonal features of the Supreme Absolute Truth, the
personal forms exhibited by the Lord in His different plenary expansions are all for the
benediction of all the universes. The personal form of the Lord is also worshiped in
meditation as Supersoul, Paramätmä, but the impersonal brahmajyoti is not worshiped.
Persons who are addicted to the impersonal feature of the Lord, whether in meditation
or otherwise, are all pilgrims to hell because, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (12.5),
impersonalists simply waste their time in mundane mental speculation because they are
addicted more to false arguments than to reality. Therefore, the association of the
impersonalists is condemned herewith by Brahmä.
All the plenary expansions of the Personality of Godhead are equally potent, as
confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.46):
dépärcir eva hi daçäntaram abhyupetya
dépäyate vivåta-hetu-samäna-dharmä
yas tädåg eva hi ca viñëutayä vibhäti
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
The Lord expands Himself as the flames of a fire expand one after another. Although
the original flame, or Çré Kåñëa, is accepted as Govinda, the Supreme Person, all other
expansions, such as Räma, Nåsiàha and Varäha, are as potent as the original Lord. All
such expanded forms are transcendental. In the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is
made clear that the Supreme Truth is eternally uncontaminated by material touch.
There is no jugglery of words and activities in the transcendental kingdom of the Lord.
All the Lord's forms are transcendental, and such manifestations are ever identical. The
particular form of the Lord exhibited to a devotee is not mundane, even though the
devotee may retain material desire, nor is it manifest under the influence of material
energy, as is foolishly considered by the impersonalists. Impersonalists who consider the
transcendental forms of the Lord to be products of the material world are surely
destined for hell.
TEXT 5
372
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Yae Tau TvdqYacr<aaMbuJak-aeXaGaNDa&
iJaga]iNTa k-<aRivvrE" é[uiTavaTaNaqTaMa( )
>a¢-ya Ga*hqTacr<a" ParYaa c Taeza&
NaaPaEiz NaaQa ôdYaaMbuåhaTSvPau&SaaMa( )) 5 ))
ye tu tvadéya-caraëämbuja-koça-gandhaà
jighranti karëa-vivaraiù çruti-väta-nétam
bhaktyä gåhéta-caraëaù parayä ca teñäà
näpaiñi nätha hådayämburuhät sva-puàsäm
SYNONYMS
ye—those who; tu—but; tvadéya—Your; caraëa-ambuja—lotus feet; koça—inside;
gandham—flavor; jighranti—smell; karëa-vivaraiù—through the channel of the ears;
çruti-väta-nétam—carried by the air of Vedic sound; bhaktyä—by devotional service;
gåhéta-caraëaù—accepting the lotus feet; parayä—transcendental; ca—also; teñäm—for
them; na—never; apaiñi—separate; nätha—O my Lord; hådaya—heart; ambu-ruhät—
from the lotus of; sva-puàsäm—of Your own devotees.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, persons who smell the aroma of Your lotus feet, carried by the air of Vedic
sound through the holes of the ears, accept Your devotional service. For them You are
never separated from the lotus of their hearts.
PURPORT
For the pure devotee of the Lord there is nothing beyond the lotus feet of the Lord, and
the Lord knows that such devotees do not wish anything more than that. The word tu
specifically establishes this fact. The Lord also does not wish to be separated from the
lotus hearts of those pure devotees. That is the transcendental relationship between the
pure devotees and the Personality of Godhead. Because the Lord does not wish to
separate Himself from the hearts of such pure devotees, it is understood that they are
specifically dearer than the impersonalists. The relationship of the pure devotees with
the Lord develops because of devotional service to the Lord on the authentic basis of
373
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Vedic authority. Such pure devotees are not mundane sentimentalists, but are factually
realists because their activities are supported by the Vedic authorities who have given
aural reception to the facts mentioned in the Vedic literatures.
The word parayä is very significant. parä bhakti, or spontaneous love of God, is the basis
of an intimate relationship with the Lord. This highest stage of relationship with the
Lord can be attained simply by hearing about Him (His name, form, quality, etc.) from
authentic sources like Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam, recited by pure, unalloyed
devotees of the Lord.
TEXT 6
TaavÙYa& d]iv<adehSauôiàiMata&
Xaaek-" SPa*ha Pair>avae ivPaul/ê l/ae>a" )
TaavNMaMaeTYaSadvGa]h AaiTaRMaUl&/
Yaavà Tae_x(iga]Ma>aYa& Pa[v*<aqTa l/aek-" )) 6 ))
tävad bhayaà draviëa-deha-suhån-nimittaà
çokaù spåhä paribhavo vipulaç ca lobhaù
tävan mamety asad-avagraha ärti-mülaà
yävan na te 'ìghrim abhayaà pravåëéta lokaù
SYNONYMS
tävat—until then; bhayam—fear; draviëa—wealth; deha—body; suhåt—relatives;
nimittam—for the matter of; çokaù—lamentation; spåhä—desire; paribhavaù—
paraphernalia; vipulaù—very great; ca—also; lobhaù—avarice; tävat—up to that time;
mama—mine; iti—thus; asat—perishable; avagrahaù—undertaking; ärti-mülam—full of
anxieties; yävat—as long as; na—do not; te—Your; aìghrim abhayam—safe lotus feet;
pravåëéta—take shelter; lokaù—the people of the world.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, the people of the world are embarrassed by all material anxieties—they are
always afraid. They always try to protect wealth, body and friends, they are filled with
lamentation and unlawful desires and paraphernalia, and they avariciously base their
374
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
undertakings on the perishable conceptions of "my" and "mine." As long as they do not
take shelter of Your safe lotus feet, they are full of such anxieties.
PURPORT
One may question how one can always think of the Lord in regard to His name, fame,
quality, etc., if one is embarrassed by thoughts of family affairs. Everyone in the material
world is full of thoughts about how to maintain his family, how to protect his wealth,
how to keep pace with friends and relatives, etc. Thus he is always in fear and
lamentation, trying to keep up with the status quo. In answer to this question, this verse
spoken by Brahmä is very appropriate.
A pure devotee of the Lord never thinks of himself as the proprietor of his home. He
surrenders everything unto the supreme control of the Lord, and thus he has no fear for
maintaining his family or protecting the interests of his family. Because of this
surrender, he no longer has any attraction for wealth. Even if there is attraction for
wealth, it is not for sense enjoyment, but for the service of the Lord. A pure devotee
may be attracted to accumulating wealth just like an ordinary man, but the difference is
that a devotee acquires money for the service of the Lord, whereas the ordinary man
acquires money for his sense enjoyment. Thus the acquisition of wealth by a devotee is
not a source of anxieties, as is the case for a worldly man. And because a pure devotee
accepts everything in the sense of serving the Lord, the poisonous teeth of accumulation
of wealth are extracted. If a snake has its poison removed and bites a man, there is no
fatal effect. Similarly, wealth accumulated in the cause of the Lord has no poisonous
teeth, and the effect is not fatal. A pure devotee is never entangled in material worldly
affairs even though he may remain in the world like an ordinary man.
TEXT 7
dEveNa Tae hTaiDaYaae >avTa" Pa[Sa(r)a‚
TSavaRéu>aaePaXaMaNaaiÜMau%eiNd]Yaa Yae )
ku-vRiNTa k-aMaSau%le/Xal/vaYa dqNaa
l/ae>aai>a>aUTaMaNaSaae_ku-Xal/aiNa XaìTa( )) 7 ))
daivena te hata-dhiyo bhavataù prasaìgät
sarväçubhopaçamanäd vimukhendriyä ye
375
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kurvanti käma-sukha-leça-laväya dénä
lobhäbhibhüta-manaso 'kuçaläni çaçvat
SYNONYMS
daivena—by fate of misfortune; te—they; hata-dhiyaù—bereft of memory; bhavataù—of
You; prasaìgät—from the topics; sarva—all; açubha—inauspiciousness; upaçamanät—
curbing down; vimukha—turned against; indriyäù—senses; ye—those; kurvanti—act;
käma—sense gratification; sukha—happiness; leça—brief; laväya—for a moment only;
dénäù—poor fellows; lobha-abhibhüta—overwhelmed by greed; manasaù—of one whose
mind; akuçaläni—inauspicious activities; çaçvat—always.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, persons who are bereft of the all-auspicious performance of chanting and
hearing about Your transcendental activities are certainly unfortunate and are also bereft
of good sense. They engage in inauspicious activities, enjoying sense gratification for a
very little while.
PURPORT
The next question is why people are against such auspicious activities as chanting and
hearing the glories and pastimes of the Lord, which can bring total freedom from the
cares and anxieties of material existence. The only answer to this question is that they
are unfortunate because of supernatural control due to their offensive activities
performed simply for the sake of sense gratification. The Lord's pure devotees, however,
take compassion upon such unfortunate persons and, in a missionary spirit, try to
persuade them into the line of devotional service. Only by the grace of pure devotees
can such unfortunate men be elevated to the position of transcendental service.
TEXT 8
+auta*$(i=}aDaaTaui>airMaa MauhurÛRMaaNaa"
XaqTaaeZ<avaTavrzEirTareTaraÀ )
k-aMaaiGanNaaCYauTa åza c Saudu>aRre<a
SaMPaXYaTaae MaNa oå§-Ma SaqdTae Mae )) 8 ))
376
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kñut-tåö-tridhätubhir imä muhur ardyamänäù
çétoñëa-väta-varañair itaretaräc ca
kämägninäcyuta-ruñä ca sudurbhareëa
sampaçyato mana urukrama sédate me
SYNONYMS
kñut—hunger; tåö—thirst; tri-dhätubhiù—three humors, namely mucus, bile and wind;
imäù—all of them; muhuù—always; ardyamänäù—perplexed; çéta—winter; uñëa—
summer; väta—wind; varañaiù—by rains; itara-itarät—and many other disturbances;
ca—also; käma-agninä—by strong sex urges; acyuta-ruñä—indefatigable anger; ca—also;
sudurbhareëa—most unbearable; sampaçyataù—so observing; manaù—mind;
urukrama—O great actor; sédate—becomes despondent; me—my.
TRANSLATION
O great actor, my Lord, all these poor creatures are constantly perplexed by hunger,
thirst, severe cold, secretion and bile, attacked by coughing winter, blasting summer,
rains and many other disturbing elements, and overwhelmed by strong sex urges and
indefatigable anger. I take pity on them, and I am very much aggrieved for them.
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord like Brahmä and persons in his disciplic succession are
always unhappy to see the perplexities of the conditioned souls, who are suffering the
onslaughts of the threefold miseries which pertain to the body and mind, to the
disturbances of material nature, and to many other such material disadvantages. Not
knowing adequate measures for relieving such difficulties, suffering persons sometimes
pose themselves as leaders of the people, and the unfortunate followers are put into
further disadvantages under such so-called leadership. This is like a blind man's leading
another blind man to fall into a ditch. Therefore, unless the devotees of the Lord take
pity on them and teach them the right path, their lives are hopeless failures. The
devotees of the Lord who voluntarily take the responsibility of raising the foolish
materialistic sense enjoyers are as confidential to the Lord as Lord Brahmä.
TEXT 9
377
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
YaavTPa*Qa¤-iMadMaaTMaNa wiNd]YaaQaR‚
MaaYaabl&/ >aGavTaae JaNa wRXa PaXYaeTa( )
Taavà Sa&Sa*iTarSaaE Pa[iTaSax(k]-MaeTa
VYaQaaRiPa du"%iNavh& vhTaq i§-YaaQaaR )) 9 ))
yävat påthaktvam idam ätmana indriyärthamäyä-
balaà bhagavato jana éça paçyet
tävan na saàsåtir asau pratisaìkrameta
vyarthäpi duùkha-nivahaà vahaté kriyärthä
SYNONYMS
yävat—as long as; påthaktvam—separatism; idam—this; ätmanaù—of the body; indriyaartha—
for sense gratification; mäyä-balam—influence of external energy; bhagavataù—
of the Personality of Godhead; janaù—a person; éça—O my Lord; paçyet—sees; tävat—
so long; na—not; saàsåtiù—the influence of material existence; asau—that man;
pratisaìkrameta—can overcome; vyarthä api—although without meaning; duùkhanivaham—
multiple miseries; vahaté—bringing; kriyä-arthä—for fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, the material miseries are without factual existence for the soul. Yet as long as
the conditioned soul sees the body as meant for sense enjoyment, he cannot get out of the
entanglement of material miseries, being influenced by Your external energy.
PURPORT
The whole trouble of the living entity in material existence is that he has an
independent conception of life. He is always dependent on the rules of the Supreme
Lord, in both the conditioned and liberated states, but by the influence of the external
energy the conditioned soul thinks himself independent of the supremacy of the
Personality of Godhead. His constitutional position is to dovetail himself with the desire
of the supreme will, but as long as he does not do so, he is sure to drag on in the shackles
of material bondage. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.55), prajahäti yadä kämän sarvän
pärtha mano-gatän: he has to give up all sorts of plans manufactured by mental
378
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
concoction. The living entity has to dovetail himself with the supreme will. That will
help him to get out of the entanglement of material existence.
TEXT 10
AöyaPa*TaaTaRk-r<aa iNaiXa iNa"XaYaaNaa
NaaNaaMaNaaerQaiDaYaa +a<a>aGaniNad]a" )
dEvahTaaQaRrcNaa ‰zYaae_iPa dev
YauZMaTPa[Sa(r)ivMau%a wh Sa&SariNTa )) 10 ))
ahny äpåtärta-karaëä niçi niùçayänä
nänä-manoratha-dhiyä kñaëa-bhagna-nidräù
daivähatärtha-racanä åñayo 'pi deva
yuñmat-prasaìga-vimukhä iha saàsaranti
SYNONYMS
ahni—during the daytime; äpåta—engaged; ärta—distressing engagement; karaëäù—
senses; niçi—at night; niùçayänäù—insomnia; nänä—various; manoratha—mental
speculations; dhiyä—by intelligence; kñaëa—constantly; bhagna—broken; nidräù—
sleep; daiva—superhuman; ähata-artha—frustrated; racanäù—plans; åñayaù—great
sages; api—also; deva—O my Lord; yuñmat—Your Lordship's; prasaìga—topic;
vimukhäù—turned against; iha—in this (material world); saàsaranti—do rotate.
TRANSLATION
Such nondevotees engage their senses in very troublesome and extensive work, and they
suffer insomnia at night because their intelligence constantly breaks their sleep with
various mental speculations. They are frustrated in all their various plans by supernatural
power. Even great sages, if they are against Your transcendental topics, must rotate in
this material world.
PURPORT
As described in the previous verse, people who have no taste for the devotional service
379
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of the Lord are occupied in material engagements. Most of them engage during the
daytime in hard physical labor; their senses are engaged very extensively in troublesome
duties in the gigantic plants of heavy industrial enterprise. The owners of such factories
are engaged in finding a market for their industrial products, and the laborers are
engaged in extensive production involving huge mechanical arrangements. "Factory" is
another name for hell. At night, hellishly engaged persons take advantage of wine and
women to satisfy their tired senses, but they are not even able to have sound sleep
because their various mental speculative plans constantly interrupt their sleep. Because
they suffer from insomnia sometimes they feel sleepy in the morning for lack of
sufficient rest. By the arrangement of supernatural power, even the great scientists and
thinkers of the world suffer frustration of their various plans and thus rot in the
material world birth after birth. A great scientist may make discoveries in atomic energy
for the quick destruction of the world and may be awarded the best prize in recognition
of his service (or disservice), but he also has to undergo the reactions of his work by
rotating in the cycle of repeated births and deaths under the superhuman law of
material nature. All these people who are against the principle of devotional service are
destined to rotate in this material world without fail.
This verse particularly mentions that even sages who are averse to the principles of
devotional service to the Lord are also condemned to undergo the terms of material
existence. Not only in this age, but formerly also, there were many sages who tried to
invent their own systems of religion without reference to devotional service to the
Supreme Lord, but there cannot be any religious principle without devotional service to
the Lord. The Supreme Lord is the leader of the entire range of living entities, and no
one can be equal to or greater than Him. Even the Lord's impersonal feature and allpervading
localized feature cannot be on an equal level with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Therefore, there cannot be any religion or system of genuine philosophy for
the advancement of the living entities without the principle of devotional service.
The impersonalists, who take much trouble in penance and austerity for self-liberation,
may approach the impersonal brahmajyoti, but ultimately, because of not being situated
in devotional service, they glide down again to the material world to undergo another
term of material existence. This is confirmed as follows:
ye 'nye 'ravindäkña vimukta-mäninas
tvayy asta-bhäväd aviçuddha-buddhayaù
äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù
patanty adho 'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù
380
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
"Persons who are falsely under the impression of being liberated, without devotional
service to the Lord, may reach the goal of the brahmajyoti, but because of their impure
consciousness and for want of shelter in the Vaikuëöhalokas, such so-called liberated
persons again fall down into material existence." (SB 10.2.32)
Therefore, no one can manufacture any system of religion without the principle of
devotional service to the Lord. As we find in the Sixth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
the initiator of religious principles is the Lord Himself. In Bhagavad-gétä also we find
that the Lord condemns all forms of religion other than that which entails the process of
surrendering unto the Supreme. Any system which leads one to the devotional service
of the Lord, and nothing else, is actually religion or philosophy. In the Sixth Canto we
find the following statements of Yamaräja, the controller of all unfaithful living entities:
dharmaà tu säkñäd bhagavat-praëétaà
na vai vidur åñayo näpi deväù
na siddha-mukhyä asurä manuñyäù
kuto nu vidyädhara-cäraëädayaù
[SB 6.3.19]
svayambhür näradaù çambhuù
kumäraù kapilo manuù
prahlädo janako bhéñmo
balir vaiyäsakir vayam
dvädaçaite vijänémo
dharmaà bhägavataà bhaöäù
guhyaà viçuddhaà durbodhaà
yaà jïätvämåtam açnute
"The principles of religion are initiated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and no
one else, including the sages and demigods, can manufacture any such principles. Since
even great sages and demigods are unauthorized to inaugurate such principles of
religion, what to speak of others—the so-called mystics, demons, human beings,
Vidyädharas and Cäraëas living in the lower planets? Twelve personalities—Brahmä,
Närada, Lord Çiva, Kumära, Kapila, Manu, Prahläda Mahäräja, Janaka Mahäräja,
Bhéñma, Bali, Çukadeva Gosvämé and Yamaräja—are agents of the Lord authorized to
speak and propagate the principles of religion." (SB 6.3.19-21)
381
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The principles of religion are not open to any ordinary living entity. They are just to
bring the human being onto the platform of morality. Nonviolence, etc., are necessary
for misguided persons because unless one is moral and nonviolent one cannot
understand the principles of religion. To understand what is actually religion is very
difficult even if one is situated in the principles of morality and nonviolence. It is very
confidential because as soon as one is conversant with the real principles of religion, he
is at once liberated to the eternal life of bliss and knowledge. Therefore, one who is not
situated in the principles of devotional service to the Lord should not pose himself as a
religious leader of the innocent public. The Éçopaniñad emphatically forbids this
nonsense in the following mantra:
andhaà tamaù praviçanti
ye 'sambhütim upäsate
tato bhüya iva te tamo
ya u sambhütyäà ratäù
(Éçopaniñad 12)
A person in ignorance of the principles of religion who therefore does nothing in the
matter of religion is far better than a person who misguides others in the name of
religion without reference to the factual religious principles of devotional service. Such
so-called leaders of religion are sure to be condemned by Brahmä and other great
authorities.
TEXT 11
Tv& >ai¢-YaaeGaPair>aaivTaôTSaraeJa
AaSSae é[uTaei+aTaPaQaae NaNau NaaQa Pau&SaaMa( )
YaÛiÖYaa Ta oåGaaYa iv>aavYaiNTa
TataÜPau" Pa[<aYaSae SadNauGa]haYa )) 11 ))
tvaà bhakti-yoga-paribhävita-håt-saroja
ässe çrutekñita-patho nanu nätha puàsäm
yad-yad-dhiyä ta urugäya vibhävayanti
tat-tad-vapuù praëayase sad-anugrahäya
382
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
tvam—unto You; bhakti-yoga—in devotional service; paribhävita—being one hundred
percent engaged; håt—of the heart; saroje—on the lotus; ässe—You reside; çrutaékñita—
seen through the ear; pathaù—the path; nanu—now; nätha—O my Lord;
puàsäm—of the devotees; yat-yat—whichever; dhiyä—by meditating; te—Your;
urugäya—O multiglorious; vibhävayanti—they specifically think of; tat-tat—the very
same; vapuù—transcendental form; praëayase—do You manifest; sat-anugrahäya—to
show Your causeless mercy.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, Your devotees can see You through the ears by the process of bona fide
hearing, and thus their hearts become cleansed, and You take Your seat there. You are so
merciful to Your devotees that You manifest Yourself in the particular eternal form of
transcendence in which they always think of You.
PURPORT
The statement here that the Lord manifests Himself before the devotee in the form in
which the devotee likes to worship Him indicates that the Lord becomes subordinate to
the desire of the devotee—so much so that He manifests His particular form as the
devotee demands. This demand of the devotee is satisfied by the Lord because He is
pliable in terms of the transcendental loving service of the devotee. This is also
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (4.11): ye yathä mäà prapadyante täàs tathaiva bhajämy
aham. We should note, however, that the Lord is never the order supplier of the
devotee. Here in this verse it is particularly mentioned: tvaà bhakti-yoga-paribhävita.
This indicates the efficiency achieved through execution of matured devotional service,
or premä, love of Godhead. This state of premä is achieved by the gradual process of
development from faith to love. On faith one associates with bona fide devotees, and by
such association one can become engaged in bona fide devotional service, which
includes proper initiation and the execution of the primary devotional duties prescribed
in the revealed scriptures. This is clearly indicated herein by the word çrutekñita. The
çrutekñita path is to hear from bona fide devotees who are conversant with Vedic
wisdom, free from mundane sentiment. By this bona fide hearing process, the neophyte
devotee becomes cleansed of all material rubbish, and thus he becomes attached to one
of the many transcendental forms of the Lord, as described in the Vedas.
383
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
This attachment of the devotee to a particular form of the Lord is due to natural
inclination. Each and every living entity is originally attached to a particular type of
transcendental service because he is eternally the servitor of the Lord. Lord Caitanya
says that the living entity is eternally a servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Çré Kåñëa. Therefore, every living entity has a particular type of service relationship
with the Lord, eternally. This particular attachment is invoked by practice of regulative
devotional service to the Lord, and thus the devotee becomes attached to the eternal
form of the Lord, exactly like one who is already eternally attached. This attachment for
a particular form of the Lord is called svarüpa-siddhi. The Lord sits on the lotus heart of
the devotee in the eternal form the pure devotee desires, and thus the Lord does not
part from the devotee, as confirmed in the previous verse. The Lord, however, does not
disclose Himself to a casual or unauthentic worshiper to be exploited. This is confirmed
in Bhagavad-gétä (7.25): nähaà prakäçaù sarvasya yoga-mäyä-samävåtaù. Rather, by yogamäyä,
the Lord remains concealed to the nondevotees or casual devotees who are
serving their sense gratification. The Lord is never visible to the pseudodevotees who
worship the demigods in charge of universal affairs. The conclusion is that the Lord
cannot become the order supplier of a pseudodevotee, but He is always prepared to
respond to the desires of a pure, unconditional devotee, who is free from all tinges of
material infection.
TEXT 12
NaaiTaPa[SaqdiTa TaQaaePaicTaaePacarE‚
raraiDaTa" SaurGa<aEôRidbÖk-aMaE" )
YaTSavR>aUTadYaYaaSadl/>YaYaEk-ae
NaaNaaJaNaeZvvihTa" SauôdNTaraTMaa )) 12 ))
nätiprasédati tathopacitopacärair
ärädhitaù sura-gaëair hådi baddha-kämaiù
yat sarva-bhüta-dayayäsad-alabhyayaiko
nänä-janeñv avahitaù suhåd antar-ätmä
SYNONYMS
na—never; ati—very much; prasédati—become satisfied; tathä—as much as; upacita—by
384
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
pompous arrangement; upacäraiù—with much worshipable paraphernalia; ärädhitaù—
being worshiped; sura-gaëaiù—by the celestial demigods; hådi baddha-kämaiù—with
hearts full of all sorts of material desires; yat—that which; sarva—all; bhüta—living
entities; dayayä—to show them causeless mercy; asat—nondevotee; alabhyayä—not
being achieved; ekaù—one without a second; nänä—various; janeñu—in living entities;
avahitaù—perceived; suhåt—well-wishing friend; antaù—within; ätmä—Supersoul.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are not very much satisfied by the worship of the demigods, who arrange
for Your worship very pompously, with various paraphernalia, but who are full of
material hankerings. You are situated in everyone's heart as the Supersoul just to show
Your causeless mercy, and You are the eternal well-wisher, but You are unavailable for
the nondevotee.
PURPORT
The demigods in the celestial heavenly planets, who are appointed administrators of the
material affairs, are also devotees of the Lord. But, at the same time, they have desires
for material opulence and sense gratification. The Lord is so kind that He awards them
all sorts of material happiness, more than they can desire, but He is not satisfied with
them because they are not pure devotees. The Lord does not want any one of His
innumerable sons (the living entities) to remain in the material world of threefold
miseries to perpetually suffer the material pangs of birth, death, old age and disease. The
demigods in the heavenly planets, and many devotees on this planet also, want to
remain in the material world as devotees of the Lord and take advantage of material
happiness. They do so at a risk of falling down to the lower status of existence, and this
makes the Lord dissatisfied with them.
Pure devotees are not desirous of any material enjoyment, nor are they averse to it.
They completely dovetail their desires with the desires of the Lord and perform nothing
on their personal account. Arjuna is a good example. On his own sentiment, due to
family affection, Arjuna did not want to fight, but finally, after hearing Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä, he agreed to fight in the interests of the Lord. Therefore, the Lord is very
much satisfied with pure devotees because they do not act for sense gratification but
only in terms of the Lord's desire. As Paramätmä, or Supersoul, He is situated in
everyone's heart, always giving everyone the chance of good counsel. Thus everyone
385
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
should take the opportunity and render transcendental loving service to Him wholly
and solely.
The nondevotees, however, are neither like the demigods nor like the pure devotees, but
are averse to the transcendental relationship with the Lord. They have revolted against
the Lord and must perpetually undergo the reactions of their own activities.
Bhagavad-gétä (4.11) states: ye yathä mäà prapadyante täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham.
"Although the Lord is equally kind to every living being, the living beings, for their own
part, are able to please the Lord to either a greater or lesser extent." The demigods are
called sakäma devotees, or devotees with material desires in mind, while the pure
devotees are called niñkäma devotees because they have no desires for their personal
interests. The sakäma devotees are self-interested because they do not think of others,
and therefore they are not able to satisfy the Lord perfectly, whereas the pure devotees
take the missionary responsibility of turning nondevotees into devotees, and they are
therefore able to satisfy the Lord more than the demigods. The Lord is unmindful of the
nondevotees, although He is sitting within everyone's heart as well-wisher and
Supersoul. However, He also gives them the chance to receive His mercy through His
pure devotees who are engaged in missionary activities. Sometimes the Lord Himself
descends for missionary activities, as He did in the form of Lord Caitanya, but mostly He
sends His bona fide representatives, and thus He shows His causeless mercy towards the
nondevotees. The Lord is so satisfied with His pure devotees that He wants to give them
the credit for missionary success, although He could do the work personally. This is the
sign of His satisfaction with His pure, niñkäma devotees, compared to the sakäma
devotees. By such transcendental activities the Lord simultaneously becomes free from
the charge of partiality and exhibits His pleasure with the devotees.
Now a question arises: If the Lord is sitting in the hearts of nondevotees, why are they
not moved to become devotees? It may be answered that the stubborn nondevotees are
like the barren land or alkaline field, where no agricultural activities can be successful.
As part and parcel of the Lord, every individual living entity has a minute quantity of
independence, and by misuse of this minute independence, the nondevotees commit
offense after offense, to both the Lord and His pure devotees engaged in missionary
work. As a result of such acts, they become as barren as an alkaline field, where there is
no strength to produce.
TEXT 13
Pau&SaaMaTaae ivivDak-MaRi>arßraÛE‚
386
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
daRNaeNa caeGa]TaPaSaa PaircYaRYaa c )
AaraDaNa& >aGavTaSTav SaiT§-YaaQaaeR
DaMaaeR_iPaRTa" k-ihRicd(iMa]YaTae Na Ya}a )) 13 ))
puàsäm ato vividha-karmabhir adhvarädyair
dänena cogra-tapasä paricaryayä ca
ärädhanaà bhagavatas tava sat-kriyärtho
dharmo 'rpitaù karhicid mriyate na yatra
SYNONYMS
puàsäm—of the people; ataù—therefore; vividha-karmabhiù—by various fruitive
activities; adhvara-ädyaiù—by performance of Vedic rituals; dänena—by charities; ca—
and; ugra—very hard; tapasä—austerity; paricaryayä—by transcendental service; ca—
also; ärädhanam—worship; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; tava—Your;
sat-kriyä-arthaù—simply for pleasing Your Lordship; dharmaù—religion; arpitaù—so
offered; karhicit—at any time; mriyate—vanquishes; na—never; yatra—there.
TRANSLATION
But the pious activities of the people, such as performance of Vedic rituals, charity,
austere penances, and transcendental service, performed with a view to worship You and
satisfy You by offering You the fruitive results, are also beneficial. Such acts of religion
never go in vain.
PURPORT
Absolute devotional service, conducted in nine different spiritual activities—hearing,
chanting, remembering, worshiping, praying, etc.—does not always appeal to people
with a pompous nature; they are more attracted by the Vedic superficial rituals and
other costly performances of social religious shows. But the process according to the
Vedic injunctions is that the fruits of all pious activities should be offered to the
Supreme Lord. In Bhagavad-gétä (9.27), the Lord demands that whatever one may do in
one's daily activities, such as worship, sacrifice, and offering charity, all the results
should be offered to Him only. This offering of the results of pious acts unto the
Supreme Lord is a sign of devotional service to the Lord and is of permanent value,
387
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
whereas enjoying the same results for oneself is only temporary. Anything done on
account of the Lord is a permanent asset and accumulates in the form of unseen piety
for gradual promotion to the unalloyed devotional service of the Lord. These undetected
pious activities will one day result in full-fledged devotional service by the grace of the
Supreme Lord. Therefore, any pious act done on account of the Supreme Lord is also
recommended here for those who are not pure devotees.
TEXT 14
XaìTSvæPaMahSaEv iNaPaqTa>aed‚
MaaehaYa baeDaiDaz<aaYa NaMa" ParSMaE )
ivìaeÙviSQaiTal/Yaezu iNaiMatal/Il/a‚
raSaaYa Tae NaMa wd& ck*-MaeìraYa )) 14 ))
çaçvat svarüpa-mahasaiva nipéta-bhedamohäya
bodha-dhiñaëäya namaù parasmai
viçvodbhava-sthiti-layeñu nimitta-léläräsäya
te nama idaà cakåmeçvaräya
SYNONYMS
çaçvat—eternally; svarüpa—transcendental form; mahasä—by the glories; eva—
certainly; nipéta—distinguished; bheda—differentiation; mohäya—unto the illusory
conception; bodha—self-knowledge; dhiñaëäya—intelligence; namaù—obeisances;
parasmai—unto the Transcendence; viçva-udbhava—creation of the cosmic
manifestation; sthiti—maintenance; layeñu—also destruction; nimitta—for the matter
of; lélä—by such pastimes; räsäya—for enjoyment; te—unto You; namaù—obeisances;
idam—this; cakåma—do I perform; éçvaräya—unto the Supreme.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my obeisances unto the Supreme Transcendence, who is eternally
distinguished by His internal potency. His indistinguishable impersonal feature is realized
by intelligence for self-realization. I offer my obeisances unto Him who by His pastimes
enjoys the creation, maintenance and dissolution of the cosmic manifestation.
388
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is eternally distinguished from the living entities by His internal
potency, although He is also understood in His impersonal feature by self-realized
intelligence. Devotees of the Lord, therefore, offer all respectful obeisances unto the
impersonal feature of the Lord. The word räsa is significant herein. The räsa dance is
performed by Lord Kåñëa in the company of the cowherd damsels at Våndävana, and the
Personality of Godhead Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu is also engaged in räsa enjoyment with
His external potency, by which He creates, maintains and dissolves the entire material
manifestation. Indirectly, Lord Brahmä offers his respectful obeisances unto Lord Çré
Kåñëa, who is factually ever engaged in räsa enjoyment with the gopés, as confirmed in
the Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad in the following words: parärdhänte so 'budhyata gopa-veço
me puruñaù purastäd ävirbabhüva. The distinction between the Lord and the living
entity is definitely experienced when there is sufficient intelligence to understand His
internal potency, as distinguished from the external potency by which He makes
possible the material manifestation.
TEXT 15
YaSYaavTaarGau<ak-MaRiv@MbNaaiNa
NaaMaaiNa Yae_SauivGaMae ivvXaa Ga*<aiNTa )
Tae_NaEk-JaNMaXaMal&/ SahSaEv ihTva
Sa&YaaNTYaPaav*TaaMa*Ta& TaMaJa& Pa[PaÛe )) 15 ))
yasyävatära-guëa-karma-viòambanäni
nämäni ye 'su-vigame vivaçä gåëanti
te 'naika-janma-çamalaà sahasaiva hitvä
saàyänty apävåtämåtaà tam ajaà prapadye
SYNONYMS
yasya—whose; avatära—incarnations; guëa—transcendental qualities; karma—
activities; viòambanäni—all mysterious; nämäni—transcendental names; ye—those;
asu-vigame—while quitting this life; vivaçäù—automatically; gåëanti—invoke; te—they;
anaika—many; janma—births; çamalam—accumulated sins; sahasä—immediately;
eva—certainly; hitvä—giving up; saàyänti—obtain; apävåta—open; amåtam—
389
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
immortality; tam—Him; ajam—the unborn; prapadye—I take shelter.
TRANSLATION
Let me take shelter of the lotus feet of Him whose incarnations, qualities and activities
are mysterious imitations of worldly affairs. One who invokes His transcendental names,
even unconsciously, at the time he quits this life, is certainly washed immediately of the
sins of many, many births and attains Him without fail.
PURPORT
The activities of the incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are a kind of
imitation of the activities going on in the material world. He is just like an actor on a
stage. An actor imitates the activities of a king on stage, although actually he is not the
king. Similarly, when the Lord incarnates, He imitates parts with which He has nothing
to do. In Bhagavad-gétä (4.14), it is said that the Lord has nothing to do with the
activities in which He is supposedly engaged: na mäà karmäëi limpanti na me karmaphale
spåhä. The Lord is omnipotent; simply by His will He can perform anything and
everything. When the Lord appeared as Lord Kåñëa, He played the part of the son of
Yaçodä and Nanda, and He lifted the Govardhana Hill, although lifting a hill is not His
concern. He can lift millions of Govardhana Hills by His simple desire; He does not
need to lift it with His hand. But He imitates the ordinary living entity by this lifting,
and at the same time He exhibits His supernatural power. Thus His name is chanted as
the lifter of Govardhana Hill, or Çré Govardhana-dhäré. Therefore, His acts in His
incarnations and His partiality to the devotees are all imitations only, just like the stage
makeup of an expert dramatical player. His acts in that capacity, however, are all
omnipotent, and the remembrance of such activities of the incarnations of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is as powerful as the Lord Himself. Ajämila remembered the
holy name of the Lord, Näräyaëa, by merely calling the name of his son Näräyaëa, and
that gave him a complete opportunity to achieve the highest perfection of life.
TEXT 16
Yaae va Ah& c iGairXaê iv>au" SvYa& c
iSQaTYauÙvPa[l/YaheTav AaTMaMaUl/Ma( )
390
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
i>atva i}aPaaÜv*Da Wk- oåPa[raeh‚
STaSMaE NaMaae >aGavTae >auvNad]uMaaYa )) 16 ))
yo vä ahaà ca giriçaç ca vibhuù svayaà ca
sthity-udbhava-pralaya-hetava ätma-mülam
bhittvä tri-päd vavådha eka uru-prarohas
tasmai namo bhagavate bhuvana-drumäya
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; vai—certainly; aham ca—also I; giriçaù ca—also Çiva; vibhuù—the
Almighty; svayam—personality (as Viñëu); ca—and; sthiti—maintenance; udbhava—
creation; pralaya—dissolution; hetavaù—the causes; ätma-mülam—self-rooted;
bhittvä—having penetrated; tri-pät—three trunks; vavådhe—grew; ekaù—one without a
second; uru—many; prarohaù—branches; tasmai—unto Him; namaù—obeisances;
bhagavate—unto the Personality of Godhead; bhuvana-drumäya—unto the tree of the
planetary system.
TRANSLATION
Your Lordship is the prime root of the tree of the planetary systems. This tree has grown
by first penetrating the material nature in three trunks—as me, Çiva and You, the
Almighty—for creation, maintenance and dissolution, and we three have grown with
many branches. Therefore I offer my obeisances unto You, the tree of the cosmic
manifestation.
PURPORT
The cosmic manifestation is grossly divided into three worlds, the upper, lower and
middle planetary systems, and then it broadens into the cosmos of fourteen planetary
systems, with the manifestation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the supreme
root. Material nature, which appears to be the cause of the cosmic manifestation, is only
the agency or energy of the Lord. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10):
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram. "Only under the superintendence of the
Supreme Lord does material nature appear to be the cause of all creation, maintenance
and dissolution." The Lord expands Himself into three—Viñëu, Brahmä and Çiva—for
391
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
maintenance, creation and destruction respectively. Of the three principal agents
controlling the three modes of material nature, Viñëu is the Almighty; even though He
is within material nature for the purpose of maintenance, He is not controlled by the
laws of material nature. The other two, Brahmä and Çiva, although almost as greatly
powerful as Viñëu, are within the control of the material energy of the Supreme Lord.
The conception of many gods controlling the many departments of material nature is ill
conceived of by the foolish pantheist. God is one without a second, and He is the primal
cause of all causes. As there are many departmental heads of governmental affairs, so
there are many heads of management of the universal affairs.
Due to a poor fund of knowledge, the impersonalist does not believe in the personal
management of things as they are. But in this verse it is clearly explained that
everything is personal and nothing is impersonal. We have already discussed this point
in the Introduction, and it is confirmed here in this verse. The tree of the material
manifestation is described in the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä as an açvattha tree
whose root is upward. We have actual experience of such a tree when we see the shadow
of a tree on the bank of a reservoir of water. The reflection of the tree on the water
appears to hang down from its upward roots. The tree of creation described here is only
a shadow of the reality which is Parabrahman, Viñëu. In the internal potential
manifestation of the Vaikuëöhalokas, the actual tree exists, and the tree reflected in the
material nature is only the shadow of this actual tree. The impersonalists, theory that
Brahman is void of all variegatedness is false because the shadow-tree described in
Bhagavad-gétä cannot exist without being the reflection of a real tree. The real tree is
situated in the eternal existence of spiritual nature, full of transcendental varieties, and
Lord Viñëu is the root of that tree also. The root is the same—the Lord—both for the
real tree and the false, but the false tree is only the perverted reflection of the real tree.
The Lord, being the real tree, is here offered obeisances by Brahmä on his own behalf
and also on behalf of Lord Çiva.
TEXT 17
l/aek-ae ivk-MaRiNarTa" ku-Xale/ Pa[Mata"
k-MaR<YaYa& TvduidTae >avdcRNae Sve )
YaSTaavdSYa bl/vaiNah JaqivTaaXaa&
SaÛiX^NatYaiNaiMazaYa NaMaae_STau TaSMaE )) 17 ))
392
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
loko vikarma-nirataù kuçale pramattaù
karmaëy ayaà tvad-udite bhavad-arcane sve
yas tävad asya balavän iha jévitäçäà
sadyaç chinatty animiñäya namo 'stu tasmai
SYNONYMS
lokaù—people in general; vikarma—work without sense; nirataù—engaged in; kuçale—
in beneficial activity; pramattaù—negligent; karmaëi—in activity; ayam—this; tvat—by
You; udite—enunciated; bhavat—of You; arcane—in worship; sve—their own; yaù—
who; tävat—as long as; asya—of the people in general; balavän—very strong; iha—this;
jévita-äçäm—struggle for existence; sadyaù—directly; chinatti—is cut to pieces;
animiñäya—by the eternal time; namaù—my obeisances; astu—let there be; tasmai—
unto Him.
TRANSLATION
People in general all engage in foolish acts, not in the really beneficial activities
enunciated directly by You for their guidance. As long as their tendency for foolish work
remains powerful, all their plans in the struggle for existence will be cut to pieces. I
therefore offer my obeisances unto Him who acts as eternal time.
PURPORT
People in general are all engaged in senseless work. They are systematically unmindful of
the real beneficial work, which is the devotional service of the Lord, technically called
the arcanä regulations. The arcanä regulations are directly instructed by the Lord in the
Närada-païcarätra and are strictly followed by the intelligent men, who know well that
the highest perfectional goal of life is to reach Lord Viñëu, who is the root of the tree
called the cosmic manifestation. Also, in the Bhägavatam and in Bhagavad-gétä such
regulative activities are clearly mentioned. Foolish people do not know that their selfinterest
is in realization of Viñëu. The Bhägavatam (7.5.30-32) says:
matir na kåñëe parataù svato vä
mitho 'bhipadyeta gåha-vratänäm
adänta-gobhir viçatäà tamisraà
punaù punaç carvita-carvaëänäm
393
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëuà
duräçayä ye bahir-artha-mäninaù
andhä yathändhair upanéyamänäs
te 'péça-tantryäm uru-dämni baddhäù
naiñäà matis tävad urukramäìghrià
spåçaty anarthäpagamo yad-arthaù
mahéyasäà päda-rajo-'bhiñekaà
niñkiïcanänäà na våëéta yävat
"Persons who are determined to totally rot in false, material happiness cannot become
Kåñëa-minded either by instructions from teachers, by self-realization or by
parliamentary discussions. They are dragged by the unbridled senses into the darkest
region of ignorance, and thus they madly engage in what is called 'chewing the chewed.'
"Because of their foolish activities, they are unaware that the ultimate goal of human life
is to achieve Viñëu, the Lord of the cosmic manifestation, and so their struggle for
existence is in the wrong direction of material civilization, which is under the external
energy. They are led by similar foolish persons, just as one blind man is led by another
blind man and both fall in the ditch.
"Such foolish men cannot be attracted towards the activities of the Supreme Powerful,
who is actually the neutralizing measure for their foolish activities, unless and until they
have the good sense to be guided by the great souls who are completely freed from
material attachment."
In Bhagavad-gétä the Lord asks everyone to give up all other occupational duties and
absolutely engage in arcanä activities, or in pleasing the Lord. But almost no one is
attracted to such arcanä activity. Everyone is more or less attracted by activities which
are conditions of rebellion against the Supreme Lord. The systems of jïäna and yoga are
also indirectly rebellious acts against the Lord. There is no auspicious activity except
arcanä of the Lord. Jïäna and yoga are sometimes accepted within the purview of arcanä
when the ultimate aim is Viñëu, and not otherwise. The conclusion is that only the
devotees of the Lord are bona fide human beings eligible for salvation. Others are vainly
struggling for existence without any actual benefit.
TEXT 18
YaSMaaiØ>aeMYahMaiPa iÜParaDaRiDaZ<Ya‚
394
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
MaDYaaiSaTa" Sak-l/l/aek-NaMaSk*-Ta& YaTa( )
TaePae TaPaae bhuSavae_vååTSaMaaNa‚
STaSMaE NaMaae >aGavTae_iDaMa%aYa Tau>YaMa( )) 18 ))
yasmäd bibhemy aham api dviparärdha-dhiñëyam
adhyäsitaù sakala-loka-namaskåtaà yat
tepe tapo bahu-savo 'varurutsamänas
tasmai namo bhagavate 'dhimakhäya tubhyam
SYNONYMS
yasmät—from whom; bibhemi—fear; aham—I; api—also; dvi-para-ardha—up to the
limit of 4,300,000,000 x 2 x 30 x 12 x 100 solar years; dhiñëyam—place; adhyäsitaù—
situated in; sakala-loka—all other planets; namaskåtam—honored by; yat—that; tepe—
underwent; tapaù—penances; bahu-savaù—many, many years; avarurutsamänaù—
desiring to obtain You; tasmai—unto Him; namaù—I do offer my obeisances;
bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhimakhäya—unto Him who is
the enjoyer of all sacrifices; tubhyam—unto Your Lordship.
TRANSLATION
Your Lordship, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You who are indefatigable time and
the enjoyer of all sacrifices. Although I am situated in an abode which will continue to
exist for a time duration of two parärdhas, although I am the leader of all other planets in
the universe, and although I have undergone many, many years of penance for selfrealization,
still I offer my respects unto You.
PURPORT
Brahmä is the greatest personality in the universe because he has the longest duration of
life. He is the most respectable personality because of his penance, influence, prestige,
etc., and still he has to offer his respectful obeisances unto the Lord. Therefore, it is
incumbent upon all others, who are far, far below the standard of Brahmä, to do as he
did and offer respects as a matter of duty.
395
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 19
iTaYaRx(MaNauZYaivbuDaaidzu JaqvYaaeiNa‚
ZvaTMaeC^YaaTMak*-TaSaeTauParqPSaYaa Ya" )
reMae iNarSTaivzYaae_PYavåÖdeh‚
STaSMaE NaMaae >aGavTae PauåzaetaMaaYa )) 19 ))
tiryaì-manuñya-vibudhädiñu jéva-yoniñv
ätmecchayätma-kåta-setu-parépsayä yaù
reme nirasta-viñayo 'py avaruddha-dehas
tasmai namo bhagavate puruñottamäya
SYNONYMS
tiryak—animals lower than human beings; manuñya—human beings, etc.; vibudhaädiñu—
amongst the demigods; jéva-yoniñu—in different species of life; ätma—self;
icchayä—by the will; ätma-kåta—self-created; setu—obligations; parépsayä—desiring to
preserve; yaù—who; reme—performing transcendental pastimes; nirasta—not being
affected; viñayaù—material contamination; api—certainly; avaruddha—manifested;
dehaù—transcendental body; tasmai—unto Him; namaù—my obeisances; bhagavate—
unto the Personality of Godhead; puruñottamäya—the primeval Lord.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, by Your own will You appear in the various species of living entities, among
animals lower than human beings as well as among the demigods, to perform Your
transcendental pastimes. You are not affected by material contamination. You come just
to fulfill the obligations of Your own principles of religion, and therefore, O Supreme
Personality, I offer my obeisances unto You for manifesting such different forms.
PURPORT
The Lord's incarnations in different species of life are all transcendental. He appears as
a human being in His incarnations of Kåñëa, Räma, etc., but He is not a human being.
Anyone who mistakes Him for an ordinary human being is certainly not very
intelligent, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.11): avajänanti mäà müòhä mänuñéà tanum
396
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
äçritam. The same principle is applicable when He appears as the hog or fish
incarnations. They are transcendental forms of the Lord and are manifested under
certain necessities of His own pleasure and pastimes. Such manifestations of the
transcendental forms of the Lord are accepted by Him mostly to enliven His devotees.
All His incarnations are manifested whenever there is a need to deliver His devotees
and maintain His own principles.
TEXT 20
Yaae_ivÛYaaNauPahTaae_iPa dXaaDaRv*tYaa
iNad]aMauvah Ja#=rqk*-Tal/aek-Yaa}a" )
ANTaJaRle/_ihk-iXaPauSPaXaaRNaukU-l/a&
>aqMaaeiMaRMaail/iNa JaNaSYa Sau%& ivv*<vNa( )) 20 ))
yo 'vidyayänupahato 'pi daçärdha-våttyä
nidräm uväha jaöharé-kåta-loka-yätraù
antar-jale 'hi-kaçipu-sparçänuküläà
bhémormi-mälini janasya sukhaà vivåëvan
SYNONYMS
yaù—one; avidyayä—influenced by nescience; anupahataù—without being affected;
api—in spite of; daça-ardha—five; våttyä—interaction; nidräm—sleep; uväha—
accepted; jaöharé—within the abdomen; kåta—doing so; loka-yätraù—maintenance of
the different entities; antaù-jale—within the water of devastation; ahi-kaçipu—on the
snake bed; sparça-anuküläm—happy for the touch; bhéma-ürmi—violent waves;
mälini—chain of; janasya—of the intelligent person; sukham—happiness; vivåëvan—
showing.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You accept the pleasure of sleeping in the water of devastation, where there are
violent waves, and You enjoy pleasure on the bed of snakes, showing the happiness of
Your sleep to intelligent persons. At that time, all the universal planets are stationed
within Your abdomen.
397
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Persons who cannot think of anything beyond the limit of their own power are like frogs
in a well who cannot imagine the length and breadth of the great Pacific Ocean. Such
people take it as legendary when they hear that the Supreme Lord is lying on His bed
within the great ocean of the universe. They are surprised that one can lie down within
water and sleep very happily. But a little intelligence can mitigate this foolish
astonishment. There are many living entities within the bed of the ocean who also enjoy
the material bodily activities of eating, sleeping, defending and mating. If such
insignificant living entities can enjoy life within the water, why can't the Supreme Lord,
who is all-powerful, sleep on the cool body of a serpent and enjoy in the turmoil of
violent ocean waves? The distinction of the Lord is that His activities are all
transcendental, and He is able to do anything and everything without being deterred by
limitations of time and space. He can enjoy His transcendental happiness regardless of
material considerations.
TEXT 21
Yaàai>aPaÚ>avNaadhMaaSaMaq@y
l/aek-}aYaaePak-r<aae YadNauGa]he<a )
TaSMaE NaMaSTa odrSQa>avaYa YaaeGa‚
iNad]avSaaNaivk-Saàil/Nae+a<aaYa )) 21 ))
yan-näbhi-padma-bhavanäd aham äsam éòya
loka-trayopakaraëo yad-anugraheëa
tasmai namas ta udara-stha-bhaväya yoganidrävasäna-
vikasan-nalinekñaëäya
SYNONYMS
yat—whose; näbhi—navel; padma—lotus; bhavanät—from the house of; aham—I;
äsam—became manifested; éòya—O worshipable one; loka-traya—the three worlds;
upakaraëaù—helping in the creation of; yat—whose; anugraheëa—by the mercy;
tasmai—unto Him; namaù—my obeisances; te—unto You; udara-stha—situated within
the abdomen; bhaväya—having the universe; yoga-nidrä-avasäna—after the end of that
transcendental sleep; vikasat—blossoming; nalina-ékñaëäya—unto Him whose opening
398
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
eyes are like lotuses.
TRANSLATION
O object of my worship, I am born from the house of Your lotus navel for the purpose of
creating the universe by Your mercy. All these planets of the universe were stationed
within Your transcendental abdomen while You were enjoying sleep. Now, Your sleep
having ended, Your eyes are open like blossoming lotuses in the morning.
PURPORT
Brahmä is teaching us the beginning of arcanä regulations from morning (four o'clock)
to night (ten o'clock). Early in the morning, the devotee has to rise from his bed and
pray to the Lord, and there are other regulative principles for offering maìgala-ärati
early in the morning. Foolish nondevotees, not understanding the importance of arcanä,
criticize the regulative principles, but they have no eyes to see that the Lord also sleeps,
by His own will. The impersonal conception of the Supreme is so detrimental to the
path of devotional service that it is very difficult to associate with the stubborn
nondevotees, who always think in terms of material conceptions.
Impersonalists always think backwards. They think that because there is form in matter,
spirit should be formless; because in matter there is sleep, in spirit there cannot be sleep;
and because the sleeping of the Deity is accepted in arcanä worship, the arcanä is mäyä.
All these thoughts are basically material. To think either positively or negatively is still
thinking materially. Knowledge accepted from the superior source of the Vedas is
standard. Here in these verses of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, we find that arcanä is
recommended. Before Brahmä took up the task of creation, he found the Lord sleeping
on the serpent bed in the waves of the water of devastation. Therefore, sleeping exists in
the internal potency of the Lord, and this is not denied by pure devotees of the Lord like
Brahmä and his disciplic succession. It is clearly said here that the Lord slept very
happily within the violent waves of the water, manifesting thereby that He is able to do
anything and everything by His transcendental will and not be hampered by any
circumstances. The Mäyävädé cannot think beyond this material experience, and thus
he denies the Lord's ability to sleep within the water. His mistake is that he compares
the Lord to himself—and that comparison is also a material thought. The whole
philosophy of the Mäyäväda school, based on "not this, not that" (neti, neti), is basically
material. Such thought cannot give one the chance to know the Supreme Personality of
399
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Godhead as He is.
TEXT 22
Saae_Ya& SaMaSTaJaGaTaa& Sauôdek- AaTMaa
SatveNa YaNMa*@YaTae >aGavaNa( >aGaeNa )
TaeNaEv Mae d*XaMaNauSPa*XaTaaÛQaah&
ó+YaaiMa PaUvRvidd& Pa[<aTaiPa[Yaae_SaaE )) 22 ))
so 'yaà samasta-jagatäà suhåd eka ätmä
sattvena yan måòayate bhagavän bhagena
tenaiva me dåçam anuspåçatäd yathähaà
srakñyämi pürvavad idaà praëata-priyo 'sau
SYNONYMS
saù—He; ayam—the Lord; samasta-jagatäm—of all the universes; suhåt ekaù—the one
friend and philosopher; ätmä—the Supersoul; sattvena—by the mode of goodness; yat—
one who; måòayate—causes happiness; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
bhagena—with six opulences; tena—by Him; eva—certainly; me—to me; dåçam—power
of introspection; anuspåçatät—let Him give; yathä—as; aham—I; srakñyämi—will be
able to create; pürva-vat—as before; idam—this universe; praëata—surrendered;
priyaù—dear; asau—He (the Lord).
TRANSLATION
Let the Supreme Lord be merciful towards me. He is the one friend and soul of all living
entities in the world, and He maintains all, for their ultimate happiness, by His six
transcendental opulences. May He be merciful towards me so that I, as before, may be
empowered with the introspection to create, for I am also one of the surrendered souls
who are dear to the Lord.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord, Puruñottama, or Çré Kåñëa, is the maintainer of all, in both the
400
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
transcendental and material worlds. He is the life and friend of all because there is
eternally natural affection and love between the living entities and the Lord. He is the
one friend and well-wisher for all, and He is one without a second. The Lord maintains
all the living entities everywhere by His six transcendental opulences, for which He is
known as bhagavän, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Brahmä prayed for
His mercy so that he might be able to create the universal affairs as he did before; only
by the Lord's causeless mercy could he create both material and spiritual personalities
like Maréci and Närada respectively. Brahmä prayed to the Lord because He is very
much dear to the surrendered soul. The surrendered soul knows nothing but the Lord,
and therefore the Lord is very affectionate towards him.
TEXT 23
Wz Pa[Paàvrdae rMaYaaTMaXa¢-ya
YaÛTk-irZYaiTa Ga*hqTaGau<aavTaar" )
TaiSMaNa( Sviv§-MaiMad& Sa*JaTaae_iPa ceTaae
YauÅqTa k-MaRXaMal&/ c YaQaa ivJaùaMa( )) 23 ))
eña prapanna-varado ramayätma-çaktyä
yad yat kariñyati gåhéta-guëävatäraù
tasmin sva-vikramam idaà såjato 'pi ceto
yuïjéta karma-çamalaà ca yathä vijahyäm
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; prapanna—one who is surrendered; vara-daù—benefactor; ramayä—
enjoying always with the goddess of fortune (Lakñmé); ätma-çaktyä—with His internal
potency; yat yat—whatever; kariñyati—He may act; gåhéta—accepting; guëa-avatäraù—
incarnation of the mode of goodness; tasmin—unto Him; sva-vikramam—with
omnipotency; idam—this cosmic manifestation; såjataù—creating; api—in spite of;
cetaù—heart; yuïjéta—be engaged; karma—work; çamalam—material affection; ca—
also; yathä—as much as; vijahyäm—I can give up.
TRANSLATION
401
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, is always the benefactor of the
surrendered souls. His activities are always enacted through His internal potency, Ramä,
or the goddess of fortune. I pray only to engage in His service in the creation of the
material world, and I pray that I not be materially affected by my works, for thus I may
be able to give up the false prestige of being the creator.
PURPORT
In the matter of material creation, maintenance and destruction, there are three
incarnations of the material modes of nature—Brahmä, Viñëu and Maheçvara. But the
Lord's incarnation as Viñëu, in His internal potency, is the supreme energy for the total
activities. Brahmä, who is only an assistant in the modes of creation, wanted to remain
in his actual position as an instrument of the Lord instead of becoming puffed up by the
false prestige of thinking himself the creator. That is the way of becoming dear to the
Supreme Lord and receiving His benediction. Foolish men want to take credit for all
creations made by them, but intelligent persons know very well that not a blade of grass
can move without the will of the Lord; thus all the credit for wonderful creations must
go to Him. By spiritual consciousness only can one be free from the contamination of
material affection and receive the benedictions offered by the Lord.
TEXT 24
Naai>ahSaTaae_M>aiSa YaSYa Pau&Saae
ivjaNaXai¢-rhMaaSaMaNaNTaXa¢e-" )
æPa& ivic}aiMadMaSYa ivv*<vTaae Mae
Maa rqirzqí iNaGaMaSYa iGara& ivSaGaR" )) 24 ))
näbhi-hradäd iha sato 'mbhasi yasya puàso
vijïäna-çaktir aham äsam ananta-çakteù
rüpaà vicitram idam asya vivåëvato me
mä rériñéñöa nigamasya giräà visargaù
SYNONYMS
näbhi-hradät—from the navel lake; iha—in this millennium; sataù—lying; ambhasi—in
the water; yasya—one whose; puàsaù—of the Personality of Godhead; vijïäna—of the
402
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
total universe; çaktiù—energy; aham—I; äsam—was born; ananta—unlimited; çakteù—
of the powerful; rüpam—form; vicitram—variegated; idam—this; asya—His;
vivåëvataù—manifesting; me—unto me; mä—may not; rériñéñöa—vanish; nigamasya—of
the Vedas; giräm—of the sounds; visargaù—vibration.
TRANSLATION
The Lord's potencies are innumerable. As He lies down in the water of devastation, I am
born as the total universal energy from the navel lake in which the lotus sprouts. I am
now engaged in manifesting His diverse energies in the form of the cosmic manifestation.
I therefore pray that in the course of my material activities I may not be deviated from
the vibration of the Vedic hymns.
PURPORT
Every person engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord in this material
world is prone to so many material activities, and if one is not strong enough to protect
himself against the onslaught of material affection, he may be diverted from the spiritual
energy. In the material creation Brahmä has to create all kinds of living entities with
bodies suitable to their material conditions. Brahmä wants to be protected by the Lord
because he has to contact many, many vicious living entities. An ordinary brähmaëa
may fall from the brahma-tejas, or the power of brahminical excellence, due to his
association with many fallen, conditioned souls. Brahmä, as the supermost brähmaëa, is
afraid of such a falldown, and therefore he prays to the Lord for protection. This is a
warning for one and all in the spiritual advancement of life. Unless one is sufficiently
protected by the Lord, he may fall down from his spiritual position; therefore one has to
pray constantly to the Lord for protection and the blessing to carry out one's duty. Lord
Caitanya also entrusted His missionary work to His devotees and assured them of His
protection against the onslaught of material affection. The path of spiritual life is stated
in the Vedas to be like the edge of a sharpened razor. A little inattentiveness may at
once create havoc and bloodshed, but one who is a completely surrendered soul, always
seeking protection from the Lord in the discharge of his entrusted duties, has no fear of
falling into material contamination.
TEXT 25
403
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Saae_Saavd>a]k-å<aae >aGavaNa( ivv*Ö‚
Pa[eMaiSMaTaeNa NaYaNaaMbuåh& ivJa*M>aNa( )
oTQaaYa ivìivJaYaaYa c Naae ivzad&
MaaDVYaa iGaraPaNaYaTaaTPauåz" Paura<a" )) 25 ))
so 'säv adabhra-karuëo bhagavän vivåddhaprema-
smitena nayanämburuhaà vijåmbhan
utthäya viçva-vijayäya ca no viñädaà
mädhvyä giräpanayatät puruñaù puräëaù
SYNONYMS
saù—He (the Lord); asau—that; adabhra—unlimited; karuëaù—merciful; bhagavän—
the Personality of Godhead; vivåddha—excessive; prema—love; smitena—by smiling;
nayana-amburuham—the lotus eyes; vijåmbhan—by opening; utthäya—for flourishing;
viçva-vijayäya—for glorifying the cosmic creation; ca—as also; naù—our; viñädam—
dejection; mädhvyä—by sweet; girä—words; apanayatät—let Him kindly remove;
puruñaù—the Supreme; puräëaù—oldest.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, who is supreme and is the oldest of all, is unlimitedly merciful. I wish that He
may smilingly bestow His benediction upon me by opening His lotus eyes. He can uplift
the entire cosmic creation and remove our dejection by kindly speaking His directions.
PURPORT
The Lord is ever increasingly merciful upon the fallen souls of this material world. The
whole cosmic manifestation is a chance for all to improve themselves in devotional
service to the Lord, and everyone is meant for that purpose. The Lord expands Himself
into many personalities who are either self-expansions or separated expansions. The
personalities of the individual souls are His separated expansions, whereas the selfexpansions
are the Lord Himself. The self-expansions are predominators, and the
separated expansions are predominated for reciprocation of transcendental bliss with
the supreme form of bliss and knowledge. The liberated souls can join in this blissful
404
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
reciprocation of predominator and predominated without materially concocted ideas.
The typical example of such a transcendental exchange between the predominator and
the predominated is the Lord's räsa-lélä with the gopés. The gopés are predominated
expansions of the internal potency, and therefore the Lord's participation in the räsalélä
dance is never to be considered like the mundane relationship of man and woman. It
is, rather, the highest perfectional stage of the exchange of feelings between the Lord
and the living entities. The Lord gives the fallen souls the chance for this highest
perfection of life. Lord Brahmä is entrusted with the management of the complete
cosmic show, and therefore he prays that the Lord bestow His blessings upon him so that
he may execute its purpose.
TEXT 26
MaE}aeYa ovac
SvSaM>av& iNaXaaMYaEv& TaPaaeivÛaSaMaaiDai>a" )
YaavNMaNaaevc" STauTva ivrraMa Sa i%àvTa( )) 26 ))
maitreya uväca
sva-sambhavaà niçämyaivaà
tapo-vidyä-samädhibhiù
yävan mano-vacaù stutvä
viraräma sa khinnavat
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—the great sage Maitreya said; sva-sambhavam—the source of his
appearance; niçämya—by seeing; evam—thus; tapaù—penance; vidyä—knowledge;
samädhibhiù—as also by concentration of the mind; yävat—as far as possible; manaù—
mind; vacaù—words; stutvä—having prayed; viraräma—became silent; saù—he
(Brahmä); khinna-vat—as if tired.
TRANSLATION
The sage Maitreya said: O Vidura, after observing the source of his appearance, namely
the Personality of Godhead, Brahmä prayed for His mercy as far as his mind and words
405
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
would permit him. Thus having prayed, he became silent, as if tired from his activities of
penance, knowledge and mental concentration.
PURPORT
Brahmä's enlightenment in knowledge was due to the Lord sitting within his heart.
After being created, Brahmä could not ascertain the source of his appearance, but after
penance and mental concentration he could see the source of his birth, and thus he
became enlightened through his heart. The spiritual master outside and the spiritual
master within are both representations of the Lord. Unless one has contact with such
bona fide representations, one cannot claim to be a spiritual master. Lord Brahmä had
no opportunity to take the help of a spiritual master from outside because at that time
Brahmä himself was the only creature in the universe. Therefore, on becoming satisfied
by the prayers of Brahmä, the Lord enlightened him about everything from within.
TEXTS 27-28
AQaai>aPa[eTaMaNvq+Ya b]ø<aae MaDauSaUdNa" )
ivz<<aceTaSa& TaeNa k-LPaVYaiTak-raM>aSaa )) 27 ))
l/aek-Sa&SQaaNaivjaNa AaTMaNa" Pairi%ÛTa" )
TaMaahaGaaDaYaa vaca k-XMal&/ XaMaYaiàv )) 28 ))
athäbhipretam anvékñya
brahmaëo madhusüdanaù
viñaëëa-cetasaà tena
kalpa-vyatikarämbhasä
loka-saàsthäna-vijïäna
ätmanaù parikhidyataù
tam ähägädhayä väcä
kaçmalaà çamayann iva
SYNONYMS
atha—thereupon; abhipretam—intention; anvékñya—observing; brahmaëaù—of
Brahmä; madhusüdanaù—the killer of the Madhu demon; viñaëëa—depressed;
406
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
cetasam—of the heart; tena—by him; kalpa—millennium; vyatikara-ambhasä—
devastating water; loka-saàsthäna—situation of the planetary system; vijïäne—in the
science; ätmanaù—of himself; parikhidyataù—sufficiently anxious; tam—unto him;
äha—said; agädhayä—deeply thoughtful; väcä—by words; kaçmalam—impurities;
çamayan—removing; iva—like that.
TRANSLATION
The Lord saw that Brahmä was very anxious about the planning and construction of the
different planetary systems and was depressed upon seeing the devastating water. He
could understand the intention of Brahmä, and thus He spoke in deep, thoughtful words,
removing all the illusion that had arisen.
PURPORT
The devastating water was so fearful that even Brahmä was perturbed at its appearance
and became very anxious about how to situate the different planetary systems in outer
space to accommodate the different kinds of living entities, such as the human beings,
those lower than the human beings, and the superhuman beings. All the planets in the
universe are situated according to the different grades of living entities under the
influence of the modes of material nature. There are three modes of material nature,
and when they are mixed with one another they become nine. When the nine are mixed
they become eighty-one, and the eighty-one also become mixed, and thus we ultimately
do not know how the delusion increases and increases. Lord Brahmä had to
accommodate different places and situations for the requisite bodies of the conditioned
souls. The task was meant only for Brahmä, and no one in the universe can even
understand how difficult it was. But by the grace of the Lord, Brahmä was able to
execute the tremendous task so perfectly that everyone is amazed to see the
workmanship of the vidhätä, or the regulator.
TEXT 29
é[q>aGavaNauvac
Maa vedGa>aR GaaSTaNd]q& SaGaR oÛMaMaavh )
TaNMaYaaPaaidTa& ùGa]e YaNMaa& Pa[aQaRYaTae >avaNa( )) 29 ))
407
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
çré-bhagavän uväca
mä veda-garbha gäs tandréà
sarga udyamam ävaha
tan mayäpäditaà hy agre
yan mäà prärthayate bhavän
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Lord, the Personality of Godhead, said; mä—do not; vedagarbha—
O You who have the depth of all Vedic wisdom; gäù tandrém—become
dejected; sarge—for creation; udyamam—enterprises; ävaha—you just undertake; tat—
that (which you want); mayä—by Me; äpäditam—executed; hi—certainly; agre—
previously; yat—which; mäm—from Me; prärthayate—begging; bhavän—you.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead then said: O Brahmä, O depth of Vedic wisdom, be
neither depressed nor anxious about the execution of creation. What you are begging from
Me has already been granted before.
PURPORT
Any person authorized by either the Lord or by His bona fide representative is already
blessed, as is the work entrusted to him. Of course, the person entrusted with such a
responsibility should always be aware of his incapability and must always look for the
mercy of the Lord for the successful execution of his duty. One should not be puffed up
because he is entrusted with certain executive work. Fortunate is he who is so entrusted,
and if he is always fixed in the sense of being subordinate to the will of the Supreme, he
is sure to come out successful in the discharge of his work. Arjuna was entrusted with
the work of fighting on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, and before he was so entrusted,
the Lord had already arranged for his victory. But Arjuna was always conscious of his
position as subordinate to the Lord, and thus he accepted Him as the supreme guide in
his responsibility. Anyone who takes pride in doing responsible work but does not give
credit to the Supreme Lord is certainly falsely proud and cannot execute anything
nicely. Brahmä and persons in the line of his disciplic succession who follow in his
footsteps are always successful in the discharge of loving transcendental service to the
Supreme Lord.
408
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 30
>aUYaSTv& TaPa AaiTaï ivÛa& cEv Madaé[YaaMa( )
Taa>YaaMaNTaôRid b]øNa( l/aek-aNd]+YaSYaPaav*TaaNa( )) 30 ))
bhüyas tvaà tapa ätiñöha
vidyäà caiva mad-äçrayäm
täbhyäm antar-hådi brahman
lokän drakñyasy apävåtän
SYNONYMS
bhüyaù—again; tvam—yourself; tapaù—penance; ätiñöha—be situated; vidyäm—in the
knowledge; ca—also; eva—certainly; mat—My; äçrayäm—under the protection;
täbhyäm—by those qualifications; antaù—within; hådi—in the heart; brahman—O
brähmaëa; lokän—all the worlds; drakñyasi—you will see; apävåtän—all disclosed.
TRANSLATION
O Brahmä, situate yourself in penance and meditation and follow the principles of
knowledge to receive My favor. By these actions you will be able to understand
everything from within your heart.
PURPORT
The mercy the Lord bestows upon a particular person engaged in executing the
responsible work entrusted unto him is beyond imagination. But His mercy is received
due to our penance and perseverance in executing devotional service. Brahmä was
entrusted with the work of creating the planetary systems. The Lord instructed him that
when he meditated he would very easily know where and how the planetary systems
must be arranged. The directions were to come from within, and there was no necessity
for anxiety in that task. Such instructions of buddhi-yoga are directly imparted by the
Lord from within, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (10.10).
TEXT 31
409
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TaTa AaTMaiNa l/aeke- c >ai¢-Yau¢-" SaMaaihTa" )
d]íaiSa Maa& TaTa& b]øNMaiYa l/aek-a&STvMaaTMaNa" )) 31 ))
tata ätmani loke ca
bhakti-yuktaù samähitaù
drañöäsi mäà tataà brahman
mayi lokäàs tvam ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; ätmani—in yourself; loke—in the universe; ca—also; bhakti-yuktaù—
being situated in devotional service; samähitaù—being completely absorbed; drañöä asi—
you shall see; mäm—Me; tatam—spread throughout; brahman—O Brahmä; mayi—in
Me; lokän—all the universe; tvam—you; ätmanaù—the living entities.
TRANSLATION
O Brahmä, when you are absorbed in devotional service, in the course of your creative
activities, you will see Me in you and throughout the universe, and you will see that you
yourself, the universe and the living entities are all in Me.
PURPORT
It is cited herein by the Lord that during his daytime Brahmä would see Him as Lord Çré
Kåñëa. He would appreciate how the Lord expanded Himself into all the calves during
His childhood at Våndävana, he would know how Yaçodämayé saw all the universes and
planetary systems within the mouth of Kåñëa during His playful childhood pastimes, and
he would also see that there are many millions of Brahmäs during the appearance of
Lord Kåñëa in Brahmä's daytime. But all these manifestations of the Lord, appearing
everywhere in His eternal, transcendental forms, cannot be understood by anyone but
the pure devotees, who are always engaged in devotional service to the Lord and are
fully absorbed in the Lord. The high qualifications of Brahmä are also indicated herein.
TEXT 32
Yada Tau SavR>aUTaezu daåZviGaniMav iSQaTaMa( )
410
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Pa[iTac+aqTa Maa& l/aek-ae JaùataùeRv k-XMal/Ma( )) 32 ))
yadä tu sarva-bhüteñu
däruñv agnim iva sthitam
praticakñéta mäà loko
jahyät tarhy eva kaçmalam
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; tu—but; sarva—all; bhüteñu—in the living entities; däruñu—in wood;
agnim—fire; iva—like; sthitam—situated; praticakñéta—you shall see; mäm—Me;
lokaù—and the universe; jahyät—can give up; tarhi—then at once; eva—certainly;
kaçmalam—illusion.
TRANSLATION
You will see Me in all living entities as well as all over the universe, just as fire is situated
in wood. Only in that state of transcendental vision will you be able to be free from all
kinds of illusion.
PURPORT
Brahmä prayed that he might not forget his eternal relationship with the Lord during
the course of his material activities. In answer to that prayer, the Lord said that he
should not think of existing without a relationship with His omnipotency. The example
is given of the fire in wood. The fire kindled in wood is always the same, although the
wood may be of different types. Similarly, the bodies within the material creation may
be specifically different according to shape and quality, but the spirit souls within them
are not different from one another. The quality of fire, warmth, is the same everywhere,
and the spiritual spark, or part and parcel of the Supreme Spirit, is the same in every
living being; thus the potency of the Lord is distributed all over His creation. This
transcendental knowledge alone can save one from the contamination of material
illusion. Since the Lord's potency is distributed everywhere, a pure soul, or devotee of
the Lord, can see everything in relationship with the Lord, and therefore he has no
all contamination of material association. The pure devotee never forgets the touch of
411
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the Lord in all circumstances.
TEXT 33
Yada rihTaMaaTMaaNa& >aUTaeiNd]YaGau<aaXaYaE" )
SvæPae<a MaYaaePaeTa& PaXYaNa( SvaraJYaMa*C^iTa )) 33 ))
yadä rahitam ätmänaà
bhütendriya-guëäçayaiù
svarüpeëa mayopetaà
paçyan sväräjyam åcchati
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; rahitam—freed from; ätmänam—self; bhüta—material elements; indriya—
material senses; guëa-äçayaiù—under the influence of the material modes of nature;
svarüpeëa—in pure existence; mayä—by Me; upetam—approaching; paçyan—by seeing;
sväräjyam—spiritual kingdom; åcchati—enjoy.
TRANSLATION
When you are free from the conception of gross and subtle bodies and when your senses
are free from all influences of the modes of material nature, you will realize your pure
form in My association. At that time you will be situated in pure consciousness.
PURPORT
In the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu it is said that a person whose only desire is to render
transcendental loving service to the Lord is a free person in any condition of material
existence. That service attitude is the svarüpa, or real form, of the living entity. Lord Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu, in the Caitanya-caritämåta, also confirms this statement by
declaring that the real, spiritual form of the living entity is eternal servitorship to the
Supreme Lord. The Mäyäväda school shudders at the thought of a service attitude in the
living entity, not knowing that in the transcendental world the service of the Lord is
based on transcendental love. Transcendental loving service is never to be compared to
the forced service of the material world. In the material world, even if one is under the
412
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
conception that he is no one's servant, he is still the servant of his senses, under the
dictation of the material modes. Factually no one is master here in the material world,
and therefore the servants of the senses have a very bad experience of servitude. They
shudder at the thought of service because they have no knowledge of the transcendental
position. In transcendental loving service, the servitor is as free as the Lord. The Lord is
svaräö, or fully independent, and the servant is also fully independent, or svaräö, in the
spiritual atmosphere because there is no forced service. There the transcendental loving
service is due to spontaneous love. A reflected glimpse of such service is experienced in
the service of the mother unto the son, the friend's service unto the friend, or the wife's
service unto the husband. These reflections of service by friends, parents or wives are
not forced, but are due only to love. Here in this material world, however, the loving
service is only a reflection. The real service, or service in svarüpa, is present in the
transcendental world, in association with the Lord. The very same service in
transcendental love can be practiced in devotion here.
This verse is also applicable to the jïäné school. The enlightened jïäné, when free from
all material contaminations, namely the gross and subtle bodies together with the senses
of the material modes of nature, is placed in the Supreme and is thus liberated from
material bondage. The jïänés and the devotees are actually in agreement up to the point
of liberation from material contamination. But whereas the jïänés remain pacified on
the platform of simple understanding, the devotees develop further spiritual
advancement in loving service. The devotees develop a spiritual individuality in their
spontaneous service attitude, which is enhanced on and on, up to the point of
mädhurya-rasa, or transcendental loving service reciprocated between the lover and the
beloved.
TEXT 34
NaaNaak-MaRivTaaNaeNa Pa[Jaa bûq" iSaSa*+aTa" )
NaaTMaavSaqdTYaiSMa&STae vzsYaaNMadNauGa]h" )) 34 ))
nänä-karma-vitänena
prajä bahvéù sisåkñataù
nätmävasédaty asmiàs te
varñéyän mad-anugrahaù
413
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
nänä-karma—varieties of service; vitänena—by expansion of; prajäù—population;
bahvéù—innumerable; sisåkñataù—desiring to increase; na—never; ätmä—self;
avasédati—will be bereaved; asmin—in the matter; te—of you; varñéyän—always
increasing; mat—My; anugrahaù—causeless mercy.
TRANSLATION
Since you have desired to increase the population innumerably and expand your varieties
of service, you shall never be deprived in this matter because My causeless mercy upon
you will always increase for all time.
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord, being cognizant of the facts of the particular time, object
and circumstances, always desires to expand the number of devotees of the Lord in
various ways. Such expansions of transcendental service may appear to be material to
the materialist, but factually they are expansions of the causeless mercy of the Lord
towards the devotee. Plans for such activities may appear to be material activities, but
they are different in potency, being engaged in the satisfaction of the transcendental
senses of the Supreme.
TEXT 35
‰izMaaÛ& Na bDanaiTa PaaPaqYaa&STva& rJaaeGau<a" )
YaNMaNaae MaiYa iNabRÖ& Pa[Jaa" Sa&Sa*JaTaae_iPa Tae )) 35 ))
åñim ädyaà na badhnäti
päpéyäàs tväà rajo-guëaù
yan mano mayi nirbaddhaà
prajäù saàsåjato 'pi te
SYNONYMS
åñim—unto the great sage; ädyam—the first of the kind; na—never; badhnäti—
encroaches; päpéyän—vicious; tväm—you; rajaù-guëaù—the material mode of passion;
414
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yat—because; manaù—mind; mayi—in Me; nirbaddham—compact in; prajäù—progeny;
saàsåjataù—generating; api—in spite of; te—your.
TRANSLATION
You are the original åñi, and because your mind is always fixed on Me, even though you
will be engaged in generating various progeny, the vicious mode of passion will never
encroach upon you.
PURPORT
The same assurance is given to Brahmä in the Second Canto, Chapter Nine, verse 36.
Being so favored by the Lord, Brahmä's schemes and plans are all infallible. If sometimes
Brahmä is seen to be bewildered, as, in the Tenth Canto, he is bewildered by seeing the
action of the internal potency, that is also for his further advancement in
transcendental service. Arjuna is found to be similarly bewildered. All such
bewilderment of the pure devotees of the Lord is specifically meant for their further
advancement in knowledge of the Lord.
TEXT 36
jaTaae_h& >avTaa TvÛ duivRjeYaae_iPa deihNaaMa( )
YaNMaa& Tv& MaNYaSae_Yau¢&- >aUTaeiNd]YaGau<aaTMai>a" )) 36 ))
jïäto 'haà bhavatä tv adya
durvijïeyo 'pi dehinäm
yan mäà tvaà manyase 'yuktaà
bhütendriya-guëätmabhiù
SYNONYMS
jïätaù—known; aham—Myself; bhavatä—by you; tu—but; adya—today; duù—difficult;
vijïeyaù—to be known; api—in spite of; dehinäm—for the conditioned soul; yat—
because; mäm—Me; tvam—you; manyase—understand; ayuktam—without being made
of; bhüta—material elements; indriya—material senses; guëa—material modes;
ätmabhiù—and false ego like the conditioned soul.
415
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Although I am not easily knowable by the conditioned soul, you have known Me today
because you know that My personality is not constituted of anything material, and
specifically not of the five gross and three subtle elements.
PURPORT
Knowledge of the Supreme Absolute Truth does not necessitate negation of the material
manifestation but understanding of spiritual existence as it is. To think that because
material existence is realized in forms therefore spiritual existence must be formless is
only a negative material conception of spirit. The real spiritual conception is that
spiritual form is not material form. Brahmä appreciated the eternal form of the Lord in
that way, and the Personality of Godhead approved of Brahmä's spiritual conception. In
Bhagavad-gétä the Lord condemned the material conception of Kåñëa's body which arises
because He is apparently present like a man. The Lord may appear in any of His many,
many spiritual forms, but He is not materially composed, nor has He any difference
between body and self. That is the way of conceiving the spiritual form of the Lord.
TEXT 37
Tau>Ya& MaiÜicik-TSaaYaaMaaTMaa Mae diXaRTaae_bih" )
Naale/Na Sail/le/ MaUl&/ PauZk-rSYa ivicNvTa" )) 37 ))
tubhyaà mad-vicikitsäyäm
ätmä me darçito 'bahiù
nälena salile mülaà
puñkarasya vicinvataù
SYNONYMS
tubhyam—unto you; mat—Me; vicikitsäyäm—on your trying to know; ätmä—self; me—
of Myself; darçitaù—exhibited; abahiù—from within; nälena—through the stem; salile—
in the water; mülam—root; puñkarasya—of the lotus, the primeval source; vicinvataù—
contemplating.
416
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
When you were contemplating whether there was a source to the stem of the lotus of
your birth and you even entered into that stem, you could not trace out anything. But at
that time I manifested My form from within.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead can be experienced only by His causeless mercy, not by
mental speculation or with the help of the material senses. Material senses cannot
approach the transcendental understanding of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He
can be appreciated only by submissive devotional service when He reveals Himself
before the devotee. Only by love of Godhead can one know God, and not otherwise.
The Personality of Godhead cannot be seen with the material eyes, but He can be seen
from within by spiritual eyes opened by the ointment of love of Godhead. As long as
one's spiritual eyes are closed due to the dirty covering of matter, one cannot see the
Lord. But when the dirt is removed by the process of devotional service, one can see the
Lord, without a doubt. Brahmä's personal endeavor to see the root of the lotus pipe
failed, but when the Lord was satisfied by his penance and devotion, He revealed
Himself from within with no external endeavor.
TEXT 38
YaÀk-QaaR(r) MaTSTaae}a& MaTk-Qaa>YaudYaaiªTaMa( )
YaÜa TaPaiSa Tae iNaïa Sa Wz MadNauGa]h" )) 38 ))
yac cakarthäìga mat-stotraà
mat-kathäbhyudayäìkitam
yad vä tapasi te niñöhä
sa eña mad-anugrahaù
SYNONYMS
yat—that which; cakartha—performed; aìga—O Brahmä; mat-stotram—prayers for Me;
mat-kathä—words regarding My activities; abhyudaya-aìkitam—enumerating My
transcendental glories; yat—or that; vä—either; tapasi—in penance; te—your; niñöhä—
faith; saù—that; eñaù—all these; mat—My; anugrahaù—causeless mercy.
417
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
O Brahmä, the prayers that you have chanted praising the glories of My transcendental
activities, the penances you have undertaken to understand Me, and your firm faith in
Me—all these are to be considered My causeless mercy.
PURPORT
When a living entity desires to serve the Lord in transcendental loving service, the Lord
helps the devotee in so many ways as the caitya-guru, or the spiritual master within, and
thus the devotee can perform many wonderful activities beyond material estimation. By
the mercy of the Lord even a layman can compose prayers of the highest spiritual
perfection. Such spiritual perfection is not limited by material qualifications but is
developed by dint of one's sincere endeavor to render transcendental service. Voluntary
endeavor is the only qualification for spiritual perfection. Material acquisitions of
wealth or education are not considered.
TEXT 39
Pa[qTaae_hMaSTau >ad]& Tae l/aek-aNaa& ivJaYaeC^Yaa )
YadSTaaEzqGauR<aMaYa& iNaGauR<a& MaaNauv<aRYaNa( )) 39 ))
préto 'ham astu bhadraà te
lokänäà vijayecchayä
yad astauñér guëamayaà
nirguëaà mänuvarëayan
SYNONYMS
prétaù—pleased; aham—Myself; astu—let it be so; bhadram—all benediction; te—unto
you; lokänäm—of the planets; vijaya—for glorification; icchayä—by your desire; yat—
that which; astauñéù—you prayed for; guëa-mayam—describing all transcendental
qualities; nirguëam—although I am free from all material qualities; mä—Me;
anuvarëayan—nicely describing.
TRANSLATION
418
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
I am very much pleased by your description of Me in terms of My transcendental
qualities, which appear mundane to the mundaners. I grant you all benedictions in your
desire to glorify all the planets by your activities.
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord like Brahmä and those in his line of disciplic succession
always desire that the Lord be known all over the universe by each and every one of the
living entities. That desire of the devotee is always blessed by the Lord. The
impersonalist sometimes prays for the mercy of the Personality of Godhead Näräyaëa as
the embodiment of material goodness, but such prayers do not satisfy the Lord because
He is not thereby glorified in terms of His actual transcendental qualities. The pure
devotees of the Lord are always most dear to Him, although He is always kind and
merciful to all living entities. Here the word guëamayam is significant because it
indicates the Lord's possessing transcendental qualities.
TEXT 40
Ya WTaeNa PauMaaiàTYa& STauTva STaae}ae<a Maa& >aJaeTa( )
TaSYaaéu SaMPa[SaqdeYa& SavRk-aMavreìr" )) 40 ))
ya etena pumän nityaà
stutvä stotreëa mäà bhajet
tasyäçu samprasédeyaà
sarva-käma-vareçvaraù
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; etena—by this; pumän—human being; nityam—regularly; stutvä—
praying; stotreëa—by the verses; mäm—Me; bhajet—may worship; tasya—his; äçu—
very soon; samprasédeyam—I shall fulfill; sarva—all; käma—desires; vara-éçvaraù—the
Lord of all benediction.
TRANSLATION
Any human being who prays like Brahmä, and who thus worships Me, shall very soon be
419
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
blessed with the fulfillment of all his desires, for I am the Lord of all benediction.
PURPORT
The prayers offered by Brahmä cannot be chanted by anyone who desires to fulfill his
own sense gratification. Such prayers can be selected only by a person who wants to
satisfy the Lord in His service. The Lord certainly fulfills all desires in regard to
transcendental loving service, but He cannot fulfill the whims of nondevotees, even
when such casual devotees offer Him the best of prayers.
TEXT 41
PaUTaeRNa TaPaSaa YajEdaRNaEYaaeRGaSaMaaiDaNaa )
raÖ& iNa"é[eYaSa& Pau&Saa& MaTPa[qiTaSTatvivNMaTaMa( )) 41 ))
pürtena tapasä yajïair
dänair yoga-samädhinä
räddhaà niùçreyasaà puàsäà
mat-prétis tattvavin-matam
SYNONYMS
pürtena—by traditional good work; tapasä—by penances; yajïaiù—by sacrifices;
dänaiù—by charities; yoga—by mysticism; samädhinä—by trance; räddham—success;
niùçreyasam—ultimately beneficial; puàsäm—of the human being; mat—of Me;
prétiù—satisfaction; tattva-vit—expert transcendentalist; matam—opinion.
TRANSLATION
It is the opinion of expert transcendentalists that the ultimate goal of performing all
traditional good works, penances, sacrifices, charities, mystic activities, trances, etc., is to
invoke My satisfaction.
PURPORT
There are many traditionally pious activities in human society, such as altruism,
420
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
philanthropy, nationalism, internationalism, charity, sacrifice, penance, and even
meditation in trance, and all of them can be fully beneficial only when they lead to the
satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The perfection of any activity—
social, political, religious or philanthropic—is to satisfy the Supreme Lord. This secret of
success is known to the devotee of the Lord, as exemplified by Arjuna on the Battlefield
of Kurukñetra. As a good, nonviolent man, Arjuna did not want to fight with his
kinsmen, but when he understood that Kåñëa wanted the fight and had arranged it at
Kurukñetra, he gave up his own satisfaction and fought for the satisfaction of the Lord.
That is the right decision for all intelligent men. One's only concern should be to satisfy
the Lord by one's activities. If the Lord is satisfied by an action, whatever it may be, then
it is successful. Otherwise, it is simply a waste of time. That is the standard of all
sacrifice, penance, austerity, mystic trance and other good and pious work.
TEXT 42
AhMaaTMaaTMaNaa& DaaTa" Pa[eï" SaNa( Pa[eYaSaaMaiPa )
ATaae MaiYa riTa& ku-YaaRÕehaidYaRTk*-Tae iPa[Ya" )) 42 ))
aham ätmätmanäà dhätaù
preñöhaù san preyasäm api
ato mayi ratià kuryäd
dehädir yat-kåte priyaù
SYNONYMS
aham—I am; ätmä—the Supersoul; ätmanäm—of all other souls; dhätaù—director;
preñöhaù—the dearest; san—being; preyasäm—of all dear things; api—certainly; ataù—
therefore; mayi—unto Me; ratim—attachment; kuryät—one should do; deha-ädiù—the
body and mind; yat-kåte—on whose account; priyaù—very dear.
TRANSLATION
I am the Supersoul of every individual. I am the supreme director and the dearest. People
are wrongly attached to the gross and subtle bodies, but they should be attached to Me
only.
421
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, is the dearest in both the conditioned
and liberated states. When a person does not know that the Lord is the only dearmost
object, then he is in the conditioned state of life, and when one knows perfectly well
that the Lord is the only dearmost object, he is considered to be liberated. There are
degrees of knowing one's relationship with the Lord, depending on the degree of
realization as to why the Supreme Lord is the dearmost object of every living being. The
real reason is clearly stated in Bhagavad-gétä (15.7). Mamaiväàço jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù
sanätanaù: the living entities are eternally parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. The
living entity is called the ätmä, and the Lord is called the Paramätmä. The living entity
is called Brahman, and the Lord is called the Parabrahman, or the Parameçvara. Éçvaraù
paramaù kåñëaù [Bs. 5.1]. The conditioned souls, who do not have self-realization, accept
the material body as the dearmost. The idea of the dearmost is then spread all over the
body, both concentrated and extended. The attachment for one's own body and its
extensions like children and relatives is actually developed on the basis of the real living
entity. As soon as the real living entity is out of the body, even the body of the most
dear son is no longer attractive. Therefore the living spark, or eternal part of the
Supreme, is the real basis of affection, and not the body. Because the living entities are
also parts of the whole living entity, that supreme living entity is the factual basis of
affection for all. One who has forgotten the basic principle of his love for everything has
only flickering love because he is in mäyä. The more one is affected by the principle of
mäyä, the more he is detached from the basic principle of love. One cannot factually
love anything unless he is fully developed in the loving service of the Lord.
In the present verse, stress is given to focusing love upon the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The word kuryät is significant here. This means "one must have it." It is just to
stress that we must have more and more attachment to the principle of love. The
influence of mäyä is experienced by the part and parcel spiritual entity, but it cannot
influence the Supersoul, the Paramätmä. The Mäyävädé philosophers, accepting the
influence of mäyä on the living entity, want to become one with the Paramätmä. But
because they have no actual love for Paramätmä, they remain ever entrapped by the
influence of mäyä and are unable to approach the vicinity of Paramätmä. This inability
is due to their lack of affection for the Paramätmä. A rich miser does not know how to
utilize his wealth, and therefore, in spite of his being very rich, his miserly behavior
keeps him everlastingly a poor man. On the other hand, a person who knows how to
utilize wealth can quickly become a rich man, even with a small credit balance.
422
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The eyes and the sun are very intimately related because without sunlight the eyes are
unable to see. But the other parts of the body, being attached to the sun as a source of
warmth, take more advantage of the sun than do the eyes. Without possessing affection
for the sun, the eyes cannot bear the rays of the sun; or, in other words, such eyes have
no capacity to understand the utility of the sun's rays. Similarly, the empiric
philosophers, despite their theoretical knowledge of Brahman, cannot utilize the mercy
of the Supreme Brahman because they lack affection. So many impersonal philosophers
remain everlastingly under the influence of mäyä Because, although they indulge in
theoretical knowledge of Brahman, they do not develop affection for Brahman nor do
they have any scope for development of affection because of their defective method. A
devotee of the sun-god, even though devoid of eyesight, can see the sun-god as he is
even from this planet, whereas one who is not a devotee of the sun cannot even bear the
glaring sunlight. Similarly, by devotional service, even though one is not on the level of
a jïäné, one can see the Personality of Godhead within himself due to his development
of pure love. In all circumstances one should try to develop love of Godhead, and that
will solve all contending problems.
TEXT 43
SavRvedMaYaeNaedMaaTMaNaaTMaaTMaYaaeiNaNaa )
Pa[Jaa" Sa*Ja YaQaaPaUv| Yaaê MaYYaNauXaerTae )) 43 ))
sarva-veda-mayenedam
ätmanätmätma-yoninä
prajäù såja yathä-pürvaà
yäç ca mayy anuçerate
SYNONYMS
sarva—all; veda-mayena—under complete Vedic wisdom; idam—this; ätmanä—by the
body; ätmä—you; ätma-yoninä—directly born of the Lord; prajäù—living entities;
såja—generate; yathä-pürvam—as it was hereinbefore; yäù—which; ca—also; mayi—in
Me; anuçerate—lie.
TRANSLATION
423
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
By following My instructions you can now generate the living entities as before, by dint
of your complete Vedic wisdom and the body you have directly received from Me, the
supreme cause of everything.
TEXT 44
MaE}aeYa ovac
TaSMaa Wv& JaGaTóí\e Pa[DaaNaPauåzeìr" )
VYaJYaed& SveNa æPae<a k-ÅNaa>aiSTaraedDae )) 44 ))
maitreya uväca
tasmä evaà jagat-srañöre
pradhäna-puruñeçvaraù
vyajyedaà svena rüpeëa
kaïja-näbhas tirodadhe
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—the sage Maitreya said; tasmai—unto him; evam—thus; jagat-srañöre—
unto the creator of the universe; pradhäna-puruña-éçvaraù—the primeval Lord, the
Personality of Godhead; vyajya idam—after instructing this; svena—in His person;
rüpeëa—by the form; kaïja-näbhaù—the Personality of Godhead Näräyaëa;
tirodadhe—disappeared.
TRANSLATION
The sage Maitreya said: After instructing Brahmä, the creator of the universe, to expand,
the primeval Lord, the Personality of Godhead in His personal form as Näräyaëa,
disappeared.
PURPORT
Before his activity in creating the universe, Brahmä saw the Lord. That is the
explanation of the catuù-çloké Bhägavatam [SB 2.9.33/34/35/36]. When the creation
awaited Brahmä's activity, Brahmä saw the Lord, and therefore the Lord existed in His
personal form before the creation. His eternal form is not created by the attempt of
424
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Brahmä, as imagined by less intelligent men. The Personality of Godhead appeared as
He is before Brahmä, and He disappeared from him in the same form, which is not
materially tinged.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Ninth Chapter, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "Brahmä's prayers for Creative Energy."
10. Divisions of the Creation
TEXT 1
ivdur ovac
ANTaihRTae >aGaviTa b]øa l/aek-iPaTaaMah" )
Pa[Jaa" SaSaJaR k-iTaDaa dEihk-IMaaRNaSaqivR>au" )) 1 ))
vidura uväca
antarhite bhagavati
brahmä loka-pitämahaù
prajäù sasarja katidhä
daihikér mänasér vibhuù
SYNONYMS
viduraù uväca—Çré Vidura said; antarhite—after the disappearance; bhagavati—of the
Personality of Godhead; brahmä—the first created living being; loka-pitämahaù—the
grandfather of all planetary inhabitants; prajäù—generations; sasarja—created;
katidhäù—how many; daihikéù—from his body; mänaséù—from his mind; vibhuù—the
great.
TRANSLATION
Çré Vidura said: O great sage, please let me know how Brahmä, the grandfather of the
425
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
planetary inhabitants, created the bodies of the living entities from his own body and
mind after the disappearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 2
Yae c Mae >aGavNa( Pa*íaSTvYYaQaaR bhuivtaMa )
TaaNa( vdSvaNauPaUVYaeR<a i^iNDa Na" SavRSa&XaYaaNa( )) 2 ))
ye ca me bhagavan påñöäs
tvayy arthä bahuvittama
tän vadasvänupürvyeëa
chindhi naù sarva-saàçayän
SYNONYMS
ye—all those; ca—also; me—by me; bhagavan—O powerful one; påñöäù—inquired;
tvayi—unto you; arthäù—purpose; bahu-vit-tama—O greatly learned one; tän—all of
them; vadasva—kindly describe; änupürvyeëa—from beginning to end; chindhi—kindly
eradicate; naù—my; sarva—all; saàçayän—doubts.
TRANSLATION
O greatly learned one, kindly eradicate all my doubts, and let me know of all that I have
inquired from you from the beginning to the end.
PURPORT
Vidura asked all relevant questions of Maitreya because he knew well that Maitreya was
the right person to reply to all the points of his inquiries. One must be confident about
the qualifications of his teacher; one should not approach a layman for replies to specific
spiritual inquiries. Such inquiries, when replied to with imaginative answers by the
teacher, are a program for wasting time.
TEXT 3
SaUTa ovac
426
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Wv& SaÄaeidTaSTaeNa +aT}aa k-aEzarivMauRiNa" )
Pa[qTa" Pa[TYaah TaaNa( Pa[énaNa( ôidSQaaNaQa >aaGaRv )) 3 ))
süta uväca
evaà saïcoditas tena
kñatträ kauñäravir muniù
prétaù pratyäha tän praçnän
hådi-sthän atha bhärgava
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; evam—thus; saïcoditaù—being enlivened; tena—
by him; kñatträ—by Vidura; kauñäraviù—the son of Kuñära; muniù—great sage; prétaù—
being pleased; pratyäha—replied; tän—those; praçnän—questions; hådi-sthän—from the
core of his heart; atha—thus; bhärgava—O son of Bhågu.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: O son of Bhågu, the great sage Maitreya Muni, thus hearing from
Vidura, felt very much enlivened. Everything was in his heart, and thus he began to reply
to the questions one after another.
PURPORT
The phrase süta uväca ("Süta Gosvämé said") appears to indicate a break in the discourse
between Mahäräja Parékñit and Çukadeva Gosvämé. While Çukadeva Gosvämé was
speaking to Mahäräja Parékñit, Süta Gosvämé was only one member of a large audience.
But Süta Gosvämé was speaking to the sages of Naimiñäraëya, headed by the sage
Çaunaka, a descendant of Çukadeva Gosvämé. This, however, does not make any
substantial difference in the topics under discussion.
TEXT 4
MaE}aeYa ovac
ivirÄae_iPa TaQaa c§e- idVYa& vzRXaTa& TaPa" )
427
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
AaTMaNYaaTMaaNaMaaveXYa YaQaah >aGavaNaJa" )) 4 ))
maitreya uväca
viriïco 'pi tathä cakre
divyaà varña-çataà tapaù
ätmany ätmänam äveçya
yathäha bhagavän ajaù
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—the great sage Maitreya said; viriïcaù—Brahmä; api—also; tathä—in
that manner; cakre—performed; divyam—celestial; varña-çatam—one hundred years;
tapaù—penances; ätmani—unto the Lord; ätmänam—his own self; äveçya—engaging;
yathä äha—as it was spoken; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; ajaù—the unborn.
TRANSLATION
The greatly learned sage Maitreya said: O Vidura, Brahmä thus engaged himself in
penances for one hundred celestial years, as advised by the Personality of Godhead, and
applied himself in devotional service to the Lord.
PURPORT
That Brahmä engaged himself for the Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, means that he
engaged himself in the service of the Lord; that is the highest penance one can perform
for any number of years. There is no retirement from such service, which is eternal and
ever encouraging.
TEXT 5
TaiÜl/aeKYaaBJaSaM>aUTaae vaYauNaa YadiDaiïTa" )
PaÚMaM>aê TaTk-al/k*-TavqYaeR<a k-iMPaTaMa( )) 5 ))
tad vilokyäbja-sambhüto
väyunä yad-adhiñöhitaù
padmam ambhaç ca tat-käla428
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kåta-véryeëa kampitam
SYNONYMS
tat vilokya—looking into that; abja-sambhütaù—whose source of birth was a lotus;
väyunä—by the air; yat—that; adhiñöhitaù—on which he was situated; padmam—lotus;
ambhaù—water; ca—also; tat-käla-kåta—which was effected by eternal time; véryeëa—
by its inherent force; kampitam—trembling.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter Brahmä saw that both the lotus on which he was situated and the water on
which the lotus was growing were trembling due to a strong, violent wind.
PURPORT
The material world is called illusory because it is a place of forgetfulness of the
transcendental service of the Lord. Thus one engaged in the the Lord's devotional
service in the material world may sometimes be very much disturbed by awkward
circumstances. There is a declaration of war between the two parties, the illusory energy
and the devotee, and sometimes the weak devotees fall victim to the onslaught of the
powerful illusory energy. Lord Brahmä, however, was sufficiently strong, by the causeless
mercy of the Lord, and he could not be victimized by the material energy, although it
gave him cause for anxiety when it managed to totter the existence of his position.
TEXT 6
TaPaSaa ùeDaMaaNaeNa ivÛYaa caTMaSa&SQaYaa )
ivv*ÖivjaNabl/ae NYaPaad( vaYau& SahaM>aSaa )) 6 ))
tapasä hy edhamänena
vidyayä cätma-saàsthayä
vivåddha-vijïäna-balo
nyapäd väyuà sahämbhasä
SYNONYMS
429
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tapasä—by penance; hi—certainly; edhamänena—increasing; vidyayä—by
transcendental knowledge; ca—also; ätma—self; saàsthayä—situated in the self;
vivåddha—matured; vijïäna—practical knowledge; balaù—power; nyapät—drank;
väyum—the wind; saha ambhasä—along with the water.
TRANSLATION
Long penance and transcendental knowledge of self-realization had matured Brahmä in
practical knowledge, and thus he drank the wind completely, along with the water.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä's struggle for existence is a personal example of the continued fight
between the living entities in the material world and the illusory energy called mäyä.
Beginning from Brahmä down to this age, the living entities are struggling with the
forces of material nature. By advanced knowledge in science and transcendental
realization, one can try to control the material energy, which works against our
endeavors, and in the modern age advanced material scientific knowledge and penance
have played very wonderful roles in controlling the powers of the material energy. Such
control of the material energy, however, can be most successfully carried out if one is a
soul surrendered unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead and carries out His order in
the spirit of loving transcendental service.
TEXT 7
TaiÜl/aeKYa ivYaÜyaiPa PauZk-r& YadiDaiïTaMa( )
ANaeNa l/aek-aNa( Pa[aGl/INaaNa( k-iLPaTaaSMaqTYaicNTaYaTa( )) 7 ))
tad vilokya viyad-vyäpi
puñkaraà yad-adhiñöhitam
anena lokän präg-lénän
kalpitäsméty acintayat
SYNONYMS
tat vilokya—looking into that; viyat-vyäpi—extensively widespread; puñkaram—the
430
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
lotus; yat—that which; adhiñöhitam—he was situated; anena—by this; lokän—all the
planets; präk-lénän—previously merged in dissolution; kalpitä asmi—I shall create; iti—
thus; acintayat—he thought.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter he saw that the lotus on which he was situated was spread throughout the
universe, and he contemplated how to create all the planets, which were previously
merged in that very same lotus.
PURPORT
The seeds of all the planets in the universe were impregnated in the lotus on which
Brahmä was situated. All the planets were already generated by the Lord, and all the
living entities were also born in Brahmä. The material world and the living entities were
all already generated in seedling forms by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
Brahmä was to disseminate the same seedlings all over the universe. The real creation is
therefore called sarga, and, later on, the manifestation by Brahmä is called visarga.
TEXT 8
PaÚk-aeXa& TadaivXYa >aGavTk-MaRcaeidTa" )
Wk&- VYa>aa¿qduåDaa i}aDaa >aaVYa& iÜSaáDaa )) 8 ))
padma-koçaà tadäviçya
bhagavat-karma-coditaù
ekaà vyabhäìkñéd urudhä
tridhä bhävyaà dvi-saptadhä
SYNONYMS
padma-koçam—the whorl of the lotus; tadä—then; äviçya—entering into; bhagavat—by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; karma—in activities; coditaù—being encouraged
by; ekam—one; vyabhäìkñét—divided into; urudhä—great division; tridhä—three
divisions; bhävyam—capable of further creation; dvi-saptadhä—fourteen divisions.
431
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Thus engaged in the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Brahmä
entered into the whorl of the lotus, and as it spread all over the universe he divided it into
three divisions of worlds and later into fourteen divisions.
TEXT 9
WTaavaÅqvl/aek-SYa Sa&SQaa>aed" SaMaaôTa" )
DaMaRSYa ùiNaiMataSYa ivPaak-" ParMaeïySaaE )) 9 ))
etäväï jéva-lokasya
saàsthä-bhedaù samähåtaù
dharmasya hy animittasya
vipäkaù parameñöhy asau
SYNONYMS
etävän—up to this; jéva-lokasya—of the planets inhabited by the living entities;
saàsthä-bhedaù—different situations of habitation; samähåtaù—performed completely;
dharmasya—of religion; hi—certainly; animittasya—of causelessness; vipäkaù—mature
stage; parameñöhé—the highest personality in the universe; asau—that.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä is the most exalted personality in the universe because of his causeless
devotional service unto the Lord in mature transcendental knowledge. He therefore
created all the fourteen planetary divisions for inhabitation by the different types of living
entities.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is the reservoir of all the qualities of the living entities. The
conditioned souls in the material world reflect only part of those qualities, and therefore
they are sometimes called pratibimbas. These pratibimba living entities, as parts and
parcels of the Supreme Lord, have inherited different proportions of His original
432
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
qualities, and in terms of their inheritance of these qualities, they appear as different
species of life and are accommodated in different planets according to the plan of
Brahmä. Brahmä is the creator of the three worlds, namely the lower planets, called the
Pätälalokas, the middle planets, called the Bhürlokas, and the upper planets, called the
Svarlokas. Still higher planets, such as Maharloka, Tapoloka, Satyaloka and Brahmaloka,
do not dissolve in the devastating water. This is because of the causeless devotional
service rendered unto the Lord by their inhabitants, whose existence continues up to
the end of dvi-parärdha time, when they are generally liberated from the chain of birth
and death in the material world.
TEXT 10
ivdur ovac
YaQaaTQa bhuæPaSYa hrerd(>auTak-MaR<a" )
k-al/a:Ya& l/+a<a& b]øNa( YaQaa v<aRYa Na" Pa[>aae )) 10 ))
vidura uväca
yathättha bahu-rüpasya
harer adbhuta-karmaëaù
käläkhyaà lakñaëaà brahman
yathä varëaya naù prabho
SYNONYMS
viduraù uväca—Vidura said; yathä—as; ättha—you have said; bahu-rüpasya—having
varieties of forms; hareù—of the Lord; adbhuta—wonderful; karmaëaù—of the actor;
käla—time; äkhyam—of the name; lakñaëam—symptoms; brahman—O learned
brähmaëa; yathä—as it is; varëaya—please describe; naù—unto us; prabho—O lord.
TRANSLATION
Vidura inquired from Maitreya: O my lord, O greatly learned sage, kindly describe
eternal time, which is another form of the Supreme Lord, the wonderful actor. What are
the symptoms of that eternal time? Please describe them to us in detail.
433
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The complete universe is a manifestation of varieties of entities, beginning from the
atoms up to the gigantic universe itself, and all is under the control of the Supreme Lord
in His form of käla, or eternal time. The controlling time has different dimensions in
relation to particular physical embodiments. There is a time for atomic dissolution and a
time for the universal dissolution. There is a time for the annihilation of the body of the
human being, and there is a time for the annihilation of the universal body. Also,
growth, development and resultant actions all depend on the time factor. Vidura wanted
to know in detail the different physical manifestations and their times of annihilation.
TEXT 11
MaE}aeYa ovac
Gau<aVYaiTak-rak-arae iNaivRXaezae_Pa[iTaiïTa" )
PauåzSTaduPaadaNaMaaTMaaNa& l/Il/YaaSa*JaTa( )) 11 ))
maitreya uväca
guëa-vyatikaräkäro
nirviçeño 'pratiñöhitaù
puruñas tad-upädänam
ätmänaà lélayäsåjat
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; guëa-vyatikara—of the interactions of the modes of
material nature; äkäraù—source; nirviçeñaù—without diversity; apratiñöhitaù—
unlimited; puruñaù—of the Supreme Person; tat—that; upädänam—instrument;
ätmänam—the material creation; lélayä—by pastimes; asåjat—created.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya said: Eternal time is the primeval source of the interactions of the three modes
of material nature. It is unchangeable and limitless, and it works as the instrument of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead for His pastimes in the material creation.
434
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The impersonal time factor is the background of the material manifestation as the
instrument of the Supreme Lord. It is the ingredient of assistance offered to material
nature. No one knows where time began and where it ends, and it is time only which
can keep a record of the creation, maintenance and destruction of the material
manifestation. This time factor is the material cause of creation and is therefore a self
expansion of the Personality of Godhead. Time is considered the impersonal feature of
the Lord.
The time factor is also explained by modern men in various ways. Some accept it almost
as it is explained in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. For example, in Hebrew literature time is
accepted, in the same spirit, as a representation of God. It is stated therein: "God, who at
sundry times and in diverse manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the
prophets...." Metaphysically, time is distinguished as absolute and real. Absolute time is
continuous and is unaffected by the speed or slowness of material things. Time is
astronomically and mathematically calculated in relation to the speed, change and life
of a particular object. Factually, however, time has nothing to do with the relativities of
things; rather, everything is shaped and calculated in terms of the facility offered by
time. Time is the basic measurement of the activity of our senses, by which we calculate
past, present and future; but in factual calculation, time has no beginning and no end.
Cäëakya Paëòita says that even a slight fraction of time cannot be purchased with
millions of dollars, and therefore even a moment of time lost without profit must be
calculated as the greatest loss in life. Time is not subject to any form of psychology, nor
are the moments objective realities in themselves, but they are dependent on particular
experiences.
Therefore, Çréla Jéva Gosvämé concludes that the time factor is intermixed with the
activities—actions and reactions—of the external energy of the Lord. The external
energy, or material nature, works under the superintendence of the time factor as the
Lord Himself, and that is why material nature appears to have produced so many
wonderful things in the cosmic manifestation. Bhagavad-gétä (9.10) confirms this
conclusion as follows:
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
435
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 12
ivì& vE b]øTaNMaa}a& Sa&iSQaTa& ivZ<auMaaYaYaa )
wRìre<a PairiC^à& k-ale/NaaVYa¢-MaUiTaRNaa )) 12 ))
viçvaà vai brahma-tan-mätraà
saàsthitaà viñëu-mäyayä
éçvareëa paricchinnaà
kälenävyakta-mürtinä
SYNONYMS
viçvam—the material phenomenon; vai—certainly; brahma—the Supreme; tatmätram—
the same as; saàsthitam—situated; viñëu-mäyayä—by the energy of Viñëu;
éçvareëa—by the Personality of Godhead; paricchinnam—separated; kälena—by the
eternal time; avyakta—unmanifested; mürtinä—by such a feature.
TRANSLATION
This cosmic manifestation is separated from the Supreme Lord as material energy by
means of käla, which is the unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Lord. It is situated as
the objective manifestation of the Lord under the influence of the same material energy of
Viñëu.
PURPORT
As stated previously by Närada before Vyäsadeva (SB 1.5.20), idaà hi viçvaà bhagavän
ivetaraù: this unmanifested world is the self-same Personality of Godhead, but it appears
to be something else beyond or besides the Lord. It appears so because of its being
separated from the Lord by means of käla. It is something like the tape-recorded voice of
a person who is now separated from the voice. As the tape recording is situated on the
tape, so the whole cosmic manifestation is situated on the material energy and appears
separate by means of käla. The material manifestation is therefore the objective
manifestation of the Supreme Lord and exhibits His impersonal feature so much adored
by impersonalist philosophers.
436
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 13
YaQaedaNaq& TaQaaGa]e c PaêadPYaeTadqd*XaMa( )) 13 ))
yathedänéà tathägre ca
paçcäd apy etad édåçam
SYNONYMS
yathä—as it is; idäném—at present; tathä—so it was; agre—in the beginning; ca—and;
paçcät—at the end; api—also; etat édåçam—it continues to be the same.
TRANSLATION
This cosmic manifestation is as it is now, it was the same in the past, and it will continue
in the same way in the future.
PURPORT
There is a systematic schedule for the perpetual manifestation, maintenance and
annihilation of the material world, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (9.8): bhüta-grämam imaà
kåtsnam avaçaà prakåter vaçät. As it is created now and as it will be destroyed later on,
so also it existed in the past and again will be created, maintained and destroyed in due
course of time. Therefore, the systematic activities of the time factor are perpetual and
eternal and cannot be stated to be false. The manifestation is temporary and occasional,
but it is not false as claimed by the Mäyävädé philosophers.
TEXT 14
SaGaaeR NavivDaSTaSYa Pa[ak*-Taae vEk*-TaSTau Ya" )
k-al/d]VYaGau<aErSYa i}aivDa" Pa[iTaSax(k]-Ma" )) 14 ))
sargo nava-vidhas tasya
präkåto vaikåtas tu yaù
käla-dravya-guëair asya
437
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tri-vidhaù pratisaìkramaù
SYNONYMS
sargaù—creation; nava-vidhaù—of nine different kinds; tasya—its; präkåtaù—material;
vaikåtaù—by the modes of material nature; tu—but; yaù—that which; käla—eternal
time; dravya—matter; guëaiù—qualities; asya—its; tri-vidhaù—three kinds;
pratisaìkramaù—annihilation.
TRANSLATION
There are nine different kinds of creations besides the one which naturally occurs due to
the interactions of the modes. There are three kinds of annihilations due to eternal time,
the material elements and the quality of one's work.
PURPORT
The scheduled creations and annihilations take place in terms of the supreme will.
There are other creations due to interactions of material elements which take place by
the intelligence of Brahmä. Later these will be more explicitly explained. At present,
only preliminary information is given. The three kinds of annihilations are (1) due to
the scheduled time of the annihilation of the entire universe, (2) due to a fire which
emanates from the mouth of Ananta, and (3) due to one's qualitative actions and
reactions.
TEXT 15
AaÛSTau MahTa" SaGaaeR Gau<avEzMYaMaaTMaNa" )
iÜTaqYaSTvhMaae Ya}a d]VYajaNai§-YaaedYa" )) 15 ))
ädyas tu mahataù sargo
guëa-vaiñamyam ätmanaù
dvitéyas tv ahamo yatra
dravya-jïäna-kriyodayaù
SYNONYMS
438
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ädyaù—the first; tu—but; mahataù—of the total emanation from the Lord; sargaù—
creation; guëa-vaiñamyam—interaction of the material modes; ätmanaù—of the
Supreme; dvitéyaù—the second; tu—but; ahamaù—false ego; yatra—wherein; dravya—
material ingredients; jïäna—material knowledge; kriyä-udayaù—awakening of activities
(work).
TRANSLATION
Of the nine creations, the first one is the creation of the mahat-tattva, or the sum total of
the material ingredients, wherein the modes interact due to the presence of the Supreme
Lord. In the second, the false ego is generated in which the material ingredients, material
knowledge and material activities arise.
PURPORT
The first emanation from the Supreme Lord for material creation is called the mahattattva.
The interaction of the material modes is the cause of false identification, or the
sense that a living being is made of material elements. This false ego is the cause of
identifying the body and mind with the soul proper. Material resources and the capacity
and knowledge to work are all generated in the second term of creation, after the mahattattva.
Jïäna indicates the senses which are sources of knowledge, and their controlling
deities. Work entails the working organs and their controlling deities. All these are
generated in the second creation.
TEXT 16
>aUTaSaGaRSTa*TaqYaSTau TaNMaa}aae d]VYaXai¢-MaaNa( )
cTauQaR WeiNd]Ya" SaGaaeR YaSTau jaNai§-YaaTMak-" )) 16 ))
bhüta-sargas tåtéyas tu
tan-mätro dravya-çaktimän
caturtha aindriyaù sargo
yas tu jïäna-kriyätmakaù
SYNONYMS
439
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bhüta-sargaù—creation of matter; tåtéyaù—is the third; tu—but; tat-mätraù—sense
perception; dravya—of the elements; çaktimän—generator; caturthaù—the fourth;
aindriyaù—in the matter of the senses; sargaù—creation; yaù—that which; tu—but;
jïäna—knowledge-acquiring; kriyä—working; ätmakaù—basically.
TRANSLATION
The sense perceptions are created in the third creation, and from these the elements are
generated. The fourth creation is the creation of knowledge and of working capacity.
TEXT 17
vEk-airk-ae devSaGaR" PaÄMaae YaNMaYa& MaNa" )
zïSTau TaMaSa" SaGaaeR YaSTvbuiÖk*-Ta" Pa[>aae" )) 17 ))
vaikäriko deva-sargaù
païcamo yan-mayaà manaù
ñañöhas tu tamasaù sargo
yas tv abuddhi-kåtaù prabhoù
SYNONYMS
vaikärikaù—interaction of the mode of goodness; deva—the demigods, or controlling
deities; sargaù—creation; païcamaù—fifth; yat—that which; mayam—sum total;
manaù—mind; ñañöhaù—sixth; tu—but; tamasaù—of darkness; sargaù—creation; yaù—
that which; tu—expletive; abuddhi-kåtaù—made foolish; prabhoù—of the master.
TRANSLATION
The fifth creation is that of the controlling deities by the interaction of the mode of
goodness, of which the mind is the sum total. The sixth creation is the ignorant darkness
of the living entity, by which the master acts as a fool.
PURPORT
The demigods in the higher planets are called devas because they are all devotees of Lord
440
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Viñëu. Viñëu-bhaktaù småto daiva äsuras tad-viparyayaù: all the devotees of Lord Viñëu
are devas, or demigods, whereas all others are asuras. That is the division of the devas
and the asuras. Devas are situated in the mode of goodness of material nature, whereas
the asuras are situated in the modes of passion or ignorance. The demigods, or
controlling deities, are entrusted with departmental management of all the different
functions of the material world. For example, one of our sense organs, the eye, is
controlled by light, light is distributed by the sun rays, and their controlling deity is the
sun. Similarly, mind is controlled by the moon. All other senses, both for working and
for acquiring knowledge, are controlled by the different demigods. The demigods are
assistants of the Lord in the management of material affairs.
After the creation of the demigods, all entities are covered by the darkness of ignorance.
Each and every living being in the material world is conditioned by his mentality of
lording it over the resources of material nature. Although a living entity is the master of
the material world, he is conditioned by ignorance, by the false impression of being the
proprietor of material things.
The energy of the Lord called avidyä is the bewildering factor of the conditioned souls.
The material nature is called avidyä, or ignorance, but to the devotees of the Lord
engaged in pure devotional service, this energy becomes vidyä, or pure knowledge. This
is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä. The energy of the Lord transforms from mahämäyä to
yogamäyä and appears to pure devotees in her real feature. The material nature
therefore appears to function in three phases: as the creative principle of the material
world, as ignorance and as knowledge. As disclosed in the previous verse, in the fourth
creation the power of knowledge is also created. The conditioned souls are not originally
fools, but by the influence of the avidyä function of material nature they are made fools,
and thus they are unable to utilize knowledge in the proper channel.
By the influence of darkness, the conditioned soul forgets his relationship with the
Supreme Lord and is overwhelmed by attachment, hatred, pride, ignorance and false
identification, the five kinds of illusion that cause material bondage.
TEXT 18
zi@Mae Pa[ak*-Taa" SaGaaR vEk*-TaaNaiPa Mae é*<au )
rJaae>aaJaae >aGavTaae l/Ile/Ya& hirMaeDaSa" )) 18 ))
ñaò ime präkåtäù sargä
441
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
vaikåtän api me çåëu
rajo-bhäjo bhagavato
léleyaà hari-medhasaù
SYNONYMS
ñaö—six; ime—all these; präkåtäù—of the material energy; sargäù—creations;
vaikåtän—secondary creations by Brahmä; api—also; me—from me; çåëu—just hear;
rajaù-bhäjaù—of the incarnation of the mode of passion (Brahmä); bhagavataù—of the
greatly powerful; lélä—pastime; iyam—this; hari—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
medhasaù—of one who has such a brain.
TRANSLATION
All the above are natural creations by the external energy of the Lord. Now hear from me
about the creations by Brahmä, who is an incarnation of the mode of passion and who, in
the matter of creation, has a brain like that of the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 19
SaáMaae Mau:YaSaGaRSTau ziÍDaSTaSQauza& c Ya" )
vNaSPaTYaaeziDal/TaaTvKSaara vqåDaae d]uMaa" )) 19 ))
saptamo mukhya-sargas tu
ñaò-vidhas tasthuñäà ca yaù
vanaspaty-oñadhi-latätvaksärä
vérudho drumäù
SYNONYMS
saptamaù—the seventh; mukhya—principle; sargaù—creation; tu—indeed; ñaö-vidhaù—
six kinds of; tasthuñäm—of those who do not move; ca—also; yaù—those; vanaspati—
fruit trees without flowers; oñadhi—trees and plants existing until the fruit is ripe;
latä—creepers; tvaksäräù—pipe plants; vérudhaù—creepers without support; drumäù—
trees with flowers and fruits.
442
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The seventh creation is that of the immovable entities, which are of six kinds: the fruit
trees without flowers, trees and plants which exist until the fruit is ripe, creepers, pipe
plants, creepers which have no support, and trees with flowers and fruits.
TEXT 20
oTóaeTaSaSTaMa"Pa[aYaa ANTa"SPaXaaR ivXaeiz<a" )) 20 ))
utsrotasas tamaù-präyä
antaù-sparçä viçeñiëaù
SYNONYMS
utsrotasaù—they seek their subsistence upwards; tamaù-präyäù—almost unconscious;
antaù-sparçäù—slightly feeling within; viçeñiëaù—with varieties of manifestation.
TRANSLATION
All the immovable trees and plants seek their subsistence upwards. They are almost
unconscious but have feelings of pain within. They are manifested in variegatedness.
TEXT 21
iTarêaMaíMa" SaGaR" Saae_íaiv&XaiÜDaae MaTa" )
Aivdae >aUirTaMaSaae ga]a<aja ôÛveidNa" )) 21 ))
tiraçcäm añöamaù sargaù
so 'ñöäviàçad-vidho mataù
avido bhüri-tamaso
ghräëa-jïä hådy avedinaù
SYNONYMS
tiraçcäm—species of lower animals; añöamaù—the eighth; sargaù—creation; saù—they
443
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
are; añöäviàçat—twenty-eight; vidhaù—varieties; mataù—considered; avidaù—without
knowledge of tomorrow; bhüri—extensively; tamasaù—ignorant; ghräëa-jïäù—can
know desirables by smell; hådi avedinaù—can remember very little in the heart.
TRANSLATION
The eighth creation is that of the lower species of life, and they are of different varieties,
numbering twenty-eight. They are all extensively foolish and ignorant. They know their
desirables by smell, but are unable to remember anything within the heart.
PURPORT
In the Vedas the symptoms of the lower animals are described as follows: athetareñäà
paçünäù açanäpipäse eväbhivijïänaà na vijïätaà vadanti na vijïätaà paçyanti na viduù
çvastanaà na lokälokäv iti; yad vä, bhüri-tamaso bahu-ruñaù ghräëenaiva jänanti hådyaà
prati svapriyaà vastv eva vindanti bhojana-çayanädy-arthaà gåhëanti. "Lower animals
have knowledge only of their hunger and thirst. They have no acquired knowledge, no
vision. Their behavior exhibits no dependence on formalities. Extensively ignorant,
they can know their desirables only by smell, and by such intelligence only can they
understand what is favorable and unfavorable. Their knowledge is concerned only with
eating and sleeping." Therefore, even the most ferocious lower animals, such as tigers,
can be tamed simply by regularly supplying meals and accommodations for sleeping.
Only snakes cannot be tamed by such an arrangement.
TEXT 22
GaaErJaae Maihz" k*-Z<a" SaUk-rae GavYaae åå" )
iÜXaf-a" PaXavêeMae Aivåí\ê SataMa )) 22 ))
gaur ajo mahiñaù kåñëaù
sükaro gavayo ruruù
dvi-çaphäù paçavaç ceme
avir uñöraç ca sattama
SYNONYMS
444
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
gauù—the cow; ajaù—the goat; mahiñaù—the buffalo; kåñëaù—a kind of stag;
sükaraù—hog; gavayaù—a species of animal; ruruù—deer; dvi-çaphäù—having two
hooves; paçavaù—animals; ca—also; ime—all these; aviù—lamb; uñöraù—camel; ca—
and; sattama—O purest.
TRANSLATION
O purest Vidura, of the lower animals the cow, goat, buffalo, kåñëa stag, hog, gavaya
animal, deer, lamb and camel all have two hooves.
TEXT 23
%rae_ìae_ìTarae GaaEr" Xar>aêMarq TaQaa )
WTae cEk-Xaf-a" +ata" é*<au PaÄNa%aNa( PaéUNa( )) 23 ))
kharo 'çvo 'çvataro gauraù
çarabhaç camaré tathä
ete caika-çaphäù kñattaù
çåëu païca-nakhän paçün
SYNONYMS
kharaù—ass; açvaù—horse; açvataraù—mule; gauraù—white deer; çarabhaù—bison;
camaré—wild cow; tathä—thus; ete—all these; ca—and; eka—only one; çaphäù—hoof;
kñattaù—O Vidura; çåëu—just hear now; païca—five; nakhän—nails; paçün—animals.
TRANSLATION
The horse, mule, ass, gaura, çarabha bison and wild cow all have only one hoof. Now you
may hear from me about the animals who have five nails.
TEXT 24
ìa Sa*Gaal/ae v*k-ae VYaaga]ae MaaJaaRr" XaXaXaçk-aE )
iSa&h" k-iPaGaRJa" kU-MaaeR GaaeDaa c Mak-radYa" )) 24 ))
445
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
çvä sågälo våko vyäghro
märjäraù çaça-çallakau
siàhaù kapir gajaù kürmo
godhä ca makarädayaù
SYNONYMS
çvä—dog; sågälaù—jackal; våkaù—fox; vyäghraù—tiger; märjäraù—cat; çaça—rabbit;
çallakau—sajäru (with thorns on the body); siàhaù—lion; kapiù—monkey; gajaù—
elephant; kürmaù—tortoise; godhä—gosäpa (snake with four legs); ca—also; makaraädayaù—
the alligator and others.
TRANSLATION
The dog, jackal, tiger, fox, cat, rabbit, sajäru, lion, monkey, elephant, tortoise, alligator,
gosäpa, etc., all have five nails in their claws. They are known as païca-nakhas, or
animals having five nails.
TEXT 25
k-ªGa*Da]bk-XYaeNa>aaSa>açUk-bihR<a" )
h&SaSaarSac§-aûk-ak-aelU/k-adYa" %Gaa" )) 25 ))
kaìka-gådhra-baka-çyenabhäsa-
bhallüka-barhiëaù
haàsa-särasa-cakrähvakäkolükädayaù
khagäù
SYNONYMS
kaìka—heron; gådhra—vulture; baka—crane; çyena—hawk; bhäsa—the bhäsa;
bhallüka—the bhallüka; barhiëaù—the peacock; haàsa—swan; särasa—the särasa;
cakrähva—the cakraväka; käka—crow; ulüka—owl; ädayaù—and others; khagäù—the
birds.
TRANSLATION
446
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The heron, vulture, crane, hawk, bhäsa, bhallüka, peacock, swan, särasa, cakraväka,
crow, owl and others are the birds.
TEXT 26
AvaRKóaeTaSTau NavMa" +atarek-ivDaae Na*<aaMa( )
rJaae_iDak-a" k-MaRPara du"%e c Sau%MaaiNaNa" )) 26 ))
arväk-srotas tu navamaù
kñattar eka-vidho nåëäm
rajo 'dhikäù karma-parä
duùkhe ca sukha-mäninaù
SYNONYMS
arväk—downwards; srotaù—passage of food; tu—but; navamaù—the ninth; kñattaù—O
Vidura; eka-vidhaù—one species; nåëäm—of human beings; rajaù—the mode of passion;
adhikäù—very prominent; karma-paräù—interested in working; duùkhe—in misery;
ca—but; sukha—happiness; mäninaù—thinking.
TRANSLATION
The creation of the human beings, who are of one species only and who stock their
eatables in the belly, is the ninth in the rotation. In the human race, the mode of passion
is very prominent. Humans are always busy in the midst of miserable life, but they think
themselves happy in all respects.
PURPORT
The human being is more passionate than the animals, and thus the sex life of the
human being is more irregular. The animals have their due time for sexual intercourse,
but the human being has no regular time for such activities. The human being is
endowed with a higher, advanced stage of consciousness for getting relief from the
existence of material miseries, but due to his ignorance he thinks that his higher
consciousness is meant for advancing in the material comforts of life. Thus his
intelligence is misused in the animal propensities—eating, sleeping, defending and
447
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mating—instead of spiritual realization. By advancing in material comforts the human
being puts himself into a more miserable condition, but, illusioned by the material
energy, he always thinks himself happy, even while in the midst of misery. Such misery
of human life is distinct from the natural comfortable life enjoyed even by the animals.
TEXT 27
vEk*-TaañYa WvETae devSaGaRê SataMa )
vEk-airk-STau Ya" Pa[ae¢-" k-aEMaarSTaU>aYaaTMak-" )) 27 ))
vaikåtäs traya evaite
deva-sargaç ca sattama
vaikärikas tu yaù proktaù
kaumäras tübhayätmakaù
SYNONYMS
vaikåtäù—creations of Brahmä; trayaù—three kinds; eva—certainly; ete—all these;
deva-sargaù—appearance of the demigods; ca—also; sattama—O good Vidura;
vaikärikaù—creation of demigods by nature; tu—but; yaù—which; proktaù—described
before; kaumäraù—the four Kumäras; tu—but; ubhaya-ätmakaù—both ways (namely
vaikåta and präkåta).
TRANSLATION
O good Vidura, these last three creations and the creation of demigods (the tenth
creation) are vaikåta creations, which are different from the previously described präkåta
(natural) creations. The appearance of the Kumäras is both.
TEXTS 28-29
devSaGaRêaíivDaae ivbuDaa" iPaTarae_Saura" )
GaNDavaRPSarSa" iSaÖa Ya+ar+aa&iSa car<aa" )) 28 ))
>aUTaPa[eTaiPaXaacaê ivÛaDa]a" ik-àradYa" )
dXaETae ivdura:YaaTaa" SaGaaRSTae ivìSa*Kk*-Taa" )) 29 ))
448
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
deva-sargaç cäñöa-vidho
vibudhäù pitaro 'suräù
gandharväpsarasaù siddhä
yakña-rakñäàsi cäraëäù
bhüta-preta-piçäcäç ca
vidyädhräù kinnarädayaù
daçaite viduräkhyätäù
sargäs te viçva-såk-kåtäù
SYNONYMS
deva-sargaù—creation of the demigods; ca—also; añöa-vidhaù—eight kinds; vibudhäù—
the demigods; pitaraù—the forefathers; asuräù—the demons; gandharva—the expert
artisans in the higher planets; apsarasaù—the angels; siddhäù—persons who are perfect
in mystic powers; yakña—the superprotectors; rakñäàsi—giants; cäraëäù—the celestial
singers; bhüta—jinn; preta—evil spirits; piçäcäù—attendant spirits; ca—also;
vidyädhräù—the celestial denizens named Vidyädharas; kinnara—superhuman beings;
ädayaù—and others; daça ete—all these ten (creations); vidura—O Vidura; äkhyätäù—
described; sargäù—creations; te—unto you; viçva-såk—the creator of the universe
(Brahmä); kåtäù—done by him.
TRANSLATION
The creation of the demigods is of eight varieties: (1) the demigods, (2) the forefathers,
(3) the asuras, or demons, (4) the Gandharvas and Apsaräs, or angels, (5) the Yakñas and
Räkñasas, (6) the Siddhas, Cäraëas and Vidyädharas, (7) the Bhütas, Pretas and Piçäcas,
and (8) the superhuman beings, celestial singers, etc. All are created by Brahmä, the
creator of the universe.
PURPORT
As explained in the Second Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the Siddhas are inhabitants
of Siddhaloka, where the residents travel in space without vehicles. At their mere will
they can pass from one planet to another without difficulty. Therefore, in the upper
planets the inhabitants are far superior to the inhabitants of this planet in all matters of
art, culture and science, since they possess brains superior to those of human beings. The
449
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
spirits and jinn mentioned in this connection are also counted among the demigods
because they are able to perform uncommon functions not possible for men.
TEXT 30
ATa" Par& Pa[v+YaaiMa v&XaaNMaNvNTarai<a c )
Wv& rJa"Plu/Ta" óía k-LPaaidZvaTMa>aUhRir" )
Sa*JaTYaMaaegaSaªLPa AaTMaEvaTMaaNaMaaTMaNaa )) 30 ))
ataù paraà pravakñyämi
vaàçän manvantaräëi ca
evaà rajaù-plutaù srañöä
kalpädiñv ätmabhür hariù
såjaty amogha-saìkalpa
ätmaivätmänam ätmanä
SYNONYMS
ataù—here; param—after; pravakñyämi—I shall explain; vaàçän—descendants;
manvantaräëi—different advents of Manus; ca—and; evam—thus; rajaù-plutaù—
infused with the mode of passion; srañöä—the creator; kalpa-ädiñu—in different
millenniums; ätma-bhüù—self-advent; hariù—the Personality of Godhead; såjati—
creates; amogha—unfailing; saìkalpaù—determination; ätmä eva—He Himself;
ätmänam—Himself; ätmanä—by His own energy.
TRANSLATION
Now I shall describe the descendants of the Manus. The creator, Brahmä, as the
incarnation of the passion mode of the Personality of Godhead, creates the universal
affairs with unfailing desires in every millennium by the force of the Lord's energy.
PURPORT
The cosmic manifestation is an expansion of one of the many energies of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; the creator and the created are both emanations of the same
Supreme Truth, as stated in the beginning of the Bhägavatam: janmädy asya yataù [SB
450
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
1.1.1].
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Tenth Chapter, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "Divisions of the Creation."
11. Calculation of Time, from the Atom
TEXT 1
MaE}aeYa ovac
crMa" SaiÜXaeza<aaMaNaek-ae_Sa&YauTa" Sada )
ParMaa<au" Sa ivjeYaae Na*<aaMaEKYa>a]Maae YaTa" )) 1 ))
maitreya uväca
caramaù sad-viçeñäëäm
aneko 'saàyutaù sadä
paramäëuù sa vijïeyo
nåëäm aikya-bhramo yataù
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; caramaù—ultimate; sat—effect; viçeñäëäm—
symptoms; anekaù—innumerable; asaàyutaù—unmixed; sadä—always; parama-aëuù—
atoms; saù—that; vijïeyaù—should be understood; nåëäm—of men; aikya—oneness;
bhramaù—mistaken; yataù—from which.
TRANSLATION
The material manifestation's ultimate particle, which is indivisible and not formed into a
body, is called the atom. It exists always as an invisible identity, even after the dissolution
of all forms. The material body is but a combination of such atoms, but it is
451
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
misunderstood by the common man.
PURPORT
The atomic description of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam is almost the same as the modern
science of atomism, and this is further described in the Paramäëu-väda of Kaëäda. In
modern science also, the atom is accepted as the ultimate indivisible particle of which
the universe is composed. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the full text of all descriptions of
knowledge, including the theory of atomism. The atom is the minute subtle form of
eternal time.
TEXT 2
SaTa Wv PadaQaRSYa SvæPaaviSQaTaSYa YaTa( )
kE-vLYa& ParMaMahaNaivXaezae iNarNTar" )) 2 ))
sata eva padärthasya
svarüpävasthitasya yat
kaivalyaà parama-mahän
aviçeño nirantaraù
SYNONYMS
sataù—of the effective manifestation; eva—certainly; pada-arthasya—of physical
bodies; svarüpa-avasthitasya—staying in the same form even to the time of dissolution;
yat—that which; kaivalyam—oneness; parama—the supreme; mahän—unlimited;
aviçeñaù—forms; nirantaraù—eternally.
TRANSLATION
Atoms are the ultimate state of the manifest universe. When they stay in their own forms
without forming different bodies, they are called the unlimited oneness. There are
certainly different bodies in physical forms, but the atoms themselves form the complete
manifestation.
TEXT 3
452
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Wv& k-al/ae_PYaNauiMaTa" SaaE+MYae SQaaELYae c SataMa )
Sa&SQaaNa>au¢-ya >aGavaNaVYa¢-ae VYa¢->auiGv>au" )) 3 ))
evaà kälo 'py anumitaù
saukñmye sthaulye ca sattama
saàsthäna-bhuktyä bhagavän
avyakto vyakta-bhug vibhuù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; kälaù—time; api—also; anumitaù—measured; saukñmye—in the subtle;
sthaulye—in the gross forms; ca—also; sattama—O best; saàsthäna—combinations of
the atoms; bhuktyä—by the motion; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
avyaktaù—unmanifested; vyakta-bhuk—controlling all physical movement; vibhuù—the
great potential.
TRANSLATION
One can estimate time by measuring the movement of the atomic combination of bodies.
Time is the potency of the almighty Personality of Godhead, Hari, who controls all
physical movement although He is not visible in the physical world.
TEXT 4
Sa k-al/" ParMaa<auvOE Yaae >au»e ParMaa<auTaaMa( )
SaTaae_ivXaez>auGYaSTau Sa k-al/" ParMaae MahaNa( )) 4 ))
sa kälaù paramäëur vai
yo bhuìkte paramäëutäm
sato 'viçeña-bhug yas tu
sa kälaù paramo mahän
SYNONYMS
saù—that; kälaù—eternal time; parama-aëuù—atomic; vai—certainly; yaù—which;
453
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bhuìkte—passes through; parama-aëutäm—the space of an atom; sataù—of the entire
aggregate; aviçeña-bhuk—passing through the nondual exhibition; yaù tu—which; saù—
that; kälaù—time; paramaù—the supreme; mahän—the great.
TRANSLATION
Atomic time is measured according to its covering a particular atomic space. That time
which covers the unmanifest aggregate of atoms is called the great time.
PURPORT
Time and space are two correlative terms. Time is measured in terms of its covering a
certain space of atoms. Standard time is calculated in terms of the movement of the sun.
The time covered by the sun in passing over an atom is calculated as atomic time. The
greatest time of all covers the entire existence of the nondual manifestation. All the
planets rotate and cover space, and space is calculated in terms of atoms. Each planet
has its particular orbit for rotating, in which it moves without deviation, and similarly
the sun has its orbit. The complete calculation of the time of creation, maintenance and
dissolution, measured in terms of the circulation of the total planetary systems until the
end of creation, is known as the supreme käla.
TEXT 5
A<auÜaOE ParMaa<aU SYaaT}aSare<auñYa" SMa*Ta" )
Jaal/akR-rXMYavGaTa" %MaevaNauPaTaàGaaTa( )) 5 ))
aëur dvau paramäëü syät
trasareëus trayaù småtaù
jälärka-raçmy-avagataù
kham evänupatann agät
SYNONYMS
aëuù—double atom; dvau—two; parama-aëu—atoms; syät—become; trasareëuù—
hexatom; trayaù—three; småtaù—considered; jäla-arka—of sunshine through the holes
of a window screen; raçmi—by the rays; avagataù—can be known; kham eva—towards
454
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the sky; anupatan agät—going up.
TRANSLATION
The division of gross time is calculated as follows: two atoms make one double atom, and
three double atoms make one hexatom. This hexatom is visible in the sunshine which
enters through the holes of a window screen. One can clearly see that the hexatom goes
up towards the sky.
PURPORT
The atom is described as an invisible particle, but when six such atoms combine
together, they are called a trasareëu, and this is visible in the sunshine pouring through
the holes of a window screen.
TEXT 6
}aSare<aui}ak&- >au»e Ya" k-al/" Sa }aui$=" SMa*Ta" )
XaTa>aaGaSTau veDa" SYaataEiñi>aSTau l/v" SMa*Ta" )) 6 ))
trasareëu-trikaà bhuìkte
yaù kälaù sa truöiù småtaù
çata-bhägas tu vedhaù syät
tais tribhis tu lavaù småtaù
SYNONYMS
trasareëu-trikam—combination of three hexatoms; bhuìkte—as they take time to
integrate; yaù—that which; kälaù—duration of time; saù—that; truöiù—by the name
truöi; småtaù—is called; çata-bhägaù—one hundred truöis; tu—but; vedhaù—called a
vedha; syät—it so happens; taiù—by them; tribhiù—three times; tu—but; lavaù—lava;
småtaù—so called.
TRANSLATION
The time duration needed for the integration of three trasareëus is called a truöi, and one
455
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
hundred truöis make one vedha. Three vedhas make one lava.
PURPORT
It is calculated that if a second is divided into 1687.5 parts, each part is the duration of a
truöi, which is the time occupied in the integration of eighteen atomic particles. Such a
combination of atoms into different bodies creates the calculation of material time. The
sun is the central point for calculating all different durations.
TEXT 7
iNaMaeziñl/vae jeYa AaManaTaSTae }aYa" +a<a" )
+a<aaNa( PaÄ ivdu" k-aïa& l/gau Taa dXa PaÄ c )) 7 ))
nimeñas tri-lavo jïeya
ämnätas te trayaù kñaëaù
kñaëän païca viduù käñöhäà
laghu tä daça païca ca
SYNONYMS
nimeñaù—the duration of time called a nimeña; tri-lavaù—the duration of three lavas;
jïeyaù—is to be known; ämnätaù—it is so called; te—they; trayaù—three; kñaëaù—the
duration of time called a kñaëa; kñaëän—such kñaëas; païca—five; viduù—one should
understand; käñöhäm—the duration of time called a käñöhä; laghu—the duration of time
called a laghu; täù—those; daça païca—fifteen; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The duration of time of three lavas is equal to one nimeña, the combination of three
nimeñas makes one kñaëa, five kñaëas combined together make one käñöhä, and fifteen
käñöhäs make one laghu.
PURPORT
By calculation it is found that one laghu is equal to two minutes. The atomic calculation
456
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of time in terms of Vedic wisdom may be converted into present time with this
understanding.
TEXT 8
l/gaUiNa vE SaMaaManaTaa dXa PaÄ c Naai@k-a )
Tae Üe MauhUTaR" Pa[hr" z@yaaMa" Saá va Na*<aaMa( )) 8 ))
laghüni vai samämnätä
daça païca ca näòikä
te dve muhürtaù praharaù
ñaò yämaù sapta vä nåëäm
SYNONYMS
laghüni—such laghus (each of two minutes); vai—exactly; samämnätä—is called; daça
païca—fifteen; ca—also; näòikä—a näòikä; te—of them; dve—two; muhürtaù—a
moment; praharaù—three hours; ñaö—six; yämaù—one fourth of a day or night; sapta—
seven; vä—or; nåëäm—of human calculation.
TRANSLATION
Fifteen laghus make one näòikä, which is also called a daëòa. Two daëòas make one
muhürta, and six or seven daëòas make one fourth of a day or night, according to human
calculation.
TEXT 9
ÜadXaaDaRPal/aeNMaaNa& cTaui>aRêTaurx(GaulE/" )
Sv<aRMaazE" k*-TaiC^d]& YaavTPa[SQaJal/Plu/TaMa( )) 9 ))
dvädaçärdha-palonmänaà
caturbhiç catur-aìgulaiù
svarëa-mäñaiù kåta-cchidraà
yävat prastha-jala-plutam
457
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
dvädaça-ardha—six; pala—of the scale of weight; unmänam—measuring pot;
caturbhiù—by weight of four; catuù-aìgulaiù—four fingers by measure; svarëa—of gold;
mäñaiù—of the weight; kåta-chidram—making a hole; yävat—as long as; prastha—
measuring one prastha; jala-plutam—filled by water.
TRANSLATION
The measuring pot for one näòikä, or daëòa, can be prepared with a six-pala-weight
[fourteen ounce] pot of copper, in which a hole is bored with a gold probe weighing four
mäña and measuring four fingers long. When the pot is placed on water, the time before
the water overflows in the pot is called one daëòa.
PURPORT
It is advised herein that the bore in the copper measuring pot must be made with a probe
weighing not more than four mäña and measuring not longer than four fingers. This
regulates the diameter of the hole. The pot is submerged in water, and the overflooding
time is called a daëòa. This is another way of measuring the duration of a daëòa, just as
time is measured by sand in a glass. It appears that in the days of Vedic civilization there
was no dearth of knowledge in physics, chemistry or higher mathematics. Measurements
were calculated in different ways, as simply as could be done.
TEXT 10
YaaMaaêTvarêTvarae MaTYaaRNaaMahNaq o>ae )
Pa+a" PaÄdXaahaiNa éu(c)-" k*-Z<aê MaaNad )) 10 ))
yämäç catväraç catväro
martyänäm ahané ubhe
pakñaù païca-daçähäni
çuklaù kåñëaç ca mänada
SYNONYMS
yämäù—three hours; catväraù—four; catväraù—and four; martyänäm—of the human
458
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
beings; ahané—duration of day; ubhe—both day and night; pakñaù—fortnight; païcadaça—
fifteen; ahäni—days; çuklaù—white; kåñëaù—black; ca—also; mänada—
measured.
TRANSLATION
It is calculated that there are four praharas, which are also called yämas, in the day and
four in the night of the human being. Similarly, fifteen days and nights are a fortnight,
and there are two fortnights, white and black, in a month.
TEXT 11
TaYaae" SaMauÀYaae MaaSa" iPaTa›<aa& TadhiNaRXaMa( )
ÜaE Taav*Tau" z@YaNa& di+a<a& caetar& idiv )) 11 ))
tayoù samuccayo mäsaù
pitèëäà tad ahar-niçam
dvau täv åtuù ñaò ayanaà
dakñiëaà cottaraà divi
SYNONYMS
tayoù—of them; samuccayaù—aggregate; mäsaù—month; pitèëäm—of the Pitä planets;
tat—that (month); ahaù-niçam—day and night; dvau—two; tau—months; åtuù—a
season; ñaö—six; ayanam—the movement of the sun in six months; dakñiëam—
southern; ca—also; uttaram—northern; divi—in the heavens.
TRANSLATION
The aggregate of two fortnights is one month, and that period is one complete day and
night for the Pitä planets. Two of such months comprise one season, and six months
comprise one complete movement of the sun from south to north.
TEXT 12
459
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
AYaNae cahNaq Pa[ahuvRTSarae ÜadXa SMa*Ta" )
Sa&vTSarXaTa& Na›<aa& ParMaaYauiNaRæiPaTaMa( )) 12 ))
ayane cähané prähur
vatsaro dvädaça småtaù
saàvatsara-çataà nèëäà
paramäyur nirüpitam
SYNONYMS
ayane—in the solar movement (of six months); ca—and; ahané—a day of the demigods;
prähuù—it is said; vatsaraù—one calendar year; dvädaça—twelve months; småtaù—is so
called; saàvatsara-çatam—one hundred years; nèëäm—of human beings; paramaäyuù—
duration of life; nirüpitam—is estimated.
TRANSLATION
Two solar movements make one day and night of the demigods, and that combination of
day and night is one complete calendar year for the human being. The human being has a
duration of life of one hundred years.
TEXT 13
Ga]h+aRTaarac§-SQa" ParMaa<vaidNaa JaGaTa( )
Sa&vTSaravSaaNaeNa PaYaeRTYaiNaiMazae iv>au" )) 13 ))
graharkña-tärä-cakra-sthaù
paramäëv-ädinä jagat
saàvatsarävasänena
paryety animiño vibhuù
SYNONYMS
graha—influential planets like the moon; åkña—luminaries like Açviné; tärä—stars;
cakra-sthaù—in the orbit; parama-aëu-ädinä—along with the atoms; jagat—the entire
universe; saàvatsara-avasänena—by the end of one year; paryeti—completes its orbit;
460
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
animiñaù—the eternal time; vibhuù—the Almighty.
TRANSLATION
Influential stars, planets, luminaries and atoms all over the universe are rotating in their
respective orbits under the direction of the Supreme, represented by eternal käla.
PURPORT
In the Brahma-saàhitä it is stated that the sun is the eye of the Supreme and it rotates
in its particular orbit of time. Similarly, beginning from the sun down to the atom, all
bodies are under the influence of the käla-cakra, or the orbit of eternal time, and each
of them has a scheduled orbital time of one saàvatsara.
TEXT 14
Sa&vTSar" PairvTSar w@avTSar Wv c )
ANauvTSarae vTSarê ivdurEv& Pa[>aaZYaTae )) 14 ))
saàvatsaraù parivatsara
iòä-vatsara eva ca
anuvatsaro vatsaraç ca
viduraivaà prabhäñyate
SYNONYMS
saàvatsaraù—orbit of the sun; parivatsaraù—circumambulation of Båhaspati; iòävatsaraù—
orbit of the stars; eva—as they are; ca—also; anuvatsaraù—orbit of the moon;
vatsaraù—one calendar year; ca—also; vidura—O Vidura; evam—thus; prabhäñyate—
they are so told.
TRANSLATION
There are five different names for the orbits of the sun, moon, stars and luminaries in the
firmament, and they each have their own saàvatsara.
461
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The subject matters of physics, chemistry, mathematics, astronomy, time and space dealt
with in the above verses of Çrémad-Bhägavatam are certainly very interesting to students
of the particular subject, but as far as we are concerned, we cannot explain them very
thoroughly in terms of technical knowledge. The subject is summarized by the statement
that above all the different branches of knowledge is the supreme control of käla, the
plenary representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Nothing exists without
Him, and therefore everything, however wonderful it may appear to our meager
knowledge, is but the work of the magical wand of the Supreme Lord. As far as time is
concerned, we beg to subjoin herewith a table of timings in terms of the modern clock.
One truöi - 8/13,500 second
One vedha - 8/135 second
One lava - 8/45 second
One nimeña - 8/15 second
One kñaëa - 8/5 second
One käñöhä - 8 seconds
One laghu - 2 minutes
One daëòa - 30 minutes
One prahara - 3 hours
One day - 12 hours
One night - 12 hours
One pakña - 15 days
Two pakñas comprise one month, and twelve months comprise one calendar year, or one
full orbit of the sun. A human being is expected to live up to one hundred years. That is
the way of the controlling measure of eternal time.
The Brahma-saàhitä (5.52) affirms this control in this way:
yac-cakñur eña savitä sakala-grahäëäà
räjä samasta-sura-mürtir açeña-tejäù
yasyäjïayä bhramati saàbhåta-käla-cakro
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, under
whose control even the sun, which is considered to be the eye of the Lord, rotates within
the fixed orbit of eternal time. The sun is the king of all planetary systems and has
462
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
unlimited potency in heat and light."
TEXT 15
Ya" Sa*JYaXai¢-MauåDaaeC^(vSaYaNa( SvXa¢-ya
Pau&Saae_>a]MaaYa idiv DaaviTa >aUTa>aed" )
k-al/a:YaYaa Gau<aMaYa& §-Taui>aivRTaNv&‚
STaSMaE bil&/ hrTa vTSarPaÄk-aYa )) 15 ))
yaù såjya-çaktim urudhocchvasayan sva-çaktyä
puàso 'bhramäya divi dhävati bhüta-bhedaù
käläkhyayä guëamayaà kratubhir vitanvaàs
tasmai balià harata vatsara-païcakäya
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; såjya—of creation; çaktim—the seeds; urudhä—in various ways;
ucchvasayan—invigorating; sva-çaktyä—by his own energy; puàsaù—of the living
entity; abhramäya—to dissipate darkness; divi—during the daytime; dhävati—moves;
bhüta-bhedaù—distinct from all other material form; käla-äkhyayä—by the name
eternal time; guëa-mayam—the material results; kratubhiù—by offerings; vitanvan—
enlarging; tasmai—unto him; balim—ingredients of offerings; harata—one should offer;
vatsara-païcakäya—offerings every five years.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, the sun enlivens all living entities with his unlimited heat and light. He
diminishes the duration of life of all living entities in order to release them from their
illusion of material attachment, and he enlarges the path of elevation to the heavenly
kingdom. He thus moves in the firmament with great velocity, and therefore everyone
should offer him respects once every five years with all ingredients of worship.
TEXT 16
ivdur ovac
463
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
iPaTa*devMaNauZYaa<aaMaaYau" PariMad& SMa*TaMa( )
Pareza& GaiTaMaac+v Yae SYau" k-LPaad( bihivRd" )) 16 ))
vidura uväca
pitå-deva-manuñyäëäm
äyuù param idaà småtam
pareñäà gatim äcakñva
ye syuù kalpäd bahir vidaù
SYNONYMS
viduraù uväca—Vidura said; pitå—the Pitä planets; deva—the heavenly planets;
manuñyäëäm—and that of the human beings; äyuù—duration of life; param—final;
idam—in their own measurement; småtam—calculated; pareñäm—of the superior living
entities; gatim—duration of life; äcakñva—kindly calculate; ye—all those who; syuù—
are; kalpät—from the millennium; bahiù—outside; vidaù—greatly learned.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: I now understand the life durations of the residents of the Pitä planets and
heavenly planets as well as that of the human beings. Now kindly inform me of the
durations of life of those greatly learned living entities who are beyond the range of a
kalpa.
PURPORT
The partial dissolution of the universe that takes place at the end of Brahmä's day does
not affect all the planetary systems. The planets of highly learned living entities like the
sages Sanaka and Bhågu are not affected by the dissolutions of the millenniums. All the
planets are of different types, and each is controlled by a different käla-cakra, or
schedule of eternal time. The time of the earth planet is not applicable to other, more
elevated planets. Therefore, Vidura herein inquires about the duration of life on other
planets.
TEXT 17
464
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
>aGavaNa( ved k-al/SYa GaiTa& >aGavTaae NaNau )
ivì& ivc+aTae Daqra YaaeGaraÖeNa c+auza )) 17 ))
bhagavän veda kälasya
gatià bhagavato nanu
viçvaà vicakñate dhérä
yoga-räddhena cakñuñä
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—O spiritually powerful one; veda—you know; kälasya—of the eternal time;
gatim—movements; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nanu—as a
matter of course; viçvam—the whole universe; vicakñate—see; dhéräù—those who are
self-realized; yoga-räddhena—by dint of mystic vision; cakñuñä—by the eyes.
TRANSLATION
O spiritually powerful one, you can understand the movements of eternal time, which is
the controlling form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because you are a selfrealized
person, you can see everything by the power of mystic vision.
PURPORT
Those who have reached the highest perfectional stage of mystic power and can see
everything in the past, present and future are called tri-käla-jïas. Similarly, the devotees
of the Lord can see everything clearly that is in the revealed scriptures. The devotees of
Lord Çré Kåñëa can very easily understand the science of Kåñëa, as well as the situation
of the material and spiritual creations, without difficulty. Devotees do not have to
endeavor for any yoga-siddhi, or perfection in mystic powers. They are competent to
understand everything by the grace of the Lord, who is sitting in everyone's heart.
TEXT 18
MaE}aeYa ovac
k*-Ta& }aeTaa ÜaPar& c k-il/êeiTa cTauYauRGaMa( )
465
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
idVYaEÜaRdXai>avRzOE" SaavDaaNa& iNaæiPaTaMa( )) 18 ))
maitreya uväca
kåtaà tretä dväparaà ca
kaliç ceti catur-yugam
divyair dvädaçabhir varñaiù
sävadhänaà nirüpitam
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; kåtam—the age of Satya; tretä—the age of Tretä;
dväparam—the age of Dväpara; ca—also; kaliù—the age of Kali; ca—and; iti—thus;
catuù-yugam—four millenniums; divyaiù—of the demigods; dvädaçabhiù—twelve;
varñaiù—thousands of years; sa-avadhänam—approximately; nirüpitam—ascertained.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya said: O Vidura, the four millenniums are called the Satya, Tretä, Dväpara and
Kali yugas. The aggregate number of years of all of these combined is equal to twelve
thousand years of the demigods.
PURPORT
The years of the demigods are equal to 360 years of humankind. As will be clarified in
the subsequent verses, 12,000 of the demigods' years, including the transitional periods
which are called yuga-sandhyäs, comprise the total of the aforementioned four
millenniums. Thus the aggregate of the above-mentioned four millenniums is 4,320,000
years.
TEXT 19
cTvair }aqi<a Üe cEk&- k*-Taaidzu YaQaa§-MaMa( )
Sa&:YaaTaaiNa Sahóai<a iÜGau<aaiNa XaTaaiNa c )) 19 ))
catväri tréëi dve caikaà
kåtädiñu yathä-kramam
466
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
saìkhyätäni sahasräëi
dvi-guëäni çatäni ca
SYNONYMS
catväri—four; tréëi—three; dve—two; ca—also; ekam—one; kåta-ädiñu—in the Satyayuga;
yathä-kramam—and subsequently others; saìkhyätäni—numbering; sahasräëi—
thousands; dvi-guëäni—twice; çatäni—hundreds; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The duration of the Satya millennium equals 4,800 years of the years of the demigods;
the duration of the Treta millennium equals 3600 years of the demigods; the duration of
the Dväpara millennium equals 2,400 years; and that of the Kali millennium is 1,200
years of the demigods.
PURPORT
As aforementioned, one year of the demigods is equal to 360 years of the human beings.
The duration of the Satya-yuga is therefore 4,800 x 360, or 1,728,000 years. The duration
of the Tretä-yuga is 3,600 x 360, or 1,296,000 years. The duration of the Dväpara-yuga is
2,400 x 360, or 864,000 years. And the last, the Kali-yuga, is 1,200 x 360, or 432,000
years.
TEXT 20
SaNDYaaSaNDYaa&XaYaaerNTaYaR" k-al/" XaTaSa&:YaYaae" )
TaMaevahuYauRGa& TaJja Ya}a DaMaaeR ivDaqYaTae )) 20 ))
sandhyä-sandhyäàçayor antar
yaù kälaù çata-saìkhyayoù
tam evähur yugaà taj-jïä
yatra dharmo vidhéyate
SYNONYMS
sandhyä—transitional period before; sandhyä-aàçayoù—and transitional period after;
467
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
antaù—within; yaù—that which; kälaù—duration of time; çata-saìkhyayoù—hundreds
of years; tam eva—that period; ähuù—they call; yugam—millennium; tat-jïäù—the
expert astronomers; yatra—wherein; dharmaù—religion; vidhéyate—is performed.
TRANSLATION
The transitional periods before and after every millennium, which are a few hundred
years as aforementioned, are known as yuga-sandhyäs, or the conjunctions of two
millenniums, according to the expert astronomers. In those periods all kinds of religious
activities are performed.
TEXT 21
DaMaRêTauZPaaNMaNauJaaNa( k*-Tae SaMaNauvTaRTae )
Sa WvaNYaeZvDaMaeR<a VYaeiTa PaadeNa vDaRTaa )) 21 ))
dharmaç catuñ-pän manujän
kåte samanuvartate
sa evänyeñv adharmeëa
vyeti pädena vardhatä
SYNONYMS
dharmaù—religion; catuù-pät—complete four dimensions; manujän—mankind; kåte—in
the Satya-yuga; samanuvartate—properly maintained; saù—that; eva—certainly;
anyeñu—in other; adharmeëa—by the influence of irreligion; vyeti—declined; pädena—
by one part; vardhatä—gradually increasing proportionately.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, in the Satya millennium mankind properly and completely maintained the
principles of religion, but in other millenniums religion gradually decreased by one part as
irreligion was proportionately admitted.
PURPORT
468
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
In the Satya millennium, complete execution of religious principles prevailed.
Gradually, the principles of religion decreased by one part in each of the subsequent
millenniums. In other words, at present there is one part religion and three parts
irreligion. Therefore people in this age are not very happy.
TEXT 22
i}al/aeKYaa YauGaSaahó& bihrab]ø<aae idNaMa( )
TaavTYaev iNaXaa TaaTa YaiàMaql/iTa ivìSa*k(- )) 22 ))
tri-lokyä yuga-sähasraà
bahir äbrahmaëo dinam
tävaty eva niçä täta
yan nimélati viçva-såk
SYNONYMS
tri-lokyäù—of the three worlds; yuga—the four yugas; sähasram—one thousand;
bahiù—outside of; äbrahmaëaù—up to Brahmaloka; dinam—is a day; tävaté—a similar
(period); eva—certainly; niçä—is night; täta—O dear one; yat—because; nimélati—goes
to sleep; viçva-såk—Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
Outside of the three planetary systems [Svarga, Martya and Pätäla], the four yugas
multiplied by one thousand comprise one day on the planet of Brahmä. A similar period
comprises a night of Brahmä, in which the creator of the universe goes to sleep.
PURPORT
When Brahmä goes to sleep in his nighttime, the three planetary systems below
Brahmaloka are all submerged in the water of devastation. In his sleeping condition,
Brahmä dreams about the Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and takes instruction from the Lord
for the rehabilitation of the devastated area of space.
TEXT 23
469
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
iNaXaavSaaNa AarBDaae l/aek-k-LPaae_NauvTaRTae )
YaaviÕNa& >aGavTaae MaNaUNa( >auÅ&êTaudRXa )) 23 ))
niçävasäna ärabdho
loka-kalpo 'nuvartate
yävad dinaà bhagavato
manün bhuïjaàç catur-daça
SYNONYMS
niçä—night; avasäne—termination; ärabdhaù—beginning from; loka-kalpaù—further
creation of the three worlds; anuvartate—follows; yävat—until; dinam—the daytime;
bhagavataù—of the lord (Brahmä); manün—the Manus; bhuïjan—existing through;
catuù-daça—fourteen.
TRANSLATION
After the end of Brahmä's night, the creation of the three worlds begins again in the
daytime of Brahmä, and they continue to exist through the life durations of fourteen
consecutive Manus, or fathers of mankind.
PURPORT
At the end of the life of each Manu there are shorter dissolutions also.
TEXT 24
Sv& Sv& k-al&/ MaNau>auR»e SaaiDak-a& ùek-SaáiTaMa( )) 24 ))
svaà svaà kälaà manur bhuìkte
sädhikäà hy eka-saptatim
SYNONYMS
svam—own; svam—accordingly; kälam—duration of life; manuù—Manu; bhuìkte—
enjoys; sa-adhikäm—a little more than; hi—certainly; eka-saptatim—seventy-one.
470
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Each and every Manu enjoys a life of a little more than seventy-one sets of four
millenniums.
PURPORT
The duration of life of a Manu comprises seventy-one sets of four millenniums, as
described in the Viñëu Puräëa. The duration of life of one Manu is about 852,000 years
in the calculation of the demigods, or, in the calculation of human beings, 306,720,000
years.
TEXT 25
MaNvNTarezu MaNavSTaÜ&XYaa ‰zYa" Saura" )
>aviNTa cEv YauGaPaTSaureXaaêaNau Yae c TaaNa( )) 25 ))
manvantareñu manavas
tad-vaàçyä åñayaù suräù
bhavanti caiva yugapat
sureçäç cänu ye ca tän
SYNONYMS
manu-antareñu—after the dissolution of each and every Manu; manavaù—other Manus;
tat-vaàçyäù—and their descendants; åñayaù—the seven famous sages; suräù—devotees
of the Lord; bhavanti—flourish; ca eva—also all of them; yugapat—simultaneously; suraéçäù—
demigods like Indra; ca—and; anu—followers; ye—all; ca—also; tän—them.
TRANSLATION
After the dissolution of each and every Manu, the next Manu comes in order, along with
his descendants, who rule over the different planets; but the seven famous sages, and
demigods like Indra and their followers, such as the Gandharvas, all appear
simultaneously with Manu.
471
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
There are fourteen Manus in one day of Brahmä, and each of them has different
descendants.
TEXT 26
Wz dENaiNdNa" SaGaaeR b]aøñEl/aeKYavTaRNa" )
iTaYaRx(Na*iPaTa*devaNaa& SaM>avae Ya}a k-MaRi>a" )) 26 ))
eña dainan-dinaù sargo
brähmas trailokya-vartanaù
tiryaì-nå-pitå-devänäà
sambhavo yatra karmabhiù
SYNONYMS
eñaù—all these creations; dainam-dinaù—daily; sargaù—creation; brähmaù—in terms of
the days of Brahmä; trailokya-vartanaù—revolution of the three worlds; tiryak—animals
lower than the human beings; nå—human beings; pitå—of the Pitä planets; devänäm—
of the demigods; sambhavaù—appearance; yatra—wherein; karmabhiù—in the cycle of
fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
In the creation, during Brahmä's day, the three planetary systems—Svarga, Martya and
Pätäla—revolve, and the inhabitants, including the lower animals, human beings,
demigods and Pitäs, appear and disappear in terms of their fruitive activities.
TEXT 27
MaNvNTarezu >aGavaNa( ib>a]TSatv& SvMaUiTaRi>a" )
MaNvaidi>aird& ivìMavTYauidTaPaaEåz" )) 27 ))
manvantareñu bhagavän
bibhrat sattvaà sva-mürtibhiù
472
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
manv-ädibhir idaà viçvam
avaty udita-pauruñaù
SYNONYMS
manu-antareñu—in each change of Manu; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
bibhrat—manifesting; sattvam—His internal potency; sva-mürtibhiù—by His different
incarnations; manu-ädibhiù—as Manus; idam—this; viçvam—the universe; avati—
maintains; udita—discovering; pauruñaù—divine potencies.
TRANSLATION
In each and every change of Manu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears by
manifesting His internal potency in different incarnations, as Manu and others. Thus He
maintains the universe by discovered power.
TEXT 28
TaMaaeMaa}aaMauPaadaYa Pa[iTaSa&åÖiv§-Ma" )
k-ale/NaaNauGaTaaXaez AaSTae TaUZ<aq& idNaaTYaYae )) 28 ))
tamo-mäträm upädäya
pratisaàruddha-vikramaù
kälenänugatäçeña
äste tüñëéà dinätyaye
SYNONYMS
tamaù—the mode of ignorance, or the darkness of night; mäträm—an insignificant
portion only; upädäya—accepting; pratisaàruddha-vikramaù—suspending all power of
manifestation; kälena—by means of the eternal käla; anugata—merged in; açeñaù—
innumerable living entities; äste—remains; tüñëém—silent; dina-atyaye—at the end of
the day.
TRANSLATION
473
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
At the end of the day, under the insignificant portion of the mode of darkness, the
powerful manifestation of the universe merges in the darkness of night. By the influence
of eternal time, the innumerable living entities remain merged in that dissolution, and
everything is silent.
PURPORT
This verse is an explanation of the night of Brahmä, which is the effect of the influence
of time in touch with an insignificant portion of the modes of material nature in
darkness. The dissolution of the three worlds is effected by the incarnation of darkness,
Rudra, represented by the fire of eternal time which blazes over the three worlds. These
three worlds are known as Bhüù, Bhuvaù and Svaù (Pätäla, Martya and Svarga). The
innumerable living entities merge into that dissolution, which appears to be the
dropping of the curtain of the scene of the Supreme Lord's energy, and so everything
becomes silent.
TEXT 29
TaMaevaNviPaDaqYaNTae l/aek-a >aUradYañYa" )
iNaXaaYaaMaNauv*taaYaa& iNaMauR¢-XaiXa>aaSk-rMa( )) 29 ))
tam evänv api dhéyante
lokä bhür-ädayas trayaù
niçäyäm anuvåttäyäà
nirmukta-çaçi-bhäskaram
SYNONYMS
tam—that; eva—certainly; anu—after; api dhéyante—are out of sight; lokäù—the
planets; bhüù-ädayaù—the three worlds, Bhüù, Bhuvaù and Svaù; trayaù—three;
niçäyäm—in the night; anuvåttäyäm—ordinary; nirmukta—without glare; çaçi—the
moon; bhäskaram—the sun.
TRANSLATION
When the night of Brahmä ensues, all the three worlds are out of sight, and the sun and
474
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the moon are without glare, just as in the due course of an ordinary night.
PURPORT
It is understood that the glare of the sun and moon disappear from the sphere of the
three worlds, but the sun and the moon themselves do not vanish. They appear in the
remaining portion of the universe, which is beyond the sphere of the three worlds. The
portion in dissolution remains without sunrays or moonglow. It all remains dark and full
of water, and there are indefatigable winds, as explained in the following verses.
TEXT 30
i}al/aeKYaa& dùMaaNaaYaa& Xa¢-ya SaªzR<aaiGanNaa )
YaaNTYaUZMa<aa Mahl/aeRk-aÂNa& >a*GvadYaae_idRTaa" )) 30 ))
tri-lokyäà dahyamänäyäà
çaktyä saìkarñaëägninä
yänty üñmaëä maharlokäj
janaà bhågv-ädayo 'rditäù
SYNONYMS
tri-lokyäm—when the spheres of the three worlds; dahyamänäyäm—being set ablaze;
çaktyä—by the potency; saìkarñaëa—from the mouth of Saìkarñaëa; agninä—by the
fire; yänti—they go; üñmaëä—heated by the warmth; mahaù-lokät—from Maharloka;
janam—to Janaloka; bhågu—the sage Bhågu; ädayaù—and others; arditäù—being so
distressed.
TRANSLATION
The devastation takes place due to the fire emanating from the mouth of Saìkarñaëa, and
thus great sages like Bhågu and other inhabitants of Maharloka transport themselves to
Janaloka, being distressed by the warmth of the blazing fire which rages through the three
worlds below.
TEXT 31
475
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TaaviT}a>auvNa& SaÛ" k-LPaaNTaEiDaTaiSaNDav" )
âavYaNTYauTk-$=a$=aePac<@vaTaeirTaaeMaRYa" )) 31 ))
tävat tri-bhuvanaà sadyaù
kalpäntaidhita-sindhavaù
plävayanty utkaöäöopacaëòa-
väteritormayaù
SYNONYMS
tävat—then; tri-bhuvanam—all the three worlds; sadyaù—immediately after; kalpaanta—
in the beginning of the devastation; edhita—inflated; sindhavaù—all the oceans;
plävayanti—inundate; utkaöa—violent; äöopa—agitation; caëòa—hurricane; väta—by
winds; érita—blown; ürmayaù—waves.
TRANSLATION
At the beginning of the devastation all the seas overflow, and hurricane winds blow very
violently. Thus the waves of the seas become ferocious, and in no time at all the three
worlds are full of water.
PURPORT
It is said that the blazing fire from the mouth of Saìkarñaëa rages for one hundred years
of the demigods, or 36,000 human years. Then for another 36,000 years there are
torrents of rain, accompanied by violent winds and waves, and the seas and oceans
overflow. These reactions of 72,000 years are the beginning of the partial devastation of
the three worlds. People forget all these devastations of the worlds and think themselves
happy in the material progress of civilization. This is called mäyä, or "that which is not."
TEXT 32
ANTa" Sa TaiSMaNa( Sail/l/ AaSTae_NaNTaaSaNaae hir" )
YaaeGaiNad]aiNaMaql/a+a" STaUYaMaaNaae JaNaal/YaE" )) 32 ))
476
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
antaù sa tasmin salila
äste 'nantäsano hariù
yoga-nidrä-niméläkñaù
stüyamäno janälayaiù
SYNONYMS
antaù—within; saù—that; tasmin—in that; salile—water; äste—there is; ananta—
Ananta; äsanaù—on the seat of; hariù—the Lord; yoga—mystic; nidrä—sleep; nimélaakñaù—
eyes closed; stüya-mänaù—being glorified; jana-älayaiù—by the inhabitants of
the Janaloka planets.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, lies down in the water on the seat of
Ananta, with His eyes closed, and the inhabitants of the Janaloka planets offer their
glorious prayers unto the Lord with folded hands.
PURPORT
We should not understand the sleeping condition of the Lord to be the same as our
sleep. Here the word yoga-nidrä is specifically mentioned, which indicates that the
Lord's sleeping condition is also a manifestation of His internal potency. Whenever the
word yoga is used it should be understood to refer to that which is transcendental. In the
transcendental stage all activities are always present, and they are glorified by prayers of
great sages like Bhågu.
TEXT 33
Wv&ivDaErhaera}aE" k-al/GaTYaaePal/i+aTaE" )
APai+aTaiMavaSYaaiPa ParMaaYauvRYa"XaTaMa( )) 33 ))
evaà-vidhair aho-rätraiù
käla-gatyopalakñitaiù
apakñitam iväsyäpi
paramäyur vayaù-çatam
477
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; vidhaiù—by the process of; ahaù—days; rätraiù—by nights; käla-gatyä—
advancement of time; upalakñitaiù—by such symptoms; apakñitam—declined; iva—just
like; asya—his; api—although; parama-äyuù—duration of life; vayaù—years; çatam—
one hundred.
TRANSLATION
Thus the process of the exhaustion of the duration of life exists for every one of the
living beings, including Lord Brahmä. One's life endures for only one hundred years, in
terms of the times in the different planets.
PURPORT
Every living being lives for one hundred years in terms of the times in different planets
for different entities. These one hundred years of life are not equal in every case. The
longest duration of one hundred years belongs to Brahmä, but although the life of
Brahmä is very long, it expires in the course of time. Brahmä is also afraid of his death,
and thus he performs devotional service to the Lord, just to release himself from the
clutches of illusory energy. Animals, of course, have no sense of responsibility, but even
humans, who have developed a sense of responsibility, while away their valuable time
without engaging in devotional service to the Lord; they live merrily, unafraid of
impending death. This is the madness of human society. The madman has no
responsibility in life. Similarly, a human being who does not develop a sense of
responsibility before he dies is no better than the madman who tries to enjoy material
life very happily without concern for the future. It is necessary that every human being
be responsible in preparing himself for the next life, even if he has a duration of life like
that of Brahmä, the greatest of all living creatures within the universe.
TEXT 34
YadDaRMaaYauzSTaSYa ParaDaRMai>aDaqYaTae )
PaUvR" ParaDaaeR_Pa§-aNTaae ùParae_Û Pa[vTaRTae )) 34 ))
yad ardham äyuñas tasya
478
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
parärdham abhidhéyate
pürvaù parärdho 'pakränto
hy aparo 'dya pravartate
SYNONYMS
yat—that which; ardham—half; äyuñaù—of the duration of life; tasya—his;
parärdham—a parärdha; abhidhéyate—is called; pürvaù—the former; para-ardhaù—half
of the duration of life; apakräntaù—having passed; hi—certainly; aparaù—the latter;
adya—in this millennium; pravartate—shall begin.
TRANSLATION
The one hundred years of Brahmä's life are divided into two parts, the first half and the
second half. The first half of the duration of Brahmä's life is already over, and the second
half is now current.
PURPORT
The duration of one hundred years in the life of Brahmä has already been discussed in
many places in this work, and it is described in Bhagavad-gétä (8.17) also. Fifty years of
the life of Brahmä are already over, and fifty years are yet to be completed; then, for
Brahmä also, death is inevitable.
TEXT 35
PaUvRSYaadaE ParaDaRSYa b]aøae NaaMa MahaNa>aUTa( )
k-LPaae Ya}aa>avd(b]øa XaBdb]øeiTa Ya& ivdu" )) 35 ))
pürvasyädau parärdhasya
brähmo näma mahän abhüt
kalpo yaträbhavad brahmä
çabda-brahmeti yaà viduù
SYNONYMS
pürvasya—of the first half; ädau—in the beginning; para-ardhasya—of the superior
479
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
half; brähmaù—Brähma-kalpa; näma—of the name; mahän—very great; abhüt—was
manifest; kalpaù—millennium; yatra—whereupon; abhavat—appeared; brahmä—Lord
Brahmä; çabda-brahma iti—the sounds of the Vedas; yam—which; viduù—they know.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning of the first half of Brahmä's life, there was a millennium called Brähmakalpa,
wherein Lord Brahmä appeared. The birth of the Vedas was simultaneous with
Brahmä's birth.
PURPORT
According to Padma Puräëa (Prabhäsa-khaëòa), in thirty days of Brahmä many kalpas
take place, such as the Varäha-kalpa and Pitå-kalpa. Thirty days make one month of
Brahmä, beginning from the full moon to the disappearance of the moon. Twelve such
months complete one year, and fifty years complete one parärdha, or one half the
duration of the life of Brahmä. The Çveta-varäha appearance of the Lord is the first
birthday of Brahmä. The birth date of Brahmä is in the month of March, according to
Hindu astronomical calculation. This statement is reproduced from the explanation of
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura.
TEXT 36
TaSYaEv caNTae k-LPaae_>aUd( Ya& PaaÚMai>ac+aTae )
YaÖreNaaRi>aSarSa AaSaqçaek-SaraeåhMa( )) 36 ))
tasyaiva cänte kalpo 'bhüd
yaà pädmam abhicakñate
yad dharer näbhi-sarasa
äsél loka-saroruham
SYNONYMS
tasya—of the Brähma-kalpa; eva—certainly; ca—also; ante—at the end of; kalpaù—
millennium; abhüt—came into existence; yam—which; pädmam—Pädma; abhicakñate—
is called; yat—in which; hareù—of the Personality of Godhead; näbhi—in the navel;
480
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sarasaù—from the reservoir of water; äsét—there was; loka—of the universe;
saroruham—lotus.
TRANSLATION
The millennium which followed the first Brähma millennium is known as the Pädmakalpa
because in that millennium the universal lotus flower grew out of the navel
reservoir of water of the Personality of Godhead, Hari.
PURPORT
The millennium following the Brähma-kalpa is known as the Pädma-kalpa because the
universal lotus grows in that millennium. The Pädma-kalpa is also called the Pitå-kalpa
in certain Puräëas.
TEXT 37
AYa& Tau k-iQaTa" k-LPaae iÜTaqYaSYaaiPa >aarTa )
varah wiTa iv:YaaTaae Ya}aaSaqC^Uk-rae hir" )) 37 ))
ayaà tu kathitaù kalpo
dvitéyasyäpi bhärata
väräha iti vikhyäto
yaträséc chükaro hariù
SYNONYMS
ayam—this; tu—but; kathitaù—known as; kalpaù—the current millennium;
dvitéyasya—of the second half; api—certainly; bhärata—O descendant of Bharata;
värähaù—Väräha; iti—thus; vikhyätaù—is celebrated; yatra—in which; äsét—appeared;
çükaraù—hog shape; hariù—the Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
O descendant of Bharata, the first millennium in the second half of the life of Brahmä is
also known as the Väräha millennium because the Personality of Godhead appeared in
481
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
that millennium as the hog incarnation.
PURPORT
The different millenniums known as the Brähma, Pädma and Väräha kalpas appear a
little puzzling for the layman. There are some scholars who think these kalpas to be one
and the same. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté, the Brähma-kalpa in the
beginning of the first half appears to be the Pädma-kalpa. We can, however, simply
abide by the text and understand that the present millennium is in the second half of
the duration of the life of Brahmä.
TEXT 38
k-al/ae_Ya& iÜParaDaaR:Yaae iNaMaez oPacYaRTae )
AVYaak*-TaSYaaNaNTaSYa ùNaadeJaRGadaTMaNa" )) 38 ))
kälo 'yaà dvi-parärdhäkhyo
nimeña upacaryate
avyäkåtasyänantasya
hy anäder jagad-ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
kälaù—eternal time; ayam—this (as measured by Brahmä's duration of life); dviparärdha-
äkhyaù—measured by the two halves of Brahmä's life; nimeñaù—less than a
second; upacaryate—is so measured; avyäkåtasya—of one who is unchanged;
anantasya—of the unlimited; hi—certainly; anädeù—of the beginningless; jagatätmanaù—
of the soul of the universe.
TRANSLATION
The duration of the two parts of Brahmä's life, as above mentioned, is calculated to be
equal to one nimeña [less than a second] for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
unchanging and unlimited and is the cause of all causes of the universe.
PURPORT
482
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The great sage Maitreya has given a considerable description of the time of different
dimensions, beginning from the atom up to the duration of the life of Brahmä. Now he
attempts to give some idea of the time of the unlimited Personality of Godhead. He just
gives a hint of His unlimited time by the standard of the life of Brahmä. The entire
duration of the life of Brahmä is calculated to be less than a second of the Lord's time,
and it is explained in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.48) as follows:
yasyaika-niçvasita-kälam athävalambya
jévanti loma-vilajä jagad-aëòa-näthäù
viñëur mahän sa iha yasya kalä-viçeño
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship Govinda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes, whose
plenary portion is Mahä-Viñëu. All the heads of the innumerable universes [the
Brahmäs] live only by taking shelter of the time occupied by one of His breaths." The
impersonalists do not believe in the form of the Lord, and thus they would hardly
believe in the Lord's sleeping. Their idea is obtained by a poor fund of knowledge; they
calculate everything in terms of man's capacity. They think that the existence of the
Supreme is just the opposite of active human existence; because the human being has
senses, the Supreme must be without sense perception; because the human being has a
form, the Supreme must be formless; and because the human being sleeps, the Supreme
must not sleep. Çrémad-Bhägavatam, however, does not agree with such impersonalists. It
is clearly stated herein that the Supreme Lord rests in yoga-nidrä, as previously
discussed. And because He sleeps, naturally He must breathe, and the Brahma-saàhitä
confirms that within His breathing period innumerable Brahmäs take birth and die.
There is complete agreement between Çrémad-Bhägavatam and the Brahma-saàhitä.
Eternal time is never lost along with the life of Brahmä. It continues, but it has no
ability to control the Supreme Personality of Godhead because the Lord is the controller
of time. In the spiritual world there is undoubtedly time, but it has no control over
activities. Time is unlimited, and the spiritual world is also unlimited, since everything
there exists on the absolute plane.
TEXT 39
k-al/ae_Ya& ParMaa<vaidiÜRParaDaaRNTa wRìr" )
NaEveiXaTau& Pa[>au>aURMan wRìrae DaaMaMaaiNaNaaMa( )) 39 ))
483
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kälo 'yaà paramäëv-ädir
dvi-parärdhänta éçvaraù
naiveçituà prabhur bhümna
éçvaro dhäma-mäninäm
SYNONYMS
kälaù—the eternal time; ayam—this; parama-aëu—atom; ädiù—beginning from; dviparärdha—
two superdurations of time; antaù—to the end; éçvaraù—controller; na—
never; eva—certainly; éçitum—to control; prabhuù—capable; bhümnaù—of the
Supreme; éçvaraù—controller; dhäma-mäninäm—of those who are body conscious.
TRANSLATION
Eternal time is certainly the controller of different dimensions, from that of the atom up
to the superdivisions of the duration of Brahmä's life; but, nevertheless, it is controlled
by the Supreme. Time can control only those who are body conscious, even up to the
Satyaloka or the other higher planets of the universe.
TEXT 40
ivk-arE" SaihTaae Yau¢E-ivRXaezaidi>arav*Ta" )
Aa<@k-aeXaae bihrYa& PaÄaXaTk-aei$=ivSTa*Ta" )) 40 ))
vikäraiù sahito yuktair
viçeñädibhir ävåtaù
äëòakoço bahir ayaà
païcäçat-koöi-viståtaù
SYNONYMS
vikäraiù—by the transformation of the elements; sahitaù—along with; yuktaiù—being
so amalgamated; viçeña—manifestations; ädibhiù—by them; ävåtaù—covered; äëòakoçaù—
the universe; bahiù—outside; ayam—this; païcäçat—fifty; koöi—ten million;
viståtaù—widespread.
484
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
This phenomenal material world is expanded to a diameter of four billion miles, as a
combination of eight material elements transformed into sixteen further categories,
within and without, as follows.
PURPORT
As explained before, the entire material world is a display of sixteen diversities and eight
material elements. The analytical studies of the material world are the subject matter of
Säìkhya philosophy. The first sixteen diversities are the eleven senses and five sense
objects, and the eight elements are the gross and subtle matter, namely earth, water, fire,
air, sky, mind, intelligence and ego. All these combined together are distributed
throughout the entire universe, which extends diametrically to four billion miles.
Besides this universe of our experience, there are innumerable other universes. Some of
them are bigger than the present one, and all of them are clustered together under
similar material elements as described below.
TEXT 41
dXaaetaraiDakE-YaR}a Pa[iví" ParMaa<auvTa( )
l/+YaTae_NTaGaRTaaêaNYae k-aei$=Xaae ù<@raXaYa" )) 41 ))
daçottarädhikair yatra
praviñöaù paramäëuvat
lakñyate 'ntar-gatäç cänye
koöiço hy aëòa-räçayaù
SYNONYMS
daça-uttara-adhikaiù—with ten times greater thickness; yatra—in which; praviñöaù—
entered; parama-aëu-vat—like atoms; lakñyate—it (the mass of universes) appears;
antaù-gatäù—come together; ca—and; anye—in the other; koöiçaù—clustered; hi—for;
aëòa-räçayaù—huge combination of universes.
TRANSLATION
485
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The layers or elements covering the universes are each ten times thicker than the one
before, and all the universes clustered together appear like atoms in a huge combination.
PURPORT
The coverings of the universes are also constituted of the elements of earth, water, fire,
air and ether, and each is ten times thicker than the one before. The first covering of
the universe is earth, and it is ten times thicker than the universe itself. If the universe
is four billion miles in size, then the size of the earthly covering of the universe is four
billion times ten. The covering of water is ten times greater than the earthly covering,
the covering of fire is ten times greater than the watery covering, the covering of air is
ten times greater than that of the fire, the covering of ether is ten times greater still
than that of air, and so on. The universe within the coverings of matter appears to be
like an atom in comparison to the coverings, and the number of universes is unknown
even to those who can estimate the coverings of the universes.
TEXT 42
Tadahur+ar& b]ø SavRk-ar<ak-ar<aMa( )
ivZ<aaeDaaRMa Par& Saa+aaTPauåzSYa MahaTMaNa" )) 42 ))
tad ähur akñaraà brahma
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
viñëor dhäma paraà säkñät
puruñasya mahätmanaù
SYNONYMS
tat—that; ähuù—is said; akñaram—infallible; brahma—the supreme; sarva-käraëa—all
causes; käraëam—the supreme cause; viñëoù dhäma—the spiritual abode of Viñëu;
param—the supreme; säkñät—without doubt; puruñasya—of the puruña incarnation;
mahätmanaù—of the Mahä-Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, is therefore said to be the original cause
486
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of all causes. Thus the spiritual abode of Viñëu is eternal without a doubt, and it is also
the abode of Mahä-Viñëu, the origin of all manifestations.
PURPORT
Lord Mahä-Viñëu, who is resting in yoga-nidrä on the Causal Ocean and creating
innumerable universes by His breathing process, only temporarily appears in the mahattattva
for the temporary manifestation of the material worlds. He is a plenary portion of
Lord Çré Kåñëa, and thus although He is nondifferent from Lord Kåñëa, His formal
appearance in the material world as an incarnation is temporary. The original form of
the Personality of Godhead is actually the svarüpa, or real form, and He eternally resides
in the Vaikuëöha world (Viñëuloka). The word mahätmanaù is used here to indicate
Mahä-Viñëu, and His real manifestation is Lord Kåñëa, who is called parama, as
confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä:
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
[Bs. 5.1]
"The Supreme Lord is Kåñëa, the original Personality of Godhead known as Govinda.
His form is eternal, full of bliss and knowledge, and He is the original cause of all
causes."
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Eleventh Chapter, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "Calculation of Time, From the Atom."
12. Creation of the Kumäras and Others
TEXT 1
MaE}aeYa ovac
487
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
wiTa Tae vi<aRTa" +ata" k-al/a:Ya" ParMaaTMaNa" )
MaihMaa vedGa>aaeR_Qa YaQaaóa+aqiàbaeDa Mae )) 1 ))
maitreya uväca
iti te varëitaù kñattaù
käläkhyaù paramätmanaù
mahimä veda-garbho 'tha
yathäsräkñén nibodha me
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Çré Maitreya said; iti—thus; te—unto you; varëitaù—described;
kñattaù—O Vidura; käla-äkhyaù—by the name eternal time; paramätmanaù—of the
Supersoul; mahimä—glories; veda-garbhaù—Lord Brahmä, the reservoir of the Vedas;
atha—hereafter; yathä—as it is; asräkñét—did create; nibodha—just try to understand;
me—from me.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: O learned Vidura, so far I have explained to you the glories of the form
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His feature of käla. Now you can hear from me
about the creation of Brahmä, the reservoir of all Vedic knowledge.
TEXT 2
SaSaJaaRGa]e_NDaTaaiMaóMaQa TaaiMaóMaaidk*-Ta( )
MahaMaaeh& c Maaeh& c TaMaêajaNav*taYa" )) 2 ))
sasarjägre 'ndha-tämisram
atha tämisram ädi-kåt
mahämohaà ca mohaà ca
tamaç cäjïäna-våttayaù
SYNONYMS
sasarja—created; agre—at first; andha-tämisram—the sense of death; atha—then;
488
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tämisram—anger upon frustration; ädi-kåt—all these; mahä-moham—ownership of
enjoyable objects; ca—also; moham—illusory conception; ca—also; tamaù—darkness in
self-knowledge; ca—as well as; ajïäna—nescience; våttayaù—engagements.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä first created the nescient engagements like self-deception, the sense of death,
anger after frustration, the sense of false ownership, and the illusory bodily conception, or
forgetfulness of one's real identity.
PURPORT
Before the factual creation of the living entities in different varieties of species, the
conditions under which a living being in the material world has to live were created by
Brahmä. Unless a living entity forgets his real identity, it is impossible for him to live in
the material conditions of life. Therefore the first condition of material existence is
forgetfulness of one's real identity. And by forgetting one's real identity, one is sure to be
afraid of death, although a pure living soul is deathless and birthless. This false
identification with material nature is the cause of false ownership of things which are
offered by the arrangement of superior control. All material resources are offered to the
living entity for his peaceful living and for the discharge of the duties of self-realization
in conditioned life. But due to false identification, the conditioned soul becomes
entrapped by the sense of false ownership of the property of the Supreme Lord. It is
evident from this verse that Brahmä himself is a creation of the Supreme Lord, and the
five kinds of nescience which condition the living entities in material existence are
creations of Brahmä. It is simply ludicrous to think the living entity to be equal with the
Supreme Being when one can understand that the conditioned souls are under the
influence of Brahmä's magic wand. Pataïjali also accepts that there are five kinds of
nescience, as mentioned herein.
TEXT 3
d*îa PaaPaqYaSaq& Sa*ií& NaaTMaaNa& bûMaNYaTa )
>aGavÖyaNaPaUTaeNa MaNaSaaNYaa& TaTaae_Sa*JaTa( )) 3 ))
dåñövä päpéyaséà såñöià
489
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nätmänaà bahv amanyata
bhagavad-dhyäna-pütena
manasänyäà tato 'såjat
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—by seeing; päpéyasém—sinful; såñöim—creation; na—did not; ätmänam—unto
Himself; bahu—much pleasure; amanyata—felt; bhagavat—on the Personality of
Godhead; dhyäna—meditation; pütena—purified by that; manasä—by such a mentality;
anyäm—another; tataù—thereafter; asåjat—created.
TRANSLATION
Seeing such a misleading creation as a sinful task, Brahmä did not feel much pleasure in
his activity, and therefore he purified himself by meditation on the Personality of
Godhead. Then he began another term of creation.
PURPORT
Although he created the different influences of nescience, Lord Brahmä was not
satisfied in performing such a thankless task, but he had to do it because most of the
conditioned souls wanted it to be so. Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) that He is
present in everyone's heart and is helping everyone to either remember of forget. The
question may be raised why the Lord, who is all-merciful, helps one to remember and
another to forget. Actually, His mercy is not exhibited in partiality towards one and
enmity towards another. The living entity, as part and parcel of the Lord, is partially
independent because he partially possesses all the qualities of the Lord. Anyone who has
some independence may sometimes misuse it due to ignorance. When the living entity
prefers to misuse his independence and glide down towards nescience, the all-merciful
Lord first of all tries to protect him from the trap, but when the living entity persists in
gliding down to hell, the Lord helps him to forget his real position. The Lord helps the
falling living entity glide down to the lowest point, just to give him the chance to see if
he is happy by misusing his independence.
Almost all the conditioned souls who are rotting in the material world are misusing their
independence, and therefore five kinds of nescience are imposed upon them. As an
obedient servitor of the Lord, Brahmä creates all these as a matter of necessity, but he is
not happy in doing so because a devotee of the Lord naturally does not like to see
490
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
anyone falling down from his real position. Persons who do not care for the path of
realization get full facilities from the Lord for executing their proclivities to the fullest
extent, and Brahmä helps in that procedure without fail.
TEXT 4
SaNak&- c SaNaNd& c SaNaaTaNaMaQaaTMa>aU" )
SaNaTku-Maar& c MauNaqiàiZ§-YaaNaUßRreTaSa" )) 4 ))
sanakaà ca sanandaà ca
sanätanam athätmabhüù
sanat-kumäraà ca munén
niñkriyän ürdhva-retasaù
SYNONYMS
sanakam—Sanaka; ca—also; sanandam—Sananda; ca—and; sanätanam—Sanätana;
atha—thereafter; ätma-bhüù—Brahmä, who is self-born; sanat-kumäram—Sanatkumära;
ca—also; munén—the great sages; niñkriyän—free from all fruitive action;
ürdhva-retasaù—those whose semen flows upwards.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning, Brahmä created four great sages named Sanaka, Sananda, Sanätana and
Sanat-kumära. All of them were unwilling to adopt materialistic activities because they
were highly elevated due to their semen's flowing upwards.
PURPORT
Although Brahmä created the principles of nescience as a matter of necessity for those
living entities who were destined to ignorance by the will of the Lord, he was not
satisfied in performing such a thankless task. He therefore created four principles of
knowledge: säìkhya, or empirical philosophy for the analytical study of material
conditions; yoga, or mysticism for liberation of the pure soul from material bondage;
vairägya, the acceptance of complete detachment from material enjoyment in life to
elevate oneself to the highest spiritual understanding; and tapas, or the various kinds of
491
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
voluntary austerities performed for spiritual perfection. Brahmä created the four great
sages Sanaka, Sananda, Sanätana and Sanat to entrust them with these four principles
of spiritual advancement, and they inaugurated their own spiritual party, or sampradäya,
known as the Kumära-sampradäya, or later on as the Nimbärka-sampradäya, for the
advancement of bhakti. All of these great sages became great devotees, for without
devotional service to the Personality of Godhead one cannot achieve success in any
activity of spiritual value.
TEXT 5
TaaNa( b>aaze Sv>aU" Pau}aaNa( Pa[Jaa" Sa*JaTa Pau}ak-a" )
TaàEC^NMaae+aDaMaaR<aae vaSaudevParaYa<aa" )) 5 ))
tän babhäñe svabhüù puträn
prajäù såjata putrakäù
tan naicchan mokña-dharmäëo
väsudeva-paräyaëäù
SYNONYMS
tän—unto the Kumäras, as above mentioned; babhäñe—addressed; svabhüù—Brahmä;
puträn—unto the sons; prajäù—generations; såjata—to create; putrakäù—O my sons;
tat—that; na—not; aicchan—desired; mokña-dharmäëaù—pledged to the principles of
liberation; väsudeva—the Personality of Godhead; paräyaëäù—who are so devoted.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä spoke to his sons after generating them. "My dear sons," he said, "now generate
progeny." But due to their being attached to Väsudeva, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, they aimed at liberation, and therefore they expressed their unwillingness.
PURPORT
The four sons of Brahmä, the Kumäras, declined to become family men even on the
request of their great father, Brahmä. Those who are serious about gaining release from
material bondage should not be entangled in the false relationship of family bondage.
492
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
People may ask how the Kumäras could refuse the orders of Brahmä, who was their
father and above all the creator of the universe. The reply is that one who is väsudevaparäyaëa,
or seriously engaged in the devotional service of the Personality of Godhead,
Väsudeva, need not care for any other obligation. It is enjoined in the Bhägavatam
(11.5.41):
devarñi-bhütäpta-nåëäà pitèëäà
na kiìkaro näyam åëé ca räjan
sarvätmanä yaù çaraëaà çaraëyaà
gato mukundaà parihåtya kartam
"Anyone who has completely given up all worldly relationships and has taken absolute
shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, who gives us salvation and who alone is fit to be
taken shelter of, is no longer a debtor or servant of anyone, including the demigods,
forefathers, sages, other living entities, relatives, and members of human society." Thus
there was nothing wrong in the acts of the Kumäras when they refused their great
father's request that they become family men.
TEXT 6
Saae_vDYaaTa" SauTaErev& Pa[TYaa:YaaTaaNauXaaSaNaE" )
§-aeDa& duivRzh& JaaTa& iNaYaNTauMauPac§-Mae )) 6 ))
so 'vadhyätaù sutair evaà
pratyäkhyätänuçäsanaiù
krodhaà durviñahaà jätaà
niyantum upacakrame
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Brahmä); avadhyätaù—thus being disrespected; sutaiù—by the sons; evam—
thus; pratyäkhyäta—refusing to obey; anuçäsanaiù—the order of their father;
krodham—anger; durviñaham—too much to be tolerated; jätam—thus generated;
niyantum—to control; upacakrame—tried his best.
TRANSLATION
493
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
On the refusal of the sons to obey the order of their father, there was much anger
generated in the mind of Brahmä, which he tried to control and not express.
PURPORT
Brahmä is the director in charge of the mode of passion of material nature. Therefore it
was natural for him to become angry on the refusal of his sons to obey his order.
Although the Kumäras were right in such acts of refusal, Brahmä, being absorbed in the
mode of passion, could not check his passionate anger. He did not express it, however,
because he knew that his sons were far enlightened in spiritual advancement and thus
he should not express his anger before them.
TEXT 7
iDaYaa iNaGa*ùMaa<aae_iPa >a]uvaeMaRDYaaTPa[JaaPaTae" )
SaÛae_JaaYaTa TaNMaNYau" ku-Maarae Naql/l/aeihTa" )) 7 ))
dhiyä nigåhyamäëo 'pi
bhruvor madhyät prajäpateù
sadyo 'jäyata tan-manyuù
kumäro néla-lohitaù
SYNONYMS
dhiyä—by intelligence; nigåhyamäëaù—being controlled; api—in spite of; bhruvoù—of
the eyebrows; madhyät—from between; prajäpateù—of Brahmä; sadyaù—at once;
ajäyata—generated; tat—his; manyuù—anger; kumäraù—a child; néla-lohitaù—mixture
of blue and red.
TRANSLATION
Although he tried to curb his anger, it came out from between his eyebrows, and a child
mixed blue and red was immediately generated.
PURPORT
494
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The face of anger is the same whether exhibited due to ignorance or knowledge.
Although Brahmä tried to curb his anger, he could not do so, even though he is the
supreme being. Such anger in its true color came from between the eyebrows of Brahmä
as Rudra, in a mixed color of blue (ignorance) and red (passion), because anger is the
product of passion and ignorance.
TEXT 8
Sa vE åraed devaNaa& PaUvRJaae >aGavaNa( >av" )
NaaMaaiNa ku-å Mae DaaTa" SQaaNaaiNa c JaGad(Gaurae )) 8 ))
sa vai ruroda devänäà
pürvajo bhagavän bhavaù
nämäni kuru me dhätaù
sthänäni ca jagad-guro
SYNONYMS
saù—he; vai—certainly; ruroda—cried loudly; devänäm pürvajaù—the eldest of all
demigods; bhagavän—the most powerful; bhavaù—Lord Çiva; nämäni—different names;
kuru—designate; me—my; dhätaù—O destiny maker; sthänäni—places; ca—also; jagatguro—
O teacher of the universe.
TRANSLATION
After his birth he began to cry: O destiny maker, teacher of the universe, kindly
designate my name and place.
TEXT 9
wiTa TaSYa vc" PaaÚae >aGavaNa( PairPaal/YaNa( )
A>YaDaaÙd]Yaa vaca Maa raedqSTaTk-raeiMa Tae )) 9 ))
iti tasya vacaù pädmo
bhagavän paripälayan
495
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
abhyadhäd bhadrayä väcä
mä rodés tat karomi te
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; tasya—his; vacaù—request; pädmaù—one who is born from the lotus flower;
bhagavän—the powerful; paripälayan—accepting the request; abhyadhät—pacified;
bhadrayä—by gentle; väcä—words; mä—do not; rodéù—cry; tat—that; karomi—I shall
do it; te—as desired by you.
TRANSLATION
The all-powerful Brahmä, who was born from the lotus flower, pacified the boy with
gentle words, accepting his request, and said: Do not cry. I shall certainly do as you
desire.
TEXT 10
Yadraedq" Sauré[eï SaaeÜeGa wv bal/k-" )
TaTaSTvaMai>aDaaSYaiNTa NaaMana åd] wiTa Pa[Jaa" )) 10 ))
yad arodéù sura-çreñöha
sodvega iva bälakaù
tatas tväm abhidhäsyanti
nämnä rudra iti prajäù
SYNONYMS
yat—as much as; arodéù—cried loudly; sura-çreñöha—O chief of the demigods; saudvegaù—
with great anxiety; iva—like; bälakaù—a boy; tataù—therefore; tväm—you;
abhidhäsyanti—will call; nämnä—by the name; rudraù—Rudra; iti—thus; prajäù—
people.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter Brahmä said: O chief of the demigods, you shall be called by the name Rudra
496
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
by all people because you have so anxiously cried.
TEXT 11
ôidiNd]Yaa<YaSauVYaaeRMa vaYauriGanJaRl&/ Mahq )
SaUYaRêNd]STaPaêEv SQaaNaaNYaGa]e k*-TaaiNa Tae )) 11 ))
håd indriyäëy asur vyoma
väyur agnir jalaà mahé
süryaç candras tapaç caiva
sthänäny agre kåtäni te
SYNONYMS
håt—the heart; indriyäëi—the senses; asuù—life air; vyoma—the sky; väyuù—the air;
agniù—fire; jalam—water; mahé—the earth; süryaù—the sun; candraù—the moon;
tapaù—austerity; ca—as well as; eva—certainly; sthänäni—all these places; agre—
hereinbefore; kåtäni—already made; te—for you.
TRANSLATION
My dear boy, I have already selected the following places for your residence: the heart,
the senses, the air of life, the sky, the air, the fire, the water, the earth, the sun, the
moon and austerity.
PURPORT
The creation of Rudra from between the eyebrows of Brahmä as the result of his anger,
generated from the mode of passion partly touched by ignorance, is very significant. In
Bhagavad-gétä (3.37) the principle of Rudra is described. Krodha (anger) is the product of
käma (lust), which is the result of the mode of passion. When lust and hankering are
unsatisfied, the element of krodha appears, which is the formidable enemy of the
conditioned soul. This most sinful and inimical passion is represented as ahaìkära, or
the false egocentric attitude of thinking oneself to be all in all. Such an egocentric
attitude on the part of the conditioned soul, who is completely under the control of
material nature, is described in Bhagavad-gétä as foolish. The egocentric attitude is a
497
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
manifestation of the Rudra principle in the heart, wherein krodha (anger) is generated.
This anger develops in the heart and is further manifested through various senses, like
the eyes, hands and legs. When a man is angry he expresses such anger with red-hot eyes
and sometimes makes a display of clenching his fists or kicking his legs. This exhibition
of the Rudra principle is the proof of Rudra's presence in such places. When a man is
angry he breathes very rapidly, and thus Rudra is represented in the air of life, or in the
activities of breathing. When the sky is overcast with dense clouds and roars in anger,
and when the wind blows very fiercely, the Rudra principle is manifested, and so also
when the sea water is infuriated by the wind it appears in a gloomy feature of Rudra,
which is very fearful to the common man. When fire is ablaze we can also experience
the presence of Rudra, and when there is an inundation over the earth we can
understand that this is also the representation of Rudra.
There are many earthly creatures who constantly represent the Rudra element. The
snake, tiger and lion are always representations of Rudra. Sometimes, because of the
extreme heat of the sun, there are cases of heatstroke, and due to the extreme coldness
created by the moon there are cases of collapse. There are many sages empowered with
the influence of austerity and many yogés, philosophers and renouncers who sometimes
exhibit their acquired power under the influence of the Rudra principle of anger and
passion. The great yogé Durväsä, under the influence of this Rudra principle, picked a
quarrel with Mahäräja Ambaréña, and a brähmaëa boy exhibited the Rudra principle by
cursing the great King Parékñit. When the Rudra principle is exhibited by persons who
are not engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
angry person falls down from the peak of his improved position. This is confirmed as
follows:
ye 'nye 'ravindäkña vimukta-mäninas
tvayy asta-bhäväd aviçuddha-buddhayaù
äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù
patanty adho 'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù
(SB 10.2.32)
The most lamentable falldown of the impersonalist is due to his false and unreasonable
claim of being one with the Supreme.
TEXT 12
498
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
MaNYauMaRNauMaRihNaSaae MahaiH^v ‰TaßJa" )
oGa]reTaa >av" k-al/ae vaMadevae Da*Tav]Ta" )) 12 ))
manyur manur mahinaso
mahäï chiva åtadhvajaù
ugraretä bhavaù kälo
vämadevo dhåtavrataù
SYNONYMS
manyuù, manuù, mahinasaù, mahän, çivaù, åtadhvajaù, ugaretäù, bhavaù, kälaù,
vämadevaù, dhåtavrataù—all names of Rudra.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: My dear boy Rudra, you have eleven other names: Manyu, Manu,
Mahinasa, Mahän, Çiva, Åtadhvaja, Ugraretä, Bhava, Käla, Vämadeva and Dhåtavrata.
TEXT 13
DaqDa*RiTarSal/aeMaa c iNaYauTSaiPaRirl/aiMbk-a )
wravTaq SvDaa dq+aa åd]a<Yaae åd] Tae iñYa" )) 13 ))
dhér dhåti-rasalomä ca
niyut sarpir ilämbikä
irävaté svadhä dékñä
rudräëyo rudra te striyaù
SYNONYMS
dhéù, dhåti, rasalä, umä, niyut, sarpiù, ilä, ambikä, irävaté, svadhä, dékñä rudräëyaù—the
eleven Rudräëés; rudra—O Rudra; te—unto you; striyaù—wives.
TRANSLATION
499
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
O Rudra, you also have eleven wives, called the Rudräëés, and they are as follows: Dhé,
Dhåti, Rasalä, Umä, Niyut, Sarpi, Ilä, Ambikä, Irävaté, Svadhä and Dékñä.
TEXT 14
Ga*ha<aETaaiNa NaaMaaiNa SQaaNaaiNa c SaYaaez<a" )
Wi>a" Sa*Ja Pa[Jaa bûq" Pa[JaaNaaMaiSa YaTPaiTa" )) 14 ))
gåhäëaitäni nämäni
sthänäni ca sa-yoñaëaù
ebhiù såja prajä bahvéù
prajänäm asi yat patiù
SYNONYMS
gåhäëa—just accept; etäni—all these; nämäni—different names; sthänäni—as well as
places; ca—also; sa-yoñaëaù—along with wives; ebhiù—with them; såja—just generate;
prajäù—progeny; bahvéù—on a large scale; prajänäm—of the living entities; asi—you
are; yat—since; patiù—the master.
TRANSLATION
My dear boy, you may now accept all the names and places designated for you and your
different wives, and since you are now one of the masters of the living entities, you may
increase the population on a large scale.
PURPORT
Brahmä, as the father of Rudra, selected the wives of his son, his living places, and his
names as well. It is natural that one should accept the wife selected by one's father, just
as a son accepts the name given by the father or as he accepts the property offered by
the father. That is the general course in increasing the population of the world. On the
other hand, the Kumäras did not accept the offering of their father because they were
elevated far beyond the business of generating a great number of sons. As the son can
refuse the order of the father for higher purposes, so the father can refuse to maintain
his sons in increasing population because of higher purposes.
500
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 15
wTYaaidí" SvGauå<aa >aGavaàql/l/aeihTa" )
Satvak*-iTaSv>aaveNa SaSaJaaRTMaSaMaa" Pa[Jaa" )) 15 ))
ity ädiñöaù sva-guruëä
bhagavän néla-lohitaù
sattväkåti-svabhävena
sasarjätma-samäù prajäù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; ädiñöaù—being ordered; sva-guruëä—by his own spiritual master; bhagavän—
the most powerful; néla-lohitaù—Rudra, whose color is mixed blue and red; sattva—
power; äkåti—bodily features; svabhävena—and with a very furious mode of nature;
sasarja—created; ätma-samäù—like his own prototype; prajäù—generations.
TRANSLATION
The most powerful Rudra, whose bodily color was blue mixed with red, created many
offspring exactly resembling him in features, strength and furious nature.
TEXT 16
åd]a<aa& åd]Sa*íaNaa& SaMaNTaad( Ga]SaTaa& JaGaTa( )
iNaXaaMYaaSa&:YaXaae YaUQaaNa( Pa[JaaPaiTarXaªTa )) 16 ))
rudräëäà rudra-såñöänäà
samantäd grasatäà jagat
niçämyäsaìkhyaço yüthän
prajäpatir açaìkata
SYNONYMS
rudräëäm—of the sons of Rudra; rudra-såñöänäm—who were generated by Rudra;
501
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
samantät—being assembled together; grasatäm—while devouring; jagat—the universe;
niçämya—by observing their activities; asaìkhyaçaù—unlimited; yüthän—assembly;
prajä-patiù—the father of the living entities; açaìkata—became afraid of.
TRANSLATION
The sons and grandsons generated by Rudra were unlimited in number, and when they
assembled together they attempted to devour the entire universe. When Brahmä, the
father of the living entities, saw this, he became afraid of the situation.
PURPORT
The generations of Rudra, the incarnation of anger, were so dangerous to the
maintenance of universal affairs that even Brahmä, the father of the living entities,
became afraid of them. The so-called devotees or followers of Rudra are also a menace.
They are sometimes dangerous even to Rudra himself. Descendants of Rudra sometimes
make plans to kill Rudra—by the grace of Rudra. That is the nature of his devotees.
TEXT 17
Al&/ Pa[Jaai>a" Sa*íai>arqd*Xaqi>a" SauraetaMa )
MaYaa Sah dhNTaqi>aidRXaê+aui>aRåLb<aE" )) 17 ))
alaà prajäbhiù såñöäbhir
édåçébhiù surottama
mayä saha dahantébhir
diçaç cakñurbhir ulbaëaiù
SYNONYMS
alam—unnecessary; prajäbhiù—by such living entities; såñöäbhiù—generated; édåçébhiù—
of this type; sura-uttama—O best among the demigods; mayä—me; saha—along with;
dahantébhiù—who are burning; diçaù—all sides; cakñurbhiù—by the eyes; ulbaëaiù—
fiery flames.
TRANSLATION
502
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Brahmä told Rudra: O best among the demigods, there is no need for you to generate
living entities of this nature. They have begun to devastate everything on all sides with
the fiery flames from their eyes, and they have even attacked me.
TEXT 18
TaPa AaiTaï >ad]& Tae SavR>aUTaSau%avhMa( )
TaPaSaEv YaQaaPaUv| óía ivìiMad& >avaNa( )) 18 ))
tapa ätiñöha bhadraà te
sarva-bhüta-sukhävaham
tapasaiva yathä pürvaà
srañöä viçvam idaà bhavän
SYNONYMS
tapaù—penance; ätiñöha—be situated; bhadram—auspicious; te—unto you; sarva—all;
bhüta—living entities; sukha-ävaham—bringing happiness; tapasä—by penance; eva—
only; yathä—as much as; pürvam—before; srañöä—will create; viçvam—the universe;
idam—this; bhavän—yourself.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, you had better situate yourself in penance, which is auspicious for all living
entities and which will bring all benediction upon you. By penance only shall you be able
to create the universe as it was before.
PURPORT
In the creation, maintenance and dissolution of the cosmic manifestation, the three
deities Brahmä, Viñëu and Maheçvara, or Çiva, are respectively in charge. Rudra was
advised not to destroy while the period of creation and maintenance was going on, but
to situate himself in penance and wait for the time of dissolution, when his services
would be called for.
TEXT 19
503
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TaPaSaEv Par& JYaaeiTa>aRGavNTaMaDaae+aJaMa( )
SavR>aUTaGauhavaSaMaÅSaa ivNdTae PauMaaNa( )) 19 ))
tapasaiva paraà jyotir
bhagavantam adhokñajam
sarva-bhüta-guhäväsam
aïjasä vindate pumän
SYNONYMS
tapasä—by penance; eva—only; param—the supreme; jyotiù—light; bhagavantam—
unto the Personality of Godhead; adhokñajam—He who is beyond the approach of the
senses; sarva-bhüta-guhä-äväsam—residing in the heart of all living entities; aïjasä—
completely; vindate—can know; pumän—a person.
TRANSLATION
By penance only can one even approach the Personality of Godhead, who is within the
heart of every living entity and at the same time beyond the reach of all senses.
PURPORT
Rudra was advised by Brahmä to perform penance as an example to his sons and
followers that penance is necessary for attaining the favor of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. In Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the common mass of people follow the path
shown by an authority. Thus Brahmä, disgusted with the Rudra generations and afraid
of being devoured by the increase of population, asked Rudra to stop producing such an
unwanted generation and take to penance for attaining the favor of the Supreme Lord.
We find, therefore, in pictures, that Rudra is always sitting in meditation for the
attainment of the favor of the Lord. Indirectly, the sons and followers of Rudra are
advised to stop the business of annihilation, following the Rudra principle while the
peaceful creation of Brahmä is going on.
TEXT 20
504
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
MaE}aeYa ovac
WvMaaTMa>auvaidí" Pair§-MYa iGara& PaiTaMa( )
ba!iMaTYaMauMaaMaN}Ya ivveXa TaPaSae vNaMa( )) 20 ))
maitreya uväca
evam ätmabhuvädiñöaù
parikramya giräà patim
bäòham ity amum ämantrya
viveça tapase vanam
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Çré Maitreya said; evam—thus; ätma-bhuvä—by Brahmä; ädiñöaù—
being so requested; parikramya—by circumambulating; giräm—of the Vedas; patim—
unto the master; bäòham—that is right; iti—thus; amum—unto Brahmä; ämantrya—
thus addressing; viveça—entered into; tapase—for the matter of penance; vanam—into
the forest.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: Thus Rudra, having been ordered by Brahmä, circumambulated his
father, the master of the Vedas. Addressing him with words of assent, he entered the
forest to perform austere penances.
TEXT 21
AQaai>aDYaaYaTa" SaGa| dXa Pau}aa" Pa[Jaijre )
>aGavC^i¢-Yau¢-SYa l/aek-SaNTaaNaheTav" )) 21 ))
athäbhidhyäyataù sargaà
daça puträù prajajïire
bhagavac-chakti-yuktasya
loka-santäna-hetavaù
SYNONYMS
505
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
atha—thus; abhidhyäyataù—while thinking of; sargam—creation; daça—ten; puträù—
sons; prajajïire—were begotten; bhagavat—regarding the Personality of Godhead;
çakti—potency; yuktasya—empowered with; loka—the world; santäna—generation;
hetavaù—the causes.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä, who was empowered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, thought of
generating living entities and begot ten sons for the extension of the generations.
TEXT 22
Marqicr}Yai(r)rSaaE Paul/STYa" Paul/h" §-Tau" )
>a*GauvRiSaïae d+aê dXaMaSTa}a Naard" )) 22 ))
marécir atry-aìgirasau
pulastyaù pulahaù kratuù
bhågur vasiñöho dakñaç ca
daçamas tatra näradaù
SYNONYMS
maréciù, atri, aìgirasau, pulastyaù, pulahaù, kratuù, bhåguù, vasiñöhaù, dakñaù—names of
sons of Brahmä; ca—and; daçamaù—the tenth; tatra—there; näradaù—Närada.
TRANSLATION
Maréci, Atri, Aìgirä, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Bhågu, Vasiñöha, Dakña, and the tenth
son, Närada, were thus born.
PURPORT
The whole process of the creation, maintenance and dissolution of the cosmic
manifestation is meant to give the conditioned souls a chance to go back home, back to
Godhead. Brahmä created Rudra to help him in his creative endeavor, but from the very
beginning Rudra began to devour the whole creation, and thus he had to be stopped
506
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
from such devastating activities. Brahmä therefore created another set of good children,
who were mostly in favor of worldly fruitive activities. He knew very well, however, that
without devotional service to the Lord there is hardly any benefit for the conditioned
souls, and therefore he at last created his worthy son Närada, who is the supreme
spiritual master of all transcendentalists. Without devotional service to the Lord one
cannot make progress in any department of activity, although the path of devotional
service is always independent of anything material. Only the transcendental loving
service of the Lord can deliver the real goal of life, and thus the service rendered by
Çréman Närada Muni is the highest among all the sons of Brahmä.
TEXT 23
oTSa(r)aàardae Jaje d+aae_x(GauïaTSvYaM>auv" )
Pa[a<aaÜiSaï" SaÅaTaae >a*GauSTvic k-raT§-Tau" )) 23 ))
utsaìgän närado jajïe
dakño 'ìguñöhät svayambhuvaù
präëäd vasiñöhaù saïjäto
bhågus tvaci karät kratuù
SYNONYMS
utsaìgät—by transcendental deliberation; näradaù—Mahämuni Närada; jajïe—was
generated; dakñaù—Dakña; aìguñöhät—from the thumb; svayambhuvaù—of Brahmä;
präëät—from the life air, or breathing; vasiñöhaù—Vasiñöha; saïjätaù—was born;
bhåguù—the sage Bhågu; tvaci—from the touch; karät—from the hand; kratuù—the
sage Kratu.
TRANSLATION
Närada was born from the deliberation of Brahmä, which is the best part of the body.
Vasiñöha was born from his breathing, Dakña from a thumb, Bhågu from his touch, and
Kratu from his hand.
PURPORT
507
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Närada was born from the best deliberation of Brahmä because Närada was able to
deliver the Supreme Lord to anyone he liked. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
cannot be realized by any amount of Vedic knowledge or by any number of penances.
But a pure devotee of the Lord like Närada can deliver the Supreme Lord by his good
will. The very name Närada suggests that he can deliver the Supreme Lord. Nära means
the "Supreme Lord," and da means "one who can deliver." That he can deliver the
Supreme Lord does not mean that the Lord is like a commodity that can be delivered to
any person. But Närada can deliver to anyone the transcendental loving service of the
Lord as a servitor, friend, parent or lover, as one may desire out of one's own
transcendental love for the Lord. In other words, it is Närada only who can deliver the
path of bhakti-yoga, the highest mystic means for attainment of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 24
Paul/hae Naai>aTaae Jaje Paul/STYa" k-<aRYaae‰Riz" )
Ai(r)ra Mau%Taae_+<aae_i}aMaRrqicMaRNaSaae_>avTa( )) 24 ))
pulaho näbhito jajïe
pulastyaù karëayor åñiù
aìgirä mukhato 'kñëo 'trir
marécir manaso 'bhavat
SYNONYMS
pulahaù—the sage Pulaha; näbhitaù—from the navel; jajïe—generated; pulastyaù—the
sage Pulastya; karëayoù—from the ears; åñiù—the great sage; aìgiräù—the sage Aìgirä;
mukhataù—from the mouth; akñëaù—from the eyes; atriù—the sage Atri; maréciù—the
sage Maréci; manasaù—from the mind; abhavat—appeared.
TRANSLATION
Pulastya was generated from the ears, Aìgirä from the mouth, Atri from the eyes, Maréci
from the mind and Pulaha from the navel of Brahmä.
TEXT 25
508
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
DaMaR" STaNaaÕi+a<aTaae Ya}a NaaraYa<a" SvYaMa( )
ADaMaR" Pa*ïTaae YaSMaaNMa*TYaul/aeRk->aYaªr" )) 25 ))
dharmaù stanäd dakñiëato
yatra näräyaëaù svayam
adharmaù påñöhato yasmän
måtyur loka-bhayaìkaraù
SYNONYMS
dharmaù—religion; stanät—from the breast; dakñiëataù—on the right side; yatra—
wherein; näräyaëaù—the Supreme Lord; svayam—personally; adharmaù—irreligion;
påñöhataù—from the back; yasmät—from which; måtyuù—death; loka—to the living
entity; bhayam-karaù—horrible.
TRANSLATION
Religion was manifested from the breast of Brahmä, wherein is seated the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Näräyaëa, and irreligion appeared from his back, where horrible
death takes place for the living entity.
PURPORT
That religion was manifested from the place where the Personality of Godhead is
personally situated is very significant because religion means devotional service to the
Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä as well as the Bhägavatam. In
Bhagavad-gétä the last instruction is to give up all other engagements in the name of
religion and take shelter of the Personality of Godhead. Çrémad-Bhägavatam also
confirms that the highest perfection of religion is that which leads to the devotional
service of the Lord, unmotivated and unhampered by material impediments. Religion in
its perfect form is the devotional service of the Lord, and irreligion is just the opposite.
The heart is the most important part of the body, whereas the back is the most neglected
part. When one is attacked by an enemy one is apt to endure attacks from the back and
protect himself carefully from all attacks on the chest. All types of irreligion spring from
the back of Brahmä, whereas real religion, the devotional service of the Lord, is
generated from the chest, the seat of Näräyaëa. Anything which does not lead to the
509
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
devotional service of the Lord is irreligion, and anything which leads to the devotional
service of the Lord is called religion.
TEXT 26
ôid k-aMaae >a]uv" §-aeDaae l/ae>aêaDardC^daTa( )
AaSYaaÜaiKSaNDavae Mae!\aià‰RiTa" PaaYaaergaaé[Ya" )) 26 ))
hådi kämo bhruvaù krodho
lobhaç cädhara-dacchadät
äsyäd väk sindhavo meòhrän
niråtiù päyor aghäçrayaù
SYNONYMS
hådi—from the heart; kämaù—lust; bhruvaù—from the eyebrows; krodhaù—anger;
lobhaù—greed; ca—also; adhara-dacchadät—from between the lips; äsyät—from the
mouth; väk—speaking; sindhavaù—the seas; meòhrät—from the penis; niråtiù—low
activities; päyoù—from the anus; agha-äçrayaù—reservoir of all vices.
TRANSLATION
Lust and desire became manifested from the heart of Brahmä, anger from between his
eyebrows, greed from between his lips, the power of speaking from his mouth, the ocean
from his penis, and low and abominable activities from his anus, the source of all sins.
PURPORT
A conditioned soul is under the influence of mental speculation. However great one
may be in the estimation of mundane education and learning, he cannot be free from
the influence of psychic activities. Therefore it is very difficult to give up lust and the
desires for low activities until one is in the line of devotional service to the Lord. When
one is frustrated in lust and low desires, anger is generated from the mind and expressed
from between the eyebrows. Ordinary men are therefore advised to concentrate the
mind by focusing on the place between the eyebrows, whereas the devotees of the Lord
are already practiced to place the Supreme Personality of Godhead on the seat of their
510
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
minds. The theory of becoming desireless is untenable because the mind cannot be made
desireless. When it is recommended that one be desireless, it is understood that one
should not desire things which are destructive to spiritual values. A devotee of the Lord
always has the Lord in his mind, and thus he does not need to be desireless because all
his desires are in relationship with the service of the Lord. The power of speaking is
called Sarasvaté, or the goddess of learning, and the birthplace of the goddess of learning
is the mouth of Brahmä. Even if a man is endowed with the favor of the goddess of
learning, it is quite possible for his heart to be full of lust and material desire and his
eyebrows to display symptoms of anger. One may be very learned in the mundane
estimation, but that does not mean that he is free from all low activities of lust and
anger. Good qualifications can be expected only from a pure devotee, who is always
engaged in the thought of the Lord, or in samädhi, with faith.
TEXT 27
^aYaaYaa" k-dRMaae Jaje devhUTYaa" PaiTa" Pa[>au" )
MaNaSaae dehTaêed& Jaje ivìk*-Taae JaGaTa( )) 27 ))
chäyäyäù kardamo jajïe
devahütyäù patiù prabhuù
manaso dehataç cedaà
jajïe viçva-kåto jagat
SYNONYMS
chäyäyäù—by the shadow; kardamaù—Kardama Muni; jajïe—became manifested;
devahütyäù—of Devahüti; patiù—husband; prabhuù—the master; manasaù—from the
mind; dehataù—from the body; ca—also; idam—this; jajïe—developed; viçva—the
universe; kåtaù—of the creator; jagat—cosmic manifestation.
TRANSLATION
Sage Kardama, husband of the great Devahüti, was manifested from the shadow of
Brahmä. Thus all became manifested from either the body or the mind of Brahmä.
PURPORT
511
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Although one of the three modes of material nature is always prominent, they are never
represented unalloyed by one another. Even in the most prominent existence of the two
lower qualities, the modes of passion and ignorance, there is sometimes a tinge of the
mode of goodness. Therefore all the sons generated from the body or the mind of
Brahmä were in the modes of passion and ignorance, but some of them, like Kardama,
were born in the mode of goodness. Närada was born in the transcendental state of
Brahmä.
TEXT 28
vac& duihTar& TaNvq& SvYaM>aUhRrTaq& MaNa" )
Ak-aMaa& ck-Mae +ata" Sak-aMa wiTa Na" é[uTaMa( )) 28 ))
väcaà duhitaraà tanvéà
svayambhür haratéà manaù
akämäà cakame kñattaù
sa-käma iti naù çrutam
SYNONYMS
väcam—Väk; duhitaram—unto the daughter; tanvém—born of his body; svayambhüù—
Brahmä; haratém—attracting; manaù—his mind; akämäm—without being sexually
inclined; cakame—desired; kñattaù—O Vidura; sa-kämaù—being sexually inclined; iti—
thus; naù—we; çrutam—have heard.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, we have heard that Brahmä had a daughter named Väk who was born from his
body and who attracted his mind toward sex, although she was not sexually inclined
towards him.
PURPORT
Balavän indriya-grämo vidväàsam api karñati (SB 9.19.17). It is said that the senses are so
mad and strong that they can bewilder even the most sensible and learned man.
Therefore it is advised that one should not indulge in living alone even with one's
512
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mother, sister or daughter. Vidväàsam api karñati means that even the most learned also
become victims of the sensuous urge. Maitreya hesitated to state this anomaly on the
part of Brahmä, who was sexually inclined to his own daughter, but still he mentioned it
because sometimes it so happens, and the living example is Brahmä himself, although he
is the primeval living being and the most learned within the whole universe. If Brahmä
could be a victim of the sexual urge, then what of others, who are prone to so many
mundane frailties? This extraordinary immortality on the part of Brahmä was heard to
have occurred in some particular kalpa, but it could not have happened in the kalpa in
which Brahmä heard directly from the Lord the four essential verses of Çrémad-
Bhägavatam because the Lord blessed Brahmä, after giving him lessons on the
Bhägavatam, that he would never be bewildered in any kalpa whatsoever. This indicates
that before the hearing of Çrémad-Bhägavatam he might have fallen a victim to such
sensuality, but after hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam directly from the Lord, there was no
possibility of such failures.
One should, however, take serious note of this incident. The human being is a social
animal, and his unrestricted mixing with the fair sex leads to downfall. Such social
freedom of man and woman, especially among the younger section, is certainly a great
stumbling block on the path of spiritual progress. Material bondage is due only to sexual
bondage, and therefore unrestricted association of man and woman is surely a great
impediment. Maitreya cited this example on the part of Brahmä just to bring to our
notice this great danger.
TEXT 29
TaMaDaMaeR k*-TaMaiTa& ivl/aeKYa iPaTar& SauTaa" )
MarqicMau:Yaa MauNaYaae ivé[M>aaTPa[TYabaeDaYaNa( )) 29 ))
tam adharme kåta-matià
vilokya pitaraà sutäù
maréci-mukhyä munayo
viçrambhät pratyabodhayan
SYNONYMS
tam—unto him; adharme—in the matter of immortality; kåta-matim—the mind being so
given; vilokya—seeing thus; pitaram—unto the father; sutäù—sons; maréci-mukhyäù—
513
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
headed by Maréci; munayaù—sages; viçrambhät—with due respect; pratyabodhayan—
submitted as follows.
TRANSLATION
Thus, finding their father so deluded in an act of immorality, the sages headed by Maréci,
all sons of Brahmä, spoke as follows with great respect.
PURPORT
The sages like Maréci were not in the wrong in submitting their protests against the acts
of their great father. They knew very well that even though their father committed a
mistake, there must have been some great purpose behind the show, otherwise such a
great personality could not have committed such a mistake. It might be that Brahmä
wanted to warn his subordinates about human frailties in their dealings with women.
This is always very dangerous for persons who are on the path of self-realization.
Therefore, great personalities like Brahmä, even when in the wrong, should not be
neglected, nor could the great sages headed by Maréci show any disrespect because of his
extraordinary behavior.
TEXT 30
NaETaTPaUvOE" k*-Ta& TvÛe Na k-irZYaiNTa caPare )
YaSTv& duihTar& GaC^eriNaGa*ùa(r)Ja& Pa[>au" )) 30 ))
naitat pürvaiù kåtaà tvad ye
na kariñyanti cäpare
yas tvaà duhitaraà gaccher
anigåhyäìgajaà prabhuù
SYNONYMS
na—never; etat—such a thing; pürvaiù—by any other Brahmä, or yourself in any
previous kalpa; kåtam—performed; tvat—by you; ye—that which; na—nor; kariñyanti—
will do; ca—also; apare—anyone else; yaù—that which; tvam—you; duhitaram—unto
the daughter; gaccheù—would do; anigåhya—without controlling; aìgajam—sex desire;
514
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
prabhuù—O father.
TRANSLATION
O father, this performance in which you are endeavoring to complicate yourself was never
attempted by any other Brahmä, nor by anyone else, nor by you in previous kalpas, nor
will anyone dare to attempt it in the future. You are the supreme being in the universe,
so how is it that you want to have sex with your daughter and cannot control your desire?
PURPORT
The post of Brahmä is the supermost post in the universe, and it appears that there are
many Brahmäs and many universes besides the one in which we are situated. One who
fills this post must be ideal in behavior, for Brahmä sets the example for all living
entities. Brahmä, the living entity who is the most pious and spiritually elevated, is
entrusted with a post next to that of the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 31
TaeJaqYaSaaMaiPa ùeTaà SauëaeKYa& JaGad(Gaurae )
Yad(v*taMaNauiTaïNa( vE l/aek-" +aeMaaYa k-LPaTae )) 31 ))
tejéyasäm api hy etan
na suçlokyaà jagad-guro
yad-våttam anutiñöhan vai
lokaù kñemäya kalpate
SYNONYMS
tejéyasäm—of the most powerful; api—also; hi—certainly; etat—such an act; na—not
suitable; su-çlokyam—good behavior; jagat-guro—O spiritual master of the universe;
yat—whose; våttam—character; anutiñöhan—following; vai—certainly; lokaù—the
world; kñemäya—for prosperity; kalpate—becomes eligible.
TRANSLATION
515
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Even though you are the most powerful being, this act does not suit you because your
character is followed for spiritual improvement by people in general.
PURPORT
It is said that a supremely powerful living entity can do anything and everything he likes
and such acts do not affect him in any way. For example, the sun, the most powerful
fiery planet in the universe, can evaporate water from anywhere and still remain as
powerful. The sun evaporates water from filthy places and yet is not infected with the
quality of the filth. Similarly, Brahmä remains unimpeachable in all conditions. But still,
since he is the spiritual master of all living entities, his behavior and character should be
so ideal that people will follow such sublime behavior and derive the highest spiritual
benefit. Therefore, he should not have acted as he did.
TEXT 32
TaSMaE NaMaae >aGavTae Ya wd& SveNa raeicza )
AaTMaSQa& VYaÅYaaMaaSa Sa DaMa| PaaTauMahRiTa )) 32 ))
tasmai namo bhagavate
ya idaà svena rociñä
ätma-sthaà vyaïjayäm äsa
sa dharmaà pätum arhati
SYNONYMS
tasmai—unto Him; namaù—obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Personality of Godhead;
yaù—who; idam—this; svena—by His own; rociñä—effulgence; ätma-stham—situated in
Himself; vyaïjayäm äsa—has manifested; saù—He; dharmam—religion; pätum—for
protection; arhati—may kindly do so.
TRANSLATION
Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto the Personality of Godhead, who, by His own
effulgence, while situated in Himself, has manifested this cosmos. May He also protect
religion for all goodness.
516
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Lust for sexual intercourse is so strong that it appears herein that Brahmä could not be
dissuaded from his determination in spite of the appeal by his great sons like Maréci.
Therefore, the great sons began to pray to the Supreme Lord for the good sense of
Brahmä. It is only by the grace of the Supreme Lord that one can be protected from the
allurement of lusty material desires. The Lord gives protection to devotees who are
always engaged in His transcendental loving service, and by His causeless mercy He
forgives the accidental fall of a devotee. Therefore, sages like Maréci prayed for the
mercy of the Lord, and their prayer was fruitful.
TEXT 33
Sa wTQa& Ga*<aTa" Pau}aaNa( Paurae d*îa Pa[JaaPaTaqNa( )
Pa[JaaPaiTaPaiTaSTaNv& TaTYaaJa v]qi@TaSTada )
Taa& idXaae JaGa*hugaaeRra& Naqhar& YaiÜduSTaMa" )) 33 ))
sa itthaà gåëataù puträn
puro dåñövä prajäpatén
prajäpati-patis tanvaà
tatyäja vréòitas tadä
täà diço jagåhur ghoräà
néhäraà yad vidus tamaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Brahmä); ittham—thus; gåëataù—speaking; puträn—sons; puraù—before;
dåñövä—seeing; prajä-patén—all the progenitors of living entities; prajäpati-patiù—the
father of them (Brahmä); tanvam—body; tatyäja—quit; vréòitaù—ashamed; tadä—at
that time; täm—that body; diçaù—all directions; jagåhuù—accepted; ghoräm—blamable;
néhäram—fog; yat—which; viduù—they know as; tamaù—darkness.
TRANSLATION
The father of all Prajäpatis, Brahmä, thus seeing all his Prajäpati sons speaking in that
way, became very much ashamed and at once gave up the body he had accepted. Later
517
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
that body appeared in all directions as the dangerous fog in darkness.
PURPORT
The best way to compensate for one's sinful acts is to give up one's body at once, and
Brahmä, the leader of the living entities, showed this by his personal example. Brahmä
has a fabulous duration of life, but he was obliged to give up his body due to his grievous
sin, even though he had merely contemplated it in his mind without having actually
done it.
This is a lesson for the living entities, showing how sinful an act it is to indulge in
unrestricted sex life. Even to think of abominable sex life is sinful, and to compensate
for such acts, one has to give up his body. In other words, one's duration of life, blessings,
opulence, etc., are decreased by sinful acts, and the most dangerous type of sinful act is
unrestricted sex.
Ignorance is the cause of sinful life, or sinful life is the cause of gross ignorance. The
feature of ignorance is darkness or fog. Darkness or fog still covers the whole universe,
and the sun is the only counteracting principle. One who takes shelter of the Lord, the
perpetual light, has no fear of being annihilated in the darkness of fog or ignorance.
TEXT 34
k-daicd( DYaaYaTa" óíuveRda AaSa&êTauMauR%aTa( )
k-Qa& ó+YaaMYah& l/aek-aNa( SaMaveTaaNa( YaQaa Paura )) 34 ))
kadäcid dhyäyataù srañöur
vedä äsaàç catur-mukhät
kathaà srakñyämy ahaà lokän
samavetän yathä purä
SYNONYMS
kadäcit—once upon a time; dhyäyataù—while contemplating; srañöuù—of Brahmä;
vedäù—the Vedic literature; äsan—became manifested; catuù-mukhät—from the four
mouths; katham srakñyämi—how shall I create; aham—myself; lokän—all these worlds;
samavetän—assembled; yathä—as they were; purä—in the past.
518
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Once upon a time, when Brahmä was thinking of how to create the worlds as in the past
millennium, the four Vedas, which contain all varieties of knowledge, became manifested
from his four mouths.
PURPORT
As a fire can consume anything and everything without being contaminated, so, by the
grace of the Lord, the fire of Brahmä's greatness consumed his desire for the sinful act of
sex with his daughter. The Vedas are the source of all knowledge, and they were first
revealed to Brahmä by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead while Brahmä
was thinking of re-creating the material world. Brahmä is powerful by dint of his
devotional service unto the Lord, and the Lord is always ready to forgive His devotee if
by chance he falls down from the noble path of devotional service. The Çrémad-
Bhägavatam (11.5.42) confirms this as follows:
sva-päda-mülaà bhajataù priyasya
tyaktvänya-bhävasya hariù pareçaù
vikarma yac cotpatitaà kathaï-cid
dhunoti sarvaà hådi sannviñöaù
"Any person who is engaged one hundred percent in the transcendental loving service
of the Lord, at His lotus feet, is very dear to the Personality of Godhead Hari, and the
Lord, being situated in the heart of the devotee, excuses all kinds of sins committed by
chance." It was never expected that a great personality like Brahmä would ever think of
sex indulgence with his daughter. The example shown by Brahmä only suggests that the
power of material nature is so strong that it can act upon everyone, even Brahmä.
Brahmä was saved by the mercy of the Lord with a little punishment, but by the grace of
the Lord he did not lose his prestige as the great Brahmä.
TEXT 35
caTauhaeR}a& k-MaRTaN}aMauPavedNaYaE" Sah )
DaMaRSYa PaadaêTvarSTaQaEvaé[Mav*taYa" )) 35 ))
cätur-hotraà karma-tantram
519
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
upaveda-nayaiù saha
dharmasya pädäç catväras
tathaiväçrama-våttayaù
SYNONYMS
cätuù—four; hotram—paraphernalia for sacrifice; karma—action; tantram—expansions
of such activities; upaveda—supplementary to the Vedas; nayaiù—by logical
conclusions; saha—along with; dharmasya—of religiosity; pädäù—principles; catväraù—
four; tathä eva—in the same way; äçrama—social orders; våttayaù—occupations.
TRANSLATION
The four kinds of paraphernalia for conducting the fire sacrifice became manifest: the
performer [the chanter], the offerer, the fire, and the action performed in terms of the
supplementary Vedas. Also the four principles of religiosity [truth, austerity, mercy and
cleanliness] and the duties in the four social orders all became manifest.
PURPORT
Eating, sleeping, defending and mating are the four principles of material bodily
demands which are common to both the animals and human society. To distinguish
human society from the animals there is the performance of religious activities in terms
of the social statuses and orders of life. They are all clearly mentioned in the Vedic
literatures and were manifested by Brahmä when the four Vedas were generated from
his four mouths. Thus the duties of humankind in terms of the statuses and social orders
were established to be observed by the civilized man. Those who traditionally follow
these principles are called Äryans, or progressive human beings.
TEXT 36
ivdur ovac
Sa vE ivìSa*JaaMaqXaae vedadqNa( Mau%Taae_Sa*JaTa( )
Yad( Yad( YaeNaaSa*Jad( devSTaNMae b]Uih TaPaaeDaNa )) 36 ))
vidura uväca
520
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sa vai viçva-såjäm éço
vedädén mukhato 'såjat
yad yad yenäsåjad devas
tan me brühi tapo-dhana
SYNONYMS
viduraù uväca—Vidura said; saù—he (Brahmä); vai—certainly; viçva—the universe;
såjäm—of those who created; éçaù—the controller; veda-ädén—the Vedas, etc.;
mukhataù—from the mouth; asåjat—established; yat—that; yat—which; yena—by
which; asåjat—created; devaù—the god; tat—that; me—unto me; brühi—please explain;
tapaù-dhana—O sage whose only wealth is penance.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: O great sage whose only wealth is penance, kindly explain to me how and
with whose help Brahmä established the Vedic knowledge which emanated from his
mouth.
TEXT 37
MaE}aeYa ovac
‰GYaJau"SaaMaaQavaR:YaaNa( vedaNa( PaUvaRidi>aMauR%E" )
XaañiMaJYaa& STauiTaSTaaeMa& Pa[aYaiêta& VYaDaaT§-MaaTa( )) 37 ))
maitreya uväca
åg-yajuù-sämätharväkhyän
vedän pürvädibhir mukhaiù
çästram ijyäà stuti-stomaà
präyaçcittaà vyadhät kramät
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; åk-yajuù-säma-atharva—the four Vedas; äkhyän—of
the name; vedän—Vedic literatures; pürva-ädibhiù—beginning with the front;
mukhaiù—by the mouths; çästram—Vedic hymns not pronounced before; ijyäm—
521
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
priestly rituals; stuti-stomam—the subject matter of the reciters; präyaçcittam—
transcendental activities; vyadhät—established; kramät—one after another.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya said: Beginning from the front face of Brahmä, gradually the four Vedas—Åk,
Yajur, Säma and Atharva—became manifest. Thereafter, Vedic hymns which had not
been pronounced before, priestly rituals, the subject matters of the recitation, and
transcendental activities were all established, one after another.
TEXT 38
AaYauveRd& DaNauveRd& GaaNDav| vedMaaTMaNa" )
SQaaPaTYa& caSa*Jad( ved& §-MaaTPaUvaRidi>aMauR%E" )) 38 ))
äyur-vedaà dhanur-vedaà
gändharvaà vedam ätmanaù
sthäpatyaà cäsåjad vedaà
kramät pürvädibhir mukhaiù
SYNONYMS
äyuù-vedam—medical science; dhanuù-vedam—military science; gändharvam—musical
art; vedam—they are all Vedic knowledge; ätmanaù—of his own; sthäpatyam—
architectural; ca—also; asåjat—created; vedam—knowledge; kramät—respectively;
pürva-ädibhiù—beginning from the front face; mukhaiù—by the mouths.
TRANSLATION
He also created the medical science, military art, musical art and architectural science, all
from the Vedas. They all emanated one after another, beginning from the front face.
PURPORT
The Vedas contain perfect knowledge, which includes all kinds of knowledge necessary
for the human society, not only on this particular planet but on other planets as well. It
522
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
is understood that military art is also necessary knowledge for the upkeep of social order,
as is the art of music. All these groups of knowledge are called the Upapuräëa, or
supplements of the Vedas. Spiritual knowledge is the main topic of the Vedas, but to
help the human being's spiritual pursuit of knowledge, the other information, as above
mentioned, forms necessary branches of the Vedic knowledge.
TEXT 39
wiTahaSaPaura<aaiNa PaÄMa& vedMaqìr" )
SaveR>Ya Wv v£e->Ya" SaSa*Jae SavRdXaRNa" )) 39 ))
itihäsa-puräëäni
païcamaà vedam éçvaraù
sarvebhya eva vaktrebhyaù
sasåje sarva-darçanaù
SYNONYMS
itihäsa—histories; puräëäni—the Puräëas (supplementary Vedas); païcamam—the
fifth; vedam—the Vedic literature; éçvaraù—the Lord; sarvebhyaù—all together; eva—
certainly; vaktrebhyaù—from his mouths; sasåje—created; sarva—all around;
darçanaù—one who can see all time.
TRANSLATION
Then he created the fifth Veda—the Puräëas and the histories—from all his mouths,
since he could see all the past, present and future.
PURPORT
There are histories of particular countries and nations and of the world, but the Puräëas
are the histories of the universe, not only in one millennium, but in many kalpas.
Brahmä has knowledge of those historical facts, and therefore all the puräëas are
histories. As originally composed by Brahmä, they are part of the Vedas and are called
the fifth Veda.
523
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 40
zae@XYauKQaaE PaUvRv£-aTPaurqZYaiGaníuTaavQa )
AaáaeYaaRMaaiTara}aaE c vaJaPaeYa& SaGaaeSavMa( )) 40 ))
ñoòaçy-ukthau pürva-vakträt
puréñy-agniñöutäv atha
äptoryämätirätrau ca
väjapeyaà sagosavam
SYNONYMS
ñoòaçé-ukthau—types of sacrifice; pürva-vakträt—from the eastern mouth; puréñiagniñöutau—
types of sacrifice; atha—then; äptoryäma-atirätrau—types of sacrifice; ca—
and; väjapeyam—type of sacrifice; sa-gosavam—type of sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
All the different varieties of fire sacrifices [ñoòaçé, uktha, puréñi, agniñöoma, äptoryäma,
atirätra, väjapeya and gosava] became manifested from the eastern mouth of Brahmä.
TEXT 41
ivÛa daNa& TaPa" SaTYa& DaMaRSYaeiTa PadaiNa c )
Aaé[Maa&ê YaQaaSa&:YaMaSa*JaTSah v*itai>a" )) 41 ))
vidyä dänaà tapaù satyaà
dharmasyeti padäni ca
äçramäàç ca yathä-saìkhyam
asåjat saha våttibhiù
SYNONYMS
vidyä—education; dänam—charity; tapaù—penance; satyam—truth; dharmasya—of
religion; iti—thus; padäni—four legs; ca—also; äçramän—orders of life; ca—also;
yathä—as they are; saìkhyam—in number; asåjat—created; saha—along with;
524
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
våttibhiù—by vocations.
TRANSLATION
Education, charity, penance and truth are said to be the four legs of religion, and to learn
this there are four orders of life with different classifications of castes according to
vocation. Brahmä created all these in systematic order.
PURPORT
The nucleus of the four social orders—brahmacarya, or student life, gåhastha, or
householder family life, vänaprastha, or retired life for practicing penance, and sannyäsa,
or renounced life for preaching the truth—is the four legs of religion. The vocational
divisions are the brähmaëas, or the intelligent class, the kñatriyas, or administrative
class, the vaiçyas, or mercantile productive class, and the çüdras, or general laborer class
who have no specific qualifications. All were systematically planned and created by
Brahmä for the regular promotion of self-realization. Student life is meant for acquiring
the best education; household family life is meant for gratifying the senses, provided it is
performed with a charitable disposition of mind, retirement from household life is
meant for penance, for advancement in spiritual life, and renounced life is meant for
preaching the Absolute Truth to the people in general. The combined actions of all
members of society make the whole situation favorable for the upliftment of the mission
of human life. The beginning of this social institution is based on education meant for
purifying the animal propensities of the human being. The highest purificatory process
is knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the purest of the pure.
TEXT 42
Saaiv}a& Pa[aJaaPaTYa& c b]aø& caQa b*htaQaa )
vaTaaRSaÄYaXaal/INaiXal/aeH^ wiTa vE Ga*he )) 42 ))
sävitraà präjäpatyaà ca
brähmaà cätha båhat tathä
värtä saïcaya-çälénaçiloïcha
iti vai gåhe
525
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
sävitram—the thread ceremony of the twice-born; präjäpatyam—to execute the vow for
one year; ca—and; brähmam—acceptance of the Vedas; ca—and; atha—also; båhat—
complete abstinence from sex life; tathä—then; värtä—vocation in terms of Vedic
sanction; saïcaya—professional duty; çäléna—livelihood without asking anyone for
cooperation; çila-uïchaù—picking up rejected grains; iti—thus; vai—even though;
gåhe—in household life.
TRANSLATION
Then the thread ceremony for the twice-born was inaugurated, as were the rules to be
followed for at least one year after acceptance of the Vedas, rules for observing complete
abstinence from sex life, vocations in terms of Vedic injunctions, various professional
duties in household life, and the method of maintaining a livelihood without anyone's
cooperation by picking up rejected grains.
PURPORT
During student life the brahmacärés were given full instructions about the importance of
the human form of life. Thus the basic education was designed to encourage the student
in becoming free from family encumbrances. Only students unable to accept such a vow
in life were allowed to go home and marry a suitable wife. Otherwise, the student would
remain a permanent brahmacäré, observing complete abstinence from sex life for his
whole life. It all depended on the quality of the student's training. We had the
opportunity to meet an avowed brahmacäré in the personality of our spiritual master,
Oà Viñëupäda Çré Çrémad Bhaktisiddhänta Gosvämé Mahäräja. Such a great soul is
called a naiñöhika-brahmacäré.
TEXT 43
vE%aNaSaa val/i%LYaaEduMbra" fe-NaPaa vNae )
NYaaSae ku-$=qck-" PaUv| bûaedae h&SaiNaiZ§-YaaE )) 43 ))
vaikhänasä välakhilyaudumbaräù
phenapä vane
526
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nyäse kuöécakaù pürvaà
bahvodo haàsa-niñkriyau
SYNONYMS
vaikhänasäù—the section of men who retire from active life and live on half-boiled
meals; välakhilya—one who quits his former stock of grains on receipt of more;
audumbaräù—one who lives on what he gets from the direction towards which he starts
after rising from bed; phenapäù—one who lives on the fruits which automatically fall
from the tree; vane—in the forest; nyäse—in the order of renunciation; kuöécakaù—life
in the family without attachment; pürvam—in the beginning; bahvodaù—giving up all
material activities and engaging fully in transcendental service; haàsa—fully engaged in
transcendental knowledge; niñkriyau—stopping all kinds of activities.
TRANSLATION
The four divisions of retired life are the vaikhänasas, välakhilyas, audumbaras and
phenapas. The four divisions of the renounced order of life are the kuöécakas, bahvodas,
haàsas and niñkriyas. All these were manifested from Brahmä.
PURPORT
The varëäçrama-dharma, or the institution of the four divisions and orders of social and
spiritual life, is not a new invention of the modern age, as proposed by the less
intelligent. It is an institution established by Brahmä from the beginning of the
creation. This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (4.13): cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöam.
TEXT 44
AaNvqi+ak-I }aYaq vaTaaR d<@NaqiTaSTaQaEv c )
Wv& VYaaôTaYaêaSaNa( Pa[<avae ùSYa dh)) 44 ))
änvékñiké trayé värtä
daëòa-nétis tathaiva ca
evaà vyähåtayaç cäsan
praëavo hy asya dahrataù
527
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
änvékñiké—logic; trayé—the three goals, namely religion, economy and salvation; värtä—
sense gratification; daëòa—law and order; nétiù—moral codes; tathä—as also; eva ca—
respectively; evam—thus; vyähåtayaù—the celebrated hymns bhüù, bhuvaù and svaù;
ca—also; äsan—came into existence; praëavaù—the oàkära; hi—certainly; asya—of
him (Brahmä); dahrataù—from the heart.
TRANSLATION
The science of logical argument, the Vedic goals of life, and also law and order, moral
codes, and the celebrated hymns bhüù, bhuvaù and svaù all became manifested from the
mouths of Brahmä, and the praëava oàkära was manifested from his heart.
TEXT 45
TaSYaaeiZ<aGaaSaqçaeMa>Yaae GaaYa}aq c Tvcae iv>aae" )
i}aíuMMaa&SaaTòuTaae_NauíuBJaGaTYaSQNa" Pa[JaaPaTae" )) 45 ))
tasyoñëig äsél lomabhyo
gäyatré ca tvaco vibhoù
triñöum mäàsät snuto 'nuñöub
jagaty asthnaù prajäpateù
SYNONYMS
tasya—his; uñëik—one of the Vedic meters; äsét—generated; lomabhyaù—from the
hairs on the body; gäyatré—the principal Vedic hymn; ca—also; tvacaù—from the skin;
vibhoù—of the Lord; triñöup—a particular type of poetic meter; mäàsät—from the flesh;
snutaù—from the sinews; anuñöup—another type of poetic meter; jagaté—another type
of poetic meter; asthnaù—from the bones; prajäpateù—of the father of the living
entities.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the art of literary expression, uñëik, was generated from the hairs on the body
528
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of the almighty Prajäpati. The principal Vedic hymn, gäyatré, was generated from the
skin, triñöup from the flesh, anuñöup from the veins, and jagaté from the bones of the lord
of the living entities.
TEXT 46
MaÂaYaa" Pai»åTPaàa b*hTaq Pa[a<aTaae_>avTa( )) 46 ))
majjäyäù paìktir utpannä
båhaté präëato 'bhavat
SYNONYMS
majjäyäù—from the bone marrow; paìktiù—a particular type of verse; utpannä—
became manifested; båhaté—another type of verse; präëataù—out of the life-breathing;
abhavat—generated.
TRANSLATION
The art of writing verse, paìkti, became manifested from the bone marrow, and that of
båhaté, another type of verse, was generated from the life-breath of the Lord of the living
entities.
TEXT 47
SPaXaRSTaSYaa>avÂqv" Svrae deh odaôTa )
OZMaa<aiMaiNd]Yaa<YaahurNTa"SQaa bl/MaaTMaNa" )
Svra" Saá ivhare<a >aviNTa SMa Pa[JaaPaTae" )) 47 ))
sparças tasyäbhavaj jévaù
svaro deha udähåta
üñmäëam indriyäëy ähur
antaù-sthä balam ätmanaù
svaräù sapta vihäreëa
bhavanti sma prajäpateù
529
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
sparçaù—the set of letters from ka to ma; tasya—his; abhavat—became; jévaù—the soul;
svaraù—vowels; dehaù—his body; udähåtaù—are expressed; üñmäëam—the letters ça,
ña, sa and ha; indriyäëi—the senses; ähuù—are called; antaù-sthäù—the set of letters so
known (ya, ra, la and va); balam—energy; ätmanaù—of his self; svaräù—music; sapta—
seven; vihäreëa—by the sensual activities; bhavanti sma—became manifested;
prajäpateù—of the lord of the living entities.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä's soul was manifested as the touch alphabets, his body as the vowels, his senses as
the sibilant alphabets, his strength as the intermediate alphabets and his sensual activities
as the seven notes of music.
PURPORT
In Sanskrit there are thirteen vowels and thirty-five consonants. The vowels are a, ä, i, é,
u, ü, å, è, ÿ, e, ai, o, au, and the consonants are ka, kha, ga, gha, etc. Amongst the
consonants, the first twenty-five letters are called the sparças. There are also four antaùsthas.
Of the üñmas there are three s's, called tälavya, mürdhanya and dantya. The
musical notes are ña, å, gä, ma, dha, and ni. All these sound vibrations are originally
called çabda-brahma, or spiritual sound. It is said, therefore, that Brahmä was created in
the Mahä-kalpa as the incarnation of spiritual sound. The Vedas are spiritual sound, and
therefore there is no need of material interpretation for the sound vibration of the
Vedic literature. The Vedas should be vibrated as they are, although they are
symbolically represented with letters which are known to us materially. In the ultimate
issue there is nothing material because everything has its origin in the spiritual world.
The material manifestation is therefore called illusion in the proper sense of the term.
For those who are realized souls there is nothing but spirit.
TEXT 48
XaBdb]øaTMaNaSTaSYa VYa¢-aVYa¢-aTMaNa" Par" )
b]øav>aaiTa ivTaTaae NaaNaaXa¢-yuPab*&ihTa" )) 48 ))
530
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
çabda-brahmätmanas tasya
vyaktävyaktätmanaù paraù
brahmävabhäti vitato
nänä-çakty-upabåàhitaù
SYNONYMS
çabda-brahma—transcendental sound; ätmanaù—of the Supreme Lord; tasya—His;
vyakta—manifested; avyakta-ätmanaù—of the unmanifested; paraù—transcendental;
brahmä—the Absolute; avabhäti—completely manifested; vitataù—distributing; nänä—
multifarious; çakti—energies; upabåàhitaù—invested with.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä is the personal representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the
source of transcendental sound and is therefore above the conception of manifested and
unmanifested. Brahmä is the complete form of the Absolute Truth and is invested with
multifarious energies.
PURPORT
The post of Brahmä is the highest responsible post within the universe, and it is offered
to the most perfect personality of the universe. Sometimes the Supreme Personality of
Godhead has to become Brahmä when there is no suitable living being to occupy the
post. In the material world, Brahmä is the complete representation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and transcendental sound, praëava, comes from him. He is
therefore invested with multifarious energies, from which all the demigods like Indra,
Candra and Varuëa are manifested. His transcendental value is not to be minimized,
even though he exhibited a tendency to enjoy his own daughter. There is a purpose for
the exhibition of such a tendency by Brahmä, and he is not to be condemned like an
ordinary living entity.
TEXT 49
TaTaae_ParaMauPaadaYa Sa SaGaaRYa MaNaae dDae )) 49 ))
531
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tato 'paräm upädäya
sa sargäya mano dadhe
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; aparäm—another; upädäya—having accepted; saù—he; sargäya—in
the matter of creation; manaù—mind; dadhe—gave attention.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter Brahmä accepted another body, in which sex life was not forbidden, and thus
he engaged himself in the matter of further creation.
PURPORT
In his former body, which was transcendental, affection for sex life was forbidden, and
Brahmä therefore had to accept another body to allow himself to be connected with sex.
He thus engaged himself in the matter of creation. His former body transformed into
fog, as previously described.
TEXT 50
‰zq<aa& >aUirvqYaaR<aaMaiPa SaGaRMaivSTa*TaMa( )
jaTva Tad(Da*dYae >aUYaiêNTaYaaMaaSa k-aErv )) 50 ))
åñéëäà bhüri-véryäëäm
api sargam aviståtam
jïätvä tad dhådaye bhüyaç
cintayäm äsa kaurava
SYNONYMS
åñéëäm—of the great sages; bhüri-véryäëäm—with great potential power; api—in spite
of; sargam—the creation; aviståtam—not extended; jïätvä—knowing; tat—that;
hådaye—in his heart; bhüyaù—again; cintayäm äsa—he began to consider; kaurava—O
son of the Kurus.
532
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
O son of the Kurus, when Brahmä saw that in spite of the presence of sages of great
potency there was no sufficient increase in population, he seriously began to consider how
the population could be increased.
TEXT 51
Ahae Ad(>auTaMaeTaNMae VYaaPa*TaSYaaiPa iNaTYada )
Na ùeDaNTae Pa[Jaa NaUNa& dEvMa}a ivgaaTak-Ma( )) 51 ))
aho adbhutam etan me
vyäpåtasyäpi nityadä
na hy edhante prajä nünaà
daivam atra vighätakam
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; adbhutam—it is wonderful; etat—this; me—for me; vyäpåtasya—being busy;
api—although; nityadä—always; na—does not; hi—certainly; edhante—generate;
prajäù—living entities; nünam—however; daivam—destiny; atra—herein;
vighätakam—against.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä thought to himself: Alas, it is wonderful that in spite of my being scattered all
over, there is still insufficient population throughout the universe. There is no other
cause for this misfortune but destiny.
TEXT 52
Wv& Yau¢-k*-TaSTaSYa dEv& cave+aTaSTada )
k-SYa æPaMa>aUd( ÜeDaa YaTk-aYaMai>ac+aTae )) 52 ))
evaà yukta-kåtas tasya
533
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
daivaà cävekñatas tadä
kasya rüpam abhüd dvedhä
yat käyam abhicakñate
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; yukta—contemplating; kåtaù—while doing so; tasya—his; daivam—
supernatural power; ca—also; avekñataù—observing; tadä—at that time; kasya—of
Brahmä; rüpam—form; abhüt—became manifested; dvedhä—twofold; yat—which is;
käyam—his body; abhicakñate—is said to be.
TRANSLATION
While he was thus absorbed in contemplation and was observing the supernatural power,
two other forms were generated from his body. They are still celebrated as the body of
Brahmä.
PURPORT
Two bodies came out from the body of Brahmä. One had a mustache, and the other had
swollen breasts. No one can explain the source of their manifestation, and therefore
until today they are known as the käyam, or the body of Brahmä, with no indication of
their relationship as his son or daughter.
TEXT 53
Taa>Yaa& æPaiv>aaGaa>Yaa& iMaQauNa& SaMaPaÛTa )) 53 ))
täbhyäà rüpa-vibhägäbhyäà
mithunaà samapadyata
SYNONYMS
täbhyäm—of them; rüpa—form; vibhägäbhyäm—thus being divided; mithunam—sex
relation; samapadyata—perfectly executed.
534
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The two newly separated bodies united together in a sexual relationship.
TEXT 54
YaSTau Ta}a PauMaaNa( Saae_>aUNMaNau" SvaYaM>auv" Svra$( )
ñq YaaSaqC^TaæPaa:Yaa MaihZYaSYa MahaTMaNa" )) 54 ))
yas tu tatra pumän so 'bhün
manuù sväyambhuvaù svaräö
stré yäséc chatarüpäkhyä
mahiñy asya mahätmanaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; tu—but; tatra—there; pumän—the male; saù—he; abhüt—became;
manuù—the father of mankind; sväyambhuvaù—of the name Sväyambhuva; sva-räö—
fully independent; stré—the woman; yä—one who; äsét—there was; çatarüpä—of the
name Çatarüpä; äkhyä—known as; mahiñé—the queen; asya—of him; mahätmanaù—the
great soul.
TRANSLATION
Out of them, the one who had the male form became known as the Manu named
Sväyambhuva, and the woman became known as Çatarüpä, the queen of the great soul
Manu.
TEXT 55
Tada iMaQauNaDaMaeR<a Pa[Jaa ùeDaaMb>aUivre )) 55 ))
tadä mithuna-dharmeëa
prajä hy edhäm babhüvire
SYNONYMS
535
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tadä—at that time; mithuna—sex life; dharmeëa—according to regulative principles;
prajäù—generations; hi—certainly; edhäm—increased; babhüvire—took place.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, by sex indulgence, they gradually increased generations of population one
after another.
TEXT 56
Sa caiPa XaTaæPaaYaa& PaÄaPaTYaaNYaJaqJaNaTa( )
iPa[Yav]TaaetaaNaPaadaE iTaó" k-NYaaê >aarTa )
AakU-iTadeRvhUiTaê Pa[SaUiTairiTa SataMa )) 56 ))
sa cäpi çatarüpäyäà
païcäpatyäny ajéjanat
priyavratottänapädau
tisraù kanyäç ca bhärata
äkütir devahütiç ca
prasütir iti sattama
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Manu); ca—also; api—in due course; çatarüpäyäm—unto Çatarüpä; païca—
five; apatyäni—children; ajéjanat—begot; priyavrata—Priyavrata; uttänapädau—
Uttänapäda; tisraù—three in number; kanyäù—daughters; ca—also; bhärata—O son of
Bharata; äkütiù—Äküti; devahütiù—Devahüti; ca—and; prasütiù—Prasüti; iti—thus;
sattama—O best of all.
TRANSLATION
O son of Bharata, in due course of time he [Manu] begot in Çatarüpä five children—two
sons, Priyavrata and Uttänapäda, and three daughters, Äküti, Devahüti and Prasüti.
TEXT 57
536
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
AakU-iTa& åcYae Pa[adaTk-dRMaaYa Tau MaDYaMaaMa( )
d+aaYaadaTPa[SaUiTa& c YaTa AaPaUirTa& JaGaTa( )) 57 ))
äkütià rucaye prädät
kardamäya tu madhyamäm
dakñäyädät prasütià ca
yata äpüritaà jagat
SYNONYMS
äkütim—the daughter named Äküti; rucaye—unto the sage Ruci; prädät—handed over;
kardamäya—unto the sage Kardama; tu—but; madhyamäm—the middle one
(Devahüti); dakñäya—unto Dakña; adät—handed over; prasütim—the youngest
daughter; ca—also; yataù—wherefrom; äpüritam—is fulfilled; jagat—the whole world.
TRANSLATION
The father, Manu, handed over his first daughter, Äküti, to the sage Ruci, the middle
daughter, Devahüti, to the sage Kardama, and the youngest, Prasüti, to Dakña. From
them, all the world filled with population.
PURPORT
The history of the creation of the population of the universe is given herewith. Brahmä
is the original living creature in the universe, from whom were generated the Manu
Sväyambhuva and his wife Çatarüpä. From Manu, two sons and three daughters were
born, and from them all the population in different planets has sprung up until now.
Therefore, Brahmä is known as the grandfather of everyone, and the Personality of
Godhead, being the father of Brahmä, is known as the great-grandfather of all living
beings. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (11.39) as follows:
väyur yamo 'gnir varuëaù çaçäìkaù
prajäpatis tvaà prapitämahaç ca
namo namas te 'stu sahasra-kåtvaù
punaç ca bhüyo 'pi namo namas te
537
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
"You are the Lord of air, the supreme justice Yama, the fire, and the Lord of rains. You
are the moon, and You are the great-grandfather. Therefore I offer my respectful
obeisances unto You again and again."
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Twelfth Chapter, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "Creation of the Kumäras and Others."
13. The Appearance of Lord Varäha
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
iNaXaMYa vac& vdTaae MauNae" Pau<YaTaMaa& Na*Pa )
>aUYa" PaPa[C^ k-aErVYaae vaSaudevk-Qaad*Ta" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
niçamya väcaà vadato
muneù puëyatamäà nåpa
bhüyaù papraccha kauravyo
väsudeva-kathädåtaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; niçamya—after hearing; väcam—talks;
vadataù—while speaking; muneù—of Maitreya Muni; puëya-tamäm—the most virtuous;
nåpa—O King; bhüyaù—then again; papraccha—inquired; kauravyaù—the best
amongst the Kurus (Vidura); väsudeva-kathä—topics on the subject of the Personality of
Godhead, Väsudeva; ädåtaù—one who so adores.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, after hearing all these most virtuous topics from the
538
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sage Maitreya, Vidura inquired further on the topics of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, which he adored to hear.
PURPORT
The word ädåtaù is significant because it indicates that Vidura had a natural inclination
for hearing the transcendental message of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and he
was never fully satisfied though continuing to hear those topics. He wanted to hear
more and more so that he could be more and more blessed by the transcendental
message.
TEXT 2
ivdur ovac
Sa vE SvaYaM>auv" SaMa]a$( iPa[Ya" Pau}a" SvYaM>auv" )
Pa[iTal/>Ya iPa[Yaa& PaÒq& ik&- ck-ar TaTaae MauNae )) 2 ))
vidura uväca
sa vai sväyambhuvaù samräö
priyaù putraù svayambhuvaù
pratilabhya priyäà patnéà
kià cakära tato mune
SYNONYMS
viduraù uväca—Vidura said; saù—he; vai—easily; sväyambhuvaù—Sväyambhuva Manu;
samräö—the king of all kings; priyaù—dear; putraù—son; svayambhuvaù—of Brahmä;
pratilabhya—after obtaining; priyäm—most loving; patném—wife; kim—what; cakära—
did; tataù—thereafter; mune—O great sage.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: O great sage, what did Sväyambhuva, the dear son of Brahmä, do after
obtaining his very loving wife?
539
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 3
cirTa& TaSYa raJazeRraidraJaSYa SataMa )
b]Uih Mae é[ÕDaaNaaYa ivZvKSaeNaaé[Yaae ùSaaE )) 3 ))
caritaà tasya räjarñer
ädi-räjasya sattama
brühi me çraddadhänäya
viñvaksenäçrayo hy asau
SYNONYMS
caritam—character; tasya—his; räjarñeù—of the saintly king; ädi-räjasya—of the
original king; sattama—O most pious one; brühi—kindly speak; me—unto me;
çraddadhänäya—unto one eager to receive; viñvaksena—of the Personality of Godhead;
äçrayaù—one who has taken shelter; hi—certainly; asau—that king.
TRANSLATION
O best of the virtuous, the original king of kings [Manu] was a great devotee of the
Personality of Godhead Hari, and thus it is worth hearing of his sublime character and
activities. Please describe them. I am very eager to hear.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is full of the transcendental topics of the Personality of Godhead
and His pure devotees. In the absolute world there is no difference in quality between
the Supreme Lord and His pure devotee. Therefore, hearing the topics of the Lord and
hearing of the character and activities of the pure devotee have the same result, namely,
the development of devotional service.
TEXT 4
é[uTaSYa Pau&Saa& Sauicré[MaSYa
NaNvÅSaa SaUiri>arqi@Taae_QaR" )
Tatad(Gau<aaNaué[v<a& Mauku-Nd‚
540
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PaadarivNd& ôdYaezu YaezaMa( )) 4 ))
çrutasya puàsäà sucira-çramasya
nanv aïjasä süribhir éòito 'rthaù
tat-tad-guëänuçravaëaà mukundapädäravindaà
hådayeñu yeñäm
SYNONYMS
çrutasya—of persons who are in the process of hearing; puàsäm—of such persons;
sucira—for a long time; çramasya—laboring very hard; nanu—certainly; aïjasä—
elaborately; süribhiù—by pure devotees; éòitaù—explained by; arthaù—statements; tat—
that; tat—that; guëa—transcendental qualities; anuçravaëam—thinking; mukunda—
the Personality of Godhead, who awards liberation; päda-aravindam—the lotus feet;
hådayeñu—within the heart; yeñäm—of them.
TRANSLATION
Persons who hear from a spiritual master with great labor and for a long time must hear
from the mouths of pure devotees about the character and activities of pure devotees.
Pure devotees always think within their hearts of the lotus feet of the Personality of
Godhead, who awards His devotees liberation.
PURPORT
Transcendental students are those who undergo great penance in being trained by
hearing the Vedas from a bona fide spiritual master. Not only must they hear about the
activities of the Lord, but they must also hear about the transcendental qualities of the
devotees who are constantly thinking of the lotus feet of the Lord within their hearts. A
pure devotee of the Lord cannot be separated from the lotus feet of the Lord for even a
moment. Undoubtedly the Lord is always within the hearts of all living creatures, but
they hardly know about it because they are deluded by the illusory material energy. The
devotees, however, realize the presence of the Lord, and therefore they can always see
the lotus feet of the Lord within their hearts. Such pure devotees of the Lord are as
glorious as the Lord; they are, in fact, recommended by the Lord as more worshipable
than He Himself. Worship of the devotee is more potent than worship of the Lord. It is
541
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
therefore the duty of the transcendental students to hear of pure devotees, as explained
by similar devotees of the Lord, because one cannot explain about the Lord or His
devotee unless one happens to be a pure devotee himself.
TEXT 5
é[qéuk- ovac
wiTa b]uva<a& ivdur& ivNaqTa&
SahóXaqZ<aRêr<aaePaDaaNaMa( )
Pa[ôíraeMaa >aGavTk-QaaYaa&
Pa[<aqYaMaaNaae MauiNar>Yací )) 5 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti bruväëaà viduraà vinétaà
sahasra-çérñëaç caraëopadhänam
prahåñöa-romä bhagavat-kathäyäà
praëéyamäno munir abhyacañöa
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; bruväëam—speaking;
viduram—unto Vidura; vinétam—very gentle; sahasra-çérñëaù—the Personality of
Godhead Kåñëa; caraëa—lotus feet; upadhänam—pillow; prahåñöa-romä—hairs standing
in ecstasy; bhagavat—in relationship with the Personality of Godhead; kathäyäm—in
the words; praëéyamänaù—being influenced by such spirit; muniù—the sage;
abhyacañöa—attempted to speak.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: The Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa was pleased to place
His lotus feet on the lap of Vidura because Vidura was very meek and gentle. The sage
Maitreya was very pleased with Vidura's words, and, being influenced by his spirit, he
attempted to speak.
PURPORT
542
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The word sahasra-çérñëaù is very significant. One who has diverse energies and activities
and a wonderful brain is known as the sahasra-çérñëaù. This qualification is applicable
only to the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, and no one else. The Personality of
Godhead was pleased to dine sometimes with Vidura at his home, and while resting He
placed His lotus feet on the lap of Vidura. Maitreya was inspired by the thought of
Vidura's wonderful fortune. The hairs of his body stood on end, and he was pleased to
narrate the topics of the Personality of Godhead with great delight.
TEXT 6
MaE}aeYa ovac
Yada Sv>aaYaRYaa SaaDa| JaaTa" SvaYaM>auvae MaNau" )
Pa[aÅil/" Pa[<aTaêed& vedGa>aRMa>aazTa )) 6 ))
maitreya uväca
yadä sva-bhäryayä särdhaà
jätaù sväyambhuvo manuù
präïjaliù praëataç cedaà
veda-garbham abhäñata
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; yadä—when; sva-bhäryayä—along with his wife;
särdham—accompanied by; jätaù—appeared; sväyambhuvaù—Sväyambhuva Manu;
manuù—the father of mankind; präïjaliù—with folded hands; praëataù—in obeisances;
ca—also; idam—this; veda-garbham—unto the reservoir of Vedic wisdom; abhäñata—
addressed.
TRANSLATION
The sage Maitreya said to Vidura: After his appearance, Manu, the father of mankind,
along with his wife, thus addressed the reservoir of Vedic wisdom, Brahmä, with
obeisances and folded hands.
TEXT 7
543
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TvMaek-" SavR>aUTaaNaa& JaNMak*-d( v*itad" iPaTaa )
TaQaaiPa Na" Pa[JaaNaa& Tae éué[Uza ke-Na va >aveTa( )) 7 ))
tvam ekaù sarva-bhütänäà
janma-kåd våttidaù pitä
tathäpi naù prajänäà te
çuçrüñä kena vä bhavet
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; ekaù—one; sarva—all; bhütänäm—living entities; janma-kåt—progenitor;
våtti-daù—source of subsistence; pitä—the father; tathä api—yet; naù—ourselves;
prajänäm—of all who are born; te—of you; çuçrüñä—service; kena—how; vä—either;
bhavet—may be possible.
TRANSLATION
You are the father of all living entities and the source of their subsistence because they
are all born of you. Please order us how we may be able to render service unto you.
PURPORT
A son's duty is not only to make the father the source of supply for all his needs, but
also, when he is grown up, to render service unto him. That is the law of creation
beginning from the time of Brahmä. A father's duty is to bring up the son until he is
grown, and when the son is grown up, it is his duty to render service unto the father.
TEXT 8
TaiÜDaeih NaMaSTau>Ya& k-MaRSvq@yaTMaXai¢-zu )
YaTk*-Tveh YaXaae ivZvGaMau}a c >aveÓiTa" )) 8 ))
tad vidhehi namas tubhyaà
karmasv éòyätma-çaktiñu
yat kåtveha yaço viñvag
544
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
amutra ca bhaved gatiù
SYNONYMS
tat—that; vidhehi—give direction; namaù—my obeisances; tubhyam—unto you;
karmasu—in duties; éòya—O worshipful one; ätma-çaktiñu—within our working
capacity; yat—which; kåtvä—doing; iha—in this world; yaçaù—fame; viñvak—
everywhere; amutra—in the next world; ca—and; bhavet—it should be; gatiù—progress.
TRANSLATION
O worshipful one, please give us your direction for the execution of duty within our
working capacity so that we can follow it for fame in this life and progress in the next.
PURPORT
Brahmä is the direct recipient of Vedic knowledge from the Personality of Godhead, and
anyone discharging his entrusted duties in disciplic succession from Brahmä is sure to
gain fame in this life and salvation in the next. The disciplic succession from Brahmä is
called the Brahma-sampradäya, and it descends as follows: Brahmä, Närada, Vyäsa,
Madhva Muni (Pürëaprajïa), Padmanäbha, Nåhari, Mädhava, Akñobhya, Jayatértha,
Jïänasindhu, Dayänidhi, Vidyänidhi, Räjendra, Jayadharma, Puruñottama,
Brahmaëyatértha, Vyäsatértha, Lakñmépati, Mädhavendra Puré, Éçvara Puré, Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, Svarüpa Dämodara and Çré Rüpa Gosvämé and others, Çré Raghunätha
däsa Gosvämé, Kåñëadäsa Gosvämé, Narottama däsa Öhäkura, Viçvanätha Cakravarté,
Jagannätha däsa Bäbäjé, Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura, Gaurakiçora däsa Bäbäjé, Çrémad
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté, A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami.
This line of disciplic succession from Brahmä is spiritual, whereas the genealogical
succession from Manu is material, but both are on the progressive march towards the
same goal of Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 9
b]øaevac
Pa[qTaSTau>YaMah& TaaTa SviSTa STaaÜa& i+aTaqìr )
YaiàVYaRl/Ike-Na ôda XaaiDa MaeTYaaTMaNaaiPaRTaMa( )) 9 ))
545
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
brahmoväca
prétas tubhyam ahaà täta
svasti städ väà kñitéçvara
yan nirvyalékena hådä
çädhi mety ätmanärpitam
SYNONYMS
brahmä uväca—Brahmä said; prétaù—pleased; tubhyam—unto you; aham—I; täta—my
dear son; svasti—all blessings; stät—let there be; väm—unto you both; kñiti-éçvara—O
lord of the world; yat—because; nirvyalékena—without reservation; hådä—by the heart;
çädhi—give instruction; mä—unto me; iti—thus; ätmanä—by self; arpitam—
surrendered.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: My dear son, O lord of the world, I am very pleased with you, and I
desire all blessings for both you and your wife. You have without reservation surrendered
yourself unto me with your heart for my instructions.
PURPORT
The relationship between the father and the son is always sublime. The father is
naturally disposed with good will towards the son, and he is always ready to help the son
in his progress in life. But in spite of the father's good will, the son is sometimes
misguided because of his misuse of personal independence. Every living entity, however
small or big he may be, has the choice of independence. If the son is unreservedly willing
to be guided by the father, the father is ten times more eager to instruct and guide him
by all means. The father and son relationship as exhibited here in the dealings of
Brahmä and Manu is excellent. Both the father and the son are well qualified, and their
example should be followed by all humankind. Manu, the son, unreservedly asked the
father, Brahmä, to instruct him, and the father, who was full of Vedic wisdom, was very
glad to instruct. The example of the father of mankind may be rigidly followed by
mankind, and that will advance the cause of the relationship of fathers and sons.
TEXT 10
546
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
WTaavTYaaTMaJaEvsr k-aYaaR ùPaiciTaGauRraE )
Xa¢-yaPa[MataEGa*RùeTa Saadr& GaTaMaTSarE" )) 10 ))
etävaty ätmajair véra
käryä hy apacitir gurau
çaktyäpramattair gåhyeta
sädaraà gata-matsaraiù
SYNONYMS
etävaté—just exactly like this; ätmajaiù—by the offspring; véra—O hero; käryä—should
be performed; hi—certainly; apacitiù—worship; gurau—unto the superior; çaktyä—with
full capacity; apramattaiù—by the sane; gåhyeta—should be accepted; sa-ädaram—with
great delight; gata-matsaraiù—by those who are beyond the limit of envy.
TRANSLATION
O hero, your example is quite befitting a son in relationship with his father. This sort of
adoration for the superior is required. One who is beyond the limit of envy and who is
sane accepts the order of his father with great delight and executes it to his full capacity.
PURPORT
When the four previous sons of Brahmä, the sages Sanaka, Sanätana, Sanandana and
Sanat-kumära, refused to obey their father, Brahmä was mortified, and his anger was
manifested in the shape of Rudra. That incident was not forgotten by Brahmä, and
therefore the obedience of Manu Sväyambhuva was very encouraging. From the
material point of view, the four sages' disobedience to the order of their father was
certainly abominable, but because such disobedience was for a higher purpose, they were
free from the reaction of disobedience. Those who disobey their fathers on material
grounds, however, are surely subjected to disciplinary reaction for such disobedience.
Manu's obedience to his father on material grounds was certainly free from envy, and in
the material world it is imperative for ordinary men to follow the example of Manu.
TEXT 11
547
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Sa TvMaSYaaMaPaTYaaiNa Sad*XaaNYaaTMaNaae Gau<aE" )
oTPaaÛ XaaSa DaMaeR<a Gaa& YajE" Pauåz& YaJa )) 11 ))
sa tvam asyäm apatyäni
sadåçäny ätmano guëaiù
utpädya çäsa dharmeëa
gäà yajïaiù puruñaà yaja
SYNONYMS
saù—therefore that obedient son; tvam—as you are; asyäm—in her; apatyäni—children;
sadåçäni—equally qualified; ätmanaù—of yourself; guëaiù—with the characteristics;
utpädya—having begotten; çäsa—rule; dharmeëa—on the principles of devotional
service; gäm—the world; yajïaiù—by sacrifices; puruñam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; yaja—worship.
TRANSLATION
Since you are my very obedient son, I ask you to beget children qualified like yourself in
the womb of your wife. Rule the world in pursuance of the principles of devotional
service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus worship the Lord by
performances of yajïa.
PURPORT
The purpose of the material creation by Brahmä is clearly described herein. Every
human being should beget nice children in the womb of his wife, as a sacrifice for the
purpose of worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead in devotional service. In the
Viñëu Puräëa (3.8.9) it is stated:
varëäçramäcäravatä
puruñeëa paraù pumän
viñëur ärädhyate panthä
nänyat tat-toña-käraëam
[Cc. Madhya 8.58]
"One can worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, by proper discharge of
548
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the principles of varëa and äçrama. There is no alternative to pacifying the Lord by
execution of the principles of the varëäçrama system."
Viñëu worship is the ultimate aim of human life. Those who take the license of married
life for sense enjoyment must also take the responsibility to satisfy the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, and the first stepping-stone is the varëäçrama-dharma
system. Varëäçrama-dharma is the systematic institution for advancing in worship of
Viñëu. However, if one directly engages in the process of devotional service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, it may not be necessary to undergo the disciplinary
system of varëäçrama-dharma. The other sons of Brahmä, the Kumäras, directly engaged
in devotional service, and thus they had no need to execute the principles of
varëäçrama-dharma.
TEXT 12
Par& éué[Uz<a& Maù& SYaaTPa[Jaar+aYaa Na*Pa )
>aGava&STae Pa[Jaa>aTauRôRzqke-Xaae_NauTauZYaiTa )) 12 ))
paraà çuçrüñaëaà mahyaà
syät prajä-rakñayä nåpa
bhagaväàs te prajä-bhartur
håñékeço 'nutuñyati
SYNONYMS
param—the greatest; çuçrüñaëam—devotional service; mahyam—unto me; syät—should
be; prajä—the living entities born in the material world; rakñayä—by saving them from
being spoiled; nåpa—O King; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; te—with you;
prajä-bhartuù—with the protector of the living beings; håñékeçaù—the Lord of the
senses; anutuñyati—is satisfied.
TRANSLATION
O King, if you can give proper protection to the living beings in the material world, that
will be the best service for me. When the Supreme Lord sees you to be a good protector of
the conditioned souls, certainly the master of the senses will be very pleased with you.
549
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The whole administrative system is arranged for the purpose of going back home, back
to Godhead. Brahmä is the representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
Manu is the representative of Brahmä. Similarly, all other kings on different planets of
the universe are representatives of Manu. The lawbook for the entire human society is
the Manu-saàhitä, which directs all activities towards the transcendental service of the
Lord. Every king, therefore, must know that his responsibility in administration is not
merely to exact taxes from the citizens but to see personally that the citizens under him
are being trained in Viñëu worship. Everyone must be educated in Viñëu worship and
engaged in the devotional service of Håñékeça, the owner of the senses. The conditioned
souls are meant not to satisfy their material senses but to satisfy the senses of Håñékeça,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the purpose of the complete
administrative system. One who knows this secret, as disclosed here in the version of
Brahmä, is the perfect administrative head. One who does not know this is a show-bottle
administrator. By training the citizens in the devotional service of the Lord, the head of
a state can be free in his responsibility, otherwise he will fail in the onerous duty
entrusted to him and thus be punishable by the supreme authority. There is no other
alternative in the discharge of administrative duty.
TEXT 13
Yaeza& Na Tauíae >aGavaNa( Yajil/(r)ae JaNaadRNa" )
Taeza& é[Maae ùPaaQaaRYa YadaTMaa Naad*Ta" SvYaMa( )) 13 ))
yeñäà na tuñöo bhagavän
yajïa-liìgo janärdanaù
teñäà çramo hy apärthäya
yad ätmä nädåtaù svayam
SYNONYMS
yeñäm—of those with whom; na—never; tuñöaù—satisfied; bhagavän—the Personality of
Godhead; yajïa-liìgaù—the form of sacrifice; janärdanaù—Lord Kåñëa, or the viñëutattva;
teñäm—of them; çramaù—labor; hi—certainly; apärthäya—without profit; yat—
because; ätmä—the Supreme Soul; na—not; ädåtaù—respected; svayam—his own self.
550
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Janärdana [Lord Kåñëa], is the form to accept all
the results of sacrifice. If He is not satisfied, then one's labor for advancement is futile.
He is the ultimate Self, and therefore one who does not satisfy Him certainly neglects his
own interests.
PURPORT
Brahmä is deputed as the supreme head of universal affairs, and he in his turn deputes
Manu and others as charges d'affaires of the material manifestation, but the whole show
is for the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Brahmä knows how to
satisfy the Lord, and similarly persons engaged in the line of Brahmä's plan of activities
also know how to satisfy the Lord. The Lord is satisfied by the process of devotional
service, consisting of the ninefold process of hearing, chanting, etc. It is in one's own
sell-interest to execute prescribed devotional service, and anyone who neglects this
process neglects his own self-interest. Everyone wants to satisfy his senses, but above the
senses is the mind, above the mind is the intelligence, above the intelligence is the
individual self, and above the individual self is the Superself. Above even the Superself
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, viñëu-tattva. The primeval Lord and the cause of
all causes is Çré Kåñëa. The complete process of perfectional service is to render service
for the satisfaction of the transcendental senses of Lord Kåñëa, who is known as
Janärdana.
TEXT 14
MaNauåvac
AadeXae_h& >aGavTaae vTaeRYaaMaqvSaUdNa )
SQaaNa& iTvhaNauJaaNaqih Pa[JaaNaa& MaMa c Pa[>aae )) 14 ))
manur uväca
ädeçe 'haà bhagavato
varteyäméva-südana
sthänaà tv ihänujänéhi
prajänäà mama ca prabho
551
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
manuù uväca—Çré Manu said; ädeçe—under the order; aham—I; bhagavataù—of your
powerful self; varteya—shall stay; améva-südana—O killer of all sins; sthänam—the
place; tu—but; iha—in this world; anujänéhi—please let me know; prajänäm—of the
living entities born from me; mama—my; ca—also; prabho—O lord.
TRANSLATION
Çré Manu said: O all-powerful lord, O killer of all sins, I shall abide by your order. Now
please let me know my place and that of the living entities born of me.
TEXT 15
Yadaek-" SavR>aUTaaNaa& Mahq MaGana MahaM>aiSa )
ASYaa oÖr<ae YaÒae dev deVYaa ivDaqYaTaaMa( )) 15 ))
yad okaù sarva-bhütänäà
mahé magnä mahämbhasi
asyä uddharaëe yatno
deva devyä vidhéyatäm
SYNONYMS
yat—because; okaù—the dwelling place; sarva—for all; bhütänäm—living entities;
mahé—the earth; magnä—merged; mahä-ambhasi—in the great water; asyäù—of this;
uddharaëe—in the lifting; yatnaù—attempt; deva—O master of the demigods; devyäù—
of this earth; vidhéyatäm—let it be done.
TRANSLATION
O master of the demigods, please attempt to lift the earth, which is merged in the great
water, because it is the dwelling place for all the living entities. It can be done by your
endeavor and by the mercy of the Lord.
PURPORT
552
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The great water mentioned in this connection is the Garbhodaka Ocean, which fills half
of the universe.
TEXT 16
MaE}aeYa ovac
ParMaeïq TvPaa& MaDYae TaQaa SaàaMave+Ya GaaMa( )
k-QaMaeNaa& SaMauàeZYa wiTa dDYaaE iDaYaa icrMa( )) 16 ))
maitreya uväca
parameñöhé tv apäà madhye
tathä sannäm avekñya gäm
katham enäà samunneñya
iti dadhyau dhiyä ciram
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Çré Maitreya Muni said; parameñöhé—Brahmä; tu—also; apäm—the
water; madhye—within; tathä—thus; sannäm—situated; avekñya—seeing; gäm—the
earth; katham—how; enäm—this; samunneñye—I shall lift; iti—thus; dadhyau—gave
attention; dhiyä—by intelligence; ciram—for a long time.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: Thus, seeing the earth merged in the water, Brahmä gave his attention
for a long time to how it could be lifted.
PURPORT
According to Jéva Gosvämé, the topics delineated here are of different millenniums. The
present topics are of the Çveta-varäha millennium, and topics regarding the Cäkñuña
millennium will also be discussed in this chapter.
TEXT 17
Sa*JaTaae Mae i+aiTavaRi>aR" âaVYaMaaNaa rSaa& GaTaa )
553
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
AQaa}a ik-MaNauïeYaMaSMaai>a" SaGaRYaaeiJaTaE" )
YaSYaah& ôdYaadaSa& Sa wRXaae ivdDaaTau Mae )) 17 ))
såjato me kñitir värbhiù
plävyamänä rasäà gatä
athätra kim anuñöheyam
asmäbhiù sarga-yojitaiù
yasyähaà hådayäd äsaà
sa éço vidadhätu me
SYNONYMS
såjataù—while engaged in creation; me—of me; kñitiù—the earth; värbhiù—by the
water; plävyamänä—being inundated; rasäm—depth of water; gatä—gone down; atha—
therefore; atra—in this matter; kim—what; anuñöheyam—is right to be attempted;
asmäbhiù—by us; sarga—creation; yojitaiù—engaged in; yasya—the one from whose;
aham—I; hådayät—from the heart; äsam—born; saù—He; éçaù—the Lord; vidadhätu—
may direct; me—unto me.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä thought: While I have been engaged in the process of creation, the earth has been
inundated by a deluge and has gone down into the depths of the ocean. What can we do
who are engaged in this matter of creation? It is best to let the Almighty Lord direct us.
PURPORT
The devotees of the Lord, who are all confidential servitors, are sometimes perplexed in
the discharge of their respective duties, but they are never discouraged. They have full
faith in the Lord, and He paves the way for the smooth progress of the devotee's duty.
TEXT 18
wTYai>aDYaaYaTaae NaaSaaivvraTSahSaaNaga )
vrahTaaek-ae iNarGaadx(GauïPairMaa<ak-" )) 18 ))
554
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ity abhidhyäyato näsävivarät
sahasänagha
varäha-toko niragäd
aìguñöha-parimäëakaù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; abhidhyäyataù—while thinking; näsä-vivarät—from the nostrils; sahasä—all
of a sudden; anagha—O sinless one; varäha-tokaù—a minute form of Varäha (a boar);
niragät—came out; aìguñöha—the upper portion of the thumb; parimäëakaù—of the
measurement.
TRANSLATION
O sinless Vidura, all of a sudden, while Brahmä was engaged in thinking, a small form of
a boar came out of his nostril. The measurement of the creature was not more than the
upper portion of a thumb.
TEXT 19
TaSYaai>aPaXYaTa" %SQa" +a<aeNa ik-l/ >aarTa )
GaJaMaa}a" Pa[vv*Dae Tadd(>auTaMa>aUNMahTa( )) 19 ))
tasyäbhipaçyataù kha-sthaù
kñaëena kila bhärata
gaja-mätraù pravavådhe
tad adbhutam abhün mahat
SYNONYMS
tasya—his; abhipaçyataù—while thus observing; kha-sthaù—situated in the sky;
kñaëena—suddenly; kila—verily; bhärata—O descendant of Bharata; gaja-mätraù—just
like an elephant; pravavådhe—thoroughly expanded; tat—that; adbhutam—
extraordinary; abhüt—transformed; mahat—into a gigantic body.
TRANSLATION
555
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
O descendant of Bharata, while Brahmä was observing Him, that boar became situated in
the sky in a wonderful manifestation as gigantic as a great elephant.
TEXT 20
MarqicPa[Mau%EivRPa[E" ku-MaarEMaRNauNaa Sah )
d*îa TaTSaaEk-r& æPa& TakR-YaaMaaSa ic}aDaa )) 20 ))
maréci-pramukhair vipraiù
kumärair manunä saha
dåñövä tat saukaraà rüpaà
tarkayäm äsa citradhä
SYNONYMS
maréci—the great sage Maréci; pramukhaiù—headed by; vipraiù—all brähmaëas;
kumäraiù—with the four Kumäras; manunä—and with Manu; saha—with; dåñövä—
seeing; tat—that; saukaram—appearance like a boar; rüpam—form; tarkayäm äsa—
argued among themselves; citradhä—in various ways.
TRANSLATION
Struck with wonder at observing the wonderful boarlike form in the sky, Brahmä, with
great brähmaëas like Maréci, as well as the Kumäras and Manu, began to argue in various
ways.
TEXT 21
ik-MaeTaTSaUk-rVYaaJa& Satv& idVYaMaviSQaTaMa( )
Ahae bTaaêYaRiMad& NaaSaaYaa Mae iviNa"Sa*TaMa( )) 21 ))
kim etat sükara-vyäjaà
sattvaà divyam avasthitam
aho batäçcaryam idaà
näsäyä me viniùsåtam
556
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
kim—what; etat—this; sükara—boar; vyäjam—pretension; sattvam—entity; divyam—
extraordinary; avasthitam—situated; aho bata—oh, it is; äçcaryam—very wonderful;
idam—this; näsäyäù—from the nose; me—my; viniùsåtam—came out.
TRANSLATION
Is this some extraordinary entity come in the pretense of a boar? It is very wonderful that
He has come from my nose.
TEXT 22
d*íae_x(GauïiXaraeMaa}a" +a<aaÓ<@iXal/aSaMa" )
AiPa iSvÙGavaNaez Yajae Mae %edYaNMaNa" )) 22 ))
dåñöo 'ìguñöha-çiro-mätraù
kñaëäd gaëòa-çilä-samaù
api svid bhagavän eña
yajïo me khedayan manaù
SYNONYMS
dåñöaù—just seen; aìguñöha—thumb; çiraù—tip; mätraù—only; kñaëät—immediately;
gaëòa-çilä—large stone; samaù—like; api svit—whether; bhagavän—the Personality of
Godhead; eñaù—this; yajïaù—Viñëu; me—my; khedayan—perturbing; manaù—mind.
TRANSLATION
First of all this boar was seen no bigger than the tip of a thumb, and within a moment He
was as large as a stone. My mind is perturbed. Is He the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Viñëu?
PURPORT
Since Brahmä is the supermost person in the universe and he had never before
557
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
experienced such a form, he could guess that the wonderful appearance of the boar was
an incarnation of Viñëu. The uncommon features symptomatic of the incarnation of
Godhead can bewilder even the mind of Brahmä.
TEXT 23
wiTa MaqMaa&SaTaSTaSYa b]ø<a" Sah SaUNaui>a" )
>aGavaNa( YajPauåzae JaGaJaaRGaeNd]Saià>a" )) 23 ))
iti mémäàsatas tasya
brahmaëaù saha sünubhiù
bhagavän yajïa-puruño
jagarjägendra-sannibhaù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; mémäàsataù—while deliberating; tasya—his; brahmaëaù—of Brahmä; saha—
along with; sünubhiù—his sons; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; yajïa—Lord
Viñëu; puruñaù—the Supreme Person; jagarja—resounded; aga-indra—great mountain;
sannibhaù—like.
TRANSLATION
While Brahmä was deliberating with his sons, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Viñëu, roared tumultuously like a great mountain.
PURPORT
It appears that great hills and mountains also have their roaring power because they are
also living entities. The volume of the sound vibrated is in proportion to the size of the
material body. While Brahmä was guessing about the appearance of the Lord's
incarnation as a boar, the Lord confirmed Brahmä's contemplation by roaring with His
gorgeous voice.
TEXT 24
558
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
b]øa<a& hzRYaaMaaSa hirSTaa&ê iÜJaaetaMaaNa( )
SvGaiJaRTaeNa k-ku->a" Pa[iTaSvNaYaTaa iv>au" )) 24 ))
brahmäëaà harñayäm äsa
haris täàç ca dvijottamän
sva-garjitena kakubhaù
pratisvanayatä vibhuù
SYNONYMS
brahmäëam—unto Brahmä; harñayäm äsa—enlivened; hariù—the Personality of
Godhead; tän—all of them; ca—also; dvija-uttamän—highly elevated brähmaëas; svagarjitena—
by His uncommon voice; kakubhaù—all directions; pratisvanayatä—which
echoed; vibhuù—the omnipotent.
TRANSLATION
The omnipotent Supreme Personality of Godhead enlivened Brahmä and the other highly
elevated brähmaëas by again roaring with His uncommon voice, which echoed in all
directions.
PURPORT
Brahmä and other enlightened brähmaëas who know the Supreme Personality of
Godhead are enlivened by the appearance of the Lord in any of His multi-incarnations.
The appearance of the wonderful and gigantic incarnation of Viñëu as the mountainlike
boar did not fill them with any kind of fear, although the Lord's resounding voice was
tumultuous and echoed horribly in all directions as an open threat to all demons who
might challenge His omnipotency.
TEXT 25
iNaXaMYa Tae gagaRirTa& Sv%ed‚
+aiYaZ<au MaaYaaMaYaSaUk-rSYa )
JaNaSTaPa"SaTYaiNavaiSaNaSTae
559
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
i}ai>a" Paiv}aEMauRNaYaae_Ga*<aNa( SMa )) 25 ))
niçamya te ghargharitaà sva-khedakñayiñëu
mäyämaya-sükarasya
janas-tapaù-satya-niväsinas te
tribhiù pavitrair munayo 'gåëan sma
SYNONYMS
niçamya—just after hearing; te—those; ghargharitam—the tumultuous sound; svakheda—
personal lamentation; kñayiñëu—destroying; mäyä-maya—all-merciful;
sükarasya—of Lord Boar; janaù—the Janaloka planet; tapaù—the Tapoloka planet;
satya—the Satyaloka planet; niväsinaù—residents; te—all of them; tribhiù—from the
three Vedas; pavitraiù—by the all-auspicious mantras; munayaù—great thinkers and
sages; agåëan sma—chanted.
TRANSLATION
When the great sages and thinkers who are residents of Janaloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka
heard the tumultuous voice of Lord Boar, which was the all-auspicious sound of the allmerciful
Lord, they chanted auspicious chants from the three Vedas.
PURPORT
The word mäyämaya is very significant in this verse. Mäyä means "mercy," "specific
knowledge" and also "illusion." Therefore Lord Boar is everything; He is merciful, He is
all knowledge, and He is illusion also. The sound which He vibrated as the boar
incarnation was answered by the Vedic hymns of the great sages in the planets Janaloka,
Tapoloka and Satyaloka. The highest intellectual and pious living entities live in those
planets, and when they heard the extraordinary voice of the boar, they could
understand that the specific sound was vibrated by the Lord and no one else. Therefore
they replied by praying to the Lord with Vedic hymns. The earth planet was submerged
in the mire, but on hearing the sound of the Lord, the inhabitants of the higher planets
were all jubilant because they knew that the Lord was there to deliver the earth.
Therefore Brahmä and all the sages, such as Bhågu, Brahmä's other sons, and learned
brähmaëas, were enlivened, and they concertedly joined in praising the Lord with the
560
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
transcendental vibrations of the Vedic hymns. The most important is the Båhannäradéya
Puräëa verse Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma,
Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare.
TEXT 26
Taeza& SaTaa& vedivTaaNaMaUiTaR‚
bR]øavDaaYaaRTMaGau<aaNauvadMa( )
ivNaÛ >aUYaae ivbuDaaedYaaYa
GaJaeNd]l/Il/ae Jal/MaaivveXa )) 26 ))
teñäà satäà veda-vitäna-mürtir
brahmävadhäryätma-guëänuvädam
vinadya bhüyo vibudhodayäya
gajendra-lélo jalam äviveça
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of them; satäm—of the great devotees; veda—all knowledge; vitäna-mürtiù—the
form of expansion; brahma—Vedic sound; avadhärya—knowing it well; ätma—of
Himself; guëa-anuvädam—transcendental glorification; vinadya—resounding; bhüyaù—
again; vibudha—of the transcendentally learned; udayäya—for the elevation or benefit;
gajendra-lélaù—playing like an elephant; jalam—the water; äviveça—entered.
TRANSLATION
Playing like an elephant, He entered into the water after roaring again in reply to the
Vedic prayers by the great devotees. The Lord is the object of the Vedic prayers, and thus
He understood that the devotees' prayers were meant for Him.
PURPORT
The form of the Lord in any shape is always transcendental and full of knowledge and
mercy. The Lord is the destroyer of all material contamination because His form is
personified Vedic knowledge. All the Vedas worship the transcendental form of the
Lord. In the Vedic mantras the devotees request the Lord to remove the glaring
561
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
effulgence because it covers His real face. That is the version of the Éçopaniñad. The
Lord has no material form, but His form is always understood in terms of the Vedas. The
Vedas are said to be the breath of the Lord, and that breath was inhaled by Brahmä, the
original student of the Vedas. The breathing from the nostril of Brahmä caused the
appearance of Lord Boar, and therefore the boar incarnation of the Lord is the
personified Vedas. The glorification of the incarnation by the sages on the higher
planets consisted of factual Vedic hymns. Whenever there is glorification of the Lord, it
is to be understood that Vedic mantras are being rightly vibrated. The Lord was
therefore pleased when such Vedic mantras were chanted, and to encourage His pure
devotees, He roared once more and entered the water to rescue the submerged earth.
TEXT 27
oiT+aával/" %cr" k-#=aer"
Sa$=a ivDauNvNa( %rraeMaXaTvk(- )
%urahTaa>a]" iSaTad&í\ wR+aa‚
JYaaeiTabR>aaSae >aGavaNMahqDa]" )) 27 ))
utkñipta-välaù kha-caraù kaöhoraù
saöä vidhunvan khara-romaça-tvak
khurähatäbhraù sita-daàñöra ékñäjyotir
babhäse bhagavän mahédhraù
SYNONYMS
utkñipta-välaù—slashing with the tail; kha-caraù—in the sky; kaöhoraù—very hard;
saöäù—hairs on the shoulder; vidhunvan—quivering; khara—sharp; romaça-tvak—skin
full of hairs; khura-ähata—struck by the hooves; abhraù—the clouds; sita-daàñöraù—
white tusks; ékñä—glance; jyotiù—luminous; babhäse—began to emit an effulgence;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; mahé-dhraù—the supporter of the world.
TRANSLATION
Before entering the water to rescue the earth, Lord Boar flew in the sky, slashing His
tail, His hard hairs quivering. His very glance was luminous, and He scattered the clouds
562
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
in the sky with His hooves and His glittering white tusks.
PURPORT
When the Lord is offered prayers by His devotees, His transcendental activities are
described. Here are some of the transcendental features of Lord Boar. As the residents
of the upper three planetary systems offered their prayers to the Lord, it is understood
that His body expanded throughout the sky, beginning from the topmost planet,
Brahmaloka, or Satyaloka. It is stated in the Brahma-saàhitä that His eyes are the sun
and the moon; therefore His very glance over the sky was as illuminating as the sun or
the moon. The Lord is described herein as mahédhraù, which means either a "big
mountain" or the "sustainer of the earth." In other words, the Lord's body was as big and
hard as the Himalayan Mountains; otherwise how was it possible that He kept the entire
earth on the support of His white tusks? The poet Jayadeva, a great devotee of the Lord,
has sung of the incident in his prayers for the incarnations:
vasati daçana-çikhare dharaëé tava lagnä
çaçini kalaìka-kaleva nimagnä
keçava dhåta-çükara-rüpa jaya jagadéça hare
"All glories to Lord Keçava [Kåñëa], who appeared as the boar. The earth was held
between His tusks, which appeared like the scars on the moon."
TEXT 28
ga]a<aeNa Pa*QVYaa" Padvq& iviJaga]Na(
§-ae@aPadeXa" SvYaMaßra(r)" )
k-ral/d&í\ae_PYak-ral/d*G>Yaa‚
MauÜq+Ya ivPa[aNa( Ga*<aTaae_ivXaTk-Ma( )) 28 ))
ghräëena påthvyäù padavéà vijighran
kroòäpadeçaù svayam adhvaräìgaù
karäla-daàñöro 'py akaräla-dågbhyäm
udvékñya viprän gåëato 'viçat kam
SYNONYMS
563
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ghräëena—by smelling; påthvyäù—of the earth; padavém—situation; vijighran—
searching after the earth; kroòa-apadeçaù—assuming the body of a hog; svayam—
personally; adhvara—transcendental; aìgaù—body; karäla—fearful; daàñöraù—teeth
(tusks); api—in spite of; akaräla—not fearful; dågbhyäm—by His glance; udvékñya—
glancing over; viprän—all the brähmaëa—devotees; gåëataù—who were engaged in
prayers; aviçat—entered; kam—the water.
TRANSLATION
He was personally the Supreme Lord Viñëu and was therefore transcendental, yet
because He had the body of a hog, He searched after the earth by smell. His tusks were
fearful, and He glanced over the devotee-brähmaëas engaged in offering prayers. Thus He
entered the water.
PURPORT
We should always remember that although the body of a hog is material, the hog form of
the Lord was not materially contaminated. It is not possible for an earthly hog to assume
a gigantic form spreading throughout the sky, beginning from the Satyaloka. His body is
always transcendental in all circumstances; therefore, the assumption of the form of a
boar is only His pastime. His body is all Vedas, or transcendental. But since He had
assumed the form of a boar, He began to search out the earth by smelling, just like a hog.
The Lord can perfectly play the part of any living entity. The gigantic feature of the
boar was certainly very fearful for all nondevotees, but to the pure devotees of the Lord
He was not at all fearful; on the contrary, He was so pleasingly glancing upon His
devotees that all of them felt transcendental happiness.
TEXT 29
Sa vJa]kU-$=a(r)iNaPaaTaveGa‚
ivXaq<aRku-i+a" STaNaYaàudNvaNa( )
oTSa*ídqgaaeRiMaR>auJaEirvaTaR‚
êu§-aeXa Yajeìr Paaih MaeiTa )) 29 ))
sa vajra-küöäìga-nipäta-vega564
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
viçérëa-kukñiù stanayann udanvän
utsåñöa-dérghormi-bhujair ivärtaç
cukroça yajïeçvara pähi meti
SYNONYMS
saù—that; vajra-küöa-aìga—body like a great mountain; nipäta-vega—the force of
diving; viçérëa—bifurcating; kukñiù—the middle portion; stanayan—resounding like;
udanvän—the ocean; utsåñöa—creating; dérgha—high; ürmi—waves; bhujaiù—by the
arms; iva ärtaù—like a distressed person; cukroça—prayed loudly; yajïa-éçvara—O
master of all sacrifices; pähi—please protect; mä—unto me; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Diving into the water like a giant mountain, Lord Boar divided the middle of the ocean,
and two high waves appeared as the arms of the ocean, which cried loudly as if praying to
the Lord, "O Lord of all sacrifices, please do not cut me in two! Kindly give me
protection!"
PURPORT
Even the great ocean was perturbed by the falling of the mountainlike body of the
transcendental boar, and it appeared to be frightened, as if death were imminent.
TEXT 30
%urE" +aurPa[EdRrYa&STadaPa
oTPaarPaar& i}aPaæ rSaaYaaMa( )
ddXaR Gaa& Ta}a SauzuPSaurGa]e
Yaa& JaqvDaaNaq& SvYaMa>YaData )) 30 ))
khuraiù kñuraprair darayaàs tad äpa
utpära-päraà tri-parü rasäyäm
dadarça gäà tatra suñupsur agre
yäà jéva-dhänéà svayam abhyadhatta
565
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
khuraiù—by the hooves; kñurapraiù—compared to a sharp weapon; darayan—
penetrating; tat—that; äpaù—water; utpära-päram—found the limitation of the
unlimited; tri-paruù—the master of all sacrifices; rasäyäm—within the water; dadarça—
found; gäm—the earth; tatra—there; suñupsuù—lying; agre—in the beginning; yäm—
whom; jéva-dhäném—the resting place for all living entities; svayam—personally;
abhyadhatta—uplifted.
TRANSLATION
Lord Boar penetrated the water with His hooves, which were like sharp arrows, and
found the limits of the ocean, although it was unlimited. He saw the earth, the resting
place for all living beings, lying as it was in the beginning of creation, and He personally
lifted it.
PURPORT
The word rasäyäm is sometimes interpreted to mean Rasätala, the lowest planetary
system, but that is not applicable in this connection, according to Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura. The earth is seven times superior to the other planetary systems,
namely Tala, Atala, Talätala, Vitala, Rasätala, Pätäla, etc. Therefore the earth cannot be
situated in the Rasätala planetary system. It is described in the Viñëu-dharma:
pätäla-müleçvara-bhoga-saàhatau
vinyasya pädau påthivéà ca bibhrataù
yasyopamäno na babhüva so 'cyuto
mamästu mäìgalya-vivåddhaye hariù
Therefore the Lord found the earth on the bottom of the Garbhodaka Ocean, where the
planets rest during the devastation at the end of Brahmä's day.
TEXT 31
Svd&í\Yaaed(Da*TYa Mahq& iNaMaGana&
Sa oiTQaTa" Sa&ååce rSaaYaa" )
566
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Ta}aaiPa dETYa& GadYaaPaTaNTa&
SauNaa>aSaNdqiPaTaTaqv]MaNYau" )) 31 ))
sva-daàñörayoddhåtya mahéà nimagnäà
sa utthitaù saàruruce rasäyäù
taträpi daityaà gadayäpatantaà
sunäbha-sandépita-tévra-manyuù
SYNONYMS
sva-daàñörayä—by His own tusks; uddhåtya—raising; mahém—the earth; nimagnäm—
submerged; saù—He; utthitaù—getting up; saàruruce—appeared very splendid;
rasäyäù—from the water; tatra—there; api—also; daityam—unto the demon; gadayä—
with the club; äpatantam—rushing towards Him; sunäbha—the wheel of Kåñëa;
sandépita—glowing; tévra—fierce; manyuù—anger.
TRANSLATION
Lord Boar very easily took the earth on His tusks and got it out of the water. Thus He
appeared very splendid. Then, His anger glowing like the Sudarçana wheel, He
immediately killed the demon [Hiraëyäkña], although he tried to fight with the Lord.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the Vedic literatures describe the incarnation of Lord
Varäha (Boar) in two different devastations, namely the Cäkñuña devastation and the
Sväyambhuva devastation. This particular appearance of the boar incarnation actually
took place in the Sväyambhuva devastation, when all planets other than the higher
ones—Jana, Mahar and Satya—merged in the water of devastation. This particular
incarnation of the boar was seen by the inhabitants of the planets mentioned above.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté suggests that the sage Maitreya amalgamated both the boar
incarnations in different devastations and summarized them in his description to
Vidura.
TEXT 32
567
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
JagaaNa åNDaaNaMaSaùiv§-Ma&
Sa l/Il/Yae>a& Ma*Garai@vaM>aiSa )
Tad]¢-PaªaiªTaGa<@Tau<@ae
YaQaa GaJaeNd]ae JaGaTaq& ivi>aNdNa( )) 32 ))
jaghäna rundhänam asahya-vikramaà
sa lélayebhaà mågaräò ivämbhasi
tad-rakta-paìkäìkita-gaëòa-tuëòo
yathä gajendro jagatéà vibhindan
SYNONYMS
jaghäna—killed; rundhänam—the obstructive enemy; asahya—unbearable; vikramam—
prowess; saù—He; lélayä—easily; ibham—the elephant; måga-räö—the lion; iva—like;
ambhasi—in the water; tat-rakta—of his blood; paìka-aìkita—smeared by the pool;
gaëòa—cheeks; tuëòaù—tongue; yathä—as if; gajendraù—the elephant; jagatém—earth;
vibhindan—digging.
TRANSLATION
Thereupon Lord Boar killed the demon within the water, just as a lion kills an elephant.
The cheeks and tongue of the Lord became smeared with the blood of the demon, just as
an elephant becomes reddish from digging in the purple earth.
TEXT 33
TaMaal/Naql&/ iSaTadNTak-ae$ya
+MaaMauiT+aPaNTa& GaJal/Il/Yaa(r) )
Pa[jaYa bÖaÅl/Yaae_NauvakE-‚
ivRiriÄMau:Yaa oPaTaSQaurqXaMa( )) 33 ))
tamäla-nélaà sita-danta-koöyä
kñmäm utkñipantaà gaja-lélayäìga
prajïäya baddhäïjalayo 'nuväkair
568
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
viriïci-mukhyä upatasthur éçam
SYNONYMS
tamäla—a blue tree named the tamäla; nélam—bluish; sita—white; danta—tusks;
koöyä—with the curved edge; kñmäm—the earth; utkñipantam—while suspending; gajalélayä—
playing like an elephant; aìga—O Vidura; prajïäya—after knowing it well;
baddha—folded; aïjalayaù—hands; anuväkaiù—by Vedic hymns; viriïci—Brahmä;
mukhyäù—headed by; upatasthuù—offered prayers; éçam—unto the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Then the Lord, playing like an elephant, suspended the earth on the edge of His curved
white tusks. He assumed a bluish complexion like that of a tamäla tree, and thus the
sages, headed by Brahmä, could understand Him to be the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and offered respectful obeisances unto the Lord.
TEXT 34
‰zYa Ocu"
iJaTa& iJaTa& Tae_iJaTa Yaj>aavNa
}aYaq& TaNau& Sva& PairDauNvTae NaMa" )
Yad]aeMaGaTaeRzu iNail/LYaurÖYa‚
STaSMaE NaMa" k-ar<aSaUk-raYa Tae )) 34 ))
åñaya ücuù
jitaà jitaà te 'jita yajïa-bhävana
trayéà tanuà sväà paridhunvate namaù
yad-roma-garteñu nililyur addhayas
tasmai namaù käraëa-sükaräya te
SYNONYMS
åñayaù ücuù—the glorified sages uttered; jitam—all glories; jitam—all victories; te—unto
You; ajita—O unconquerable one; yajïa-bhävana—one who is understood by
569
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
performances of sacrifice; trayém—personified Vedas; tanum—such a body; sväm—own;
paridhunvate—shaking; namaù—all obeisances; yat—whose; roma—hairs; garteñu—in
the holes; nililyuù—submerged; addhayaù—the oceans; tasmai—unto Him; namaù—
offering obeisances; käraëa-sükaräya—unto the hog form assumed for reasons; te—unto
You.
TRANSLATION
All the sages uttered with great respect: O unconquerable enjoyer of all sacrifices, all
glories and all victories unto You! You are moving in Your form of the personified Vedas,
and in the hair holes of Your body the oceans are submerged. For certain reasons [to
uplift the earth] You have now assumed the form of a boar.
PURPORT
The Lord can assume any form He likes, and in all circumstances He is the cause of all
causes. Since His form is transcendental, He is always the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, as He is in the Causal Ocean in the form of Mahä-Viñëu. Innumerable
universes generate from the holes of His bodily hairs, and thus His transcendental body
is the Vedas personified. He is the enjoyer of all sacrifices, and He is the unconquerable
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is never to be misunderstood to be other than the
Supreme Lord because of His assuming the form of a boar to lift the earth. That is the
clear understanding of sages and great personalities like Brahmä and other residents of
the higher planetary systems.
TEXT 35
æPa& TavETaàNau duZk*-TaaTMaNaa&
dudRXaRNa& dev YadßraTMak-Ma( )
^Nda&iSa YaSYa Tvic bihRraeMa‚
SvaJYa& d*iXa Tvx(iga]zu caTauhaeR}aMa( )) 35 ))
rüpaà tavaitan nanu duñkåtätmanäà
durdarçanaà deva yad adhvarätmakam
chandäàsi yasya tvaci barhi-romasv
570
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
äjyaà dåçi tv aìghriñu cätur-hotram
SYNONYMS
rüpam—form; tava—Your; etat—this; nanu—but; duñkåta-ätmanäm—of souls who are
simply miscreants; durdarçanam—very difficult to see; deva—O Lord; yat—that;
adhvara-ätmakam—worshipable by performances of sacrifice; chandäàsi—the Gäyatré
mantra and others; yasya—whose; tvaci—touch of the skin; barhiù—sacred grass called
kuça; romasu—hairs on the body; äjyam—clarified butter; dåçi—in the eyes; tu—also;
aìghriñu—on the four legs; cätuù-hotram—four kinds of fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, Your form is worshipable by performances of sacrifice, but souls who are simply
miscreants are unable to see it. All the Vedic hymns, Gäyatré and others, are in the touch
of Your skin. In Your bodily hairs is the kuça grass, in Your eyes is the clarified butter,
and in Your four legs are the four kinds of fruitive activities.
PURPORT
There is a class of miscreants who are known in the words of Bhagavad-gétä as veda-vädé,
or so-called strict followers of the Vedas. They do not believe in the incarnation of the
Lord, what to speak of the Lord's incarnation as the worshipable hog. They describe
worship of the different forms or incarnations of the Lord as anthropomorphism. In the
estimation of Çrémad-Bhägavatam these men are miscreants, and in Bhagavad-gétä (7.15)
they are called not only miscreants but also fools and the lowest of mankind, and it is
said that their knowledge has been plundered by illusion due to their atheistic
temperament. For such condemned persons, the Lord's incarnation as the gigantic hog is
invisible. These strict followers of the Vedas who despise the eternal forms of the Lord
may know from Çrémad-Bhägavatam that such incarnations are personified forms of the
Vedas. Lord Boar's skin, His eyes and His bodily hair holes are all described here as
different parts of the Vedas. He is therefore the personified form of the Vedic hymns,
and specifically the Gäyatré mantra.
TEXT 36
571
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
óKTau<@ AaSaqTóuv wRXa NaaSaYaae‚
ir@aedre cMaSaa" k-<aRrNDa]e )
Pa[aiXa}aMaaSYae Ga]SaNae Ga]haSTau Tae
YaÀvR<a& Tae >aGavàiGanhae}aMa( )) 36 ))
srak tuëòa äsét sruva éça näsayor
iòodare camasäù karëa-randhre
präçitram äsye grasane grahäs tu te
yac carvaëaà te bhagavann agni-hotram
SYNONYMS
srak—the plate for sacrifice; tuëòe—on the tongue; äsét—there is; sruvaù—another
plate for sacrifice; éça—O Lord; näsayoù—of the nostrils; iòä—the plate for eating;
udare—in the belly; camasäù—another plate for sacrifices; karëa-randhre—in the holes
of the ears; präçitram—the plate called the Brahmä plate; äsye—in the mouth;
grasane—in the throat; grahäù—the plates known as soma plates; tu—but; te—Your;
yat—that which; carvaëam—chewing; te—Your; bhagavan—O my Lord; agni-hotram—
is Your eating through Your sacrificial fire.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, Your tongue is a plate of sacrifice, Your nostril is another plate of sacrifice, in
Your belly is the eating plate of sacrifice, and another plate of sacrifice is the holes of
Your ears. In Your mouth is the Brahmä plate of sacrifice, Your throat is the plate of
sacrifice known as soma, and whatever You chew is known as agni-hotra.
PURPORT
The veda-vädés say that there is nothing more than the Vedas and the performances of
sacrifice mentioned in the Vedas. They have recently made a rule in their group to
formally observe daily sacrifice; they simply ignite a small fire and offer something
whimsically, but they do not strictly follow the sacrificial rules and regulations
mentioned in the Vedas. It is understood that by regulation there are different plates of
sacrifice required, such as srak, sruvä, barhis, cätur-hotra, iòä, camasa, präçitra, graha and
572
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
agni-hotra. One cannot achieve the results of sacrifice unless one observes the strict
regulations. In this age there is practically no facility for performing sacrifices in strict
discipline. Therefore, in this age of Kali there is a stricture regarding such sacrifices: it is
explicitly directed that one should perform saìkértana-yajïa and nothing more. The
incarnation of the Supreme Lord is Yajïeçvara, and unless one has respect for the
incarnation of the Lord, he cannot perfectly perform sacrifice. In other words, taking
shelter of the Lord and rendering service unto Him is the factual performance of all
sacrifices, as explained herein. Different plates of sacrifice correspond to the different
parts of the body of the Lord's incarnation. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Eleventh Canto,
it is explicitly directed that one should perform saìkértana-yajïa to please the Lord's
incarnation as Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. This should be rigidly followed in order to
achieve the result of yajïa performance.
TEXT 37
dq+aaNauJaNMaaePaSad" iXaraeDar&
Tv& Pa[aYa<aqYaaedYaNaqYad&í\" )
iJaûa Pa[vGYaRSTav XaqzRk&- §-Taae"
SaTYaavSaQYa& icTaYaae_Savae ih Tae )) 37 ))
dékñänujanmopasadaù çirodharaà
tvaà präyaëéyodayanéya-daàñöraù
jihvä pravargyas tava çérñakaà kratoù
satyävasathyaà citayo 'savo hi te
SYNONYMS
dékñä—initiation; anujanma—spiritual birth, or repeated incarnations; upasadaù—three
kinds of desires (relationship, activities and ultimate goal); çiraù-dharam—the neck;
tvam—You; präyaëéya—after the result of initiation; udayanéya—the last rites of
desires; daàñöraù—the tusks; jihvä—the tongue; pravargyaù—prior activities; tava—
Your; çérñakam—head; kratoù—of the sacrifice; satya—fire without sacrifice;
ävasathyam—fire of worship; citayaù—aggregate of all desires; asavaù—life breath; hi—
certainly; te—Your.
573
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Moreover, O Lord, the repetition of Your appearance is the desire for all kinds of
initiation. Your neck is the place for three desires, and Your tusks are the result of
initiation and the end of all desires. Your tongue is the prior activities of initiation, Your
head is the fire without sacrifice as well as the fire of worship, and Your living forces are
the aggregate of all desires.
TEXT 38
SaaeMaSTau reTa" SavNaaNYaviSQaiTa"
Sa&SQaaiv>aedaSTav dev DaaTav" )
Sa}aai<a SavaRi<a XarqrSaiNDa‚
STv& SavRYaj§-TauiriíbNDaNa" )) 38 ))
somas tu retaù savanäny avasthitiù
saàsthä-vibhedäs tava deva dhätavaù
saträëi sarväëi çaréra-sandhis
tvaà sarva-yajïa-kratur iñöi-bandhanaù
SYNONYMS
somaù tu retaù—Your semen is the sacrifice called soma; savanäni—ritualistic
performances of the morning; avasthitiù—different statuses of bodily growth; saàsthävibhedäù—
seven varieties of sacrifices; tava—Your; deva—O Lord; dhätavaù—
ingredients of the body such as skin and flesh; saträëi—sacrifices performed over twelve
days; sarväëi—all of them; çaréra—the bodily; sandhiù—joints; tvam—Your Lordship;
sarva—all; yajïa—asoma sacrifices; kratuù—soma sacrifices; iñöi—the ultimate desire;
bandhanaù—attachment.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, Your semen is the sacrifice called soma-yajïa. Your growth is the ritualistic
performances of the morning. Your skin and touch sensations are the seven elements of
the agniñöoma sacrifice. Your bodily joints are symbols of various other sacrifices
574
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
performed in twelve days. Therefore You are the object of all sacrifices called soma and
asoma, and You are bound by yajïas only.
PURPORT
There are seven kinds of routine yajïas performed by all followers of the Vedic rituals,
and they are called agniñöoma, atyagniñöoma, uktha, ñoòaçé, väjapeya, atirätra and
äptoryäma. Anyone performing such yajïas regularly is supposed to be situated with the
Lord. But anyone who is in contact with the Supreme Lord by discharging devotional
service is understood to have performed all different varieties of yajïas.
TEXT 39
NaMaae NaMaSTae_i%l/MaN}adevTaa‚
d]VYaaYa SavR§-Tave i§-YaaTMaNae )
vEraGYa>a¢-yaTMaJaYaaNau>aaivTa‚
jaNaaYa ivÛaGaurve NaMaae NaMa" )) 39 ))
namo namas te 'khila-mantra-devatädravyäya
sarva-kratave kriyätmane
vairägya-bhaktyätmajayänubhävitajïänäya
vidyä-gurave namo namaù
SYNONYMS
namaù namaù—obeisances unto You; te—unto You, who are worshipable; akhila—allinclusive;
mantra—hymns; devatä—the Supreme Lord; dravyäya—unto all ingredients
for performing sacrifices; sarva-kratave—unto all kinds of sacrifices; kriyä-ätmane—
unto You, the supreme form of all sacrifices; vairägya—renunciation; bhaktyä—by
devotional service; ätma-jaya-anubhävita—perceivable by conquering the mind;
jïänäya—such knowledge; vidyä-gurave—the supreme spiritual master of all knowledge;
namaù namaù—again I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead and are worshipable by universal
575
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
prayers, Vedic hymns and sacrificial ingredients. We offer our obeisances unto You. You
can be realized by the pure mind freed from all visible and invisible material
contamination. We offer our respectful obeisances to You as the supreme spiritual master
of knowledge in devotional service.
PURPORT
The qualification of bhakti, or devotional service to the Lord, is that the devotee should
be free from all material contaminations and desires. This freedom is called vairägya, or
renouncement of material desires. One who engages in devotional service to the Lord
according to regulative principles is automatically freed from material desires, and in
that pure state of mind one can realize the Personality of Godhead. The Personality of
Godhead, being situated in everyone's heart, instructs the devotee regarding pure
devotional service so that he may ultimately achieve the association of the Lord. This is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (10.10) as follows:
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
"To one who constantly engages in the devotional service of the Lord with faith and
love, the Lord certainly gives the intelligence to achieve Him at the ultimate end."
One has to conquer the mind, and one may do it by following the Vedic rituals and by
performing different types of sacrifice. The ultimate end of all those performances is to
attain bhakti, or the devotional service of the Lord. Without bhakti one cannot
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The original Personality of Godhead
or His innumerable expansions of Viñëu are the only objects of worship by all the Vedic
rituals and sacrificial performances.
TEXT 40
d&í\aGa]k-ae$ya >aGav&STvYaa Da*Taa
ivraJaTae >aUDar >aU" Sa>aUDara )
YaQaa vNaaià"SarTaae dTaa Da*Taa
MaTa(r)JaeNd]SYa SaPa}aPaiÚNaq )) 40 ))
576
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
daàñörägra-koöyä bhagavaàs tvayä dhåtä
viräjate bhüdhara bhüù sa-bhüdharä
yathä vanän niùsarato datä dhåtä
mataì-gajendrasya sa-patra-padminé
SYNONYMS
daàñöra-agra—the tips of the tusks; koöyä—by the edges; bhagavan—O Personality of
Godhead; tvayä—by You; dhåtä—sustained; viräjate—is so beautifully situated; bhüdhara—
O lifter of the earth; bhüù—the earth; sa-bhüdharä—with mountains; yathä—as
much as; vanät—from the water; niùsarataù—coming out; datä—by the tusk; dhåtä—
captured; matam-gajendrasya—infuriated elephant; sa-patra—with leaves; padminé—
the lotus flower.
TRANSLATION
O lifter of the earth, the earth with its mountains, which You have lifted with Your
tusks, is situated as beautifully as a lotus flower with leaves sustained by an infuriated
elephant just coming out of the water.
PURPORT
The fortune of the earth planet is praised because of its being specifically sustained by
the Lord; its beauty is appreciated and compared to that of a lotus flower situated on the
trunk of an elephant. As a lotus flower with leaves is very beautifully situated, so the
world, with its many beautiful mountains, appeared on the tusks of the Lord Boar.
TEXT 41
}aYaqMaYa& æPaiMad& c SaaEk-r&
>aUMa<@le/NaaQa dTaa Da*TaeNa Tae )
ck-aiSTa é*(r)ae!gaNaeNa >aUYaSaa
ku-l/acle/Nd]SYa YaQaEv iv>a]Ma" )) 41 ))
trayémayaà rüpam idaà ca saukaraà
bhü-maëòalenätha datä dhåtena te
577
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
cakästi çåìgoòha-ghanena bhüyasä
kuläcalendrasya yathaiva vibhramaù
SYNONYMS
trayé-mayam—Vedas personified; rüpam—form; idam—this; ca—also; saukaram—the
boar; bhü-maëòalena—by the earth planet; atha—now; datä—by the tusk; dhåtena—
sustained by; te—Your; cakästi—is glowing; çåìga-üòha—sustained by the peaks;
ghanena—by the clouds; bhüyasä—more glorified; kula-acala-indrasya—of the great
mountains; yathä—as much as; eva—certainly; vibhramaù—decoration.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, as the peaks of great mountains become beautiful when decorated with clouds,
Your transcendental body has become beautiful because of Your lifting the earth on the
edge of Your tusks.
PURPORT
The word vibhramaù is significant. Vibhramaù means "illusion" as well as "beauty." When
a cloud rests on the peak of a great mountain, it appears to be sustained by the
mountain, and at the same time it looks very beautiful. Similarly, the Lord has no need
to sustain the earth on His tusks, but when He does so the world becomes beautiful, just
as the Lord becomes more beautiful because of His pure devotees on the earth. Although
the Lord is the transcendental personification of the Vedic hymns, He has become more
beautiful because of His appearance to sustain the earth.
TEXT 42
Sa&SQaaPaYaENaa& JaGaTaa& SaTaSQauza&
l/aek-aYa PaÒqMaiSa MaaTar& iPaTaa )
ivDaeMa caSYaE NaMaSaa Sah TvYaa
YaSYaa& SvTaeJaae_iGaniMavar<aavDaa" )) 42 ))
saàsthäpayainäà jagatäà sa-tasthuñäà
lokäya patném asi mätaraà pitä
578
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
vidhema cäsyai namasä saha tvayä
yasyäà sva-tejo 'gnim iväraëäv adhäù
SYNONYMS
saàsthäpaya enäm—raise this earth; jagatäm—both the moving and; sa-tasthuñäm—
nonmoving; lokäya—for their residence; patném—wife; asi—You are; mätaram—the
mother; pitä—the father; vidhema—do we offer; ca—also; asyai—unto the mother;
namasä—with all obeisances; saha—along with; tvayä—with You; yasyäm—in whom;
sva-tejaù—by Your own potency; agnim—fire; iva—likened; araëau—in the araëi wood;
adhäù—invested.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, for the residential purposes of all inhabitants, both moving and nonmoving, this
earth is Your wife, and You are the supreme father. We offer our respectful obeisances
unto You, along with mother earth, in whom You have invested Your own potency, just
as an expert sacrificer puts fire in the araëi wood.
PURPORT
The so-called law of gravitation which sustains the planets is described herein as the
potency of the Lord. This potency is invested by the Lord in the way that an expert
sacrificial brähmaëa puts fire in the araëi wood by the potency of Vedic mantras. By this
arrangement the world becomes habitable for both the moving and nonmoving
creatures. The conditioned souls, who are residents of the material world, are put in the
womb of mother earth in the same way the seed of a child is put by the father in the
womb of the mother. This conception of the Lord and the earth as father and mother is
explained in Bhagavad-gétä (14.4). Conditioned souls are devoted to the motherland in
which they take their birth, but they do not know their father. The mother is not
independent in producing children. Similarly, material nature cannot produce living
creatures unless in contact with the supreme father, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Çrémad-Bhägavatam teaches us to offer obeisances unto the mother along with
the Father, the Supreme Lord, because it is the Father only who impregnates the mother
with all energies for the sustenance and maintenance of all living beings, both moving
and nonmoving.
579
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 43
k-" é[ÕDaqTaaNYaTaMaSTav Pa[>aae
rSaa& GaTaaYaa >auv oiÜbhR<aMa( )
Na ivSMaYaae_SaaE TviYa ivìivSMaYae
Yaae MaaYaYaed& SaSa*Jae_iTaivSMaYaMa( )) 43 ))
kaù çraddadhétänyatamas tava prabho
rasäà gatäyä bhuva udvibarhaëam
na vismayo 'sau tvayi viçva-vismaye
yo mäyayedaà sasåje 'tivismayam
SYNONYMS
kaù—who else; çraddadhéta—can endeavor; anyatamaù—anyone besides Yourself;
tava—Your; prabho—O Lord; rasäm—in the water; gatäyäù—while lying in; bhuvaù—
of the earth; udvibarhaëam—deliverance; na—never; vismayaù—wonderful; asau—
such an act; tvayi—unto You; viçva—universal; vismaye—full of wonders; yaù—one
who; mäyayä—by potencies; idam—this; sasåje—created; ativismayam—surpassing all
wonders.
TRANSLATION
Who else but You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, could deliver the earth from
within the water? It is not very wonderful for You, however, because You acted most
wonderfully in the creation of the universe. By Your energy You have created this
wonderful cosmic manifestation.
PURPORT
When a scientist discovers something impressive to the ignorant mass of people, the
common man, without inquiry, accepts such a discovery as wonderful. But the
intelligent man is not struck with wonder by such discoveries. He gives all credit to the
person who created the wonderful brain of the scientist. A common man is also struck
with wonder by the wonderful action of material nature, and he gives all credit to the
580
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
cosmic manifestation. The learned Kåñëa conscious person, however, knows well that
behind the cosmic manifestation is the brain of Kåñëa, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä
(9.10): mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram. Since Kåñëa can direct the
wonderful cosmic manifestation, it is not at all wonderful for Him to assume the gigantic
form of a boar and thus deliver the earth from the mire of the water. A devotee is
therefore not astonished to see the wonderful boar because he knows that the Lord is
able to act far more wonderfully by His potencies, which are inconceivable to the brain
of even the most erudite scientist.
TEXT 44
ivDauNvTaa vedMaYa& iNaJa& vPau‚
JaRNaSTaPa"SaTYaiNavaiSaNaae vYaMa( )
Sa$=aiXa%aed(DaUTaiXavaMbuibNdui>a‚
ivRMa*JYaMaaNaa >a*XaMaqXa PaaivTaa" )) 44 ))
vidhunvatä vedamayaà nijaà vapur
janas-tapaù-satya-niväsino vayam
saöä-çikhoddhüta-çivämbu-bindubhir
vimåjyamänä bhåçam éça pävitäù
SYNONYMS
vidhunvatä—while shaking; veda-mayam—personified Vedas; nijam—own; vapuù—
body; janaù—the Janaloka planetary system; tapaù—the Tapoloka planetary system;
satya—the Satyaloka planetary system; niväsinaù—the inhabitants; vayam—we; saöä—
hairs on the shoulder; çikha-uddhüta—sustained by the tip of the hair; çiva—auspicious;
ambu—water; bindubhiù—by the particles; vimåjyamänäù—we are thus sprinkled by;
bhåçam—highly; éça—O Supreme Lord; pävitäù—purified.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Lord, undoubtedly we are inhabitants of the most pious planets—the Jana,
Tapas and Satya lokas—but still we have been purified by the drops of water sprinkled
from Your shoulder hairs by the shaking of Your body.
581
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Ordinarily the body of a hog is considered impure, but one should not consider that the
hog incarnation assumed by the Lord is also impure. That form of the Lord is the
personified Vedas and is transcendental. The inhabitants of the Jana, Tapas and Satya
lokas are the most pious persons in the material world, but because those planets are
situated in the material world, there are so many material impurities there also.
Therefore, when the drops of water from the tips of the Lord's shoulder hairs were
sprinkled upon the bodies of the inhabitants of the higher planets, they felt purified.
The Ganges water is pure because of its emanating from the toe of the Lord, and there is
no difference between the water emanating from the toe and that from the tips of the
hair on the shoulder of Lord Boar. They are both absolute and transcendental.
TEXT 45
Sa vE bTa >a]íMaiTaSTavEzTae
Ya" k-MaR<aa& PaarMaPaark-MaR<a" )
YaÛaeGaMaaYaaGau<aYaaeGaMaaeihTa&
ivì& SaMaSTa& >aGavNa( ivDaeih XaMa( )) 45 ))
sa vai bata bhrañöa-matis tavaiñate
yaù karmaëäà päram apära-karmaëaù
yad-yogamäyä-guëa-yoga-mohitaà
viçvaà samastaà bhagavan vidhehi çam
SYNONYMS
saù—he; vai—certainly; bata—alas; bhrañöa-matiù—nonsense; tava—Your; eñate—
desires; yaù—one who; karmaëäm—of activities; päram—limit; apära-karmaëaù—of
one who has unlimited activities; yat—by whom; yoga—mystic power; mäyä—potency;
guëa—modes of material nature; yoga—mystic power; mohitam—bewildered; viçvam—
the universe; samastam—in total; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vidhehi—just be pleased to bestow; çam—good fortune.
TRANSLATION
582
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
O Lord, there is no limit to Your wonderful activities. Anyone who desires to know the
limit of Your activities is certainly nonsensical. Everyone in this world is conditioned by
the powerful mystic potencies. Please bestow Your causeless mercy upon these
conditioned souls.
PURPORT
Mental speculators who want to understand the limit of the Unlimited are certainly
nonsensical. Every one of them is captivated by the external potencies of the Lord. The
best thing for them is to surrender unto Him, knowing Him to be inconceivable, for thus
they can receive His causeless mercy. This prayer was offered by the inhabitants of the
higher planetary systems, namely the Jana, Tapas and Satya lokas, who are far more
intelligent and powerful than humans.
Viçvaà samastam is very significant here. There are the material world and the spiritual
world. The sages pray: "Both worlds are bewildered by Your different energies. Those
who are in the spiritual world are absorbed in Your loving service, forgetting themselves
and You also, and those in the material world are absorbed in material sense
gratification and therefore also forget You. No one can know You, because You are
unlimited. It is best not to try to know You by unnecessary mental speculation. Rather,
kindly bless us so that we can worship You with causeless devotional service."
TEXT 46
MaE}aeYa ovac
wTYauPaSQaqYaMaaNaae_SaaE MauiNai>ab]Røvaidi>a" )
Sail/le/ Sv%ura§-aNTa oPaaDataaivTaaviNaMa( )) 46 ))
maitreya uväca
ity upasthéyamäno 'sau
munibhir brahma-vädibhiù
salile sva-khuräkränta
upädhattävitävanim
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—the sage Maitreya said; iti—thus; upasthéyamänaù—being praised by;
583
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
asau—Lord Boar; munibhiù—by the great sages; brahma-vädibhiù—by the
transcendentalists; salile—on the water; sva-khura-äkränte—touched by His own
hooves; upädhatta—placed; avitä—the maintainer; avanim—the earth.
TRANSLATION
The sage Maitreya said: The Lord, being thus worshiped by all the great sages and
transcendentalists, touched the earth with His hooves and placed it on the water.
PURPORT
The earth was placed on the water by His inconceivable potency. The Lord is allpowerful,
and therefore He can sustain the huge planets either on the water or in the
air, as He likes. The tiny human brain cannot conceive how these potencies of the Lord
can act. Man can give some vague explanation of the laws by which such phenomena are
made possible, but actually the tiny human brain is unable to conceive of the activities
of the Lord, which are therefore called inconceivable. Yet the frog-philosophers still try
to give some imaginary explanation.
TEXT 47
Sa wTQa& >aGavaNauvq„| ivZvKSaeNa" Pa[JaaPaiTa" )
rSaaYaa l/Il/YaaeàqTaaMaPSau NYaSYa YaYaaE hir" )) 47 ))
sa itthaà bhagavän urvéà
viñvaksenaù prajäpatiù
rasäyä lélayonnétäm
apsu nyasya yayau hariù
SYNONYMS
saù—He; ittham—in this manner; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; urvém—the
earth; viñvaksenaù—another name of Viñëu; prajä-patiù—the Lord of the living entities;
rasäyäù—from within the water; lélayä—very easily; unnétäm—raised; apsu—on the
water; nyasya—placing; yayau—returned to His own abode; hariù—the Personality of
Godhead.
584
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
In this manner the Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu, the maintainer of all living
entities, raised the earth from within the water, and having placed it afloat on the water,
He returned to His own abode.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead Lord Viñëu descends by His will to the material planets in
His innumerable incarnations for particular purposes, and again He goes back to His
own abode. When He descends He is called an avatära because avatära means "one who
descends." Neither the Lord Himself nor His specific devotees who come to this earth
are ordinary living entities like us.
TEXT 48
Ya WvMaeTaa& hirMaeDaSaae hre"
k-Qaa& Sau>ad]a& k-QaNaqYaMaaiYaNa" )
é*<vqTa >a¢-ya é[vYaeTa vaeXaTaq&
JaNaadRNaae_SYaaéu ôid Pa[SaqdiTa )) 48 ))
ya evam etäà hari-medhaso hareù
kathäà subhadräà kathanéya-mäyinaù
çåëvéta bhaktyä çravayeta voçatéà
janärdano 'syäçu hådi prasédati
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; evam—thus; etäm—this; hari-medhasaù—who destroys the material
existence of the devotee; hareù—of the Personality of Godhead; kathäm—narration; subhadräm—
auspicious; kathanéya—worthy to narrate; mäyinaù—of the merciful by His
internal potency; çåëvéta—hears; bhaktyä—in devotion; çravayeta—also allows others to
hear; vä—either; uçatém—very pleasing; janärdanaù—the Lord; asya—his; äçu—very
soon; hådi—within the heart; prasédati—becomes very pleased.
TRANSLATION
585
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
If one hears and describes in a devotional service attitude this auspicious narration of
Lord Boar, which is worthy of description, the Lord, who is within the heart of everyone,
is very pleased.
PURPORT
In His various incarnations, the Lord appears, acts and leaves behind Him a narrative
history which is as transcendental as He Himself. Every one of us is fond of hearing
some wonderful narration, but most stories are neither auspicious nor worth hearing
because they are of the inferior quality of material nature. Every living entity is of
superior quality, spirit soul, and nothing material can be auspicious for him. Intelligent
persons should therefore hear personally and cause others to hear the descriptive
narrations of the Lord's activities, for that will destroy the pangs of material existence.
Out of His causeless mercy only, the Lord comes to this earth and leaves behind His
merciful activities so that the devotees may derive transcendental benefit.
TEXT 49
TaiSMaNa( Pa[Saàe Sak-l/aiXaza& Pa[>aaE
ik&- dulR/>a& Taai>arl&/ l/vaTMai>a" )
ANaNYad*íya >aJaTaa& GauhaXaYa"
SvYa& ivDatae SvGaiTa& Par" ParaMa( )) 49 ))
tasmin prasanne sakaläçiñäà prabhau
kià durlabhaà täbhir alaà lavätmabhiù
ananya-dåñöyä bhajatäà guhäçayaù
svayaà vidhatte sva-gatià paraù paräm
SYNONYMS
tasmin—unto Him; prasanne—being pleased; sakala-äçiñäm—of all benediction;
prabhau—unto the Lord; kim—what is that; durlabham—very difficult to obtain;
täbhiù—with them; alam—away; lava-ätmabhiù—with insignificant gains; ananyadåñöyä—
by nothing but devotional service; bhajatäm—of those who are engaged in
devotional service; guhä-äçayaù—residing within the heart; svayam—personally;
vidhatte—executes; sva-gatim—in His own abode; paraù—the supreme; paräm—
586
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
transcendental.
TRANSLATION
Nothing remains unachieved when the Supreme Personality of Godhead is pleased with
someone. By transcendental achievement one understands everything else to be
insignificant. One who engages in transcendental loving service is elevated to the highest
perfectional stage by the Lord Himself, who is seated in everyone's heart.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (10.10), the Lord gives intelligence to the pure devotees so
that they may be elevated to the highest perfectional stage. It is confirmed herein that a
pure devotee, who constantly engages in the loving service of the Lord, is awarded all
knowledge necessary to reach the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For such a devotee
there is nothing valuable to be achieved but the Lord's service. If one serves faithfully,
there is no possibility of frustration because the Lord Himself takes charge of the
devotee's advancement. The Lord is seated in everyone's heart, and He knows the
devotee's motive and arranges everything achievable. In other words, the pseudo
devotee, who is anxious to achieve material gains, cannot attain the highest perfectional
stage because the Lord is in knowledge of his motive. One merely has to become sincere
in his purpose, and then the Lord is there to help in every way.
TEXT 50
k-ae NaaMa l/aeke- PauåzaQaRSaarivTa(
Paurak-QaaNaa& >aGavTk-QaaSauDaaMa( )
AaPaqYa k-<aaRÅil/i>a>aRvaPaha‚
Mahae ivrJYaeTa ivNaa NareTarMa( )) 50 ))
ko näma loke puruñärtha-säravit
purä-kathänäà bhagavat-kathä-sudhäm
äpéya karëäïjalibhir bhaväpahäm
aho virajyeta vinä naretaram
587
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
kaù—who; näma—indeed; loke—in the world; puruña-artha—goal of life; sära-vit—one
who knows the essence of; purä-kathänäm—of all past histories; bhagavat—regarding
the Personality of Godhead; kathä-sudhäm—the nectar of the narrations about the
Personality of Godhead; äpéya—by drinking; karëa-aïjalibhiù—by aural reception;
bhava-apahäm—that which kills all material pangs; aho—alas; virajyeta—could refuse;
vinä—except; nara-itaram—other than the human being. being.
TRANSLATION
Who, other than one who is not a human being, can exist in this world and not be
interested in the ultimate goal of life? Who can refuse the nectar of narrations about the
Personality of Godhead's activities, which by itself can deliver one from all material
pangs?
PURPORT
The narration of the activities of the Personality of Godhead is like a constant flow of
nectar. No one can refuse to drink such nectar except one who is not a human being.
Devotional service to the Lord is the highest goal of life for every human being, and
such devotional service begins by hearing about the transcendental activities of the
Personality of Godhead. Only an animal, or a man who is almost an animal in behavior,
can refuse to take an interest in hearing the transcendental message of the Lord. There
are many books of stories and histories in the world, but except for the histories or
narrations on the topics of the Personality of Godhead, none are capable of diminishing
the burden of material pangs. Therefore one who is serious about eliminating material
existence must chant and hear of the transcendental activities of the Personality of
Godhead. Otherwise one must be compared to the nonhumans.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Thirteenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Appearance of Lord Varäha."
14. Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening
588
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
iNaXaMYa k-aEzariv<aaePavi<aRTaa&
hre" k-Qaa& k-ar<aSaUk-raTMaNa" )
PauNa" Sa PaPa[C^ TaMauÛTaaÅil/‚
NaR caiTaTa*áae ivdurae Da*Tav]Ta" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
niçamya kauñäraviëopavarëitäà
hareù kathäà käraëa-sükarätmanaù
punaù sa papraccha tam udyatäïjalir
na cätitåpto viduro dhåta-vrataù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; niçamya—after hearing; kauñäraviëä—by
the sage Maitreya; upavarëitäm—described; hareù—of the Personality of Godhead;
kathäm—narrations; käraëa—for the reason of lifting the earth; sükara-ätmanaù—of
the boar incarnation; punaù—again; saù—he; papraccha—inquired; tam—from him
(Maitreya); udyata-aïjaliù—with folded hands; na—never; ca—also; ati-tåptaù—very
much satisfied; viduraù—Vidura; dhåta-vrataù—taken to a vow.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After hearing from the great sage Maitreya about the Lord's
incarnation as Varäha, Vidura, who had taken a vow, begged him with folded hands to
please narrate further transcendental activities of the Lord, since he [Vidura] did not yet
feel satisfied.
TEXT 2
ivdur ovac
TaeNaEv Tau MauiNaé[eï hir<aa YajMaUiTaRNaa )
589
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
AaiddETYaae ihr<Yaa+aae hTa wTYaNauéué[uMa )) 2 ))
vidura uväca
tenaiva tu muni-çreñöha
hariëä yajïa-mürtinä
ädi-daityo hiraëyäkño
hata ity anuçuçruma
SYNONYMS
viduraù uväca—Çré Vidura said; tena—by Him; eva—certainly; tu—but; muni-çreñöha—
O chief among the sages; hariëä—by the Personality of Godhead; yajïa-mürtinä—the
form of sacrifices; ädi—original; daityaù—demon; hiraëyäkñaù—by the name
Hiraëyäkña; hataù—slain; iti—thus; anuçuçruma—heard in succession.
TRANSLATION
Çré Vidura said: O chief amongst the great sages, I have heard by disciplic succession that
Hiraëyäkña, the original demon, was slain by the same form of sacrifices, the Personality
of Godhead [Lord Boar].
PURPORT
As referred to previously, the boar incarnation was manifested in two millenniums—
namely Sväyambhuva and Cäkñuña. In both millenniums there was a boar incarnation of
the Lord, but in the Sväyambhuva millennium He lifted the earth from within the water
of the universe, whereas in the Cäkñuña millennium He killed the first demon,
Hiraëyäkña. In the Sväyambhuva millennium He assumed the color white, and in the
Cäkñuña millennium He assumed the color red. Vidura had already heard about one of
them, and he proposed to hear about the other. The two different boar incarnations
described are the one Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 3
TaSYa caeÖrTa" +aaE<aq& Svd&í\aGa]e<a l/Il/Yaa )
dETYaraJaSYa c b]øNa( k-SMaaÖeTaaer>aUNMa*Da" )) 3 ))
590
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tasya coddharataù kñauëéà
sva-daàñörägreëa lélayä
daitya-räjasya ca brahman
kasmäd dhetor abhün mådhaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—His; ca—also; uddharataù—while lifting; kñauëém—the earth planet; svadaàñöra-
agreëa—by the edge of His tusks; lélayä—in His pastimes; daitya-räjasya—of
the king of demons; ca—and; brahman—O brähmaëa; kasmät—from what; hetoù—
reason; abhüt—there was; mådhaù—fight.
TRANSLATION
What was the reason, O brähmaëa, for the fight between the demon king and Lord Boar
while the Lord was lifting the earth as His pastime?
TEXT 4
é[ÕDaaNaaYa >a¢-aYa b]Uih TaÂNMaivSTarMa( )
‰ze Na Ta*PYaiTa MaNa" Par& k-aETaUhl&/ ih Mae )) 4 ))
çraddadhänäya bhaktäya
brühi taj-janma-vistaram
åñe na tåpyati manaù
paraà kautühalaà hi me
SYNONYMS
çraddadhänäya—unto a faithful person; bhaktäya—unto a devotee; brühi—please
narrate; tat—His; janma—appearance; vistaram—in detail; åñe—O great sage; na—not;
tåpyati—become satisfied; manaù—mind; param—very much; kautühalam—inquisitive;
hi—certainly; me—my.
TRANSLATION
591
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
My mind has become very inquisitive, and therefore I am not satisfied with hearing the
narration of the Lord's appearance. Please, therefore, speak more and more to a devotee
who is faithful.
PURPORT
One who is actually faithful and inquisitive is qualified to hear the transcendental
pastimes of the appearance and disappearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Vidura was a suitable candidate to receive such transcendental messages.
TEXT 5
MaE}aeYa ovac
SaaDau vqr TvYaa Pa*íMavTaark-Qaa& hre" )
Yatv& Pa*C^iSa MaTYaaRNaa& Ma*TYauPaaXaivXaaTaNaqMa( )) 5 ))
maitreya uväca
sädhu véra tvayä påñöam
avatära-kathäà hareù
yat tvaà påcchasi martyänäà
måtyu-päça-viçätaném
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; sädhu—devotee; véra—O warrior; tvayä—by you;
påñöam—inquired; avatära-kathäm—topics on the incarnation of the Lord; hareù—of
the Personality of Godhead; yat—that which; tvam—your good self; påcchasi—asking
me; martyänäm—of those who are destined for death; måtyu-päça—the chain of birth
and death; viçätaném—source of liberation.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya said: O warrior, the inquiry made by you is just befitting a
devotee because it concerns the incarnation of the Personality of Godhead. He is the
source of liberation from the chain of birth and death for all those who are otherwise
destined to die.
592
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The great sage Maitreya addressed Vidura as a warrior not only because Vidura belonged
to the Kuru family but because he was anxious to hear about the chivalrous activities of
the Lord in His incarnations of Varäha and Nåsiàha. Because the inquiries concerned
the Lord, they were perfectly befitting a devotee. A devotee has no taste for hearing
anything mundane. There are many topics of mundane warfare, but a devotee is not
inclined to hear them. The topics of the warfare in which the Lord engages do not
concern the war of death but the war against the chain of mäyä which obliges one to
accept repeated birth and death. In other words, one who takes delight in hearing the
war topics of the Lord is relieved from the chains of birth and death. Foolish people are
suspicious of Kåñëa's taking part in the Battle of Kurukñetra, not knowing that His
taking part insured liberation for all who were present on the battlefield. It is said by
Bhéñmadeva that all who were present on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra attained their
original spiritual existences after death. Therefore, hearing the war topics of the Lord is
as good as any other devotional service.
TEXT 6
YaYaaetaaNaPad" Pau}aae MauiNaNaa GaqTaYaa>aRk-" )
Ma*TYaae" k*-TvEv MaUDNYaRx(iga]Maaåraeh hre" PadMa( )) 6 ))
yayottänapadaù putro
muninä gétayärbhakaù
måtyoù kåtvaiva mürdhny aìghrim
äruroha hareù padam
SYNONYMS
yayä—by which; uttänapadaù—of King Uttänapäda; putraù—son; muninä—by the sage;
gétayä—being sung; arbhakaù—a child; måtyoù—of death; kåtvä—placing; eva—
certainly; mürdhni—on the head; aìghrim—feet; äruroha—ascended; hareù—of the
Personality of Godhead; padam—to the abode.
TRANSLATION
593
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
By hearing these topics from the sage [Närada], the son of King Uttänapäda [Dhruva] was
enlightened regarding the Personality of Godhead, and he ascended to the abode of the
Lord, placing his feet over the head of death.
PURPORT
While quitting his body, Mahäräja Dhruva, the son of King Uttänapäda, was attended
by personalities like Sunanda and others, who received him in the kingdom of God. He
left this world at an early age, as a young boy, although he had attained the throne of his
father and had several children of his own. Because he was due to quit this world, death
was waiting for him. He did not care for death, however, and even with his present body
he boarded a spiritual airplane and went directly to the planet of Viñëu because of his
association with the great sage Närada, who had spoken to him the narration of the
pastimes of the Lord.
TEXT 7
AQaa}aaPaqiTahaSaae_Ya& é[uTaae Mae vi<aRTa" Paura )
b]ø<aa devdeveNa devaNaaMaNauPa*C^TaaMa( )) 7 ))
athäträpétihäso 'yaà
çruto me varëitaù purä
brahmaëä deva-devena
devänäm anupåcchatäm
SYNONYMS
atha—now; atra—in this matter; api—also; itihäsaù—history; ayam—this; çrutaù—
heard; me—by me; varëitaù—described; purä—years ago; brahmaëä—by Brahmä; devadevena—
the foremost of the demigods; devänäm—by the demigods; anupåcchatäm—
asking.
TRANSLATION
This history of the fight between the Lord as a boar and the demon Hiraëyäkña was heard
by me in a year long ago as it was described by the foremost of the demigods, Brahmä,
594
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
when he was questioned by the other demigods.
TEXT 8
idiTadaR+aaYa<aq +ataMaaRrqc& k-XYaPa& PaiTaMa( )
APaTYak-aMaa ck-Mae SaNDYaaYaa& ôC^YaaidRTaa )) 8 ))
ditir däkñäyaëé kñattar
märécaà kaçyapaà patim
apatya-kämä cakame
sandhyäyäà håc-chayärditä
SYNONYMS
ditiù—Diti; däkñäyaëé—the daughter of Dakña; kñattaù—O Vidura; märécam—the son
of Maréci; kaçyapam—Kaçyapa; patim—her husband; apatya-kämä—desirous of having a
child; cakame—longed for; sandhyäyäm—in the evening; håt-çaya—by sex desires;
arditä—distressed.
TRANSLATION
Diti, daughter of Dakña, being afflicted with sex desire, begged her husband, Kaçyapa, the
son of Maréci, to have intercourse with her in the evening in order to beget a child.
TEXT 9
wîaiGaniJaû& PaYaSaa Pauåz& YaJauza& PaiTaMa( )
iNaãaecTYakR- AaSaqNaMaGNYaGaare SaMaaihTaMa( )) 9 ))
iñövägni-jihvaà payasä
puruñaà yajuñäà patim
nimlocaty arka äsénam
agny-agäre samähitam
SYNONYMS
595
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
iñövä—after worshiping; agni—fire; jihvam—tongue; payasä—by oblation; puruñam—
unto the Supreme Person; yajuñäm—of all sacrifices; patim—master; nimlocati—while
setting; arke—the sun; äsénam—sitting; agni-agäre—in the sacrificial hall; samähitam—
completely in trance.
TRANSLATION
The sun was setting, and the sage was sitting in trance after offering oblations to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, whose tongue is the sacrificial fire.
PURPORT
Fire is considered to be the tongue of the Personality of Godhead Viñëu, and oblations
of grains and clarified butter offered to the fire are thus accepted by Him. That is the
principle of all sacrifices, of which Lord Viñëu is the master. In other words, the
satisfaction of Lord Viñëu includes the satisfaction of all demigods and other living
beings.
TEXT 10
idiTaåvac
Wz Maa& TvTk*-Tae ivÜNa( k-aMa AataXaraSaNa" )
duNaaeiTa dqNaa& iv§-MYa rM>aaiMav MaTa(r)Ja" )) 10 ))
ditir uväca
eña mäà tvat-kåte vidvan
käma ätta-çaräsanaù
dunoti dénäà vikramya
rambhäm iva mataìgajaù
SYNONYMS
ditiù uväca—beautiful Diti said; eñaù—all these; mäm—unto me; tvat-kåte—for you;
vidvan—O learned one; kämaù—Cupid; ätta-çaräsanaù—taking his arrows; dunoti—
distresses; dénäm—poor me; vikramya—attacking; rambhäm—banana tree; iva—like;
matam-gajaù—mad elephant.
596
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
In that place the beautiful Diti expressed her desire: O learned one, Cupid is taking his
arrows and distressing me forcibly, as a mad elephant troubles a banana tree.
PURPORT
Beautiful Diti, seeing her husband absorbed in trance, began to speak loudly, not
attempting to attract him by bodily expressions. She frankly said that her whole body
was distressed by sex desire because of her husband's presence, just as a banana tree is
troubled by a mad elephant. It was not natural for her to agitate her husband when he
was in trance, but she could not control her strong sexual appetite. Her sex desire was
like a mad elephant, and therefore it was the prime duty of her husband to give her all
protection by fulfilling her desire.
TEXT 11
TaÙvaNdùMaaNaaYaa& SaPaÒqNaa& SaMa*iÖi>a" )
Pa[JaavTaqNaa& >ad]& Tae MaYYaaYau»aMaNauGa]hMa( )) 11 ))
tad bhavän dahyamänäyäà
sa-patnénäà samåddhibhiù
prajävaténäà bhadraà te
mayy äyuìktäm anugraham
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; bhavän—your good self; dahyamänäyäm—being distressed; sapatnénäm—
of the co-wives; samåddhibhiù—by the prosperity; prajä-vaténäm—of those
who have children; bhadram—all prosperity; te—unto you; mayi—unto me; äyuìktäm—
do unto me, in all respects; anugraham—favor.
TRANSLATION
Therefore you should be kind towards me by showing me complete mercy. I desire to
have sons, and I am much distressed by seeing the opulence of my co-wives. By
597
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
performing this act, you will become happy.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä sexual intercourse for begetting children is accepted as righteous. A
person sexually inclined for simple sense gratification, however, is unrighteous. In Diti's
appeal to her husband for sex, it was not exactly that she was afflicted by sex desires, but
she desired sons. Since she had no sons, she felt poorer than her co-wives. Therefore
Kaçyapa was supposed to satisfy his bona fide wife.
TEXT 12
>aTaRYaaRáaeåMaaNaaNaa& l/aek-aNaaivXaTae YaXa" )
PaiTa>aRviÜDaae YaaSaa& Pa[JaYaa NaNau JaaYaTae )) 12 ))
bhartary äptorumänänäà
lokän äviçate yaçaù
patir bhavad-vidho yäsäà
prajayä nanu jäyate
SYNONYMS
bhartari—by the husband; äpta-urumänänäm—of those who are beloved; lokän—in the
world; äviçate—spreads; yaçaù—fame; patiù—husband; bhavat-vidhaù—like your good
self; yäsäm—of those whose; prajayä—by children; nanu—certainly; jäyate—expands.
TRANSLATION
A woman is honored in the world by the benediction of her husband, and a husband like
you will become famous by having children because you are meant for the expansion of
living entities.
PURPORT
According to Åñabhadeva, one should not become a father or mother unless one is
confident that he can beget children whom he can deliver from the clutches of birth
598
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
and death. Human life is the only opportunity to get out of the material scene, which is
full of the miseries of birth, death, old age and diseases. Every human being should be
given the opportunity to take advantage of his human form of life, and a father like
Kaçyapa is supposed to beget good children for the purpose of liberation.
TEXT 13
Paura iPaTaa Naae >aGavaNd+aae duihTa*vTSal/" )
k&- v*<aqTa vr& vTSaa wTYaPa*C^Ta Na" Pa*Qak(- )) 13 ))
purä pitä no bhagavän
dakño duhitå-vatsalaù
kaà våëéta varaà vatsä
ity apåcchata naù påthak
SYNONYMS
purä—in days long ago; pitä—father; naù—our; bhagavän—the most opulent; dakñaù—
Dakña; duhitå-vatsalaù—affectionate to his daughters; kam—unto whom; våëéta—you
want to accept; varam—your husband; vatsäù—O my children; iti—thus; apåcchata—
inquired; naù—us; påthak—separately.
TRANSLATION
In days long ago, our father, the most opulent Dakña, who was affectionate to his
daughters, asked each of us separately whom we would prefer to select as our husband.
PURPORT
It appears from this verse that free selection of a husband was allowed by the father, but
not by free association. The daughters were asked separately to submit their selection of
a husband who was famous for his acts and personality. The ultimate selection depended
on the choice of the father.
TEXT 14
599
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Sa ividTvaTMaJaaNaa& Naae >aav& SaNTaaNa>aavNa" )
}aYaaedXaaddataaSaa& YaaSTae Xaql/MaNauv]Taa" )) 14 ))
sa viditvätmajänäà no
bhävaà santäna-bhävanaù
trayodaçädadät täsäà
yäs te çélam anuvratäù
SYNONYMS
saù—Dakña; viditvä—understanding; ätma-jänäm—of the daughters; naù—our;
bhävam—indication; santäna—children; bhävanaù—well-wisher; trayodaça—thirteen;
adadät—handed over; täsäm—of all of them; yäù—those who are; te—your; çélam—
behavior; anuvratäù—all faithful.
TRANSLATION
Our well-wishing father, Dakña, after knowing our intentions, handed over thirteen of
his daughters unto you, and since then we have all been faithful.
PURPORT
Generally the daughters were too shy to express their opinions before their father, but
the father would accept the daughters' intentions through someone else, such as a
grandmother to whom the grandchildren had free access. King Dakña collected the
opinions of his daughters and thus handed over thirteen to Kaçyapa. Every one of Diti's
sisters was a mother of children. Therefore, since she was equally faithful to the same
husband, why should she remain without children?
TEXT 15
AQa Mae ku-å k-LYaa<a& k-aMa& k-Mal/l/aecNa )
AaTaaeRPaSaPaR<a& >aUMaàMaaega& ih MahqYaiSa )) 15 ))
atha me kuru kalyäëaà
kämaà kamala-locana
600
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ärtopasarpaëaà bhümann
amoghaà hi mahéyasi
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; me—unto me; kuru—kindly do; kalyäëam—benediction; kämam—
desire; kamala-locana—O lotus-eyed one; ärta—of the distressed; upasarpaëam—the
approaching; bhüman—O great one; amogham—without failure; hi—certainly;
mahéyasi—to a great person.
TRANSLATION
O lotus-eyed one, kindly bless me by fulfilling my desire. When someone in distress
approaches a great person, his pleas should never go in vain.
PURPORT
Diti knew well that her request might be rejected because of the untimely situation, but
she pleaded that when there is an emergency or a distressful condition, there is no
consideration of time or situation.
TEXT 16
wiTa Taa& vqr Maarqc" k*-Pa<aa& bhu>aaiz<aqMa( )
Pa[TYaahaNauNaYaNa( vaca Pa[v*ÖaNa(r)k-XMal/aMa( )) 16 ))
iti täà véra märécaù
kåpaëäà bahu-bhäñiëém
pratyähänunayan väcä
pravåddhänaìga-kaçmaläm
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; täm—unto her; véra—O hero; märécaù—the son of Maréci (Kaçyapa);
kåpaëäm—unto the poor; bahu-bhäñiëém—too talkative; pratyäha—replied; anunayan—
pacifying; väcä—by words; pravåddha—highly agitated; anaìga—lust; kaçmaläm—
contaminated.
601
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
O hero [Vidura], Diti, being thus afflicted by the contamination of lust, and therefore
poor and talkative, was pacified by the son of Maréci in suitable words.
PURPORT
When a man or woman is afflicted by the lust of sex desire, it is to be understood as
sinful contamination. Kaçyapa was engaged in his spiritual activities, but he did not
have sufficient strength to refuse his wife, who was thus afflicted. He could have refused
her with strong words expressing impossibility, but he was not as spiritually strong as
Vidura. Vidura is addressed here as a hero because no one is stronger in self-control
than a devotee of the Lord. It appears that Kaçyapa was already inclined to have sexual
enjoyment with his wife, and because he was not a strong man he tried to dissuade her
only with pacifying words.
TEXT 17
Wz Tae_h& ivDaaSYaaiMa iPa[Ya& >aqå YaidC^iSa )
TaSYaa" k-aMa& Na k-" ku-YaaRiTSaiÖñEviGaRk-I YaTa" )) 17 ))
eña te 'haà vidhäsyämi
priyaà bhéru yad icchasi
tasyäù kämaà na kaù kuryät
siddhis traivargiké yataù
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; te—your request; aham—I; vidhäsyämi—shall execute; priyam—very dear;
bhéru—O afflicted one; yat—what; icchasi—you are desiring; tasyäù—her; kämam—
desires; na—not; kaù—who; kuryät—would perform; siddhiù—perfection of liberation;
traivargiké—three; yataù—from whom.
TRANSLATION
O afflicted one, I shall forthwith gratify whatever desire is dear to you, for who else but
602
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
you is the source of the three perfections of liberation?
PURPORT
The three perfections of liberation are religiosity, economic development and sense
gratification: For a conditioned soul, the wife is considered to be the source of liberation
because she offers her service to the husband for his ultimate liberation. Conditional
material existence is based on sense gratification, and if someone has the good fortune
to get a good wife, he is helped by the wife in all respects. If one is disturbed in his
conditional life, he becomes more and more entangled in material contamination. A
faithful wife is supposed to cooperate with her husband in fulfilling all material desires
so that he can then become comfortable and execute spiritual activities for the
perfection of life. If, however, the husband is progressive in spiritual advancement, the
wife undoubtedly shares in his activities, and thus both the wife and the husband profit
in spiritual perfection. It is essential, therefore, that girls as well as boys be trained to
discharge spiritual duties so that at the time of cooperation both will be benefited. The
training of the boy is brahmacarya, and the training of the girl is chastity. A faithful
wife and spiritually trained brahmacäré are a good combination for advancement of the
human mission.
TEXT 18
SavaRé[MaaNauPaadaYa Svaé[Mae<a k-l/}avaNa( )
VYaSaNaa<aRvMaTYaeiTa Jal/YaaNaEYaRQaa<aRvMa( )) 18 ))
sarväçramän upädäya
sväçrameëa kalatravän
vyasanärëavam atyeti
jala-yänair yathärëavam
SYNONYMS
sarva—all; äçramän—social orders; upädäya—completing; sva—own; äçrameëa—by the
social orders; kalatra-vän—a person living with a wife; vyasana-arëavam—the
dangerous ocean of material existence; atyeti—one can cross over; jala-yänaiù—with
seagoing vessels; yathä—as; arëavam—the ocean.
603
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
As one can cross over the ocean with seagoing vessels, one can cross the dangerous
situation of the material ocean by living with a wife.
PURPORT
There are four social orders for cooperation in the endeavor for liberation from material
existence. The orders of brahmacarya, or pious student life, household life with a wife,
retired life and renounced life all depend for successful advancement on the
householder who lives with a wife. This cooperation is essential for the proper
functioning of the institution of the four social orders and the four spiritual orders of
life. This Vedic varëäçrama system is generally known as the caste system. The man who
lives with a wife has a great responsibility in maintaining the members of the other
social orders—the brahmacärés, vänaprasthas and sannyäsés. Except for the gåhasthas, or
the householders, everyone is supposed to engage in the spiritual advancement of life,
and therefore the brahmacäré, the vänaprastha and the sannyäsé have very little time to
earn a livelihood. They therefore collect alms from the gåhasthas, and thus they secure
the bare necessities of life and cultivate spiritual understanding. By helping the other
three sections of society cultivate spiritual values, the householder also makes
advancement in spiritual life. Ultimately every member of society automatically
becomes spiritually advanced and easily crosses the ocean of nescience.
TEXT 19
YaaMaahuraTMaNaae ùDa| é[eYaSk-aMaSYa MaaiNaiNa )
YaSYaa& SvDaurMaDYaSYa PauMaa&êriTa ivJvr" )) 19 ))
yäm ähur ätmano hy ardhaà
çreyas-kämasya mänini
yasyäà sva-dhuram adhyasya
pumäàç carati vijvaraù
SYNONYMS
yäm—the wife who; ähuù—is said; ätmanaù—of the body; hi—thus; ardham—half;
çreyaù—welfare; kämasya—of all desires; mänini—O respectful one; yasyäm—in whom;
604
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sva-dhuram—all responsibilities; adhyasya—entrusting; pumän—a man; carati—moves;
vijvaraù—without anxiety.
TRANSLATION
O respectful one, a wife is so helpful that she is called the better half of a man's body
because of her sharing in all auspicious activities. A man can move without anxiety
entrusting all responsibilities to his wife.
PURPORT
By the Vedic injunction, the wife is accepted as the better half of a man's body because
she is supposed to be responsible for discharging half of the duties of the husband. A
family man has a responsibility to perform five kinds of sacrifices, called païca-yajïa, in
order to get relief from all kinds of unavoidable sinful reaction incurred in the course of
his affairs. When a man becomes qualitatively like the cats and dogs, he forgets his
duties in cultivating spiritual values, and thus he accepts his wife as a sense gratificatory
agency. When the wife is accepted as a sense gratificatory agency, personal beauty is the
main consideration, and as soon as there is a break in personal sense gratification, there
is disruption or divorce. But when husband and wife aim at spiritual advancement by
mutual cooperation, there is no consideration of personal beauty or the disruption of socalled
love. In the material world there is no question of love. Marriage is actually a duty
performed in mutual cooperation as directed in the authoritative scriptures for spiritual
advancement. Therefore marriage is essential in order to avoid the life of cats and dogs,
who are not meant for spiritual enlightenment.
TEXT 20
YaaMaaié[TYaeiNd]YaaraTaqNduJaRYaaiNaTaraé[MaE" )
vYa& JaYaeMa hel/ai>adRSYaUNduGaRPaiTaYaRQaa )) 20 ))
yäm äçrityendriyärätén
durjayän itaräçramaiù
vayaà jayema heläbhir
dasyün durga-patir yathä
605
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
yäm—whom; äçritya—taking shelter of; indriya—senses; arätén—enemies; durjayän—
difficult to conquer; itara—other than the householders; äçramaiù—by orders of society;
vayam—we; jayema—can conquer; heläbhiù—easily; dasyün—invading plunderers;
durga-patiù—a fort commander; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
As a fort commander very easily conquers invading plunderers, by taking shelter of a wife
one can conquer the senses, which are unconquerable in the other social orders.
PURPORT
Of the four orders of human society—the student, or brahmacäré order, the householder,
or gåhastha order, the retired, or vänaprastha order, and the renounced, or sannyäsé
order—the householder is on the safe side. The bodily senses are considered plunderers
of the fort of the body. The wife is supposed to be the commander of the fort, and
therefore whenever there is an attack on the body by the senses, it is the wife who
protects the body from being smashed. The sex demand is inevitable for everyone, but
one who has a fixed wife is saved from the onslaught of the sense enemies. A man who
possesses a good wife does not create a disturbance in society by corrupting virgin girls.
Without a fixed wife, a man becomes a debauchee of the first order and is a nuisance in
society—unless he is a trained brahmacäré, vänaprastha or sannyäsé. Unless there is rigid
and systematic training of the brahmacäré by the expert spiritual master, and unless the
student is obedient, it is sure that the so-called brahmacäré will fall prey to the attack of
sex. There are so many instances of falldown, even for great yogés like Viçvämitra. A
gåhastha is saved, however, because of his faithful wife. Sex life is the cause of material
bondage, and therefore it is prohibited in three äçramas and is allowed only in the
gåhastha-äçrama. The gåhastha is responsible for producing first-quality brahmacärés,
vänaprasthas and sannyäsés.
TEXT 21
Na vYa& Pa[>avSTaa& TvaMaNauk-Tau| Ga*heìir )
APYaaYauza va k-aTSNYaeRNa Yae caNYae Gau<aGa*Danv" )) 21 ))
606
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
na vayaà prabhavas täà tväm
anukartuà gåheçvari
apy äyuñä vä kärtsnyena
ye cänye guëa-gådhnavaù
SYNONYMS
na—never; vayam—we; prabhavaù—are able; täm—that; tväm—unto you;
anukartum—do the same; gåha-éçvari—O queen of the home; api—in spite of; äyuñä—
by duration of life; vä—or (in the next life); kärtsnyena—entire; ye—who; ca—also;
anye—others; guëa-gådhnavaù—those who are able to appreciate qualities.
TRANSLATION
O queen of the home, we are not able to act like you, nor could we repay you for what
you have done, even if we worked for our entire life or even after death. To repay you is
not possible, even for those who are admirers of personal qualities.
PURPORT
So much glorification of a woman by her husband indicates that he is henpecked or is
talking lightly in joke. Kaçyapa meant that householders living with wives enjoy the
heavenly blessings of sense enjoyment and at the same time have no fear of going down
to hell. The man in the renounced order of life has no wife and may be driven by sex
desire to seek another woman or another's wife and thus go to hell. In other words, the
so-called man of the renounced order, who has left his house and wife, goes to hell if he
again desires sexual pleasure, knowingly or unknowingly. In that way the householders
are on the side of safety. Therefore husbands as a class cannot repay their debt to
women either in this life or in the next. Even if they engage themselves in repaying the
women throughout their whole lives, it is still not possible. Not all husbands are as able
to appreciate the good qualities of their wives, but even though one is able to appreciate
these qualities, it is still not possible to repay the debt to the wife. Such extraordinary
praises by a husband for his wife are certainly in the mode of joking.
TEXT 22
607
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
AQaaiPa k-aMaMaeTa& Tae Pa[JaaTYaE k-rva<Yal/Ma( )
YaQaa Maa& NaaiTaraeciNTa MauhUTa| Pa[iTaPaal/Ya )) 22 ))
athäpi kämam etaà te
prajätyai karaväëy alam
yathä mäà nätirocanti
muhürtaà pratipälaya
SYNONYMS
atha api—even though (it is not possible); kämam—this sex desire; etam—as it is; te—
your; prajätyai—for the sake of children; karaväëi—let me do; alam—without delay;
yathä—as; mäm—unto me; na—may not; atirocanti—reproach; muhürtam—a few
seconds; pratipälaya—wait for.
TRANSLATION
Even though it is not possible to repay you, I shall satisfy your sex desire immediately for
the sake of begetting children. But you must wait for only a few seconds so that others
may not reproach me.
PURPORT
The henpecked husband may not be able to repay his wife for all the benefits that he
derives from her, but as for begetting children by fulfilling sexual desire, it is not at all
difficult for any husband unless he is thoroughly impotent. This is a very easy task for a
husband under normal conditions. In spite of Kaçyapa's being very eager, he requested
her to wait for a few seconds so that others might not reproach him. He explains his
position as follows.
TEXT 23
Wza gaaerTaMaa vel/a gaaera<aa& gaaerdXaRNaa )
criNTa YaSYaa& >aUTaaiNa >aUTaeXaaNaucrai<a h )) 23 ))
eñä ghoratamä velä
608
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ghoräëäà ghora-darçanä
caranti yasyäà bhütäni
bhüteçänucaräëi ha
SYNONYMS
eñä—this time; ghora-tamä—most horrible; velä—period; ghoräëäm—of the horrible;
ghora-darçanä—horrible looking; caranti—move; yasyäm—in which; bhütäni—ghosts;
bhüta-éça—the lord of the ghosts; anucaräëi—constant companions; ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
This particular time is most inauspicious because at this time the horrible-looking ghosts
and constant companions of the lord of the ghosts are visible.
PURPORT
Kaçyapa has already told his wife Diti to wait for a while, and now he warns her that
failure to consider the particular time will result in punishment from the ghosts and evil
spirits who move during this time, along with their master, Lord Rudra.
TEXT 24
WTaSYaa& Saaiß SaNDYaaYaa& >aGavaNa( >aUTa>aavNa" )
ParqTaae >aUTaPazRiÙv*Rze<aa$=iTa >aUTara$( )) 24 ))
etasyäà sädhvi sandhyäyäà
bhagavän bhüta-bhävanaù
paréto bhüta-parñadbhir
våñeëäöati bhütaräö
SYNONYMS
etasyäm—in this period; sädhvi—O chaste one; sandhyäyäm—at the junction of day and
night (evening); bhagavän—the Personality of God; bhüta-bhävanaù—the well-wisher
of the ghostly characters; parétaù—surrounded by; bhüta-parñadbhiù—by ghostly
companions; våñeëa—on the back of the bull carrier; aöati—travels; bhüta-räö—the king
609
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of the ghosts.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çiva, the king of the ghosts, sitting on the back of his bull carrier, travels at this
time, accompanied by ghosts who follow him for their welfare.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva, or Rudra, is the king of the ghosts. Ghostly characters worship Lord Çiva to
be gradually guided toward a path of self-realization. Mäyävädé philosophers are mostly
worshipers of Lord Çiva, and Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya is considered to be the incarnation
of Lord Çiva for preaching godlessness to the Mäyävädé philosophers. Ghosts are bereft
of a physical body because of their grievously sinful acts, such as suicide. The last resort
of the ghostly characters in human society is to take shelter of suicide, either material or
spiritual. Material suicide causes loss of the physical body, and spiritual suicide causes
loss of the individual identity. Mäyävädé philosophers desire to lose their individuality
and merge into the impersonal spiritual brahmajyoti existence. Lord Çiva, being very
kind to the ghosts, sees that although they are condemned, they get physical bodies. He
places them into the wombs of women who indulge in sexual intercourse regardless of
the restrictions on time and circumstance. Kaçyapa wanted to impress this fact upon
Diti so that she might wait for a while.
TEXT 25
XMaXaaNac§-aiNal/DaUil/DaUMa]‚
ivk-I<aRivÛaeTaJa$=ak-l/aPa" )
>aSMaavGau<#=aMal/åKMadehae
deviñi>a" PaXYaiTa devrSTae )) 25 ))
çmaçäna-cakränila-dhüli-dhümravikérëa-
vidyota-jaöä-kaläpaù
bhasmävaguëöhämala-rukma-deho
devas tribhiù paçyati devaras te
610
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
çmaçäna—burning crematorium; cakra-anila—whirlwind; dhüli—dust; dhümra—smoky;
vikérëa-vidyota—thus smeared over beauty; jaöä-kaläpaù—bunches of matted hair;
bhasma—ashes; avaguëöha—covered by; amala—stainless; rukma—reddish; dehaù—
body; devaù—the demigod; tribhiù—with three eyes; paçyati—sees; devaraù—younger
brother of the husband; te—your.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çiva's body is reddish, and he is unstained, but he is covered with ashes. His hair is
dusty from the whirlwind dust of the burning crematorium. He is the younger brother of
your husband, and he sees with his three eyes.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva is not an ordinary living entity, nor is he in the category of Viñëu, or the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is far more powerful than any living entity up to
the standard of Brahmä, yet he is not on an equal level with Viñëu. Since he is almost
like Lord Viñëu, Çiva can see past, present and future. One of his eyes is like the sun,
another is like the moon, and his third eye, which is between his eyebrows, is like fire.
He can generate fire from his middle eye, and he is able to vanquish any powerful living
entity, including Brahmä, yet he does not live pompously in a nice house, etc., nor does
he possess any material properties, although he is master of the material world. He lives
mostly in the crematorium, where dead bodies are burnt, and the whirlwind dust of the
crematorium is his bodily dress. He is unstained by material contamination. Kaçyapa
took him as his younger brother because the youngest sister of Diti (Kaçyapa's wife) was
married to Lord Çiva. The husband of one's sister is considered one's brother. By that
social relationship, Lord Çiva happened to be the younger brother of Kaçyapa. Kaçyapa
warned his wife that because Lord Çiva would see their sex indulgence, the time was not
appropriate. Diti might argue that they would enjoy sex life in a private place, but
Kaçyapa reminded her that Lord Çiva has three eyes, called the sun, moon and fire, and
one cannot escape his vigilance any more than one can escape Viñëu. Although seen by
the police, a criminal is sometimes not immediately punished; the police wait for the
proper time to apprehend him. The forbidden time for sexual intercourse would be
noted by Lord Çiva, and Diti would meet with proper punishment by giving birth to a
child of ghostly character or a godless impersonalist. Kaçyapa foresaw this, and thus he
611
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
warned his wife Diti.
TEXT 26
Na YaSYa l/aeke- SvJaNa" Parae va
NaaTYaad*Taae NaaeTa k-iêiÜGaùR" )
vYa& v]TaEYaRÀr<aaPaivÖa‚
MaaXaaSMahe_Jaa& bTa >au¢->aaeGaaMa( )) 26 ))
na yasya loke sva-janaù paro vä
nätyädåto nota kaçcid vigarhyaù
vayaà vratair yac-caraëäpaviddhäm
äçäsmahe 'jäà bata bhukta-bhogäm
SYNONYMS
na—never; yasya—of whom; loke—in the world; sva-janaù—kinsman; paraù—
unconnected; vä—nor; na—neither; ati—greater; ädåtaù—favorable; na—not; uta—or;
kaçcit—anyone; vigarhyaù—criminal; vayam—we; vrataiù—by vows; yat—whose;
caraëa—feet; apaviddhäm—rejected; äçäsmahe—respectfully worship; ajäm—mahäprasäda;
bata—certainly; bhukta-bhogäm—remnants of foodstuff.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çiva regards no one as his relative, yet there is no one who is not connected with
him; he does not regard anyone as very favorable or abominable. We respectfully worship
the remnants of his foodstuff, and we vow to accept what is rejected by him.
PURPORT
Kaçyapa informed his wife that just because Lord Çiva happened to be his brother-inlaw,
that should not encourage her in her offense towards him. Kaçyapa warned her that
actually Lord Çiva is not connected with anyone, nor is anyone his enemy. Since he is
one of the three controllers of the universal affairs, he is equal to everyone. His
greatness is incomparable because he is a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. It is said that among all the devotees of the Personality of Godhead, Lord Çiva
612
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
is the greatest. Thus the remnants of foodstuff left by him are accepted by other
devotees as mahä-prasäda, or great spiritual foodstuff. The remnants of foodstuff offered
to Lord Kåñëa are called prasäda, but when the same prasäda is eaten by a great devotee
like Lord Çiva, it is called mahä-prasäda. Lord Çiva is so great that he does not care for
the material prosperity for which every one of us is so eager. Pärvaté, who is the powerful
material nature personified, is under his full control as his wife, yet he does not use her
even to build a residential house. He prefers to remain without shelter, and his great
wife also agrees to live with him humbly. People in general worship goddess Durgä, the
wife of Lord Çiva, for material prosperity, but Lord Çiva engages her in his service
without material desire. He simply advises his great wife that of all kinds of worship, the
worship of Viñëu is the highest, and greater than that is the worship of a great devotee
or anything in relation with Viñëu.
TEXT 27
YaSYaaNavÛacirTa& MaNaqiz<aae
Ga*<aNTYaivÛaPa$=l&/ ibi>aTSav" )
iNarSTaSaaMYaaiTaXaYaae_iPa YaTSvYa&
iPaXaaccYaaRMacrÓiTa" SaTaaMa( )) 27 ))
yasyänavadyäcaritaà manéñiëo
gåëanty avidyä-paöalaà bibhitsavaù
nirasta-sämyätiçayo 'pi yat svayaà
piçäca-caryäm acarad gatiù satäm
SYNONYMS
yasya—whose; anavadya—unimpeachable; äcaritam—character; manéñiëaù—great
sages; gåëanti—follow; avidyä—nescience; paöalam—mass; bibhitsavaù—desiring to
dismantle; nirasta—nullified; sämya—equality; atiçayaù—greatness; api—in spite of;
yat—as; svayam—personally; piçäca—devil; caryäm—activities; acarat—performed;
gatiù—destination; satäm—of the devotees of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
613
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Although no one in the material world is equal to or greater than Lord Çiva, and although
his unimpeachable character is followed by great souls to dismantle the mass of nescience,
he nevertheless remains as if a devil to give salvation to all devotees of the Lord.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva's uncivilized, devilish characteristics are never abominable because he teaches
the sincere devotees of the Lord how to practice detachment from material enjoyment.
He is called Mahädeva, or the greatest of all demigods, and no one is equal to or greater
than him in the material world. He is almost equal with Lord Viñëu. Although he always
associates with Mäyä, Durgä, he is above the reactionary stage of the three modes of
material nature, and although he is in charge of devilish characters in the mode of
ignorance, he is not affected by such association.
TEXT 28
hSaiNTa YaSYaacirTa& ih du>aRGaa"
SvaTMaNa]TaSYaaivduz" SaMaqihTaMa( )
YaEvRñMaaLYaa>ar<aaNaule/PaNaE"
ì>aaeJaNa& SvaTMaTaYaaePal/ail/TaMa( )) 28 ))
hasanti yasyäcaritaà hi durbhagäù
svätman-ratasyäviduñaù saméhitam
yair vastra-mälyäbharaëänulepanaiù
çva-bhojanaà svätmatayopalälitam
SYNONYMS
hasanti—laugh at; yasya—whose; äcaritam—activity; hi—certainly; durbhagäù—the
unfortunate; sva-ätman—in the self; ratasya—of one engaged; aviduñaù—not knowing;
saméhitam—his purpose; yaiù—by whom; vastra—clothing; mälya—garlands;
äbharaëa—ornaments; anu—such luxurious; lepanaiù—with ointments; çvabhojanam—
eatable by the dogs; sva-ätmatayä—as if the self; upalälitam—fondled.
TRANSLATION
614
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Unfortunate, foolish persons, not knowing that he is engaged in his own self, laugh at
him. Such foolish persons engage in maintaining the body—which is eatable by dogs—
with dresses, ornaments, garlands and ointments.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva never accepts any luxurious dress, garland, ornament or ointment. But those
who are addicted to the decoration of the body, which is finally eatable by dogs, very
luxuriously maintain it as the self. Such persons do not understand Lord Çiva, but they
approach him for luxurious material comforts. There are two kinds of devotees of Lord
Çiva. One class is the gross materialist seeking only bodily comforts from Lord Çiva, and
the other class desires to become one with him. They are mostly impersonalists and
prefer to chant çivo'ham, "I am Çiva," or "After liberation I shall become one with Lord
Çiva." In other words, the karmés and jïänés are generally devotees of Lord Çiva, but they
do not properly understand his real purpose in life. Sometimes so-called devotees of Lord
Çiva imitate him in using poisonous intoxicants. Lord Çiva once swallowed an ocean of
poison, and thus his throat became blue. The imitation Çivas try to follow him by
indulging in poisons, and thus they are ruined. The real purpose of Lord Çiva is to serve
the Soul of the soul, Lord Kåñëa. He desires that all luxurious articles, such as nice
garments, garlands, ornaments and cosmetics, be given to Lord Kåñëa only, because
Kåñëa is the real enjoyer. He refuses to accept such luxurious items himself because they
are only meant for Kåñëa. However, since they do not know this purpose of Lord Çiva,
foolish persons either laugh at him or profitlessly try to imitate him.
TEXT 29
b]øadYaae YaTk*-TaSaeTauPaal/a
YaTk-ar<a& ivìiMad& c MaaYaa )
Aajak-rq YaSYa iPaXaaccYaaR
Ahae iv>aUManêirTa& iv@MbNaMa( )) 29 ))
brahmädayo yat-kåta-setu-pälä
yat-käraëaà viçvam idaà ca mäyä
äjïä-karé yasya piçäca-caryä
aho vibhümnaç caritaà viòambanam
615
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
brahma-ädayaù—demigods like Brahmä; yat—whose; kåta—activities; setu—religious
rites; päläù—observers; yat—one who is; käraëam—the origin of; viçvam—the universe;
idam—this; ca—also; mäyä—material energy; äjïä-karé—order carrier; yasya—whose;
piçäca—devilish; caryä—activity; aho—O my lord; vibhümnaù—of the great; caritam—
character; viòambanam—simply imitation.
TRANSLATION
Demigods like Brahmä also follow the religious rites observed by him. He is the controller
of the material energy, which causes the creation of the material world. He is great, and
therefore his devilish characteristics are simply imitation.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva is the husband of Durgä, the controller of the material energy. Durgä is
personified material energy, and Lord Çiva, being her husband, is the controller of the
material energy. He is also the incarnation of the mode of ignorance and one of the
three deities representing the Supreme Lord. As His representative, Lord Çiva is
identical with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is very great, and his
renunciation of all material enjoyment is an ideal example of how one should be
materially unattached. One should therefore follow in his footsteps and be unattached
to matter, not imitate his uncommon acts like drinking poison.
TEXT 30
MaE}aeYa ovac
SaEv& Sa&ividTae >a}aaR MaNMaQaaeNMaiQaTaeiNd]Yaa )
JaGa]ah vaSaae b]øzeRv*Rzl/Iv GaTa}aPaa )) 30 ))
maitreya uväca
saivaà saàvidite bharträ
manmathonmathitendriyä
jagräha väso brahmarñer
våñaléva gata-trapä
616
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; sä—she; evam—thus; saàvidite—in spite of being
informed; bharträ—by her husband; manmatha—by Cupid; unmathita—being pressed;
indriyä—senses; jagräha—caught hold of; väsaù—clothing; brahma-åñeù—of the great
brähmaëa—sage; våñalé—public prostitute; iva—like; gata-trapä—without shame.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya said: Diti was thus informed by her husband, but she was pressed by Cupid for
sexual satisfaction. She caught hold of the clothing of the great brähmaëa sage, just like a
shameless public prostitute.
PURPORT
The difference between a married wife and a public prostitute is that one is restrained in
sex life by the rules and regulations of the scriptures, whereas the other is unrestricted
in sex life and is conducted solely by the strong sex urge. Although very enlightened,
Kaçyapa, the great sage, became a victim of his prostitute wife. Such is the strong force
of material energy.
TEXT 31
Sa ividTvaQa >aaYaaRYaaSTa& iNabRNDa& ivk-MaRi<a )
NaTva idíaYa rhiSa TaYaaQaaePaivveXa ih )) 31 ))
sa viditvätha bhäryäyäs
taà nirbandhaà vikarmaëi
natvä diñöäya rahasi
tayäthopaviveça hi
SYNONYMS
saù—he; viditvä—understanding; atha—thereupon; bhäryäyäù—of the wife; tam—that;
nirbandham—obstinacy; vikarmaëi—in the forbidden act; natvä—offering obeisances;
diñöäya—unto worshipable fate; rahasi—in a secluded place; tayä—with her; atha—
thus; upaviveça—lay; hi—certainly.
617
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Understanding his wife's purpose, he was obliged to perform the forbidden act, and thus
after offering his obeisances unto worshipable fate, he lay with her in a secluded place.
PURPORT
It appears from the talks of Kaçyapa with his wife that he was a worshiper of Lord Çiva,
and although he knew that Lord Çiva would not be pleased with him for such a
forbidden act, he was obliged to act by his wife's desire, and thus he offered his
obeisances unto fate. He knew that the child born of such untimely sexual intercourse
would certainly not be a good child, but could not protect himself because he was too
obligated to his wife. In a similar case, however, when Öhäkura Haridäsa was tempted by
a public prostitute at the dead of night, he avoided the allurement because of his
perfection in Kåñëa consciousness. That is the difference between a Kåñëa conscious
person and others. Kaçyapa Muni was greatly learned and enlightened, and he knew all
the rules and regulations of systematic life, yet he failed to protect himself from the
attack of sex desire. Öhäkura Haridäsa was not born of a brähmaëa family, nor was he
himself brähmaëa, yet he could protect himself from such an attack due to his being
Kåñëa conscious. Öhäkura Haridäsa used to chant the holy name of the Lord three
hundred thousand times daily.
TEXT 32
AQaaePaSPa*XYa Sail/l&/ Pa[a<aaNaaYaMYa vaGYaTa" )
DYaaYaÅJaaPa ivrJa& b]ø JYaaeiTa" SaNaaTaNaMa( )) 32 ))
athopaspåçya salilaà
präëän äyamya väg-yataù
dhyäyaï jajäpa virajaà
brahma jyotiù sanätanam
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; upaspåçya—touching or taking bath in water; salilam—water; präëän
äyamya—practicing trance; väk-yataù—controlling speech; dhyäyan—meditating;
jajäpa—chanted within the mouth; virajam—pure; brahma—Gäyatré hymns; jyotiù—
618
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
effulgence; sanätanam—eternal.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the brähmaëa took his bath in the water and controlled his speech by
practicing trance, meditating on the eternal effulgence and chanting the holy Gäyatré
hymns within his mouth.
PURPORT
As one has to take bath after using the toilet, so one has to wash himself with water
after sexual intercourse, especially when at a forbidden time. Kaçyapa Muni meditated
on the impersonal brahmajyoti by chanting the Gäyatré mantra within his mouth. When
a Vedic mantra is chanted within the mouth so that only the chanter can hear, the
chanting is called japa. But when such mantras are chanted loudly, it is called kértana.
The Vedic hymn Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare
Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare can be chanted both softly to oneself or loudly; therefore
it is called the mahä-mantra, or the great hymn.
Kaçyapa Muni appears to be an impersonalist. Comparing his character with that of
Öhäkura Haridäsa as referred to above, it is clear that the personalist is stronger in sense
control than the impersonalist. This is explained in Bhagavad-gétä as paraà dåñövä
nivartate; [Bg. 9.59] i.e., one ceases to accept lower grade things when one is situated in a
superior condition. One is supposed to be purified after taking bath and chanting
Gäyatré, but the mahä-mantra is so powerful that one can chant loudly or softly, in any
condition, and he is protected from all the evils of material existence.
TEXT 33
idiTaSTau v]qi@Taa TaeNa k-MaaRvÛeNa >aarTa )
oPaSa(r)MYa ivPa[izRMaDaaeMau:Ya>Ya>aazTa )) 33 ))
ditis tu vréòitä tena
karmävadyena bhärata
upasaìgamya viprarñim
adho-mukhy abhyabhäñata
619
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
ditiù—Diti, the wife of Kaçyapa; tu—but; vréòitä—ashamed; tena—by that; karma—act;
avadyena—faulty; bhärata—O son of the Bharata family; upasaìgamya—going nearer
to; vipra-åñim—the brähmaëa—sage; adhaù-mukhé—with her face lowered;
abhyabhäñata—politely said.
TRANSLATION
O son of the Bharata family, Diti, after this, went nearer to her husband, her face
lowered because of her faulty action. She spoke as follows.
PURPORT
When one is ashamed of an abominable action, one naturally becomes down-faced. Diti
came to her senses after the abominable sexual intercourse with her husband. Such
sexual intercourse is condemned as prostitution. In other words, sex life with one's wife
is equal to prostitution if the regulations are not properly followed.
TEXT 34
idiTaåvac
Na Mae Ga>aRiMaMa& b]øNa( >aUTaaNaaMa*z>aae_vDaqTa( )
åd]" PaiTaihR >aUTaaNaa& YaSYaak-rvMa&hSaMa( )) 34 ))
ditir uväca
na me garbham imaà brahman
bhütänäm åñabho 'vadhét
rudraù patir hi bhütänäà
yasyäkaravam aàhasam
SYNONYMS
ditiù uväca—the beautiful Diti said; na—not; me—my; garbham—pregnancy; imam—
this; brahman—O brähmaëa; bhütänäm—of all living entities; åñabhaù—the noblest of
all living entities; avadhét—let him kill; rudraù—Lord Çiva; patiù—master; hi—
620
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
certainly; bhütänäm—of all living entities; yasya—whose; akaravam—I have done;
aàhasam—offense.
TRANSLATION
The beautiful Diti said: My dear brähmaëa, kindly see that my embryo is not killed by
Lord Çiva, the lord of all living entities, because of the great offense I have committed
against him.
PURPORT
Diti was conscious of her offense and was anxious to be excused by Lord Çiva. Lord Çiva
has two popular names, Rudra and Äçutoña. He is very prone to anger as well as quickly
pacified. Diti knew that because of his being quickly angered he might spoil the
pregnancy she had so unlawfully achieved. But because he was also Äçutoña, she
implored her brähmaëa husband to help her in pacifying Lord Çiva, for her husband was
a great devotee of Lord Çiva. In other words, Lord Çiva might have been angry with Diti
because she obliged her husband to transgress the law, but he would not refuse her
husband's prayer. Therefore the application for excuse was submitted through her
husband. She prayed to Lord Çiva as follows.
TEXT 35
NaMaae åd]aYa MahTae devaYaaeGa]aYa Maq!uze )
iXavaYa NYaSTad<@aYa Da*Tad<@aYa MaNYave )) 35 ))
namo rudräya mahate
deväyogräya méòhuñe
çiväya nyasta-daëòäya
dhåta-daëòäya manyave
SYNONYMS
namaù—all obeisances unto; rudräya—unto the angry Lord Çiva; mahate—unto the
great; deväya—unto the demigod; ugräya—unto the ferocious; méòhuñe—unto the
fulfiller of all material desires; çiväya—unto the all-auspicious; nyasta-daëòäya—unto
621
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the forgiving; dhåta-daëòäya—unto the immediate chastiser; manyave—unto the angry.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my obeisances unto the angry Lord Çiva, who is simultaneously the very
ferocious great demigod and the fulfiller of all material desires. He is all-auspicious and
forgiving, but his anger can immediately move him to chastise.
PURPORT
Diti prayed for the mercy of Lord Çiva very cleverly. She prayed: "The lord can cause me
to cry, but if he likes he can also stop my crying because he is Äçutoña. He is so great that
if he likes he can immediately destroy my pregnancy, but by his mercy he can also fulfill
my desire that my pregnancy not be spoiled. Because he is all-auspicious, it is not
difficult for him to excuse me from being punished, although he is now ready to punish
me because I have moved his great anger. He appears like a man, but he is the lord of all
men."
TEXT 36
Sa Na" Pa[SaqdTaa& >aaMaae >aGavaNauvRNauGa]h" )
VYaaDaSYaaPYaNauk-MPYaaNaa& ñq<aa& dev" SaTaqPaiTa" )) 36 ))
sa naù prasédatäà bhämo
bhagavän urv-anugrahaù
vyädhasyäpy anukampyänäà
stréëäà devaù saté-patiù
SYNONYMS
saù—he; naù—with us; prasédatäm—be pleased; bhämaù—brother-in-law; bhagavän—
the personality of all opulences; uru—very great; anugrahaù—merciful; vyädhasya—of
the hunter; api—also; anukampyänäm—of the objects of mercy; stréëäm—of the
women; devaù—the worshipable lord; saté-patiù—the husband of Saté (the chaste).
TRANSLATION
622
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Let him be pleased with us, since he is my brother-in-law, the husband of my sister Saté.
He is also the worshipable lord of all women. He is the personality of all opulences and
can show mercy towards women, who are excused even by the uncivilized hunters.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva is the husband of Saté, one of the sisters of Diti. Diti invoked the pleasure of
her sister Saté so that Saté would request her husband to excuse her. Besides that, Lord
Çiva is the worshipable lord of all women. He is naturally very kind towards women, on
whom even the uncivilized hunters also show their mercy. Since Lord Çiva is himself
associated with women, he knows very well their defective nature, and he might not
take very seriously Diti's unavoidable offense, which occurred due to her faulty nature.
Every virgin girl is supposed to be a devotee of Lord Çiva. Diti remembered her
childhood worship of Lord Çiva and begged his mercy.
TEXT 37
MaE}aeYa ovac
SvSaGaRSYaaiXaz& l/aeKYaaMaaXaaSaaNaa& Pa[vePaTaqMa( )
iNav*taSaNDYaaiNaYaMaae >aaYaaRMaah Pa[JaaPaiTa" )) 37 ))
maitreya uväca
sva-sargasyäçiñaà lokyäm
äçäsänäà pravepatém
nivåtta-sandhyä-niyamo
bhäryäm äha prajäpatiù
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—the great sage Maitreya said; sva-sargasya—of her own children;
äçiñam—welfare; lokyäm—in the world; äçäsänäm—desiring; pravepatém—while
trembling; nivåtta—averted from; sandhyä-niyamaù—the rules and regulations of
evening; bhäryäm—unto the wife; äha—said; prajäpatiù—the progenitor.
TRANSLATION
623
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Maitreya said: The great sage Kaçyapa thus addressed his wife, who was trembling
because of fear that her husband was offended. She understood that he had been
dissuaded from his daily duties of offering evening prayers, yet she desired the welfare of
her children in the world.
TEXT 38
k-XYaPa ovac
APa[aYaTYaadaTMaNaSTae daezaNMaaEhUiTaRk-aduTa )
MaiàdeXaaiTacare<a devaNaa& caiTahel/NaaTa( )) 38 ))
kaçyapa uväca
apräyatyäd ätmanas te
doñän mauhürtikäd uta
man-nideçäticäreëa
devänäà cätihelanät
SYNONYMS
kaçyapaù uväca—the learned brähmaëa Kaçyapa said; apräyatyät—because of the
pollution; ätmanaù—of the mind; te—your; doñät—because of defilement;
mauhürtikät—in terms of the moment; uta—also; mat—my; nideça—direction;
aticäreëa—being too neglectful; devänäm—of the demigods; ca—also; atihelanät—being
too apathetic.
TRANSLATION
The learned Kaçyapa said: Because of your mind's being polluted, because of defilement
of the particular time, because of your negligence of my directions, and because of your
being apathetic to the demigods, everything was inauspicious.
PURPORT
The conditions for having good progeny in society are that the husband should be
disciplined in religious and regulative principles and the wife should be faithful to the
husband. In Bhagavad-gétä (7.11) it is said that sexual intercourse according to religious
624
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
principles is a representation of Kåñëa consciousness. Before engaging in sexual
intercourse, both the husband and the wife must consider their mental condition, the
particular time, the husband's direction, and obedience to the demigods. According to
Vedic society, there is a suitable auspicious time for sex life, which is called the time for
garbhädhäna. Diti neglected all the principles of scriptural injunction, and therefore,
although she was very anxious for auspicious children, she was informed that her
children would not be worthy to be the sons of a brähmaëa. There is a clear indication
herein that a brähmaëa's son is not always a brähmaëa. Personalities like Rävaëa and
Hiraëyakaçipu were actually born of brähmaëas, but they were not accepted as
brähmaëas because their fathers did not follow the regulative principles for their birth.
Such children are called demons, or Räkñasas. There were only one or two Räkñasas in
the previous ages due to negligence of the disciplinary methods, but during the age of
Kali there is no discipline in sex life. How, then, can one expect good children?
Certainly unwanted children cannot be a source of happiness in society, but through the
Kåñëa consciousness movement they can be raised to the human standard by chanting
the holy name of God. That is the unique contribution of Lord Caitanya to human
society.
TEXT 39
>aivZYaTaSTava>ad]av>ad]e Jaa#=raDaMaaE )
l/aek-aNa( SaPaal/a&ñq&êi<@ Mauhura§-NdiYaZYaTa" )) 39 ))
bhaviñyatas taväbhadräv
abhadre jäöharädhamau
lokän sa-päläàs tréàç caëòi
muhur äkrandayiñyataù
SYNONYMS
bhaviñyataù—will take birth; tava—your; abhadrau—two contemptuous sons; abhadre—
O unlucky one; jäöhara-adhamau—born of a condemned womb; lokän—all planets; sapälän—
with their rulers; trén—three; caëòi—haughty one; muhuù—constantly; äkrandayiñyataù—
will cause lamentation.
625
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
O haughty one, you will have two contemptuous sons born of your condemned womb.
Unlucky woman, they will cause constant lamentation to all the three worlds!
PURPORT
Contemptuous sons are born of the condemned womb of their mother. In Bhagavad-gétä
(1.40) it is said, "When there is deliberate negligence of the regulative principles of
religious life, the women as a class become polluted, and as a result there are unwanted
children." This is especially true for boys; if the mother is not good, there cannot be good
sons. The learned Kaçyapa could foresee the character of the sons who would be born of
the condemned womb of Diti. The womb was condemned because of the mother's being
too sexually inclined and thus transgressing all the laws and injunctions of the
scriptures. In a society where such women are predominant, one should not expect good
children.
TEXT 40
Pa[ai<aNaa& hNYaMaaNaaNaa& dqNaaNaaMak*-TaaGaSaaMa( )
ñq<aa& iNaGa*ùMaa<aaNaa& k-aeiPaTaezu MahaTMaSau )) 40 ))
präëinäà hanyamänänäà
dénänäm akåtägasäm
stréëäà nigåhyamäëänäà
kopiteñu mahätmasu
SYNONYMS
präëinäm—when the living entities; hanyamänänäm—being killed; dénänäm—of the
poor; akåta-ägasäm—of the faultless; stréëäm—of the women; nigåhyamäëänäm—being
tortured; kopiteñu—being enraged; mahätmasu—when the great souls.
TRANSLATION
They will kill poor, faultless living entities, torture women and enrage the great souls.
626
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Demoniac activities are predominant when innocent, faultless living entities are killed,
women are tortured, and the great souls engaged in Kåñëa consciousness are enraged. In
a demoniac society, innocent animals are killed to satisfy the tongue, and women are
tortured by unnecessary sexual indulgence. Where there are women and meat, there
must be liquor and sex indulgence. When these are prominent in society, by God's grace
one can expect a change in the social order by the Lord Himself or by His bona fide
representative.
TEXT 41
Tada ivìeìr" §u-Öae >aGavaçaek->aavNa" )
hiNaZYaTYavTaqYaaRSaaE YaQaad]qNa( XaTaPavRDa*k(- )) 41 ))
tadä viçveçvaraù kruddho
bhagaväl loka-bhävanaù
haniñyaty avatéryäsau
yathädrén çataparva-dhåk
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; viçva-éçvaraù—the Lord of the universe; kruddhaù—in great anger;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; loka-bhävanaù—desiring the welfare
of the people in general; haniñyati—will kill; avatérya—descending Himself; asau—He;
yathä—as if; adrén—the mountains; çata-parva-dhåk—the controller of the thunderbolt
(Indra).
TRANSLATION
At that time the Lord of the universe, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the
well-wisher of all living entities, will descend and kill them, just as Indra smashes the
mountains with his thunderbolts.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.8), the Lord descends as an incarnation to deliver the
627
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
devotees and kill the miscreants. The Lord of the universe and of everything would
appear to kill the sons of Diti because of their offending the devotees of the Lord. There
are many agents of the Lord, such as Indra, Candra, Varuëa, goddess Durgä, and Kälé,
who can chastise any formidable miscreants in the world. The example of mountains
being smashed by a thunderbolt is very appropriate. The mountain is considered the
most strongly built body within the universe, yet it can be easily smashed by the
arrangement of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not need
to descend in order to kill any strongly built body; He comes down just for the sake of
His devotees. Everyone is subject to the miseries offered by material nature, but because
the activities of miscreants, such as killing innocent people and animals or torturing
women, are harmful to everyone and are therefore a source of pain for the devotees, the
Lord comes down. He descends only to give relief to His ardent devotees. The killing of
the miscreant by the Lord is also the mercy of the Lord towards the miscreant, although
apparently the Lord takes the side of the devotee. Since the Lord is absolute, there is no
difference between His activities of killing the miscreants and favoring the devotees.
TEXT 42
idiTaåvac
vDa& >aGavTaa Saa+aaTSauNaa>aaedarbahuNaa )
AaXaaSae Pau}aYaaeMaRù& Maa §u-Öad(b]aø<aad(Pa[>aae )) 42 ))
ditir uväca
vadhaà bhagavatä säkñät
sunäbhodära-bähunä
äçäse putrayor mahyaà
mä kruddhäd brähmaëäd prabho
SYNONYMS
ditiù uväca—Diti said; vadham—the killing; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; säkñät—directly; sunäbha—with His Sudarçana weapon; udära—very
magnanimous; bähunä—by the arms; äçäse—I desire; putrayoù—of the sons; mahyam—
of mine; mä—never be it so; kruddhät—by the rage; brähmaëät—of the brähmaëas;
prabho—O my husband.
628
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Diti said: It is very good that my sons will be magnanimously killed by the arms of the
Personality of Godhead with His Sudarçana weapon. O my husband, may they never be
killed by the wrath of the brähmaëa devotees.
PURPORT
When Diti heard from her husband that the great souls would be angered by the
activities of her sons, she was very anxious. She thought that her sons might be killed by
the wrath of the brähmaëas. The Lord does not appear when the brähmaëas become
angry at someone, because the wrath of a brähmaëa is sufficient in itself. He certainly
appears, however, when His devotee simply becomes sorry. A devotee of the Lord never
prays to the Lord to appear for the sake of the troubles the miscreants cause for him, and
he never bothers Him by asking for protection. Rather, the Lord is anxious to give
protection to the devotees. Diti knew well that the killing of her sons by the Lord would
also be His mercy, and therefore she says that the wheel and arms of the Lord are
magnanimous. If someone is killed by the wheel of the Lord and is thus fortunate
enough to see the arms of the Lord, that is sufficient for his liberation. Such good
fortune is not achieved even by the great sages.
TEXT 43
Na b]ød<@dGDaSYa Na >aUTa>aYadSYa c )
Naark-aêaNauGa*õiNTa Yaa& Yaa& YaaeiNaMaSaaE GaTa" )) 43 ))
na brahma-daëòa-dagdhasya
na bhüta-bhayadasya ca
närakäç cänugåhëanti
yäà yäà yonim asau gataù
SYNONYMS
na—never; brahma-daëòa—punishment by a brähmaëa; dagdhasya—of one who is so
punished; na—neither; bhüta-bhaya-dasya—of one who is always fearful to the living
entities; ca—also; närakäù—those condemned to hell; ca—also; anugåhëanti—do any
favor; yäm yäm—whichever; yonim—species of life; asau—the offender; gataù—goes.
629
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
A person who is condemned by a brähmaëa or is always fearful to other living entities is
not favored either by those who are already in hell or by those in the species in which he
is born.
PURPORT
A practical example of a condemned species of life is the dog. Dogs are so condemned
that they never show any sympathy to their contemporaries.
TEXTS 44-45
k-XYaPa ovac
k*-TaXaaek-aNauTaaPaeNa SaÛ" Pa[TYavMaXaRNaaTa( )
>aGavTYauåMaaNaaÀ >ave MaYYaiPa cadraTa( )) 44 ))
Pau}aSYaEv c Pau}aa<aa& >aivTaEk-" SaTaa& MaTa" )
GaaSYaiNTa YaÛXa" éuÖ& >aGavÛXaSaa SaMaMa( )) 45 ))
kaçyapa uväca
kåta-çokänutäpena
sadyaù pratyavamarçanät
bhagavaty uru-mänäc ca
bhave mayy api cädarät
putrasyaiva ca puträëäà
bhavitaikaù satäà mataù
gäsyanti yad-yaçaù çuddhaà
bhagavad-yaçasä samam
SYNONYMS
kaçyapaù uväca—the learned Kaçyapa said; kåta-çoka—having lamented; anutäpena—by
penitence; sadyaù—immediately; pratyavamarçanät—by proper deliberation;
bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uru—great; mänät—adoration;
ca—and; bhave—unto Lord Çiva; mayi api—unto me also; ca—and; ädarät—by respect;
630
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
putrasya—of the son; eva—certainly; ca—and; puträëäm—of the sons; bhavitä—shall
be born; ekaù—one; satäm—of the devotees; mataù—approved; gäsyanti—will
broadcast; yat—of whom; yaçaù—recognition; çuddham—transcendental; bhagavat—of
the Personality of Godhead; yaçasä—with recognition; samam—equally.
TRANSLATION
The learned Kaçyapa said: Because of your lamentation, penitence and proper
deliberation, and also because of your unflinching faith in the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and your adoration for Lord Çiva and me, one of the sons [Prahläda] of your son
[Hiraëyakaçipu] will be an approved devotee of the Lord, and his fame will be broadcast
equally with that of the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 46
YaaeGaEheRMaev duvR<a| >aaviYaZYaiNTa SaaDav" )
iNavOEraidi>araTMaaNa& YaC^ql/MaNauviTaRTauMa( )) 46 ))
yogair hemeva durvarëaà
bhävayiñyanti sädhavaù
nirvairädibhir ätmänaà
yac-chélam anuvartitum
SYNONYMS
yogaiù—by the rectifying processes; hema—gold; iva—like; durvarëam—inferior
quality; bhävayiñyanti—will purify; sädhavaù—saintly persons; nirvaira-ädibhiù—by
practice of freedom from animosity, etc.; ätmänam—the self; yat—whose; çélam—
character; anuvartitum—to follow in the footsteps.
TRANSLATION
In order to follow in his footsteps, saintly persons will try to emulate his character by
practicing freedom from animosity, just as the purifying processes rectify gold of inferior
quality.
631
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Yoga practice, the process of purifying one's existential identity, is based mainly on selfcontrol.
Without self-control one cannot practice freedom from animosity. In the
conditional state, every living being is envious of another living being, but in the
liberated state there is an absence of animosity. Prahläda Mahäräja was tortured by his
father in so many ways, yet after the death of his father he prayed for his father's
liberation by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He did not ask any benediction that
he might have asked, but he prayed that his atheistic father might be liberated. He never
cursed any of the persons who engaged in torturing him at the instigation of his father.
TEXT 47
YaTPa[Saadaidd& ivì& Pa[SaqdiTa YadaTMak-Ma( )
Sa Svd*G>aGavaNa( YaSYa TaaeZYaTae_NaNYaYaa d*Xaa )) 47 ))
yat-prasädäd idaà viçvaà
prasédati yad-ätmakam
sa sva-dåg bhagavän yasya
toñyate 'nanyayä dåçä
SYNONYMS
yat—by whose; prasädät—mercy of; idam—this; viçvam—universe; prasédati—becomes
happy; yat—whose; ätmakam—because of His omnipotence; saù—He; sva-dåk—taking
special care for His devotees; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yasya—
whose; toñyate—becomes pleased; ananyayä—without deviation; dåçä—by intelligence.
TRANSLATION
Everyone will be pleased with him because the Personality of Godhead, the supreme
controller of the universe, is always satisfied with a devotee who does not wish for
anything beyond Him.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated everywhere as the Supersoul, and He
632
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
can dictate to anyone and everyone as He likes. The would-be grandson of Diti, who was
predicted to be a great devotee, would be liked by everyone, even by the enemies of his
father, because he would have no other vision besides the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. A pure devotee of the Lord sees the presence of his worshipable Lord
everywhere. The Lord reciprocates in such a way that all living entities in whom the
Lord is dwelling as the Supersoul also like a pure devotee because the Lord is present in
their hearts and can dictate to them to be friendly to His devotee. There are many
instances in history wherein even the most ferocious animal became friendly to a pure
devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 48
Sa vE Maha>aaGavTaae MahaTMaa
MahaNau>aavae MahTaa& Maihï" )
Pa[v*Ö>a¢-ya ùNau>aaivTaaXaYae
iNaveXYa vEku-<#=iMaMa& ivhaSYaiTa )) 48 ))
sa vai mahä-bhägavato mahätmä
mahänubhävo mahatäà mahiñöhaù
pravåddha-bhaktyä hy anubhävitäçaye
niveçya vaikuëöham imaà vihäsyati
SYNONYMS
saù—he; vai—certainly; mahä-bhägavataù—the topmost devotee; mahä-ätmä—
expanded intelligence; mahä-anubhävaù—expanded influence; mahatäm—of the great
souls; mahiñöhaù—the greatest; pravåddha—well matured; bhaktyä—by devotional
service; hi—certainly; anubhävita—being situated in the anubhäva stage of ecstasy;
äçaye—in the mind; niveçya—entering; vaikuëöham—in the spiritual sky; imam—this
(material world); vihäsyati—will quit.
TRANSLATION
That topmost devotee of the Lord will have expanded intelligence and expanded influence
and will be the greatest of the great souls. Due to matured devotional service, he will
633
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
certainly be situated in transcendental ecstasy and will enter the spiritual sky after
quitting this material world.
PURPORT
There are three stages of transcendental development in devotional service, which are
technically called sthäyi-bhäva, anubhäva and mahäbhäva. Continual perfect love of
Godhead is called sthäyi-bhäva, and when it is performed in a particular type of
transcendental relationship it is called anubhäva. But the stage of mahäbhäva is visible
amongst the personal pleasure potential energies of the Lord. It is understood that the
grandson of Diti, namely Prahläda Mahäräja, would constantly meditate on the Lord
and reiterate His activities. Because he would constantly remain in meditation, he would
easily transfer himself to the spiritual world after quitting his material body. Such
meditation is still more conveniently performed by chanting and hearing the holy name
of the Lord. This is especially recommended in this age of Kali.
TEXT 49
Al/MPa$=" Xaql/Darae Gau<aak-rae
ôí" ParÖyaR VYaiQaTaae du"i%Taezu )
A>aUTaXa}auJaRGaTa" Xaaek-hTaaR
NaEdaigak&- TaaPaiMavae@uraJa" )) 49 ))
alampaöaù çéla-dharo guëäkaro
håñöaù pararddhyä vyathito duùkhiteñu
abhüta-çatrur jagataù çoka-hartä
naidäghikaà täpam ivoòuräjaù
SYNONYMS
alampaöaù—virtuous; çéla-dharaù—qualified; guëa-äkaraù—reservoir of all good
qualities; håñöaù—jolly; para-åddhyä—by others' happiness; vyathitaù—distressed;
duùkhiteñu—in others' unhappiness; abhüta-çatruù—without enemies; jagataù—of all
the universe; çoka-hartä—destroyer of lamentation; naidäghikam—due to the summer
sun; täpam—distress; iva—likened; uòu-räjaù—the moon.
634
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
He will be a virtuously qualified reservoir of all good qualities; he will be jolly and happy
in others' happiness, distressed in others' distress, and will have no enemies. He will be a
destroyer of the lamentation of all the universes, like the pleasant moon after the summer
sun.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja, the exemplary devotee of the Lord, had all the good qualities
humanly possible. Although he was the emperor of this world, he was not profligate.
Beginning from his childhood he was the reservoir of all good qualities. Without
enumerating those qualities, it is said here summarily that he was endowed with all good
qualities. That is the sign of a pure devotee. The most important characteristic of a pure
devotee is that he is not lampaöa, or licentious, and another quality is that he is always
eager to mitigate the miseries of suffering humanity. The most obnoxious misery of a
living entity is his forgetfulness of Kåñëa. A pure devotee, therefore, always tries to
evoke everyone's Kåñëa consciousness. This is the panacea for all miseries.
TEXT 50
ANTabRihêaMal/MaBJaNae}a&
SvPaUåzeC^aNauGa*hqTaæPaMa( )
PaaE}aSTav é[ql/l/Naal/l/aMa&
d]ía Sfu-rTku-<@l/Mai<@TaaNaNaMa( )) 50 ))
antar bahiç cämalam abja-netraà
sva-püruñecchänugåhéta-rüpam
pautras tava çré-lalanä-lalämaà
drañöä sphurat-kuëòala-maëòitänanam
SYNONYMS
antaù—within; bahiù—without; ca—also; amalam—spotless; abja-netram—lotus eyes;
sva-püruña—own devotee; icchä-anugåhéta-rüpam—accepting form according to desire;
pautraù—grandchild; tava—your; çré-lalanä—beautiful goddess of fortune; lalämam—
635
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
decorated; drañöä—will see; sphurat-kuëòala—with brilliant earrings; maëòita—
decorated; änanam—face.
TRANSLATION
Your grandson will be able to see, inside and outside, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, whose wife is the beautiful goddess of fortune. The Lord can assume the form
desired by the devotee, and His face is always beautifully decorated with earrings.
PURPORT
It is predicted herewith that the grandson of Diti, Prahläda Mahäräja, would not only
see the Personality of Godhead within himself by meditation but would also be able to
see Him personally with his eyes. This direct vision is possible only for one who is highly
elevated in Kåñëa consciousness, for the Lord is not possible to see with material eyes.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has multifarious eternal forms such as Kåñëa,
Baladeva, Saìkarñaëa, Aniruddha, Pradyumna, Väsudeva, Näräyaëa, Räma, Nåsiàha,
Varäha and Vämana, and the devotee of the Lord knows all those Viñëu forms. A pure
devotee becomes attached to one of the eternal forms of the Lord, and the Lord is
pleased to appear before him in the form desired. A devotee does not imagine something
whimsical about the form of the Lord, nor does he ever think that the Lord is
impersonal and can assume a form desired by the nondevotee. The nondevotee has no
idea of the form of the Lord, and thus he cannot think of any one of the abovementioned
forms. But whenever a devotee sees the Lord, he sees Him in a most
beautifully decorated form, accompanied by His constant companion the goddess of
fortune, who is eternally beautiful.
TEXT 51
MaE}aeYa ovac
é[uTva >aaGavTa& PaaE}aMaMaaedTa idiTa>a*RXaMa( )
Pau}aYaaeê vDa& k*-Z<aaiÜidTvaSaqNMahaMaNaa" )) 51 ))
maitreya uväca
çrutvä bhägavataà pautram
636
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
amodata ditir bhåçam
putrayoç ca vadhaà kåñëäd
viditväsén mahä-manäù
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—the sage Maitreya said; çrutvä—by hearing; bhägavatam—to be a great
devotee of the Lord; pautram—grandson; amodata—took pleasure; ditiù—Diti;
bhåçam—very greatly; putrayoù—of two sons; ca—also; vadham—the killing; kåñëät—by
Kåñëa; viditvä—knowing this; äsét—became; mahä-manäù—highly pleased in mind.
TRANSLATION
The sage Maitreya said: Hearing that her grandson would be a great devotee and that her
sons would be killed by Kåñëa, Diti was highly pleased in mind.
PURPORT
Diti was very aggrieved to learn that because of her untimely pregnancy her sons would
be demons and would fight with the Lord. But when she heard that her grandson would
be a great devotee and that her two sons would be killed by the Lord, she was very
satisfied. As the wife of a great sage and the daughter of a great Prajäpati, Dakña, she
knew that being killed by the Personality of Godhead is a great fortune. Since the Lord
is absolute, His acts of violence and nonviolence are both on the absolute platform.
There is no difference in such acts of the Lord. Mundane violence and nonviolence
have nothing to do with the Lord's acts. A demon killed by Him attains the same result
as one who attains liberation after many, many births of penance and austerity. The
word bhåçam is significant herein because it indicates that Diti was pleased beyond her
expectations.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening."
15. Description of the Kingdom of God
637
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 1
MaE}aeYa ovac
Pa[aJaaPaTYa& Tau TataeJa" ParTaeJaaehNa& idiTa" )
dDaar vzaRi<a XaTa& XaªMaaNaa SauradRNaaTa( )) 1 ))
maitreya uväca
präjäpatyaà tu tat tejaù
para-tejo-hanaà ditiù
dadhära varñäëi çataà
çaìkamänä surärdanät
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—the sage Maitreya said; präjäpatyam—of the great Prajäpati; tu—but;
tat tejaù—his powerful semen; para-tejaù—others' prowess; hanam—troubling; ditiù—
Diti (Kaçyapa's wife); dadhära—bore; varñäëi—years; çatam—hundred; çaìkamänä—
being doubtful; sura-ardanät—disturbing to the demigods.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: My dear Vidura, Diti, the wife of the sage Kaçyapa, could understand
that the sons within her womb would be a cause of disturbance to the demigods. As such,
she continuously bore the powerful semen of Kaçyapa Muni, which was meant to give
trouble to others, for one hundred years.
PURPORT
The great sage Çré Maitreya was explaining to Vidura the activities of the demigods,
including Lord Brahmä. When Diti heard from her husband that the sons she bore
within her abdomen would be causes of disturbances to the demigods, she was not very
happy. There are two classes of men—devotees and nondevotees. Nondevotees are
called demons, and devotees are called demigods. No sane man or woman can tolerate
the nondevotees' giving trouble to devotees. Diti, therefore, was reluctant to give birth
to her babies; she waited for one hundred years so that at least she could save the
638
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
demigods from the disturbance for that period.
TEXT 2
l/aeke- TaeNaahTaal/aeke- l/aek-Paal/a hTaaEJaSa" )
NYavedYaNa( ivìSa*Jae ßaNTaVYaiTak-r& idXaaMa( )) 2 ))
loke tenähatäloke
loka-pälä hataujasaù
nyavedayan viçva-såje
dhvänta-vyatikaraà diçäm
SYNONYMS
loke—within this universe; tena—by the force of the pregnancy of Diti; ähata—being
devoid of; äloke—light; loka-päläù—the demigods of various planets; hata-ojasaù—
whose prowess was diminished; nyavedayan—asked; viçva-såje—Brahmä; dhväntavyatikaram—
expansion of darkness; diçäm—in all directions.
TRANSLATION
By the force of the pregnancy of Diti, the light of the sun and moon was impaired in all
the planets, and the demigods of various planets, being disturbed by that force, asked the
creator of the universe, Brahmä, "What is this expansion of darkness in all directions?"
PURPORT
It appears from this verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam that the sun is the source of light for all
the planets in the universe. The modern scientific theory which states that there are
many suns in each universe is not supported by this verse. It is understood that in each
universe there is only one sun, which supplies light to all the planets. In Bhagavad-gétä
the moon is also stated to be one of the stars. There are many stars, and when we see
them glittering at night we can understand that they are reflectors of light; just as
moonlight is a reflection of sunlight, other planets also reflect sunlight, and there are
many other planets which cannot be seen by our naked eyes. The demoniac influence of
the sons in the womb of Diti expanded darkness throughout the universe.
639
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 3
deva Ocu"
TaMa WTaiÜ>aae veTQa Sa&ivGana YaÜYa& >a*XaMa( )
Na ùVYa¢&- >aGavTa" k-ale/NaaSPa*ívTMaRNa" )) 3 ))
devä ücuù
tama etad vibho vettha
saàvignä yad vayaà bhåçam
na hy avyaktaà bhagavataù
kälenäspåñöa-vartmanaù
SYNONYMS
deväù ücuù—the demigods said; tamaù—darkness; etat—this; vibho—O great one;
vettha—you know; saàvignäù—very anxious; yat—because; vayam—we; bhåçam—very
much; na—not; hi—because; avyaktam—unmanifest; bhagavataù—of You (the Supreme
Personality of Godhead); kälena—by time; aspåñöa—untouched; vartmanaù—whose
way.
TRANSLATION
The fortunate demigods said: O great one, just see this darkness, which you know very
well and which is causing us anxieties. Because the influence of time cannot touch you,
there is nothing unmanifest before you.
PURPORT
Brahmä is addressed herein as Vibhu and as the Personality of Godhead. He is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead's incarnation of the mode of passion in the material
world. He is nondifferent, in the representative sense, from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and therefore the influence of time cannot affect him. The influence of time,
which manifests as past, present and future, cannot touch higher personalities like
Brahmä and other demigods. Sometimes demigods and great sages who have attained
such perfection are called tri-käla jïa.
640
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 4
devdev JaGaÖaTal/aeRk-NaaQaiXa%aMa<ae )
ParezaMaPareza& Tv& >aUTaaNaaMaiSa >aavivTa( )) 4 ))
deva-deva jagad-dhätar
lokanätha-çikhämaëe
pareñäm apareñäà tvaà
bhütänäm asi bhäva-vit
SYNONYMS
deva-deva—O god of the demigods; jagat-dhätaù—O sustainer of the universe;
lokanätha-çikhämaëe—O head jewel of all the demigods in other planets; pareñäm—of
the spiritual world; apareñäm—of the material world; tvam—you; bhütänäm—of all
living entities; asi—are; bhäva-vit—knowing the intentions.
TRANSLATION
O god of the demigods, sustainer of the universe, head jewel of all the demigods in other
planets, you know the intentions of all living entities, in both the spiritual and material
worlds.
PURPORT
Because Brahmä is almost on an equal footing with the Personality of Godhead, he is
addressed here as the god of the demigods, and because he is the secondary creator of
this universe, he is addressed as the sustainer of the universe. He is the head of all the
demigods, and therefore he is addressed here as the head jewel of the demigods. It is not
difficult for him to understand everything which is happening in both the spiritual and
material worlds. He knows everyone's heart and everyone's intentions. Therefore he was
requested to explain this incident. Why was the pregnancy of Diti causing such
anxieties all over the universe?
TEXT 5
641
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
NaMaae ivjaNavqYaaRYa MaaYaYaedMauPaeYauze )
Ga*hqTaGau<a>aedaYa NaMaSTae_VYa¢-YaaeNaYae )) 5 ))
namo vijïäna-véryäya
mäyayedam upeyuñe
gåhéta-guëa-bhedäya
namas te 'vyakta-yonaye
SYNONYMS
namaù—respectful obeisances; vijïäna-véryäya—O original source of strength and
scientific knowledge; mäyayä—by the external energy; idam—this body of Brahmä;
upeyuñe—having obtained; gåhéta—accepting; guëa-bhedäya—the differentiated mode
of passion; namaù te—offering obeisances unto you; avyakta—unmanifested; yonaye—
source.
TRANSLATION
O original source of strength and scientific knowledge, all obeisances unto you! You have
accepted the differentiated mode of passion from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
With the help of external energy you are born of the unmanifested source. All obeisances
unto you!
PURPORT
The Vedas are the original scientific knowledge for all departments of understanding,
and this knowledge of the Vedas was first impregnated into the heart of Brahmä by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore Brahmä is the original source of all
scientific knowledge. He is born directly from the transcendental body of
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, who is never seen by any creature of this material universe and
therefore always remains unmanifested. Brahmä is stated here to be born of the
unmanifested. He is the incarnation of the mode of passion in material nature, which is
the separated, external energy of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 6
642
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Yae TvaNaNYaeNa >aaveNa >aavYaNTYaaTMa>aavNaMa( )
AaTMaiNa Pa[aeTa>auvNa& Par& SadSadaTMak-Ma( )) 6 ))
ye tvänanyena bhävena
bhävayanty ätma-bhävanam
ätmani prota-bhuvanaà
paraà sad-asad-ätmakam
SYNONYMS
ye—those who; tvä—on you; ananyena—without deviation; bhävena—with devotion;
bhävayanti—meditate; ätma-bhävanam—who generates all living entities; ätmani—
within your self; prota—linked; bhuvanam—all the planets; param—the supreme; sat—
effect; asat—cause; ätmakam—generator.
TRANSLATION
O lord, all these planets exist within your self, and all the living entities are generated
from you. Therefore you are the cause of this universe, and anyone who meditates upon
you without deviation attains devotional service.
TEXT 7
Taeza& SauPaKvYaaeGaaNaa& iJaTaìaSaeiNd]YaaTMaNaaMa( )
l/BDaYauZMaTPa[SaadaNaa& Na ku-TaiêTPara>av" )) 7 ))
teñäà supakva-yogänäà
jita-çväsendriyätmanäm
labdha-yuñmat-prasädänäà
na kutaçcit paräbhavaù
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of them; su-pakva-yogänäm—who are mature mystics; jita—controlled; çväsa—
breath; indriya—the senses; ätmanäm—the mind; labdha—attained; yuñmat—your;
prasädänäm—mercy; na—not; kutaçcit—anywhere; paräbhavaù—defeat.
643
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
There is no defeat in this material world for persons who control the mind and senses by
controlling the breathing process and who are therefore experienced, mature mystics.
This is because by such perfection in yoga they have attained your mercy.
PURPORT
The purpose of yogic performances is explained here. It is said that an experienced
mystic attains full control of the senses and the mind by controlling the breathing
process. Therefore, controlling the breathing process is not the ultimate aim of yoga.
The real purpose of yogic performances is to control the mind and the senses. Anyone
who has such control is to be understood to be an experienced, mature mystic yogé. It is
indicated herein that a yogé who has control over the mind and senses has the actual
benediction of the Lord, and he has no fear. In other words, one cannot attain the
mercy and benediction of the Supreme Lord until one is able to control the mind and
the senses. This is actually possible when one fully engages in Kåñëa consciousness. A
person whose senses and mind are always engaged in the transcendental service of the
Lord has no possibility of engaging in material activities. The devotees of the Lord are
not defeated anywhere in the universe. It is stated, näräyaëa-paräù sarve: one who is
näräyaëa-para, or a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is not afraid
anywhere, whether he is sent to hell or promoted to heaven (SB 6.17.28).
TEXT 8
YaSYa vaca Pa[Jaa" SavaR GaavSTaNTYaev YaiN}aTaa" )
hriNTa bil/MaaYataaSTaSMaE Mau:YaaYa Tae NaMa" )) 8 ))
yasya väcä prajäù sarvä
gävas tantyeva yantritäù
haranti balim äyattäs
tasmai mukhyäya te namaù
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; väcä—by the Vedic directions; prajäù—living entities; sarväù—all;
gävaù—bulls; tantyä—by a rope; iva—as; yantritäù—are directed; haranti—offer, take
644
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
away; balim—presentation, ingredients for worship; äyattäù—under control; tasmai—
unto him; mukhyäya—unto the chief person; te—unto you; namaù—respectful
obeisances.
TRANSLATION
All the living entities within the universe are conducted by the Vedic directions, as a bull
is directed by the rope attached to its nose. No one can violate the rules laid down in the
Vedic literatures. To the chief person, who has contributed the Vedas, we offer our
respect!
PURPORT
The Vedic literatures are the laws of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One cannot
violate the injunctions given in the Vedic literatures any more than one can violate the
state laws. Any living creature who wants real benefit in life must act according to the
direction of the Vedic literature. The conditioned souls who have come to this material
world for material sense gratification are regulated by the injunctions of the Vedic
literature. Sense gratification is just like salt. One cannot take too much or too little, but
one must take some salt in order to make one's foodstuff palatable. Those conditioned
souls who have come to this material world should utilize their senses according to the
direction of the Vedic literature, otherwise they will be put into a more miserable
condition of life. No human being or demigod can enact laws like those of the Vedic
literature because the Vedic regulations are prescribed by the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 9
Sa Tv& ivDaTSv Xa& >aUMa&STaMaSaa lu/ák-MaR<aaMa( )
Ad>a]dYaYaa d*íya AaPaàaNahRSaqi+aTauMa( )) 9 ))
sa tvaà vidhatsva çaà bhümaàs
tamasä lupta-karmaëäm
adabhra-dayayä dåñöyä
äpannän arhasékñitum
SYNONYMS
645
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
saù—he; tvam—you; vidhatsva—perform; çam—good fortune; bhüman—O great lord;
tamasä—by the darkness; lupta—have been suspended; karmaëäm—of prescribed
duties; adabhra—magnanimous, without reservation; dayayä—mercy; dåñöyä—by your
glance; äpannän—us, the surrendered; arhasi—are able; ékñitum—to see.
TRANSLATION
The demigods prayed to Brahmä: Please look upon us mercifully, for we have fallen into a
miserable condition; because of the darkness, all our work has been suspended.
PURPORT
Because of complete darkness throughout the universe, the regular activities and
engagements of all the different planets were suspended. In the North and South Poles
of this planet there are sometimes no divisions of day and night; similarly, when the
sunlight does not approach the different planets within the universe, there is no
distinction between day and night.
TEXT 10
Wz dev idTaeGaR>aR AaeJa" k-aXYaPaMaiPaRTaMa( )
idXaiSTaiMarYaNa( SavaR vDaRTae_iGanirvEDaiSa )) 10 ))
eña deva diter garbha
ojaù käçyapam arpitam
diças timirayan sarvä
vardhate 'gnir ivaidhasi
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; deva—O lord; diteù—of Diti; garbhaù—womb; ojaù—semen; käçyapam—of
Kaçyapa; arpitam—deposited; diçaù—directions; timirayan—causing complete darkness;
sarväù—all; vardhate—overloads; agniù—fire; iva—as; edhasi—fuel.
TRANSLATION
646
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
As fuel overloads a fire, so the embryo created by the semen of Kaçyapa in the womb of
Diti has caused complete darkness throughout the universe.
PURPORT
The darkness throughout the universe is explained herewith as being caused by the
embryo created in the womb of Diti by the semen of Kaçyapa.
TEXT 11
MaE}aeYa ovac
Sa Pa[hSYa Mahabahae >aGavaNa( XaBdGaaecr" )
Pa[TYaacíaTMa>aUdeRvaNa( Pa[q<aNa( åicrYaa iGara )) 11 ))
maitreya uväca
sa prahasya mahä-bäho
bhagavän çabda-gocaraù
pratyäcañöätma-bhür devän
préëan rucirayä girä
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; saù—he; prahasya—smiling; mahä-bäho—O mightyarmed
(Vidura); bhagavän—the possessor of all opulences; çabda-gocaraù—who is
understood by transcendental sound vibration; pratyäcañöa—replied; ätma-bhüù—Lord
Brahmä; devän—the demigods; préëan—satisfying; rucirayä—with sweet; girä—words.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: Thus Lord Brahmä, who is understood by transcendental vibration,
tried to satisfy the demigods, being pleased with their words of prayer.
PURPORT
Brahmä could understand the misdeeds of Diti, and therefore he smiled at the whole
situation. He replied to the demigods present there in words they could understand.
647
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 12
b]øaevac
MaaNaSaa Mae SauTaa YauZMaTPaUvRJaa" SaNak-adYa" )
ceåivRhaYaSaa l/aek-açaeke-zu ivGaTaSPa*ha" )) 12 ))
brahmoväca
mänasä me sutä yuñmatpürvajäù
sanakädayaù
cerur vihäyasä lokäl
lokeñu vigata-spåhäù
SYNONYMS
brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; mänasäù—born from the mind; me—my; sutäù—
sons; yuñmat—than you; pürva-jäù—born previously; sanaka-ädayaù—headed by
Sanaka; ceruù—traveled; vihäyasä—by traveling in outer space or flying in the sky;
lokän—to the material and spiritual worlds; lokeñu—among the people; vigata-spåhäù—
without any desire.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: My four sons Sanaka, Sanätana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumära, who
were born from my mind, are your predecessors. Sometimes they travel throughout the
material and spiritual skies without any definite desire.
PURPORT
When we speak of desire we refer to desire for material sense gratification. Saintly
persons like Sanaka, Sanätana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumära have no material desire,
but sometimes they travel all over the universe, out of their own accord, to preach
devotional service.
TEXT 13
648
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Ta Wk-da >aGavTaae vEku-<#=SYaaMal/aTMaNa" )
YaYauvOEku-<#=iNal/Ya& SavRl/aek-NaMaSk*-TaMa( )) 13 ))
ta ekadä bhagavato
vaikuëöhasyämalätmanaù
yayur vaikuëöha-nilayaà
sarva-loka-namaskåtam
SYNONYMS
te—they; ekadä—once upon a time; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; vaikuëöhasya—of Lord Viñëu; amala-ätmanaù—being freed from all material
contamination; yayuù—entered; vaikuëöha-nilayam—the abode named Vaikuëöha;
sarva-loka—by the residents of all the material planets; namaskåtam—worshiped.
TRANSLATION
After thus traveling all over the universes, they also entered into the spiritual sky, for
they were freed from all material contamination. In the spiritual sky there are spiritual
planets known as Vaikuëöhas, which are the residence of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and His pure devotees and are worshiped by the residents of all the material
planets.
PURPORT
The material world is full of cares and anxieties. In any one of the planets, beginning
from the highest down to the lowest, Pätäla, every living creature must be full of cares
and anxieties because in the material planets one cannot live eternally. The living
entities, however, are actually eternal. They want an eternal home, an eternal residence,
but because of accepting a temporal abode in the material world, they are naturally full
of anxiety. In the spiritual sky the planets are called Vaikuëöha because the residents of
these planets are free from all anxieties. For them there is no question of birth, death,
old age and diseases, and therefore they are not anxious. On the other hand, the
residents of the material planets are always afraid of birth, death, disease and old age,
and therefore they are full of anxieties.
649
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 14
vSaiNTa Ya}a Pauåza" SaveR vEku-<#=MaUTaRYa" )
Yae_iNaiMataiNaiMataeNa DaMaeR<aaraDaYaNa( hirMa( )) 14 ))
vasanti yatra puruñäù
sarve vaikuëöha-mürtayaù
ye 'nimitta-nimittena
dharmeëärädhayan harim
SYNONYMS
vasanti—they live; yatra—where; puruñäù—persons; sarve—all; vaikuëöha-mürtayaù—
having a four-handed form similar to that of the Supreme Lord, Viñëu; ye—those
Vaikuëöha persons; animitta—without desire for sense gratification; nimittena—caused
by; dharmeëa—by devotional service; ärädhayan—continuously worshiping; harim—
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
In the Vaikuëöha planets all the residents are similar in form to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. They all engage in devotional service to the Lord without desires for sense
gratification.
PURPORT
The residents and the form of living in Vaikuëöha are described in this verse. The
residents are all like the Supreme Personality of Godhead Näräyaëa. In the Vaikuëöha
planets Kåñëa's plenary feature as four-handed Näräyaëa is the predominating Deity,
and the residents of Vaikuëöhaloka are also four-handed, just contrary to our
conception here in the material world. Nowhere in the material world do we find a
human being with four hands. In Vaikuëöhaloka there is no occupation but the service
of the Lord, and this service is not rendered with a purpose. Although every service has
a particular result, the devotees never aspire for the fulfillment of their own desires;
their desires are fulfilled by rendering transcendental loving service to the Lord.
650
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 15
Ya}a caÛ" PauMaaNaaSTae >aGavaNa( XaBdGaaecr" )
Satv& iví>Ya ivrJa& SvaNaa& Naae Ma*@YaNa( v*z" )) 15 ))
yatra cädyaù pumän äste
bhagavän çabda-gocaraù
sattvaà viñöabhya virajaà
svänäà no måòayan våñaù
SYNONYMS
yatra—in the Vaikuëöha planets; ca—and; ädyaù—original; pumän—person; äste—is
there; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; çabda-gocaraù—understood
through the Vedic literature; sattvam—the mode of goodness; viñöabhya—accepting;
virajam—uncontaminated; svänäm—of His own associates; naù—us; måòayan—
increasing happiness; våñaù—the personification of religious principles.
TRANSLATION
In the Vaikuëöha planets is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the original
person and who can be understood through the Vedic literature. He is full of the
uncontaminated mode of goodness, with no place for passion or ignorance. He contributes
religious progress for the devotees.
PURPORT
The kingdom of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the spiritual sky cannot be
understood by any process other than hearing from the description of the Vedas. No one
can go see it. In this material world also, one who is unable to pay to go to a far distant
place by motorized conveyances can only understand about that place from authentic
books. Similarly, the Vaikuëöha planets in the spiritual sky are beyond this material sky.
The modern scientists who are trying to travel in space are having difficulty going even
to the nearest planet, the moon, to say nothing of the highest planets within the
universe. There is no possibility that they can go beyond the material sky, enter the
spiritual sky and see for themselves the spiritual planets, Vaikuëöha. Therefore, the
651
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kingdom of God in the spiritual sky can be understood only through the authentic
descriptions of the Vedas and Puräëas.
In the material world there are three modes of material qualities—goodness, passion and
ignorance—but in the spiritual world there is no trace of the modes of passion and
ignorance; there is only the mode of goodness, which is uncontaminated by any tinge of
ignorance or passion. In the material world, even if a person is completely in goodness,
he is sometimes subject to be polluted by tinges of the modes of ignorance and passion.
But in the Vaikuëöha world, the spiritual sky, only the mode of goodness in its pure form
exists. The Lord and His devotees reside in the Vaikuëöha planets, and they are of the
same transcendental quality, namely, çuddha-sattva, the mode of pure goodness. The
Vaikuëöha planets are very dear to the Vaiñëavas, and for the progressive march of the
Vaiñëavas toward the kingdom of God, the Lord Himself helps His devotees.
TEXT 16
Ya}a NaE"é[eYaSa& NaaMa vNa& k-aMadugaEd]uRMaE" )
SavRTauRé[qi>aivR>a]aJaTkE-vLYaiMav MaUiTaRMaTa( )) 16 ))
yatra naiùçreyasaà näma
vanaà käma-dughair drumaiù
sarvartu-çrébhir vibhräjat
kaivalyam iva mürtimat
SYNONYMS
yatra—in the Vaikuëöha planets; naiùçreyasam—auspicious; näma—named; vanam—
forests; käma-dughaiù—yielding desire; drumaiù—with trees; sarva—all; åtu—seasons;
çrébhiù—with flowers and fruits; vibhräjat—splendid; kaivalyam—spiritual; iva—as;
mürtimat—personal.
TRANSLATION
In those Vaikuëöha planets there are many forests which are very auspicious. In those
forests the trees are desire trees, and in all seasons they are filled with flowers and fruits
because everything in the Vaikuëöha planets is spiritual and personal.
652
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
In the Vaikuëöha planets the land, the trees, the fruits and flowers and the cows—
everything—is completely spiritual and personal. The trees are desire trees. On this
material planet the trees can produce fruits and flowers according to the order of
material energy, but in the Vaikuëöha planets the trees, the land, the residents and the
animals are all spiritual. There is no difference between the tree and the animal or the
animal and the man. Here the word mürtimat indicates that everything has a spiritual
form. Formlessness, as conceived by the impersonalists, is refuted in this verse; in the
Vaikuëöha planets, although everything is spiritual, everything has a particular form.
The trees and the men have form, and because all of them, although differently formed,
are spiritual, there is no difference between them.
TEXT 17
vEMaaiNak-a" Sal/l/NaaêirTaaiNa Xaìd(
GaaYaiNTa Ya}a XaMal/+aPa<aaiNa >aTauR" )
ANTaJaRle/_Nauivk-SaNMaDauMaaDavqNaa&
GaNDaeNa %i<@TaiDaYaae_PYaiNal&/ i+aPaNTa" )) 17 ))
vaimänikäù sa-lalanäç caritäni çaçvad
gäyanti yatra çamala-kñapaëäni bhartuù
antar-jale 'nuvikasan-madhu-mädhavénäà
gandhena khaëòita-dhiyo 'py anilaà kñipantaù
SYNONYMS
vaimänikäù—flying in their airplanes; sa-lalanäù—along with their wives; caritäni—
activities; çaçvat—eternally; gäyanti—sing; yatra—in those Vaikuëöha planets;
çamala—all inauspicious qualities; kñapaëäni—devoid of; bhartuù—of the Supreme
Lord; antaù-jale—in the midst of the water; anuvikasat—blossoming; madhu—fragrant,
laden with honey; mädhavénäm—of the mädhavé flowers; gandhena—by the fragrance;
khaëòita—disturbed; dhiyaù—minds; api—even though; anilam—breeze; kñipantaù—
deriding.
653
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
In the Vaikuëöha planets the inhabitants fly in their airplanes, accompanied by their
wives and consorts, and eternally sing of the character and activities of the Lord, which
are always devoid of all inauspicious qualities. While singing the glories of the Lord, they
deride even the presence of the blossoming mädhavé flowers, which are fragrant and laden
with honey.
PURPORT
It appears from this verse that the Vaikuëöha planets are full of all opulences. There are
airplanes in which the inhabitants travel in the spiritual sky with their sweethearts.
There is a breeze carrying the fragrance of blossoming flowers, and this breeze is so nice
that it also carries the honey of the flowers. The inhabitants of Vaikuëöha, however, are
so interested in glorifying the Lord that they do not like the disturbance of such a nice
breeze while they are chanting the Lord's glories. In other words, they are pure devotees.
They consider glorification of the Lord more important than their own sense
gratification. In the Vaikuëöha planets there is no question of sense gratification. To
smell the fragrance of a blossoming flower is certainly very nice, but it is simply for sense
gratification. The inhabitants of Vaikuëöha give first preference to the service of the
Lord, not their own sense gratification. Serving the Lord in transcendental love yields
such transcendental pleasure that, in comparison, sense gratification is counted as
insignificant.
TEXT 18
PaaravTaaNYa>a*TaSaarSac§-vak-‚
daTYaUhh&Saéuk-iTaitairbihR<aa& Ya" )
k-ael/ahl/ae ivrMaTae_icrMaa}aMauÀE‚
>a*R(r)aiDaPae hirk-QaaiMav GaaYaMaaNae )) 18 ))
pärävatänyabhåta-särasa-cakraväkadätyüha-
haàsa-çuka-tittiri-barhiëäà yaù
kolähalo viramate 'cira-mätram uccair
bhåìgädhipe hari-kathäm iva gäyamäne
654
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
pärävata—pigeons; anyabhåta—cuckoo; särasa—crane; cakraväka—cakraväka;
dätyüha—gallinule; haàsa—swan; çuka—parrot; tittiri—partridge; barhiëäm—of the
peacock; yaù—which; kolähalaù—tumult; viramate—stops; acira-mätram—temporarily;
uccaiù—loudly; bhåìga-adhipe—king of the bumblebees; hari-kathäm—the glories of the
Lord; iva—as; gäyamäne—while singing.
TRANSLATION
When the king of bees hums in a high pitch, singing the glories of the Lord, there is a
temporary lull in the noise of the pigeon, the cuckoo, the crane, the cakraväka, the swan,
the parrot, the partridge and the peacock. Such transcendental birds stop their own
singing simply to hear the glories of the Lord.
PURPORT
This verse reveals the absolute nature of Vaikuëöha. There is no difference between the
birds there and the human residents. The situation in the spiritual sky is that everything
is spiritual and variegated. Spiritual variegatedness means that everything is animate.
There is nothing inanimate. Even the trees, the ground, the plants, the flowers, the
birds and the beasts are all on the level of Kåñëa consciousness. The special feature of
Vaikuëöhaloka is that there is no question of sense gratification, In the material world
even an ass enjoys his sound vibration, but in the Vaikuëöhas such nice birds as the
peacock, the cakraväka and the cuckoo prefer to hear the vibration of the glories of the
Lord from the bees. The principles of devotional service, beginning with hearing and
chanting, are very prominent in the Vaikuëöha world.
TEXT 19
MaNdarku-Ndku-rbaeTPal/cMPak-a<aR‚
PauàaGaNaaGabku-l/aMbuJaPaairJaaTaa" )
GaNDae_icRTae Taul/iSak-a>ar<aeNa TaSYaa
YaiSMa&STaPa" SauMaNaSaae bhu MaaNaYaiNTa )) 19 ))
mandära-kunda-kurabotpala-campakärëa655
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
punnäga-näga-bakulämbuja-pärijätäù
gandhe 'rcite tulasikäbharaëena tasyä
yasmiàs tapaù sumanaso bahu mänayanti
SYNONYMS
mandära—mandära; kunda-kunda; kuraba-kuraba; utpala-utpala; campaka-campaka;
arëa-arëa flower; punnäga—punnäga; näga-nägakeçara; bakula-bakula; ambuja—lily;
pärijätäù—pärijäta; gandhe—fragrance; arcite—being worshiped; tulasikä—tulasi;
äbharaëena—with a garland; tasyäù—of her; yasmin—in which Vaikuëöha; tapaù—
austerity; su-manasaù—good minded, Vaikuëöha minded; bahu—very much;
mänayanti—glorify.
TRANSLATION
Although flowering plants like the mandära, kunda, kurabaka, utpala, campaka, arëa,
punnäga, nägakeçara, bakula, lily and pärijäta are full of transcendental fragrance, they
are still conscious of the austerities performed by tulasé, for tulasé is given special
preference by the Lord, who garlands Himself with tulasé leaves.
PURPORT
The importance of tulasé leaves is very clearly mentioned here. Tulasé plants and their
leaves are very important in devotional service. Devotees are recommended to water the
tulasé tree every day and collect the leaves to worship the Lord. One time an atheistic
svämé remarked, "What is the use of watering the tulasé plant? It is better to water
eggplant. By watering the eggplant one can get some fruits, but what is the use of
watering the tulasé?" These foolish creatures, unacquainted with devotional service,
sometimes play havoc with the education of people in general.
The most important thing about the spiritual world is that there is no envy among the
devotees there. This is true even among the flowers, which are all conscious of the
greatness of tulasé. In the Vaikuëöha world entered by the four Kumäras, even the birds
and flowers are conscious of service to the Lord.
TEXT 20
656
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
YaTSax(ku-l&/ hirPadaNaiTaMaa}ad*íE‚
vOEdUYaRMaark-TaheMaMaYaEivRMaaNaE" )
Yaeza& b*hTk-i$=Ta$=a" iSMaTaXaaei>aMau:Ya"
k*-Z<aaTMaNaa& Na rJa AadDauåTSMaYaaÛE" )) 20 ))
yat saìkulaà hari-padänati-mätra-dåñöair
vaidürya-märakata-hema-mayair vimänaiù
yeñäà båhat-kaöi-taöäù smita-çobhi-mukhyaù
kåñëätmanäà na raja ädadhur utsmayädyaiù
SYNONYMS
yat—that Vaikuëöha abode; saìkulam—is pervaded; hari-pada—at the two lotus feet of
Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; änati—by obeisances; mätra—simply;
dåñöaiù—are obtained; vaidürya—lapis lazuli; märakata—emeralds; hema—gold;
mayaiù—made of; vimänaiù—with airplanes; yeñäm—of those passengers; båhat—large;
kaöi-taöäù—hips; smita—smiling; çobhi—beautiful; mukhyaù—faces; kåñëa—in Kåñëa;
ätmanäm—whose minds are absorbed; na—not; rajaù—sex desire; ädadhuù—stimulate;
utsmaya-ädyaiù—by intimate friendly dealings, laughing and joking.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Vaikuëöha travel in their airplanes made of lapis lazuli, emerald and
gold. Although crowded by their consorts, who have large hips and beautiful smiling
faces, they cannot be stimulated to passion by their mirth and beautiful charms.
PURPORT
In the material world, opulences are achieved by materialistic persons by dint of their
labor. One cannot enjoy material prosperity unless he works very hard to achieve it. But
the devotees of the Lord who are residents of Vaikuëöha have the opportunity to enjoy a
transcendental situation of jewels and emeralds. Ornaments made of gold bedecked with
jewels are achieved not by working hard but by the benediction of the Lord. In other
words, devotees in the Vaikuëöha world, or even in this material world, cannot be
poverty-stricken, as is sometimes supposed. They have ample opulences for enjoyment,
657
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
but they need not labor to achieve them. It is also stated that in the Vaikuëöha world
the consorts of the residents are many, many times more beautiful than we can find in
this material world, even in the higher planets. It is specifically mentioned here that a
woman's large hips are very attractive and they stimulate man's passion, but the
wonderful feature of Vaikuëöha is that although the women have large hips and
beautiful faces and are decorated with ornaments of emeralds and jewels, the men are so
absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness that the beautiful bodies of the women cannot attract
them. In other words, there is enjoyment of the association of the opposite sex, but there
is no sexual relationship. The residents of Vaikuëöha have a better standard of pleasure,
so there is no need of sex pleasure.
TEXT 21
é[q æiPa<aq Kv<aYaTaq cr<aarivNd&
l/Il/aMbuJaeNa hirSaÚiNa Mau¢-daeza )
Sa&l/+YaTae Sf-i$=k-ku-@y oPaeTaheiMan
SaMMaaJaRTaqv YadNauGa]h<ae_NYaYaÒ" )) 21 ))
çré rüpiëé kvaëayaté caraëäravindaà
lélämbujena hari-sadmani mukta-doñä
saàlakñyate sphaöika-kuòya upeta-hemni
sammärjatéva yad-anugrahaëe 'nya-yatnaù
SYNONYMS
çré—Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune; rüpiëé—assuming a beautiful form; kvaëayaté—
tinkling; caraëa-aravindam—lotus feet; lélä-ambujena—playing with a lotus flower; harisadmani—
the house of the Supreme Personality; mukta-doñä—freed from all faults;
saàlakñyate—becomes visible; sphaöika—crystal; kuòye—walls; upeta—mixed; hemni—
gold; sammärjaté iva—appearing like a sweeper; yat-anugrahaëe—to receive her favor;
anya—others'; yatnaù—very much careful.
TRANSLATION
The ladies in the Vaikuëöha planets are as beautiful as the goddess of fortune herself.
658
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Such transcendentally beautiful ladies, their hands playing with lotuses and their leg
bangles tinkling, are sometimes seen sweeping the marble walls, which are bedecked at
intervals with golden borders, in order to receive the grace of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
PURPORT
In the Brahma-saàhitä it is stated that the Supreme Lord, Govinda, is always served in
His abode by many, many millions of goddesses of fortune. Lakñmé-sahasra-çatasambhrama-
sevyamänam [Bs. 5.29]. These millions and trillions of goddesses of fortune
who reside in the Vaikuëöha planets are not exactly consorts of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, but are the wives of the devotees of the Lord and also engage in the service
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is stated here that in the Vaikuëöha planets
the houses are made of marble. Similarly, in the Brahma-saàhitä it is stated that the
ground on the Vaikuëöha planets is made of touchstone. Thus there is no need to sweep
the stone in Vaikuëöha, for there is hardly any dust on it, but still, in order to satisfy the
Lord, the ladies there always engage in dusting the marble walls. Why? The reason is
that they are eager to achieve the grace of the Lord by doing so.
It is also stated here that in the Vaikuëöha planets the goddesses of fortune are faultless.
Generally the goddess of fortune does not remain steadily in one place. Her name is
Caïcalä, which means "one who is not steady." We find, therefore, that a man who is
very rich may become the poorest of the poor. Another example is Rävaëa. Rävaëa took
away Lakñmé, Sétäjé, to his kingdom, and instead of being happy by the grace of Lakñmé,
his family and his kingdom were vanquished. Thus Lakñmé in the house of Rävaëa is
Caïcalä, or unsteady. Men of Rävaëa's class want Lakñmé only, without her husband,
Näräyaëa; therefore they become unsteady due to Lakñméjé. Materialistic persons find
fault on the part of Lakñmé, but in Vaikuëöha Lakñméjé is fixed in the service of the Lord.
In spite of her being the goddess of fortune, she cannot be happy without the grace of
the Lord. Even the goddess of fortune needs the Lord's grace in order to be happy, yet in
the material world even Brahmä, the highest created being, seeks the favor of Lakñmé for
happiness.
TEXT 22
vaPaqzu ivd]uMaTa$=aSvMal/aMa*TaaPSau
Pa[eZYaaiNvTaa iNaJavNae Taul/Saqi>arqXaMa( )
659
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
A>YacRTaq Svl/k-MauàSaMaq+Ya v£-‚
MauC^eizTa& >aGavTaeTYaMaTaa(r) YaC^\q" )) 22 ))
väpéñu vidruma-taöäsv amalämåtäpsu
preñyänvitä nija-vane tulasébhir éçam
abhyarcaté svalakam unnasam ékñya vaktram
uccheñitaà bhagavatety amatäìga yac-chréù
SYNONYMS
väpéñu—in the ponds; vidruma—made of coral; taöäsu—banks; amala—transparent;
amåta—nectarean; apsu—water; preñyä-anvitä—surrounded by maidservants; nijavane—
in her own garden; tulasébhiù—with tulasé; éçam—the Supreme Lord;
abhyarcaté—worship; su-alakam—with her face decorated with tilaka; unnasam—raised
nose; ékñya—by seeing; vaktram—face; uccheñitam—being kissed; bhagavatä—by the
Supreme Lord; iti—thus; amata—thought; aìga—O demigods; yat-çréù—whose beauty.
TRANSLATION
The goddesses of fortune worship the Lord in their own gardens by offering tulasé leaves
on the coral-paved banks of transcendental reservoirs of water. While offering worship to
the Lord, they can see on the water the reflection of their beautiful faces with raised
noses, and it appears that they have become more beautiful because of the Lord's kissing
their faces.
PURPORT
Generally, when a woman is kissed by her husband, her face becomes more beautiful. In
Vaikuëöha also, although the goddess of fortune is naturally as beautiful as can be
imagined, she nevertheless awaits the kissing of the Lord to make her face more
beautiful. The beautiful face of the goddess of fortune appears in ponds of
transcendental crystal water when she worships the Lord with tulasé leaves in her
garden.
TEXT 23
660
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Yaà v]JaNTYagai>adae rcNaaNauvada‚
C^*<viNTa Yae_NYaivzYaa" ku-k-Qaa MaiTaganq" )
YaaSTau é[uTaa hTa>aGaENa*Ri>arataSaara‚
STaa&STaaNa( i+aPaNTYaXar<aezu TaMa"Sau hNTa )) 23 ))
yan na vrajanty agha-bhido racanänuvädäc
chåëvanti ye 'nya-viñayäù kukathä mati-ghnéù
yäs tu çrutä hata-bhagair nåbhir ätta-säräs
täàs tän kñipanty açaraëeñu tamaùsu hanta
SYNONYMS
yat—Vaikuëöha; na—never; vrajanti—approach; agha-bhidaù—of the vanquisher of all
kinds of sins; racanä—of the creation; anuvädät—than narrations; çåëvanti—hear; ye—
those who; anya—other; viñayäù—subject matter; ku-kathäù—bad words; mati-ghnéù—
killing intelligence; yäù—which; tu—but; çrutäù—are heard; hata-bhagaiù—
unfortunate; nåbhiù—by men; ätta—taken away; säräù—values of life; tän tän—such
persons; kñipanti—are thrown; açaraëeñu—devoid of all shelter; tamaùsu—in the
darkest part of material existence; hanta—alas.
TRANSLATION
It is very much regrettable that unfortunate people do not discuss the description of the
Vaikuëöha planets but engage in topics which are unworthy to hear and which bewilder
one's intelligence. Those who give up the topics of Vaikuëöha and take to talk of the
material world are thrown into the darkest region of ignorance.
PURPORT
The most unfortunate persons are the impersonalists, who cannot understand the
transcendental variegatedness of the spiritual world. They are afraid to talk about the
beauty of the Vaikuëöha planets because they think that variegatedness must be
material. Such impersonalists think that the spiritual world is completely void, or, in
other words, that there is no variegatedness. This mentality is described here as ku-kathä
mati-ghnéù, "intelligence bewildered by unworthy words." The philosophies of voidness
661
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
and of the impersonal situation of the spiritual world are condemned here because they
bewilder one's intelligence. How can the impersonalist and the void philosopher think
of this material world, which is full of variegatedness, and then say that there is no
variegatedness in the spiritual world? It is said that this material world is the perverted
reflection of the spiritual world, so unless there is variegatedness in the spiritual world,
how can there be temporary variegatedness in the material world? That one can
transcend this material world does not imply that there is no transcendental
variegatedness.
Here in the Bhägavatam, in this verse particularly, it is stressed that people who try to
discuss and understand the real spiritual nature of the spiritual sky and the Vaikuëöhas
are fortunate. The variegatedness of the Vaikuëöha planets is described in relation to
the transcendental pastimes of the Lord. But instead of trying to understand the
spiritual abode and the spiritual activities of the Lord, people are more interested in
politics and economic developments. They hold many conventions, meetings and
discussions to solve the problems of this worldly situation, where they can remain for
only a few years, but they are not interested in understanding the spiritual situation of
the Vaikuëöha world. If they are at all fortunate, they become interested in going back
home, back to Godhead, but unless they understand the spiritual world, they rot in this
material darkness continuously.
TEXT 24
Yae_>YaiQaRTaaMaiPa c Naae Na*GaiTa& Pa[Paàa
jaNa& c TatvivzYa& SahDaMa| Ya}a )
NaaraDaNa& >aGavTaae ivTarNTYaMauZYa
SaMMaaeihTaa ivTaTaYaa bTa MaaYaYaa Tae )) 24 ))
ye 'bhyarthitäm api ca no nå-gatià prapannä
jïänaà ca tattva-viñayaà saha-dharmaà yatra
närädhanaà bhagavato vitaranty amuñya
sammohitä vitatayä bata mäyayä te
SYNONYMS
ye—those persons; abhyarthitäm—desired; api—certainly; ca—and; naù—by us
662
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
(Brahmä and the other demigods); nå-gatim—the human form of life; prapannäù—have
attained; jïänam—knowledge; ca—and; tattva-viñayam—subject matter about the
Absolute Truth; saha-dharmam—along with religious principles; yatra—where; na—
not; ärädhanam—worship; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vitaranti—perform; amuñya—of the Supreme Lord; sammohitäù—being bewildered;
vitatayä—all-pervading; bata—alas; mäyayä—by the influence of the illusory energy;
te—they.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: My dear demigods, the human form of life is of such importance that
we also desire to have such life, for in the human form one can attain perfect religious
truth and knowledge. If one in this human form of life does not understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and His abode, it is to be understood that he is very much
affected by the influence of external nature.
PURPORT
Brahmäjé condemns very vehemently the condition of the human being who does not
take interest in the Personality of Godhead and His transcendental abode, Vaikuëöha.
The human form of life is desired even by Brahmäjé. Brahmä and other demigods have
much better material bodies than human beings, yet the demigods, including Brahmä,
nevertheless desire to attain the human form of life because it is specifically meant for
the living entity who can attain transcendental knowledge and religious perfection. It is
not possible to go back to Godhead in one life, but in the human form one should at
least understand the goal of life and begin Kåñëa consciousness. It is said that the human
form is a great boon because it is the most suitable boat for crossing over the nescience
ocean. The spiritual master is considered to be the most able captain in that boat, and
the information from the scriptures is the favorable wind for floating over the ocean of
nescience. The human being who does not take advantage of all these facilities in this
life is committing suicide. Therefore one who does not begin Kåñëa consciousness in the
human form of life loses his life to the influence of the illusory energy. Brahmä regrets
the situation of such a human being.
TEXT 25
663
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
YaÀ v]JaNTYaiNaiMazaMa*z>aaNauv*tYaa
dUreYaMaa ùuPair Na" SPa*h<aqYaXaql/a" )
>aTauRiMaRQa" SauYaXaSa" k-QaNaaNauraGa‚
vE(c)-VYabaZPak-l/Yaa Paul/k-Ik*-Taa(r)a" )) 25 ))
yac ca vrajanty animiñäm åñabhänuvåttyä
düre yamä hy upari naù spåhaëéya-çéläù
bhartur mithaù suyaçasaù kathanänurägavaiklavya-
bäñpa-kalayä pulaké-kåtäìgäù
SYNONYMS
yat—Vaikuëöha; ca—and; vrajanti—go; animiñäm—of the demigods; åñabha—chief;
anuvåttyä—following in the footsteps; düre—keeping at a distance; yamäù—regulative
principles; hi—certainly; upari—above; naù—us; spåhaëéya—to be desired; çéläù—good
qualities; bhartuù—of the Supreme Lord; mithaù—for one another; suyaçasaù—glories;
kathana—by discussions, discourses; anuräga—attraction; vaiklavya—ecstasy; bäñpakalayä—
tears in the eyes; pulaké-kåta—shivering; aìgäù—bodies.
TRANSLATION
Persons whose bodily features change in ecstasy and who breathe heavily and perspire due
to hearing the glories of the Lord are promoted to the kingdom of God, even though they
do not care for meditation and other austerities. The kingdom of God is above the
material universes, and it is desired by Brahmä and other demigods.
PURPORT
It is clearly stated herein that the kingdom of God is above the material universes. Just
as there are many hundreds of thousands of higher planets above this earth, so there are
many millions and billions of spiritual planets belonging to the spiritual sky. Brahmäjé
states herein that the spiritual kingdom is above the kingdom of the demigods. One can
enter the kingdom of the Supreme Lord only when one is highly developed in desirable
qualities. All good qualities develop in the person of a devotee. It is stated in Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, Fifth Canto, Eighteenth Chapter, verse 12, that anyone who is Kåñëa
664
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
conscious is endowed with all the good qualities of the demigods. In the material world
the qualities of the demigods are highly appreciated, just as, even in our experience, the
qualities of a gentleman are more highly appreciated than the qualities of a man in
ignorance or in a lower condition of life. The qualities of the demigods in the higher
planets are far superior to the qualities of the inhabitants of this earth.
Brahmäjé confirms herewith that only persons who have developed the desirable
qualities can enter into the kingdom of God. In the Caitanya-caritämåta, the devotee's
desirable qualities are described to be twenty-six in number. They are stated as follows:
He is very kind; he does not quarrel with anyone; he accepts Kåñëa consciousness as the
highest goal of life; he is equal to everyone; no one can find fault in his character; he is
magnanimous, mild and always clean, internally and externally; he does not profess to
possess anything in this material world; he is a benefactor to all living entities; he is
peaceful and is a soul completely surrendered to Kåñëa; he has no material desire to
fulfill; he is meek and humble, always steady, and has conquered the sensual activities;
he does not eat more than required to maintain body and soul together; he is never mad
after material identity; he is respectful to all others and does not demand respect for
himself; he is very grave, very compassionate and very friendly; he is poetic; he is expert
in all activities, and he is silent in nonsense. Similarly, in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Third
Canto, Twenty-fifth Chapter, verse 21, the qualifications of a saintly person are
mentioned. It is said there that a saintly person eligible to enter into the kingdom of
God is very tolerant and very kind to all living entities. He is not partial; he is kind both
to human beings and to animals. He is not such a fool that he will kill a goat Näräyaëa
to feed a human Näräyaëa, or daridra-näräyaëa. He is very kind to all living entities;
therefore he has no enemy. He is very peaceful. These are the qualities of persons who
are eligible to enter into the kingdom of God. That such a person gradually becomes
liberated and enters the kingdom of God is confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Fifth
Canto, Fifth Chapter, verse 2. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Second Canto, Third Chapter,
verse 24, also states that if a person does not cry or exhibit bodily changes after chanting
the holy name of God without offense, it is to be understood that he is hardhearted and
that therefore his heart does not change even after he chants the holy name of God,
Hare Kåñëa. These bodily changes can take place due to ecstasy when we offenselessly
chant the holy names of God: Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare
Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare.
It may be noted that there are ten offenses we should avoid. The first offense is to decry
persons who try in their lives to broadcast the glories of the Lord. People must be
educated in understanding the glories of the Supreme; therefore the devotees who
665
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
engage in preaching the glories of the Lord are never to be decried. It is the greatest
offense. Furthermore, the holy name of Viñëu is the most auspicious name, and His
pastimes are also nondifferent from the holy name of the Lord. There are many foolish
persons who say that one can chant Hare Kåñëa or chant the name of Kälé or Durgä or
Çiva because they are all the same. If one thinks that the holy name of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and the names and activities of the demigods are on the same
level, or if one accepts the holy name of Viñëu to be a material sound vibration, that is
also an offense. The third offense is to think of the spiritual master who spreads the
glories of the Lord as an ordinary human being. The fourth offense is to consider the
Vedic literatures, such as the Puräëas or other transcendentally revealed scriptures, to
be ordinary books of knowledge. The fifth offense is to think that devotees have given
artificial importance to the holy name of God. The actual fact is that the Lord is
nondifferent from His name. The highest realization of spiritual value is to chant the
holy name of God, as prescribed for the age—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa,
Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. The sixth offense is to give
some interpretation on the holy name of God. The seventh offense is to act sinfully on
the strength of chanting the holy name of God. It is understood that one can be freed
from all sinful reaction simply by chanting the holy name of God, but if one thinks that
he is therefore at liberty to commit all kinds of sinful acts, that is a symptom of offense.
The eighth offense is to equate the chanting of Hare Kåñëa with other spiritual
activities, such as meditation, austerity, penance or sacrifice. They cannot be equated at
any level. The ninth offense is to specifically glorify the importance of the holy name
before persons who have no interest. The tenth offense is to be attached to the
misconception of possessing something, or to accept the body as one's self, while
executing the process of spiritual cultivation.
When one is free from all ten of these offenses in chanting the holy name of God, he
develops the ecstatic bodily features called pulakäçru. Pulaka means "symptoms of
happiness," and açru means "tears in the eyes." The symptoms of happiness and tears in
the eyes must appear in a person who has chanted the holy name offenselessly. Here in
this verse it is stated that those who have actually developed the symptoms of happiness
and tears in the eyes by chanting the glories of the Lord are eligible to enter the
kingdom of God. In the Caitanya-caritämåta it is said that if one does not develop these
symptoms while chanting Hare Kåñëa, it is to be understood that he is still offensive.
Caitanya-caritämåta suggests a nice remedy in this connection. There it is said in verse
31, Chapter Eight, of Ädi-lélä, that if anyone takes shelter of Lord Caitanya and just
chants the holy name of the Lord, Hare Kåñëa, he becomes freed from all offenses.
666
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 26
TaiÜìGauvRiDak*-Ta& >auvNaEk-vNÛ&
idVYa& ivic}aivbuDaaGY]aivMaaNaXaaeic" )
AaPau" Para& MaudMaPaUvRMauPaeTYa YaaeGa‚
MaaYaable/Na MauNaYaSTadQaae ivku-<#=Ma( )) 26 ))
tad viçva-gurv-adhikåtaà bhuvanaika-vandyaà
divyaà vicitra-vibudhägrya-vimäna-çociù
äpuù paräà mudam apürvam upetya yogamäyä-
balena munayas tad atho vikuëöham
SYNONYMS
tat—then; viçva-guru—by the teacher of the universe, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; adhikåtam—predominated; bhuvana—of the planets; eka—alone; vandyam—
worthy to be worshiped; divyam—spiritual; vicitra—highly decorated; vibudha-agrya—of
the devotees (who are the best of the learned); vimäna—of the airplanes; çociù—
illuminated; äpuù—attained; paräm—the highest; mudam—happiness; apürvam—
unprecedented; upetya—having attained; yoga-mäyä—by spiritual potency; balena—by
the influence; munayaù—the sages; tat—Vaikuëöha; atho—that; vikuëöham—Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
Thus the great sages, Sanaka, Sanätana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumära, upon reaching the
above-mentioned Vaikuëöha in the spiritual world by dint of their mystic yoga
performance, perceived unprecedented happiness. They found that the spiritual sky was
illuminated by highly decorated airplanes piloted by the best devotees of Vaikuëöha and
was predominated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is one without a second. He is above everyone. No
one is equal to Him, nor is anyone greater than Him. Therefore He is described here as
viçva-guru. He is the prime living entity of the entire material and spiritual creation and
667
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
is bhuvanaika-vandyam, the only worshipable personality in the three worlds. The
airplanes in the spiritual sky are self-illuminated and are piloted by great devotees of the
Lord. In other words, in the Vaikuëöha planets there is no scarcity of the things which
are available in the material world; they are available, but they are more valuable
because they are spiritual and therefore eternal and blissful. The sages felt an
unprecedented happiness because Vaikuëöha was not predominated by an ordinary man.
The Vaikuëöha planets are predominated by expansions of Kåñëa, who are differently
named as Madhusüdana, Mädhava, Näräyaëa, Pradyumna, etc. These transcendental
planets are worshipable because the Personality of Godhead personally rules them. It is
said here that the sages reached the transcendental spiritual sky by dint of their mystic
power. That is the perfection of the yoga system. The breathing exercises and disciplines
to keep health in proper order are not the ultimate goals of yoga perfection. The yoga
system as generally understood is añöäìga-yoga, or siddhi, eightfold perfection in yoga. By
dint of perfection in yoga one can become lighter than the lightest and heavier than the
heaviest; one can go wherever he likes and can achieve opulences as he likes. There are
eight such perfections. The åñis, the four Kumäras, reached Vaikuëöha by becoming
lighter than the lightest and thus passing over the space of the material world. Modern
mechanical space vehicles are unsuccessful because they cannot go to the highest region
of this material creation, and they certainly cannot enter the spiritual sky. But by
perfection of the yoga system one not only can travel through material space, but can
surpass material space and enter the spiritual sky. We learn this fact also from an
incident concerning Durväsä Muni and Mahäräja Ambaréña. It is understood that in one
year Durväsä Muni traveled everywhere and went into the spiritual sky to meet the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa. By present standards, scientists calculate
that if one could travel at the speed of light, it would take forty thousand years to reach
the highest planet of this material world. But the yoga system can carry one without
limitation or difficulty. The word yoga-mäyä is used in this verse. Yoga-mäyä-balena
vikuëöham. The transcendental happiness exhibited in the spiritual world and all other
spiritual manifestations there are made possible by the influence of yoga-mäyä, the
internal potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 27
TaiSMaàTaqTYa MauNaYa" z@SaÂMaaNaa"
k-+aa" SaMaaNavYaSaavQa SaáMaaYaaMa( )
668
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
devavc+aTa Ga*hqTaGadaE ParaDYaR‚
ke-YaUrku-<@l/ik-rq$=iv$=ªvezaE )) 27 ))
tasminn atétya munayaù ñaò asajjamänäù
kakñäù samäna-vayasäv atha saptamäyäm
deväv acakñata gåhéta-gadau parärdhyakeyüra-
kuëòala-kiréöa-viöaìka-veñau
SYNONYMS
tasmin—in that Vaikuëöha; atétya—after passing through; munayaù—the great sages;
ñaö—six; asajja mänäù—without being much attracted; kakñäù—walls; samäna—equal;
vayasau—age; atha—thereafter; saptamäyäm—at the seventh gate; devau—two
Vaikuëöha doormen; acakñata—saw; gåhéta—carrying; gadau—maces; para-ardhya—
most valuable; keyüra—bracelets; kuëòala—earrings; kiréöa—helmets; viöaìka—
beautiful; veñau—garments.
TRANSLATION
After passing through the six entrances of Vaikuëöha-puré, the Lord's residence, without
feeling astonishment at all the decorations, they saw at the seventh gate two shining
beings of the same age, armed with maces and adorned with most valuable jewelry,
earrings, diamonds, helmets, garments, etc.
PURPORT
The sages were so eager to see the Lord within Vaikuëöha-puré that they did not care to
see the transcendental decorations of the six gates which they passed by one after
another. But at the seventh door they found two doormen of the same age. The
significance of the doormen's being of the same age is that in the Vaikuëöha planets
there is no old age, so one cannot distinguish who is older than whom. The inhabitants
of Vaikuëöha are decorated like the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, with
çaìkha, cakra, gadä and padma (conch, wheel, club and lotus).
TEXT 28
669
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
MataiÜref-vNaMaail/k-Yaa iNavqTaaE
ivNYaSTaYaaiSaTacTauíYabahuMaDYae )
v£&- >a]uva ku-i$=l/Yaa Sfu-$=iNaGaRMaa>Yaa&
r¢e-+a<aeNa c MaNaaGa]>aSa& dDaaNaaE )) 28 ))
matta-dvirepha-vanamälikayä nivétau
vinyastayäsita-catuñöaya-bähu-madhye
vaktraà bhruvä kuöilayä sphuöa-nirgamäbhyäà
raktekñaëena ca manäg rabhasaà dadhänau
SYNONYMS
matta—intoxicated; dvi-repha—bees; vana-mälikayä—with a garland of fresh flowers;
nivétau—hanging on the neck; vinyastayä—placed around; asita—blue; catuñöaya—four;
bähu—hands; madhye—between; vaktram—face; bhruvä—with their eyebrows;
kuöilayä—arched; sphuöa—snorting; nirgamäbhyäm—breathing; rakta—reddish;
ékñaëena—with eyes; ca—and; manäk—somewhat; rabhasam—agitated; dadhänau—
glanced over.
TRANSLATION
The two doormen were garlanded with fresh flowers which attracted intoxicated bees and
which were placed around their necks and between their four blue arms. From their
arched eyebrows, discontented nostrils and reddish eyes, they appeared somewhat
agitated.
PURPORT
Their garlands attracted swarms of bees because they were garlands of fresh flowers. In
the Vaikuëöha world everything is fresh, new and transcendental. The inhabitants of
Vaikuëöha have bodies of bluish color and four hands like Näräyaëa.
TEXT 29
ÜaYaeRTaYaaeiNaRivivéuiMaRzTaaerPa*îa
670
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PaUvaR YaQaa Paur$=vJa]k-Paai$=k-a Yaa" )
SavR}a Tae_ivzMaYaa MauNaYa" Svd*íya
Yae SaÄrNTYaivhTaa ivGaTaai>aXaªa" )) 29 ))
dväry etayor niviviçur miñator apåñövä
pürvä yathä puraöa-vajra-kapäöikä yäù
sarvatra te 'viñamayä munayaù sva-dåñöyä
ye saïcaranty avihatä vigatäbhiçaìkäù
SYNONYMS
dväri—in the door; etayoù—both doorkeepers; niviviçuù—entered; miñatoù—while
seeing; apåñövä—without asking; pürväù—as before; yathä—as; puraöa—made of gold;
vajra—and diamond; kapäöikäù—the doors; yäù—which; sarvatra—everywhere; te—
they; aviña-mayä—without any sense of discrimination; munayaù—the great sages; svadåñöyä—
out of their own will; ye—who; saïcaranti—move; avihatäù—without being
checked; vigata—without; abhiçaìkäù—doubt.
TRANSLATION
The great sages, headed by Sanaka, had opened doors everywhere. They had no idea of
"ours" and "theirs." With open minds, they entered the seventh door out of their own
will, just as they had passed through the six other doors, which were made of gold and
diamonds.
PURPORT
The great sages—namely, Sanaka, Sanätana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumära—although
very old in years, maintained themselves eternally as small children. They were not at
all duplicitous, and they entered the doors exactly as little children enter places without
any idea of what it is to trespass. That is a child's nature. A child can enter any place,
and no one checks him. Indeed, a child is generally welcome in his attempts to go places,
but if it so happens that a child is checked from entering a door, he naturally becomes
very sorry and angry. That is the nature of a child. In this case, the same thing
happened. The childlike saintly personalities entered all the six doors of the palace, and
no one checked them; therefore when they attempted to enter the seventh door and
671
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
were forbidden by the doormen, who checked them with their sticks, they naturally
became very angry and sorrowful. An ordinary child would cry, but because these were
not ordinary children, they immediately made preparations to punish the doormen, for
the doormen had committed a great offense. Even to this day a saintly person is never
checked from entering anyone's door in India.
TEXT 30
TaaNa( vq+Ya vaTarXaNaa&êTaur" ku-MaaraNa(
v*ÖaNdXaaDaRvYaSaae ividTaaTMaTatvaNa( )
ve}ae<a caS%l/YaTaaMaTadhR<aa&STaaE
TaeJaae ivhSYa >aGavTPa[iTakU-l/Xaql/aE )) 30 ))
tän vékñya väta-raçanäàç caturaù kumärän
våddhän daçärdha-vayaso viditätma-tattvän
vetreëa cäskhalayatäm atad-arhaëäàs tau
tejo vihasya bhagavat-pratiküla-çélau
SYNONYMS
tän—them; vékñya—after seeing; väta-raçanän—naked; caturaù—four; kumärän—boys;
våddhän—aged; daça-ardha—five years; vayasaù—appearing as of the age; vidita—had
realized; ätma-tattvän—the truth of the self; vetreëa—with their staffs; ca—also;
askhalayatäm—forbade; a-tat-arhaëän—not deserving such from them; tau—those two
porters; tejaù—glories; vihasya—disregarding the etiquette; bhagavat-pratiküla-çélau—
having a nature displeasing to the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The four boy-sages, who had nothing to cover their bodies but the atmosphere, looked
only five years old, even though they were the oldest of all living creatures and had
realized the truth of the self. But when the porters, who happened to possess a disposition
quite unpalatable to the Lord, saw the sages, they blocked their way with their staffs,
despising their glories, although the sages did not deserve such treatment at their hands.
672
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The four sages were the first-born sons of Brahmä. Therefore all other living entities,
including Lord Çiva, are born later and are therefore younger than the four Kumäras.
Although they looked like five-year-old boys and traveled naked, the Kumäras were
older than all other living creatures and had realized the truth of the self. Such saints
were not to be forbidden to enter the kingdom of Vaikuëöha, but by chance the
doormen objected to their entrance. This was not fitting. The Lord is always anxious to
serve sages like the Kumäras, but in spite of knowing this fact, the doormen,
astonishingly and outrageously, prohibited them from entering.
TEXT 31
Taa>Yaa& iMazTSviNaiMazezu iNaizDYaMaaNaa"
SvhRtaMaa ùiPa hre" Pa[iTaharPaa>YaaMa( )
Ocu" SauôtaMaidd*i+aTa>a(r) wRz‚
Tk-aMaaNauJaeNa SahSaa Ta oPaPlu/Taa+aa" )) 31 ))
täbhyäà miñatsv animiñeñu niñidhyamänäù
svarhattamä hy api hareù pratihära-päbhyäm
ücuù suhåttama-didåkñita-bhaìga éñat
kämänujena sahasä ta upaplutäkñäù
SYNONYMS
täbhyäm—by those two porters; miñatsu—while looking on; animiñeñu—demigods living
in Vaikuëöha; niñidhyamänäù—being forbidden; su-arhattamäù—by far the fittest
persons; hi api—although; hareù—of Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
pratihära-päbhyäm—by the two doorkeepers; ücuù—said; suhåt-tama—most beloved;
didåkñita—eagerness to see; bhaìge—hindrance; éñat—slight; käma-anujena—by the
younger brother of lust (anger); sahasä—suddenly; te—those great sages; upapluta—
agitated; akñäù—eyes.
TRANSLATION
When the Kumäras, although by far the fittest persons, were thus forbidden entrance by
673
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the two chief doorkeepers of Çré Hari while other divinities looked on, their eyes
suddenly turned red because of anger due to their great eagerness to see their most
beloved master, Çré Hari, the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic system, a sannyäsé, a person in the renounced order of life, is
dressed in saffron-colored garments. This saffron dress is practically a passport for the
mendicant and sannyäsé to go anywhere. The sannyäsé's duty is to enlighten people in
Kåñëa consciousness. Those in the renounced order of life have no other business but
preaching the glories and supremacy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore
the Vedic sociological conception is that a sannyäsé should not be restricted; he is
allowed to go anywhere and everywhere he wants, and he is not refused any gift he
might demand from a householder. The four Kumäras came to see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Näräyaëa. The word suhåttama, "best of all friends," is
important. As Lord Kåñëa states in the Bhagavad-gétä, He is the best friend of all living
entities. Suhådaà sarva-bhütänäm [Bg. 5.29]. No one can be a greater well-wishing friend
to any living entity than the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is so kindly disposed
towards everyone that in spite of our completely forgetting our relationship with the
Supreme Lord, He comes Himself—sometimes personally, as Lord Kåñëa appeared on
this earth, and sometimes as His devotee, as did Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu—and
sometimes He sends His bona fide devotees to reclaim all the fallen souls. Therefore, He
is the greatest well-wishing friend of everyone, and the Kumäras wanted to see Him.
The doorkeepers should have known that the four sages had no other business, and
therefore to restrict them from entering the palace was not apt.
In this verse it is figuratively stated that the younger brother of desire suddenly
appeared in person when the sages were forbidden to see their most beloved Personality
of Godhead. The younger brother of desire is anger. If one's desire is not fulfilled, the
younger brother, anger, follows. Here we can mark that even great saintly persons like
the Kumäras were also angry, but they were not angry for their personal interests. They
were angry because they were forbidden to enter the palace to see the Personality of
Godhead. Therefore the theory that in the perfectional stage one should not have anger
is not supported in this verse. Anger will continue even in the liberated stage. These
four mendicant brothers, the Kumäras, were considered liberated persons, but still they
were angry because they were restricted in their service to the Lord. The difference
between the anger of an ordinary person and that of a liberated person is that an
674
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ordinary person becomes angry because his sense desires are not being fulfilled, whereas
a liberated person like the Kumäras becomes angry when restricted in the discharge of
duties for serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
In the previous verse it has been clearly mentioned that the Kumäras were liberated
persons. Viditätma-tattva means "one who understands the truth of self-realization." One
who does not understand the truth of self-realization is called ignorant, but one who
understands the self, the Superself, their interrelation, and activities in self-realization is
called viditätma-tattva. Although the Kumäras were already liberated persons, they
nevertheless became angry. This point is very important. Becoming liberated does not
necessitate losing one's sensual activities. Sense activities continue even in the liberated
stage. The difference is, however, that sense activities in liberation are accepted only in
connection with Kåñëa consciousness, whereas sense activities in the conditioned stage
are enacted for personal sense gratification.
TEXT 32
MauNaYa Ocu"
k-ae vaiMahETYa >aGavTPaircYaRYaaeÀE‚
STaÖiMaR<aa& iNavSaTaa& ivzMa" Sv>aav" )
TaiSMaNa( Pa[XaaNTaPauåze GaTaivGa]he va&
k-ae vaTMavTku-hk-Yaae" PairXaªNaqYa" )) 32 ))
munaya ücuù
ko väm ihaitya bhagavat-paricaryayoccais
tad-dharmiëäà nivasatäà viñamaù svabhävaù
tasmin praçänta-puruñe gata-vigrahe väà
ko vätmavat kuhakayoù pariçaìkanéyaù
SYNONYMS
munayaù—the great sages; ücuù—said; kaù—who; väm—you two; iha—in Vaikuëöha;
etya—having attained; bhagavat—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
paricaryayä—by the service; uccaiù—having been developed by past pious actions; tatdharmiëäm—
of the devotees; nivasatäm—dwelling in Vaikuëöha; viñamaù—discordant;
svabhävaù—mentality; tasmin—in the Supreme Lord; praçänta-puruñe—without
675
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
anxieties; gata-vigrahe—without any enemy; väm—of you two; kaù—who; vä—or; ätmavat—
like yourselves; kuhakayoù—maintaining duplicity; pariçaìkanéyaù—not becoming
trustworthy.
TRANSLATION
The sages said: Who are these two persons who have developed such a discordant
mentality even though they are posted in the service of the Lord in the highest position
and are expected to have developed the same qualities as the Lord? How are these two
persons living in Vaikuëöha? Where is the possibility of an enemy's coming into this
kingdom of God? The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no enemy. Who could be
envious of Him? Probably these two persons are imposters; therefore they suspect others
to be like themselves.
PURPORT
The difference between the inhabitants of a Vaikuëöha planet and those of a material
planet is that in Vaikuëöha all the residents engage in the service of the Lord Himself
and are equipped with all His good qualities. It has been analyzed by great personalities
that when a conditioned soul is liberated and becomes a devotee, about seventy-nine
percent of all the good qualities of the Lord develop in his person. Therefore in the
Vaikuëöha world there is no question of enmity between the Lord and the residents.
Here in this material world the citizens may be inimical to the chief executives or heads
of state, but in Vaikuëöha there is no such mentality. One is not allowed to enter
Vaikuëöha unless he has completely developed the good qualities. The basic principle of
goodness is to accept subordination to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The sages,
therefore, were surprised to see that the two doormen who checked them from entering
the palace were not exactly like the residents of Vaikuëöhaloka. It may be said that a
doorman's duty is to determine who should be allowed to enter the palace and who
should not. But that is not relevant in this matter because no one is allowed to enter the
Vaikuëöha planets unless he has developed one hundred percent his mentality of
devotional service to the Supreme Lord. No enemy of the Lord can enter
Vaikuëöhaloka. The Kumäras concluded that the only reason for the doormen's
checking them was that the doormen themselves were imposters.
TEXT 33
676
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Na ùNTar& >aGavTaqh SaMaSTaku-+aa‚
vaTMaaNaMaaTMaiNa Na>aae Na>aSaqv Daqra" )
PaXYaiNTa Ya}a YauvYaae" Sauril/i(r)Naae" ik&-
VYauTPaaidTa& ùudr>aeid >aYa& YaTaae_SYa )) 33 ))
na hy antaraà bhagavatéha samasta-kukñäv
ätmänam ätmani nabho nabhaséva dhéräù
paçyanti yatra yuvayoù sura-liìginoù kià
vyutpäditaà hy udara-bhedi bhayaà yato 'sya
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—because; antaram—distinction; bhagavati—in the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; iha—here; samasta-kukñau—everything is within the abdomen; ätmänam—
the living entity; ätmani—in the Supersoul; nabhaù—the small quantity of air;
nabhasi—within the whole air; iva—as; dhéräù—the learned; paçyanti—see; yatra—in
whom; yuvayoù—of you two; sura-liìginoù—dressed like inhabitants of Vaikuëöha;
kim—how; vyutpäditam—awakened, developed; hi—certainly; udara-bhedi—distinction
between the body and the soul; bhayam—fearfulness; yataù—wherefrom; asya—of the
Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
In the Vaikuëöha world there is complete harmony between the residents and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, just as there is complete harmony within space between
the big and the small skies. Why then is there a seed of fear in this field of harmony?
These two persons are dressed like inhabitants of Vaikuëöha, but wherefrom can their
disharmony come into existence?
PURPORT
Just as there are different departments in each state in this material world—the civil
department and the criminal department—so, in God's creation, there are two
departments of existence. As in the material world we find that the criminal department
is far, far smaller than the civil department, so this material world, which is considered
677
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the criminal department, is one fourth of the entire creation of the Lord. All living
entities who are residents of the material universes are considered to be more or less
criminals because they do not wish to abide by the order of the Lord or they are against
the harmonious activities of God's will. The principle of creation is that the Supreme
Lord, the Personality of Godhead, is by nature joyful, and He becomes many in order to
enhance His transcendental joy. The living entities like ourselves, being part and parcel
of the Supreme Lord, are meant to satisfy the senses of the Lord. Thus, whenever there
is a discrepancy in that harmony, immediately the living entity is entrapped by mäyä, or
illusion.
The external energy of the Lord is called the material world, and the kingdom of the
internal energy of the Lord is called Vaikuëöha, or the kingdom of God. In the
Vaikuëöha world there is no disharmony between the Lord and the residents. Therefore
God's creation in the Vaikuëöha world is perfect. There is no cause of fear. The entire
kingdom of God is such a completely harmonious unit that there is no possibility of
enmity. Everything there is absolute. Just as there are many physiological constructions
within the body yet they work in one order for the satisfaction of the stomach, and just
as in a machine there are hundreds and thousands of parts yet they run in harmony to
fulfill the function of the machine, in the Vaikuëöha planets the Lord is perfect, and the
inhabitants also perfectly engage in the service of the Lord.
The Mäyävädé philosophers, the impersonalists, interpret this verse of Çrémad-
Bhägavatam to mean that the small sky and the big sky are one, but this idea cannot
stand. The example of the big sky and the small skies is also applicable within a person's
body. The big sky is the body itself, and the intestines and other parts of the body
occupy the small sky. Each and every part of the body has individuality, even though
occupying a small part of the total body. Similarly, the whole creation is the body of the
Supreme Lord, and we created beings, or anything that is created, are but a small part of
that body. The parts of the body are never equal to the whole. This is never possible. In
Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the living entities, who are parts and parcels of the Supreme
Lord, are eternally parts and parcels. According to the Mäyävädé philosophers, the living
entity in illusion considers himself part and parcel although he is actually one and the
same as the supreme whole. This theory is not valid. The oneness of the whole and the
part is in their quality. The qualitative oneness of the small and large portions of the sky
does not imply that the small sky becomes the big sky.
There is no cause for the politics of divide and rule in the Vaikuëöha planets; there is no
fear, because of the united interests of the Lord and the residents. Mäyä means
disharmony between the living entities and the Supreme Lord, and Vaikuëöha means
678
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
harmony between them. Actually all living entities are provided for and maintained by
the Lord because He is the supreme living entity. But foolish creatures, although
actually under the control of the supreme living entity, defy His existence, and that
state is called mäyä. Sometimes they deny that there is such a being as God. They say,
"Everything is void." And sometimes they deny Him in a different way: "There may be a
God, but He has no form." Both these conceptions arise from the rebellious condition of
the living entity. As long as this rebellious condition prevails, the material world will
continue in disharmony.
Harmony or disharmony is realized because of the law and order of a particular place.
Religion is the law and order of the Supreme Lord. In the Çrémad Bhagavad-gétä we find
that religion means devotional service, or Kåñëa consciousness. Kåñëa says, "Give up all
other religious principles and simply become a soul surrendered unto Me." This is
religion. When one is fully conscious that Kåñëa is the supreme enjoyer and Supreme
Lord and one acts accordingly, that is real religion. Anything which goes against this
principle is not religion. Kåñëa therefore says: "Just give up all other religious principles."
In the spiritual world this religious principle of Kåñëa consciousness is maintained in
harmony, and therefore that world is called Vaikuëöha. If the same principles can be
adopted here, wholly or partially, then it is also Vaikuëöha. So it is with any society,
such as the International Society for Krishna Consciousness: If the members of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness, putting faith in Kåñëa as the center,
live in harmony according to the order and principles of Bhagavad-gétä, then they are
living in Vaikuëöha, not in this material world.
TEXT 34
TaÜaMaMauZYa ParMaSYa ivku-<#=>aTauR"
k-Tau| Pa[k*-íiMah DaqMaih MaNdDaq>YaaMa( )
l/aek-aiNaTaae v]JaTaMaNTar>aavd*íya
PaaPaqYaSañYa wMae irPavae_SYa Ya}a )) 34 ))
tad väm amuñya paramasya vikuëöha-bhartuù
kartuà prakåñöam iha dhémahi manda-dhébhyäm
lokän ito vrajatam antara-bhäva-dåñöyä
päpéyasas traya ime ripavo 'sya yatra
679
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; väm—unto these two; amuñya—of Him; paramasya—the Supreme;
vikuëöha-bhartuù—the Lord of Vaikuëöha; kartum—to bestow; prakåñöam—benefit;
iha—in the matter of this offense; dhémahi—let us consider; manda-dhébhyäm—those
whose intelligence is not very nice; lokän—to the material world; itaù—from this place
(Vaikuëöha); vrajatam—go; antara-bhäva—duality; dåñöyä—on account of seeing;
päpéyasaù—sinful; trayaù—three; ime—these; ripavaù—enemies; asya—of a living
entity; yatra—where.
TRANSLATION
Therefore let us consider how these two contaminated persons should be punished. The
punishment should be apt, for thus benefit can eventually be bestowed upon them. Since
they find duality in the existence of Vaikuëöha life, they are contaminated and should be
removed from this place to the material world, where the living entities have three kinds
of enemies.
PURPORT
The reason why pure souls come into the existential circumstances of the material
world, which is considered to be the criminal department of the Supreme Lord, is stated
in Bhagavad-gétä, Seventh Chapter, verse 27. It is stated that as long as a living entity is
pure, he is in complete harmony with the desires of the Supreme Lord, but as soon as he
becomes impure he is in disharmony with the desires of the Lord. By contamination he
is forced to transfer to this material world, where the living entities have three enemies,
namely desire, anger and lust. These three enemies force the living entities to continue
material existence, and when one is free from them he is eligible to enter the kingdom of
God. One should not, therefore, be angry in the absence of an opportunity for sense
gratification, and one should not be lusty to acquire more than necessary. In this verse it
is clearly stated that the two doormen should be sent into the material world, where
criminals are allowed to reside. Since the basic principles of criminality are sense
gratification, anger and unnecessary lust, persons conducted by these three enemies of
the living entity are never promoted to Vaikuëöhaloka. People should learn Bhagavadgétä
and accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, as the Lord of everything;
they should practice satisfying the senses of the Supreme Lord instead of trying to satisfy
their own senses. Training in Kåñëa consciousness will help one be promoted to
680
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Vaikuëöha.
TEXT 35
TaezaiMaTaqirTaMau>aavvDaaYaR gaaer&
Ta& b]ød<@MaiNavar<aMañPaUGaE" )
SaÛae hrerNaucravuå ib>YaTaSTaTa(‚
PaadGa]havPaTaTaaMaiTak-aTare<a )) 35 ))
teñäm itéritam ubhäv avadhärya ghoraà
taà brahma-daëòam aniväraëam astra-pügaiù
sadyo harer anucaräv uru bibhyatas tatpäda-
grahäv apatatäm atikätareëa
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of the four Kumäras; iti—thus; éritam—uttered; ubhau—both doorkeepers;
avadhärya—understanding; ghoram—terrible; tam—that; brahma-daëòam—curse of a
brähmaëa; aniväraëam—not able to be counteracted; astra-pügaiù—by any kind of
weapon; sadyaù—at once; hareù—of the Supreme Lord; anucarau—devotees; uru—very
much; bibhyataù—became fearful; tat-päda-grahau—grasping their feet; apatatäm—fell
down; ati-kätareëa—in great anxiety.
TRANSLATION
When the doormen of Vaikuëöhaloka, who were certainly devotees of the Lord, found
that they were going to be cursed by the brähmaëas, they at once became very much
afraid and fell down at the feet of the brähmaëas in great anxiety, for a brähmaëa's curse
cannot be counteracted by any kind of weapon.
PURPORT
Although, by chance, the doormen committed a mistake by checking the brähmaëas
from entering the gate of Vaikuëöha, they were at once aware of the gravity of the curse.
There are many kinds of offenses, but the greatest offense is to offend a devotee of the
Lord. Because the doormen were also devotees of the Lord, they were able to understand
681
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
their mistake and were terrified when the four Kumäras were ready to curse them.
TEXT 36
>aUYaadgaaeiNa >aGaviÙrk-air d<@ae
Yaae NaaE hreTa Saurhel/NaMaPYaXaezMa( )
Maa vae_NauTaaPak-l/Yaa >aGavTSMa*iTaganae
Maaehae >aveidh Tau NaaE v]JaTaaerDaae_Da" )) 36 ))
bhüyäd aghoni bhagavadbhir akäri daëòo
yo nau hareta sura-helanam apy açeñam
mä vo 'nutäpa-kalayä bhagavat-småti-ghno
moho bhaved iha tu nau vrajator adho 'dhaù
SYNONYMS
bhüyät—let it be; aghoni—for the sinful; bhagavadbhiù—by you; akäri—was done;
daëòaù—punishment; yaù—that which; nau—in relation to us; hareta—should destroy;
sura-helanam—disobeying great demigods; api—certainly; açeñam—unlimited; mä—not;
vaù—of you; anutäpa—repentance; kalayä—by a little; bhagavat—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; småti-ghnaù—destroying the memory of; mohaù—illusion;
bhavet—should be; iha—in the foolish species of life; tu—but; nau—of us; vrajatoù—
who are going; adhaù adhaù—down to the material world.
TRANSLATION
After being cursed by the sages, the doormen said: It is quite apt that you have punished
us for neglecting to respect sages like you. But we pray that due to your compassion at
our repentance, the illusion of forgetting the Supreme Personality of Godhead will not
come upon us as we go progressively downward.
PURPORT
To a devotee, any heavy punishment is tolerable but the one which effects forgetfulness
of the Supreme Lord. The doormen, who were also devotees, could understand the
punishment meted out to them, for they were conscious of the great offense they had
682
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
committed by not allowing the sages to enter Vaikuëöhaloka. In the lowest species of
life, including the animal species, forgetfulness of the Lord is very prominent. The
doormen were aware that they were going to the criminal department of the material
world, and they expected that they might go to the lowest species and forget the
Supreme Lord. They prayed, therefore, that this might not happen in the lives they were
going to accept because of the curse. In Bhagavad-gétä, Sixteenth Chapter, verses 19 and
20, it is said that those who are envious of the Lord and His devotees are thrown into
the species of abominable life; life after life such fools are unable to remember the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore they continue going down and down.
TEXT 37
Wv& TadEv >aGavaNarivNdNaa>a"
SvaNaa& ivbuDYa SadiTa§-MaMaaYaRôÛ" )
TaiSMaNa( YaYaaE ParMah&SaMahaMauNaqNaa‚
MaNvez<aqYacr<aaE cl/YaNa( Sahé[q" )) 37 ))
evaà tadaiva bhagavän aravinda-näbhaù
svänäà vibudhya sad-atikramam ärya-hådyaù
tasmin yayau paramahaàsa-mahä-munénäm
anveñaëéya-caraëau calayan saha-çréù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; tadä eva—at that very moment; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; aravinda-näbhaù—with a lotus growing from His navel; svänäm—of His own
servants; vibudhya—learned about; sat—to the great sages; atikramam—the insult;
ärya—of the righteous; hådyaù—the delight; tasmin—there; yayau—went;
paramahaàsa—recluses; mahä-munénäm—by the great sages; anveñaëéya—which are
worthy to be sought; caraëau—the two lotus feet; calayan—walking; saha-çréù—with
the goddess of fortune.
TRANSLATION
At that very moment, the Lord, who is called Padmanäbha because of the lotus grown
683
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
from His navel and who is the delight of the righteous, learned about the insult offered by
His own servants to the saints. Accompanied by His spouse, the goddess of fortune, He
went to the spot on those very feet sought for by recluses and great sages.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä the Lord declares that His devotees cannot be vanquished at any time.
The Lord could understand that the quarrel between the doormen and the sages was
taking a different turn, and therefore He instantly came out of His place and went to
the spot to stop further aggravation so that His devotees, the doormen, might not be
vanquished for good.
TEXT 38
Ta& TvaGaTa& Pa[iTaôTaaEPaiYak&- SvPauiM>a‚
STae_c+aTaa+aivzYa& SvSaMaaiDa>aaGYaMa( )
h&Saié[YaaeVYaRJaNaYaae" iXavvaYaul/ael/‚
C^u>a]aTaPa}aXaiXake-SarXaqk-raMbuMa( )) 38 ))
taà tv ägataà pratihåtaupayikaà sva-pumbhis
te 'cakñatäkña-viñayaà sva-samädhi-bhägyam
haàsa-çriyor vyajanayoù çiva-väyu-lolacchubhrätapatra-
çaçi-kesara-çékarämbum
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; tu—but; ägatam—coming forward; pratihåta—carried; aupayikam—the
paraphernalia; sva-pumbhiù—by His own associates; te—the great sages (the Kumäras);
acakñata—saw; akña-viñayam—now a subject matter for seeing; sva-samädhi-bhägyam—
visible simply by ecstatic trance; haàsa-çriyoù—as beautiful as white swans;
vyajanayoù—the cämaras (bunches of white hair); çiva-väyu—favorable winds; lolat—
moving; çubhra-ätapatra—the white umbrella; çaçi—the moon; kesara—pearls; çékara—
drops; ambum—water.
TRANSLATION
684
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The sages, headed by Sanaka Åñi, saw that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu,
who was formerly visible only within their hearts in ecstatic trance, had now actually
become visible to their eyes. As He came forward, accompanied by His own associates
bearing all paraphernalia, such as an umbrella and a cämara fan, the white bunches of hair
moved very gently, like two swans, and due to their favorable breeze the pearls garlanding
the umbrella also moved, like drops of nectar falling from the white full moon or ice
melting due to a gust of wind.
PURPORT
In this verse we find the word acakñatäkña-viñayam. The Supreme Lord cannot be seen
by ordinary eyes, but He now became visible to the eyesight of the Kumäras. Another
significant word is samädhi-bhägyam. Meditators who are very fortunate can see the
Viñëu form of the Lord within their hearts by following the yogic process. But to see
Him face to face is a different matter. This is only possible for pure devotees. The
Kumäras, therefore, upon seeing the Lord coming forward with His associates, who were
holding an umbrella and a cämara fan, were struck with wonder that they were seeing
the Lord face to face. It is said in the Brahma-saàhitä that devotees, being elevated in
love of God, always see Çyämasundara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, within
their hearts. But when they are mature, the same God is visible before them face to face.
For ordinary persons the Lord is not visible; however, when one can understand the
significance of His holy name and one engages himself in the devotional service of the
Lord, beginning with the tongue, by chanting and tasting prasäda, then gradually the
Lord reveals Himself. Thus the devotee constantly sees the Lord within his heart, and,
in a more mature stage, one can see the same Lord directly, as we see everything else.
TEXT 39
k*-TòPa[SaadSauMau%& SPa*h<aqYaDaaMa
òehavl/aek-k-l/Yaa ôid Sa&SPa*XaNTaMa( )
XYaaMae Pa*QaavuriSa Xaaei>aTaYaa ié[Yaa Sv‚
êU@aMai<a& Sau>aGaYaNTaiMavaTMaiDaZ<YaMa( )) 39 ))
kåtsna-prasäda-sumukhaà spåhaëéya-dhäma
snehävaloka-kalayä hådi saàspåçantam
685
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
çyäme påthäv urasi çobhitayä çriyä svaçcüòämaëià
subhagayantam ivätma-dhiñëyam
SYNONYMS
kåtsna-prasäda—blessing everyone; su-mukham—auspicious face; spåhaëéya—desirable;
dhäma—shelter; sneha—affection; avaloka—looking upon; kalayä—by expansion;
hådi—within the heart; saàspåçantam—touching; çyäme—unto the Lord with blackish
color; påthau—broad; urasi—chest; çobhitayä—being decorated; çriyä—goddess of
fortune; svaù—heavenly planets; cüòä-maëim—summit; subhagayantam—spreading
good fortune; iva—like; ätma—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dhiñëyam—abode.
TRANSLATION
The Lord is the reservoir of all pleasure. His auspicious presence is meant for everyone's
benediction, and His affectionate smiling and glancing touch the core of the heart. The
Lord's beautiful bodily color is blackish, and His broad chest is the resting place of the
goddess of fortune, who glorifies the entire spiritual world, the summit of all heavenly
planets. Thus it appeared that the Lord was personally spreading the beauty and good
fortune of the spiritual world.
PURPORT
When the Lord came, He was pleased with everyone; therefore it is stated here, kåtsnaprasäda-
sumukham. The Lord knew that even the offensive doormen were His pure
devotees, although by chance they committed an offense at the feet of other devotees.
To commit an offense against a devotee is very dangerous in devotional service. Lord
Caitanya therefore said that an offense to a devotee is just like a mad elephant run
loose; when a mad elephant enters a garden, it tramples all the plants. Similarly, an
offense unto the feet of a pure devotee murders one's position in devotional service. On
the part of the Lord there was no offended mood because He does not accept any offense
created by His sincere devotee. But a devotee should be very cautious of committing
offenses at the feet of another devotee. The Lord, being equal to all, and being especially
inclined to His devotee, looked as mercifully at the offenders as at the offended. This
attitude of the Lord was due to His unlimited quantity of transcendental qualities. His
cheerful attitude towards the devotees was so pleasing and heart-touching that His very
smile was attractive for them. That attraction was glorious not only for all the higher
686
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
planets of this material world, but beyond, for the spiritual world also. Generally a
human being has no idea of what the constitutional position is in the higher material
planets, which are far better constituted in regard to all paraphernalia, yet the
Vaikuëöha planet is so pleasing and so celestial that it is compared to the middle jewel or
locket in a necklace of jewels.
In this verse the words spåhaëéya-dhäma indicate that the Lord is the reservoir of all
pleasure because He has all the transcendental qualities. Although only some of these
are aspired for by persons who hanker after the pleasure of merging in the impersonal
Brahman, there are other aspirants who want to associate with the Lord personally as
His servants. The Lord is so kind that He gives shelter to everyone—both impersonalists
and devotees. He gives shelter to the impersonalists in His impersonal Brahman
effulgence, whereas He gives shelter to the devotees in His personal abodes known as
the Vaikuëöhalokas. He is especially inclined to His devotee; He touches the core of the
heart of the devotee simply by smiling and glancing over him. The Lord is always served
in the Vaikuëöhaloka by many hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune, as stated
by the Brahma-saàhitä (lakñmé-sahasra-çata-sambhrama-sevyamänam [Bs. 5.29]). In this
material world, one is glorified if he is favored even a pinch by the goddess of fortune, so
we can simply imagine how glorified is the kingdom of God in the spiritual world, where
many hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune engage in the direct service of the
Lord. Another feature of this verse is that it openly declares where the Vaikuëöhalokas
are situated. They are situated as the summit of all the heavenly planets, which are
above the sun globe, at the upper limit of the universe, and are known as Satyaloka, or
Brahmaloka. The spiritual world is situated beyond the universe. Therefore it is stated
here that the spiritual world, Vaikuëöhaloka, is the summit of all planetary systems.
TEXT 40
PaqTaa&éuke- Pa*QauiNaTaiMbiNa ivSfu-rNTYaa
k-aHCYaail/i>aivRåTaYaa vNaMaal/Yaa c )
vLGauPa[k-aeïvl/Ya& ivNaTaaSauTaa&Sae
ivNYaSTahSTaiMaTare<a DauNaaNaMaBJaMa( )) 40 ))
pétäàçuke påthu-nitambini visphurantyä
käïcyälibhir virutayä vana-mälayä ca
valgu-prakoñöha-valayaà vinatä-sutäàse
687
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
vinyasta-hastam itareëa dhunänam abjam
SYNONYMS
péta-aàçuke—covered with a yellow cloth; påthu-nitambini—on His large hips;
visphurantyä—shining brightly; käïcyä—with a girdle; alibhiù—by the bees; virutayä—
humming; vana-mälayä—with a garland of fresh flowers; ca—and; valgu—lovely;
prakoñöha—wrists; valayam—bracelets; vinatä-suta—of Garuòa, the son of Vinatä;
aàse—on the shoulder; vinyasta—rested; hastam—one hand; itareëa—with another
hand; dhunänam—being twirled; abjam—a lotus flower.
TRANSLATION
He was adorned with a girdle that shone brightly on the yellow cloth covering His large
hips, and He wore a garland of fresh flowers which was distinguished by humming bees.
His lovely wrists were graced with bracelets, and He rested one of His hands on the
shoulder of Garuòa, His carrier, and twirled a lotus with another hand.
PURPORT
Here is a full description of the Personality of Godhead as personally experienced by the
sages. The Lord's personal body was covered with yellow robes, and His waist was thin.
In Vaikuëöha, whenever there is a flower garland on the chest of the Personality of
Godhead or any one of His associates, it is described that the humming bees are there.
All these features were very beautiful and attractive for the devotees. One of the Lord's
hands rested on His carrier, Garuòa, and in another hand He twirled a lotus flower.
These are personal characteristics of the Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa.
TEXT 41
ivÛuiT+aPaNMak-rku-<@l/Ma<@NaahR‚
Ga<@SQal/aeàSaMau%& Mai<aMaiTk-rq$=Ma( )
daedR<@z<@ivvre hrTaa ParaDYaR‚
hare<a k-NDarGaTaeNa c k-aESTau>aeNa )) 41 ))
vidyut-kñipan-makara-kuëòala-maëòanärha688
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
gaëòa-sthalonnasa-mukhaà maëimat-kiréöam
dor-daëòa-ñaëòa-vivare haratä parärdhyahäreëa
kandhara-gatena ca kaustubhena
SYNONYMS
vidyut—lightning; kñipat—outshining; makara—alligator shaped; kuëòala—earrings;
maëòana—decoration; arha—as it fits; gaëòa-sthala—cheeks; unnasa—prominent nose;
mukham—countenance; maëi-mat—gem-studded; kiréöam—crown; doù-daëòa—of His
four stout arms; ñaëòa—group; vivare—between; haratä—charming; para-ardhya—by
the most precious; häreëa—necklace; kandhara-gatena—adorning His neck; ca—and;
kaustubhena—by the Kaustubha jewel.
TRANSLATION
His countenance was distinguished by cheeks that enhanced the beauty of His alligatorshaped
pendants, which outshone lightning. His nose was prominent, and His head was
covered with a gem-studded crown. A charming necklace hung between His stout arms,
and His neck was adorned with the gem known by the name Kaustubha.
TEXT 42
A}aaePaSa*íiMaiTa caeiTSMaTaiMaiNdraYaa"
SvaNaa& iDaYaa ivricTa& bhuSaaEïva!yMa( )
Maù& >avSYa >avTaa& c >aJaNTaMa(r)&
NaeMauiNaRrq+Ya NaivTa*ád*Xaae Mauda kE-" )) 42 ))
atropasåñöam iti cotsmitam indiräyäù
svänäà dhiyä viracitaà bahu-sauñöhaväòhyam
mahyaà bhavasya bhavatäà ca bhajantam aìgaà
nemur nirékñya na vitåpta-dåço mudä kaiù
SYNONYMS
atra—here, in the matter of the beauty; upasåñöam—curbed down; iti—thus; ca—and;
689
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
utsmitam—the pride of her beauty; indiräyäù—of the goddess of fortune; svänäm—of
His own devotees; dhiyä—by intelligence; viracitam—meditated on; bahu-sauñöhavaäòhyam—
very beautifully decorated; mahyam—of me; bhavasya—of Lord Çiva;
bhavatäm—of all of you; ca—and; bhajantam—worshiped; aìgam—the figure; nemuù—
bowed down; nirékñya—after seeing; na—not; vitåpta—satiated; dåçaù—eyes; mudä—
joyously; kaiù—by their heads.
TRANSLATION
The exquisite beauty of Näräyaëa, being many times magnified by the intelligence of His
devotees, was so attractive that it defeated the pride of the goddess of fortune in being the
most beautiful. My dear demigods, the Lord who thus manifested Himself is worshipable
by me, by Lord Çiva and by all of you. The sages regarded Him with unsated eyes and
joyously bowed their heads at His lotus feet.
PURPORT
The beauty of the Lord was so enchanting that it could not be sufficiently described.
The goddess of fortune is supposed to be the most beautiful sight within the spiritual and
material creations of the Lord; she has a sense of being the most beautiful, yet her
beauty was defeated when the Lord appeared. In other words, the beauty of the goddess
of fortune is secondary in the presence of the Lord. In the words of Vaiñëava poets, it is
said that the Lord's beauty is so enchanting that it defeats hundreds of thousands of
Cupids. He is therefore called Madana-mohana. It is also described that the Lord
sometimes becomes mad after the beauty of Rädhäräëé. Poets describe that under those
circumstances, although Lord Kåñëa is Madana-mohana, He becomes Madana-däha, or
enchanted by the beauty of Rädhäräëé. Actually the Lord's beauty is superexcellent,
surpassing even the beauty of Lakñmé in Vaikuëöha. The devotees of the Lord in the
Vaikuëöha planets want to see the Lord as the most beautiful, but the devotees in
Gokula or Kåñëaloka want to see Rädhäräëé as more beautiful than Kåñëa. The
adjustment is that the Lord, being bhakta-vatsala, or one who wants to please His
devotees, assumes such features so that devotees like Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva and other
demigods may be pleased. Here also, for the devotee-sages, the Kumäras, the Lord
appeared in His most beautiful feature, and they continued to see Him without satiation
and wanted to continue seeing Him more and more.
690
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 43
TaSYaarivNdNaYaNaSYa PadarivNd‚
ik-ÅLk-iMaé[Taul/SaqMak-rNdvaYau" )
ANTaGaRTa" Svivvre<a ck-ar Taeza&
Sa¿ae>aMa+arJauzaMaiPa ictaTaNvae" )) 43 ))
tasyäravinda-nayanasya padäravindakiïjalka-
miçra-tulasé-makaranda-väyuù
antar-gataù sva-vivareëa cakära teñäà
saìkñobham akñara-juñäm api citta-tanvoù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Him; aravinda-nayanasya—of the lotus-eyed Lord; pada-aravinda—of the
lotus feet; kiïjalka—with the toes; miçra—mixed; tulasé—the tulasé leaves;
makaranda—fragrance; väyuù—breeze; antaù-gataù—entered within; sva-vivareëa—
through their nostrils; cakära—made; teñäm—of the Kumäras; saìkñobham—agitation
for change; akñara-juñäm—attached to impersonal Brahman realization; api—even
though; citta-tanvoù—in both mind and body.
TRANSLATION
When the breeze carrying the aroma of tulasé leaves from the toes of the lotus feet of the
Personality of Godhead entered the nostrils of those sages, they experienced a change
both in body and in mind, even though they were attached to the impersonal Brahman
understanding.
PURPORT
It appears from this verse that the four Kumäras were impersonalists or protagonists of
the philosophy of monism, becoming one with the Lord. But as soon as they saw the
Lord's features, their minds changed. In other words, the impersonalist who feels
transcendental pleasure in striving to become one with the Lord is defeated when he
sees the beautiful transcendental features of the Lord. Because of the fragrance of His
lotus feet, carried by the air and mixed with the aroma of tulasé, their minds changed;
691
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
instead of becoming one with the Supreme Lord, they thought it wise to be devotees.
Becoming a servitor of the lotus feet of the Lord is better than becoming one with the
Lord.
TEXT 44
Tae va AMauZYa vdNaaiSaTaPaÚk-aeXa‚
MauÜq+Ya SauNdrTaraDarku-NdhaSaMa(
l/BDaaiXaz" PauNarve+Ya TadqYaMax(iga]‚
ÜNÜ& Na%aå<aMai<aé[Ya<a& iNadDYau" )) 44 ))
te vä amuñya vadanäsita-padma-koçam
udvékñya sundaratarädhara-kunda-häsam
labdhäçiñaù punar avekñya tadéyam aìghridvandvaà
nakhäruëa-maëi-çrayaëaà nidadhyuù
SYNONYMS
te—those sages; vai—certainly; amuñya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vadana—face; asita—blue; padma—lotus; koçam—inside; udvékñya—after looking up;
sundara-tara—more beautiful; adhara—lips; kunda—jasmine flower; häsam—smiling;
labdha—achieved; äçiñaù—aims of life; punaù—again; avekñya—looking down;
tadéyam—His; aìghri-dvandvam—pair of lotus feet; nakha—nails; aruëa—red; maëi—
rubies; çrayaëam—shelter; nidadhyuù—meditated.
TRANSLATION
The Lord's beautiful face appeared to them like the inside of a blue lotus, and the Lord's
smile appeared to be a blossoming jasmine flower. After seeing the face of the Lord, the
sages were fully satisfied, and when they wanted to see Him further, they looked upon
the nails of His lotus feet, which resembled rubies. Thus they viewed the Lord's
transcendental body again and again, and so they finally achieved meditation on the
Lord's personal feature.
TEXT 45
692
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Pau&Saa& GaiTa& Ma*GaYaTaaiMah YaaeGaMaaGaOE‚
DYaaRNaaSPad& bhu MaTa& NaYaNaai>araMaMa(
PaaE„&ò& vPaudRXaRYaaNaMaNaNYaiSaÖE‚
raETPaitakE-" SaMaGa*<aNa( YauTaMaí>aaeGaE" )) 45 ))
puàsäà gatià mågayatäm iha yoga-märgair
dhyänäspadaà bahu-mataà nayanäbhirämam
pauàsnaà vapur darçayänam ananya-siddhair
autpattikaiù samagåëan yutam añöa-bhogaiù
SYNONYMS
puàsäm—of those persons; gatim—liberation; mågayatäm—who are searching; iha—
here in this world; yoga-märgaiù—by the process of añöäìga-yoga; dhyäna-äspadam—
object of meditation; bahu—by the great yogis; matam—approved; nayana—eyes;
abhirämam—pleasing; pauàsnam—human; vapuù—form; darçayänam—displaying;
ananya—not by others; siddhaiù—perfected; autpattikaiù—eternally present;
samagåëan—praised; yutam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is endowed;
añöa-bhogaiù—with eight kinds of achievement.
TRANSLATION
This is the form of the Lord which is meditated upon by the followers of the yoga process,
and it is pleasing to the yogés in meditation. It is not imaginary but factual, as proved by
great yogés. The Lord is full in eight kinds of achievement, but for others these
achievements are not possible in full perfection.
PURPORT
The success of the yoga process is very nicely described here. It is specifically mentioned
that the form of the Lord as four-handed Näräyaëa is the object of meditation for the
followers of yoga-märga. In the modern age there are so many so-called yogés who do not
target their meditation on the four-handed Näräyaëa form. Some of them try to
meditate on something impersonal or void, but that is not approved by the great yogés
who follow the standard method. The real yoga-märga process is to control the senses, sit
693
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
in a solitary and sanctified place and meditate on the four-handed form of Näräyaëa,
decorated as described in this chapter as He appeared before the four sages. This
Näräyaëa form is Kåñëa's expansion; therefore the Kåñëa consciousness movement
which is now spreading is the real, topmost process of yoga practice.
Kåñëa consciousness is the highest yoga performance by trained devotional yogés. Despite
all the allurement of yoga practice, the eight kinds of yogic perfections are hardly
achievable by the common man. But here it is described that the Lord, who appeared
before the four sages, is Himself full of all eight of those perfections. The highest yogamärga
process is to concentrate the mind twenty-four hours a day on Kåñëa. This is
called Kåñëa consciousness. The yoga system, as described in Çrémad-Bhägavatam and
Bhagavad-gétä or as recommended in the Pataïjali yoga process, is different from the
nowadays—practiced haöha-yoga as it is generally understood in the Western countries.
Real yoga practice is to control the senses and, after such control is established, to
concentrate the mind on the Näräyaëa form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Çré Kåñëa. Lord Kåñëa is the original Personality of Godhead, and all the other Viñëu
forms—with four hands decorated with conch, lotus, club and wheel—are plenary
expansions of Kåñëa. In Bhagavad-gétä it is recommended that one meditate upon the
form of the Lord. To practice concentration of the mind, one has to sit with the head
and the back in a straight line, and one must practice in a secluded place, sanctified by a
sacred atmosphere. The yogé should observe the rules and regulations of brahmacarya—
to strictly live a life of self-restraint and celibacy. One cannot practice yoga in a
congested city, living a life of extravagancy, including unrestricted sex indulgence and
adultery of the tongue. Yoga practice necessitates controlling the senses, and the
beginning of sense control is to control the tongue. One who can control the tongue can
also have control over the other senses. One cannot allow the tongue to take all kinds of
forbidden food and drink and at the same time advance in the practice of yoga. It is a
very regrettable fact that many unauthorized so-called yogés come to the Western
countries and exploit people's inclination towards yoga practice. Such unauthorized yogés
even dare to say publicly that one can indulge in the habit of drinking and at the same
time practice meditation.
Five thousand years ago Lord Kåñëa recommended yoga practice to Arjuna, but Arjuna
frankly expressed his inability to follow the stringent rules and regulations of the yoga
system. One should be very practical in every field of activities and should not waste his
valuable time in practicing useless gymnastic feats in the name of yoga. Real yoga is to
search out the four-handed Supersoul within one's heart and see Him perpetually in
meditation. Such continued meditation is called samädhi, and the object of this
694
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
meditation is the four-handed Näräyaëa, with bodily decorations as described in this
chapter of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. If, however, one wants to meditate upon something void
or impersonal, it will take a very long time before he achieves success in yoga practice.
We cannot concentrate our mind on something void or impersonal. Real yoga is to fix
the mind on the form of the Lord, the four-handed Näräyaëa who is sitting in
everyone's heart.
By meditation one can understand that God is seated within one's heart. Even if one
does not know it, God is seated within the heart of everyone. Not only is He seated in
the heart of the human being, but He is also within the hearts of cats and dogs.
Bhagavad-gétä certifies this fact by the declaration of the Lord, éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe [Bg. 18.61]. The éçvara, the supreme controller of the world, is seated in the heart
of everyone. Not only is He in everyone's heart, but He is also present within the atom.
No place is vacant or devoid of the presence of the Lord. That is the statement of
Éçopaniñad. God is present everywhere, and His right of proprietorship applies to
everything. The feature of the Lord by which He is present everywhere is called
Paramätmä. Ätmä means the individual soul, and Paramätmä means the individual
Supersoul; both ätmä and Paramätmä are individual persons. The difference between
ätmä and Paramätmä is that the ätmä, or the soul, is present only in a particular body,
whereas the Paramätmä is present everywhere. In this connection, the example of the
sun is very nice. An individual person may be situated in one place, but the sun, even
though a similar individual entity, is present on the head of every individual person. In
Bhagavad-gétä this is explained. Therefore even though the qualities of all entities,
including the Lord, are equal, the Supersoul is different from the individual soul by
quantitative power of expansion. The Lord, or the Supersoul, can expand Himself into
millions of different forms, whereas the individual soul cannot do so.
The Supersoul, being seated in everyone's heart, can witness everyone's activities—past,
present and future. In the Upaniñads the Supersoul is described as being seated with the
individual soul as friend and witness. As a friend, the Lord is always anxious to get back
His friend, the individual soul, and bring him back home, back to Godhead. As a witness
He is the bestower of all benedictions, and He endows each individual with the result of
his actions. The Supersoul gives the individual soul all facilities to achieve whatever he
desires to enjoy in this material world. Suffering is a reaction to the living entity's
propensity to try to lord it over the material world. But the Lord instructs His friend, the
individual soul, who is also His son, to give up all other engagements and simply
surrender unto Him for perpetual bliss and an eternal life full of knowledge. This is the
last instruction of Bhagavad-gétä, the most authorized and widely read book on all
695
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
varieties of yoga. Thus the last word of Bhagavad-gétä is the last word in the perfection of
yoga.
It is stated in Bhagavad-gétä that a person who is always absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness
is the topmost yogé. What is Kåñëa consciousness? As the individual soul is present by his
consciousness throughout his entire body, so the Supersoul, or Paramätmä, is present
throughout the whole creation by superconsciousness. This superconscious energy is
imitated by the individual soul, who has limited consciousness. I can understand what is
going on within my limited body, but I cannot feel what is going on in another's body. I
am present throughout my body by my consciousness, but my consciousness is not
present in another's body. The Supersoul, or Paramätmä, however, being present
everywhere and within everyone, is also conscious of everyone's existence. The theory
that the soul and the Supersoul are one is not acceptable because it is not confirmed by
authoritative Vedic literature. The individual soul's consciousness cannot act in
superconsciousness. This superconsciousness can be achieved, however, by dovetailing
individual consciousness with the consciousness of the Supreme. This dovetailing
process is called surrender, or Kåñëa consciousness. From the teachings of Bhagavad-gétä
we learn very clearly that Arjuna, in the beginning, did not want to fight with his
brothers and relatives, but after understanding Bhagavad-gétä he dovetailed his
consciousness with the superconsciousness of Kåñëa. He was then in Kåñëa
consciousness.
A person in full Kåñëa consciousness acts by the dictation of Kåñëa. In the beginning of
Kåñëa consciousness, dictation is received through the transparent medium of the
spiritual master. When one is sufficiently trained and acts in submissive faith and love
for Kåñëa under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master, the dovetailing process
becomes more firm and accurate. This stage of devotional service by the devotee in
Kåñëa consciousness is the most perfect stage of the yoga system. At this stage, Kåñëa, or
the Supersoul, dictates from within, while from without the devotee is helped by the
spiritual master, who is the bona fide representative of Kåñëa. From within He helps the
devotee as caitya, for He is seated within the heart of everyone. Understanding that
God is seated within everyone's heart is not, however, sufficient. One has to be
acquainted with God from both within and without, and one must take dictation from
within and without to act in Kåñëa consciousness. This is the highest perfectional stage
of the human form of life and the topmost perfection of all yoga.
For a perfect yogé, there are eight kinds of superachievements: one can become lighter
than air, one can become smaller than the atom, one can become bigger than a
mountain, one can achieve whatever he desires, one can control like the Lord, and so
696
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
on. But when one rises to the perfectional stage of receiving dictation from the Lord,
that is greater than any stage of material achievements above mentioned. The breathing
exercise of the yoga system which is generally practiced is just the beginning. Meditation
on the Supersoul is just another step forward. But to obtain direct contact with the
Supersoul and take dictation from Him is the highest perfectional stage. The breathing
exercises of meditation practice were very difficult even five thousand years ago,
otherwise Arjuna would not have rejected the proposal of Kåñëa that he adopt this
system. This age of Kali is called the fallen age. In this age, people in general are shortliving
and very slow to understand self-realization or spiritual life; they are mostly
unfortunate, and therefore if someone is a little bit interested in self-realization he is
likely to be misguided by so many frauds. The only way to realize the perfect stage of
yoga is to follow the principles of Bhagavad-gétä as practiced by Lord Caitanya. This is
the simplest and highest perfection of yoga practice. Lord Caitanya demonstrated this
Kåñëa consciousness yoga system in a practical manner simply by chanting the holy
name of Kåñëa, as prescribed in the Vedänta, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Bhagavad-gétä, and
many important Puräëas.
The largest number of Indians follow this yoga process, and in the United States it is
gradually spreading in many cities. It is very easy and practical for this age, especially for
those who are serious about success in yoga. No other process of yoga can be successful in
this age. The meditation process was possible in the golden age, Satya-yuga, because
people in that age used to live for hundreds of thousands of years. If one wants success in
practical yoga practice, it is advised that he take to the chanting of Hare Kåñëa, Hare
Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare, and
he will actually feel himself making progress. In Bhagavad-gétä this practice of Kåñëa
consciousness is prescribed as räja-vidyä, or the king of all erudition.
Those who have taken to this most sublime bhakti-yoga system, who practice devotional
service in transcendental love of Kåñëa, can testify to its happy and easy execution. The
four sages Sanaka, Sanätana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumära also became attracted by the
features of the Lord and the transcendental aroma of the dust of His lotus feet, as
already described in verse 43.
Yoga necessitates controlling the senses, and bhakti-yoga, or Kåñëa consciousness, is the
process of purifying the senses. When the senses are purified, they are automatically
controlled. One cannot stop the activities of the senses by artificial means, but if one
purifies the senses by engaging in the service of the Lord, the senses not only can be
controlled from rubbish engagement, but can be engaged in the Lord's transcendental
service, as aspired to by the four sages Sanaka, Sanätana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumära.
697
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Kåñëa consciousness is not, therefore, a manufactured concoction of the speculative
mind. It is the process enjoined in Bhagavad-gétä (9.34): man-manä bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru [Bg. 18.65].
TEXT 46
ku-Maara Ocu"
Yaae_NTaihRTaae ôid GaTaae_iPa duraTMaNaa& Tv&
Saae_ÛEv Naae NaYaNaMaUl/MaNaNTa raÖ"
YaùeRv k-<aRivvre<a Gauha& GaTaae Na"
iPa}aaNauvi<aRTarha >avduÙveNa )) 46 ))
kumärä ücuù
yo 'ntarhito hådi gato 'pi durätmanäà tvaà
so 'dyaiva no nayana-mülam ananta räddhaù
yarhy eva karëa-vivareëa guhäà gato naù
pitränuvarëita-rahä bhavad-udbhavena
SYNONYMS
kumäräù ücuù—the Kumäras said; yaù—He who; antarhitaù—not manifested; hådi—in
the heart; gataù—is seated; api—even though; durätmanäm—to the rascals; tvam—You;
saù—He; adya—today; eva—certainly; naù—of us; nayana-mülam—face to face;
ananta—O unlimited one; räddhaù—attained; yarhi—when; eva—certainly; karëavivareëa—
through the ears; guhäm—intelligence; gataù—have attained; naù—our;
piträ—by our father; anuvarëita—described; rahäù—mysteries; bhavat-udbhavena—by
Your appearance.
TRANSLATION
The Kumäras said: Our dear Lord, You are not manifested to rascals, even though You
are seated within the heart of everyone. But as far as we are concerned, we see You face
to face, although You are unlimited. The statements we have heard about You from our
father, Brahmä, through the ears have now been actually realized by Your kind
appearance.
698
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The so-called yogés who concentrate their mind or meditate upon the impersonal or void
are described here. This verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam describes persons who are expected
to be very expert yogés engaged in meditation but who do not find the Supreme
Personality of Godhead seated within the heart. These persons are described here as
durätmä, which means a person who has a very crooked heart, or a less intelligent
person, just opposite to a mahätmä, which means one who has a broad heart. Those socalled
yogés who, although engaged in meditation, are not broad hearted cannot find the
four-handed Näräyaëa form, even though He is seated within their heart. Although the
first realization of the Supreme Absolute Truth is impersonal Brahman, one should not
remain satisfied with experiencing the impersonal effulgence of the Supreme Lord. In
the Éçopaniñad also, the devotee prays that the glaring effulgence of Brahman may be
removed from his eyes so that he can see the real, personal feature of the Lord and thus
satisfy himself fully. Similarly, although the Lord is not visible in the beginning because
of His glaring bodily effulgence, if a devotee sincerely wants to see Him, the Lord is
revealed to him. It is said in Bhagavad-gétä that the Lord cannot be seen by our
imperfect eyes, He cannot be heard by our imperfect ears, and He cannot be
experienced by our imperfect senses; but if one engages in devotional service with faith
and devotion, then God reveals Himself.
Here the four sages Sanat-kumära, Sanätana, Sanandana and Sanaka are described as
actually sincere devotees. Although they had heard from their father, Brahmä, about the
personal feature of the Lord, only the impersonal feature—Brahman—was revealed to
them. But because they were sincerely searching for the Lord, they finally saw His
personal feature directly, which corresponded with the description given by their father.
They thus became fully satisfied. Here they express their gratitude because although
they were foolish impersonalists in the beginning, by the grace of the Lord they could
now have the good fortune to see His personal feature. Another significant aspect of
this verse is that the sages describe their experience of hearing from their father,
Brahmä, who was born of the Lord directly. In other words, the disciplic succession from
the Lord to Brahmä and from Brahmä to Närada and from Närada to Vyäsa, and so on,
is accepted here. Because the Kumäras were sons of Brahmä, they had the opportunity to
learn Vedic knowledge from the disciplic succession of Brahmä, and therefore, in spite
of their impersonalist beginnings, they became, in the end, direct seers of the personal
feature of the Lord.
699
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 47
Ta& Tva& ivdaMa >aGavNa( ParMaaTMaTatv&
SatveNa SaMPa[iTa riTa& rcYaNTaMaezaMa( )
Yatae_NauTaaPaividTaEd*R!>ai¢-YaaeGaE‚
åd(Ga]NQaYaae ôid ivduMauRNaYaae ivraGaa" )) 47 ))
taà tväà vidäma bhagavan param ätma-tattvaà
sattvena samprati ratià racayantam eñäm
yat te 'nutäpa-viditair dåòha-bhakti-yogair
udgranthayo hådi vidur munayo virägäù
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; tväm—You; vidäma—we know; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of
Godhead; param—the Supreme; ätma-tattvam—Absolute Truth; sattvena—by Your
form of pure goodness; samprati—now; ratim—love of God; racayantam—creating;
eñäm—of all of them; yat—which; te—Your; anutäpa—mercy; viditaiù—understood;
dåòha—unflinching; bhakti-yogaiù—through devotional service; udgranthayaù—without
attachment, free from material bondage; hådi—in the heart; viduù—understood;
munayaù—great sages; virägäù—not interested in material life.
TRANSLATION
We know that You are the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, who
manifests His transcendental form in the uncontaminated mode of pure goodness. This
transcendental, eternal form of Your personality can be understood only by Your mercy,
through unflinching devotional service, by great sages whose hearts have been purified in
the devotional way.
PURPORT
The Absolute Truth can be understood in three features—impersonal Brahman,
localized Paramätmä, and Bhagavän, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Here it is
admitted that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the last word in understanding the
Absolute Truth. Even though the four Kumäras were instructed by their great learned
700
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
father, Brahmä, they could not actually understand the Absolute Truth. They could
only understand the Supreme Absolute Truth when they personally saw the Personality
of Godhead with their own eyes. In other words, if one sees or understands the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the other two features of the Absolute Truth—namely
impersonal Brahman and localized Paramätmä—are also automatically understood.
Therefore the Kumäras confirm: "You are the ultimate Absolute Truth." The
impersonalist may argue that since the Supreme Personality of Godhead was so nicely
decorated, He was therefore not the Absolute Truth. But here it is confirmed that all
the variegatedness of the absolute platform is constituted of çuddha-sattva, pure
goodness. In the material world, any quality—goodness, passion or ignorance—is
contaminated. Even the quality of goodness here in the material world is not free from
tinges of passion and ignorance. But in the transcendental world, only pure goodness,
without any tinge of passion or ignorance, exists; therefore the form of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and His variegated pastimes and paraphernalia are all pure
sattva-guëa. Such variegatedness in pure goodness is exhibited eternally by the Lord for
the satisfaction of the devotee. The devotee does not want to see the Supreme
Personality of Absolute Truth in voidness or impersonalism. In one sense, absolute
transcendental variegatedness is meant only for the devotees, not for others, because
this distinct feature of transcendental variegatedness can be understood only by the
mercy of the Supreme Lord and not by mental speculation or the ascending process. It is
said that one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead when one is even
slightly favored by Him; otherwise, without His mercy, a man may speculate for
thousands of years and not understand what is actually the Absolute Truth. This mercy
can be perceived by the devotee when he is completely freed from contamination. It is
stated, therefore, that only when all contamination is rooted out and the devotee is
completely detached from material attractions can he receive this mercy of the Lord.
TEXT 48
NaaTYaiNTak&- ivGa<aYaNTYaiPa Tae Pa[Saad&
ik-MvNYadiPaRTa>aYa& >a]uv oàYaESTae )
Yae_(r) Tvdx(iga]Xar<aa >avTa" k-QaaYaa"
k-ITaRNYaTaqQaRYaXaSa" ku-Xal/a rSaja" )) 48 ))
nätyantikaà vigaëayanty api te prasädaà
701
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kimv anyad arpita-bhayaà bhruva unnayais te
ye 'ìga tvad-aìghri-çaraëä bhavataù kathäyäù
kértanya-tértha-yaçasaù kuçalä rasa-jïäù
SYNONYMS
na—not; ätyantikam—liberation; vigaëayanti—care for; api—even; te—those;
prasädam—benedictions; kim u—what to speak; anyat—other material happinesses;
arpita—given; bhayam—fearfulness; bhruvaù—of the eyebrows; unnayaiù—by the
raising; te—Your; ye—those devotees; aìga—O Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tvat—Your; aìghri—lotus feet; çaraëäù—who have taken shelter; bhavataù—Your;
kathäyäù—narrations; kértanya—worth chanting; tértha—pure; yaçasaù—glories;
kuçaläù—very expert; rasa-jïäù—knowers of the mellows or humors.
TRANSLATION
Persons who are very expert and most intelligent in understanding things as they are
engage in hearing narrations of the auspicious activities and pastimes of the Lord, which
are worth chanting and worth hearing. Such persons do not care even for the highest
material benediction, namely liberation, to say nothing of other less important
benedictions like the material happiness of the heavenly kingdom.
PURPORT
The transcendental bliss enjoyed by the devotees of the Lord is completely different
from the material happiness enjoyed by less intelligent persons. The less intelligent
persons in the material world are engaged by the four principles of benediction called
dharma, artha, käma and mokña. Generally they prefer to take to religious life to achieve
some material benediction, the purpose of which is to satisfy the senses. When, by that
process, they become confused or frustrated in fulfilling the maximum amount of sense
enjoyment, they try to become one with the Supreme, which is, according to their
conception, mukti, or liberation. There are five kinds of liberation, the least important
of which is called säyujya, to become one with the Supreme. Devotees don't care for such
liberation because they are actually intelligent. Nor are they inclined to accept any of
the other four kinds of liberation, namely to live on the same planet as the Lord, to live
with Him side by side as an associate, to have the same opulence, and to attain the same
bodily features. They are concerned only with glorifying the Supreme Lord and His
702
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
auspicious activities. Pure devotional service is çravaëaà kértanam [SB 7.5.23]. Pure
devotees, who take transcendental pleasure in hearing and chanting the glories of the
Lord, do not care for any kind of liberation; even if they are offered the five liberations,
they refuse to accept them, as stated in the Bhägavatam in the Third Canto.
Materialistic persons aspire for the sense enjoyment of heavenly pleasure in the
heavenly kingdom, but devotees reject such material pleasure at once. The devotee does
not even care for the post of Indra. A devotee knows that any pleasurable material
position is subject to be annihilated at a certain point. Even if one reaches the post of
Indra, Candra, or any other demigod, he must be dissolved at a certain stage. A devotee
is never interested in such temporary pleasure. From Vedic scriptures it is understood
that sometimes even Brahmä and Indra fall down, but a devotee in the transcendental
abode of the Lord never falls. This transcendental stage of life, in which one feels
transcendental pleasure in hearing the Lord's pastimes, is also recommended by Lord
Caitanya. When Lord Caitanya was talking with Rämänanda Räya, there were varieties
of suggestions offered by Rämänanda regarding spiritual realization, but Lord Caitanya
rejected all but one—that one should hear the glories of the Lord in association with
pure devotees. That is acceptable for everyone, especially in this age. One should engage
himself in hearing from pure devotees about the activities of the Lord. That is
considered the supreme benediction for mankind.
TEXT 49
k-aMa& >av" Svv*iJaNaEiNaRrYaezu Na" STaa‚
ÀeTaae_il/vÛid Nau Tae PadYaae rMaeTa )
vacê NaSTaul/iSavÛid Tae_x(iga]Xaae>aa"
PaUYaeRTa Tae Gau<aGa<aEYaRid k-<aRrNDa]" )) 49 ))
kämaà bhavaù sva-våjinair nirayeñu naù stäc
ceto 'livad yadi nu te padayo rameta
väcaç ca nas tulasivad yadi te 'ìghri-çobhäù
püryeta te guëa-gaëair yadi karëa-randhraù
SYNONYMS
kämam—as much as deserved; bhavaù—birth; sva-våjinaiù—by our own sinful activities;
703
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nirayeñu—in low births; naù—our; stät—let it be; cetaù—minds; ali-vat—like bees;
yadi—if; nu—may be; te—Your; padayoù—at Your lotus feet; rameta—are engaged;
väcaù—words; ca—and; naù—our; tulasi-vat—like the tulasé leaves; yadi—if; te—Your;
aìghri—at Your lotus feet; çobhäù—beautified; püryeta—are filled; te—Your; guëagaëaiù—
by transcendental qualities; yadi—if; karëa-randhraù—the holes of the ears.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, we pray that You let us be born in any hellish condition of life, just as long as our
hearts and minds are always engaged in the service of Your lotus feet, our words are made
beautiful [by speaking of Your activities] just as tulasé leaves are beautified when offered
unto Your lotus feet, and as long as our ears are always filled with the chanting of Your
transcendental qualities.
PURPORT
The four sages now offer their humility to the Personality of Godhead because of their
having been haughty in cursing two other devotees of the Lord. Jaya and Vijaya, the two
doorkeepers who checked them from entering the Vaikuëöha planet, were certainly
offenders, but as Vaiñëavas, the four sages should not have cursed them in anger. After
the incident, they became conscious that they had done wrong by cursing the devotees
of the Lord, and they prayed to the Lord that even in the hellish condition of life their
minds might not be distracted from the engagement of service to the lotus feet of Lord
Näräyaëa. Those who are devotees of the Lord are not afraid of any condition of life,
provided there is constant engagement in the service of the Lord. It is said of the
näräyaëa-para, or those who are devotees of Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, na kutaçcana bibhyati (SB 6.17.28). They are not afraid of entering a hellish
condition, for since they are engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord,
heaven or hell is the same for them. In material life both heaven and hell are one and
the same because they are material; in either place there is no engagement in the Lord's
service. Therefore those who are engaged in the service of the Lord see no distinction
between heaven and hell; it is only the materialists who prefer one to the other.
These four devotees prayed to the Lord that although they might go to hell because they
had cursed devotees, they might not forget the service of the Lord. The transcendental
loving service of the Lord is performed in three ways—with the body, with the mind
and with words. Here the sages pray that their words may always be engaged in
704
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
glorifying the Supreme Lord. One may speak very nicely with ornamental language or
one may be expert at controlled grammatical presentation, but if one's words are not
engaged in the service of the Lord, they have no flavor and no actual use. The example
is given here of tulasé leaves. The tulasé leaf is very useful even from the medicinal or
antiseptic point of view. It is considered sacred and is offered to the lotus feet of the
Lord. The tulasé leaf has numerous good qualities, but if it were not offered to the lotus
feet of the Lord, tulasé could not be of much value or importance. Similarly, one may
speak very nicely from the rhetorical or grammatical point of view, which may be very
much appreciated by a materialistic audience, but if one's words are not offered to the
service of the Lord, they are useless. The holes of the ears are very small and can be
filled with any insignificant sound, so how can they receive as great a vibration as the
glorification of the Lord? The answer is that the holes of the ears are like the sky. As the
sky can never be filled up, the quality of the ear is such that one may go on pouring in
vibrations of various kinds, yet it is capable of receiving more and more vibrations. A
devotee is not afraid of going to hell if he has the opportunity to hear the glories of the
Lord constantly. This is the advantage of chanting Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa
Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. One may be put in
any condition, but God gives him the prerogative to chant Hare Kåñëa. In any condition
of life, if one goes on chanting he will never be unhappy.
TEXT 50
Pa[aduêk-QaR Yaidd& PauåhUTa æPa&
TaeNaeXa iNav*RiTaMavaPaurl&/ d*Xaae Na" )
TaSMaa wd& >aGavTae NaMa wiÜDaeMa
Yaae_NaaTMaNaa& duådYaae >aGavaNa( Pa[TaqTa" )) 50 ))
präduçcakartha yad idaà puruhüta rüpaà
teneça nirvåtim aväpur alaà dåço naù
tasmä idaà bhagavate nama id vidhema
yo 'nätmanäà durudayo bhagavän pratétaù
SYNONYMS
präduçcakartha—You have manifested; yat—which; idam—this; puruhüta—O greatly
705
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
worshiped; rüpam—eternal form; tena—by that form; éça—O Lord; nirvåtim—
satisfaction; aväpuù—obtained; alam—so much; dåçaù—vision; naù—our; tasmai—unto
Him; idam—this; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaù—
obeisances; it—only; vidhema—let us offer; yaù—who; anätmanäm—of those who are
less intelligent; durudayaù—cannot be seen; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; pratétaù—has been seen by us.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, we therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto Your eternal form as the
Personality of Godhead, which You have so kindly manifested before us. Your supreme,
eternal form cannot be seen by unfortunate, less intelligent persons, but we are so much
satisfied in our mind and vision to see it.
PURPORT
The four sages were impersonalists in the beginning of their spiritual life, but
afterwards, by the grace of their father and spiritual master, Brahmä, they understood
the eternal, spiritual form of the Lord and felt completely satisfied. In other words, the
transcendentalists who aspire to the impersonal Brahman or localized Paramätmä are
not fully satisfied and still hanker for more. Even if they are satisfied in their minds,
still, transcendentally, their eyes are not satisfied. But as soon as such persons come to
realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they are satisfied in all respects. In other
words, they become devotees and want to see the form of the Lord continually. It is
confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä that one who has developed transcendental love of
Kåñëa by smearing his eyes with the ointment of love sees constantly the eternal form of
the Lord. The particular word used in this connection, anätmanäm, signifies those who
have no control over the mind and senses and who therefore speculate and want to
become one with the Lord. Such persons cannot have the pleasure of seeing the eternal
form of the Lord. For the impersonalists and the so-called yogés, the Lord is always
hidden by the curtain of yogamäyä. Bhagavad-gétä says that even when Lord Kåñëa was
seen by everyone while He was present on the surface of the earth, the impersonalists
and the so-called yogés could not see Him because they were devoid of devotional
eyesight. The theory of the impersonalists and so-called yogés is that the Supreme Lord
assumes a particular form when He comes in touch with mäyä, although actually He has
no form. This very conception of the impersonalists and so-called yogés checks them
706
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
from seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is. The Lord, therefore, is always
beyond the sight of such nondevotees. The four sages felt so much obliged to the Lord
that they offered their respectful obeisances unto Him again and again.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Fifteenth Chapter, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "Description of the Kingdom of God."
16. The Two Doorkeepers of Vaikuëöha, Jaya and Vijaya, Cursed by
the Sages
TEXT 1
b]øaevac
wiTa Tad( Ga*<aTaa& Taeza& MauNaqNaa& YaaeGaDaiMaR<aaMa( )
Pa[iTaNaNÛ JaGaaded& ivku-<#=iNal/Yaae iv>au" )) 1 ))
brahmoväca
iti tad gåëatäà teñäà
munénäà yoga-dharmiëäm
pratinandya jagädedaà
vikuëöha-nilayo vibhuù
SYNONYMS
brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; iti—thus; tat—speech; gåëatäm—praising; teñäm—of
them; munénäm—those four sages; yoga-dharmiëäm—engaged in linking with the
Supreme; pratinandya—after congratulating; jagäda—said; idam—these words;
vikuëöha-nilayaù—whose abode is bereft of anxiety; vibhuù—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
707
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: After thus congratulating the sages for their nice words, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whose abode is in the kingdom of God, spoke as follows.
TEXT 2
é[q>aGavaNauvac
WTaaE TaaE PaazRdaE Maù& JaYaae ivJaYa Wv c )
k-dQask*-TYa Maa& YaÜae bû§-aTaaMaiTa§-MaMa( )) 2 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
etau tau pärñadau mahyaà
jayo vijaya eva ca
kadarthé-kåtya mäà yad vo
bahv akrätäm atikramam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; etau—these two; tau—
they; pärñadau—attendants; mahyam—of Mine; jayaù—named Jaya; vijayaù—named
Vijaya; eva—certainly; ca—and; kadarthé-kåtya—by ignoring; mäm—Me; yat—which;
vaù—against you; bahu—great; akrätäm—have committed; atikramam—offense.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead said: These attendants of Mine, Jaya and Vijaya by name,
have committed a great offense against you because of ignoring Me.
PURPORT
To commit an offense at the feet of a devotee of the Lord is a great wrong. Even when a
living entity is promoted to Vaikuëöha, there is still the chance that he may commit
offenses, but the difference is that when one is in a Vaikuëöha planet, even if by chance
one commits an offense, he is protected by the Lord. This is the remarkable fact in the
dealings of the Lord and the servitor, as seen in the present incident concerning Jaya
708
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
and Vijaya. The word atikramam used herein indicates that in offending a devotee one
neglects the Supreme Lord Himself.
By mistake the doormen held the sages from entering Vaikuëöhaloka, but because they
were engaged in the transcendental service of the Lord, their annihilation was not
expected by advanced devotees. The Lord's presence on the spot was very pleasing to the
hearts of the devotees. The Lord understood that the trouble was due to His lotus feet
not being seen by the sages, and therefore He wanted to please them by personally going
there. The Lord is so merciful that even if there is some impediment for the devotee, He
Himself manages matters in such a way that the devotee is not bereft of having audience
at His lotus feet. There is a very good example in the life of Haridäsa Öhäkura. When
Caitanya Mahäprabhu was residing at Jagannätha puré, Haridäsa Öhäkura, who
happened to be Muhammadan by birth, was with Him. In Hindu temples, especially in
those days, no one but a Hindu was allowed to enter. Although Haridäsa Öhäkura was
the greatest of all Hindus in his behavior, he considered himself a Muhammadan and did
not enter the temple. Lord Caitanya could understand his humility, and since he did not
go to see the temple, Lord Caitanya Himself, who is nondifferent from Jagannätha, used
to come and sit with Haridäsa Öhäkura daily. Here in Çrémad-Bhägavatam we also find
this same behavior of the Lord. His devotees were prevented from seeing His lotus feet,
but the Lord Himself came to see them on the same lotus feet for which they aspired. It
is also significant that He was accompanied by the goddess of fortune. The goddess of
fortune is not to be seen by ordinary persons, but the Lord was so kind that although the
devotees did not aspire for such an honor, He appeared before them with the goddess of
fortune.
TEXT 3
YaSTveTaYaaeDa*RTaae d<@ae >aviÙMaaRMaNauv]TaE" )
Sa WvaNauMaTaae_SMaai>aMauRNaYaae devhel/NaaTa( )) 3 ))
yas tv etayor dhåto daëòo
bhavadbhir mäm anuvrataiù
sa evänumato 'smäbhir
munayo deva-helanät
SYNONYMS
709
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yaù—which; tu—but; etayoù—regarding both Jaya and Vijaya; dhåtaù—has been given;
daëòaù—punishment; bhavadbhiù—by you; mäm—Me; anuvrataiù—devoted to; saù—
that; eva—certainly; anumataù—is approved; asmäbhiù—by Me; munayaù—O great
sages; deva—against you; helanät—because of an offense.
TRANSLATION
O great sages, I approve of the punishment that you who are devoted to Me have meted
out to them.
TEXT 4
TaÜ" Pa[SaadYaaMYaÛ b]ø dEv& Par& ih Mae )
TaÖqTYaaTMak*-Ta& MaNYae YaTSvPauiM>arSaTk*-Taa" )) 4 ))
tad vaù prasädayämy adya
brahma daivaà paraà hi me
tad dhéty ätma-kåtaà manye
yat sva-pumbhir asat-kåtäù
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; vaù—you sages; prasädayämi—I am seeking your forgiveness; adya—just
now; brahma—the brähmaëas; daivam—most beloved personalities; param—highest;
hi—because; me—My; tat—that offense; hi—because; iti—thus; ätma-kåtam—done by
Me; manye—I consider; yat—which; sva-pumbhiù—by My own attendants; asat-kåtäù—
having been disrespected.
TRANSLATION
To Me, the brähmaëa is the highest and most beloved personality. The disrespect shown
by My attendants has actually been displayed by Me because the doormen are My
servitors. I take this to be an offense by Myself; therefore I seek your forgiveness for the
incident that has arisen.
710
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The Lord is always in favor of the brähmaëas and the cows, and therefore it is said, gobrähmaëa-
hitäya ca. Lord Kåñëa, or Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is also
the worshipable Deity of the brähmaëas. In the Vedic literature, in the åg-mantra hymns
of the Åg Veda, it is stated that those who are actually brähmaëas always look to the
lotus feet of Viñëu: oà tad viñëoù paramaà padaà sadä paçyanti sürayaù. Those who are
qualified brähmaëas worship only the Viñëu form of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, which means Kåñëa, Räma and all Viñëu expansions. A so-called brähmaëa
who is born in the family of brähmaëas but performs activities aimed against the
Vaiñëavas cannot be accepted as a brähmaëa, because brähmaëa means Vaiñëava and
Vaiñëava means brähmaëa. One who has become a devotee of the Lord is also a
brähmaëa. The formula is brahma jänätéti brähmaëaù. A brähmaëa is one who has
understood Brahman, and a Vaiñëava is one who has understood the Personality of
Godhead. Brahman realization is the beginning of realization of the Personality of
Godhead. One who understands the Personality of Godhead also knows the impersonal
feature of the Supreme, which is Brahman. Therefore one who becomes a Vaiñëava is
already a brähmaëa. It should be noted that the glories of the brähmaëa described in this
chapter by the Lord Himself refer to His devotee-brähmaëa, or the Vaiñëava. It should
never be misunderstood that the so-called brähmaëas who are born in brähmaëa families
but have no brahminical qualifications are referred to in this connection.
TEXT 5
YaàaMaaiNa c Ga*õaiTa l/aek-ae >a*TYae k*-TaaGaiSa )
Saae_SaaDauvadSTaTk-IiTa| hiNTa TvciMavaMaYa" )) 5 ))
yan-nämäni ca gåhëäti
loko bhåtye kåtägasi
so 'sädhu-vädas tat-kértià
hanti tvacam ivämayaù
SYNONYMS
yat—of whom; nämäni—the names; ca—and; gåhëäti—take; lokaù—people in general;
bhåtye—when a servant; kåta-ägasi—has committed something wrong; saù—that;
711
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
asädhu-vädaù—blame; tat—of that person; kértim—the reputation; hanti—destroys;
tvacam—the skin; iva—as; ämayaù—leprosy.
TRANSLATION
A wrong act committed by a servant leads people in general to blame his master, just as a
spot of white leprosy on any part of the body pollutes all of the skin.
PURPORT
A Vaiñëava, therefore, should be fully qualified. As stated in the Bhägavatam, anyone
who has become a Vaiñëava has developed all the good qualities of the demigods. There
are twenty-six qualifications mentioned in the Caitanya-caritämåta. A devotee should
always see that his Vaiñëava qualities increase with the advancement of his Kåñëa
consciousness. A devotee should be blameless because any offense by the devotee is a
scar on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The devotee's duty is to be always
conscious in his dealings with others, especially with another devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 6
YaSYaaMa*TaaMal/YaXa"é[v<aavGaah"
SaÛ" PauNaaiTa JaGadaìPacaiÜku-<#=" )
Saae_h& >avÙy oPal/BDaSauTaqQaRk-IiTaR‚
iX^NÛa& SvbahuMaiPa v" Pa[iTakU-l/v*itaMa( )) 6 ))
yasyämåtämala-yaçaù-çravaëävagähaù
sadyaù punäti jagad äçvapacäd vikuëöhaù
so 'haà bhavadbhya upalabdha-sutértha-kértiç
chindyäà sva-bähum api vaù pratiküla-våttim
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; amåta—nectar; amala—uncontaminated; yaçaù—glories; çravaëa—
hearing; avagähaù—entering into; sadyaù—immediately; punäti—purifies; jagat—the
universe; äçva-pacät—including even the dog-eaters; vikuëöhaù—without anxiety; saù—
that person; aham—I am; bhavadbhyaù—from you; upalabdha—obtained; su-tértha—the
712
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
best place of pilgrimage; kértiù—the fame; chindyäm—would cut off; sva-bähum—My
own arm; api—even; vaù—towards you; pratiküla-våttim—acting inimically.
TRANSLATION
Anyone in the entire world, even down to the caëòäla, who lives by cooking and eating
the flesh of the dog, is immediately purified if he takes bath in hearing through the ear
the glorification of My name, fame, etc. Now you have realized Me without doubt;
therefore I will not hesitate to lop off My own arm if its conduct is found hostile to you.
PURPORT
Real purification can take place in human society if its members take to Kåñëa
consciousness. This is clearly stated in all Vedic literature. Anyone who takes to Kåñëa
consciousness in all sincerity, even if he is not very advanced in good behavior, is
purified. A devotee can be recruited from any section of human society, although it is
not expected that everyone in all segments of society is well behaved. As stated in this
verse and in many places in Bhagavad-gétä, even if one is not born in a brähmaëa family,
or even if he is born in a family of caëòälas, if he simply takes to Kåñëa consciousness he
is immediately purified. In Bhagavad-gétä, Ninth Chapter, verses 30-32, it is clearly
stated that even though a man is not well behaved, if he simply takes to Kåñëa
consciousness he is understood to be a saintly person. As long as a person is in this
material world he has two different relationships in his dealings with others—one
relationship pertains to the body, and the other pertains to the spirit. As far as bodily
affairs or social activities are concerned, although a person is purified on the spiritual
platform, it is sometimes seen that he acts in terms of his bodily relationships. If a
devotee born in the family of a caëòäla (the lowest caste) is sometimes found engaged in
his habitual activities, he is not to be considered a caëòäla. In other words, a Vaiñëava
should not be evaluated in terms of his body. The çästra states that no one should think
the Deity in the temple to be made of wood or stone, and no one should think that a
person coming from a lower-caste family who has taken to Kåñëa consciousness is still of
the same low caste. These attitudes are forbidden because anyone who takes to Kåñëa
consciousness is understood to be fully purified. He is at least engaged in the process of
purification, and if he sticks to the principle of Kåñëa consciousness he will very soon be
fully purified. The conclusion is that if one takes to Kåñëa consciousness with all
seriousness, he is to be understood as already purified, and Kåñëa is ready to give him
713
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
protection by all means. The Lord assures herein that He is ready to give protection to
His devotee even if there is need to cut off part of His own body.
TEXT 7
YaTSaevYaa cr<aPaÚPaiv}are<au&
SaÛ"+aTaai%l/Mal&/ Pa[iTal/BDaXaql/Ma( )
Na é[qivRr¢-MaiPa Maa& ivJahaiTa YaSYaa"
Pa[e+aal/vaQaR wTare iNaYaMaaNa( vhiNTa )) 7 ))
yat-sevayä caraëa-padma-pavitra-reëuà
sadyaù kñatäkhila-malaà pratilabdha-çélam
na çrér viraktam api mäà vijahäti yasyäù
prekñä-lavärtha itare niyamän vahanti
SYNONYMS
yat—of whom; sevayä—by the service; caraëa—feet; padma—lotus; pavitra—sacred;
reëum—the dust; sadyaù—immediately; kñata—wiped out; akhila—all; malam—sins;
pratilabdha—acquired; çélam—disposition; na—not; çréù—the goddess of fortune;
viraktam—have no attachment; api—even though; mäm—Me; vijahäti—leave;
yasyäù—of the goddess of fortune; prekñä-lava-arthaù—for obtaining a slight favor;
itare—others, like Lord Brahmä; niyamän—sacred vows; vahanti—observe.
TRANSLATION
The Lord continued: Because I am the servitor of My devotees, My lotus feet have
become so sacred that they immediately wipe out all sin, and I have acquired such a
disposition that the goddess of fortune does not leave Me, even though I have no
attachment for her and others praise her beauty and observe sacred vows to secure from
her even a slight favor.
PURPORT
The relationship between the Lord and His devotee is transcendentally beautiful. As the
714
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
devotee thinks that it is due to being a devotee of the Lord that he is elevated in all good
qualities, so the Lord also thinks that it is because of His devotion to the servitor that all
His transcendental glories have increased. In other words, as the devotee is always
anxious to render service to the Lord, so the Lord is ever anxious to render service to
the devotee. The Lord admits herein that although He certainly has the quality that
anyone who receives a slight particle of the dust of His lotus feet becomes at once a great
personality, this greatness is due to His affection for His devotee. It is because of this
affection that the goddess of fortune does not leave Him and that not only one but
many thousands of goddesses of fortune engage in His service. In the material world,
simply to get a little favor from the goddess of fortune, people observe many rigid
regulations of austerity and penance. The Lord cannot tolerate any inconvenience on
the part of the devotee. He is therefore famous as bhakta-vatsala.
TEXT 8
Naah& TaQaaiÚ YaJaMaaNahivivRTaaNae
XCYaaeTad(ga*TaPlu/TaMadNa( huTa>aux(Mau%eNa )
Yad(b]aø<aSYa Mau%TaêrTaae_NaugaaSa&
TauíSYa MaYYavihTaEiNaRJak-MaRPaakE-" )) 8 ))
nähaà tathädmi yajamäna-havir vitäne
çcyotad-ghåta-plutam adan huta-bhuì-mukhena
yad brähmaëasya mukhataç carato 'nughäsaà
tuñöasya mayy avahitair nija-karma-päkaiù
SYNONYMS
na—not; aham—I; tathä—on the other hand; admi—I eat; yajamäna—by the sacrificer;
haviù—the oblations; vitäne—in the sacrificial fire; çcyotat—pouring; ghåta—ghee;
plutam—mixed; adan—eating; huta-bhuk—the sacrificial fire; mukhena—by the mouth;
yat—as; brähmaëasya—of the brähmaëa; mukhataù—from the mouth; carataù—acting;
anughäsam—morsels; tuñöasya—satisfied; mayi—to Me; avahitaiù—offered; nija—own;
karma—activities; päkaiù—by the results.
TRANSLATION
715
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
I do not enjoy the oblations offered by the sacrificers in the sacrificial fire, which is one
of My own mouths, with the same relish as I do the delicacies overflowing with ghee
which are offered to the mouths of the brähmaëas who have dedicated to Me the results
of their activities and who are ever satisfied with My prasäda.
PURPORT
The devotee of the Lord, or the Vaiñëava, does not take anything without offering it to
the Lord. Since a Vaiñëava dedicates all the results of his activities to the Lord, he does
not taste anything eatable which is not first offered to Him. The Lord also relishes
giving to the Vaiñëava's mouth all eatables offered to Him. It is clear from this verse that
the Lord eats through the sacrificial fire and the brähmaëa's mouth. So many articles—
grains, ghee, etc.—are offered in sacrifice for the satisfaction of the Lord. The Lord
accepts sacrificial offerings from the brähmaëas and devotees, and elsewhere it is stated
that whatever is given for the brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas to eat is also accepted by the
Lord. But here it is said that He accepts offerings to the mouths of brähmaëas and
Vaiñëavas with even greater relish. The best example of this is found in the life of
Advaita Prabhu in his dealings with Haridäsa Öhäkura. Even though Haridäsa was born
of a Muhammadan family, Advaita Prabhu offered him the first dish of prasäda after the
performance of a sacred fire ceremony. Haridäsa Öhäkura informed him that he was
born of a Muhammadan family and asked why Advaita Prabhu was offering the first
dish to a Muhammadan instead of an elevated brähmaëa. Out of his humbleness,
Haridäsa condemned himself a Muhammadan, but Advaita Prabhu, being an
experienced devotee, accepted him as a real brähmaëa. Advaita Prabhu asserted that by
offering the first dish to Haridäsa Öhäkura, he was getting the result of feeding one
hundred thousand brähmaëas. The conclusion is that if one can feed a brähmaëa or
Vaiñëava, it is better than performing hundreds of thousands of sacrifices. In this age,
therefore, it is recommended that harer näma [Cc. Ädi 17.21]—chanting the holy name
of God—and pleasing the Vaiñëava are the only means to elevate oneself to spiritual
life.
TEXT 9
Yaeza& ib>aMYaRhMa%<@ivku-<#=YaaeGa‚
MaaYaaiv>aUiTarMal/ax(iga]rJa" ik-rq$E=" )
716
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ivPa[a&STau k-ae Na ivzheTa YadhR<aaM>a"
SaÛ" PauNaaiTa SahcNd]l/l/aMal/aek-aNa( )) 9 ))
yeñäà bibharmy aham akhaëòa-vikuëöha-yogamäyä-
vibhütir amaläìghri-rajaù kiréöaiù
vipräàs tu ko na viñaheta yad-arhaëämbhaù
sadyaù punäti saha-candra-laläma-lokän
SYNONYMS
yeñäm—of the brähmaëas; bibharmi—I bear; aham—I; akhaëòa—unbroken; vikuëöha—
unobstructed; yoga-mäyä—internal energy; vibhütiù—opulence; amala—pure; aìghri—
of the feet; rajaù—the dust; kiréöaiù—on My helmet; viprän—the brähmaëas; tu—then;
kaù—who; na—not; viñaheta—carry; yat—of the Supreme Lord; arhaëa-ambhaù—
water which has washed the feet; sadyaù—at once; punäti—sanctifies; saha—along
with; candra-laläma—Lord Çiva; lokän—the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
I am the master of My unobstructed internal energy, and the water of the Ganges is the
remnant left after My feet are washed. That water sanctifies the three worlds, along with
Lord Çiva, who bears it on his head. If I can take the dust of the feet of the Vaiñëava on
My head, who will refuse to do the same?
PURPORT
The difference between the internal and external energies of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is that in the internal energy, or in the spiritual world, all the opulences are
undisturbed, whereas in the external or material energy, all the opulences are temporary
manifestations. The Lord's supremacy is equal in both the spiritual and material worlds,
but the spiritual world is called the kingdom of God, and the material world is called the
kingdom of mäyä. Mäyä refers to that which is not actually fact. The opulence of the
material world is a reflection. It is stated in Bhagavad-gétä that this material world is just
like a tree whose roots are up and branches down. This means that the material world is
the shadow of the spiritual world. Real opulence is in the spiritual world. In the spiritual
world the predominating Deity is the Lord Himself, whereas in the material world there
717
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
are many lords. That is the difference between the internal and external energies. The
Lord says that although He is the predominating factor of the internal energy and
although the material world is sanctified just by the water that has washed His feet, He
has the greatest respect for the brähmaëa and the Vaiñëava. When the Lord Himself
offers so much respect to the Vaiñëava and the brähmaëa, how can one deny such
respect to such personalities?
TEXT 10
Yae Mae TaNaUiÜRJavraNduhTaqMaRdqYaa
>aUTaaNYal/BDaXar<aaiNa c >aedbuÖya )
d]+YaNTYaga+aTad*Xaae ùihMaNYavSTaaNa(
Ga*Da]a åza MaMa ku-zNTYaiDad<@NaeTau" )) 10 ))
ye me tanür dvija-varän duhatér madéyä
bhütäny alabdha-çaraëäni ca bheda-buddhyä
drakñyanty agha-kñata-dåço hy ahi-manyavas tän
gådhrä ruñä mama kuñanty adhidaëòa-netuù
SYNONYMS
ye—which persons; me—My; tanüù—body; dvija-varän—the best of the brähmaëas;
duhatéù—cows; madéyäù—relating to Me; bhütäni—living entities; alabdha-çaraëäni—
defenseless; ca—and; bheda-buddhyä—considering as different; drakñyanti—see; agha—
by sin; kñata—is impaired; dåçaù—whose faculty of judgment; hi—because; ahi—like a
snake; manyavaù—angry; tän—those same persons; gådhräù—the vulturelike
messengers; ruñä—angrily; mama—My; kuñanti—tear; adhidaëòa-netuù—of the
superintendent of punishment, Yamaräja.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëas, the cows and the defenseless creatures are My own body. Those whose
faculty of judgment has been impaired by their own sin look upon these as distinct from
Me. They are just like furious serpents, and they are angrily torn apart by the bills of the
vulturelike messengers of Yamaräja, the superintendent of sinful persons.
718
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The defenseless creatures, according to Brahma-saàhitä, are the cows, brähmaëas,
women, children and old men. Of these five, the brähmaëas and cows are especially
mentioned in this verse because the Lord is always anxious about the benefit of the
brähmaëas and the cows and is prayed to in this way. The Lord especially instructs,
therefore, that no one should be envious of these five, especially the cows and
brähmaëas. In some of the Bhägavatam readings, the word duhitèù is used instead of
duhatéù. But in either case, the meaning is the same. Duhatéù means "cow," and duhitèù
can also be used to mean "cow" because the cow is supposed to be the daughter of the
sun-god. Just as children are taken care of by the parents, women as a class should be
taken care of by the father, husband or grown-up son. Those who are helpless must be
taken care of by their respective guardians, otherwise the guardians will be subjected to
the punishment of Yamaräja, who is appointed by the Lord to supervise the activities of
sinful living creatures. The assistants, or messengers, of Yamaräja are likened here to
vultures, and those who do not execute their respective duties in protecting their wards
are compared to serpents. Vultures deal very seriously with serpents, and similarly the
messengers will deal very seriously with neglectful guardians.
TEXT 11
Yae b]aø<aaNMaiYa iDaYaa i+aPaTaae_cRYaNTa‚
STauZYad(Da*d" iSMaTaSauDaaei+aTaPaÚv£-a" )
va<YaaNauraGak-l/YaaTMaJavd( Ga*<aNTa"
SaMbaeDaYaNTYahiMavahMauPaaôTaSTaE" )) 11 ))
ye brähmaëän mayi dhiyä kñipato 'rcayantas
tuñyad-dhådaù smita-sudhokñita-padma-vakträù
väëyänuräga-kalayätmajavad gåëantaù
sambodhayanty aham iväham upähåtas taiù
SYNONYMS
ye—which persons; brähmaëän—the brähmaëas; mayi—in Me; dhiyä—with
intelligence; kñipataù—uttering harsh words; arcayantaù—respecting; tuñyat—
gladdened; hådaù—hearts; smita—smiling; sudhä—nectar; ukñita—wet; padma—
719
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
lotuslike; vakträù—faces; väëyä—with words; anuräga-kalayä—loving; ätmaja-vat—like
a son; gåëantaù—praising; sambodhayanti—pacify; aham—I; iva—as; aham—I;
upähåtaù—being controlled; taiù—by them.
TRANSLATION
On the other hand, they captivate My heart who are gladdened in heart and who, their
lotus faces enlightened by nectarean smiles, respect the brähmaëas, even though the
brähmaëas utter harsh words. They look upon the brähmaëas as My own Self and pacify
them by praising them in loving words, even as a son would appease an angry father or as
I am pacifying you.
PURPORT
It has been observed in many instances in the Vedic scriptures that when the brähmaëas
or Vaiñëavas curse someone in an angry mood, the person who is cursed does not take it
upon himself to treat the brähmaëas or Vaiñëavas in the same way. There are many
examples of this. For instance, the sons of Kuvera, when cursed by the great sage
Närada, did not seek revenge in the same harsh way, but submitted. Here also, when
Jaya and Vijaya were cursed by the four Kumäras, they did not become harsh towards
them; rather, they submitted. That should be the way of treating brähmaëas and
Vaiñëavas. One may sometimes be faced with a grievous situation created by a
brähmaëa, but instead of meeting him with a similar mood, one should try to pacify him
with a smiling face and mild treatment. Brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas should be accepted as
earthly representatives of Näräyaëa. Nowadays some foolish persons have manufactured
the term daridra-näräyaëa, indicating that the poor man should be accepted as the
representative of Näräyaëa. But in Vedic literature we do not find that poor men should
be treated as representatives of Näräyaëa. Of course, "those who are unprotected" are
mentioned here, but the definition of this phrase is clear from the çästras. The poor man
should not be unprotected, but the brähmaëa should especially be treated as the
representative of Näräyaëa and should be worshiped like Him. It is specifically said that
to pacify the brähmaëas, one's face should be lotuslike. A lotuslike face is exhibited
when one is adorned with love and affection. In this respect, the example of the father's
being angry at the son and the son's trying to pacify the father with smiling and sweet
words is very appropriate.
720
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 12
TaNMae Sv>aTauRrvSaaYaMal/+aMaa<aaE
YauZMaÜyiTa§-MaGaiTa& Pa[iTaPaÛ SaÛ" )
>aUYaae MaMaaiNTak-iMaTaa& TadNauGa]hae Mae
YaTk-LPaTaaMaicrTaae >a*TaYaaeivRvaSa" )) 12 ))
tan me sva-bhartur avasäyam alakñamäëau
yuñmad-vyatikrama-gatià pratipadya sadyaù
bhüyo mamäntikam itäà tad anugraho me
yat kalpatäm acirato bhåtayor viväsaù
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; me—My; sva-bhartuù—of their master; avasäyam—the intention;
alakñamäëau—not knowing; yuñmat—against you; vyatikrama—offense; gatim—result;
pratipadya—reaping; sadyaù—immediately; bhüyaù—again; mama antikam—near Me;
itäm—obtain; tat—that; anugrahaù—a favor; me—to Me; yat—which; kalpatäm—let it
be arranged; acirataù—not long; bhåtayoù—of these two servants; viväsaù—exile.
TRANSLATION
These servants of Mine have transgressed against you, not knowing the mind of their
master. I shall therefore deem it a favor done to Me if you order that, although reaping
the fruit of their transgression, they may return to My presence soon and the time of
their exile from My abode may expire before long.
PURPORT
From this statement we can understand how anxious the Lord is to get his servitor back
into Vaikuëöha. This incident, therefore, proves that those who have once entered a
Vaikuëöha planet can never fall down. The case of Jaya and Vijaya is not a falldown; it
is just an accident. The Lord is always anxious to get such devotees back again to the
Vaikuëöha planets as soon as possible. It is to be assumed that there is no possibility of a
misunderstanding between the Lord and the devotees, but when there are discrepancies
or disruptions between one devotee and another, one has to suffer the consequences,
721
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
although that suffering is temporary. The Lord is so kind to His devotees that He took
all the responsibility for the doormen's offense and requested the sages to give them
facilities to return to Vaikuëöha as soon as possible.
TEXT 13
b]øaevac
AQa TaSYaaeXaTaq& devqMa*izku-LYaa& SarSvTaqMa( )
NaaSvaÛ MaNYaudíaNaa& TaezaMaaTMaaPYaTa*PYaTa )) 13 ))
brahmoväca
atha tasyoçatéà devém
åñi-kulyäà sarasvatém
näsvädya manyu-dañöänäà
teñäm ätmäpy atåpyata
SYNONYMS
brahmä—Lord Brahmä; uväca—said; atha—now; tasya—of the Supreme Lord; uçatém—
lovely; devém—shining; åñi-kulyäm—like a series of Vedic hymns; sarasvatém—speech;
na—not; äsvädya—hearing; manyu—anger; dañöänäm—bitten; teñäm—of those sages;
ätmä—the mind; api—even though; atåpyata—satiated.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä continued: Even though the sages had been bitten by the serpent of anger, their
souls were not satiated with hearing the Lord's lovely and illuminating speech, which was
like a series of Vedic hymns.
TEXT 14
SaTaq& VYaadaYa é*<vNTaae l/gvq& GauvRQaRGaûraMa( )
ivGaaùaGaaDaGaM>aqra& Na ivduSTaiÀk-IizRTaMa( )) 14 ))
satéà vyädäya çåëvanto
722
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
laghvéà gurv-artha-gahvaräm
vigähyägädha-gambhéräà
na vidus tac-cikérñitam
SYNONYMS
satém—excellent; vyädäya—with attentive aural reception; çåëvantaù—hearing;
laghvém—properly composed; guru—momentous; artha—import; gahvaräm—difficult to
understand; vigähya—pondering; agädha—deep; gambhéräm—grave; na—not; viduù—
understand; tat—of the Supreme Lord; cikérñitam—the intention.
TRANSLATION
The Lord's excellent speech was difficult to comprehend because of its momentous import
and its most profound significance. The sages heard it with wide-open ears and pondered
it as well. But although hearing, they could not understand what He intended to do.
PURPORT
It should be understood that no one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
speaking. There is no difference between the Supreme Person and His speeches, for He
stands on the absolute platform. The sages tried with wide open ears to understand the
words from the lips of the Supreme Lord, but although His speech was very concise and
meaningful, the sages could not completely comprehend what He was saying. They could
not even comprehend the purport of the speech or what the Supreme Lord wanted to
do. Nor could they understand whether the Lord was angry or pleased with them.
TEXT 15
Tae YaaeGaMaaYaYaarBDaPaarMaeïyMahaedYaMa( )
Pa[aecu" Pa[aÅl/Yaae ivPa[a" Pa[ôía" +aui>aTaTvc" )) 15 ))
te yoga-mäyayärabdhapärameñöhya-
mahodayam
procuù präïjalayo vipräù
prahåñöäù kñubhita-tvacaù
723
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
te—those; yoga-mäyayä—through His internal potency; ärabdha—had been revealed;
pärameñöhya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahä-udayam—multiglories;
procuù—spoke; präïjalayaù—with folded hands; vipräù—the four brähmaëas;
prahåñöäù—extremely delighted; kñubhita-tvacaù—hair standing on end.
TRANSLATION
The four brähmaëa sages were nevertheless extremely delighted to behold Him, and they
experienced a thrill throughout their bodies. They then spoke as follows to the Lord, who
had revealed the multiglories of the Supreme Personality through His internal potency,
yogamäyä.
PURPORT
The sages were almost too puzzled to speak before the Supreme Personality of Godhead
for the first time, and the hairs of their bodies stood erect due to their extreme joy. The
highest opulence in the material world is called pärameñöhya, the opulence of Brahmä.
But that material opulence of Brahmä, who lives on the topmost planet within this
material world, cannot compare to the opulence of the Supreme Lord because the
transcendental opulence in the spiritual world is caused by yogamäyä, whereas the
opulence in the material world is caused by mahämäyä.
TEXT 16
‰zYa Ocu"
Na vYa& >aGavNa( ivÚSTav dev ick-IizRTaMa( )
k*-Taae Mae_NauGa]hêeiTa YadDYa+a" Pa[>aazSae )) 16 ))
åñaya ücuù
na vayaà bhagavan vidmas
tava deva cikérñitam
kåto me 'nugrahaç ceti
yad adhyakñaù prabhäñase
724
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
åñayaù—the sages; ücuù—said; na—not; vayam—we; bhagavan—O Supreme
Personality of Godhead; vidmaù—did know; tava—Your; deva—O Lord; cikérñitam—
wish for us to do; kåtaù—has been done; me—unto Me; anugrahaù—favor; ca—and;
iti—thus; yat—which; adhyakñaù—the supreme ruler; prabhäñase—You say.
TRANSLATION
The sages said: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, we are unable to know what You
intend for us to do, for even though You are the supreme ruler of all, You speak in our
favor as if we had done something good for You.
PURPORT
The sages could understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is above
everyone, was speaking as if He were in the wrong; therefore it was difficult for them to
understand the words of the Lord. They could understand, however, that the Lord was
speaking in such a humble way just to show them His all-merciful favor.
TEXT 17
b]ø<YaSYa Par& dEv& b]aø<aa" ik-l/ Tae Pa[>aae )
ivPa[a<aa& devdevaNaa& >aGavaNaaTMadEvTaMa( )) 17 ))
brahmaëyasya paraà daivaà
brähmaëäù kila te prabho
vipräëäà deva-devänäà
bhagavän ätma-daivatam
SYNONYMS
brahmaëyasya—of the supreme director of the brahminical culture; param—the highest;
daivam—position; brähmaëäù—the brähmaëas; kila—for the teaching of others; te—
Your; prabho—O Lord; vipräëäm—of the brähmaëas; deva-devänäm—to be worshiped
by the demigods; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ätma—the self;
daivatam—worshipable Deity.
725
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You are the supreme director of the brahminical culture. Your considering the
brähmaëas to be in the highest position is Your example for teaching others. Actually You
are the supreme worshipable Deity, not only for the gods but for the brähmaëas also.
PURPORT
In the Brahma-saàhitä it is clearly stated that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the cause of all causes. There are undoubtedly many demigods, the chiefs of whom are
Brahmä and Çiva. Lord Viñëu is the Lord of Brahmä and Çiva, not to speak of the
brähmaëas in this material world. As mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä, the Supreme Lord is
very favorable towards all activities performed according to brahminical culture, or the
qualities of control of the senses and mind, cleanliness, forbearance, faith in scripture,
and practical and theoretical knowledge. The Lord is the Supersoul of everyone. In
Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the Lord is the source of all emanations; thus He is also the
source of Brahmä and Çiva.
TEXT 18
Tvta" SaNaaTaNaae DaMaaeR r+YaTae TaNaui>aSTav )
DaMaRSYa ParMaae Gauùae iNaivRk-arae >avaNMaTa" )) 18 ))
tvattaù sanätano dharmo
rakñyate tanubhis tava
dharmasya paramo guhyo
nirvikäro bhavän mataù
SYNONYMS
tvattaù—from You; sanätanaù—eternal; dharmaù—occupation; rakñyate—is protected;
tanubhiù—by multimanifestations; tava—Your; dharmasya—of religious principles;
paramaù—the supreme; guhyaù—objective; nirvikäraù—unchangeable; bhavän—You;
mataù—in our opinion.
TRANSLATION
726
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
You are the source of the eternal occupation of all living entities, and by Your
multimanifestations of Personalities of Godhead, You have always protected religion. You
are the supreme objective of religious principles, and in our opinion You are inexhaustible
and unchangeable eternally.
PURPORT
The statement in this verse dharmasya paramo guhyaù refers to the most confidential
part of all religious principles. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä. The conclusion of
Lord Kåñëa in His advice to Arjuna is: "Give up all other religious engagement and just
surrender unto Me." This is the most confidential knowledge in executing religious
principles. In the Bhägavatam also it is stated that if one does not become Kåñëa
conscious after very rigidly executing one's specified religious duties, all his labor in
following so-called religious principles is simply a waste of time. Here also the sages
confirm the statement that the Supreme Lord, not the demigods, is the ultimate goal of
all religious principles. There are many foolish propagandists who say that worship of
the demigods is also a way to reach the supreme goal, but in the authorized statements of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and Bhagavad-gétä this is not accepted. Bhagavad-gétä says that one
who worships a particular demigod can reach the demigod's planet, but one who
worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead can enter into Vaikuëöha. Some
propagandists say that regardless of what one does he will ultimately reach the supreme
abode of the Personality of Godhead, but this is not valid. The Lord is eternal, the Lord's
servitor is eternal, and the Lord's abode is also eternal. They are all described here as
sanätana, or eternal. The result of devotional service, therefore, is not temporary, as is
the achievement of heavenly planets by worshiping the demigods. The sages wanted to
stress that although the Lord, out of His causeless mercy, says that He worships the
brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas, actually the Lord is worshipable not only by the brähmaëas
and Vaiñëavas but also by the demigods.
TEXT 19
TariNTa ùÅSaa Ma*TYau& iNav*taa YadNauGa]haTa( )
YaaeiGaNa" Sa >avaNa( ik&- iSvdNauGa*ùeTa YaTParE" )) 19 ))
taranti hy aïjasä måtyuà
nivåttä yad-anugrahät
727
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yoginaù sa bhavän kià svid
anugåhyeta yat paraiù
SYNONYMS
taranti—cross over; hi—because; aïjasä—easily; måtyum—birth and death; nivåttäù—
ceasing all material desires; yat—Your; anugrahät—by mercy; yoginaù—
transcendentalists; saù—the Supreme Lord; bhavän—You; kim svit—never possible;
anugåhyeta—may be favored; yat—which; paraiù—by others.
TRANSLATION
Mystics and transcendentalists, by the mercy of the Lord, cross beyond nescience by
ceasing all material desires. It is not possible, therefore, that the Supreme Lord can be
favored by others.
PURPORT
Unless one is favored by the Supreme Lord, one cannot cross over the ocean of the
nescience of repeated birth and death. Here it is stated that yogés or mystics cross
beyond nescience by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There are many
kinds of mystics, such as the karma-yogé, jïäna-yogé, dhyäna-yogé and bhakti-yogé. The
karmés particularly search after the favor of the demigods, the jïänés want to become
one with the Supreme Absolute Truth, and the yogés are satisfied simply by partial vision
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramätmä, and ultimately by oneness with
Him. But the bhaktas, the devotees, want to associate with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead eternally and serve Him. It has already been admitted that the Lord is eternal,
and those who want the favor of the Supreme Lord perpetually are also eternal.
Therefore yogés here means devotees. By the mercy of the Lord, devotees can easily pass
beyond the nescience of birth and death and attain the eternal abode of the Lord. The
Lord is therefore not in need of another's favor because no one is equal to or greater
than Him. Actually, everyone needs the favor of the Lord for successful understanding
of his human mission.
TEXT 20
728
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Ya& vE iv>aUiTaåPaYaaTYaNauvel/MaNYaE‚
rQaaRiQaRi>a" SviXarSaa Da*TaPaadre<au" )
DaNYaaiPaRTaax(iga]Taul/SaqNavdaMaDaaManae
l/aek&- MaDauv]TaPaTaeirv k-aMaYaaNaa )) 20 ))
yaà vai vibhütir upayäty anuvelam anyair
arthärthibhiù sva-çirasä dhåta-päda-reëuù
dhanyärpitäìghri-tulasé-nava-däma-dhämno
lokaà madhuvrata-pater iva käma-yänä
SYNONYMS
yam—whom; vai—certainly; vibhütiù—Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune; upayäti—waits
upon; anuvelam—occasionally; anyaiù—by others; artha—material facility; arthibhiù—
by those who desire; sva-çirasä—on their own heads; dhåta—accepting; päda—of the
feet; reëuù—the dust; dhanya—by the devotees; arpita—offered; aìghri—at Your feet;
tulasé—of tulasé leaves; nava—fresh; däma—on the garland; dhämnaù—having a place;
lokam—the place; madhu-vrata-pateù—of the king of the bees; iva—like; käma-yänä—is
anxious to secure.
TRANSLATION
The goddess of fortune, Lakñmé, the dust of whose feet is worn on the head by others,
waits upon You, as appointed, for she is anxious to secure a place in the abode of the king
of bees, who hovers on the fresh wreath of tulasé leaves offered at Your feet by some
blessed devotee.
PURPORT
As previously described, tulasé has attained all superior qualities due to being placed at
the lotus feet of the Lord. The comparison made here is very nice. As the king of bees
hovers over the tulasé leaves offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, so Lakñmé, the goddess
who is sought by the demigods, brähmaëas, Vaiñëavas and everyone else, always engages
in rendering service to the lotus feet of the Lord. The conclusion is that no one can be
the benefactor of the Lord; everyone is actually the servant of the servant of the Lord
729
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
[Cc. Madhya 13.80].
TEXT 21
YaSTaa& iviv¢-cirTaErNauvTaRMaaNaa&
NaaTYaaid]YaTParMa>aaGavTaPa[Sa(r)" )
Sa Tv& iÜJaaNauPaQaPau<YarJa"PauNaqTa"
é[qvTSal/+Ma ik-MaGaa >aGa>aaJaNaSTvMa( )) 21 ))
yas täà vivikta-caritair anuvartamänäà
nätyädriyat parama-bhägavata-prasaìgaù
sa tvaà dvijänupatha-puëya-rajaù-punétaù
çrévatsa-lakñma kim agä bhaga-bhäjanas tvam
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; täm—Lakñmé; vivikta—completely pure; caritaiù—devotional services;
anuvartamänäm—serving; na—not; atyädriyat—attached; parama—the highest;
bhägavata—devotees; prasaìgaù—attached; saù—the Supreme Lord; tvam—You;
dvija—of the brähmaëas; anupatha—on the path; puëya—sanctified; rajaù—dust;
punétaù—purified; çrévatsa—of Çrévatsa; lakñma—the mark; kim—what; agäù—You
obtained; bhaga—all opulences or all good qualities; bhäjanaù—the reservoir; tvam—
You.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You are exceedingly attached to the activities of Your pure devotees, yet You are
never attached to the goddesses of fortune who constantly engage in Your transcendental
loving service. How can You be purified, therefore, by the dust of the path traversed by
the brähmaëas, and how can You be glorified or made fortunate by the marks of Çrévatsa
on Your chest?
PURPORT
It is said in the Brahma-saàhitä that the Lord is always served by many hundreds of
730
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
thousands of goddesses of fortune in His Vaikuëöha planet, yet because of His attitude of
renunciation of all opulences, He is not attached to any one of them. The Lord has six
opulences—unlimited wealth, unlimited fame, unlimited strength, unlimited beauty,
unlimited knowledge and unlimited renunciation. All the demigods and other living
entities worship Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune, just to get her favor, yet the Lord is
never attached to her because He can create an unlimited number of such goddesses for
His transcendental service. The goddess of fortune, Lakñmé, is sometimes envious of the
tulasé leaves which are placed at the lotus feet of the Lord, for they remain fixed there
and do not move, whereas Lakñméjé, although stationed by the chest of the Lord,
sometimes has to please other devotees who pray for her favor. Lakñméjé sometimes has
to go to satisfy her numerous devotees, but tulasé leaves never forsake their position, and
the Lord therefore appreciates the service of the tulasé more than the service of Lakñmé.
When the Lord says, therefore, that it is due to the causeless mercy of the brähmaëas
that Lakñméjé does not leave Him, we can understand that Lakñméjé is attracted by the
opulence of the Lord, not by the brähmaëas' benedictions upon Him. The Lord is not
dependent on anyone's mercy for His opulence; He is always self-sufficient. The Lord's
statement that His opulence is due to the benediction of the brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas is
only to teach others that they should offer respect to the brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas, the
devotees of the Lord.
TEXT 22
DaMaRSYa Tae >aGavTaiñYauGa i}ai>a" SvE"
PaiÙêracriMad& iÜJadevTaaQaRMa( )
NaUNa& >a*Ta& Tadi>agaaiTa rJaSTaMaê
SatveNa Naae vrdYaa TaNauva iNarSYa )) 22 ))
dharmasya te bhagavatas tri-yuga tribhiù svaiù
padbhiç caräcaram idaà dvija-devatärtham
nünaà bhåtaà tad-abhighäti rajas tamaç ca
sattvena no varadayä tanuvä nirasya
SYNONYMS
dharmasya—of the personification of all religion; te—of You; bhagavataù—of the
731
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Supreme Personality of Godhead; tri-yuga—You who are manifest in all three
millenniums; tribhiù—by three; svaiù—Your own; padbhiù—feet; cara-acaram—animate
and inanimate; idam—this universe; dvija—the twice-born; devatä—the demigods;
artham—for the sake of; nünam—however; bhåtam—protected; tat—those feet;
abhighäti—destroying; rajaù—the mode of passion; tamaù—the mode of ignorance; ca—
and; sattvena—of pure goodness; naù—unto us; vara-dayä—bestowing all blessings;
tanuvä—by Your transcendental form; nirasya—driving away.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You are the personification of all religion. Therefore You manifest Yourself in
three millenniums, and thus You protect this universe, which consists of animate and
inanimate beings. By Your grace, which is of pure goodness and is the bestower of all
blessings, kindly drive away the elements of rajas and tamas for the sake of the demigods
and twice-born.
PURPORT
The Lord is addressed in this verse as tri-yuga, or one who appears in three
millenniums—namely the Satya, Dväpara and Tretä yugas. He is not mentioned as
appearing in the fourth millennium, or Kali-yuga. It is described in Vedic literature that
in Kali-yuga He comes as channa-avatära, or an incarnation, but He does not appear as a
manifest incarnation. In the other yugas, however, the Lord is a manifest incarnation,
and therefore he is addressed as tri-yuga, or the Lord who appears in three yugas.
Çrédhara Svämé describes tri-yuga as follows: yuga means "couple," and tri means "three."
The Lord is manifested as three couples by His six opulences, or three couples of
opulences. In that way He can be addressed as tri-yuga. The Lord is the personality of
religious principles. In three millenniums religious principles are protected by three
kinds of spiritual culture, namely austerity, cleanliness and mercy. The Lord is called triyuga
in that way also. In the age of Kali these three requisites to spiritual culture are
almost absent, but the Lord is so kind that in spite of Kali-yuga's being devoid of these
three spiritual qualities, He comes and protects the people of this age in His covered
incarnation as Lord Caitanya. Lord Caitanya is called "covered" because although He is
Kåñëa Himself, He presents Himself as a devotee of Kåñëa, not directly Kåñëa. The
devotees pray to Lord Caitanya, therefore, to eliminate their stock of passion and
ignorance, the most conspicuous assets of this yuga. In the Kåñëa consciousness
732
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
movement one cleanses himself of the modes of passion and ignorance by chanting the
holy name of the Lord, Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, as introduced by Lord Caitanya.
The four Kumäras were cognizant of their situation in the modes of passion and
ignorance because, although in Vaikuëöha, they wanted to curse devotees of the Lord.
Since they were conscious of their own weakness, they prayed to the Lord to remove
their still-existing passion and ignorance. The three transcendental qualifications—
cleanliness, austerity and mercy—are the qualifications of the twice-born and the
demigods. Those who are not situated in the quality of goodness cannot accept these
three principles of spiritual culture. For the Kåñëa consciousness movement, therefore,
there are three sinful activities which are prohibited—namely illicit sex, intoxication,
and eating food other than the prasäda offered to Kåñëa. These three prohibitions are
based on the principles of austerity, cleanliness and mercy. Devotees are merciful
because they spare the poor animals, and they are clean because they are free of
contamination from unwanted foodstuff and unwanted habits. Austerity is represented
by restricted sex life. These principles, indicated by the prayers of the four Kumäras,
should be followed by the devotees who are engaged in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 23
Na Tv& iÜJaaetaMaku-l&/ YaidhaTMaGaaePa&
Gaaeáa v*z" SvhR<aeNa SaSaUNa*TaeNa )
TaùeRv Na&+YaiTa iXavSTav dev PaNQaa
l/aek-ae_Ga]hqZYad*z>aSYa ih TaTPa[Maa<aMa( )) 23 ))
na tvaà dvijottama-kulaà yadi hätma-gopaà
goptä våñaù svarhaëena sa-sünåtena
tarhy eva naìkñyati çivas tava deva panthä
loko 'grahéñyad åñabhasya hi tat pramäëam
SYNONYMS
na—not; tvam—You; dvija—of the twice-born; uttama-kulam—the highest class; yadi—
if; ha—indeed; ätma-gopam—worthy to be protected by You; goptä—the protector;
våñaù—the best; su-arhaëena—by worship; sa-sünåtena—along with mild words; tarhi—
then; eva—certainly; naìkñyati—will be lost; çivaù—auspicious; tava—Your; deva—O
733
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Lord; panthäù—the path; lokaù—the people in general; agrahéñyat—would accept;
åñabhasya—of the best; hi—because; tat—that; pramäëam—authority.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You are the protector of the highest of the twice-born. If You do not protect
them by offering worship and mild words, then certainly the auspicious path of worship
will be rejected by people in general, who act on the strength and authority of Your
Lordship.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä it is stated by the Lord Himself that the acts and character of great
authorities are followed by people in general. Leaders of ideal character are therefore
needed in society. Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appeared in this material
world just to show the example of perfect authority, and people have to follow His path.
The Vedic injunction is that one cannot understand the Absolute Truth simply by
mental speculation or logical argument. One has to follow the authorities. Mahäjano
yena gataù sa panthäù [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. Great authorities should be followed;
otherwise, if we simply depend on the scriptures, we are sometimes misled by rascals, or
else we cannot understand or follow the different spiritual injunctions. The best path is
to follow the authorities. The four brähmaëa-sages stated that Kåñëa is naturally the
protector of the cows and brähmaëas: go-brähmaëa-hitäya ca. When Kåñëa was on this
planet, He set a practical example. He was a cowherd boy, and He was very respectful to
the brähmaëas and devotees.
It is also affirmed herein that the brähmaëas are the best of the twice-born. Brähmaëas,
kñatriyas and vaiçyas are all twice-born, but the brähmaëas are the best. When there is a
fight between two persons, each of them protects the upper part of his body—the head,
the arms and the belly. Similarly, for the actual advancement of human civilization, the
best part of the social body, namely the brähmaëas, the kñatriyas and vaiçyas (the
intelligent class of men, the military class and the mercantile men) should be given
special protection. Protection of the laborers should not be neglected, but special
protection should be given to the upper orders. Of all classes of men, the brähmaëas and
the Vaiñëavas should be given special protection. They should be worshiped. When
their protection is performed, it is just like worshiping God. That is not exactly
protection; it is a duty. One should worship the brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas by offering
734
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
them all kinds of endowments and sweet words, and if one has no means to offer
anything, he must at least use sweet words to pacify them. The Lord personally exhibited
this behavior towards the Kumäras.
If this system is not introduced by the leaders, then human civilization will be lost.
When there is no protection and special treatment for persons who are devotees of the
Lord, who are highly intelligent in spiritual life, then the whole society is lost. The word
naìkñyati indicates that such a civilization becomes spoiled and is annihilated. The kind
of civilization recommended is called deva-patha, which means the "royal road of the
demigods." Demigods are supposed to be fully fixed in devotional service, or Kåñëa
consciousness; that is the auspicious path that should be protected. If the authorities or
the leaders of society do not give special respect to the brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas and do
not offer them not only sweet words but all facilities, then the path of progress will be
lost to human civilization. The Lord personally wanted to teach this, and therefore He
offered so much praise to the Kumäras.
TEXT 24
Tatae_Na>aqíiMav SatviNaDaeivRiDaTSaae"
+aeMa& JaNaaYa iNaJaXai¢-i>aåd(Da*Taare" )
NaETaavTaa }YaiDaPaTaebRTa ivì>aTauR‚
STaeJa" +aTa& TvvNaTaSYa Sa Tae ivNaaed" )) 24 ))
tat te 'nabhéñöam iva sattva-nidher vidhitsoù
kñemaà janäya nija-çaktibhir uddhåtäreù
naitävatä try-adhipater bata viçva-bhartus
tejaù kñataà tv avanatasya sa te vinodaù
SYNONYMS
tat—that destruction of the path of auspiciousness; te—by You; anabhéñöam—is not
liked; iva—as; sattva-nidheù—the reservoir of all goodness; vidhitsoù—desiring to do;
kñemam—good; janäya—for the people in general; nija-çaktibhiù—by Your own
potencies; uddhåta—destroyed; areù—the opposite element; na—not; etävatä—by this;
tri-adhipateù—of the proprietor of the three kinds of creations; bata—O Lord; viçvabhartuù—
the maintainer of the universe; tejaù—potency; kñatam—reduced; tu—but;
735
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
avanatasya—submissive; saù—that; te—Your; vinodaù—pleasure.
TRANSLATION
Dear Lord, You never want the auspicious path to be destroyed, for You are the reservoir
of all goodness. Just to benefit people in general, You destroy the evil element by Your
mighty potency. You are the proprietor of the three creations and the maintainer of the
entire universe. Therefore Your potency is not reduced by Your submissive behavior.
Rather, by submission You exhibit Your transcendental pastimes.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa was never reduced in His position by becoming a cowherd boy or by offering
respect to Sudämä Brähmaëa or His other devotees like Nanda Mahäräja, Vasudeva,
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and the Päëòavas' mother, Kunté. Everyone knew that He was the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, yet His behavior was exemplary. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]; His form is completely
spiritual, full of bliss and knowledge, and it is eternal. Because the living entities are His
parts and parcels, originally they also belong to the same quality of eternal form as the
Lord, but when they come in contact with mäyä, the material potency, due to their
forgetfulness their existential constitution is covered. We should try to understand the
appearance of Lord Kåñëa in this spirit, as the Kumäras pray to Him. He is eternally a
cowherd boy at Våndävana, He is eternally the leader of the Battle of Kurukñetra, and
He is eternally the opulent prince of Dvärakä and the lover of the damsels of
Våndävana; all His appearances are meaningful because they show His real
characteristics to the conditioned souls, who have forgotten their relationship with the
Supreme Lord. He does everything for their benefit. The force exhibited in the Battle of
Kurukñetra by the desire of Kåñëa and through the agency of Arjuna was also necessary
because when people become too irreligious, force is required. Nonviolence in this
respect is rascaldom.
TEXT 25
Ya& vaNaYaaedRMaMaDaqXa >avaNa( ivDatae
v*ita& Nau va TadNauMaNMaih iNaVYaRl/Ik-Ma( )
736
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ASMaaSau va Ya oicTaae iDa]YaTaa& Sa d<@ae
Yae_NaaGaSaaE vYaMaYau&+Maih ik-iLbze<a )) 25 ))
yaà vänayor damam adhéça bhavän vidhatte
våttià nu vä tad anumanmahi nirvyalékam
asmäsu vä ya ucito dhriyatäà sa daëòo
ye 'nägasau vayam ayuìkñmahi kilbiñeëa
SYNONYMS
yam—which; vä—or; anayoù—of both of them; damam—punishment; adhéça—O Lord;
bhavän—Your Lordship; vidhatte—awards; våttim—better existence; nu—certainly;
vä—or; tat—that; anumanmahi—we accept; nirvyalékam—without duplicity; asmäsu—
to us; vä—or; yaù—whichever; ucitaù—is proper; dhriyatäm—may be awarded; saù—
that; daëòaù—punishment; ye—who; anägasau—sinless; vayam—we; ayuìkñmahi—
allotted; kilbiñeëa—with a curse.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, whatever punishment You wish to award to these two innocent persons or also to
us we shall accept without duplicity. We understand that we have cursed two faultless
persons.
PURPORT
The sages, the four Kumäras, now reject their cursing of the two doorkeepers, Jaya and
Vijaya, because they are now conscious that persons who engage in the service of the
Lord cannot be at fault at any stage. It is said that anyone who has implicit faith in the
service of the Lord, or who actually engages in transcendental loving service, has all the
good qualities of the demigods. Therefore, a devotee cannot be at fault. If sometimes it is
found that he is in error by accident or by some temporary arrangement, that should not
be taken very seriously. The cursing of Jaya and Vijaya is here repented. Now the
Kumäras are thinking in terms of their position in the modes of passion and ignorance,
and they are prepared to accept any kind of punishment from the Lord. In general,
when dealing with devotees, we should not try to find faults. In Bhagavad-gétä also it is
confirmed that the devotee who faithfully serves the Supreme Lord, even if found to
737
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
commit a gross mistake, should be considered a sädhu, or saintly person. Due to former
habits he may commit some wrong, but because he is engaged in the service of the Lord,
that wrong should not be taken very seriously.
TEXT 26
é[q>aGavaNauvac
WTaaE SaureTarGaiTa& Pa[iTaPaÛ SaÛ"
Sa&rM>aSaM>a*TaSaMaaDYaNaubÖYaaeGaaE )
>aUYa" Sak-aXaMauPaYaaSYaTa Aaéu Yaae v"
XaaPaae MaYaEv iNaiMaTaSTadveTa ivPa[a" )) 26 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
etau suretara-gatià pratipadya sadyaù
saàrambha-sambhåta-samädhy-anubaddha-yogau
bhüyaù sakäçam upayäsyata äçu yo vaù
çäpo mayaiva nimitas tad aveta vipräù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead replied; etau—these two
doorkeepers; sura-itara—demoniac; gatim—the womb; pratipadya—obtaining; sadyaù—
quickly; saàrambha—by anger; sambhåta—intensified; samädhi—concentration of
mind; anubaddha—firmly; yogau—united with Me; bhüyaù—again; sakäçam—to My
presence; upayäsyataù—shall return; äçu—shortly; yaù—which; vaù—of you; çäpaù—
curse; mayä—by Me; eva—alone; nimitaù—ordained; tat—that; aveta—know; vipräù—
O brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
The Lord replied: O brähmaëas, know that the punishment you inflicted on them was
originally ordained by Me, and therefore they will fall to a birth in a demoniac family. But
they will be firmly united with Me in thought through mental concentration intensified
by anger, and they will return to My presence shortly.
738
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The Lord stated that the punishment inflicted by the sages upon the doorkeepers Jaya
and Vijaya was conceived by the Lord Himself. Without the Lord's sanction, nothing
can happen. It is to be understood that there was a plan in the cursing of the Lord's
devotees in Vaikuëöha, and His plan is explained by many stalwart authorities. The Lord
sometimes desires to fight. The fighting spirit also exists in the Supreme Lord, otherwise
how could fighting be manifested at all? Because the Lord is the source of everything,
anger and fighting are also inherent in His personality. When He desires to fight with
someone, He has to find an enemy, but in the Vaikuëöha world there is no enemy
because everyone is engaged fully in His service. Therefore He sometimes comes to the
material world as an incarnation in order to manifest His fighting spirit.
In Bhagavad-gétä (4.8) also it is said that the Lord appears just to give protection to the
devotees and to annihilate the nondevotees. The nondevotees are found in the material
world, not in the spiritual world; therefore, when the Lord wants to fight, He has to
come to this world. But who will fight with the Supreme Lord? No one is able to fight
with Him! Therefore, because the Lord's pastimes in the material world are always
performed with His associates, not with others, He has to find some devotee who will
play the part of an enemy. In Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says to Arjuna, "My dear Arjuna,
both you and I have appeared many, many times in this material world, but you have
forgotten, whereas I remember." Thus Jaya and Vijaya were selected by the Lord to fight
with Him in the material world, and that was the reason the sages came to see Him and
accidentally the doorkeepers were cursed. It was the Lord's desire to send them to the
material world, not perpetually, but for some time. Therefore, just as on a theatrical
stage someone takes the part of enemy to the proprietor of the stage, although the play is
for a short time and there is no permanent enmity between the servant and the
proprietor, so the sura janas (devotees) were cursed by the sages to go to the asura jana,
or atheistic families. That a devotee should come into an atheistic family is surprising,
but it is simply a show. After finishing their mock fighting, both the devotee and the
Lord are again associated in the spiritual planets. That is very explicitly explained here.
The conclusion is that no one falls from the spiritual world, or Vaikuëöha planet, for it
is the eternal abode. But sometimes, as the Lord desires, devotees come into this material
world as preachers or as atheists. In each case we must understand that there is a plan of
the Lord. Lord Buddha, for example, was an incarnation, yet he preached atheism:
"There is no God." But actually there was a plan behind this, as explained in the
Bhägavatam.
739
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 27
b]øaevac
AQa Tae MauNaYaae d*îa NaYaNaaNaNd>aaJaNaMa( )
vEku-<#&= TadiDaïaNa& ivku-<#&= c SvYa&Pa[>aMa( )) 27 ))
brahmoväca
atha te munayo dåñövä
nayanänanda-bhäjanam
vaikuëöhaà tad-adhiñöhänaà
vikuëöhaà ca svayaà-prabham
SYNONYMS
brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; atha—now; te—those; munayaù—sages; dåñövä—
after seeing; nayana—of the eyes; änanda—pleasure; bhäjanam—producing;
vaikuëöham—the Vaikuëöha planet; tat—of Him; adhiñöhänam—the abode;
vikuëöham—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca—and; svayam-prabham—selfilluminating.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: After seeing the Lord of Vaikuëöha, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, in the self-illuminated Vaikuëöha planet, the sages left that transcendental
abode.
PURPORT
The transcendental abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as stated in
Bhagavad-gétä and confirmed in this verse, is self-illuminated. In Bhagavad-gétä it is said
that in the spiritual world there is no need of sun, moon or electricity. This indicates
that all the planets there are self-illuminated, self-sufficient and independent;
everything there is complete. Lord Kåñëa says that once one goes to that Vaikuëöha
planet, he never returns. The inhabitants of Vaikuëöha never return to the material
world, but the incident of Jaya and Vijaya was a different case. They came to the
740
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
material world for some time, and then they returned to Vaikuëöha.
TEXT 28
>aGavNTa& Pair§-MYa Pa[i<aPaTYaaNauMaaNYa c )
Pa[iTaJaGMau" Pa[MauidTaa" Xa&SaNTaae vEZ<avq& ié[YaMa( )) 28 ))
bhagavantaà parikramya
praëipatyänumänya ca
pratijagmuù pramuditäù
çaàsanto vaiñëavéà çriyam
SYNONYMS
bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parikramya—after
circumambulating; praëipatya—after offering obeisances; anumänya—after learning;
ca—and; pratijagmuù—returned; pramuditäù—extremely delighted; çaàsantaù—
glorifying; vaiñëavém—of the Vaiñëavas; çriyam—opulence.
TRANSLATION
The sages circumambulated the Supreme Lord, offered their obeisances and returned,
extremely delighted at learning of the divine opulences of the Vaiñëava.
PURPORT
It is still a respectful practice to circumambulate the Lord in Hindu temples. Especially
in Vaiñëava temples there is an arrangement for people to offer their respects to the
Deity and circumambulate the temple at least three times.
TEXT 29
>aGavaNaNauGaavah YaaTa& Maa >aEíMaSTau XaMa( )
b]øTaeJa" SaMaQaaeR_iPa hNTau& NaeC^e MaTa& Tau Mae )) 29 ))
bhagavän anugäv äha
741
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yätaà mä bhaiñöam astu çam
brahma-tejaù samartho 'pi
hantuà necche mataà tu me
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anugau—to His two attendants; äha—
said; yätam—depart from this place; mä—let there not be; bhaiñöam—fear; astu—let
there be; çam—happiness; brahma—of a brähmaëa; tejaù—the curse; samarthaù—being
able; api—even; hantum—to nullify; na icche—do not desire; matam—approved; tu—on
the contrary; me—by Me.
TRANSLATION
The Lord then said to His attendants, Jaya and Vijaya: Depart this place, but fear not.
All glories unto you. Though I am capable of nullifying the brähmaëas' curse, I would not
do so. On the contrary, it has My approval.
PURPORT
As explained in connection with text 26, all the incidents that took place had the
approval of the Lord. Ordinarily, there is no possibility that the four sages could be so
angry with the doorkeepers, nor could the Supreme Lord neglect His two doorkeepers,
nor can one come back from Vaikuëöha after once taking birth there. All these
incidents, therefore, were designed by the Lord Himself for the sake of His pastimes in
the material world. Thus He plainly says that it was done with His approval. Otherwise,
it would have been impossible for inhabitants of Vaikuëöha to come back to this
material world simply because of a brahminical curse. The Lord especially blesses the socalled
culprits: "All glories unto you." A devotee, once accepted by the Lord, can never
fall down. That is the conclusion of this incident.
TEXT 30
WTaTPaurEv iNaidRí& rMaYaa §u-ÖYaa Yada )
PauraPavairTaa Üair ivXaNTaq MaYYauPaarTae )) 30 ))
742
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
etat puraiva nirdiñöaà
ramayä kruddhayä yadä
puräpaväritä dväri
viçanté mayy upärate
SYNONYMS
etat—this departure; purä—formerly; eva—certainly; nirdiñöam—foretold; ramayä—by
Lakñmé; kruddhayä—furious; yadä—when; purä—previously; apaväritä—prevented;
dväri—at the gate; viçanté—entering; mayi—as I; upärate—was resting.
TRANSLATION
This departure from Vaikuëöha was foretold by Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune. She was
very angry because when she left My abode and then returned, you stopped her at the
gate while I was sleeping.
TEXT 31
MaiYa Sa&rM>aYaaeGaeNa iNaSTaqYaR b]øhel/NaMa( )
Pa[TYaeZYaTa& iNak-aXa& Mae k-ale/NaaLPaqYaSaa PauNa" )) 31 ))
mayi saàrambha-yogena
nistérya brahma-helanam
pratyeñyataà nikäçaà me
kälenälpéyasä punaù
SYNONYMS
mayi—unto Me; saàrambha-yogena—by practice of mystic yoga in anger; nistérya—
being liberated from; brahma-helanam—the result of disobedience to the brähmaëas;
pratyeñyatam—will come back; nikäçam—near; me—Me; kälena—in due course of time;
alpéyasä—very short; punaù—again.
TRANSLATION
743
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The Lord assured the two Vaikuëöha inhabitants, Jaya and Vijaya: By practicing the
mystic yoga system in anger, you will be cleansed of the sin of disobeying the brähmaëas
and within a very short time return to Me.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead advised the two doorkeepers, Jaya and Vijaya, that
by dint of bhakti-yoga in anger they would be delivered from the curses of the
brähmaëas. Çréla Madhva Muni remarks in this connection that by practicing bhaktiyoga
one can become free from all sinful reactions. Even a brahma-çäpa, or curse by a
brähmaëa, which cannot be overcome by any other means, can be overcome by bhaktiyoga.
One can practice bhakti-yoga in many rasas. There are twelve rasas, five primary and
seven secondary. The five primary rasas constitute direct bhakti-yoga, but although the
seven secondary rasas are indirect, they are also counted within bhakti-yoga if they are
used in the service of the Lord. In other words, bhakti-yoga is all-inclusive. If one
somehow or other becomes attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he
becomes engaged in bhakti-yoga, as described in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.29.15): kämaà
krodhaà bhayam. The gopés were attracted to Kåñëa by bhakti-yoga in a relationship of
lusty desire (käma). Similarly, Kaàsa was attached to bhakti-yoga by dint of fear of his
death. Thus bhakti-yoga is so powerful that even becoming an enemy of the Lord and
always thinking of Him can deliver one very quickly. It is said, viñëu-bhaktaù småto daiva
äsuras tad-vipanyayaù: "Devotees of Lord Viñëu are called demigods, whereas
nondevotees are called asuras." But bhakti-yoga is so powerful that both demigods and
asuras can derive its benefits if they always think of the Personality of Godhead. The
basic principle of bhakti-yoga is to think of the Supreme Lord always. The Lord says in
Bhagavad-gétä (18.65), man-manä bhava mad-bhaktaù: "Always think of Me." It doesn't
matter which way one thinks; the very thought of the Personality of Godhead is the
basic principle of bhakti-yoga.
In the material planets there are different grades of sinful activities, of which
disrespecting a brähmaëa or a Vaiñëava is the most sinful. Here it is clearly stated that
one can overcome even that grave sin simply by thinking of Viñëu, not even favorably
but in anger. Thus even if those who are not devotees always think of Viñëu, they
become free from all sinful activities. Kåñëa consciousness is the highest form of
thought. Lord Viñëu is thought of in this age by chanting Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa,
Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. From the
744
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
statements of the Bhägavatam it appears that if one thinks of Kåñëa, even as an enemy,
that particular qualification—thinking of Viñëu, or Kåñëa—cleanses one of all sins.
TEXT 32
Üa"SQaavaidXYa >aGavaNa( ivMaaNaé[ei<a>aUz<aMa( )
SavaRiTaXaYaYaa l/+MYaa Jauí& Sv& iDaZ<YaMaaivXaTa( )) 32 ))
dväùsthäv ädiçya bhagavän
vimäna-çreëi-bhüñaëam
sarvätiçayayä lakñmyä
juñöaà svaà dhiñëyam äviçat
SYNONYMS
dväù-sthau—to the doorkeepers; ädiçya—just directing them; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; vimäna-çreëi-bhüñaëam—always decorated with first-class
airplanes; sarva-atiçayayä—in every respect extensively opulent; lakñmyä—opulences;
juñöam—bedecked with; svam—His own; dhiñëyam—abode; äviçat—went back.
TRANSLATION
After thus speaking at the door of Vaikuëöha, the Lord returned to His abode, where
there are many celestial airplanes and all-surpassing wealth and splendor.
PURPORT
It is clear from this verse that all the incidents took place at the entrance of
Vaikuëöhaloka. In other words, the sages were not actually within Vaikuëöhaloka, but
were at the gate. It could be asked, "How could they return to the material world if they
entered Vaikuëöhaloka?" But factually they did not enter, and therefore they returned.
There are many similar incidents where great yogés and brähmaëas, by dint of their yoga
practice, have gone from this material world to Vaikuëöhaloka—but they were not
meant to stay there. They came back. It is also confirmed here that the Lord was
surrounded by many Vaikuëöha airplanes. Vaikuëöhaloka is described here as having
splendid opulence, far surpassing the splendor of this material world.
745
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
All other living creatures, including the demigods, are born of Brahmä, and Brahmä is
born of Lord Viñëu. Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä, in the Tenth Chapter, ahaà sarvasya
prabhavaù: [Bg. 10.8] Lord Viñëu is the origin of all manifestations in the material world.
Those who know that Lord Viñëu is the origin of everything, who are conversant with
the process of creation and who understand that Viñëu, or Kåñëa, is the most
worshipable object of all living entities, engage themselves in Viñëu worship as
Vaiñëavas. The Vedic hymns also confirm this: oà tad viñëoù paramaà padam. The goal
of life is to understand Viñëu. The Bhägavatam also confirms this elsewhere. Foolish
people, not knowing that Viñëu is the supreme worshipable object, create so many
worshipable objects in this material world, and therefore they fall down.
TEXT 33
TaaE Tau GaqvaR<a‰z>aaE duSTaraÖirl/aek-Ta" )
hTaié[YaaE b]øXaaPaad>aUTaa& ivGaTaSMaYaaE )) 33 ))
tau tu gérväëa-åñabhau
dustaräd dhari-lokataù
hata-çriyau brahma-çäpäd
abhütäà vigata-smayau
SYNONYMS
tau—those two gatekeepers; tu—but; gérväëa-åñabhau—the best of the demigods;
dustarät—unable to be avoided; hari-lokataù—from Vaikuëöha, the abode of Lord Hari;
hata-çriyau—diminished in beauty and luster; brahma-çäpät—from the curse of a
brähmaëa; abhütäm—became; vigata-smayau—morose.
TRANSLATION
But those two gatekeepers, the best of the demigods, their beauty and luster diminished
by the curse of the brähmaëas, became morose and fell from Vaikuëöha, the abode of the
Supreme Lord.
TEXT 34
746
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Tada ivku-<#=iDaz<aataYaaeiNaRPaTaMaaNaYaae" )
hahak-arae MahaNaaSaqiÜMaaNaaGY]aezu Pau}ak-a" )) 34 ))
tadä vikuëöha-dhiñaëät
tayor nipatamänayoù
hähä-käro mahän äséd
vimänägryeñu putrakäù
SYNONYMS
tadä—then; vikuëöha—of the Supreme Lord; dhiñaëät—from the abode; tayoù—as both
of them; nipatamänayoù—were falling; hähä-käraù—roaring in disappointment;
mahän—great; äsét—occurred; vimäna-agryeñu—in the best of airplanes; putrakäù—O
demigods.
TRANSLATION
Then, as Jaya and Vijaya fell from the Lord's abode, a great roar of disappointment arose
from all the demigods, who were sitting in their splendid airplanes.
TEXT 35
Taavev ùDauNaa Pa[aáaE PaazRdPa[vraE hre" )
idTaeJaR#=riNaivRí& k-aXYaPa& TaeJa oLb<aMa( )) 35 ))
täv eva hy adhunä präptau
pärñada-pravarau hareù
diter jaöhara-nirviñöaà
käçyapaà teja ulbaëam
SYNONYMS
tau—those two doorkeepers; eva—certainly; hi—addressed; adhunä—now; präptau—
having gotten; pärñada-pravarau—important associates; hareù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; diteù—of Diti; jaöhara—womb; nirviñöam—entering;
käçyapam—of Kaçyapa Muni; tejaù—semen; ulbaëam—very strong.
747
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä continued: Those two principal doorkeepers of the Personality of Godhead
have now entered the womb of Diti, the powerful semen of Kaçyapa Muni having covered
them.
PURPORT
Here is clear proof of how a living entity coming originally from Vaikuëöhaloka is
encaged in material elements. The living entity takes shelter within the semen of a
father, which is injected within the womb of a mother, and with the help of the mother's
emulsified ovum the living entity grows a particular type of a body. In this connection it
is to be remembered that the mind of Kaçyapa Muni was not in order when he
conceived the two sons, Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu. Therefore the semen he
discharged was simultaneously extremely powerful and mixed with the quality of anger.
It is to be concluded that while conceiving a child one's mind must be very sober and
devotional. For this purpose the Garbhädhäna-saàskära is recommended in the Vedic
scriptures. If the mind of the father is not sober, the semen discharged will not be very
good. Thus the living entity, wrapped in the matter produced from the father and
mother, will be demoniac like Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu. The conditions of
conception are to be carefully studied. This is a very great science.
TEXT 36
TaYaaerSaurYaaerÛ TaeJaSaa YaMaYaaeihR v" )
Aai+aá& TaeJa WTaihR >aGava&STaiÜiDaTSaiTa )) 36 ))
tayor asurayor adya
tejasä yamayor hi vaù
äkñiptaà teja etarhi
bhagaväàs tad vidhitsati
SYNONYMS
tayoù—of them; asurayoù—of the two asuras; adya—today; tejasä—by the prowess;
yamayoù—of the twins; hi—certainly; vaù—of all you demigods; äkñiptam—agitated;
tejaù—power; etarhi—thus certainly; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
748
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tat—that; vidhitsati—desires to do.
TRANSLATION
It is the prowess of these twin asuras [demons] that has disturbed you, for it has
minimized your power. There is no remedy within my power, however, for it is the Lord
Himself who desires to do all this.
PURPORT
Although Hiraëyakaçipu and Hiraëyäkña, formerly Jaya and Vijaya, became asuras, the
demigods of this material world could not control them, and therefore Lord Brahmä said
that neither he nor all the demigods could counteract the disturbance they created.
They came within the material world by the order of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and He alone could counteract such disturbances. In other words, although
Jaya and Vijaya assumed the bodies of asuras, they remained more powerful than
anyone, thus proving that the Supreme Personality of Godhead desired to fight because
the fighting spirit is also within Him. He is the original in everything, but when He
desires to fight He must fight with a devotee. Therefore by His desire only were Jaya and
Vijaya cursed by the Kumäras. The Lord ordered the gatekeepers to go down to the
material world to become His enemies so that He could fight with them and His fighting
desires would be satisfied by the service of His personal devotees.
Brahmä showed the demigods that the situation created by the darkness, for which they
were disturbed, was the desire of the Supreme Lord. He wanted to show that even
though these two attendants were coming in the forms of demons, they were very
powerful, greater than the demigods, who could not control them. No one can surpass
the acts of the Supreme Lord. The demigods were also advised not to try to counteract
this incident, because it was ordered by the Lord. Similarly, anyone who is ordered by
the Lord to perform some action in this material world, especially preaching His glories,
cannot be counteracted by anyone; the will of the Lord is executed under all
circumstances.
TEXT 37
ivìSYa Ya" iSQaiTal/YaaeÙvheTauraÛae
YaaeGaeìrEriPa durTYaYaYaaeGaMaaYa" )
749
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
+aeMa& ivDaaSYaiTa Sa Naae >aGava&S}YaDaqXa‚
STa}aaSMadqYaivMa*XaeNa ik-YaaiNahaQaR" )) 37 ))
viçvasya yaù sthiti-layodbhava-hetur ädyo
yogeçvarair api duratyaya-yogamäyaù
kñemaà vidhäsyati sa no bhagaväàs tryadhéças
taträsmadéya-vimåçena kiyän ihärthaù
SYNONYMS
viçvasya—of the universe; yaù—who; sthiti—maintenance; laya—destruction;
udbhava—creation; hetuù—the cause; ädyaù—the most ancient person; yoga-éçvaraiù—
by the masters of yoga; api—even; duratyaya—cannot be easily understood; yogamäyaù—
His yogamäyä potency; kñemam—good; vidhäsyati—will do; saù—He; naù—of
us; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tri-adhéçaù—the controller of the
three modes of material nature; tatra—there; asmadéya—by our; vimåçena—
deliberation; kiyän—what; iha—on this subject; arthaù—purpose.
TRANSLATION
My dear sons, the Lord is the controller of the three modes of nature and is responsible
for the creation, preservation and dissolution of the universe. His wonderful creative
power, yogamäyä, cannot be easily understood even by the masters of yoga. That most
ancient person, the Personality of Godhead, will alone come to our rescue. What purpose
can we serve on His behalf by deliberating on the subject?
PURPORT
When something is arranged by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one should not be
disturbed by it, even if it appears to be a reverse according to one's calculations. For
example, sometimes we see that a powerful preacher is killed, or sometimes he is put into
difficulty, just as Haridäsa Öhäkura was. He was a great devotee who came into this
material world to execute the will of the Lord by preaching the Lord's glories. But
Haridäsa was punished at the hands of the Kazi by being beaten in twenty-two
marketplaces. Similarly, Lord Jesus Christ was crucified, and Prahläda Mahäräja was put
through so many tribulations. The Päëòavas, who were direct friends of Kåñëa, lost their
750
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kingdom, their wife was insulted, and they had to undergo many severe tribulations.
Seeing all these reverses affect devotees, one should not be disturbed; one should simply
understand that in these matters there must be some plan of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The Bhägavatam's conclusion is that a devotee is never disturbed by such
reverses. He accepts even reverse conditions as the grace of the Lord. One who
continues to serve the Lord even in reverse conditions is assured that he will go back to
Godhead, back to the Vaikuëöha planets. Lord Brahmä assured the demigods that there
was no use in talking about how the disturbing situation of darkness was taking place,
since the actual fact was that it was ordered by the Supreme Lord. Brahmä knew this
because he was a great devotee; it was possible for him to understand the plan of the
Lord.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Sixteenth Chapter, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "The Two Doorkeepers of Vaikuëöha, Jaya and Vijaya, Cursed by the
Sages."
END OF THE THIRD CANTO PART I
Srimad Bhagavatam
Third Canto
Part I
“The Status Quo”
e-book
This e-book and others are available for download at:
www.e-vedas.com
Hard bound books may be purchased at:
www.thekrishnastore.com
Email comments or questions to:
comments@evedas.com
This e-book was completed on December 2, 2004
e-books copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved
www.krishna.com
Distributed by e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
"Srimad Bhagavatam Third Canto Part II" by His Divine Grace
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed
version of this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation
copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only, under the
"fair use" guidelines established by international copyright laws.
You may use this electronic file to evaluate the printed version of
this book, for your own private use, or for short excerpts used in
academic works, research, student papers, presentations, and the
like. You can distribute this evaluation copy to others over the
Internet, so long as you keep this copyright information intact and
do not add or subtract anything to this file and its contents. You
may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) of this book in any
medium without the express written permission from the copyright
holders.
Reference any excerpts in the following way: "Excerpted from
"Srimad Bhagavatam Third Canto Part II " by A.C. Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
International, www.Krishna.com."
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2004
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue,
Los Angeles, California 90034, USA. All rights reserved. For any
questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluate dozens of
other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,
www.Krishna.com.

About the Author
His Divine Grace AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most
distinguished teacher of Vedic religion and thought, is the author of
Bhagavad-gita As It Is, Srimad-Bhagavatam, The Sri Isopanisad and many
other English versions of Vedic literature. He is the Founder-Arcarya of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness, which has hundreds of
centers throughout the world.
For more information about His Divine Grace visit:
http://www.krishna.com/newsite/main.php?id=7
1
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
17. Victory of Hiraëyäkña Over All the Directions of the Universe
SB 3.17.1
TEXT 1
MaE}aeYa ovac
iNaXaMYaaTMa>auva GaqTa& k-ar<a& XaªYaaeiJ‡Taa" )
TaTa" SaveR NYavTaRNTa i}aidvaYa idvaEk-Sa" )) 1 ))
maitreya uväca
niçamyätma-bhuvä gétaà
käraëaà çaìkayojjhitäù
tataù sarve nyavartanta
tridiväya divaukasaù
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù—the sage Maitreya; uväca—said; niçamya—upon hearing; ätma-bhuvä—by
Brahmä; gétam—explanation; käraëam—the cause; çaìkayä—from fear; ujjhitäù—freed;
tataù—then; sarve—all; nyavartanta—returned; tri-diväya—to the heavenly planets;
diva-okasaù—the demigods (who inhabit the higher planets).
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: The demigods, the inhabitants of the higher planets, were freed from
all fear upon hearing the cause of the darkness explained by Brahmä, who was born from
Viñëu. Thus they all returned to their respective planets.
PURPORT
The demigods, who are denizens of higher planets, are also very much afraid of incidents
such as the universe's becoming dark, and so they consulted Brahmä. This indicates that
the quality of fear exists for every living entity in the material world. The four principal
activities of material existence are eating, sleeping, fearing and mating. The fear
2
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
element exists also in the demigods. On every planet, even in the higher planetary
systems, including the moon and the sun, as well as on this earth, the same principles of
animal life exist. Otherwise, why are the demigods also afraid of the darkness? The
difference between the demigods and ordinary human beings is that the demigods
approach authority, whereas the inhabitants of this earth defy authority. If people would
only approach the authority, then every adverse condition in this universe could be
rectified. Arjuna was also disturbed on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, but he approached
the authority, Kåñëa, and his problem was solved. The conclusive instruction of this
incident is that we may be disturbed by some material condition, but if we approach the
authority who can actually explain the matter, then our problem is solved. The demigods
approached Brahmä for the meaning of the disturbance, and after hearing from him
they were satisfied and returned home peacefully.
SB 3.17.2
TEXT 2
idiTaSTau >aTauRradeXaadPaTYaPairXaiªNaq )
PaU<aeR vzRXaTae Saaßq Pau}aaE Pa[Sauzuve YaMaaE )) 2 ))
ditis tu bhartur ädeçäd
apatya-pariçaìkiné
pürëe varña-çate sädhvé
putrau prasuñuve yamau
SYNONYMS
ditiù—Diti; tu—but; bhartuù—of her husband; ädeçät—by the order; apatya—from her
children; pariçaìkiné—being apprehensive of trouble; pürëe—full; varña-çate—after one
hundred years; sädhvé—the virtuous lady; putrau—two sons; prasuñuve—begot; yamau—
twins.
TRANSLATION
The virtuous lady Diti had been very apprehensive of trouble to the gods from the
children in her womb, and her husband predicted the same. She brought forth twin sons
after a full one hundred years of pregnancy.
SB 3.17.3
3
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 3
oTPaaTaa bhvSTa}a iNaPaeTauJaaRYaMaaNaYaae" )
idiv >auVYaNTair+ae c l/aek-SYaaeå>aYaavha" )) 3 ))
utpätä bahavas tatra
nipetur jäyamänayoù
divi bhuvy antarikñe ca
lokasyoru-bhayävahäù
SYNONYMS
utpätäù—natural disturbances; bahavaù—many; tatra—there; nipetuù—occurred;
jäyamänayoù—on their birth; divi—in the heavenly planets; bhuvi—on the earth;
antarikñe—in outer space; ca—and; lokasya—to the world; uru—greatly; bhayaävahäù—
causing fear.
TRANSLATION
On the birth of the two demons there were many natural disturbances, all very fearful
and wonderful, in the heavenly planets, the earthly planets and in between them.
SB 3.17.4
TEXT 4
Sahacl/a >auvêelu/idRXa" SavaR" Pa[JaJvlu/" )
SaaeLk-aêaXaNaYa" PaeTau" ke-TavêaiTaRheTav" )) 4 ))
sahäcalä bhuvaç celur
diçaù sarväù prajajvaluù
solkäç cäçanayaù petuù
ketavaç cärti-hetavaù
SYNONYMS
saha—along with; acaläù—the mountains; bhuvaù—of the earth; celuù—shook; diçaù—
directions; sarväù—all; prajajvaluù—blazed like fire; sa—with; ulkäù—meteors; ca—
4
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
and; açanayaù—thunderbolts; petuù—fell; ketavaù—comets; ca—and; ärti-hetavaù—the
cause of all inauspiciousness.
TRANSLATION
There were earthquakes along the mountains on the earth, and it appeared that there was
fire everywhere. Many inauspicious planets like Saturn appeared, along with comets,
meteors and thunderbolts.
PURPORT
When natural disturbances occur on a planet, one should understand that a demon must
have taken birth there. In the present age the number of demoniac people is increasing;
therefore natural disturbances are also increasing. There is no doubt about this, as we
can understand from the statements of the Bhägavatam.
SB 3.17.5
TEXT 5
vvaE vaYau" Saudu"SPaXaR" fU-Tk-araNaqrYaNMauhu" )
oNMaUl/YaàGaPaTaqNvaTYaaNaqk-ae rJaaeßJa" )) 5 ))
vavau väyuù suduùsparçaù
phüt-kärän érayan muhuù
unmülayan naga-patén
vätyänéko rajo-dhvajaù
SYNONYMS
vavau—blew; väyuù—the winds; su-duùsparçaù—unpleasant to touch; phüt-kärän—
hissing sounds; érayan—giving out; muhuù—again and again; unmülayan—uprooting;
naga-patén—gigantic trees; vätyä—cyclonic air; anékaù—armies; rajaù—dust; dhvajaù—
ensigns.
TRANSLATION
There blew winds which were most uninviting to the touch, hissing again and again and
uprooting gigantic trees. They had storms for their armies and clouds of dust for their
5
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ensigns.
PURPORT
When there are natural disturbances like blowing cyclones, too much heat or snowfall,
and uprooting of trees by hurricanes, it is to be understood that the demoniac
population is increasing and so the natural disturbance is also taking place. There are
many countries on the globe, even at the present moment, where all these disturbances
are current. This is true all over the world. There is insufficient sunshine, and there are
always clouds in the sky, snowfall and severe cold. These assure that such places are
inhabited by demoniac people who are accustomed to all kinds of forbidden, sinful
activity.
SB 3.17.6
TEXT 6
oÖSatai@dM>aaedga$=Yaa Naí>aaGa<ae )
VYaaeiMan Pa[ivíTaMaSaa Na SMa VYaad*XYaTae PadMa( )) 6 ))
uddhasat-taòid-ambhodaghaöayä
nañöa-bhägaëe
vyomni praviñöa-tamasä
na sma vyädåçyate padam
SYNONYMS
uddhasat—laughing loudly; taòit—lightning; ambhoda—of clouds; ghaöayä—by masses;
nañöa—lost; bhä-gaëe—the luminaries; vyomni—in the sky; praviñöa—enveloped;
tamasä—by darkness; na—not; sma vyädåçyate—could be seen; padam—any place.
TRANSLATION
The luminaries in the heavens were screened by masses of clouds, in which lightning
sometimes flashed as though laughing. Darkness reigned everywhere, and nothing could
be seen.
SB 3.17.7
TEXT 7
6
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
cu§-aeXa ivMaNaa vaiDaRådUiMaR" +aui>aTaaedr" )
SaaedPaaNaaê SairTaêu+au>au" éuZk-PaªJaa" )) 7 ))
cukroça vimanä värdhir
udürmiù kñubhitodaraù
sodapänäç ca saritaç
cukñubhuù çuñka-paìkajäù
SYNONYMS
cukroça—wailed aloud; vimanäù—stricken with sorrow; värdhiù—the ocean; udürmiù—
high waves; kñubhita—agitated; udaraù—the creatures inside; sa-udapänäù—with the
drinking water of the lakes and the wells; ca—and; saritaù—the rivers; cukñubhuù—
were agitated; çuñka—withered; paìkajäù—lotus flowers.
TRANSLATION
The ocean with its high waves wailed aloud as if stricken with sorrow, and there was a
commotion among the creatures inhabiting the ocean. The rivers and lakes were also
agitated, and lotuses withered.
SB 3.17.8
TEXT 8
Mauhu" PairDaYaae_>aUvNa( Saraûae" XaiXaSaUYaRYaae" )
iNagaaRTaa rQaiNahivvre>Ya" Pa[Jaijre )) 8 ))
muhuù paridhayo 'bhüvan
sarähvoù çaçi-süryayoù
nirghätä ratha-nirhrädä
vivarebhyaù prajajïire
SYNONYMS
muhuù—again and again; paridhayaù—misty halos; abhüvan—appeared; sa-rähvoù—
during eclipses; çaçi—of the moon; süryayoù—of the sun; nirghätäù—claps of thunder;
ratha-nirhrädäù—sounds like those of rattling chariots; vivarebhyaù—from the
7
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mountain caves; prajajïire—were produced.
TRANSLATION
Misty halos appeared around the sun and the moon during solar and lunar eclipses again
and again. Claps of thunder were heard even without clouds, and sounds like those of
rattling chariots emerged from the mountain caves.
SB 3.17.9
TEXT 9
ANTaGa]aRMaezu Mau%Taae vMaNTYaae viöMauLb<aMa( )
Sa*Gaal/aelU/k-$=ªarE" Pa[<aeduriXav& iXava" )) 9 ))
antar-grämeñu mukhato
vamantyo vahnim ulbaëam
sågälolüka-öaìkäraiù
praëedur açivaà çiväù
SYNONYMS
antaù—in the interior; grämeñu—in the villages; mukhataù—from their mouths;
vamantyaù—vomiting; vahnim—fire; ulbaëam—fearful; sågäla—jackals; ulüka—owls;
öaìkäraiù—with their cries; praëeduù—created their respective vibrations; açivam—
portentously; çiväù—the she-jackals.
TRANSLATION
In the interior of the villages she-jackals yelled portentously, vomiting strong fire from
their mouths, and jackals and owls also joined them with their cries.
SB 3.17.10
TEXT 10
Sa(r)qTavd]aedNavduàMaYYa iXaraeDaraMa( )
VYaMauÄNa( ivivDaa vacae Ga]aMaiSa&haSTaTaSTaTa" )) 10 ))
saìgétavad rodanavad
8
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
unnamayya çirodharäm
vyamuïcan vividhä väco
gräma-siàhäs tatas tataù
SYNONYMS
saìgéta-vat—like singing; rodana-vat—like wailing; unnamayya—raising; çirodharäm—
the neck; vyamuïcan—uttered; vividhäù—various; väcaù—cries; gräma-siàhäù—the
dogs; tataù tataù—here and there.
TRANSLATION
Raising their necks, dogs cried here and there, now in the manner of singing and now of
wailing.
SB 3.17.11
TEXT 11
%raê k-kR-XaE" +ata" %urEganRNTaae DaraTal/Ma( )
%ak-aRrr>aSaa Mataa" PaYaRDaavNa( væQaXa" )) 11 ))
kharäç ca karkaçaiù kñattaù
khurair ghnanto dharä-talam
khärkära-rabhasä mattäù
paryadhävan varüthaçaù
SYNONYMS
kharäù—asses; ca—and; karkaçaiù—hard; kñattaù—O Vidura; khuraiù—with their
hooves; ghnantaù—striking; dharä-talam—the surface of the earth; khäù-kära—braying;
rabhasäù—wildly engaged in; mattäù—mad; paryadhävan—ran hither and thither;
varüthaçaù—in herds.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, the asses ran hither and thither in herds, striking the earth with their hard
hooves and wildly braying.
9
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Asses also feel very respectable as a race, and when they run in flocks hither and thither
in so-called jollity, it is understood to be a bad sign for human society.
SB 3.17.12
TEXT 12
ådNTaae raSa>a}aSTaa Naq@adudPaTaNa( %Gaa" )
gaaeze_r<Yae c PaXav" Xak*-NMaU}aMaku-vRTa )) 12 ))
rudanto räsabha-trastä
néòäd udapatan khagäù
ghoñe 'raëye ca paçavaù
çakån-mütram akurvata
SYNONYMS
rudantaù—shrieking; räsabha—by the asses; trastäù—frightened; néòät—from the nest;
udapatan—flew up; khagäù—birds; ghoñe—in the cowshed; araëye—in the woods; ca—
and; paçavaù—the cattle; çakåt—dung; mütram—urine; akurvata—passed.
TRANSLATION
Frightened by the braying of the asses, birds flew shrieking from their nests, while cattle
in the cowsheds as well as in the woods passed dung and urine.
SB 3.17.13
TEXT 13
Gaavae_}aSaàSa*GdaehaSTaaeYada" PaUYavizR<a" )
VYaådNdevil/(r)aiNa d]uMaa" PaeTauivRNaaiNal/Ma( )) 13 ))
gävo 'trasann asåg-dohäs
toyadäù püya-varñiëaù
vyarudan deva-liìgäni
drumäù petur vinänilam
10
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
gävaù—the cows; atrasan—were frightened; asåk—blood; dohäù—yielding; toyadäù—
clouds; püya—pus; varñiëaù—raining; vyarudan—shed tears; deva-liìgäni—the images
of the gods; drumäù—trees; petuù—fell down; vinä—without; anilam—a blast of wind.
TRANSLATION
Cows, terrified, yielded blood in place of milk, clouds rained pus, the images of the gods
in the temples shed tears, and trees fell down without a blast of wind.
SB 3.17.14
TEXT 14
Ga]haNa( Pau<YaTaMaaNaNYae >aGa<aa&êaiPa dqiPaTaa" )
AiTaceåvR§-GaTYaa YauYauDauê ParSParMa( )) 14 ))
grahän puëyatamän anye
bhagaëäàç cäpi dépitäù
aticerur vakra-gatyä
yuyudhuç ca parasparam
SYNONYMS
grahän—planets; puëya-tamän—most auspicious; anye—others (the ominous planets);
bha-gaëän—luminaries; ca—and; api—also; dépitäù—illuminating; aticeruù—
overlapped; vakra-gatyä—taking retrograde courses; yuyudhuù—came into conflict;
ca—and; paraù-param—with one another.
TRANSLATION
Ominous planets such as Mars and Saturn shone brighter and surpassed the auspicious
ones such as Mercury, Jupiter and Venus as well as a number of lunar mansions. Taking
seemingly retrograde courses, the planets came in conflict with one another.
PURPORT
The entire universe is moving under the three modes of material nature. Those living
entities who are in goodness are called the pious species—pious lands, pious trees, etc. It
11
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
is similar with the planets also; many planets are considered pious, and others are
considered impious. Saturn and Mars are considered impious. When the pious planets
shine very brightly, it is an auspicious sign, but when the inauspicious planets shine very
brightly, this is not a very good sign.
SB 3.17.15
TEXT 15
d*îaNYaa&ê MahaeTPaaTaaNaTatatvivd" Pa[Jaa" )
b]øPau}aaNa*Tae >aqTaa MaeiNare ivìSaMâvMa( )) 15 ))
dåñövänyäàç ca mahotpätän
atat-tattva-vidaù prajäù
brahma-puträn åte bhétä
menire viçva-samplavam
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—having seen; anyän—others; ca—and; mahä—great; utpätän—evil omens; atat-
tattva-vidaù—not knowing the secret (of the portents); prajäù—people; brahmaputrän—
the sons of Brahmä (the four Kumäras); åte—except; bhétäù—being fearful;
menire—thought; viçva-samplavam—the dissolution of the universe.
TRANSLATION
Marking these and many other omens of evil times, everyone but the four sage—sons of
Brahmä, who were aware of the fall of Jaya and Vijaya and of their birth as Diti's sons,
was seized with fear. They did not know the secrets of these portents and thought that
the dissolution of the universe was at hand.
PURPORT
According to Bhagavad-gétä, Seventh Chapter, the laws of nature are so stringent that it
is impossible for the living entity to surpass their enforcement. It is also explained that
only those who are fully surrendered to Kåñëa in Kåñëa consciousness can be saved. We
can learn from the description of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam that it is because of the birth
of two great demons that there were so many natural disturbances. It is to be indirectly
understood, as previously described, that when there are constant disturbances on the
12
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
earth, that is an omen that some demoniac people have been born or that the demoniac
population has increased. In former days there were only two demons—those born of
Diti—yet there were so many disturbances. At the present day, especially in this age of
Kali, these disturbances are always visible, which indicates that the demoniac
population has certainly increased.
To check the increase of demoniac population, the Vedic civilization enacted so many
rules and regulations of social life, the most important of which is the garbhädhäna
process for begetting good children. In Bhagavad-gétä Arjuna informed Kåñëa that if
there is unwanted population (varëa-saìkara), the entire world will appear to be hell.
People are very anxious for peace in the world, but there are so many unwanted children
born without the benefit of the garbhädhäna ceremony, just like the demons born from
Diti. Diti was so lusty that she forced her husband to copulate at a time which was
inauspicious, and therefore the demons were born to create disturbances. In having sex
life to beget children, one should observe the process for begetting nice children; if each
and every householder in every family observes the Vedic system, then there are nice
children, not demons, and automatically there is peace in the world. If we do not follow
regulations in life for social tranquillity, we cannot expect peace. Rather, we will have to
undergo the stringent reactions of natural laws.
SB 3.17.16
TEXT 16
TaavaiddETYaaE SahSaa VYaJYaMaaNaaTMaPaaEåzaE )
vv*DaaTae_XMaSaare<a k-aYaeNaaid]PaTaq wv )) 16 ))
täv ädi-daityau sahasä
vyajyamänätma-pauruñau
vavådhäte 'çma-säreëa
käyenädri-paté iva
SYNONYMS
tau—those two; ädi-daityau—demons in the beginning of creation; sahasä—quickly;
vyajyamäna—being manifest; ätma—own; pauruñau—prowess; vavådhäte—grew; açmasäreëa—
steellike; käyena—with bodily frames; adri-paté—two great mountains; iva—
like.
13
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
These two demons who appeared in ancient times soon began to exhibit uncommon bodily
features; they had steellike frames which began to grow just like two great mountains.
PURPORT
There are two classes of men in the world; one is called the demon, and the other is
called the demigod. The demigods concern themselves with the spiritual upliftment of
human society, whereas the demons are concerned with physical and material
upliftment. The two demons born of Diti began to make their bodies as strong as iron
frames, and they were so tall that they seemed to touch outer space. They were
decorated with valuable ornaments, and they thought that this was success in life.
Originally it was planned that Jaya and Vijaya, the two doorkeepers of Vaikuëöha, were
to take birth in this material world, where, by the curse of the sages, they were to play
the part of always being angry with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As demoniac
persons, they became so angry that they were not concerned with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but simply with physical comforts and physical upliftment.
SB 3.17.17
TEXT 17
idivSPa*XaaE heMaik-rq$=k-aei$=i>a‚
iNaRåÖk-aïaE Sfu-rd(r)da>auJaaE )
Gaa& k-MPaYaNTaaE cr<aE" Pade Pade
k-$ya Sauk-aHCYaakR-MaTaqTYa TaSQaTau" )) 17 ))
divi-spåçau hema-kiréöa-koöibhir
niruddha-käñöhau sphurad-aìgadä-bhujau
gäà kampayantau caraëaiù pade pade
kaöyä sukäïcyärkam atétya tasthatuù
SYNONYMS
divi-spåçau—touching the sky; hema—golden; kiréöa—of their helmets; koöibhiù—with
the crests; niruddha—blocked; käñöhau—the directions; sphurat—brilliant; aìgadä—
bracelets; bhujau—on whose arms; gäm—the earth; kampayantau—shaking; caraëaiù—
14
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
with their feet; pade pade—at every step; kaöyä—with their waists; su-käïcyä—with
beautiful decorated belts; arkam—the sun; atétya—surpassing; tasthatuù—they stood.
TRANSLATION
Their bodies became so tall that they seemed to kiss the sky with the crests of their gold
crowns. They blocked the view of all directions and while walking shook the earth at
every step. Their arms were adorned with brilliant bracelets, and they stood as if covering
the sun with their waists, which were bound with excellent and beautiful girdles.
PURPORT
In the demoniac way of civilization, people are interested in getting a body constructed
in such a way that when they walk on the street the earth will tremble and when they
stand it will appear that they cover the sun and the vision of the four directions. If a
race appears strong in body, their country is materially considered to be among the
highly advanced nations of the world.
SB 3.17.18
TEXT 18
Pa[JaaPaiTaNaaRMa TaYaaerk-azsd(
Ya" Pa[ak(- SvdehaÛMaYaaerJaaYaTa )
Ta& vE ihr<Yak-iXaPau& ivdu" Pa[Jaa
Ya& Ta& ihr<Yaa+aMaSaUTa SaaGa]Ta" )) 18 ))
prajäpatir näma tayor akärñéd
yaù präk sva-dehäd yamayor ajäyata
taà vai hiraëyakaçipuà viduù prajä
yaà taà hiraëyäkñam asüta sägrataù
SYNONYMS
prajäpatiù—Kaçyapa; näma—names; tayoù—of the two; akärñét—gave; yaù—who;
präk—first; sva-dehät—from his body; yamayoù—of the twins; ajäyata—was delivered;
tam—him; vai—indeed; hiraëyakaçipum—Hiraëyakaçipu; viduù—know; prajäù—
people; yam—whom; tam—him; hiraëyäkñam—Hiraëyäkña; asüta—gave birth to; sä—
15
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
she (Diti); agrataù—first.
TRANSLATION
Kaçyapa, Prajäpati, the creator of the living entities, gave his twin sons their names; the
one who was born first he named Hiraëyäkña, and the one who was first conceived by
Diti he named Hiraëyakaçipu.
PURPORT
There is an authoritative Vedic literature called Piëòa-siddhi in which the scientific
understanding of pregnancy is very nicely described. It is stated that when the male
secretion enters the menstrual flux in the uterus in two successive drops, the mother
develops two embryos in her womb, and she brings forth twins in a reverse order to that
in which they were first conceived; the child conceived first is born later, and the one
conceived later is brought forth first. The first child conceived in the womb lives behind
the second child, so when birth takes place the second child appears first, and the first
child appears second. In this case it is understood that Hiraëyäkña, the second child
conceived, was delivered first, whereas Hiraëyakaçipu, the child who was behind him,
having been conceived first, was born second.
SB 3.17.19
TEXT 19
c§e- ihr<Yak-iXaPaudaeR>Yaa| b]øvre<a c )
vXae SaPaal/amçaek-a&ñqNaku-TaaeMa*TYauåÖTa" )) 19 ))
cakre hiraëyakaçipur
dorbhyäà brahma-vareëa ca
vaçe sa-päläû lokäàs trén
akuto-måtyur uddhataù
SYNONYMS
cakre—made; hiraëyakaçipuù—Hiraëyakaçipu; dorbhyäm—by his two arms; brahmavareëa—
by the benediction of Brahmä; ca—and; vaçe—under his control; sa-pälän—
along with their protectors; lokän—the worlds; trén—three; akutaù-måtyuù—fearing
death from no one; uddhataù—puffed up.
16
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The elder child, Hiraëyakaçipu, was unafraid of death from anyone within the three
worlds because he received a benediction from Lord Brahmä. He was proud and puffed up
due to this benediction and was able to bring all three planetary systems under his
control.
PURPORT
As will be revealed in later chapters, Hiraëyakaçipu underwent severe austerity and
penance to satisfy Brahmä and thus receive a benediction of immortality. Actually, it is
impossible even for Lord Brahmä to give anyone the benediction of becoming immortal,
but indirectly Hiraëyakaçipu received the benediction that no one within this material
world would be able to kill him. In other words, because he originally came from the
abode of Vaikuëöha, he was not to be killed by anyone within this material world. The
Lord desired to appear Himself to kill him. One may be very proud of his material
advancement in knowledge, but he cannot be immune to the four principles of material
existence, namely birth, death, old age and disease. It was the Lord's plan to teach people
that even Hiraëyakaçipu, who was so powerful and strongly built, could not live more
than his destined duration of life. One may become as strong and puffed up as
Hiraëyakaçipu and bring under his control all the three worlds, but there is no
possibility of continuing life eternally or keeping the conquered booty forever. So many
emperors have ascended to power, and they are now lost in oblivion; that is the history
of the world.
SB 3.17.20
TEXT 20
ihr<Yaa+aae_NauJaSTaSYa iPa[Ya" Pa[qiTak*-dNvhMa( )
GadaPaai<aidRv& YaaTaae YauYauTSauMa*RGaYaNa( r<aMa( )) 20 ))
hiraëyäkño 'nujas tasya
priyaù préti-kåd anvaham
gadä-päëir divaà yäto
yuyutsur mågayan raëam
SYNONYMS
17
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
hiraëyäkñaù—Hiraëyäkña; anujaù—younger brother; tasya—his; priyaù—beloved; prétikåt—
ready to please; anu-aham—every day; gadä-päëiù—with a club in hand; divam—
to the higher planets; yätaù—traveled; yuyutsuù—desirous to fight; mågayan—seeking;
raëam—combat.
TRANSLATION
His younger brother, Hiraëyäkña, was always ready to satisfy his elder brother by his
activities. Hiraëyäkña took a club on his shoulder and traveled all over the universe with
a fighting spirit just to satisfy Hiraëyakaçipu.
PURPORT
The demoniac spirit is to train all family members to exploit the resources of this
universe for personal sense gratification, whereas the godly spirit is to engage everything
in the service of the Lord. Hiraëyakaçipu was himself very powerful, and he made his
younger brother, Hiraëyäkña, powerful to assist him in fighting with everyone and
lording it over material nature as long as possible. If possible, he wanted to rule the
universe eternally. These are demonstrations of the spirit of the demoniac living entity.
SB 3.17.21
TEXT 21
Ta& vq+Ya du"SahJav& r<aTk-aÄNaNaUPaurMa( )
vEJaYaNTYaa óJaa JauíMa&SaNYaSTaMahaGadMa( )) 21 ))
taà vékñya duùsaha-javaà
raëat-käïcana-nüpuram
vaijayantyä srajä juñöam
aàsa-nyasta-mahä-gadam
SYNONYMS
tam—him; vékñya—having seen; duùsaha—difficult to control; javam—temper; raëat—
tinkling; käïcana—gold; nüpuram—anklets; vaijayantyä srajä—with a vaijayanté
garland; juñöam—adorned; aàsa—on his shoulder; nyasta—rested; mahä-gadam—a
huge mace.
18
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyäkña's temper was difficult to control. He had anklets of gold tinkling about his
feet, he was adorned with a gigantic garland, and he rested his huge mace on one of his
shoulders.
SB 3.17.22
TEXT 22
MaNaaevqYaRvraeiTSa¢-MaSa*<YaMaku-Taae>aYaMa( )
>aqTaa iNail/iLYare devaSTaa+YaR}aSTaa wvahYa" )) 22 ))
mano-vérya-varotsiktam
asåëyam akuto-bhayam
bhétä nililyire deväs
tärkñya-trastä ivähayaù
SYNONYMS
manaù-vérya—by mental and bodily strength; vara—by the boon; utsiktam—proud;
asåëyam—not able to be checked; akutaù-bhayam—fearing no one; bhétäù—frightened;
nililyire—hid themselves; deväù—the demigods; tärkñya—Garuòa; trastäù—frightened
of; iva—like; ahayaù—snakes.
TRANSLATION
His mental and bodily strength as well as the boon conferred upon him had made him
proud. He feared death at the hands of no one, and there was no checking him. The gods,
therefore, were seized with fear at his very sight, and they hid themselves even as snakes
hide themselves for fear of Garuòa.
PURPORT
The asuras are generally strongly built, as described here, and therefore their mental
condition is very sound, and their prowess is also extraordinary. Hiraëyäkña and
Hiraëyakaçipu, having received the boon that they would not be killed by any other
living entity within this universe, were almost immortal, and thus they were completely
fearless.
19
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.17.23
TEXT 23
Sa vE iTaraeihTaaNa( d*îa MahSaa SveNa dETYara$( )
SaeNd]aNdevGa<aaNa( +aqbaNaPaXYaNa( VYaNadd( >a*XaMa( )) 23 ))
sa vai tirohitän dåñövä
mahasä svena daitya-räö
sendrän deva-gaëän kñébän
apaçyan vyanadad bhåçam
SYNONYMS
saù—he; vai—indeed; tirohitän—vanished; dåñövä—having seen; mahasä—by might;
svena—his own; daitya-räö—the chief of the Daityas (demons); sa-indrän—along with
Indra; deva-gaëän—the demigods; kñébän—intoxicated; apaçyan—not finding;
vyanadat—roared; bhåçam—loudly.
TRANSLATION
On not finding Indra and the other demigods, who had previously been intoxicated with
power, the chief of the Daityas, seeing that they had all vanished before his might, roared
loudly.
SB 3.17.24
TEXT 24
TaTaae iNav*ta" §-Ii@ZYaNa( GaM>aqr& >aqMaiNaSvNaMa( )
ivJaGaahe MahaSatvae vaiDa| Mata wv iÜPa" )) 24 ))
tato nivåttaù kréòiñyan
gambhéraà bhéma-nisvanam
vijagähe mahä-sattvo
värdhià matta iva dvipaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; nivåttaù—returned; kréòiñyan—for the sake of sport; gambhéram—deep;
20
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bhéma-nisvanam—making a terrible sound; vijagähe—dived; mahä-sattvaù—the mighty
being; värdhim—in the ocean; mattaù—in wrath; iva—like; dvipaù—an elephant.
TRANSLATION
After returning from the heavenly kingdom, the mighty demon, who was like an elephant
in wrath, for the sake of sport dived into the deep ocean, which was roaring terribly.
SB 3.17.25
TEXT 25
TaiSMaNa( Pa[ivíe vå<aSYa SaEiNak-a
YaadaeGa<aa" SaàiDaYa" SaSaaßSaa" )
AhNYaMaaNaa AiPa TaSYa vcRSaa
Pa[DaizRTaa dUrTar& Pa[dud]uvu" )) 25 ))
tasmin praviñöe varuëasya sainikä
yädo-gaëäù sanna-dhiyaù sasädhvasäù
ahanyamänä api tasya varcasä
pradharñitä dürataraà pradudruvuù
SYNONYMS
tasmin praviñöe—when he entered the ocean; varuëasya—of Varuëa; sainikäù—the
defenders; yädaù-gaëäù—the aquatic animals; sanna-dhiyaù—depressed; sa-sädhvasäù—
with fear; ahanyamänäù—not being hit; api—even; tasya—his; varcasä—by splendor;
pradharñitäù—stricken; düra-taram—far away; pradudruvuù—they ran fast.
TRANSLATION
On his entering the ocean, the aquatic animals who formed the host of Varuëa were
stricken with fear and ran far away. Thus Hiraëyäkña showed his splendor without
dealing a blow.
PURPORT
Materialistic demons sometimes appear to be very powerful and are seen to establish
their supremacy throughout the world. Here also it appears that Hiraëyäkña, by his
21
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
demoniac strength, actually established his supremacy throughout the universe, and the
demigods were afraid of his uncommon power. Not only were the demigods in space
afraid of the demons Hiraëyakaçipu and Hiraëyäkña, but so also were the aquatic
animals within the sea.
SB 3.17.26
TEXT 26
Sa vzRPaUGaaNaudDaaE Mahabl/‚
êrNMahaeMasH^(vSaNaeirTaaNMauhu" )
MaaEVYaaRi>aJagane GadYaa iv>aavrq‚
MaaSaeidva&STaaTa Paurq& Pa[ceTaSa" )) 26 ))
sa varña-pügän udadhau mahä-balaç
caran mahorméï chvasaneritän muhuù
maurvyäbhijaghne gadayä vibhävarém
äsediväàs täta puréà pracetasaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he; varña-pügän—for many years; udadhau—in the ocean; mahä-balaù—mighty;
caran—moving; mahä-ürmén—gigantic waves; çvasana—by the wind; éritän—tossed;
muhuù—again and again; maurvyä—iron; abhijaghne—he struck; gadayä—with his
mace; vibhävarém—Vibhävaré; äsedivän—reached; täta—O dear Vidura; purém—the
capital; pracetasaù—of Varuëa.
TRANSLATION
Moving about in the ocean for many, many years, the mighty Hiraëyäkña smote the
gigantic wind-tossed waves again and again with his iron mace and reached Vibhävaré, the
capital of Varuëa.
PURPORT
Varuëa is supposed to be the predominating deity of the waters, and his capital, which is
known as Vibhävaré, is within the watery kingdom.
SB 3.17.27
22
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 27
Ta}aaePal/>YaaSaurl/aek-Paal/k&-
YaadaeGa<aaNaaMa*z>a& Pa[ceTaSaMa( )
SMaYaNa( Pa[l/BDau& Pa[i<aPaTYa Naqcv‚
ÂGaad Mae deùiDaraJa Sa&YauGaMa( )) 27 ))
tatropalabhyäsura-loka-pälakaà
yädo-gaëänäm åñabhaà pracetasam
smayan pralabdhuà praëipatya nécavaj
jagäda me dehy adhiräja saàyugam
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; upalabhya—having reached; asura-loka—of the regions where the demons
reside; pälakam—the guardian; yädaù-gaëänäm—of the aquatic creatures; åñabham—
the lord; pracetasam—Varuëa; smayan—smiling; pralabdhum—to make fun;
praëipatya—having bowed down; néca-vat—like a lowborn man; jagäda—he said; me—
to me; dehi—give; adhiräja—O great lord; saàyugam—battle.
TRANSLATION
Vibhävaré is the home of Varuëa, lord of the aquatic creatures and guardian of the lower
regions of the universe, where the demons generally reside. There Hiraëyäkña fell at
Varuëa's feet like a lowborn man, and to make fun of him he said with a smile, "Give me
battle, O Supreme Lord!"
PURPORT
The demoniac person always challenges others and tries to occupy others' property by
force. Here these symptoms are fully displayed by Hiraëyäkña, who begged war from a
person who had no desire to fight.
SB 3.17.28
TEXT 28
Tv& l/aek-Paal/ae_iDaPaiTab*RhC^\va
23
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
vqYaaRPahae duMaRdvqrMaaiNaNaaMa( )
iviJaTYa l/aeke-_i%l/dETYadaNavaNa(
Yad]aJaSaUYaeNa PauraYaJaTPa[>aae )) 28 ))
tvaà loka-pälo 'dhipatir båhac-chravä
véryäpaho durmada-véra-mäninäm
vijitya loke 'khila-daitya-dänavän
yad räjasüyena puräyajat prabho
SYNONYMS
tvam—you (Varuëa); loka-pälaù—guardian of the planet; adhipatiù—a ruler; båhatçraväù—
of wide fame; vérya—the power; apahaù—diminished; durmada—of the proud;
véra-mäninäm—thinking themselves very big heroes; vijitya—having conquered; loke—
in the world; akhila—all; daitya—the demons; dänavän—the Dänavas; yat—whence;
räja-süyena—with a Räjasüya sacrifice; purä—formerly; ayajat—worshiped; prabho—O
lord.
TRANSLATION
You are the guardian of an entire sphere and a ruler of wide fame. Having crushed the
might of arrogant and conceited warriors and having conquered all the Daityas and
Dänavas in the world, you once performed a Räjasüya sacrifice to the Lord.
SB 3.17.29
TEXT 29
Sa WvMauiTSa¢-MadeNa iviÜza
d*!& Pa[l/BDaae >aGavaNaPaa& PaiTa" )
raez& SaMauTQa& XaMaYaNa( SvYaa iDaYaa
VYavaecd(r)aePaXaMa& GaTaa vYaMa( )) 29 ))
sa evam utsikta-madena vidviñä
dåòhaà pralabdho bhagavän apäà patiù
roñaà samutthaà çamayan svayä dhiyä
vyavocad aìgopaçamaà gatä vayam
24
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
saù—Varuëa; evam—thus; utsikta—puffed up; madena—with vanity; vidviñä—by the
enemy; dåòham—deeply; pralabdhaù—mocked; bhagavän—worshipful; apäm—of the
waters; patiù—the lord; roñam—anger; samuttham—sprung up; çamayan—controlling;
svayä dhiyä—by his reason; vyavocat—he replied; aìga—O dear one; upaçamam—
desisting from warfare; gatäù—gone; vayam—we.
TRANSLATION
Thus mocked by an enemy whose vanity knew no bounds, the worshipful lord of the
waters waxed angry, but by dint of his reason he managed to curb the anger that had
sprung up in him, and he replied: O dear one, we have now desisted from warfare, having
grown too old for combat.
PURPORT
As we see, warmongering materialists always create fighting without reason.
SB 3.17.30
TEXT 30
PaXYaaiMa NaaNYa& PauåzaTPauraTaNaad(
Ya" Sa&YauGae Tva& r<aMaaGaRk-aeivdMa( )
AaraDaiYaZYaTYaSaurzR>aeih Ta&
MaNaiSvNaae Ya& Ga*<aTae >avad*Xaa" )) 30 ))
paçyämi nänyaà puruñät purätanäd
yaù saàyuge tväà raëa-märga-kovidam
ärädhayiñyaty asurarñabhehi taà
manasvino yaà gåëate bhavädåçäù
SYNONYMS
paçyämi—I see; na—not; anyam—other; puruñät—than the person; purätanät—most
ancient; yaù—who; saàyuge—in battle; tväm—to you; raëa-märga—in the tactics of
war; kovidam—very much skilled; ärädhayiñyati—will give satisfaction; asura-åñabha—O
chief of the asuras; ihi—approach; tam—Him; manasvinaù—heroes; yam—whom;
25
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
gåëate—praise; bhavädåçäù—like you.
TRANSLATION
You are so skilled in war that I do not see anyone else but the most ancient person, Lord
Viñëu, who can give satisfaction in battle to you. Therefore, O chief of the asuras,
approach Him, whom even heroes like you mention with praise.
PURPORT
Aggressive materialistic warriors are actually punished by the Supreme Lord for their
policy of unnecessarily disturbing world peace. Therefore Varuëa advised Hiraëyäkña
that the right course to satisfy his fighting spirit would be to seek to fight with Viñëu.
SB 3.17.31
TEXT 31
Ta& vqrMaaradi>aPaÛ ivSMaYa"
XaiYaZYaSae vqrXaYae ìi>av*RTa" )
YaSTviÜDaaNaaMaSaTaa& Pa[XaaNTaYae
æPaai<a Datae SadNauGa]heC^Yaa )) 31 ))
taà véram äräd abhipadya vismayaù
çayiñyase véra-çaye çvabhir våtaù
yas tvad-vidhänäm asatäà praçäntaye
rüpäëi dhatte sad-anugrahecchayä
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; véram—the great hero; ärät—quickly; abhipadya—on reaching; vismayaù—
rid of pride; çayiñyase—you will lie down; véraçaye—on the battlefield; çvabhiù—by dogs;
våtaù—surrounded; yaù—He who; tvat-vidhänäm—like you; asatäm—of wicked persons;
praçäntaye—for the extermination; rüpäëi—forms; dhatte—He assumes; sat—to the
virtuous; anugraha—to show His grace; icchayä—with a desire.
TRANSLATION
Varuëa continued: On reaching Him you will be rid of your pride at once and will lie
26
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
down on the field of battle, surrounded by dogs, for eternal sleep. It is in order to
exterminate wicked fellows like you and to show His grace to the virtuous that He
assumes His various incarnations like Varäha.
PURPORT
Asuras do not know that their bodies consist of the five elements of material nature and
that when they fall they become objects of pastimes for dogs and vultures. Varuëa
advised Hiraëyäkña to meet Viñëu in His boar incarnation so that his hankering for
aggressive war would be satisfied and his powerful body would be vanquished.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Seventeenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Victory of Hiraëyäkña Over All the Directions of the
Universe."
18. The Battle Between Lord Boar and the Demon Hiraëyäkña
SB 3.18.1
TEXT 1
MaE}aeYa ovac
TadevMaak-<YaR Jale/Xa>aaizTa&
MahaMaNaaSTaiÜGa<aYYa duMaRd" )
hreivRidTva GaiTaMa(r) Naardad(
rSaaTal&/ iNaivRivXae TvraiNvTa" )) 1 ))
maitreya uväca
tad evam äkarëya jaleça-bhäñitaà
mahä-manäs tad vigaëayya durmadaù
harer viditvä gatim aìga näradäd
rasätalaà nirviviçe tvaränvitaù
27
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù—the great sage Maitreya; uväca—said; tat—that; evam—thus; äkarëya—
hearing; jala-éça—of the controller of water, Varuëa; bhäñitam—words; mahä-manäù—
proud; tat—those words; vigaëayya—having paid little heed to; durmadaù—
vainglorious; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viditvä—having learned;
gatim—the whereabouts; aìga—O dear Vidura; näradät—from Närada; rasätalam—to
the depths of the ocean; nirviviçe—entered; tvarä-anvitaù—with great speed.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya continued: The proud and falsely glorious Daitya paid little heed to the words of
Varuëa. O dear Vidura, he learned from Närada the whereabouts of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and hurriedly betook himself to the depths of the ocean.
PURPORT
Materialistic warmongers are not even afraid to fight with their mightiest enemy, the
Personality of Godhead. The demon was very encouraged to learn from Varuëa that
there was one fighter who could actually combat him, and he was very enthusiastic to
search out the Supreme Personality of Godhead just to give Him a fight, even though it
was predicted by Varuëa that by fighting with Viñëu he would become prey for dogs,
jackals and vultures. Since demoniac persons are less intelligent, they dare to fight with
Viñëu, who is known as Ajita, or one who has never been conquered.
SB 3.18.2
TEXT 2
ddXaR Ta}aai>aiJaTa& DaraDar&
Pa[aeàqYaMaaNaaviNaMaGa]d&í\Yaa )
MauZ<aNTaMa+<aa Svåcae_å<aié[Yaa
JahaSa cahae vNaGaaecrae Ma*Ga" )) 2 ))
dadarça taträbhijitaà dharä-dharaà
pronnéyamänävanim agra-daàñörayä
muñëantam akñëä sva-ruco 'ruëa-çriyä
jahäsa cäho vana-gocaro mågaù
28
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
dadarça—he saw; tatra—there; abhijitam—the victorious; dharä—the earth; dharam—
bearing; pronnéyamäna—being raised upward; avanim—the earth; agra-daàñörayä—by
the tip of His tusk; muñëantam—who was diminishing; akñëä—with His eyes; svarucaù—
Hiraëyäkña's own splendor; aruëa—reddish; çriyä—radiant; jahäsa—he
laughed; ca—and; aho—oh; vana-gocaraù—amphibious; mågaù—beast.
TRANSLATION
He saw there the all-powerful Personality of Godhead in His boar incarnation, bearing
the earth upward on the ends of His tusks and robbing him of his splendor with His
reddish eyes. The demon laughed: Oh, an amphibious beast!
PURPORT
In a previous chapter we have discussed the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as Varäha, the boar. While Varäha, with His tusks, engaged in uplifting the
submerged earth from the depths of the waters, this great demon Hiraëyäkña met Him
and challenged Him, calling Him a beast. Demons cannot understand the incarnations
of the Lord; they think that His incarnations as a fish or boar or tortoise are big beasts
only. They misunderstand the body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even in His
human form, and they deride His descent. In the Caitanya-sampradäya there is
sometimes a demoniac misconception about the descent of Nityänanda Prabhu.
Nityänanda Prabhu's body is spiritual, but demoniac persons consider the body of the
Supreme Personality to be material, just like ours. Avajänanti mäà müòhäù: [Bg. 9.11]
persons who have no intelligence deride the transcendental form of the Lord as
material.
SB 3.18.3
TEXT 3
AahENaMaeùj Mahq& ivMauÄ Naae
rSaaEk-Saa& ivìSa*JaeYaMaiPaRTaa )
Na SviSTa YaaSYaSYaNaYaa MaMae+aTa"
SauraDaMaaSaaidTaSaUk-rak*-Tae )) 3 ))
29
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ähainam ehy ajïa mahéà vimuïca no
rasaukasäà viçva-såjeyam arpitä
na svasti yäsyasy anayä mamekñataù
surädhamäsädita-sükaräkåte
SYNONYMS
äha—Hiraëyäkña said; enam—to the Lord; ehi—come and fight; ajïa—O fool; mahém—
the earth; vimuïca—give up; naù—to us; rasä-okasäm—of the inhabitants of the lower
regions; viçva-såjä—by the creator of the universe; iyam—this earth; arpitä—entrusted;
na—not; svasti—well-being; yäsyasi—You will go; anayä—with this; mama ékñataù—
while I am seeing; sura-adhama—O lowest of the demigods; äsädita—having taken;
sükara-äkåte—the form of a boar.
TRANSLATION
The demon addressed the Lord: O best of the demigods, dressed in the form of a boar, just
hear me. This earth is entrusted to us, the inhabitants of the lower regions, and You
cannot take it from my presence and not be hurt by me.
PURPORT
Çrédhara Svämé, commenting on this verse, states that although the demon wanted to
deride the Personality of Godhead in the form of a boar, actually he worshiped Him in
several words. For example, he addressed Him as vana-gocaraù, which means "one who is
a resident of the forest," but another meaning of vana-gocaraù is "one who lies on the
water." Viñëu lies on the water, so the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be properly
addressed in this way. The demon also addressed Him as mågaù, indicating,
unintentionally, that the Supreme Personality is sought after by great sages, saintly
persons and transcendentalists. He also addressed Him as ajïa. Çrédhara Svämé says that
jïa means "knowledge," and there is no knowledge which is unknown to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Indirectly, therefore, the demon said that Viñëu knows
everything. The demon addressed Him as surädhama. Sura means "the demigods," and
adhama means "Lord of all there is." He is Lord of all the demigods; therefore He is the
best of all demigods, or God. When the demon used the phrase "in my presence," the
implied meaning was, "In spite of my presence, You are completely able to take away the
earth." Na svasti yäsyasi: "unless You kindly take this earth from our custody, there can
30
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
be no good fortune for us."
SB 3.18.4
TEXT 4
Tv& Na" SaPaÒEr>avaYa ik&- >a*Taae
Yaae MaaYaYaa hNTYaSauraNa( Parae+aiJaTa( )
Tva& YaaeGaMaaYaabl/MaLPaPaaEåz&
Sa&SQaaPYa MaU! Pa[Ma*Jae SauôC^uc" )) 4 ))
tvaà naù sapatnair abhaväya kià bhåto
yo mäyayä hanty asurän parokña-jit
tväà yogamäyä-balam alpa-pauruñaà
saàsthäpya müòha pramåje suhåc-chucaù
SYNONYMS
tvam—You; naù—us; sapatnaiù—by our enemies; abhaväya—for killing; kim—is it that;
bhåtaù—maintained; yaù—He who; mäyayä—by deception; hanti—kills; asurän—the
demons; parokña-jit—who conquered by remaining invisible; tväm—You; yogamäyäbalam—
whose strength is bewildering power; alpa-pauruñam—whose power is meager;
saàsthäpya—after killing; müòha—fool; pramåje—I shall wipe out; suhåt-çucaù—the
grief of my kinsmen.
TRANSLATION
You rascal, You have been nourished by our enemies to kill us, and You have killed some
demons by remaining invisible. O fool, Your power is only mystic, so today I shall enliven
my kinsmen by killing You.
PURPORT
The demon used the word abhaväya, which means "for killing." Çrédhara Svämé
comments that this "killing" means liberating, or, in other words, killing the process of
continued birth and death. The Lord kills the process of birth and death and keeps
Himself invisible. The activities of the Lord's internal potency are inconceivable, but by
a slight exhibition of this potency, the Lord, by His grace, can deliver one from
31
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nescience. Çucaù means "miseries"; the miseries of material existence can be
extinguished by the Lord by His potential energy of internal yogamäyä. In the Upaniñads
(Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.8) it is stated, paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate [Cc. Madhya
13.65, purport]. The Lord is invisible to the eyes of the common man, but His energies act
in various ways. When demons are in adversity, they think that God is hiding Himself
and is working by His mystic potency. They think that if they can find God they can kill
Him just by seeing Him. Hiraëyäkña thought that way, and he challenged the Lord: "You
have done tremendous harm to our community, taking the part of the demigods, and
You have killed our kinsmen in so many ways, always keeping Yourself hidden. Now I
see You face to face, and I am not going to let You go. I shall kill You and save my
kinsmen from Your mystic misdeeds."
Not only are demons always anxious to kill God with words and philosophy, but they
think that if one is materially powerful he can kill God with materially fatal weapons.
Demons like Kaàsa, Rävaëa and Hiraëyakaçipu thought themselves powerful enough to
kill even God. Demons cannot understand that God, by His multifarious potencies, can
work so wonderfully that He can be present everywhere and still remain in His eternal
abode, Goloka Våndävana.
SB 3.18.5
TEXT 5
TviYa Sa&iSQaTae GadYaa Xaq<aRXaqzR‚
<YaSMad(>auJaCYauTaYaa Yae c Tau>YaMa( )
bil&/ hrNTYa*zYaae Yae c deva"
SvYa& SaveR Na >aivZYaNTYaMaUl/a" )) 5 ))
tvayi saàsthite gadayä çérëa-çérñaëy
asmad-bhuja-cyutayä ye ca tubhyam
balià haranty åñayo ye ca deväù
svayaà sarve na bhaviñyanty amüläù
SYNONYMS
tvayi—when You; saàsthite—are killed; gadayä—by the mace; çérëa—smashed;
çérñaëi—skull; asmat-bhuja—from my hand; cyutayä—released; ye—those who; ca—
and; tubhyam—to You; balim—presentations; haranti—offer; åñayaù—sages; ye—those
32
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
who; ca—and; deväù—demigods; svayam—automatically; sarve—all; na—not;
bhaviñyanti—will exist; amüläù—without roots.
TRANSLATION
The demon continued: When You fall dead with Your skull smashed by the mace hurled
by my arms, the demigods and sages who offer You oblations and sacrifice in devotional
service will also automatically cease to exist, like trees without roots.
PURPORT
Demons are very much disturbed when devotees worship the Lord in the prescribed
ways recommended in the scriptures. In the Vedic scriptures, the neophyte devotees are
advised to engage in nine kinds of devotional service, such as to hear and chant the holy
name of God, to remember Him always, to chant on beads Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa,
Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare, to worship
the Lord in the form of His Deity incarnation in the temples, and to engage in various
activities of Kåñëa consciousness to increase the number of godly persons for perfect
peace in the world. Demons do not like such activity. They are always envious of God
and His devotees. Their propaganda not to worship in the temple or church but simply
to make material advancement for satisfaction of the senses is always current. The
demon Hiraëyäkña, upon seeing the Lord face to face, wanted to make a permanent
solution by killing the Personality of Godhead with his powerful mace. The example of
an uprooted tree mentioned here by the demon is very significant. Devotees accept that
God is the root of everything. Their example is that just as the stomach is the source of
energy of all the limbs of the body, God is the original source of all energy manifested in
the material and spiritual worlds; therefore, as supplying food to the stomach is the
process to satisfy all the limbs of the body, Kåñëa consciousness, or developing love of
Kåñëa, is the sublime method for satisfying the source of all happiness. The demon wants
to uproot this source because if the root, God, were to be checked, the activities of the
Lord and the devotees would automatically stop. The demon would be very much
satisfied by such a situation in society. Demons are always anxious to have a godless
society for their sense gratification. According to Çrédhara Svämé, this verse means that
when the demon would be deprived of his mace by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
not only the neophyte devotees but also the ancient sagacious devotees of the Lord
would be very much satisfied.
SB 3.18.6
33
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 6
Sa TauÛMaaNaae_irduå¢-TaaeMarE‚
d|í\aGa]Gaa& GaaMauPal/+Ya >aqTaaMa( )
Taaed& Ma*ziàrGaadMbuMaDYaad(
Ga]ahahTa" Sak-re<auYaRQae>a" )) 6 ))
sa tudyamäno 'ri-durukta-tomarair
daàñörägra-gäà gäm upalakñya bhétäm
todaà måñan niragäd ambu-madhyäd
grähähataù sa-kareëur yathebhaù
SYNONYMS
saù—He; tudyamänaù—being pained; ari—of the enemy; durukta—by the abusive
words; tomaraiù—by the weapons; daàñöra-agra—on the ends of His tusks; gäm—
situated; gäm—the earth; upalakñya—seeing; bhétäm—frightened; todam—the pain;
måñan—bearing; niragät—He came out; ambu-madhyät—from the midst of the water;
gräha—by a crocodile; ähataù—attacked; sa-kareëuù—along with a she-elephant;
yathä—as; ibhaù—an elephant.
TRANSLATION
Although the Lord was pained by the shaftlike abusive words of the demon, He bore the
pain. But seeing that the earth on the ends of His tusks was frightened, He rose out of
the water just as an elephant emerges with its female companion when assailed by an
alligator.
PURPORT
The Mäyävädé philosopher cannot understand that the Lord has feelings. The Lord is
satisfied if someone offers Him a nice prayer, and similarly, if someone decries His
existence or calls Him by ill names, God is dissatisfied. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is decried by the Mäyävädé philosophers, who are almost demons. They say
that God has no head, no form, no existence and no legs, hands or other bodily limbs. In
other words, they say that He is dead or lame. All these misconceptions of the Supreme
34
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Lord are a source of dissatisfaction to Him; He is never pleased with such atheistic
descriptions. In this case, although the Lord felt sorrow from the piercing words of the
demon, He delivered the earth for the satisfaction of the demigods, who are ever His
devotees. The conclusion is that God is as sentient as we are. He is satisfied by our
prayers and dissatisfied by our harsh words against Him. In order to give protection to
His devotee, He is always ready to tolerate insulting words from the atheists.
SB 3.18.7
TEXT 7
Ta& iNa"SarNTa& Sail/l/adNaud]uTaae
ihr<Yake-Xaae iÜrd& YaQaa ‡z" )
k-ral/d&í\ae_XaiNaiNaSvNaae_b]vqd(
GaTaihik&- TvSaTaa& ivGaihRTaMa( )) 7 ))
taà niùsarantaà saliläd anudruto
hiraëya-keço dviradaà yathä jhañaù
karäla-daàñöro 'çani-nisvano 'bravéd
gata-hriyäà kià tv asatäà vigarhitam
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; niùsarantam—coming out; salilät—from the water; anudrutaù—chased;
hiraëya-keçaù—having golden hair; dviradam—an elephant; yathä—as; jhañaù—a
crocodile; karäla-daàñöraù—having fearful teeth; açani-nisvanaù—roaring like thunder;
abravét—he said; gata-hriyäm—for those who are shameless; kim—what; tu—indeed;
asatäm—for the wretches; vigarhitam—reproachable.
TRANSLATION
The demon, who had golden hair on his head and fearful tusks, gave chase to the Lord
while He was rising from the water, even as an alligator would chase an elephant. Roaring
like thunder, he said: Are You not ashamed of running away before a challenging
adversary? There is nothing reproachable for shameless creatures!
PURPORT
35
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
When the Lord was coming out of the water, taking the earth in His arms to deliver it,
the demon derided Him with insulting words, but the Lord did not care because He was
very conscious of His duty. For a dutiful man there is nothing to fear. Similarly, those
who are powerful have no fear of derision or unkind words from an enemy. The Lord
had nothing to fear from anyone, yet He was merciful to His enemy by neglecting him.
Although apparently He fled from the challenge, it was just to protect the earth from
calamity that He tolerated Hiraëyäkña's deriding words.
SB 3.18.8
TEXT 8
Sa GaaMaudSTaaTSail/l/SYa Gaaecre
ivNYaSYa TaSYaaMadDaaTSvSatvMa( )
Ai>aíuTaae ivìSa*Jaa Pa[SaUNaE‚
raPaUYaRMaa<aae ivbuDaE" PaXYaTaae_re" )) 8 ))
sa gäm udastät salilasya gocare
vinyasya tasyäm adadhät sva-sattvam
abhiñöuto viçva-såjä prasünair
äpüryamäëo vibudhaiù paçyato 'reù
SYNONYMS
saù—the Lord; gäm—the earth; udastät—on the surface; salilasya—of the water;
gocare—within His sight; vinyasya—having placed; tasyäm—to the earth; adadhät—He
invested; sva—His own; sattvam—existence; abhiñöutaù—praised; viçva-såjä—by
Brahmä (the creator of the universe); prasünaiù—by flowers; äpüryamäëaù—becoming
satisfied; vibudhaiù—by the demigods; paçyataù—while looking on; areù—the enemy.
TRANSLATION
The Lord placed the earth within His sight on the surface of the water and transferred to
her His own energy in the form of the ability to float on the water. While the enemy
stood looking on, Brahmä, the creator of the universe, extolled the Lord, and the other
demigods rained flowers on Him.
PURPORT
36
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Those who are demons cannot understand how the Supreme Personality of Godhead
floated the earth on water, but to devotees of the Lord this is not a very wonderful act.
Not only the earth but many, many millions of planets are floating in the air, and this
floating power is endowed upon them by the Lord; there is no other possible
explanation. The materialists can explain that the planets are floating by the law of
gravitation, but the law of gravitation works under the control or direction of the
Supreme Lord. That is the version of Bhagavad-gétä, which confirms, by the Lord's
statement, that behind the material laws or nature's laws and behind the growth,
maintenance, production and evolution of all the planetary systems—behind
everything—is the Lord's direction. The Lord's activities could be appreciated only by
the demigods, headed by Brahmä, and therefore when they saw the uncommon prowess
of the Lord in keeping the earth on the surface of the water, they showered flowers on
Him in appreciation of His transcendental activity.
SB 3.18.9
TEXT 9
ParaNauz¢&- TaPaNaqYaaePak-LPa&
MahaGad& k-aÄNaic}ad&XaMa( )
MaMaaR<Ya>aq+<a& Pa[TaudNTa& duå¢E-"
Pa[c<@MaNYau" Pa[hSa&STa& b>aaze )) 9 ))
paränuñaktaà tapanéyopakalpaà
mahä-gadaà käïcana-citra-daàçam
marmäëy abhékñëaà pratudantaà duruktaiù
pracaëòa-manyuù prahasaàs taà babhäñe
SYNONYMS
parä—from behind; anuñaktam—who followed very closely; tapanéya-upakalpam—who
had a considerable amount of gold ornaments; mahä-gadam—with a great mace;
käïcana—golden; citra—beautiful; daàçam—armor; marmäëi—the core of the heart;
abhékñëam—constantly; pratudantam—piercing; duruktaiù—by abusive words;
pracaëòa—terrible; manyuù—anger; prahasan—laughing; tam—to him; babhäñe—He
said.
37
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The demon, who had a wealth of ornaments, bangles and beautiful golden armor on his
body, chased the Lord from behind with a great mace. The Lord tolerated his piercing ill
words, but in order to reply to him, He expressed His terrible anger.
PURPORT
The Lord could have chastised the demon immediately while the demon was deriding
the Lord with ill words, but the Lord tolerated him to please the demigods and to show
that they should not be afraid of demons while discharging their duties. Therefore His
toleration was displayed mainly to drive away the fears of the demigods, who should
know that the Lord is always present to protect them. The demon's derision of the Lord
was just like the barking of dogs; the Lord did not care about it, since He was doing His
own work in delivering the earth from the midst of the water. Materialistic demons
always possess large amounts of gold in various shapes, and they think that a large
amount of gold, physical strength and popularity can save them from the wrath of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
SB 3.18.10
TEXT 10
é[q>aGavaNauvac
SaTYa& vYa& >aae vNaGaaecra Ma*Gaa
YauZMaiÜDaaNMa*GaYae Ga]aMaiSa&haNa( )
Na Ma*TYauPaaXaE" Pa[iTaMau¢-SYa vqra
ivk-TQaNa& Tav Ga*õNTYa>ad] )) 10 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
satyaà vayaà bho vana-gocarä mågä
yuñmad-vidhän mågaye gräma-siàhän
na måtyu-päçaiù pratimuktasya vérä
vikatthanaà tava gåhëanty abhadra
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; satyam—indeed;
38
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
vayam—We; bhoù—O; vana-gocaräù—dwelling in the forest; mågäù—creatures;
yuñmat-vidhän—like you; mågaye—I am searching to kill; gräma-siàhän—dogs; na—
not; måtyu-päçaiù—by the bonds of death; pratimuktasya—of one who is bound; véräù—
the heroes; vikatthanam—loose talk; tava—your; gåhëanti—take notice of; abhadra—O
mischievous one.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead said: Indeed, We are creatures of the jungle, and We are
searching after hunting dogs like you. One who is freed from the entanglement of death
has no fear from the loose talk in which you are indulging, for you are bound up by the
laws of death.
PURPORT
Demons and atheistic persons can go on insulting the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
but they forget that they are subjected to the laws of birth and death. They think that
simply by decrying the existence of the Supreme Lord or defying His stringent laws of
nature, one can be freed from the clutches of birth and death. In Bhagavad-gétä it is said
that simply by understanding the transcendental nature of God one can go back home,
back to Godhead. But demons and atheistic persons do not try to understand the nature
of the Supreme Lord; therefore they remain in the entanglement of birth and death.
SB 3.18.11
TEXT 11
WTae vYa& NYaaSahra rSaaEk-Saa&
GaTaihGadYaa d]aivTaaSTae )
iTaïaMahe_QaaiPa k-QaiÄdaJaaE
SQaeYa& Kv YaaMaae bil/NaaeTPaaÛ vErMa( )) 11 ))
ete vayaà nyäsa-harä rasaukasäà
gata-hriyo gadayä drävitäs te
tiñöhämahe 'thäpi kathaïcid äjau
stheyaà kva yämo balinotpädya vairam
SYNONYMS
39
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ete—Ourselves; vayam—We; nyäsa—of the charge; haräù—thieves; rasä-okasäm—of
the inhabitants of Rasätala; gata-hriyaù—shameless; gadayä—by the mace; drävitäù—
chased; te—your; tiñöhämahe—We shall stay; atha api—nevertheless; kathaïcit—
somehow; äjau—on the battlefield; stheyam—We must stay; kva—where; yämaù—can
We go; balinä—with a powerful enemy; utpädya—having created; vairam—enmity.
TRANSLATION
Certainly We have stolen the charge of the inhabitants of Rasätala and have lost all
shame. Although bitten by your powerful mace, I shall stay here in the water for some
time because, having created enmity with a powerful enemy, I now have no place to go.
PURPORT
The demon should have known that God cannot be driven out of any place, for He is
all-pervading. Demons think of their possessions as their property, but actually
everything belongs to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can take anything at
any time He likes.
SB 3.18.12
TEXT 12
Tv& Pad]QaaNaa& ik-l/ YaUQaPaaiDaPaae
ga$=Sv Naae_SvSTaYa AaìNaUh" )
Sa&SQaaPYa caSMaaNa( Pa[Ma*Jaaé[u Svk-aNaa&
Ya" Sva& Pa[iTaja& NaaiTaiPaPaTYaRSa>Ya" )) 12 ))
tvaà pad-rathänäà kila yüthapädhipo
ghaöasva no 'svastaya äçv anühaù
saàsthäpya cäsmän pramåjäçru svakänäà
yaù sväà pratijïäà nätipiparty asabhyaù
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; pad-rathänäm—of foot soldiers; kila—indeed; yüthapa—of the leaders;
adhipaù—the commander; ghaöasva—take steps; naù—Our; asvastaye—for defeat;
äçu—promptly; anühaù—without consideration; saàsthäpya—having killed; ca—and;
40
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
asmän—Us; pramåja—wipe away; açru—tears; svakänäm—of your kith and kin; yaù—
he who; sväm—his own; pratijïäm—promised word; na—not; atipiparti—fulfills;
asabhyaù—not fit to sit in an assembly.
TRANSLATION
You are supposed to be the commander of many foot soldiers, and now you may take
prompt steps to overthrow Us. Give up all your foolish talk and wipe out the cares of
your kith and kin by slaying Us. One may be proud, yet he does not deserve a seat in an
assembly if he fails to fulfill his promised word.
PURPORT
A demon may be a great soldier and commander of a large number of infantry, but in
the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead he is powerless and is destined to
die. The Lord, therefore, challenged the demon not to go away, but to fulfill his
promised word to kill Him.
SB 3.18.13
TEXT 13
MaE}aeYa ovac
Saae_iDai+aáae >aGavTaa Pa[l/BDaê åza >a*XaMa( )
AaJaharaeLb<a& §-aeDa& §-I@yMaaNaae_ihrai@v )) 13 ))
maitreya uväca
so 'dhikñipto bhagavatä
pralabdhaç ca ruñä bhåçam
äjahärolbaëaà krodhaà
kréòyamäno 'hi-räò iva
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù—the great sage Maitreya; uväca—said; saù—the demon; adhikñiptaù—having
been insulted; bhagavatä—by the Personality of Godhead; pralabdhaù—ridiculed; ca—
and; ruñä—angry; bhåçam—greatly; äjahära—collected; ulbaëam—great; krodham—
anger; kréòyamänaù—being played with; ahi-räö—a great cobra; iva—like.
41
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: The demon, being thus challenged by the Personality of Godhead,
became angry and agitated, and he trembled in anger like a challenged cobra.
PURPORT
A cobra is very fierce before ordinary persons, but before an enchanter who can play
with him, he is a plaything. Similarly, a demon may be very powerful in his own domain,
but before the Lord he is insignificant. The demon Rävaëa was a fierce figure before the
demigods, but when he was before Lord Rämacandra he trembled and prayed to his
deity, Lord Çiva, but to no avail.
SB 3.18.14
TEXT 14
Sa*JaàMaizRTa" ìaSaaNMaNYauPa[cil/TaeiNd]Ya" )
AaSaaÛ TarSaa dETYaae GadYaaNYahNaÖirMa( )) 14 ))
såjann amarñitaù çväsän
manyu-pracalitendriyaù
äsädya tarasä daityo
gadayä nyahanad dharim
SYNONYMS
såjan—giving out; amarñitaù—being angry; çväsän—breaths; manyu—by wrath;
pracalita—agitated; indriyaù—whose senses; äsädya—attacking; tarasä—quickly;
daityaù—the demon; gadayä—with his mace; nyahanat—struck; harim—Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
Hissing indignantly, all his senses shaken by wrath, the demon quickly sprang upon the
Lord and dealt Him a blow with his powerful mace.
SB 3.18.15
TEXT 15
>aGava&STau GadaveGa& ivSa*í& irPau<aaeriSa )
42
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
AvÄYaitarêqNaae YaaeGaaæ! wvaNTak-Ma( )) 15 ))
bhagaväàs tu gadä-vegaà
visåñöaà ripuëorasi
avaïcayat tiraçcéno
yogärüòha iväntakam
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Lord; tu—however; gadä-vegam—the blow of the mace; visåñöam—
thrown; ripuëä—by the enemy; urasi—at His breast; avaïcayat—dodged; tiraçcénaù—
aside; yoga-ärüòhaù—an accomplished yogé; iva—like; antakam—death.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, however, by moving slightly aside, dodged the violent mace-blow aimed at His
breast by the enemy, just as an accomplished yogé would elude death.
PURPORT
The example is given herein that the perfect yogé can overcome a deathblow although it
is offered by the laws of nature. It is useless for a demon to beat the transcendental body
of the Lord with a powerful mace, for no one can surpass His prowess. Those who are
advanced transcendentalists are freed from the laws of nature, and even a deathblow
cannot act on them. Superficially it may be seen that a yogé is attacked by a deathblow,
but by the grace of the Lord he can overcome many such attacks for the service of the
Lord. As the Lord exists by His own independent prowess, by the grace of the Lord the
devotees also exist for His service.
SB 3.18.16
TEXT 16
PauNaGaRda& SvaMaadaYa >a]aMaYaNTaMa>aq+<aXa" )
A>YaDaavÖir" §u-Ö" Sa&rM>aaÕídC^dMa( )) 16 ))
punar gadäà sväm ädäya
bhrämayantam abhékñëaçaù
abhyadhävad dhariù kruddhaù
43
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
saàrambhäd dañöa-dacchadam
SYNONYMS
punaù—again; gadäm—mace; sväm—his; ädäya—having taken; bhrämayantam—
brandishing; abhékñëaçaù—repeatedly; abhyadhävat—rushed to meet; hariù—the
Personality of Godhead; kruddhaù—angry; saàrambhät—in rage; dañöa—bitten;
dacchadam—his lip.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead now exhibited His anger and rushed to meet the demon, who
bit his lip in rage, took up his mace again and began to repeatedly brandish it about.
SB 3.18.17
TEXT 17
TaTaê GadYaaraiTa& di+a<aSYaa& >a]uiv Pa[>au" )
AaJagane Sa Tau Taa& SaaEMYa GadYaa k-aeivdae_hNaTa( )) 17 ))
tataç ca gadayärätià
dakñiëasyäà bhruvi prabhuù
äjaghne sa tu täà saumya
gadayä kovido 'hanat
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; ca—and; gadayä—with His mace; arätim—the enemy; dakñiëasyäm—on
the right; bhruvi—on the brow; prabhuù—the Lord; äjaghne—struck; saù—the Lord;
tu—but; täm—the mace; saumya—O gentle Vidura; gadayä—with his mace; kovidaù—
expert; ahanat—he saved himself.
TRANSLATION
Then with His mace the Lord struck the enemy on the right of his brow, but since the
demon was expert in fighting, O gentle Vidura, he protected himself by a maneuver of his
own mace.
SB 3.18.18
44
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 18
Wv& Gada>Yaa& Gauvs>Yaa& hYaR+aae hirrev c )
iJaGaqzYaa SauSa&rBDaavNYaaeNYaMai>aJaganTau" )) 18 ))
evaà gadäbhyäà gurvébhyäà
haryakño harir eva ca
jigéñayä susaàrabdhäv
anyonyam abhijaghnatuù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; gadäbhyäm—with their maces; gurvébhyäm—huge; haryakñaù—the
demon Haryakña (Hiraëyäkña); hariù—Lord Hari; eva—certainly; ca—and; jigéñayä—
with a desire for victory; susaàrabdhau—enraged; anyonyam—each other;
abhijaghnatuù—they struck.
TRANSLATION
In this way, the demon Haryakña and the Lord, the Personality of Godhead, struck each
other with their huge maces, each enraged and seeking his own victory.
PURPORT
Haryakña is another name for Hiraëyäkña, the demon.
SB 3.18.19
TEXT 19
TaYaae" SPa*DaaeiSTaGMaGadahTaa(r)Yaae"
+aTaaóvga]a<aivv*ÖMaNYvae" )
ivic}aMaaGaa|êrTaaeiJaRGaqzYaa
VYa>aaidl/aYaaiMav éuiZMa<aaeMa*RDa" )) 19 ))
tayoù spådhos tigma-gadähatäìgayoù
kñatäsrava-ghräëa-vivåddha-manyvoù
vicitra-märgäàç carator jigéñayä
45
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
vyabhäd iläyäm iva çuñmiëor mådhaù
SYNONYMS
tayoù—them; spådhoù—the two combatants; tigma—pointed; gadä—by the maces;
ähata—injured; aìgayoù—their bodies; kñata-äsrava—blood coming out from the
injuries; ghräëa—smell; vivåddha—increased; manyvoù—anger; vicitra—of various
kinds; märgän—maneuvers; caratoù—performing; jigéñayä—with a desire to win;
vyabhät—it looked like; iläyäm—for the sake of a cow (or the earth); iva—like;
çuñmiëoù—of two bulls; mådhaù—an encounter.
TRANSLATION
There was keen rivalry between the two combatants; both had sustained injuries on their
bodies from the blows of each other's pointed maces, and each grew more and more
enraged at the smell of blood on his person. In their eagerness to win, they performed
maneuvers of various kinds, and their contest looked like an encounter between two
forceful bulls for the sake of a cow.
PURPORT
Here the earth planet is called ilä. This earth was formerly known as Ilävåta-varña, and
when Mahäräja Parékñit ruled the earth it was called Bhärata-varña. Actually, Bhäratavarña
is the name for the entire planet, but gradually Bhärata-varña has come to mean
India. As India has recently been divided into Pakistan and Hindustan, similarly the
earth was formerly called Ilävåta-varña, but gradually as time passed it was divided by
national boundaries.
SB 3.18.20
TEXT 20
dETYaSYa YajavYavSYa MaaYaa‚
Ga*hqTavarahTaNaaeMaRhaTMaNa" )
k-aErVYa Maùa& iÜzTaaeivRMadRNa&
idd*+auraGaad*izi>av*RTa" Svra$( )) 20 ))
daityasya yajïävayavasya mäyä46
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
gåhéta-väräha-tanor mahätmanaù
kauravya mahyäà dviñator vimardanaà
didåkñur ägäd åñibhir våtaù svaräö
SYNONYMS
daityasya—of the demon; yajïa-avayavasya—of the Personality of Godhead (of whose
body yajïa is a part); mäyä—through His potency; gåhéta—was assumed; väräha—of a
boar; tanoù—whose form; mahä-ätmanaù—of the Supreme Lord; kauravya—O Vidura
(descendant of Kuru); mahyäm—for the sake of the world; dviñatoù—of the two
enemies; vimardanam—the fight; didåkñuù—desirous to see; ägät—came; åñibhiù—by
the sages; våtaù—accompanied; svaräö—Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
O descendant of Kuru, Brahmä, the most independent demigod of the universe,
accompanied by his followers, came to see the terrible fight for the sake of the world
between the demon and the Personality of Godhead, who appeared in the form of a boar.
PURPORT
The fight between the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the demon is
compared to a fight between bulls for the sake of a cow. The earth planet is also called
go, or cow. As bulls fight between themselves to ascertain who will have union with a
cow, there is always a constant fight between the demons and the Supreme Lord or His
representative for supremacy over the earth. Here the Lord is significantly described as
yajïävayava. One should not consider the Lord to have the body of an ordinary boar. He
can assume any form, and He possesses all such forms eternally. It is from Him that all
other forms have emanated. This boar form is not to be considered the form of an
ordinary hog; His body is actually full of yajïa, or worshipful offerings. Yajïa (sacrifices)
are offered to Viñëu. Yajïa means the body of Viñëu. His body is not material; therefore
He should not be taken to be an ordinary boar.
Brahmä is described in this verse as svaräö. Actually, full independence is exclusive to
the Lord Himself, but as part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, every living entity has a
minute quantity of independence. Each and every one of the living entities within this
universe has this minute independence, but Brahmä, being the chief of all living
entities, has a greater potential of independence than any other. He is the
47
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
representative of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and has been assigned to
preside over universal affairs. All other demigods work for him; therefore he is described
here as svaräö. He is always accompanied by great sages and transcendentalists, all of
whom came to see the bullfight between the demon and the Lord.
SB 3.18.21
TEXT 21
AaSaàXaaE<@qrMaPaeTaSaaßSa&
k*-TaPa[Taqk-arMahaYaRiv§-MaMa( )
ivl/+Ya dETYa& >aGavaNa( Sahó<aq‚
JaRGaad NaaraYa<aMaaidSaUk-rMa( )) 21 ))
äsanna-çauëòéram apeta-sädhvasaà
kåta-pratékäram ahärya-vikramam
vilakñya daityaà bhagavän sahasra-ëér
jagäda näräyaëam ädi-sükaram
SYNONYMS
äsanna—attained; çauëòéram—power; apeta—devoid of; sädhvasam—fear; kåta—
making; pratékäram—opposition; ahärya—unopposable; vikramam—having power;
vilakñya—having seen; daityam—the demon; bhagavän—the worshipful Brahmä;
sahasra-néù—the leader of thousands of sages; jagäda—addressed; näräyaëam—Lord
Näräyaëa; ädi—the original; sükaram—having the form of a boar.
TRANSLATION
After arriving at the place of combat, Brahmä, the leader of thousands of sages and
transcendentalists, saw the demon, who had attained such unprecedented power that no
one could fight with him. Brahmä then addressed Näräyaëa, who was assuming the form
of a boar for the first time.
SB 3.18.22, SB 3.18.23, SB 3.18.22-23
TEXTS 22-23
b]øaevac
48
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Wz Tae dev devaNaaMax(iga]MaUl/MauPaeYauzaMa( )
ivPa[a<aa& SaaEr>aeYaq<aa& >aUTaaNaaMaPYaNaaGaSaaMa( )) 22 ))
AaGaSk*-ÙYak*-d(duZk*-dSMad]aÖvrae_Saur" )
ANvezàPa[iTarQaae l/aek-aNa$=iTa k-<$=k-" )) 23 ))
brahmoväca
eña te deva devänäm
aìghri-mülam upeyuñäm
vipräëäà saurabheyéëäà
bhütänäm apy anägasäm
ägas-kåd bhaya-kåd duñkåd
asmad-räddha-varo 'suraù
anveñann apratiratho
lokän aöati kaëöakaù
SYNONYMS
brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; eñaù—this demon; te—Your; deva—O Lord;
devänäm—to the demigods; aìghri-mülam—Your feet; upeyuñäm—to those having
obtained; vipräëäm—to the brähmaëas; saurabheyéëäm—to the cows; bhütänäm—to
ordinary living entities; api—also; anägasäm—innocent; ägaù-kåt—an offender; bhayakåt—
a source of fear; duñkåt—wrongdoer; asmat—from me; räddha-varaù—having
attained a boon; asuraù—a demon; anveñan—searching; apratirathaù—having no proper
combatant; lokän—all over the universe; aöati—he wanders; kaëöakaù—being a
pinprick for everyone.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: My dear Lord, this demon has proved to be a constant pinprick to the
demigods, the brähmaëas, the cows and innocent persons who are spotless and always
dependent upon worshiping Your lotus feet. He has become a source of fear by
unnecessarily harassing them. Since he has attained a boon from me, he has become a
demon, always searching for a proper combatant, wandering all over the universe for this
infamous purpose.
49
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
There are two classes of living entities; one is called sura, or the demigods, and the other
is called asura, or the demons. Demons are generally fond of worshiping the demigods,
and there are evidences that by such worship they get extensive power for their sense
gratification. This later proves to be a cause of trouble to the brähmaëas, demigods and
other innocent living entities. Demons habitually find fault with the demigods,
brähmaëas and innocent, to whom they are a constant source of fear. The way of the
demon is to take power from the demigods and then tease the demigods themselves.
There is an instance of a great devotee of Lord Çiva who obtained a boon from Lord
Çiva that the head of whomever he touched with his hand would come off its trunk. As
soon as the boon was offered to him, the demon wanted to touch the very head of Lord
Çiva. That is their way. The devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead do not,
however, ask any favor for sense gratification. Even if they are offered liberation, they
refuse it. They are happy simply engaging in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord.
SB 3.18.24
TEXT 24
MaENa& MaaYaaivNa& d*á& iNarx(ku-XaMaSataMaMa( )
Aa§-I@ bal/vÕev YaQaaXaqivzMauiTQaTaMa( )) 24 ))
mainaà mäyävinaà dåptaà
niraìkuçam asattamam
äkréòa bälavad deva
yathäçéviñam utthitam
SYNONYMS
mä—do not; enam—him; mäyä-vinam—skilled in conjuring tricks; dåptam—arrogant;
niraìkuçam—self-sufficient; asat-tamam—most wicked; äkréòa—play with; bäla-vat—
like a child; deva—O Lord; yathä—as; äçéviñam—a serpent; utthitam—aroused.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä continued: My dear Lord, there is no need to play with this serpentine
demon, who is always very skilled in conjuring tricks and is arrogant, self-sufficient and
50
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
most wicked.
PURPORT
No one is unhappy when a serpent is killed. It is a practice among village boys to catch a
serpent by the tail and play with it for some time and then kill it. Similarly, the Lord
could have killed the demon at once, but He played with him in the same way as a child
plays with a snake before killing it. Brahmä requested, however, that since the demon
was more wicked and undesirable than a serpent, there was no need to play with him. It
was his wish that he be killed at once, without delay.
SB 3.18.25
TEXT 25
Na Yaavdez vDaeRTa Sva& vel/a& Pa[aPYa daå<a" )
Sva& dev MaaYaaMaaSQaaYa TaavÂùgaMaCYauTa )) 25 ))
na yävad eña vardheta
sväà veläà präpya däruëaù
sväà deva mäyäm ästhäya
tävaj jahy agham acyuta
SYNONYMS
na yävat—before; eñaù—this demon; vardheta—may increase; sväm—his own; veläm—
demoniac hour; präpya—having reached; däruëaù—formidable; sväm—Your own;
deva—O Lord; mäyäm—internal potency; ästhäya—using; tävat—at once; jahi—kill;
agham—the sinful one; acyuta—O infallible one.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä continued: My dear Lord, You are infallible. Please kill this sinful demon before
the demoniac hour arrives and he presents another formidable approach favorable to him.
You can kill him by Your internal potency without doubt.
SB 3.18.26
TEXT 26
Wza gaaerTaMaa SaNDYaa l/aek-C^Mb$(=k-rq Pa[>aae )
51
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
oPaSaPaRiTa SavaRTMaNa( Saura<aa& JaYaMaavh )) 26 ))
eñä ghoratamä sandhyä
loka-cchambaö-karé prabho
upasarpati sarvätman
suräëäà jayam ävaha
SYNONYMS
eñä—this; ghora-tamä—darkest; sandhyä—evening time; loka—the world; chambaökaré—
destroying; prabho—O Lord; upasarpati—is approaching; sarva-ätman—O Soul of
all souls; suräëäm—to the demigods; jayam—victory; ävaha—bring.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, the darkest evening, which covers the world, is fast approaching. Since You are
the Soul of all souls, kindly kill him and win victory for the demigods.
SB 3.18.27
TEXT 27
ADauNaEzae_i>aiJaàaMa YaaeGaae MaaEhUiTaRk-ae ùGaaTa( )
iXavaYa NaSTv& SauôdaMaaéu iNaSTar duSTarMa( )) 27 ))
adhunaiño 'bhijin näma
yogo mauhürtiko hy agät
çiväya nas tvaà suhådäm
äçu nistara dustaram
SYNONYMS
adhunä—now; eñaù—this; abhijit näma—called abhijit; yogaù—auspicious;
mauhürtikaù—moment; hi—indeed; agät—has almost passed; çiväya—for the welfare;
naù—of us; tvam—You; suhådäm—of Your friends; äçu—quickly; nistara—dispose of;
dustaram—the formidable foe.
TRANSLATION
52
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The auspicious period known as abhijit, which is most opportune for victory, commenced
at midday and has all but passed; therefore, in the interest of Your friends, please dispose
of this formidable foe quickly.
SB 3.18.28
TEXT 28
idíya Tva& ivihTa& Ma*TYauMaYaMaaSaaidTa" SvYaMa( )
iv§-MYaENa& Ma*Dae hTva l/aek-aNaaDaeih XaMaRi<a )) 28 ))
diñöyä tväà vihitaà måtyum
ayam äsäditaù svayam
vikramyainaà mådhe hatvä
lokän ädhehi çarmaëi
SYNONYMS
diñöyä—by fortune; tväm—to You; vihitam—ordained; måtyum—death; ayam—this
demon; äsäditaù—has come; svayam—of his own accord; vikramya—exhibiting Your
prowess; enam—him; mådhe—in the duel; hatvä—killing; lokän—the worlds; ädhehi—
establish; çarmaëi—in peace.
TRANSLATION
This demon, luckily for us, has come of his own accord to You, his death ordained by
You; therefore, exhibiting Your ways, kill him in the duel and establish the worlds in
peace.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Eighteenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Battle Between Lord Boar and the Demon Hiraëyäkña."
SB 3.19: The Killing of the Demon Hiraëyäkña
19. The Killing of the Demon Hiraëyäkña
SB 3.19.1
53
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 1
MaE}aeYa ovac
AvDaaYaR ivirÄSYa iNaVYaRl/Ik-aMa*Ta& vc" )
Pa[hSYa Pa[eMaGa>aeR<a TadPaa(r)eNa Saae_Ga]hqTa( )) 1 ))
maitreya uväca
avadhärya viriïcasya
nirvyalékämåtaà vacaù
prahasya prema-garbheëa
tad apäìgena so 'grahét
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; avadhärya—after hearing; viriïcasya—of Lord Brahmä;
nirvyaléka—free from all sinful purposes; amåtam—nectarean; vacaù—words;
prahasya—heartily laughing; prema-garbheëa—laden with love; tat—those words;
apäìgena—with a glance; saù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; agrahét—
accepted.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: After hearing the words of Brahmä, the creator, which were free from
all sinful purposes and as sweet as nectar, the Lord heartily laughed and accepted his
prayer with a glance laden with love.
PURPORT
The word nirvyaléka is very significant. The prayers of the demigods or devotees of the
Lord are free from all sinful purposes, but the prayers of demons are always filled with
sinful purposes. The demon Hiraëyäkña became powerful by deriving a boon from
Brahmä, and after attaining that boon he created a disturbance because of his sinful
intentions. The prayers of Brahmä and other demigods are not to be compared to the
prayers of the demons. Their purpose is to please the Supreme Lord; therefore the Lord
smiled and accepted the prayer to kill the demon. Demons, who are never interested in
praising the Supreme Personality of Godhead because they have no information of Him,
go to the demigods, and in Bhagavad-gétä this is condemned. Persons who go to the
54
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
demigods and pray for advancement in sinful activities are considered to be bereft of all
intelligence. Demons have lost all intelligence because they do not know what is
actually their self-interest. Even if they have information of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, they decline to approach Him; it is not possible for them to get their desired
boons from the Supreme Lord because their purposes are always sinful. It is said that the
dacoits in Bengal used to worship the goddess Kälé for fulfillment of their sinful desires
to plunder others' property, but they never went to a Viñëu temple because they might
have been unsuccessful in praying to Viñëu. Therefore the prayers of the demigods or
the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are always untinged by sinful
purposes.
SB 3.19.2
TEXT 2
TaTa" SaPaÒ& Mau%TaêrNTaMaku-Taae>aYaMa( )
JagaaNaaeTPaTYa GadYaa hNaavSaurMa+aJa" )) 2 ))
tataù sapatnaà mukhataç
carantam akuto-bhayam
jaghänotpatya gadayä
hanäv asuram akñajaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; sapatnam—enemy; mukhataù—in front of Him; carantam—stalking;
akutaù-bhayam—fearlessly; jaghäna—struck; utpatya—after springing up; gadayä—with
His mace; hanau—at the chin; asuram—the demon; akña-jaù—the Lord, who was born
from the nostril of Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, who had appeared from the nostril of Brahmä, sprang and aimed His mace at
the chin of His enemy, the Hiraëyäkña demon, who was stalking fearlessly before Him.
SB 3.19.3
TEXT 3
Saa hTaa TaeNa GadYaa ivhTaa >aGavTk-raTa( )
55
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ivgaUi<aRTaaPaTad]eJae Tadd(>auTaiMava>avTa( )) 3 ))
sä hatä tena gadayä
vihatä bhagavat-karät
vighürëitäpatad reje
tad adbhutam iväbhavat
SYNONYMS
sä—that mace; hatä—struck; tena—by Hiraëyäkña; gadayä—with his mace; vihatä—
slipped; bhagavat—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; karät—from the hand;
vighürëitä—whirling; apatat—fell down; reje—was shining; tat—that; adbhutam—
miraculous; iva—indeed; abhavat—was.
TRANSLATION
Struck by the demon's mace, however, the Lord's mace slipped from His hand and looked
splendid as it fell down whirling. This was miraculous, for the mace was blazing
wonderfully.
SB 3.19.4
TEXT 4
Sa Tada l/BDaTaqQaaeR_iPa Na bbaDae iNaraYauDaMa( )
MaaNaYaNa( Sa Ma*Dae DaMa| ivZvKSaeNa& Pa[k-aePaYaNa( )) 4 ))
sa tadä labdha-tértho 'pi
na babädhe niräyudham
mänayan sa mådhe dharmaà
viñvaksenaà prakopayan
SYNONYMS
saù—that Hiraëyäkña; tadä—then; labdha-térthaù—having gained an excellent
opportunity; api—although; na—not; babädhe—attacked; niräyudham—having no
weapon; mänayan—respecting; saù—Hiraëyäkña; mådhe—in battle; dharmam—the
code of combat; viñvaksenam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prakopayan—
56
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
making angry.
TRANSLATION
Even though the demon had an excellent opportunity to strike his unarmed foe without
obstruction, he respected the law of single combat, thereby kindling the fury of the
Supreme Lord.
SB 3.19.5
TEXT 5
GadaYaaMaPaivÖaYaa& hahak-are iviNaGaRTae )
MaaNaYaaMaaSa TaÖMa| SauNaa>a& caSMariÜ>au" )) 5 ))
gadäyäm apaviddhäyäà
hähä-käre vinirgate
mänayäm äsa tad-dharmaà
sunäbhaà cäsmarad vibhuù
SYNONYMS
gadäyäm—as His mace; apaviddhäyäm—fell; hähä-käre—a cry of alarm; vinirgate—
arose; mänayäm äsa—acknowledged; tat—of Hiraëyäkña; dharmam—righteousness;
sunäbham—the Sudarçana cakra; ca—and; asmarat—remembered; vibhuù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
As the Lord's mace fell to the ground and a cry of alarm arose from the witnessing crowd
of gods and åñis, the Personality of Godhead acknowledged the demon's love of
righteousness and therefore invoked His Sudarçana discus.
SB 3.19.6
TEXT 6
Ta& VYaGa]c§&- idiTaPau}aaDaMaeNa
SvPaazRdMau:YaeNa ivzÂMaaNaMa( )
ic}aa vacae_TaiÜda& %ecra<aa&
57
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Ta}a SMaaSaNa( SviSTa Tae_Mau& JahqiTa )) 6 ))
taà vyagra-cakraà diti-puträdhamena
sva-pärñada-mukhyena viñajjamänam
citrä väco 'tad-vidäà khe-caräëäà
tatra smäsan svasti te 'muà jahéti
SYNONYMS
tam—unto the Personality of Godhead; vyagra—revolving; cakram—whose discus; ditiputra—
son of Diti; adhamena—vile; sva-pärñada—of His associates; mukhyena—with
the chief; viñajjamänam—playing; citräù—various; väcaù—expressions; a-tat-vidäm—of
those who did not know; khe-caräëäm—flying in the sky; tatra—there; sma äsan—
occurred; svasti—fortune; te—unto You; amum—him; jahi—please kill; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
As the discus began to revolve in the Lord's hands and the Lord contended at close
quarters with the chief of His Vaikuëöha attendants, who had been born as Hiraëyäkña, a
vile son of Diti, there issued from every direction strange expressions uttered by those
who were witnessing from airplanes. They had no knowledge of the Lord's reality, and
they cried, "May victory attend You! Pray dispatch him. Play no more with him."
SB 3.19.7
TEXT 7
Sa Ta& iNaXaaMYaatarQaa(r)MaGa]Taae
VYaviSQaTa& PaÚPal/aXal/aecNaMa( )
ivl/aeKYa caMazRPairPlu/TaeiNd]Yaae
åza SvdNTaC^dMaadXaC^(vSaNa( )) 7 ))
sa taà niçämyätta-rathäìgam agrato
vyavasthitaà padma-paläça-locanam
vilokya cämarña-pariplutendriyo
ruñä sva-danta-cchadam ädaçac chvasan
58
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
saù—that demon; tam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; niçämya—after seeing;
ätta-rathäìgam—armed with the Sudarçana disc; agrataù—before him; vyavasthitam—
standing in position; padma—lotus flower; paläça—petals; locanam—eyes; vilokya—
after seeing; ca—and; amarña—by indignation; paripluta—overpowered; indriyaù—his
senses; ruñä—with great resentment; sva-danta-chadam—his own lip; ädaçat—bit;
çvasan—hissing.
TRANSLATION
When the demon saw the Personality of Godhead, who had eyes just like lotus petals,
standing in position before him, armed with His Sudarçana discus, his senses were
overpowered by indignation. He began to hiss like a serpent, and he bit his lip in great
resentment.
SB 3.19.8
TEXT 8
k-ral/d&í\ê+au>Yaa| SaÄ+aa<aae dhiàv )
Ai>aPlu/TYa SvGadYaa hTaae_SaqTYaahNaÖirMa( )) 8 ))
karäla-daàñöraç cakñurbhyäà
saïcakñäëo dahann iva
abhiplutya sva-gadayä
hato 'séty ähanad dharim
SYNONYMS
karäla—fearful; daàñöraù—having tusks; cakñurbhyäm—with both eyes; saïcakñäëaù—
staring; dahan—burning; iva—as if; abhiplutya—attacking; sva-gadayä—with his own
club; hataù—slain; asi—You are; iti—thus; ähanat—struck; harim—at Hari.
TRANSLATION
The demon, who had fearful tusks, stared at the Personality of Godhead as though to
burn Him. Springing into the air, he aimed his mace at the Lord, exclaiming at the same
time, "You are slain!"
59
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.19.9
TEXT 9
Pada SaVYaeNa Taa& SaaDaae >aGavaNa( YajSaUk-r" )
l/Il/Yaa iMazTa" Xa}aae" Pa[ahrÜaTar&hSaMa( )) 9 ))
padä savyena täà sädho
bhagavän yajïa-sükaraù
lélayä miñataù çatroù
präharad väta-raàhasam
SYNONYMS
padä—with His foot; savyena—left; täm—that mace; sädho—O Vidura; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajïa-sükaraù—in His boar form, the enjoyer of all
sacrifices; lélayä—playfully; miñataù—looking on; çatroù—of His enemy (Hiraëyäkña);
präharat—knocked down; väta-raàhasam—having the force of a tempest.
TRANSLATION
O saintly Vidura, while His enemy looked on, the Lord in His boar form, the enjoyer of
all sacrificial offerings, playfully knocked down the mace with His left foot, even as it
came upon Him with the force of a tempest.
SB 3.19.10
TEXT 10
Aah caYauDaMaaDaTSv ga$=Sv Tv& iJaGaqziSa )
wTYau¢-" Sa Tada >aUYaSTaa@YaNa( VYaNadd( >a*XaMa( )) 10 ))
äha cäyudham ädhatsva
ghaöasva tvaà jigéñasi
ity uktaù sa tadä bhüyas
täòayan vyanadad bhåçam
SYNONYMS
äha—He said; ca—and; äyudham—weapon; ädhatsva—take up; ghaöasva—try; tvam—
60
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
you; jigéñasi—are eager to conquer; iti—thus; uktaù—challenged; saù—Hiraëyäkña;
tadä—at that time; bhüyaù—again; täòayan—striking at; vyanadat—roared; bhåçam—
loudly.
TRANSLATION
The Lord then said: "Take up your weapon and try again, eager as you are to conquer
Me." Challenged in these words, the demon aimed his mace at the Lord and once more
loudly roared.
SB 3.19.11
TEXT 11
Taa& Sa AaPaTaTaq& vq+Ya >aGavaNa( SaMaviSQaTa" )
JaGa]ah l/Il/Yaa Pa[aáa& GaåTMaaiNav PaàGaqMa( )) 11 ))
täà sa äpatatéà vékñya
bhagavän samavasthitaù
jagräha lélayä präptäà
garutmän iva pannagém
SYNONYMS
täm—that mace; saù—He; äpatatém—flying toward; vékñya—after seeing; bhagavän—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; samavasthitaù—stood firmly; jagräha—caught;
lélayä—easily; präptäm—entered into His presence; garutmän—Garuòa; iva—as;
pannagém—a serpent.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord saw the mace flying toward Him, He stood firmly where He was and
caught it with the same ease as Garuòa, the king of birds, would seize a serpent.
SB 3.19.12
TEXT 12
SvPaaEåze Pa[iTahTae hTaMaaNaae MahaSaur" )
NaEC^Óda& dqYaMaaNaa& hir<aa ivGaTaPa[>a" )) 12 ))
61
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sva-pauruñe pratihate
hata-mäno mahäsuraù
naicchad gadäà déyamänäà
hariëä vigata-prabhaù
SYNONYMS
sva-pauruñe—his valor; pratihate—frustrated; hata—destroyed; mänaù—pride; mahäasuraù—
the great demon; na aicchat—desired not (to take); gadäm—the mace;
déyamänäm—being offered; hariëä—by Hari; vigata-prabhaù—reduced in splendor.
TRANSLATION
His valor thus frustrated, the great demon felt humiliated and was put out of
countenance. He was reluctant to take back the mace when it was offered by the
Personality of Godhead.
SB 3.19.13
TEXT 13
JaGa]ah i}aiXa%& éUl&/ Jvl/JJvl/Nal/aelu/PaMa( )
YajaYa Da*TaæPaaYa ivPa[aYaai>acrNa( YaQaa )) 13 ))
jagräha tri-çikhaà çülaà
jvalaj-jvalana-lolupam
yajïäya dhåta-rüpäya
vipräyäbhicaran yathä
SYNONYMS
jagräha—took up; tri-çikham—three-pointed; çülam—trident; jvalat—flaming;
jvalana—fire; lolupam—rapacious; yajïäya—at the enjoyer of all sacrifices; dhåtarüpäya—
in the form of Varäha; vipräya—unto a brähmaëa; abhicaran—acting
malevolently; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
He now took a trident which was as rapacious as a flaming fire and hurled it against the
62
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Lord, the enjoyer of all sacrifices, even as one would use penance for a malevolent
purpose against a holy brähmaëa.
SB 3.19.14
TEXT 14
TadaeJaSaa dETYaMaha>a$=aiPaRTa&
ck-aSadNTa"% odq<aRdqiDaiTa )
c§e-<a icC^ed iNaXaaTaNaeiMaNaa
hirYaRQaa Taa+YaRPaTa}aMauiJ‡TaMa( )) 14 ))
tad ojasä daitya-mahä-bhaöärpitaà
cakäsad antaù-kha udérëa-dédhiti
cakreëa ciccheda niçäta-neminä
harir yathä tärkñya-patatram ujjhitam
SYNONYMS
tat—that trident; ojasä—with all his strength; daitya—among the demons; mahäbhaöa—
by the mighty fighter; arpitam—hurled; cakäsat—shining; antaù-khe—in the
middle of the sky; udérëa—increased; dédhiti—illumination; cakreëa—by the Sudarçana
disc; ciccheda—He cut to pieces; niçäta—sharpened; neminä—rim; hariù—Indra;
yathä—as; tärkñya—of Garuòa; patatram—the wing; ujjhitam—abandoned.
TRANSLATION
Hurled by the mighty demon with all his strength, the flying trident shone brightly in the
sky. The Personality of Godhead, however, tore it to pieces with His discus Sudarçana,
which had a sharp-edged rim, even as Indra cut off a wing of Garuòa.
PURPORT
The context of the reference given herein regarding Garuòa and Indra is this. Once
upon a time, Garuòa, the carrier of the Lord, snatched away a nectar pot from the hands
of the demigods in heaven in order to liberate his mother, Vinatä, from the clutches of
his stepmother, Kadrü, the mother of the serpents. On learning of this, Indra, the King
of heaven, hurled his thunderbolt against Garuòa. With a view to respect the
63
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
infallibility of Indra's weapon, Garuòa, though otherwise invincible, being the Lord's
own mount, dropped one of his wings, which was shattered to pieces by the thunderbolt.
The inhabitants of higher planets are so sensible that even in the process of fighting
they observe the preliminary rules and regulations of gentleness. In this case, Garuòa
wanted to show respect for Indra; since he knew that Indra's weapon must destroy
something, he offered his wing.
SB 3.19.15
TEXT 15
v*K<ae SvéUle/ bhuDaair<aa hre"
Pa[TYaeTYa ivSTaq<aRMaurae iv>aUiTaMaTa( )
Pa[v*Öraez" Sa k-#=aerMauiíNaa
NadNa( Pa[ôTYaaNTarDaqYaTaaSaur" )) 15 ))
våkëe sva-çüle bahudhäriëä hareù
pratyetya vistérëam uro vibhütimat
pravåddha-roñaù sa kaöhora-muñöinä
nadan prahåtyäntaradhéyatäsuraù
SYNONYMS
våkëe—when cut; sva-çüle—his trident; bahudhä—to many pieces; ariëä—by the
Sudarçana cakra; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pratyetya—after
advancing toward; vistérëam—broad; uraù—chest; vibhüti-mat—the abode of the
goddess of fortune; pravåddha—having been increased; roñaù—anger; saù—Hiraëyäkña;
kaöhora—hard; muñöinä—with his fist; nadan—roaring; prahåtya—after striking;
antaradhéyata—disappeared; asuraù—the demon.
TRANSLATION
The demon was enraged when his trident was cut to pieces by the discus of the
Personality of Godhead. He therefore advanced toward the Lord and, roaring aloud,
struck his hard fist against the Lord's broad chest, which bore the mark of Çrévatsa. Then
he went out of sight.
PURPORT
64
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Çrévatsa is a curl of white hair on the chest of the Lord which is a special sign of His
being the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Vaikuëöhaloka or in Goloka Våndävana,
the inhabitants are exactly of the same form as the Personality of Godhead, but by this
Çrévatsa mark on the chest of the Lord He is distinguished from all others.
SB 3.19.16
TEXT 16
TaeNaeTQaMaahTa" +ata>aRGavaNaaidSaUk-r" )
Naak-MPaTa MaNaak(- KvaiPa óJaa hTa wv iÜPa" )) 16 ))
tenettham ähataù kñattar
bhagavän ädi-sükaraù
näkampata manäk kväpi
srajä hata iva dvipaù
SYNONYMS
tena—by Hiraëyäkña; ittham—thus; ähataù—struck; kñattaù—O Vidura; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; ädi-sükaraù—the first boar; na akampata—did not
feel quaking; manäk—even slightly; kva api—anywhere; srajä—by a garland of flowers;
hataù—struck; iva—as; dvipaù—an elephant.
TRANSLATION
Hit in this manner by the demon, O Vidura, the Lord, who had appeared as the first boar,
did not feel the least quaking in any part of His body, any more than an elephant would
when struck with a wreath of flowers.
PURPORT
As previously explained, the demon was originally a servitor of the Lord in Vaikuëöha,
but somehow or other he fell as a demon. His fight with the Supreme Lord was meant
for his liberation. The Lord enjoyed the striking on His transcendental body, just like a
fully grown-up father fighting with his child. Sometimes a father takes pleasure in
having a mock fight with his small child, and similarly the Lord felt Hiraëyäkña's
striking on His body to be like flowers offered for worship. In other words, the Lord
desired to fight in order to enjoy His transcendental bliss; therefore He enjoyed the
65
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
attack.
SB 3.19.17
TEXT 17
AQaaeåDaaSa*JaNMaaYaa& YaaeGaMaaYaeìre hraE )
Yaa& ivl/aeKYa Pa[JaañSTaa MaeiNare_SYaaePaSa&YaMaMa( )) 17 ))
athorudhäsåjan mäyäà
yoga-mäyeçvare harau
yäà vilokya prajäs trastä
menire 'syopasaàyamam
SYNONYMS
atha—then; urudhä—in many ways; asåjat—he cast; mäyäm—conjuring tricks; yogamäyä-
éçvare—the Lord of yogamäyä; harau—at Hari; yäm—which; vilokya—after
seeing; prajäù—the people; trastäù—fearful; menire—thought; asya—of this universe;
upasaàyamam—the dissolution.
TRANSLATION
The demon, however, employed many conjuring tricks against the Personality of
Godhead, who is the Lord of yogamäyä. At the sight of this the people were filled with
alarm and thought that the dissolution of the universe was near.
PURPORT
The fighting enjoyment of the Supreme Lord with His devotee, who had been converted
into a demon, appeared severe enough to bring about the dissolution of the universe.
This is the greatness of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; even the wavering of His
little finger appears to be a great and very dangerous movement in the eyes of the
inhabitants of the universe.
SB 3.19.18
TEXT 18
Pa[vvuvaRYavê<@aSTaMa" Paa&SavMaErYaNa( )
66
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
idG>Yaae iNaPaeTauGa]aRva<a" +aePa<aE" Pa[ihTaa wv )) 18 ))
pravavur väyavaç caëòäs
tamaù päàsavam airayan
digbhyo nipetur gräväëaù
kñepaëaiù prahitä iva
SYNONYMS
pravavuù—were blowing; väyavaù—winds; caëòäù—fierce; tamaù—darkness;
päàsavam—caused by dust; airayan—were spreading; digbhyaù—from every direction;
nipetuù—came down; gräväëaù—stones; kñepaëaiù—by machine guns; prahitäù—
thrown; iva—as if.
TRANSLATION
Fierce winds began to blow from all directions, spreading darkness occasioned by dust and
hail storms; stones came in volleys from every corner, as if thrown by machine guns.
SB 3.19.19
TEXT 19
ÛaENaRí>aGa<aa>a]aEgaE" SaivÛuTSTaNaiYaÒui>a" )
vzRiÙ" PaUYake-XaaSa*iGv<MaU}aaSQaqiNa caSak*-Ta( )) 19 ))
dyaur nañöa-bhagaëäbhraughaiù
sa-vidyut-stanayitnubhiù
varñadbhiù püya-keçäsågvië-
müträsthéni cäsakåt
SYNONYMS
dyauù—the sky; nañöa—having disappeared; bha-gaëa—luminaries; abhra—of clouds;
oghaiù—by masses; sa—accompanied by; vidyut—lightning; stanayitnubhiù—and
thunder; varñadbhiù—raining; püya—pus; keça—hair; asåk—blood; viö—stool; mütra—
urine; asthéni—bones; ca—and; asakåt—again and again.
67
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The luminaries in outer space disappeared due to the sky's being overcast with masses of
clouds, which were accompanied by lightning and thunder. The sky rained pus, hair,
blood, stool, urine and bones.
SB 3.19.20
TEXT 20
iGarYa" Pa[TYad*XYaNTa NaaNaaYauDaMaucae_Naga )
idGvaSaSaae YaaTauDaaNYa" éUil/NYaae Mau¢-MaUDaRJaa" )) 20 ))
girayaù pratyadåçyanta
nänäyudha-muco 'nagha
dig-väsaso yätudhänyaù
çülinyo mukta-mürdhajäù
SYNONYMS
girayaù—mountains; pratyadåçyanta—appeared; nänä—various; äyudha—weapons;
mucaù—discharging; anagha—O sinless Vidura; dik-väsasaù—naked; yätudhänyaù—
demonesses; çülinyaù—armed with tridents; mukta—hanging loose; mürdhajäù—hair.
TRANSLATION
O sinless Vidura, mountains discharged weapons of various kinds, and naked demonesses
armed with tridents appeared with their hair hanging loose.
SB 3.19.21
TEXT 21
bhui>aYaR+ar+aaei>a" PatYaìrQaku-ÅrE" )
AaTaTaaiYai>aåTSa*ía ih&óa vacae_iTavEXaSaa" )) 21 ))
bahubhir yakña-rakñobhiù
patty-açva-ratha-kuïjaraiù
ätatäyibhir utsåñöä
hiàsrä väco 'tivaiçasäù
68
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
bahubhiù—by many; yakña-rakñobhiù—Yakñas and Räkñasas; patti—marching on foot;
açva—on horses; ratha—on chariots; kuïjaraiù—or on elephants; ätatäyibhiù—ruffians;
utsåñöäù—were uttered; hiàsräù—cruel; väcaù—words; ati-vaiçasäù—murderous.
TRANSLATION
Cruel and savage slogans were uttered by hosts of ruffian Yakñas and Räkñasas, who all
either marched on foot or rode on horses, elephants or chariots.
SB 3.19.22
TEXT 22
Pa[aduZk*-TaaNaa& MaaYaaNaaMaaSaurq<aa& ivNaaXaYaTa( )
SaudXaRNaañ& >aGavaNa( Pa[aYau» diYaTa& i}aPaaTa( )) 22 ))
präduñkåtänäà mäyänäm
äsuréëäà vinäçayat
sudarçanästraà bhagavän
präyuìkta dayitaà tri-pät
SYNONYMS
präduñkåtänäm—displayed; mäyänäm—the magical forces; äsuréëäm—displayed by the
demon; vinäçayat—desiring to destroy; sudarçana-astram—the Sudarçana weapon;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; präyuìkta—threw; dayitam—beloved;
tri-pät—the enjoyer of all sacrifices.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, the personal enjoyer of all sacrifices, now discharged His beloved Sudarçana,
which was capable of dispersing the magical forces displayed by the demon.
PURPORT
Even famous yogés and demons can sometimes enact very magical feats by their mystic
power, but in the presence of the Sudarçana cakra, when it is let loose by the Lord, all
such magical jugglery is dispersed. The instance of the quarrel between Durväsä Muni
69
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
and Mahäräja Ambaréña is a practical example in this matter. Durväsä Muni wanted to
display many magical wonders, but when the Sudarçana cakra appeared, Durväsä himself
was afraid and fled to various planets for his personal protection. The Lord is described
here as tri-pät, which means that He is the enjoyer of three kinds of sacrifices. In
Bhagavad-gétä the Lord confirms that He is the beneficiary and enjoyer of all sacrifices,
penances and austerities. The Lord is the enjoyer of three kinds of yajïa. As further
described in Bhagavad-gétä, there are sacrifices of goods, sacrifices of meditation and
sacrifices of philosophical speculation. Those on the paths of jïäna, yoga and karma all
have to come in the end to the Supreme Lord because väsudevaù sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]—
the Supreme Lord is the ultimate enjoyer of everything. That is the perfection of all
sacrifice.
SB 3.19.23
TEXT 23
Tada idTae" SaMa>avTSahSaa ôid vePaQau" )
SMarNTYaa >aTauRradeXa& STaNaaÀaSa*k(- Pa[Sauóuve )) 23 ))
tadä diteù samabhavat
sahasä hådi vepathuù
smarantyä bhartur ädeçaà
stanäc cäsåk prasusruve
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that moment; diteù—of Diti; samabhavat—occurred; sahasä—suddenly; hådi—
in the heart; vepathuù—a shudder; smarantyäù—recalling; bhartuù—of her husband,
Kaçyapa; ädeçam—the words; stanät—from her breast; ca—and; asåk—blood;
prasusruve—flowed.
TRANSLATION
At that very moment, a shudder suddenly ran through the heart of Diti, the mother of
Hiraëyäkña. She recalled the words of her husband, Kaçyapa, and blood flowed from her
breasts.
PURPORT
70
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
At Hiraëyäkña's last moment, his mother, Diti, remembered what her husband had said.
Although her sons would be demons, they would have the advantage of being killed by
the Personality of Godhead Himself. She remembered this incident by the grace of the
Lord, and her breasts flowed blood instead of milk. In many instances we find that when
a mother is moved by affection for her sons, milk flows from her breasts. In the case of
the demon's mother, the blood could not transform into milk, but it flowed down her
breasts as it was. Blood transforms into milk. To drink milk is auspicious, but to drink
blood is inauspicious, although they are one and the same thing. This formula is
applicable in the case of cow's milk also.
SB 3.19.24
TEXT 24
ivNaíaSau SvMaaYaaSau >aUYaêav]JYa ke-XavMa( )
åzaePaGaUhMaaNaae_Mau& dd*Xae_viSQaTa& bih" )) 24 ))
vinañöäsu sva-mäyäsu
bhüyaç cävrajya keçavam
ruñopagühamäno 'muà
dadåçe 'vasthitaà bahiù
SYNONYMS
vinañöäsu—when dispelled; sva-mäyäsu—his magic forces; bhüyaù—again; ca—and;
ävrajya—after coming into the presence; keçavam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; ruñä—full of rage; upagühamänaù—embracing; amum—the Lord; dadåçe—
saw; avasthitam—standing; bahiù—outside.
TRANSLATION
When the demon saw his magic forces dispelled, he once again came into the presence of
the Personality of Godhead, Keçava, and, full of rage, tried to embrace Him within his
arms to crush Him. But to his great amazement he found the Lord standing outside the
circle of his arms.
PURPORT
In this verse the Lord is addressed as Keçava because He killed the demon Keçé in the
71
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
beginning of creation. Keçava is also a name of Kåñëa. Kåñëa is the origin of all
incarnations, and it is confirmed in Brahma-saàhitä that Govinda, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes, exists simultaneously in His different
incarnations and expansions. The demon's attempt to measure the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is significant. The demon wanted to embrace Him with his arms, thinking
that with his limited arms he could capture the Absolute by material power. He did not
know that God is the greatest of the great and the smallest of the small. No one can
capture the Supreme Lord or bring Him under his control. But the demoniac person
always attempts to measure the length and breadth of the Supreme Lord. By His
inconceivable potency the Lord can become the universal form, as explained in
Bhagavad-gétä, and at the same time He can remain within the box of His devotees as
their worshipable Deity. There are many devotees who keep a statue of the Lord in a
small box and carry it with them everywhere; every morning they worship the Lord in
the box. The Supreme Lord, Keçava, or the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is not bound
by any measurement of our calculation. He can remain with His devotee in any suitable
form, yet He is unapproachable by any amount of demoniac activities.
SB 3.19.25
TEXT 25
Ta& Mauiíi>aivRiNaganNTa& vJa]SaarErDaae+aJa" )
k-re<a k-<aRMaUle/_hNa( YaQaa Tvaí\& MaåTPaiTa" )) 25 ))
taà muñöibhir vinighnantaà
vajra-särair adhokñajaù
kareëa karëa-müle 'han
yathä tväñöraà marut-patiù
SYNONYMS
tam—Hiraëyäkña; muñöibhiù—with his fists; vinighnantam—striking; vajra-säraiù—as
hard as a thunderbolt; adhokñajaù—Lord Adhokñaja; kareëa—with the hand; karëamüle—
at the root of the ear; ahan—struck; yathä—as; tväñöram—the demon Våtra (son
of Tvañöä); marut-patiù—Indra (lord of the Maruts).
TRANSLATION
72
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The demon now began to strike the Lord with his hard fists, but Lord Adhokñaja slapped
him in the root of the ear, even as Indra, the lord of the Maruts, hit the demon Våtra.
PURPORT
The Lord is explained here to be adhokñaja, beyond the reach of all material calculation.
Akñaja means "the measurement of our senses," and adhokñaja means "that which is
beyond the measurement of our senses."
SB 3.19.26
TEXT 26
Sa AahTaae ivìiJaTaa ùvjYaa
Pair>a]MaÓa}a odSTal/aecNa" )
ivXaq<aRbaûx(iga]iXaraeåhae_PaTad(
YaQaa NaGaeNd]ae lu/il/Taae Na>aSvTaa )) 26 ))
sa ähato viçva-jitä hy avajïayä
paribhramad-gätra udasta-locanaù
viçérëa-bähv-aìghri-çiroruho 'patad
yathä nagendro lulito nabhasvatä
SYNONYMS
saù—he; ähataù—having been struck; viçva-jitä—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; hi—though; avajïayä—indifferently; paribhramat—wheeling; gätraù—body;
udasta—bulged out; locanaù—eyes; viçérëa—broken; bähu—arms; aìghri—legs; çiraùruhaù—
hair; apatat—fell down; yathä—like; naga-indraù—a gigantic tree; lulitaù—
uprooted; nabhasvatä—by the wind.
TRANSLATION
Though struck indifferently by the Lord, the conqueror of all, the demon's body began to
wheel. His eyeballs bulged out of their sockets. His arms and legs broken and the hair on
his head scattered, he fell down dead, like a gigantic tree uprooted by the wind.
PURPORT
73
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
It does not take even a moment for the Lord to kill any powerful demon, including
Hiraëyäkña. The Lord could have killed him long before, but He allowed the demon to
display the full extent of his magical feats. One may know that by magical feats, by
scientific advancement of knowledge or by material power one cannot become the equal
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His one signal is sufficient to destroy all our
attempts. His inconceivable power, as displayed here, is so strong that the demon,
despite all his demoniac maneuvers, was killed by the Lord when the Lord desired,
simply by one slap.
SB 3.19.27
TEXT 27
i+aTaaE XaYaaNa& TaMaku-<#=vcRSa&
k-ral/d&í\& PairdídC^dMa( )
AJaadYaae vq+Ya XaXa&SauraGaTaa
Ahae wMaa& k-ae Nau l/>aeTa Sa&iSQaiTaMa( )) 27 ))
kñitau çayänaà tam akuëöha-varcasaà
karäla-daàñöraà paridañöa-dacchadam
ajädayo vékñya çaçaàsur ägatä
aho imaà ko nu labheta saàsthitim
SYNONYMS
kñitau—on the ground; çayänam—lying; tam—Hiraëyäkña; akuëöha—unfaded;
varcasam—glow; karäla—fearful; daàñöram—teeth; paridañöa—bitten; dat-chadam—
lip; aja-ädayaù—Brahmä and others; vékñya—having seen; çaçaàsuù—admiringly said;
ägatäù—arrived; aho—oh; imam—this; kaù—who; nu—indeed; labheta—could meet;
saàsthitim—death.
TRANSLATION
Aja [Brahmä] and others arrived on the spot to see the fearfully tusked demon lying on
the ground, biting his lip. The glow of his face was yet unfaded, and Brahmä admiringly
said: Oh, who could meet such blessed death?
PURPORT
74
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Although the demon was dead, his bodily luster was unfaded. This is very peculiar
because when a man or animal is dead, the body immediately becomes pale, the luster
gradually fades, and decomposition takes place. But here, although Hiraëyäkña lay dead,
his bodily luster was unfaded because the Lord, the Supreme Spirit, was touching his
body. One's bodily luster remains fresh only as long as the spirit soul is present.
Although the demon's soul had departed his body, the Supreme Spirit touched the body,
and therefore his bodily luster did not fade. The individual soul is different from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead
when he quits his body is certainly very fortunate, and therefore personalities like
Brahmä and the other demigods eulogized the death of the demon.
SB 3.19.28
TEXT 28
Ya& YaaeiGaNaae YaaeGaSaMaaiDaNaa rhae
DYaaYaiNTa il/(r)adSaTaae MauMau+aYaa )
TaSYaEz dETYa‰z>a" PadahTaae
Mau%& Pa[PaXYa&STaNauMauTSaSaJaR h )) 28 ))
yaà yogino yoga-samädhinä raho
dhyäyanti liìgäd asato mumukñayä
tasyaiña daitya-åñabhaù padähato
mukhaà prapaçyaàs tanum utsasarja ha
SYNONYMS
yam—whom; yoginaù—the yogés; yoga-samädhinä—in mystic trance; rahaù—in
seclusion; dhyäyanti—meditate upon; liìgät—from the body; asataù—unreal;
mumukñayä—seeking freedom; tasya—of Him; eñaù—this; daitya—son of Diti;
åñabhaù—the crest jewel; padä—by a foot; ähataù—struck; mukham—countenance;
prapaçyan—while gazing on; tanum—the body; utsasarja—he cast off; ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä continued: He was struck by a forefoot of the Lord, whom yogés, seeking
freedom from their unreal material bodies, meditate upon in seclusion in mystic trance.
While gazing on His countenance, this crest jewel of Diti's sons has cast off his mortal
75
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
coil.
PURPORT
The process of yoga is very clearly described in this verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. It is
said here that the ultimate end of the yogés and mystics who perform meditation is to get
rid of this material body. Therefore they meditate in secluded places to attain yogic
trance. Yoga has to be performed in a secluded place, not in public or in a demonstration
on stage, as nowadays practiced by many so-called yogés. Real yoga aims at ridding one of
the material body. Yoga practice is not intended to keep the body fit and young. Such
advertisements of so-called yoga are not approved by any standard method. Particularly
mentioned in this verse is the word yam, or "unto whom," indicating that meditation
should be targeted on the Personality of Godhead. Even if one concentrates his mind on
the boar form of the Lord, that is also yoga. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, one who
concentrates his mind constantly in meditation upon the Personality of Godhead in one
of His many varieties of forms is the first-class yogé, and he can very easily attain trance
simply by meditating upon the form of the Lord. If one is able to continue such
meditation on the Lord's form at the time of one's death, one is liberated from this
mortal body and is transferred to the kingdom of God. This opportunity was given to the
demon by the Lord, and therefore Brahmä and other demigods were astonished. In other
words, the perfection of yoga practice can be attained by a demon also if he is simply
kicked by the Lord.
SB 3.19.29
TEXT 29
WTaaE TaaE PaazRdavSYa XaaPaaÛaTaavSaÓiTaMa( )
PauNa" k-iTaPaYaE" SQaaNa& Pa[PaTSYaeTae h JaNMai>a" )) 29 ))
etau tau pärñadäv asya
çäpäd yätäv asad-gatim
punaù katipayaiù sthänaà
prapatsyete ha janmabhiù
SYNONYMS
etau—these two; tau—both; pärñadau—personal assistants; asya—of the Personality of
76
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Godhead; çäpät—because of being cursed; yätau—have gone; asat-gatim—to take birth
in a demoniac family; punaù—again; katipayaiù—a few; sthänam—own place;
prapatsyete—will get back; ha—indeed; janmabhiù—after births.
TRANSLATION
These two personal assistants of the Supreme Lord, having been cursed, have been
destined to take birth in demoniac families. After a few such births, they will return to
their own positions.
SB 3.19.30
TEXT 30
deva Ocu"
NaMaae NaMaSTae_i%l/YajTaNTave
iSQaTaaE Ga*hqTaaMal/SatvMaUTaRYae )
idíya hTaae_Ya& JaGaTaaMaåNTaud‚
STvTPaad>a¢-ya vYaMaqXa iNav*RTaa" )) 30 ))
devä ücuù
namo namas te 'khila-yajïa-tantave
sthitau gåhétämala-sattva-mürtaye
diñöyä hato 'yaà jagatäm aruntudas
tvat-päda-bhaktyä vayam éça nirvåtäù
SYNONYMS
deväù—the demigods; ücuù—said; namaù—obeisances; namaù—obeisances; te—unto
You; akhila-yajïa-tantave—the enjoyer of all sacrifices; sthitau—for the purpose of
maintaining; gåhéta—assumed; amala—pure; sattva—goodness; mürtaye—form; diñöyä—
fortunately; hataù—slain; ayam—this; jagatäm—to the worlds; aruntudaù—causing
torment; tvat-päda—to Your feet; bhaktyä—with devotion; vayam—we; éça—O Lord;
nirvåtäù—have attained happiness.
TRANSLATION
The demigods addressed the Lord: All obeisances unto You! You are the enjoyer of all
77
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sacrifices, and You have assumed the form of a boar, in pure goodness, for the purpose of
maintaining the world. Fortunately for us, this demon, who was a torment to the worlds,
has been slain by You, and we too, O Lord, are now at ease, in devotion to Your lotus
feet.
PURPORT
The material world consists of three modes—goodness, passion and ignorance—but the
spiritual world is pure goodness. It is said here that the form of the Lord is pure
goodness, which means that it is not material. In the material world there is no pure
goodness. In the Bhägavatam the stage of pure goodness is called sattvaà viçuddham.
Viçuddham means "pure." In pure goodness there is no contamination by the two inferior
qualities, namely passion and ignorance. The form of the boar, therefore, in which the
Lord appeared, is nothing of the material world. There are many other forms of the
Lord, but none of them belong to the material qualities. Such forms are nondifferent
from the Viñëu form, and Viñëu is the enjoyer of all sacrifices.
The sacrifices which are recommended in the Vedas are meant to please the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In ignorance only, people try to satisfy many other agents, but
the real purpose of life is to satisfy the Supreme Lord, Viñëu. All sacrifices are meant to
please the Supreme Lord. The living entities who know this perfectly well are called
demigods, godly or almost God. Since the living entity is part and parcel of the Supreme
Lord, it is his duty to serve the Lord and please Him. The demigods are all attached to
the Personality of Godhead, and for their pleasure the demon, who was a source of
trouble to the world, was killed. Purified life is meant to please the Lord, and all
sacrifices performed in purified life are called Kåñëa consciousness. This Kåñëa
consciousness is developed by devotional service, as clearly mentioned here.
SB 3.19.31
TEXT 31
MaE}aeYa ovac
Wv& ihr<Yaa+aMaSaùiv§-Ma&
Sa SaadiYaTva hirraidSaUk-r" )
JaGaaMa l/aek&- SvMa%i<@TaaeTSav&
SaMaqi@Ta" PauZk-rivíraidi>a" )) 31 ))
78
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
maitreya uväca
evaà hiraëyäkñam asahya-vikramaà
sa sädayitvä harir ädi-sükaraù
jagäma lokaà svam akhaëòitotsavaà
saméòitaù puñkara-viñöarädibhiù
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Çré Maitreya said; evam—thus; hiraëyäkñam—Hiraëyäkña; asahyavikramam—
very powerful; saù—the Lord; sädayitvä—after killing; hariù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; ädi-sükaraù—the origin of the boar species; jagäma—returned;
lokam—to His abode; svam—own; akhaëòita—uninterrupted; utsavam—festival;
saméòitaù—being praised; puñkara-viñöara—lotus seat (by Lord Brahmä, whose seat is a
lotus); ädibhiù—and the others.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya continued: After thus killing the most formidable demon Hiraëyäkña, the
Supreme Lord Hari, the origin of the boar species, returned to His own abode, where
there is always an uninterrupted festival. The Lord was praised by all the demigods,
headed by Brahmä.
PURPORT
The Lord is spoken of herewith as the origin of the boar species. As stated in the
Vedänta-sütra (1.1.2), the Absolute Truth is the origin of everything. Therefore it is to
be understood that all 8,400,000 species of bodily forms originate from the Lord, who is
always ädi, or the beginning. In Bhagavad-gétä Arjuna addresses the Lord as ädyam, or
the original. Similarly, in the Brahma-saàhitä the Lord is addressed as ädi-puruñam, the
original person. Indeed, in Bhagavad-gétä (10.8) the Lord Himself declares, mattaù
sarvaà pravartate: "From Me everything proceeds."
In this situation the Lord assumed the shape of a boar to kill the demon Hiraëyäkña and
pick up the earth from the Garbha Ocean. Thus He became ädi-sükara, the original
boar. In the material world a boar or pig is considered most abominable, but the ädisükara,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was not treated as an ordinary boar. Even
Lord Brahmä and the other demigods praised the Lord's form as a boar.
This verse confirms the statement in Bhagavad-gétä that the Lord appears as He is from
79
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
His transcendental abode for the sake of killing the miscreants and saving the devotees.
By killing the demon Hiraëyäkña He fulfilled His promise to kill the demons and always
protect the demigods headed by Brahmä. The statement that the Lord returned to His
own abode indicates that He has His own particular transcendental residence. Since He
is full of all energies, He is all-pervasive in spite of His residing in Goloka Våndävana,
just as the sun, although situated in a particular place within the universe, is present by
its sunshine throughout the universe.
Although the Lord has His particular abode in which to reside, He is all-pervasive. The
impersonalists accept one aspect of the Lord's features, the all-pervasive aspect, but they
cannot understand His localized situation in His transcendental abode, where He always
engages in fully transcendental pastimes. Especially mentioned in this verse is the word
akhaëòitotsavam. Utsava means "pleasure." Whenever some function takes place to
express happiness, it is called utsava. Utsava, the expression of complete happiness, is
always present in the Vaikuëöhalokas, the abode of the Lord, who is worshipable even by
demigods like Brahmä, to say nothing of other, less important entities such as human
beings.
The Lord descends from His abode to this world, and therefore He is called avatära,
which means "one who descends." Sometimes avatära is understood to refer to an
incarnation who assumes a material form of flesh and bone, but actually avatära refers to
one who descends from higher regions. The Lord's abode is situated far above this
material sky, and He descends from that higher position; thus He is called avatära.
SB 3.19.32
TEXT 32
MaYaa YaQaaNaU¢-Mavaid Tae hre"
k*-TaavTaarSYa SauiMa}a ceiíTaMa( )
YaQaa ihr<Yaa+a odariv§-Maae
MahaMa*Dae §-I@Naviàrak*-Ta" )) 32 ))
mayä yathänüktam avädi te hareù
kåtävatärasya sumitra ceñöitam
yathä hiraëyäkña udära-vikramo
mahä-mådhe kréòanavan niräkåtaù
SYNONYMS
80
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mayä—by me; yathä—as; anüktam—told; avädi—was explained; te—to you; hareù—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kåta-avatärasya—who assumed the incarnation;
sumitra—O dear Vidura; ceñöitam—the activities; yathä—as; hiraëyäkñaù—Hiraëyäkña;
udära—very extensive; vikramaù—prowess; mahä-mådhe—in a great fight; kréòanavat—
like a plaything; niräkåtaù—was killed.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, I have explained to you the Personality of
Godhead's coming down as the first boar incarnation and killing in a great fight a demon
of unprecedented prowess as if he were just a plaything. This has been narrated by me as
I heard it from my predecessor spiritual master.
PURPORT
Here the sage Maitreya admits that he explained the incident of the killing of
Hiraëyäkña by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as a straight narration; he did not
manufacture anything or add interpretation, but explained whatever he had heard from
his spiritual master. Thus he accepted as bona fide the system of paramparä, or receiving
the transcendental message in disciplic succession. Unless received by this bona fide
process of hearing from a spiritual master, the statement of an äcärya or preceptor
cannot be valid.
It is also stated here that although the demon Hiraëyäkña was unlimited in prowess, he
was just like a doll for the Lord. A child breaks so many dolls without real endeavor.
Similarly, although a demon may be very powerful and extraordinary in the eyes of an
ordinary man in the material world, to the Lord, killing such a demon is no difficulty.
He can kill millions of demons as simply as a child plays with dolls and breaks them.
SB 3.19.33
TEXT 33
SaUTa ovac
wiTa k-aEzarva:YaaTaaMaaé[uTYa >aGavTk-QaaMa( )
+ataaNaNd& Par& le/>ae Maha>aaGavTaae iÜJa )) 33 ))
süta uväca
iti kauñäraväkhyätäm
81
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
äçrutya bhagavat-kathäm
kñattänandaà paraà lebhe
mahä-bhägavato dvija
SYNONYMS
sütaù—Süta Gosvämé; uväca—said; iti—thus; kauñärava—from Maitreya (son of
Kuñäru); äkhyätäm—told; äçrutya—having heard; bhagavat-kathäm—the narration
about the Lord; kñattä—Vidura; änandam—bliss; param—transcendental; lebhe—
achieved; mahä-bhägavataù—the great devotee; dvija—O brähmaëa (Çaunaka).
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé continued: My dear brähmaëa, Kñattä [Vidura] the great devotee of the
Lord achieved transcendental bliss by hearing the narration of the pastimes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead from the authoritative source of the sage Kauñärava
[Maitreya], and he was very pleased.
PURPORT
If anyone wants to derive transcendental pleasure by hearing the pastimes of the Lord,
he must hear from the authoritative source, as explained here. Maitreya heard the
narration from his bona fide spiritual master, and Vidura also heard from Maitreya. One
becomes an authority simply by presenting whatever he has heard from his spiritual
master, and one who does not accept a bona fide spiritual master cannot be an authority.
This is clearly explained here. If one wants to have transcendental pleasure, he must
find a person with authority. It is also stated in the Bhägavatam that simply by hearing
from an authoritative source, with the ear and the heart, one can relish the pastimes of
the Lord, otherwise it is not possible. Sanätana Gosvämé, therefore, has especially
warned that one should not hear anything about the personality of the Lord from the
lips of a nondevotee. Nondevotees are considered to be like serpents; as milk is poisoned
by a serpent's touch, so, although the narration of the pastimes of the Lord is as pure as
milk, when administered by serpentlike nondevotees it becomes poisonous. Not only
does it have no effect in transcendental pleasure, but it is dangerous also. Lord Caitanya
Mahäprabhu has warned that no description of the pastimes of the Lord should be heard
from the Mäyäväda, or impersonalist, school. He has clearly said, mäyävädi-bhäñya çunile
haya sarva näça: if anyone hears the Mäyävädés' interpretation of the pastimes of the
82
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Lord, or their interpretation of Bhagavad-gétä, Çrémad-Bhägavatam or any other Vedic
literature, then he is doomed. Once one is associated with impersonalists, he can never
understand the personal feature of the Lord and His transcendental pastimes.
Süta Gosvämé was speaking to the sages headed by Çaunaka, and therefore he addressed
them in this verse as dvija, twice-born. The sages assembled in Naimiñäraëya hearing
Çrémad-Bhägavatam from Süta Gosvämé were all brähmaëas, but to acquire the
qualifications of a brähmaëa is not everything. Merely to be twice-born is not
perfection. Perfection is attained when one hears the pastimes and activities of the Lord
from a bona fide source.
SB 3.19.34
TEXT 34
ANYaeza& Pau<Yaëaek-aNaaMauÕaMaYaXaSaa& SaTaaMa( )
oPaé[uTYa >aveNMaaed" é[qvTSaaªSYa ik&- PauNa" )) 34 ))
anyeñäà puëya-çlokänäm
uddäma-yaçasäà satäm
upaçrutya bhaven modaù
çrévatsäìkasya kià punaù
SYNONYMS
anyeñäm—of others; puëya-çlokänäm—of pious reputation; uddäma-yaçasäm—whose
fame is spread everywhere; satäm—of the devotees; upaçrutya—by hearing; bhavet—
may arise; modaù—pleasure; çrévatsa-aìkasya—of the Lord, who bears the mark
Çrévatsa; kim punaù—what to speak of.
TRANSLATION
What to speak of hearing the pastimes of the Lord, whose chest is marked with Çrévatsa,
people may take transcendental pleasure even in hearing of the works and deeds of the
devotees, whose fame is immortal.
PURPORT
Bhägavatam literally means the pastimes of the Lord and the Lord's devotees. For
example, there are pastimes of Lord Kåñëa and narrations of devotees like Prahläda,
83
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Dhruva and Mahäräja Ambaréña. Both pastimes pertain to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead because the devotees' pastimes are in relation with Him. The Mahäbhärata, for
example, the history of the Päëòavas and their activities, is sacred because the Päëòavas
had a direct relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
SB 3.19.35
TEXT 35
Yaae GaJaeNd]& ‡zGa]STa& DYaaYaNTa& cr<aaMbuJaMa( )
§-aeXaNTaqNaa& k-re<aUNaa& k*-C^\Taae_MaaecYad( d]uTaMa( )) 35 ))
yo gajendraà jhaña-grastaà
dhyäyantaà caraëämbujam
kroçanténäà kareëünäà
kåcchrato 'mocayad drutam
SYNONYMS
yaù—He who; gaja-indram—the king of elephants; jhaña—an alligator; grastam—
attacked by; dhyäyantam—meditating upon; caraëa—feet; ambujam—lotus;
kroçanténäm—while crying; kareëünäm—the female elephants; kåcchrataù—from
danger; amocayat—delivered; drutam—quickly.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead delivered the king of the elephants, who was attacked by an
alligator and who meditated upon the lotus feet of the Lord. At that time the female
elephants who accompanied him were crying, and the Lord saved them from the
impending danger.
PURPORT
The example of the elephant in danger who was saved by the Supreme Lord is especially
cited here because even if one is an animal he can approach the Personality of Godhead
in devotional service, whereas even a demigod cannot approach the Supreme Person
unless he is a devotee.
SB 3.19.36
TEXT 36
84
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Ta& Sau%araDYaMa*Jaui>arNaNYaXar<aENa*Ri>a" )
k*-Taj" k-ae Na SaeveTa duraraDYaMaSaaDaui>a" )) 36 ))
taà sukhärädhyam åjubhir
ananya-çaraëair nåbhiù
kåtajïaù ko na seveta
durärädhyam asädhubhiù
SYNONYMS
tam—unto Him; sukha—easily; ärädhyam—worshiped; åjubhiù—by the unpretentious;
ananya—no other; çaraëaiù—who take shelter; nåbhiù—by men; kåta-jïaù—grateful
soul; kaù—what; na—not; seveta—would render service; durärädhyam—impossible to
be worshiped; asädhubhiù—by the nondevotees.
TRANSLATION
What grateful soul is there who would not render his loving service to such a great master
as the Personality of Godhead? The Lord can be easily pleased by spotless devotees who
resort exclusively to Him for protection, though the unrighteous man finds it difficult to
propitiate Him.
PURPORT
Every living entity, especially persons in the human race, must feel grateful for the
benedictions offered by the grace of the Supreme Lord. Anyone, therefore, with a simple
heart of gratefulness must be Kåñëa conscious and offer devotional service to the Lord.
Those who are actually thieves and rogues do not recognize or acknowledge the
benedictions offered to them by the Supreme Lord, and they cannot render Him
devotional service. Ungrateful persons are those who do not understand how much
benefit they are deriving by the arrangement of the Lord. They enjoy the sunshine and
moonshine, and they get water free of charge, yet they do not feel grateful, but simply go
on enjoying these gifts of the Lord. Therefore, they must be called thieves and rogues.
SB 3.19.37
TEXT 37
85
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Yaae vE ihr<Yaa+avDa& Mahad(>auTa&
iv§-Ii@Ta& k-ar<aSaUk-raTMaNa" )
é*<aaeiTa GaaYaTYaNauMaaedTae_ÅSaa
ivMauCYaTae b]øvDaadiPa iÜJaa" )) 37 ))
yo vai hiraëyäkña-vadhaà mahädbhutaà
vikréòitaà käraëa-sükarätmanaù
çåëoti gäyaty anumodate 'ïjasä
vimucyate brahma-vadhäd api dvijäù
SYNONYMS
yaù—he who; vai—indeed; hiraëyäkña-vadham—of the killing of Hiraëyäkña; mahäadbhutam—
most wonderful; vikréòitam—pastime; käraëa—for reasons like raising the
earth from the ocean; sükara—appearing in the form of a boar; ätmanaù—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; çåëoti—hears; gäyati—chants; anumodate—takes
pleasure; aïjasä—at once; vimucyate—becomes freed; brahma-vadhät—from the sin of
killing a brähmaëa; api—even; dvijäù—O brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëas, anyone who hears, chants, or takes pleasure in the wonderful narration of
the killing of the Hiraëyäkña demon by the Lord, who appeared as the first boar in order
to deliver the world, is at once relieved of the results of sinful activities, even the killing
of a brähmaëa.
PURPORT
Since the Personality of Godhead is in the absolute position, there is no difference
between His pastimes and His personality. Anyone who hears about the pastimes of the
Lord associates with the Lord directly, and one who associates directly with the Lord is
certainly freed from all sinful activities, even to the extent of the killing of a brähmaëa,
which is considered the most sinful activity in the material world. One should be very
eager to hear about the activities of the Lord from the bona fide source, the pure
devotee. If one simply gives aural reception to the narration and accepts the glories of
the Lord, then he is qualified. The impersonalist philosophers cannot understand the
86
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
activities of the Lord. They think that all His activities are mäyä; therefore they are
called Mäyävädés. Since everything to them is mäyä, these narrations are not for them.
Some impersonalists are reluctant to hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam, although many of them
are now taking an interest in it just for monetary gain. Actually, however, they have no
faith. On the contrary, they describe it in their own way. We should not hear, therefore,
from the Mäyävädés. We have to hear from Süta Gosvämé or Maitreya, who actually
present the narrations as they are, and only then can we relish the pastimes of the Lord;
otherwise the effects on the neophyte audience will be poisonous.
SB 3.19.38
TEXT 38
WTaNMahaPau<YaMal&/ Paiv}a&
DaNYa& YaXaSYa& PadMaaYauraiXazaMa( )
Pa[a<aeiNd]Yaa<aa& YauiDa XaaEYaRvDaRNa&
NaaraYa<aae_NTae GaiTar(r) é*<vTaaMa( )) 38 ))
etan mahä-puëyam alaà pavitraà
dhanyaà yaçasyaà padam äyur-äçiñäm
präëendriyäëäà yudhi çaurya-vardhanaà
näräyaëo 'nte gatir aìga çåëvatäm
SYNONYMS
etat—this narrative; mahä-puëyam—conferring great merit; alam—very; pavitram—
sacred; dhanyam—conferring wealth; yaçasyam—bearing fame; padam—the receptacle;
äyuù—of longevity; äçiñäm—of the objects of one's desire; präëa—of the vital organs;
indriyäëäm—of the organs of action; yudhi—on the field of battle; çaurya—the
strength; vardhanam—increasing; näräyaëaù—Lord Näräyaëa; ante—at the end of life;
gatiù—shelter; aìga—O dear Çaunaka; çåëvatäm—of those who listen.
TRANSLATION
This most sacred narrative confers extraordinary merit, wealth, fame, longevity, and all
the objects of one's desire. On the field of battle it promotes the strength of one's vital
organs and organs of action. One who listens to it at the last moment of his life is
transferred to the supreme abode of the Lord, O dear Çaunaka.
87
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Devotees are generally attracted by the narratives of the pastimes of the Lord, and even
though they do not prosecute austerities or meditation, this very process of hearing
attentively about the pastimes of the Lord will endow them with innumerable benefits,
such as wealth, fame, longevity and other desirable aims of life. If one continues to hear
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is full of narratives of the pastimes of the Lord, at the end of
this life, one is sure to be transferred to the eternal, transcendental abode of the Lord.
Thus hearers are benefited both ultimately and for as long as they are in the material
world. That is the supreme, sublime result of engaging in devotional service. The
beginning of devotional service is to spare some time and listen to Çrémad-Bhägavatam
from the right source. Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu also recommended five items of
devotional service, namely to serve the devotees of the Lord, to chant Hare Kåñëa, to
hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam, to worship the Deity of the Lord and to live in a place of
pilgrimage. Just performing these five activities can deliver one from the miserable
condition of material life.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Nineteenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Killing of the Demon Hiraëyäkña."
20. Conversation Between Maitreya and Vidura
SB 3.20.1
TEXT 1
XaaENak- ovac
Mahq& Pa[iTaïaMaDYaSYa SaaETae SvaYaM>auvae MaNau" )
k-aNYaNviTaïd( Üarai<a MaaGaaRYaavrJaNMaNaaMa( )) 1 ))
çaunaka uväca
mahéà pratiñöhäm adhyasya
saute sväyambhuvo manuù
käny anvatiñöhad dväräëi
88
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
märgäyävara-janmanäm
SYNONYMS
çaunakaù—Çaunaka; uväca—said; mahém—the earth; pratiñöhäm—situated; adhyasya—
having secured; saute—O Süta Gosvämé; sväyambhuvaù—Sväyambhuva; manuù—
Manu; käni—what; anvatiñöhat—performed; dväräëi—ways; märgäya—to get out;
avara—later; janmanäm—of those to be born.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çaunaka inquired: O Süta Gosvämé, after the earth was again situated in its orbit,
what did Sväyambhuva Manu do to show the path of liberation to persons who were to
take birth later on?
PURPORT
The appearance of the Lord as the first boar incarnation occurred during the time of
Sväyambhuva Manu, whereas the present age is in the period of Vaivasvata Manu. Each
Manu's period lasts seventy-two times the cycle of four ages, and one cycle of ages equals
4,320,000 solar years. Thus 4,320,000 x 72 solar years is the reign of one Manu. In each
Manu's period there are many changes in many ways, and there are fourteen Manus
within one day of Brahmä. It is understood here that Manu creates scriptural regulations
for the salvation of the conditioned souls, who come to the material world for material
enjoyment. The Lord is so kind that any soul who wants to enjoy in this material world
is given full facility for enjoyment, and at the same time he is shown the path of
salvation. Çaunaka Åñi, therefore, inquired from Süta Gosvämé: "What did Sväyambhuva
Manu do after the reinstatement of the earth in its orbital situation?"
SB 3.20.2
TEXT 2
+ataa Maha>aaGavTa" k*-Z<aSYaEk-aiNTak-" SauôTa( )
YaSTaTYaaJaaGa]Ja& k*-Z<ae SaaPaTYaMagavaiNaiTa )) 2 ))
kñattä mahä-bhägavataù
kåñëasyaikäntikaù suhåt
yas tatyäjägrajaà kåñëe
89
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
säpatyam aghavän iti
SYNONYMS
kñattä—Vidura; mahä-bhägavataù—a great devotee of the Lord; kåñëasya—of Lord
Kåñëa; ekäntikaù—unalloyed devotee; suhåt—intimate friend; yaù—he who; tatyäja—
abandoned; agra-jam—his elder brother (King Dhåtaräñöra); kåñëe—toward Kåñëa; saapatyam—
along with his one hundred sons; agha-vän—offender; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Çaunaka Åñi inquired about Vidura, who was a great devotee and friend of Lord Kåñëa
and who gave up the company of his elder brother because the latter, along with his sons,
played tricks against the desires of the Lord.
PURPORT
The incident referred to here is that Vidura left the protection of his elder brother
Dhåtaräñöra, went traveling everywhere to sacred places and met Maitreya at Hardwar.
Çaunaka Åñi here inquires about the topics of the conversation between Maitreya Åñi
and Vidura. Vidura's qualification was that he was not only a friend of the Lord but also
a great devotee. When Kåñëa tried to stop the war and mitigate the misunderstanding
between the cousin-brothers, they refused to accept His counsel; therefore Kñattä, or
Vidura, was unsatisfied with them, and he left the palace. As a devotee, Vidura showed
by example that anywhere that Kåñëa is not honored is a place unfit for human
habitation. A devotee may be tolerant regarding his own interests, but he should not be
tolerant when there is misbehavior toward the Lord or the Lord's devotee. Here the
word aghavän is very significant, for it indicates that the Kauravas, Dhåtaräñöra's sons,
lost the war because of being sinful in disobeying the instructions of Kåñëa.
SB 3.20.3
TEXT 3
ÜEPaaYaNaadNavrae MaihTve TaSYa dehJa" )
SavaRTMaNaa ié[Ta" k*-Z<a& TaTPara&êaPYaNauv]Ta" )) 3 ))
dvaipäyanäd anavaro
mahitve tasya dehajaù
90
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sarvätmanä çritaù kåñëaà
tat-paräàç cäpy anuvrataù
SYNONYMS
dvaipäyanät—from Vyäsadeva; anavaraù—in no way inferior; mahitve—in greatness;
tasya—his (Vyäsa's); deha-jaù—born of his body; sarva-ätmanä—with all his heart;
çritaù—took shelter; kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa; tat-parän—those devoted to Him; ca—and;
api—also; anuvrataù—followed.
TRANSLATION
Vidura was born from the body of Veda-vyäsa and was not less than he. Thus he accepted
the lotus feet of Kåñëa wholeheartedly and was attached to His devotees.
PURPORT
The history of Vidura is that he was born of a çüdra mother, but his seminal father was
Vyäsadeva; thus he was not less than Vyäsadeva in any respect. Since he was born of a
great father, who was supposed to be an incarnation of Näräyaëa and who composed all
the Vedic literatures, Vidura was also a great personality. He accepted Kåñëa as his
worshipable Lord and followed His instructions wholeheartedly.
SB 3.20.4
TEXT 4
ik-MaNvPa*C^NMaE}aeYa& ivrJaaSTaqQaRSaevYaa )
oPaGaMYa ku-XaavTaR AaSaqNa& TatvivtaMaMa( )) 4 ))
kim anvapåcchan maitreyaà
virajäs tértha-sevayä
upagamya kuçävarta
äsénaà tattva-vittamam
SYNONYMS
kim—what; anvapåcchat—inquired; maitreyam—from the sage Maitreya; virajäù—
Vidura, who was without material contamination; tértha-sevayä—by visiting sacred
91
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
places; upagamya—having met; kuçävarte—at Kuçävarta (Haridvära, or Hardwar);
äsénam—who was abiding; tattva-vit-tamam—the foremost knower of the science of
spiritual life.
TRANSLATION
Vidura was purified of all passion by wandering in sacred places, and at last he reached
Hardwar, where he met the great sage who knew the science of spiritual life, and he
inquired from him. Çaunaka Åñi therefore asked: What more did Vidura inquire from
Maitreya?
PURPORT
Here the words virajäs tértha-sevayä refer to Vidura, who was completely cleansed of all
contamination by traveling to places of pilgrimage. In India there are hundreds of sacred
places of pilgrimage, of which Prayäga, Hardwar, Våndävana and Rämeçvaram are
considered principal. After leaving his home, which was full of politics and diplomacy,
Vidura wanted to purify himself by traveling to all the sacred places, which are so
situated that anyone who goes there automatically becomes purified. This is especially
true in Våndävana; any person may go there, and even if he is sinful he will at once
contact an atmosphere of spiritual life and will automatically chant the names of Kåñëa
and Rädhä. That we have actually seen and experienced. It is recommended in the
çästras that after retiring from active life and accepting the vänaprastha (retired) order,
one should travel everywhere to places of pilgrimage in order to purify himself. Vidura
completely discharged this duty, and at last he reached Kuçävarta, or Hardwar, where
the sage Maitreya was sitting.
Another significant point is that one must go to sacred places not only to take bath
there but to search out great sages like Maitreya and take instructions from them. If one
does not do so, his traveling to places of pilgrimage is simply a waste of time. Narottama
däsa Öhäkura, a great äcärya of the Vaiñëava sect, has, for the present, forbidden us to
go to such places of pilgrimage because in this age, the times having so changed, a
sincere person may have a different impression on seeing the behavior of the present
residents of the pilgrimage sites. He has recommended that instead of taking the trouble
to travel to such places, one should concentrate his mind on Govinda, and that will help
him. Of course, to concentrate one's mind on Govinda in any place is a path meant for
those who are the most spiritually advanced; it is not for ordinary persons. Ordinary
persons may still derive benefit from traveling to holy places like Prayäga, Mathurä,
92
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Våndävana and Hardwar.
It is recommended in this verse that one find a person who knows the science of God, or
a tattva-vit. Tattva-vit means "one who knows the Absolute Truth." There are many
pseudotranscendentalists, even at places of pilgrimage. Such men are always present,
and one has to be intelligent enough to find the actual person to be consulted; then
one's attempt to progress by traveling to different holy places will be successful. One has
to be freed from all contamination, and at the same time he has to find a person who
knows the science of Kåñëa. Kåñëa helps a sincere person; as stated in the Caitanyacaritämåta,
guru-kåñëa-prasäde: by the mercy of the spiritual master and Kåñëa, one
attains the path of salvation, devotional service. If one sincerely searches for spiritual
salvation, then Kåñëa, being situated in everyone's heart, gives him the intelligence to
find a suitable spiritual master. By the grace of a spiritual master like Maitreya, one gets
the proper instruction and advances in his spiritual life.
SB 3.20.5
TEXT 5
TaYaae" Sa&vdTaae" SaUTa Pa[v*taa ùMal/a" k-Qaa" )
AaPaae Gaa(r)a wvagaganqhRre" PaadaMbuJaaé[Yaa" )) 5 ))
tayoù saàvadatoù süta
pravåttä hy amaläù kathäù
äpo gäìgä ivägha-ghnér
hareù pädämbujäçrayäù
SYNONYMS
tayoù—while the two (Maitreya and Vidura); saàvadatoù—were conversing; süta—O
Süta; pravåttäù—arose; hi—certainly; amaläù—spotless; kathäù—narrations; äpaù—
waters; gäìgäù—of the River Ganges; iva—like; agha-ghnéù—vanquishing all sins;
hareù—of the Lord; päda-ambuja—the lotus feet; äçrayäù—taking shelter.
TRANSLATION
Çaunaka inquired about the conversation between Vidura and Maitreya: There must have
been many narrations of the spotless pastimes of the Lord. The hearing of such narrations
is exactly like bathing in the water of the Ganges, for it can free one from all sinful
93
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
reactions.
PURPORT
The water of the Ganges is purified because it pours forth from the lotus feet of the
Lord. Similarly, Bhagavad-gétä is as good as the water of the Ganges because it is spoken
from the mouth of the Supreme Lord. So it is with any topic on the pastimes of the Lord
or the characteristics of His transcendental activities. The Lord is absolute; there is no
difference between His words, His perspiration or His pastimes. The water of the
Ganges, the narrations of His pastimes and the words spoken by Him are all on the
absolute platform, and thus taking shelter of any one of them is equally good. Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé has enunciated that anything in relationship with Kåñëa is on the
transcendental platform. If we can dovetail all our activities in relationship with Kåñëa,
then we do not stand on the material platform, but always on the spiritual platform.
SB 3.20.6
TEXT 6
Taa Na" k-ITaRYa >ad]& Tae k-ITaRNYaaedark-MaR<a" )
rSaj" k-ae Nau Ta*PYaeTa hirl/Il/aMa*Ta& iPabNa( )) 6 ))
tä naù kértaya bhadraà te
kértanyodära-karmaëaù
rasajïaù ko nu tåpyeta
hari-lélämåtaà piban
SYNONYMS
täù—those talks; naù—to us; kértaya—narrate; bhadram te—may all good come unto
you; kértanya—should be chanted; udära—liberal; karmaëaù—activities; rasa-jïaù—a
devotee who can appreciate mellow tastes; kaù—who; nu—indeed; tåpyeta—would feel
satisfied; hari-lélä-amåtam—the nectar of the pastimes of the Lord; piban—drinking.
TRANSLATION
O Süta Gosvämé, all good fortune to you! Please narrate the activities of the Lord, which
are all magnanimous and worth glorifying. What sort of devotee can be satiated by
hearing the nectarean pastimes of the Lord?
94
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The narration of the pastimes of the Lord, which are always enacted on the
transcendental platform, should be received with all respect by devotees. Those who are
actually on the transcendental platform are never satiated by hearing the continuous
narration of the pastimes of the Lord. For example, if any self-realized soul reads from
Bhagavad-gétä, he will never feel satiated. The narrations of Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-
Bhägavatam may be read thousands and thousands of times, and still, without fail, new
aspects of the subject matter will be relished by the devotee.
SB 3.20.7
TEXT 7
WvMauGa]é[va" Pa*í ‰izi>aNaOE„iMazaYaNaE" )
>aGavTYaiPaRTaaDYaaTMaSTaaNaah é[UYaTaaiMaiTa )) 7 ))
evam ugraçraväù påñöa
åñibhir naimiñäyanaiù
bhagavaty arpitädhyätmas
tän äha çrüyatäm iti
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; ugraçraväù—Süta Gosvämé; påñöaù—being asked; åñibhiù—by the sages;
naimiña-ayanaiù—who were assembled in the forest of Naimiña; bhagavati—unto the
Lord; arpita—dedicated; adhyätmaù—his mind; tän—to them; äha—said; çrüyatäm—
just hear; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
On being asked to speak by the great sages of Naimiñäraëya, the son of Romaharñaëa,
Süta Gosvämé, whose mind was absorbed in the transcendental pastimes of the Lord, said:
Please hear what I shall now speak.
SB 3.20.8
TEXT 8
SaUTa ovac
95
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
hreDa*RTa§-ae@TaNaae" SvMaaYaYaa
iNaXaMYa GaaeåÖr<a& rSaaTal/aTa( )
l/Il/a& ihr<Yaa+aMavjYaa hTa&
SaÅaTahzaeR MauiNaMaah >aarTa" )) 8 ))
süta uväca
harer dhåta-kroòa-tanoù sva-mäyayä
niçamya gor uddharaëaà rasätalät
léläà hiraëyäkñam avajïayä hataà
saïjäta-harño munim äha bhärataù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta said; hareù—of the Lord; dhåta—who had assumed; kroòa—of a boar;
tanoù—body; sva-mäyayä—by His divine potency; niçamya—having heard; goù—of the
earth; uddharaëam—uplifting; rasätalät—from the bottom of the ocean; léläm—sport;
hiraëyäkñam—the demon Hiraëyäkña; avajïayä—neglectfully; hatam—killed; saïjätaharñaù—
being overjoyed; munim—to the sage (Maitreya); äha—said; bhärataù—Vidura.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé continued: Vidura, the descendant of Bharata, was delighted to hear the
story of the Lord, who, having assumed by His own divine potency the form of a boar,
had enacted the sport of lifting the earth from the bottom of the ocean and indifferently
killing the demon Hiraëyäkña. Vidura then spoke to the sage as follows.
PURPORT
It is stated here that the Lord assumed the form of a boar by His own potency. His form
is not actually the form of a conditioned soul. A conditioned soul is forced to accept a
particular type of body by the higher authority of material laws, but here it is clearly said
that the Lord was not forced to accept the form of a boar by the external power. In
Bhagavad-gétä the same fact is confirmed; when the Lord descends to this earth, He
assumes a form by His own internal potency. The form of the Lord, therefore, can never
consist of material energy. The Mäyäväda version that when Brahman assumes a form
the form is accepted from mäyä is not acceptable, because although mäyä is superior to
96
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the conditioned soul, she is not superior to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; she is
under the control of the Supreme Godhead, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä. Mäyä is
under His superintendence; mäyä cannot overcome the Lord. The Mäyäväda idea that
the living entity is the Supreme Absolute Truth but has become covered by mäyä is
invalid, because mäyä cannot be so great that it can cover the Supreme. The covering
capacity can be employed on the part and parcel of Brahman, not on the Supreme
Brahman.
SB 3.20.9
TEXT 9
ivdur ovac
Pa[JaaPaiTaPaiTa" Sa*îa Pa[JaaSaGaeR Pa[JaaPaTaqNa( )
ik-Maar>aTa Mae b]øNa( Pa[b]UùVYa¢-MaaGaRivTa( )) 9 ))
vidura uväca
prajäpati-patiù såñövä
prajä-sarge prajäpatén
kim ärabhata me brahman
prabrühy avyakta-märga-vit
SYNONYMS
viduraù uväca—Vidura said; prajäpati-patiù—Lord Brahmä; såñövä—after creating;
prajä-sarge—for the purpose of creating living beings; prajäpatén—the Prajäpatis; kim—
what; ärabhata—started; me—to me; brahman—O holy sage; prabrühi—tell; avyaktamärga-
vit—knower of that which we do not know.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: Since you know of matters inconceivable to us, tell me, O holy sage, what
did Brahmä do to create living beings after evolving the Prajäpatis, the progenitors of
living beings?
PURPORT
Significant here is the word avyakta-märga-vit, "one who knows that which is beyond
our perception." To know matters beyond one's perception, one has to learn from a
97
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
superior authority in the line of disciplic succession. Just to know who is our father is
beyond our perception. For that, the mother is the authority. Similarly, we have to
understand everything beyond our perception from the authority who actually knows.
The first avyakta-märga-vit, or authority, is Brahmä, and the next authority in disciplic
succession is Närada. Maitreya Åñi belongs to that disciplic succession, so he also is
avyakta-märga-vit. Anyone in the bona fide line of disciplic succession is avyakta-märgavit,
a personality who knows that which is beyond ordinary perception.
SB 3.20.10
TEXT 10
Yae MarqCYaadYaae ivPa[a YaSTau SvaYaM>auvae MaNau" )
Tae vE b]ø<a AadeXaaTk-QaMaeTad>aavYaNa( )) 10 ))
ye marécy-ädayo viprä
yas tu sväyambhuvo manuù
te vai brahmaëa ädeçät
katham etad abhävayan
SYNONYMS
ye—those; maréci-ädayaù—great sages headed by Maréci; vipräù—brähmaëas; yaù—
who; tu—indeed; sväyambhuvaù manuù—and Sväyambhuva Manu; te—they; vai—
indeed; brahmaëaù—of Lord Brahmä; ädeçät—by the order; katham—how; etat—this
universe; abhävayan—evolved.
TRANSLATION
Vidura inquired: How did the Prajäpatis [such progenitors of living entities as Maréci and
Sväyambhuva Manu] create according to the instruction of Brahmä, and how did they
evolve this manifested universe?
SB 3.20.11
TEXT 11
SaiÜTaqYaa" ik-MaSa*JaNa( SvTaN}aa oTa k-MaRSau )
AahaeiSvTSa&hTaa" SavR wd& SMa SaMak-LPaYaNa( )) 11 ))
98
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sa-dvitéyäù kim asåjan
svatanträ uta karmasu
äho svit saàhatäù sarva
idaà sma samakalpayan
SYNONYMS
sa-dvitéyäù—with their wives; kim—whether; asåjan—created; sva-tanträù—remaining
independent; uta—or; karmasu—in their actions; äho svit—or else; saàhatäù—jointly;
sarve—all the Prajäpatis; idam—this; sma samakalpayan—produced.
TRANSLATION
Did they evolve the creation in conjunction with their respective wives, did they remain
independent in their action, or did they all jointly produce it?
SB 3.20.12
TEXT 12
MaE}aeYa ovac
dEveNa duivRTaKYaeR<a Pare<aaiNaiMaze<a c )
JaaTa+aae>aaÙGavTaae MahaNaaSaqd( Gau<a}aYaaTa( )) 12 ))
maitreya uväca
daivena durvitarkyeëa
pareëänimiñeëa ca
jäta-kñobhäd bhagavato
mahän äséd guëa-trayät
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; daivena—by superior management known as destiny;
durvitarkyeëa—beyond empiric speculation; pareëa—by Mahä-Viñëu; animiñeëa—by
the potency of eternal time; ca—and; jäta-kñobhät—the equilibrium was agitated;
bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; mahän—the total material elements (the
mahat-tattva); äsét—were produced; guëa-trayät—from the three modes of nature.
99
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Maitreya said: When the equilibrium of the combination of the three modes of nature was
agitated by the unseen activity of the living entity, by Mahä-Viñëu and by the force of
time, the total material elements were produced.
PURPORT
The cause of the material creation is described here very lucidly. The first cause is daiva,
or the destiny of the conditioned soul. The material creation exists for the conditioned
soul who wanted to become a false lord for sense enjoyment. One cannot trace out the
history of when the conditioned soul first desired to lord it over material nature, but in
Vedic literature we always find that the material creation is meant for the sense
enjoyment of the conditioned soul. There is a nice verse which says that the sum and
substance of the conditioned soul's sense enjoyment is that as soon as he forgets his
primary duty, to render service to the Lord, he creates an atmosphere of sense
enjoyment, which is called mäyä; that is the cause of material creation.
Another word used here is durvitarkyeëa. No one can argue about when and how the
conditioned soul became desirous of sense enjoyment, but the cause is there. Material
nature is an atmosphere meant only for the sense enjoyment of the conditioned soul,
and it is created by the Personality of Godhead. It is mentioned here that in the
beginning of the creation the material nature, or prakåti, is agitated by the Personality of
Godhead, Viñëu. There are three Viñëus mentioned. One is Mahä-Viñëu, another is
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, and the third is Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. The First Canto of Çrémad-
Bhägavatam discusses all these three Viñëus, and here also it is confirmed that Viñëu is
the cause of creation. From Bhagavad-gétä also we learn that prakåti begins to work and
is still working under Kåñëa's, or Viñëu's, glance of superintendence, but the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is unchangeable. One should not mistakenly think that because
the creation emanates from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He has therefore
transformed into this material cosmic manifestation. He exists in His personal form
always, but the cosmic manifestation takes place by His inconceivable potency. The
workings of that energy are difficult to comprehend, but it is understood from Vedic
literature that the conditioned soul creates his own destiny and is offered a particular
body by the laws of nature under the superintendence of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who always accompanies him as Paramätmä.
SB 3.20.13
TEXT 13
100
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
rJa"Pa[DaaNaaNMahTaiñil/(r)ae dEvcaeidTaaTa( )
JaaTa" SaSaJaR >aUTaaidivRYadadqiNa PaÄXa" )) 13 ))
rajaù-pradhänän mahatas
tri-liìgo daiva-codität
jätaù sasarja bhütädir
viyad-ädéni païcaçaù
SYNONYMS
rajaù-pradhänät—in which the element of rajas, or passion, predominates; mahataù—
from the mahat-tattva; tri-liìgaù—of three kinds; daiva-codität—impelled by superior
authority; jätaù—was born; sasarja—evolved; bhüta-ädiù—the false ego (origin of the
material elements); viyat—the ether; ädéni—beginning with; païcaçaù—in groups of
five.
TRANSLATION
As impelled by the destiny of the jéva, the false ego, which is of three kinds, evolved from
the mahat-tattva, in which the element of rajas predominates. From the ego, in turn,
evolved many groups of five principles.
PURPORT
The primordial matter, or prakåti, material nature, consisting of three modes, generates
four groups of five. The first group is called elementary and consists of earth, water, fire,
air and ether. The second group of five is called tan-mätra, referring to the subtle
elements (sense objects): sound, touch, form, taste and smell. The third group is the five
sense organs for acquiring knowledge: eyes, ears, nose, tongue and skin. The fourth
group is the five working senses: speech, hands, feet, anus and genitals. Some say that
there are five groups of five. One group is the sense objects, one is the five elements, one
is the five sense organs for acquiring knowledge, another is the senses for working, and
the fifth group is the five deities who control these divisions.
SB 3.20.14
TEXT 14
101
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TaaiNa cEkE-k-Xa" óíuMaSaMaQaaRiNa >aaEiTak-Ma( )
Sa&hTYa dEvYaaeGaeNa hEMaMa<@MavaSa*JaNa( )) 14 ))
täni caikaikaçaù srañöum
asamarthäni bhautikam
saàhatya daiva-yogena
haimam aëòam aväsåjan
SYNONYMS
täni—those elements; ca—and; eka-ekaçaù—separately; srañöum—to produce;
asamarthäni—unable; bhautikam—the material universe; saàhatya—having combined;
daiva-yogena—with the energy of the Supreme Lord; haimam—shining like gold;
aëòam—globe; aväsåjan—produced.
TRANSLATION
Separately unable to produce the material universe, they combined with the help of the
energy of the Supreme Lord and were able to produce a shining egg.
SB 3.20.15
TEXT 15
Saae_XaiYaíaiBDaSail/le/ Aa<@k-aeXaae iNaraTMak-" )
SaaGa]& vE vzRSaahóMaNvvaTSaqtaMaqìr" )) 15 ))
so 'çayiñöäbdhi-salile
äëòakoço nirätmakaù
sägraà vai varña-sähasram
anvavätsét tam éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
saù—it; açayiñöa—lay; abdhi-salile—on the waters of the Causal Ocean; äëòa-koçaù—
egg; nirätmakaù—in an unconscious state; sägram—a little more than; vai—in fact;
varña-sähasram—a thousand years; anvavätsét—became situated; tam—in the egg;
éçvaraù—the Lord.
102
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
For over one thousand years the shiny egg lay on the waters of the Causal Ocean in the
lifeless state. Then the Lord entered it as Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu.
PURPORT
From this verse it appears that all the universes are floating in the Causal Ocean.
SB 3.20.16
TEXT 16
TaSYa Naa>aer>aUTPaÚ& Sahóak-aeRådqiDaiTa )
SavRJaqviNak-aYaaEk-ae Ya}a SvYaMa>aUTSvra$( )) 16 ))
tasya näbher abhüt padmaà
sahasrärkoru-dédhiti
sarva-jévanikäyauko
yatra svayam abhüt svaräö
SYNONYMS
tasya—of the Lord; näbheù—from the navel; abhüt—sprouted up; padmam—a lotus;
sahasra-arka—a thousand suns; uru—more; dédhiti—with dazzling splendor; sarva—all;
jéva-nikäya—resting place of conditioned souls; okaù—place; yatra—where; svayam—
himself; abhüt—emanated; sva-räö—the omnipotent (Lord Brahmä).
TRANSLATION
From the navel of the Personality of Godhead Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu sprouted a lotus
flower effulgent like a thousand blazing suns. This lotus flower is the reservoir of all
conditioned souls, and the first living entity who came out of the lotus flower was the
omnipotent Brahmä
PURPORT
It appears from this verse that the conditioned souls who rested within the body of the
Personality of Godhead after the dissolution of the last creation came out in the sum
total form of the lotus. This is called hiraëyagarbha. The first living entity to come out
103
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
was Lord Brahmä, who is independently able to create the rest of the manifested
universe. The lotus is described here as effulgent as the glare of a thousand suns. This
indicates that the living entities, as parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, are also of
the same quality, since the Lord also diffuses His bodily glare, known as brahmajyoti. The
description of Vaikuëöhaloka, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä and other Vedic literatures, is
confirmed herewith. In Vaikuëöha, the spiritual sky, there is no need of sunshine,
moonshine, electricity or fire. Every planet there is self-effulgent like the sun.
SB 3.20.17
TEXT 17
Saae_Nauivíae >aGavTaa Ya" XaeTae Sail/l/aXaYae )
l/aek-Sa&SQaa& YaQaaPaUv| iNaMaRMae Sa&SQaYaa SvYaa )) 17 ))
so 'nuviñöo bhagavatä
yaù çete saliläçaye
loka-saàsthäà yathä pürvaà
nirmame saàsthayä svayä
SYNONYMS
saù—Lord Brahmä; anuviñöaù—was entered; bhagavatä—by the Lord; yaù—who; çete—
sleeps; salila-äçaye—on the Garbhodaka Ocean; loka-saàsthäm—the universe; yathä
pürvam—as previously; nirmame—created; saàsthayä—by intelligence; svayä—his own.
TRANSLATION
When that Supreme Personality of Godhead who is lying on the Garbhodaka Ocean
entered the heart of Brahmä, Brahmä brought his intelligence to bear, and with the
intelligence invoked he began to create the universe as it was before.
PURPORT
At a certain time, the Personality of Godhead, Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, lies in the Käraëa
Ocean and produces many thousands of universes from His breathing; then He enters
again into each and every universe as Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and fills up half of each
universe with His own perspiration. The other half of the universe remains vacant, and
that vacant region is called outer space. Then the lotus flower sprouts from His abdomen
104
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
and produces the first living creature, Brahmä. Then again, as Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, the
Lord enters into the heart of every living entity, including Brahmä. This is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä, Fifteenth Chapter. The Lord says, "I am seated in everyone's heart, and
by Me are remembrance and forgetfulness made possible." As the witness of the
activities of the individual entities, the Lord gives each one remembrance and
intelligence to act according to his desire at the time he was annihilated in his last birth
in the last millennium. This intelligence is invoked according to one's own capacity, or
by the law of karma.
Brahmä was the first living entity, and he was empowered by the Supreme Lord to act in
charge of the mode of passion; therefore, he was given the required intelligence, which
is so powerful and extensive that he is almost independent of the control of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Just as a highly posted manager is almost as
independent as the owner of a firm, Brahmä is described here as independent because, as
the Lord's representative to control the universe, he is almost as powerful and
independent as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord, as the Supersoul within
Brahmä, gave him the intelligence to create. The creative power, therefore, of every
living entity is not his own; it is by the grace of the Lord that one can create. There are
many scientists and great workers in this material world who have wonderful creative
force, but they act and create only according to the direction of the Supreme Lord. A
scientist may create many wonderful inventions by the direction of the Lord, but it is
not possible for him to overcome the stringent laws of material nature by his
intelligence, nor is it possible to acquire such intelligence from the Lord, for the Lord's
supremacy would then be hampered. It is stated in this verse that Brahmä created the
universe as it was before. This means that he created everything by the same name and
form as in the previous cosmic manifestation.
SB 3.20.18
TEXT 18
SaSaJaR C^aYaYaaivÛa& PaÄPavaR<aMaGa]Ta" )
TaaiMaóMaNDaTaaiMaó& TaMaae Maaehae MahaTaMa" )) 18 ))
sasarja cchäyayävidyäà
païca-parväëam agrataù
tämisram andha-tämisraà
tamo moho mahä-tamaù
105
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
sasarja—created; chäyayä—with his shadow; avidyäm—ignorance; païca-parväëam—
five varieties; agrataù—first of all; tämisram—tämisra; andha-tämisram-andha-tämisra;
tamaù-tamas; mohaù-moha; mahä-tamaù-mahä-tamas, or mahä-moha.
TRANSLATION
First of all, Brahmä created from his shadow the coverings of ignorance of the conditioned
souls. They are five in number and are called tämisra, andha-tämisra, tamas, moha and
mahä-moha.
PURPORT
The conditioned souls, or living entities who come to the material world to enjoy sense
gratification, are covered in the beginning by five different conditions. The first
condition is a covering of tämisra, or anger. Constitutionally, each and every living
entity has minute independence; it is misuse of that minute independence for the
conditioned soul to think that he can also enjoy like the Supreme Lord or to think,
"Why shall I not be a free enjoyer like the Supreme Lord?" This forgetfulness of his
constitutional position is due to anger or envy. The living entity, being eternally a partand-
parcel servitor of the Supreme Lord, can never, by constitution, be an equal enjoyer
with the Lord. When he forgets this, however, and tries to be one with Him, his
condition is called tämisra. Even in the field of spiritual realization, this tämisra
mentality of the living entity is hard to overcome. In trying to get out of the
entanglement of material life, there are many who want to be one with the Supreme.
Even in their transcendental activities, this lower-grade mentality of tämisra continues.
Andha-tämisra involves considering death to be the ultimate end. The atheists generally
think that the body is the self and that everything is therefore ended with the end of
the body. Thus they want to enjoy material life as far as possible during the existence of
the body. Their theory is: "As long as you live, you should live prosperously. Never mind
whether you commit all kinds of so-called sins. You must eat sumptuously. Beg, borrow
and steal, and if you think that by stealing and borrowing you are being entangled in
sinful activities for which you will have to pay, then just forget that misconception
because after death everything is finished. No one is responsible for anything he does
during his life." This atheistic conception of life is killing human civilization, for it is
without knowledge of the continuation of eternal life.
106
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
This andha-tämisra ignorance is due to tamas. The condition of not knowing anything
about the spirit soul is called tamas. This material world is also generally called tamas
because ninety-nine percent of its living entities are ignorant of their identity as soul.
Almost everyone is thinking that he is this body; he has no information of the spirit
soul. Guided by this misconception, one always thinks, "This is my body, and anything in
relationship with this body is mine." For such misguided living entities, sex life is the
background of material existence. Actually, the conditioned souls, in ignorance in this
material world, are simply guided by sex life, and as soon as they get the opportunity for
sex life, they become attached to so-called home, motherland, children, wealth and
opulence. As these attachments increase, moha, or the illusion of the bodily concept of
life, also increases. Thus the idea that "I am this body, and everything belonging to this
body is mine" also increases, and as the whole world is put into moha, sectarian societies,
families and nationalities are created, and they fight with one another. Mahä-moha
means to be mad after material enjoyment. Especially in this age of Kali, everyone is
overwhelmed by the madness to accumulate paraphernalia for material enjoyment.
These definitions are very nicely given in Viñëu Puräëa, wherein it is said:
tamo 'viveko mohaù syäd
antaù-karaëa-vibhramaù
mahä-mohas tu vijïeyo
grämya-bhoga-sukhaiñaëä
maraëaà hy andha-tämisraà
tämisraà krodha ucyate
avidyä païca-parvaiñä
prädurbhütä mahätmanaù
SB 3.20.19
TEXT 19
ivSaSaJaaRTMaNa" k-aYa& Naai>aNaNd&STaMaaeMaYaMa( )
JaGa*huYaR+ar+aa&iSa rai}a& +auta*$(=SaMauÙvaMa( )) 19 ))
visasarjätmanaù käyaà
näbhinandaàs tamomayam
jagåhur yakña-rakñäàsi
rätrià kñut-tåö-samudbhaväm
107
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
visasarja—threw off; ätmanaù—his own; käyam—body; na—not; abhinandan—being
pleased; tamaù-mayam—made of ignorance; jagåhuù—took possession; yakña-rakñäàsi—
the Yakñas and Räkñasas; rätrim—night; kñut—hunger; tåö—thirst; samudbhaväm—the
source.
TRANSLATION
Out of disgust, Brahmä threw off the body of ignorance, and taking this opportunity,
Yakñas and Räkñasas sprang for possession of the body, which continued to exist in the
form of night. Night is the source of hunger and thirst.
SB 3.20.20
TEXT 20
+auta*@(>YaaMauPaSa*íaSTae Ta& JaGDauMai>adud]uvu" )
Maa r+aTaENa& Ja+aßiMaTYaUcu" +auta*@idRTaa" )) 20 ))
kñut-tåòbhyäm upasåñöäs te
taà jagdhum abhidudruvuù
mä rakñatainaà jakñadhvam
ity ücuù kñut-tåò-arditäù
SYNONYMS
kñut-tåòbhyäm—by hunger and thirst; upasåñöäù—were overcome; te—the demons
(Yakñas and Räkñasas); tam—Lord Brahmä; jagdhum—to eat; abhidudruvuù—ran
toward; mä—do not; rakñata—spare; enam—him; jakñadhvam—eat; iti—thus; ücuù—
said; kñut-tåö-arditäù—afflicted by hunger and thirst.
TRANSLATION
Overpowered by hunger and thirst, they ran to devour Brahmä from all sides and cried,
"Spare him not! Eat him up!"
PURPORT
The representatives of the Yakñas and Räkñasas still exist in some countries of the world.
108
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
It is understood that such uncivilized men take pleasure in killing their own
grandfathers and holding a "love feast" by roasting the bodies.
SB 3.20.21
TEXT 21
devSTaaNaah Sa&ivGanae Maa Maa& Ja+aTa r+aTa )
Ahae Mae Ya+ar+aa&iSa Pa[Jaa YaUYa& b>aUivQa )) 21 ))
devas tän äha saàvigno
mä mäà jakñata rakñata
aho me yakña-rakñäàsi
prajä yüyaà babhüvitha
SYNONYMS
devaù—Lord Brahmä; tän—to them; äha—said; saàvignaù—being anxious; mä—do
not; mäm—me; jakñata—eat; rakñata—protect; aho—oh; me—my; yakña-rakñäàsi—O
Yakñas and Räkñasas; prajäù—sons; yüyam—you; babhüvitha—were born.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä, the head of the demigods, full of anxiety, asked them, "Do not eat me, but
protect me. You are born from me and have become my sons. Therefore you are Yakñas
and Räkñasas."
PURPORT
The demons who were born from the body of Brahmä were called Yakñas and Räkñasas
because some of them cried that Brahmä should be eaten and the others cried that he
should not be protected. The ones who said that he should be eaten were called Yakñas,
and the ones who said that he should not be protected became Räkñasas, man-eaters.
The two, Yakñas and Räkñasas, are the original creation by Brahmä and are represented
even until today in the uncivilized men who are scattered all over the universe. They are
born of the mode of ignorance, and therefore, because of their behavior, they are called
Räkñasas, or man-eaters.
SB 3.20.22
TEXT 22
109
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
devTaa" Pa[>aYaa Yaa Yaa dqVYaNa( Pa[Mau%Taae_Sa*JaTa( )
Tae AhazuRdeRvYaNTaae ivSa*ía& Taa& Pa[>aaMah" )) 22 ))
devatäù prabhayä yä yä
dévyan pramukhato 'såjat
te ahärñur devayanto
visåñöäà täà prabhäm ahaù
SYNONYMS
devatäù—the demigods; prabhayä—with the glory of light; yäù yäù—those who;
dévyan—shining; pramukhataù—chiefly; asåjat—created; te—they; ahärñuù—took
possession of; devayantaù—being active; visåñöäm—separated; täm—that; prabhäm—
effulgent form; ahaù—daytime.
TRANSLATION
He then created the chief demigods, who were shining with the glory of goodness. He
dropped before them the effulgent form of daytime, and the demigods sportingly took
possession of it.
PURPORT
Demons were born from the creation of night, and the demigods were born from the
creation of day. In other words, demons like the Yakñas and Räkñasas are born of the
quality of ignorance, and demigods are born of the quality of goodness.
SB 3.20.23
TEXT 23
devae_devaÅgaNaTa" Sa*JaiTa SMaaiTal/aelu/PaaNa( )
Ta WNa& l/aelu/PaTaYaa MaEQauNaaYaai>aPaeidre )) 23 ))
devo 'deväï jaghanataù
såjati smätilolupän
ta enaà lolupatayä
maithunäyäbhipedire
110
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
devaù—Lord Brahmä; adevän—demons; jaghanataù—from his buttocks; såjati sma—
gave birth; ati-lolupän—excessively fond of sex; te—they; enam—Lord Brahmä;
lolupatayä—with lust; maithunäya—for copulation; abhipedire—approached.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä then gave birth to the demons from his buttocks, and they were very fond
of sex. Because they were too lustful, they approached him for copulation.
PURPORT
Sex life is the background of material existence. Here also it is repeated that demons are
very fond of sex life. The more one is free from the desires for sex, the more he is
promoted to the level of the demigods; the more one is inclined to enjoy sex, the more
he is degraded to the level of demoniac life.
SB 3.20.24
TEXT 24
TaTaae hSaNa( Sa >aGavaNaSaurEiNaRrPa}aPaE" )
ANvqYaMaaNaSTarSaa §u-Öae >aqTa" ParaPaTaTa( )) 24 ))
tato hasan sa bhagavän
asurair nirapatrapaiù
anvéyamänas tarasä
kruddho bhétaù paräpatat
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; hasan—laughing; saù bhagavän—the worshipful Lord Brahmä; asuraiù—
by the demons; nirapatrapaiù—shameless; anvéyamänaù—being followed; tarasä—in
great haste; kruddhaù—angry; bhétaù—being afraid; paräpatat—ran away.
TRANSLATION
The worshipful Brahmä first laughed at their stupidity, but finding the shameless asuras
close upon him, he grew indignant and ran in great haste out of fear.
111
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Sexually inclined demons have no respect even for their father, and the best policy for a
saintly father like Brahmä is to leave such demoniac sons.
SB 3.20.25
TEXT 25
Sa oPav]JYa vrd& Pa[PaàaiTaRhr& hirMa( )
ANauGa]haYa >a¢-aNaaMaNauæPaaTMadXaRNaMa( )) 25 ))
sa upavrajya varadaà
prapannärti-haraà harim
anugrahäya bhaktänäm
anurüpätma-darçanam
SYNONYMS
saù—Lord Brahmä; upavrajya—approaching; vara-dam—the bestower of all boons;
prapanna—of those taking shelter at His lotus feet; ärti—distress; haram—who dispels;
harim—Lord Çré Hari; anugrahäya—for showing mercy; bhaktänäm—to His devotees;
anurüpa—in suitable forms; ätma-darçanam—who manifests Himself.
TRANSLATION
He approached the Personality of Godhead, who bestows all boons and who dispels the
agony of His devotees and of those who take shelter of His lotus feet. He manifests His
innumerable transcendental forms for the satisfaction of His devotees.
PURPORT
Here the words bhaktänäm anurüpätma-darçanam mean that the Personality of Godhead
manifests His multiforms according to the desires of the devotees. For example,
Hanumänjé (Vajräìgajé) wanted to see the form of the Lord as the Personality of
Godhead Rämacandra, whereas other Vaiñëavas want to see the form of Rädhä-Kåñëa,
and still other devotees want to see the Lord in the form of Lakñmé-Näräyaëa. The
Mäyävädé philosophers think that although all these forms are assumed by the Lord just
as the devotees desire to see Him, actually He is impersonal. From Brahma-saàhitä,
112
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
however, we can understand that this is not so, for the Lord has multiforms. It is said in
the Brahma-saàhitä, advaitam acyutam. The Lord does not appear before the devotee
because of the devotee's imagination. Brahma-saàhitä further explains that the Lord has
innumerable forms: rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena tiñöhan [Bs. 5.39]. He exists in millions
and millions of forms. There are 8,400,000 spieces of living entities, but the incarnations
of the Supreme Lord are innumerable. In the Bhägavatam it is stated that as the waves
in the sea cannot be counted but appear and disappear continually, the incarnations and
forms of the Lord are innumerable. A devotee is attached to a particular form, and it is
that form which he worships. We have just described the first appearance of the boar
within this universe. There are innumerable universes, and somewhere or other the boar
form is now existing. All the forms of the Lord are eternal. It is the devotee's inclination
to worship a particular form, and he engages in devotional service to that form. In a
verse in the Rämäyaëa, Hanumän, the great devotee of Räma, said, "I know that there is
no difference between the Sétä-Räma and Lakñmé-Näräyaëa forms of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but nevertheless, the form of Räma and Sétä has absorbed my
affection and love. Therefore I want to see the Lord in the forms of Räma and Sétä."
Similarly, the Gauòéya Vaiñëava loves the forms of Rädhä and Kåñëa, and Kåñëa and
Rukmiëé at Dvärakä. The words bhaktänäm anurüpätma-darçanam mean that the Lord
is always pleased to favor the devotee in the particular form in which the devotee wants
to worship and render service unto Him. In this verse it is stated that Brahmä
approached Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This form of the Lord is
Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. Whenever there is some trouble and Brahmä has to approach the
Lord, he can approach Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, and it is the grace of the Lord that
whenever Brahmä approaches about disturbances in the universe, the Lord gives him
relief in so many ways.
SB 3.20.26
TEXT 26
Paaih Maa& ParMaaTMa&STae Pa[ez<aeNaaSa*Ja& Pa[Jaa" )
Taa wMaa Yai>aTau& PaaPaa oPaa§-aMaiNTa Maa& Pa[>aae )) 26 ))
pähi mäà paramätmaàs te
preñaëenäsåjaà prajäù
tä imä yabhituà päpä
upäkrämanti mäà prabho
113
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
pähi—protect; mäm—me; parama-ätman—O Supreme Lord; te—Your; preñaëena—by
order; asåjam—I created; prajäù—living beings; täù imäù—those very persons;
yabhitum—to have sex; päpäù—sinful beings; upäkrämanti—are approaching; mäm—
me; prabho—O Lord.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, approaching the Lord, addressed Him thus: My Lord, please protect me
from these sinful demons, who were created by me under Your order. They are infuriated
by an appetite for sex and have come to attack me.
PURPORT
It appears here that the homosexual appetite of males for each other is created in this
episode of the creation of the demons by Brahmä. In other words, the homosexual
appetite of a man for another man is demoniac and is not for any sane male in the
ordinary course of life.
SB 3.20.27
TEXT 27
TvMaek-" ik-l/ l/aek-aNaa& i(c)-íaNaa& (c)e-XaNaaXaNa" )
TvMaek-" (c)e-XadSTaezaMaNaaSaàPada& Tav )) 27 ))
tvam ekaù kila lokänäà
kliñöänäà kleça-näçanaù
tvam ekaù kleçadas teñäm
anäsanna-padäà tava
SYNONYMS
tvam—You; ekaù—alone; kila—indeed; lokänäm—of the people; kliñöänäm—afflicted
with miseries; kleça—the distresses; näçanaù—relieving; tvam ekaù—You alone; kleçadaù—
inflicting distress; teñäm—on those; anäsanna—not taken shelter; padäm—feet;
tava—Your.
114
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the only one capable of ending the affliction of the distressed and
inflicting agony on those who never resort to Your feet.
PURPORT
The words kleçadas teñäm anäsanna-padäà tava indicate that the Lord has two concerns.
The first is to give protection to persons who take shelter of His lotus feet, and the
second is to give trouble to those who are always demoniac and who are inimical toward
the Lord. Mäyä's function is to give afflictions to the nondevotees. Here Brahmä said,
"You are the protector of the surrendered souls; therefore I surrender unto Your lotus
feet. Please give me protection from these demons."
SB 3.20.28
TEXT 28
Saae_vDaaYaaRSYa k-aPaR<Ya& iviv¢-aDYaaTMadXaRNa" )
ivMauÄaTMaTaNau& gaaeraiMaTYau¢-ae ivMauMaaec h )) 28 ))
so 'vadhäryäsya kärpaëyaà
viviktädhyätma-darçanaù
vimuïcätma-tanuà ghoräm
ity ukto vimumoca ha
SYNONYMS
saù—the Supreme Lord, Hari; avadhärya—perceiving; asya—of Lord Brahmä;
kärpaëyam—the distress; vivikta—without a doubt; adhyätma—minds of others;
darçanaù—one who can see; vimuïca—cast off; ätma-tanum—your body; ghoräm—
impure; iti uktaù—thus commanded; vimumoca ha—Lord Brahmä threw it off.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, who can distinctly see the minds of others, perceived Brahmä's distress and
said to him: "Cast off this impure body of yours." Thus commanded by the Lord, Brahmä
cast off his body.
115
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The Lord is described here by the word viviktädhyätma-darçanaù. If anyone can
completely perceive another's distress without doubt, it is the Lord Himself. If someone
is in distress and wants to get relief from his friend, sometimes it so happens that his
friend does not appreciate the volume of distress he is suffering. But for the Supreme
Lord it is not difficult. The Supreme Lord, as Paramätmä, is sitting within the heart of
every living entity, and He directly perceives the exact causes of distress. In Bhagavadgétä
the Lord says, sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöaù: [Bg. 15.15] "I am sitting in everyone's
heart, and because of Me one's remembrance and forgetfulness occur." Thus whenever
one fully surrenders unto the Supreme Lord, one finds that He is sitting within one's
heart. He can give us direction how to get out of dangers or how to approach Him in
devotional service. The Lord, however, asked Brahmä to give up his present body
because it had created the demoniac principle. According to Çrédhara Svämé, Brahmä's
constant dropping of his body does not refer to his actually giving up his body. Rather,
he suggests that Brahmä gave up a particular mentality. Mind is the subtle body of the
living entity. We may sometimes be absorbed in some thought which is sinful, but if we
give up the sinful thought, it may be said that we give up the body. Brahmä's mind was
not in correct order when he created the demons. It must have been full of passion
because the entire creation was passionate; therefore such passionate sons were born. It
follows that any father and mother should also be careful while begetting children. The
mental condition of a child depends upon the mental status of his parents at the time he
is conceived. According to the Vedic system, therefore, the garbhädhäna-saàskära, or
the ceremony for giving birth to a child, is observed. Before begetting a child, one has to
sanctify his perplexed mind. When the parents engage their minds in the lotus feet of
the Lord and in such a state the child is born, naturally good devotee children come;
when the society is full of such good population, there is no trouble from demoniac
mentalities.
SB 3.20.29
TEXT 29
Taa& Kv<aÀr<aaM>aaeJaa& Madivûl/l/aecNaaMa( )
k-aÄqk-l/aPaivl/Sad(dukU-l/C^àraeDaSaMa( )) 29 ))
täà kvaëac-caraëämbhojäà
mada-vihvala-locanäm
116
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
käïcé-kaläpa-vilasadduküla-
cchanna-rodhasam
SYNONYMS
täm—that body; kvaëat—tinkling with ankle bells; caraëa-ambhojäm—with lotus feet;
mada—intoxication; vihvala—overwhelmed; locanäm—with eyes; käïcé-kaläpa—with a
girdle made of golden ornaments; vilasat—shining; duküla—by fine cloth; channa—
covered; rodhasam—having hips.
TRANSLATION
The body given up by Brahmä took the form of the evening twilight, when the day and
night meet, a time which kindles passion. The asuras, who are passionate by nature,
dominated as they are by the element of rajas, took it for a damsel, whose lotus feet
resounded with the tinkling of anklets, whose eyes were wide with intoxication and
whose hips were covered by fine cloth, over which shone a girdle.
PURPORT
As early morning is the period for spiritual cultivation, the beginning of evening is the
period for passion. Demoniac men are generally very fond of sex enjoyment; therefore
they very much appreciate the approach of evening. The demons took the approach of
the evening twilight to be a beautiful woman, and they began to adore her in various
ways. They imagined the twilight to be a very beautiful woman with tinkling bangles on
her feet, a girdle on her hips, and beautiful breasts, and for their sexual satisfaction they
imagined the appearance of this beautiful girl before them.
SB 3.20.30
TEXT 30
ANYaaeNYaëezYaaetau(r)iNarNTarPaYaaeDaraMa( )
SauNaaSaa& SauiÜJaa& iòGDahaSal/Il/avl/aek-NaaMa( )) 30 ))
anyonya-çleñayottuìganirantara-
payodharäm
sunäsäà sudvijäà snigdhahäsa-
lélävalokanäm
117
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
anyonya—to each other; çleñayä—because of clinging; uttuìga—raised; nirantara—
without intervening space; payaù-dharäm—breasts; su-näsäm—shapely nose; sudvijäm—
beautiful teeth; snigdha—lovely; häsa—smile; lélä-avalokanäm—sportful
glance.
TRANSLATION
Her breasts projected upward because of their clinging to each other, and they were too
contiguous to admit any intervening space. She had a shapely nose and beautiful teeth; a
lovely smile played on her lips, and she cast a sportful glance at the asuras.
SB 3.20.31
TEXT 31
GaUhNTaq& v]q@YaaTMaaNa& Naql/al/k-væiQaNaqMa( )
oPal/>YaaSaura DaMaR SaveR SaMMauMauhu" iñYaMa( )) 31 ))
gühantéà vréòayätmänaà
nélälaka-varüthiném
upalabhyäsurä dharma
sarve sammumuhuù striyam
SYNONYMS
gühantém—hiding; vréòayä—out of shyness; ätmänam—herself; néla—dark; alaka—hair;
varüthiném—a bunch; upalabhya—upon imagining; asuräù—the demons; dharma—O
Vidura; sarve—all; sammumuhuù—were captivated; striyam—woman.
TRANSLATION
Adorned with dark tresses, she hid herself, as it were, out of shyness. Upon seeing that
girl, the asuras were all infatuated with an appetite for sex.
PURPORT
The difference between demons and demigods is that a beautiful woman very easily
attracts the minds of demons, but she cannot attract the mind of a godly person. A godly
118
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
person is full of knowledge, and a demoniac person is full of ignorance. Just as a child is
attracted by a beautiful doll, similarly a demon, who is less intelligent and full of
ignorance, is attracted by material beauty and an appetite for sex. The godly person
knows that this nicely dressed and ornamented attraction of high breasts, high hips,
beautiful nose and fair complexion is mäyä. All the beauty a woman can display is only a
combination of flesh and blood. Çré Çaìkaräcärya has advised all persons not to be
attracted by the interaction of flesh and blood; they should be attracted by the real
beauty In spiritual life. The real beauty is Kåñëa and Rädhä. One who is attracted by the
beauty of Rädhä and Kåñëa cannot be attracted by the false beauty of this material
world. That is the difference between a demon and a godly person or devotee.
SB 3.20.32
TEXT 32
Ahae æPaMahae DaEYaRMahae ASYaa Nav& vYa" )
MaDYae k-aMaYaMaaNaaNaaMak-aMaev ivSaPaRiTa )) 32 ))
aho rüpam aho dhairyam
aho asyä navaà vayaù
madhye kämayamänänäm
akämeva visarpati
SYNONYMS
aho—oh; rüpam—what beauty; aho—oh; dhairyam—what self-control; aho—oh;
asyäù—her; navam—budding; vayaù—youth; madhye—in the midst;
kämayamänänäm—of those passionately longing for; akämä—free from passion; iva—
like; visarpati—walking with us.
TRANSLATION
The demons praised her: Oh, what a beauty! What rare self-control! What a budding
youth! In the midst of us all, who are passionately longing for her, she is moving about
like one absolutely free from passion.
SB 3.20.33
TEXT 33
119
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ivTakR-YaNTaae bhuDaa Taa& SaNDYaa& Pa[Madak*-iTaMa( )
Ai>aSaM>aaVYa ivé[M>aaTPaYaRPa*C^Na( ku-MaeDaSa" )) 33 ))
vitarkayanto bahudhä
täà sandhyäà pramadäkåtim
abhisambhävya viçrambhät
paryapåcchan kumedhasaù
SYNONYMS
vitarkayantaù—indulging in speculations; bahudhä—various kinds; täm—her;
sandhyäm—the evening twilight; pramadä—a young woman; äkåtim—in the form of;
abhisambhävya—treating with great respect; viçrambhät—fondly; paryapåcchan—
questioned; ku-medhasaù—wicked-minded.
TRANSLATION
Indulging in various speculations about the evening twilight, which appeared to them
endowed with the form of a young woman, the wicked-minded asuras treated her with
respect and fondly spoke to her as follows.
SB 3.20.34
TEXT 34
k-aiSa k-SYaaiSa rM>aaeå k-ae vaQaRSTae_}a >aaiMaiNa )
æPad]iv<aPa<YaeNa du>aRGaaàae ivbaDaSae )) 34 ))
käsi kasyäsi rambhoru
ko värthas te 'tra bhämini
rüpa-draviëa-paëyena
durbhagän no vibädhase
SYNONYMS
kä—who; asi—are you; kasya—belonging to whom; asi—are you; rambhoru—O pretty
one; kaù—what; vä—or; arthaù—object; te—your; atra—here; bhämini—O passionate
lady; rüpa—beauty; draviëa—priceless; paëyena—with the commodity; durbhagän—
120
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
unfortunate; naù—us; vibädhase—you tantalize.
TRANSLATION
Who are you, O pretty girl? Whose wife or daughter are you, and what can be the object
of your appearing before us? Why do you tantalize us, unfortunate as we are, with the
priceless commodity of your beauty?
PURPORT
The mentality of the demons in being enamored by the false beauty of this material
world is expressed herein. The demoniac can pay any price for the skin beauty of this
material world. They work very hard all day and night, but the purpose of their hard
work is to enjoy sex life. Sometimes they misrepresent themselves as karma-yogés, not
knowing the meaning of the word yoga. Yoga means to link up with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, or to act in Kåñëa consciousness. A person who works very
hard, no matter in what occupation, and who offers the result of the work to the service
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is called a karma-yogi.
SB 3.20.35
TEXT 35
Yaa va k-aictvMable/ idíya SaNdXaRNa& Tav )
oTSauNaaezq+aMaa<aaNaa& k-Nduk-§-I@Yaa MaNa" )) 35 ))
yä vä käcit tvam abale
diñöyä sandarçanaà tava
utsunoñékñamäëänäà
kanduka-kréòayä manaù
SYNONYMS
yä—whosoever; vä—or; käcit—anyone; tvam—you; abale—O beautiful girl; diñöyä—by
fortune; sandarçanam—seeing; tava—of you; utsunoñi—you agitate; ékñamäëänäm—of
the onlookers; kanduka—with a ball; kréòayä—by play; manaù—the mind.
TRANSLATION
121
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Whosoever you may be, O beautiful girl, we are fortunate in being able to see you. While
playing with a ball, you have agitated the minds of all onlookers.
PURPORT
Demons arrange many kinds of performances to see the glaring beauty of a beautiful
woman. Here it is stated that they saw the girl playing with a ball. Sometimes the
demoniac arrange for so-called sports, like tennis, with the opposite sex. The purpose of
such sporting is to see the bodily construction of the beautiful girl and enjoy a subtle sex
mentality. This demoniac sex mentality of material enjoyment is sometimes encouraged
by so-called yogés who encourage the public to enjoy sex life in different varieties and at
the same time advertise that if one meditates on a certain manufactured mantra one can
become God within six months. The public wants to be cheated, and Kåñëa therefore
creates such cheaters to misrepresent and delude. These so-called yogés are actually
enjoyers of the world garbed as yogés. Bhagavad-gétä, however, recommends that if one
wants to enjoy life, then it cannot be with these gross senses. A patient is advised by the
experienced physician to refrain from ordinary enjoyment while in the diseased
condition. A diseased person cannot enjoy anything; he has to restrain his enjoyment in
order to get rid of the disease. Similarly, our material condition is a diseased condition.
If one wants to enjoy real sense enjoyment, then one must get free of the entanglement
of material existence. In spiritual life we can enjoy sense enjoyment which has no end.
The difference between material and spiritual enjoyment is that material enjoyment is
limited. Even if a man engages in material sex enjoyment, he cannot enjoy it for long.
But when the sex enjoyment is given up, then one can enter spiritual life, which is
unending. In the Bhägavatam (5.5.1) it is stated that brahma-saukhya, spiritual
happiness, is ananta, unending. Foolish creatures are enamored by the beauty of matter
and think that the enjoyment it offers is real, but actually that is not real enjoyment.
SB 3.20.36
TEXT 36
NaEk-}a Tae JaYaiTa Xaail/iNa PaadPaÚ&
ganNTYaa Mauhu" k-rTale/Na PaTaTPaTa(r)Ma( )
MaDYa& ivzqdiTa b*hTSTaNa>aar>aqTa&
XaaNTaev d*iírMal/a SauiXa%aSaMaUh" )) 36 ))
122
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
naikatra te jayati çälini päda-padmaà
ghnantyä muhuù kara-talena patat-pataìgam
madhyaà viñédati båhat-stana-bhära-bhétaà
çänteva dåñöir amalä suçikhä-samühaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; ekatra—in one place; te—your; jayati—stay; çälini—O beautiful woman; pädapadmam—
lotus feet; ghnantyäù—striking; muhuù—again and again; kara-talena—by
the palm of the hand; patat—bouncing; pataìgam—the ball; madhyam—waist;
viñédati—gets fatigued; båhat—full grown; stana—of your breasts; bhära—by the weight;
bhétam—oppressed; çäntä iva—as if fatigued; dåñöiù—vision; amalä—clear; su—
beautiful; çikhä—your hair; samühaù—bunch.
TRANSLATION
O beautiful woman, when you strike the bouncing ball against the ground with your hand
again and again, your lotus feet do not stay in one place. Oppressed by the weight of your
full-grown breasts, your waist becomes fatigued, and your clear vision grows dull, as it
were. Pray braid your comely hair.
PURPORT
The demons observed beautiful gestures in the woman's every step. Here they praise her
full-grown breasts, her scattered hair and her movements in stepping forward and
backward while playing with the ball. In every step they enjoy her womanly beauty, and
while they enjoy her beauty their minds become agitated by sex desire. As moths at
night surround a fire and are killed, so the demons become victims of the movements of
the ball-like breasts of a beautiful woman. The scattered hair of a beautiful woman also
afflicts the heart of a lusty demon.
SB 3.20.37
TEXT 37
wiTa SaaYaNTaNaq& SaNDYaaMaSaura" Pa[MadaYaTaqMa( )
Pa[l/ae>aYaNTaq& JaGa*huMaRTva MaU!iDaYa" iñYaMa( )) 37 ))
iti säyantanéà sandhyäm
123
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
asuräù pramadäyatém
pralobhayantéà jagåhur
matvä müòha-dhiyaù striyam
SYNONYMS
iti—in this way; säyantaném—the evening; sandhyäm—twilight; asuräù—the demons;
pramadäyatém—behaving like a wanton woman; pralobhayantém—alluring; jagåhuù—
seized; matvä—thinking to be; müòha-dhiyaù—unintelligent; striyam—a woman.
TRANSLATION
The asuras, clouded in their understanding, took the evening twilight to be a beautiful
woman showing herself in her alluring form, and they seized her.
PURPORT
The asuras are described here as müòha-dhiyaù, meaning that they are captivated by
ignorance, just like the ass. The demons were captivated by the false, glaring beauty of
this material form, and thus they embraced her.
SB 3.20.38
TEXT 38
Pa[hSYa >aavGaM>aqr& iJaga]NTYaaTMaaNaMaaTMaNaa )
k-aNTYaa SaSaJaR >aGavaNa( GaNDavaRPSarSaa& Ga<aaNa( )) 38 ))
prahasya bhäva-gambhéraà
jighrantyätmänam ätmanä
käntyä sasarja bhagavän
gandharväpsarasäà gaëän
SYNONYMS
prahasya—smiling; bhäva-gambhéram—with a deep purpose; jighrantyä—understanding;
ätmänam—himself; ätmanä—by himself; käntyä—by his loveliness; sasarja—created;
bhagavän—the worshipful Lord Brahmä; gandharva—the celestial musicians;
apsarasäm—and of the heavenly dancing girls; gaëän—the hosts of.
124
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
With a laugh full of deep significance, the worshipful Brahmä then evolved by his own
loveliness, which seemed to enjoy itself by itself, the hosts of Gandharvas and Apsaräs.
PURPORT
The musicians in the upper planetary systems are called Gandharvas, and the dancing
girls are called Apsaräs. After being attacked by the demons and evolving a form of a
beautiful woman in the twilight, Brahmä next created Gandharvas and Apsaräs. Music
and dancing employed in sense gratification are to be accepted as demoniac, but the
same music and dancing, when employed in glorifying the Supreme Lord as kértana, are
transcendental, and they bring about a life completely fit for spiritual enjoyment.
SB 3.20.39
TEXT 39
ivSaSaJaR TaNau& Taa& vE JYaaeTòa& k-aiNTaMaTaq& iPa[YaaMa( )
Ta Wv caddu" Pa[qTYaa ivìavSauPauraeGaMaa" )) 39 ))
visasarja tanuà täà vai
jyotsnäà käntimatéà priyäm
ta eva cädaduù prétyä
viçvävasu-purogamäù
SYNONYMS
visasarja—gave up; tanum—form; täm—that; vai—in fact; jyotsnäm—moonlight; käntimatém—
shining; priyäm—beloved; te—the Gandharvas; eva—certainly; ca—and;
ädaduù—took possession; prétyä—gladly; viçvävasu-puraù-gamäù—headed by Viçvävasu.
TRANSLATION
After that, Brahmä gave up that shining and beloved form of moonlight. Viçvävasu and
other Gandharvas gladly took possession of it.
SB 3.20.40
TEXT 40
125
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Sa*îa >aUTaiPaXaaca&ê >aGavaNaaTMaTaiNd]<aa )
idGvaSaSaae Mau¢-ke-XaaNa( vq+Ya caMaql/Yad( d*XaaE )) 40 ))
såñövä bhüta-piçäcäàç ca
bhagavän ätma-tandriëä
dig-väsaso mukta-keçän
vékñya cämélayad dåçau
SYNONYMS
såñövä—having created; bhüta—ghosts; piçäcän—fiends; ca—and; bhagavän—Lord
Brahmä; ätma—his; tandriëä—from laziness; dik-väsasaù—naked; mukta—disheveled;
keçän—hair; vékñya—seeing; ca—and; amélayat—closed; dåçau—two eyes.
TRANSLATION
The glorious Brahmä next evolved from his sloth the ghosts and fiends, but he closed his
eyes when he saw them stand naked with their hair scattered.
PURPORT
Ghosts and mischievous hobgoblins are also the creation of Brahmä; they are not false.
All of them are meant for putting the conditioned soul into various miseries. They are
understood to be the creation of Brahmä under the direction of the Supreme Lord.
SB 3.20.41
TEXT 41
JaGa*huSTaiÜSa*ía& Taa& Ja*M>a<aa:Yaa& TaNau& Pa[>aae" )
iNad]aiMaiNd]Yaiv(c)e-dae YaYaa >aUTaezu d*XYaTae )
YaeNaaeiC^íaNDazRYaiNTa TaMauNMaad& Pa[c+aTae )) 41 ))
jagåhus tad-visåñöäà täà
jåmbhaëäkhyäà tanuà prabhoù
nidräm indriya-vikledo
yayä bhüteñu dåçyate
yenocchiñöän dharñayanti
126
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tam unmädaà pracakñate
SYNONYMS
jagåhuù—took possession; tat-visåñöäm—thrown off by him; täm—that; jåmbhaëaäkhyäm—
known as yawning; tanum—the body; prabhoù—of Lord Brahmä; nidräm—
sleep; indriya-vikledaù—drooling; yayä—by which; bhüteñu—among the living beings;
dåçyate—is observed; yena—by which; ucchiñöän—smeared with stool and urine;
dharñayanti—bewilder; tam—that; unmädam—madness; pracakñate—is spoken of.
TRANSLATION
The ghosts and hobgoblins took possession of the body thrown off in the form of yawning
by Brahmä, the creator of the living entities. This is also known as the sleep which causes
drooling. The hobgoblins and ghosts attack men who are impure, and their attack is
spoken of as insanity.
PURPORT
The disease of insanity or being haunted by ghosts takes place in an unclean state of
existence. Here it is clearly stated that when a man is fast asleep and saliva flows from
his mouth and he remains unclean, ghosts then take advantage of his unclean state and
haunt his body. In other words, those who drool while sleeping are considered unclean
and are subject to be haunted by ghosts or to, go insane.
SB 3.20.42
TEXT 42
OJaRSvNTa& MaNYaMaaNa AaTMaaNa& >aGavaNaJa" )
SaaDYaaNa( Ga<aaNa( iPaTa*Ga<aaNa( Parae+ae<aaSa*JaTPa[>au" )) 42 ))
ürjasvantaà manyamäna
ätmänaà bhagavän ajaù
sädhyän gaëän pitå-gaëän
parokñeëäsåjat prabhuù
SYNONYMS
127
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ürjaù-vantam—full of energy; manyamänaù—recognizing; ätmänam—himself;
bhagavän—the most worshipful; ajaù—Brahmä; sädhyän—the demigods; gaëän—hosts;
pitå-gaëän—and the Pitäs; parokñeëa—from his invisible form; asåjat—created;
prabhuù—the lord of beings.
TRANSLATION
Recognizing himself to be full of desire and energy, the worshipful Brahmä, the creator of
the living entities, evolved from his own invisible form, from his navel, the hosts of
Sädhyas and Pitäs.
PURPORT
The Sädhyas and Pitäs are invisible forms of departed souls, and they are also created by
Brahmä.
SB 3.20.43
TEXT 43
Ta AaTMaSaGa| Ta& k-aYa& iPaTar" Pa[iTaPaeidre )
SaaDYae>Yaê iPaTa*>Yaê k-vYaae YaiÜTaNvTae )) 43 ))
ta ätma-sargaà taà käyaà
pitaraù pratipedire
sädhyebhyaç ca pitåbhyaç ca
kavayo yad vitanvate
SYNONYMS
te—they; ätma-sargam—source of their existence; tam—that; käyam—body; pitaraù—
the Pitäs; pratipedire—accepted; sädhyebhyaù—to the Sädhyas; ca—and; pitåbhyaù—to
the Pitäs; ca—also; kavayaù—those well versed in rituals; yat—through which;
vitanvate—offer oblations.
TRANSLATION
The Pitäs themselves took possession of the invisible body, the source of their existence.
It is through the medium of this invisible body that those well versed in the rituals offer
128
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
oblations to the Sädhyas and Pitäs [in the form of their departed ancestors] on the
occasion of çräddha.
PURPORT
Çräddha is a ritualistic performance observed by the followers of the Vedas. There is a
yearly occasion of fifteen days when ritualistic religionists follow the principle of
offering oblations to departed souls. Thus those fathers and ancestors who, by freaks of
nature, might not have a gross body for material enjoyment can again gain such bodies
due to the offering of çräddha oblations by their descendants. The performance of
çräddha, or offering oblations with prasäda, is still current in India, especially at Gayä,
where oblations are offered at the lotus feet of Viñëu in a celebrated temple. Because the
Lord is thus pleased with the devotional service of the descendants, by His grace He
liberates the condemned souls of forefathers who do not have gross bodies, and He
favors them to again receive a gross body for development of spiritual advancement.
Unfortunately, by the influence of mäyä, the conditioned soul employs the body he gets
for sense gratification, forgetting that such an occupation may lead him to return to an
invisible body. The devotee of the Lord, or one who is in Kåñëa consciousness, however,
does not need to perform such ritualistic ceremonies as çräddha because he is always
pleasing the Supreme Lord; therefore his fathers and ancestors who might have been in
difficulty are automatically relieved. The vivid example is Prahläda Mahäräja. Prahläda
Mahäräja requested Lord Nåsiàhadeva to deliver his sinful father, who had so many
times offended the lotus feet of the Lord. The Lord replied that in a family where a
Vaiñëava like Prahläda is born, not only his father but his father's father and their
fathers—up to the fourteenth father back—are all automatically delivered. The
conclusion, therefore, is that Kåñëa consciousness is the sum total of all good work for
the family, for society and for all living entities. In the Caitanya-caritämåta the author
says that a person fully conversant with Kåñëa consciousness does not perform any
rituals because he knows that simply by serving Kåñëa in full Kåñëa consciousness, all
rituals are automatically performed.
SB 3.20.44
TEXT 44
iSaÖaNa( ivÛaDara&êEv iTaraeDaaNaeNa Saae_Sa*JaTa( )
Tae>Yaae_ddataMaaTMaaNaMaNTaDaaRNaa:YaMad(>auTaMa( )) 44 ))
129
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
siddhän vidyädharäàç caiva
tirodhänena so 'såjat
tebhyo 'dadät tam ätmänam
antardhänäkhyam adbhutam
SYNONYMS
siddhän—the Siddhas; vidyädharän—Vidyädharas; ca eva—and also; tirodhänena—by
the faculty of remaining hidden from vision; saù—Lord Brahmä; asåjat—created;
tebhyaù—to them; adadät—gave; tam ätmänam—that form of his; antardhänaäkhyam—
known as the Antardhäna; adbhutam—wonderful.
TRANSLATION
Then Lord Brahmä, by his ability to be hidden from vision, created the Siddhas and
Vidyädharas and gave them that wonderful form of his known as the Antardhäna.
PURPORT
Antardhäna means that these living creatures can be perceived to be present, but they
cannot be seen by vision.
SB 3.20.45
TEXT 45
Sa ik-àraNa( ik-MPauåzaNa( Pa[TYaaTMYaeNaaSa*JaTPa[>au" )
MaaNaYaàaTMaNaaTMaaNaMaaTMaa>aaSa& ivl/aek-YaNa( )) 45 ))
sa kinnarän kimpuruñän
pratyätmyenäsåjat prabhuù
mänayann ätmanätmänam
ätmäbhäsaà vilokayan
SYNONYMS
saù—Lord Brahmä; kinnarän—the Kinnaras; kimpuruñän—the Kimpuruñas;
pratyätmyena—from his reflection (in water); asåjat—created; prabhuù—the lord of the
living beings (Brahmä); mänayan—admiring; ätmanä ätmänam—himself by himself;
130
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ätma-äbhäsam—his reflection; vilokayan—seeing.
TRANSLATION
One day, Brahmä, the creator of the living entities, beheld his own reflection in the
water, and admiring himself, he evolved Kimpuruñas as well as Kinnaras out of that
reflection.
SB 3.20.46
TEXT 46
Tae Tau TaÂGa*hU æPa& TYa¢&- YaTParMaeiïNaa )
iMaQauNaq>aUYa GaaYaNTaSTaMaevaeziSa k-MaRi>a" )) 46 ))
te tu taj jagåhü rüpaà
tyaktaà yat parameñöhinä
mithuné-bhüya gäyantas
tam evoñasi karmabhiù
SYNONYMS
te—they (the Kinnaras and Kimpuruñas); tu—but; tat—that; jagåhuù—took possession
of; rüpam—that shadowy form; tyaktam—given up; yat—which; parameñöhinä—by
Brahmä; mithuné-bhüya—coming together with their spouses; gäyantaù—praise in song;
tam—him; eva—only; uñasi—at daybreak; karmabhiù—with his exploits.
TRANSLATION
The Kimpuruñas and Kinnaras took possession of that shadowy form left by Brahmä.
That is why they and their spouses sing his praises by recounting his exploits at every
daybreak.
PURPORT
The time early in the morning, one and a half hours before sunrise, is called brähmamuhürta.
During this brähma-muhürta, spiritual activities are recommended. Spiritual
activities performed early in the morning have a greater effect than in any other part of
the day.
131
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.20.47
TEXT 47
deheNa vE >aaeGavTaa XaYaaNaae bhuicNTaYaa )
SaGaeR_NauPaicTae §-aeDaaduTSaSaJaR h TaÜPau" )) 47 ))
dehena vai bhogavatä
çayäno bahu-cintayä
sarge 'nupacite krodhäd
utsasarja ha tad vapuù
SYNONYMS
dehena—with his body; vai—indeed; bhogavatä—stretching out full length; çayänaù—
lying fully stretched; bahu—great; cintayä—with concern; sarge—the creation;
anupacite—not proceeded; krodhät—out of anger; utsasarja—gave up; ha—in fact; tat—
that; vapuù—body.
TRANSLATION
Once Brahmä lay down with his body stretched at full length. He was very concerned
that the work of creation had not proceeded apace, and in a sullen mood he gave up that
body too.
SB 3.20.48
TEXT 48
Yae_hqYaNTaaMauTa" ke-Xaa AhYaSTae_(r) Jaijre )
SaPaaR" Pa[SaPaRTa" §U-ra NaaGaa >aaeGaaeåk-NDara" )) 48 ))
ye 'héyantämutaù keçä
ahayas te 'ìga jajïire
sarpäù prasarpataù krürä
nägä bhogoru-kandharäù
SYNONYMS
ye—which; ahéyanta—dropped out; amutaù—from that; keçäù—hairs; ahayaù—snakes;
132
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
te—they; aìga—O dear Vidura; jajïire—took birth as; sarpäù—snakes; prasarpataù—
from the crawling body; krüräù—envious; nägäù—cobras; bhoga—with hoods; uru—big;
kandharäù—whose necks.
TRANSLATION
O dear Vidura, the hair that dropped from that body transformed into snakes, and even
while the body crawled along with its hands and feet contracted, there sprang from it
ferocious serpents and Nägas with their hoods expanded.
SB 3.20.49
TEXT 49
Sa AaTMaaNa& MaNYaMaaNa" k*-Tak*-TYaiMavaTMa>aU" )
Tada MaNaUNa( SaSaJaaRNTae MaNaSaa l/aek->aavNaaNa( )) 49 ))
sa ätmänaà manyamänaù
kåta-kåtyam ivätmabhüù
tadä manün sasarjänte
manasä loka-bhävanän
SYNONYMS
saù—Lord Brahmä; ätmänam—himself; manyamänaù—considering; kåta-kåtyam—had
accomplished the object of life; iva—as if; ätmabhüù—born from the Supreme; tadä—
then; manün—the Manus; sasarja—created; ante—at the end; manasä—from his mind;
loka—of the world; bhävanän—promoting the welfare.
TRANSLATION
One day Brahmä, the self-born, the first living creature, felt as if the object of his life had
been accomplished. At that time he evolved from his mind the Manus, who promote the
welfare activities or the universe.
SB 3.20.50
TEXT 50
Tae>Ya" Saae_Sa*JaTSvqYa& Paur& PauåzMaaTMavaNa( )
133
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TaaNa( d*îa Yae Paura Sa*ía" Pa[XaXa&Sau" Pa[JaaPaiTaMa( )) 50 ))
tebhyaù so 'såjat svéyaà
puraà puruñam ätmavän
tän dåñövä ye purä såñöäù
praçaçaàsuù prajäpatim
SYNONYMS
tebhyaù—to them; saù—Lord Brahmä; asåjat—gave; svéyam—his own; puram—body;
puruñam—human; ätma-vän—self-possessed; tän—them; dåñövä—on seeing; ye—those
who; purä—earlier; såñöäù—were created (the demigods, Gandharvas, etc., who were
created earlier); praçaçaàsuù—applauded; prajäpatim—Brahmä (the lord of created
beings).
TRANSLATION
The self-possessed creator gave them his own human form. On seeing the Manus, those
who had been created earlier—the demigods, the Gandharvas and so on—applauded
Brahmä, the lord of the universe.
SB 3.20.51
TEXT 51
Ahae WTaÂGaTóí" Sauk*-Ta& bTa Tae k*-TaMa( )
Pa[iTaiïTaa" i§-Yaa YaiSMaNa( Saak-MaàMadaMahe )) 51 ))
aho etaj jagat-srañöaù
sukåtaà bata te kåtam
pratiñöhitäù kriyä yasmin
säkam annam adäma he
SYNONYMS
aho—oh; etat—this; jagat-srañöaù—O creator of the universe; sukåtam—well done;
bata—indeed; te—by you; kåtam—produced; pratiñöhitäù—established soundly; kriyäù—
all ritualistic performances; yasmin—in which; säkam—along with this; annam—the
134
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sacrificial oblations; adäma—we shall share; he—O.
TRANSLATION
They prayed: O creator of the universe, we are glad; what you have produced is well
done. Since ritualistic acts have now been established soundly in this human form, we
shall all share the sacrificial oblations.
PURPORT
The importance of sacrifice is also mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä, Third Chapter, verse 10.
The Lord confirms there that in the beginning of creation Brahmä created the Manus,
along with the ritualistic sacrificial method, and blessed them: "Continue these
sacrificial rites, and you will be gradually elevated to your proper position of selfrealization
and will also enjoy material happiness." All the living entities created by
Brahmä are conditioned souls and are inclined to lord it over material nature. The
purpose of sacrificial rituals is to revive, gradually, the spiritual realization of the living
entities. That is the beginning of life within this universe. These sacrificial rituals,
however, are intended to please the Supreme Lord. Unless one pleases the Supreme
Lord, or unless one is Kåñëa conscious, one cannot be happy either in material
enjoyment or in spiritual realization.
SB 3.20.52
TEXT 52
TaPaSaa ivÛYaa Yau¢-ae YaaeGaeNa SauSaMaaiDaNaa )
‰zqNa*izôRzqke-Xa" SaSaJaaRi>aMaTaa" Pa[Jaa" )) 52 ))
tapasä vidyayä yukto
yogena susamädhinä
åñén åñir håñékeçaù
sasarjäbhimatäù prajäù
SYNONYMS
tapasä—by penance; vidyayä—by worship; yuktaù—being engaged; yogena—by
concentration of the mind in devotion; su-samädhinä—by nice meditation; åñén—the
sages; åñiù—the first seer (Brahmä); håñékeçaù—the controller of his senses; sasarja—
135
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
created; abhimatäù—beloved; prajäù—sons.
TRANSLATION
Having equipped himself with austere penance, adoration, mental concentration and
absorption in devotion, accompanied by dispassion, and having controlled his senses,
Brahmä, the self-born living creature, evolved great sages as his beloved sons.
PURPORT
The ritualistic performances of sacrifice are meant for material economic development;
in other words, they are meant to keep the body in good condition for cultivation of
spiritual knowledge. But for actual attainment of spiritual knowledge, other
qualifications are needed. What is essential is vidyä, or worship of the Supreme Lord.
Sometimes the word yoga is used to refer to the gymnastic performances of different
bodily postures which help mental concentration. Generally, the different bodily
postures in the yoga system are accepted by less intelligent men to be the end of yoga,
but actually they are meant to concentrate the mind upon the Supersoul. After creating
persons for economic development, Brahmä created sages who would set the example for
spiritual realization.
SB 3.20.53
TEXT 53
Tae>YaêEkE-k-Xa" SvSYa dehSYaa&XaMadadJa" )
YataTSaMaaiDaYaaeGaiÖRTaPaaeivÛaivri¢-MaTa( )) 53 ))
tebhyaç caikaikaçaù svasya
dehasyäàçam adäd ajaù
yat tat samädhi-yogarddhitapo-
vidyä-viraktimat
SYNONYMS
tebhyaù—to them; ca—and; ekaikaçaù—each one; svasya—of his own; dehasya—body;
aàçam—part; adät—gave; ajaù—the unborn Brahmä; yat—which; tat—that;
samädhi—deep meditation; yoga—concentration of the mind; åddhi—supernatural
power; tapaù—austerity; vidyä—knowledge; virakti—renunciation; mat—possessing.
136
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
To each one of these sons the unborn creator of the universe gave a part of his own body,
which was characterized by deep meditation, mental concentration, supernatural power,
austerity, adoration and renunciation.
PURPORT
The word viraktimat in this verse means "possessed of the qualification of renunciation."
Spiritual realization cannot be attained by materialistic persons. For those who are
addicted to sense enjoyment, spiritual realization is not possible. In Bhagavad-gétä it is
stated that those who are too attached to seeking material possessions and material
enjoyment cannot reach yoga-samädhi, absorption in Kåñëa consciousness. Propaganda
that one can enjoy this life materially and at the same time spiritually advance is simply
bogus. The principles of renunciation are four: (1) to avoid illicit sex life, (2) to avoid
meat-eating, (3) to avoid intoxication and (4) to avoid gambling. These four principles
are called tapasya, or austerity. To absorb the mind in the Supreme in Kåñëa
consciousness is the process of spiritual realization.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Twentieth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Conversation Between Maitreya and Vidura."
SB 3.21: Conversation Between Manu and Kardama
21. Conversation Between Manu and Kardama
SB 3.21.1
TEXT 1
ivdur ovac
SvaYaM>auvSYa c MaNaaev|Xa" ParMaSaMMaTa" )
k-QYaTaa& >aGavNa( Ya}a MaEQauNaeNaEiDare Pa[Jaa" )) 1 ))
vidura uväca
sväyambhuvasya ca manor
137
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
vaàçaù parama-sammataù
kathyatäà bhagavan yatra
maithunenaidhire prajäù
SYNONYMS
viduraù uväca—Vidura said; sväyambhuvasya—of Sväyambhuva; ca—and; manoù—of
Manu; vaàçaù—the dynasty; parama—most; sammataù—esteemed; kathyatäm—kindly
describe; bhagavan—O worshipful sage; yatra—in which; maithunena—through sexual
intercourse; edhire—multiplied; prajäù—the progeny.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: The line of Sväyambhuva Manu was most esteemed. O worshipful sage, I
beg you—give me an account of this race, whose progeny multiplied through sexual
intercourse.
PURPORT
Regulated sex life to generate good population is worth accepting. Actually, Vidura was
not interested in hearing the history of persons who merely engaged in sex life, but he
was interested in the progeny of Sväyambhuva Manu because in that dynasty, good
devotee kings appeared who protected their subjects very carefully with spiritual
knowledge. By hearing the history of their activities, therefore, one becomes more
enlightened. An important word used in this connection is parama-sammataù, which
indicates that the progeny created by Sväyambhuva Manu and his sons was approved of
by great authorities. In other words, sex life for creating exemplary population is
acceptable to all sages and authorities of Vedic scripture.
SB 3.21.2
TEXT 2
iPa[Yav]TaaetaaNaPaadaE SauTaaE SvaYaM>auvSYa vE )
YaQaaDaMa| JauGauPaTau" SaáÜqPavTaq& MahqMa( )) 2 ))
priyavratottänapädau
sutau sväyambhuvasya vai
yathä-dharmaà jugupatuù
138
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sapta-dvépavatéà mahém
SYNONYMS
priyavrata—Mahäräja Priyavrata; uttänapädau—and Mahäräja Uttänapäda; sutau—the
two sons; sväyambhuvasya—of Sväyambhuva Manu; vai—indeed; yathä—according to;
dharmam—religious principles; jugupatuù—ruled; sapta-dvépa-vatém—consisting of
seven islands; mahém—the world.
TRANSLATION
The two great sons of Sväyambhuva Manu—Priyavrata and Uttänapäda—ruled the
world, consisting of seven islands, just according to religious principles.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is also a history of the great rulers of different parts of the universe.
In this verse the names of Priyavrata and Uttänapäda, sons of Sväyambhuva, are
mentioned. They ruled this earth, which is divided into seven islands. These seven
islands are still current, as Asia, Europe, Africa, America, Australia and the North and
South Poles. There is no chronological history of all the Indian kings in Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, but the deeds of the most important kings, such as Priyavrata and
Uttänapäda, and many others, like Lord Rämacandra and Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, are
recorded because the activities of such pious kings are worth hearing; people may benefit
by studying their histories.
SB 3.21.3
TEXT 3
TaSYa vE duihTaa b]øNdevhUTaqiTa ivé[uTaa )
PaÒq Pa[JaaPaTaeå¢-a k-dRMaSYa TvYaaNaga )) 3 ))
tasya vai duhitä brahman
devahütéti viçrutä
patné prajäpater uktä
kardamasya tvayänagha
SYNONYMS
139
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tasya—of that Manu; vai—indeed; duhitä—the daughter; brahman—O holy brähmaëa;
devahüti—named Devahüti; iti—thus; viçrutä—was known; patné—wife; prajäpateù—of
the lord of created beings; uktä—has been spoken of; kardamasya—of Kardama Muni;
tvayä—by you; anagha—O sinless one.
TRANSLATION
O holy brähmaëa, O sinless one, you have spoken of his daughter, known by the name
Devahüti, as the wife of the sage Kardama, the lord of created beings.
PURPORT
Here we are speaking of Sväyambhuva Manu, but in Bhagavad-gétä we hear about
Vaivasvata Manu. The present age belongs to the Vaivasvata Manu. Sväyambhuva
Manu was previously ruling, and his history begins from the Varäha age, or the
millennium when the Lord appeared as the boar. There are fourteen Manus in one day
of the life of Brahmä, and in the life of each Manu there are particular incidents. The
Vaivasvata Manu of Bhagavad-gétä is different from Sväyambhuva Manu.
SB 3.21.4
TEXT 4
TaSYaa& Sa vE MahaYaaeGaq Yau¢-aYaa& YaaeGal/+a<aE" )
SaSaJaR k-iTaDaa vqYa| TaNMae éué[Uzve vd )) 4 ))
tasyäà sa vai mahä-yogé
yuktäyäà yoga-lakñaëaiù
sasarja katidhä véryaà
tan me çuçrüñave vada
SYNONYMS
tasyäm—in her; saù—Kardama Muni; vai—in fact; mahä-yogé—great mystic yogé;
yuktäyäm—endowed; yoga-lakñaëaiù—with the eightfold symptoms of yogic perfection;
sasarja—propagated; katidhä—how many times; véryam—offspring; tat—that narration;
me—to me; çuçrüñave—who am eager to hear; vada—tell.
TRANSLATION
140
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
How many offspring did that great yogé beget through the princess, who was endowed
with eightfold perfection in the yoga principles? Oh, pray tell me this, for I am eager to
hear it.
PURPORT
Here Vidura inquired about Kardama Muni and his wife, Devahüti, and about their
children. It is described here that Devahüti was very much advanced in the performance
of eightfold yoga. The eight divisions of yoga performance are described as (1) control of
the senses, (2) strict following of the rules and regulations, (3) practice of the different
sitting postures, (4) control of the breath, (5) withdrawing the senses from sense objects,
(6) concentration of the mind, (7) meditation and (8) self-realization. After selfrealization
there are eight further perfectional stages, which are called yoga-siddhis. The
husband and wife, Kardama and Devahüti, were advanced in yoga practice; the husband
was a mahä-yogé, great mystic, and the wife was a yoga-lakñaëa, or one advanced in yoga.
They united and produced children. Formerly, after making their lives perfect, great
sages and saintly persons used to beget children, otherwise they strictly observed the
rules and regulations of celibacy. Brahmacarya (following the rules and regulations of
celibacy) is required for perfection of self-realization and mystic power. There is no
recommendation in the Vedic scriptures that one can go on enjoying material sense
gratification at one's whims, as one likes, and at the same time become a great meditator
by paying a rascal some money.
SB 3.21.5
TEXT 5
åicYaaeR >aGavaNa( b]øNd+aae va b]ø<a" SauTa" )
YaQaa SaSaJaR >aUTaaiNa l/Bßa >aaYaa| c MaaNavqMa( )) 5 ))
rucir yo bhagavän brahman
dakño vä brahmaëaù sutaù
yathä sasarja bhütäni
labdhvä bhäryäà ca mänavém
SYNONYMS
ruciù—Ruci; yaù—who; bhagavän—worshipful; brahman—O holy sage; dakñaù—Dakña;
141
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
vä—and; brahmaëaù—of Lord Brahmä; sutaù—the son; yathä—in what way; sasarja—
generated; bhütäni—offspring; labdhvä—after securing; bhäryäm—as their wives; ca—
and; mänavém—the daughters of Sväyambhuva Manu.
TRANSLATION
O holy sage, tell me how the worshipful Ruci and Dakña, the son of Brahmä, generated
children after securing as their wives the other two daughters of Sväyambhuva Manu.
PURPORT
All the great personalities who increased the population in the beginning of the
creation are called Prajäpatis. Brahmä is also known as Prajäpati, as were some of his
later sons. Sväyambhuva Manu is also known as Prajäpati, as is Dakña, another son of
Brahmä. Sväyambhuva had two daughters, Äküti and Prasüti. The Prajäpati Ruci
married Äküti, and Dakña married Prasüti. These couples and their children produced
immense numbers of children to populate the entire universe. Vidura's inquiry was,
"How did they beget the population in the beginning?"
SB 3.21.6
TEXT 6
MaE}aeYa ovac
Pa[Jaa" Sa*JaeiTa >aGavaNa( k-dRMaae b]ø<aaeidTa" )
SarSvTYaa& TaPaSTaePae Sahóa<aa& SaMaa dXa )) 6 ))
maitreya uväca
prajäù såjeti bhagavän
kardamo brahmaëoditaù
sarasvatyäà tapas tepe
sahasräëäà samä daça
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—the great sage Maitreya said; prajäù—children; såja—beget; iti—thus;
bhagavän—the worshipful; kardamaù—Kardama Muni; brahmaëä—by Lord Brahmä;
uditaù—commanded; sarasvatyäm—on the bank of the River Sarasvaté; tapaù—
penance; tepe—practiced; sahasräëäm—of thousands; samäù—years; daça—ten.
142
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya replied: Commanded by Lord Brahmä to beget children in the
worlds, the worshipful Kardama Muni practiced penance on the bank of the River
Sarasvaté for a period of ten thousand years.
PURPORT
It is understood herein that Kardama Muni meditated in yoga for ten thousand years
before attaining perfection. Similarly, we have information that Välméki Muni also
practiced yoga meditation for sixty thousand years before attaining perfection.
Therefore, yoga practice can be successfully performed by persons who have a very long
duration of life, such as one hundred thousand years; in that way it is possible to have
perfection in yoga. Otherwise, there is no possibility of attaining the real perfection.
Following the regulations, controlling the senses and practicing the different sitting
postures are merely the preliminary practices. We do not know how people can be
captivated by the bogus yoga system in which it is stated that simply by meditating
fifteen minutes daily one can attain the perfection of becoming one with God. This age
(Kali-yuga) is the age of bluffing and quarrel. Actually there is no possibility of attaining
yoga perfection by such paltry proposals. The Vedic literature, for emphasis, clearly
states three times that in this age of Kali-kalau nästy eva nästy eva nästy eva—there is no
other alternative, no other alternative, no other alternative than harer näma [Adi 17.21],
chanting the holy name of the Lord.
SB 3.21.7
TEXT 7
TaTa" SaMaaiDaYau¢e-Na i§-YaaYaaeGaeNa k-dRMa" )
SaMPa[Paede hir& >a¢-ya Pa[PaàvrdaéuzMa( )) 7 ))
tataù samädhi-yuktena
kriyä-yogena kardamaù
samprapede harià bhaktyä
prapanna-varadäçuñam
SYNONYMS
tataù—then, in that penance; samädhi-yuktena—in trance; kriyä-yogena—by bhakti143
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yoga worship; kardamaù—the sage Kardama; samprapede—served; harim—the
Personality of Godhead; bhaktyä—in devotional service; prapanna—to the surrendered
souls; varadäçuñam—the bestower of all blessings.
TRANSLATION
During that period of penance, the sage Kardama, by worship through devotional service
in trance, propitiated the Personality of Godhead, who is the quick bestower of all
blessings upon those who flee to Him for protection.
PURPORT
The significance of meditation is described here. Kardama Muni practiced mystic yoga
meditation for ten thousand years just to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Hari. Therefore, whether one practices yoga or speculates and does research to find God,
one's efforts must be mixed with the process of devotion. Without devotion, nothing can
be perfect. The target of perfection and realization is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. In the Sixth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä it is clearly said that one who
constantly engages in Kåñëa consciousness is the topmost yogé. The Personality of
Godhead, Hari, also fulfills the desires of His surrendered devotee. One has to surrender
unto the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead, Hari, or Kåñëa, in order to achieve
real success. Devotional service, or engagement in Kåñëa consciousness, is the direct
method, and all other methods, although recommended, are indirect. In this age of Kali
the direct method is especially more feasible than the indirect because people are shortliving,
their intelligence is poor, and they are poverty-stricken and embarrassed by so
many miserable disturbances. Lord Caitanya, therefore, has given the greatest boon: in
this age one simply has to chant the holy name of God to attain perfection in spiritual
life.
The words samprapede harim mean that in various ways Kardama Muni satisfied the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, by his devotional service. Devotional service is
also expressed by the word kriyä-yogena. Kardama Muni not only meditated but also
engaged in devotional service; to attain perfection in yoga practice or meditation, one
must act in devotional service by hearing, chanting, remembering, etc. Remembering is
meditation also. But who is to be remembered? One should remember the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Not only must one remember the Supreme Person; one must
hear about the activities of the Lord and chant His glories. This information is in the
authoritative scriptures. After engaging himself for ten thousand years in performing
144
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
different types of devotional service, Kardama Muni attained the perfection of
meditation, but that is not possible in this age of Kali, wherein it is very difficult to live
for as much as one hundred years. At the present moment, who will be successful in the
rigid performance of the many yoga rules and regulations? Moreover, perfection is
attained only by those who are surrendered souls. Where there is no mention of the
Personality of Godhead, where is there surrender? And where there is no meditation
upon the Personality of Godhead, where is the yoga practice? Unfortunately, people in
this age, especially persons who are of a demoniac nature, want to be cheated. Thus the
Supreme Personality of Godhead sends great cheaters who mislead them in the name of
yoga and render their lives useless and doomed. In Bhagavad-gétä, therefore, it is clearly
stated, in the Sixteenth Chapter, verse 17, that rascals of self-made authority, being
puffed up by illegally collected money, perform yoga without following the authoritative
books. They are very proud of the money they have plundered from innocent persons
who wanted to be cheated.
SB 3.21.8
TEXT 8
TaavTPa[Saàae >aGavaNa( PauZk-ra+a" k*-Tae YauGae )
dXaRYaaMaaSa Ta& +ata" XaaBd& b]ø dDaÜPau" )) 8 ))
tävat prasanno bhagavän
puñkaräkñaù kåte yuge
darçayäm äsa taà kñattaù
çäbdaà brahma dadhad vapuù
SYNONYMS
tävat—then; prasannaù—being pleased; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; puñkara-akñaù—lotus-eyed; kåte yuge—in the Satya-yuga; darçayäm äsa—
showed; tam—to that Kardama Muni; kñattaù—O Vidura; çäbdam—which is to be
understood only through the Vedas; brahma—the Absolute Truth; dadhat—exhibiting;
vapuù—His transcendental body.
TRANSLATION
Then, in the Satya-yuga, the lotus-eyed Supreme Personality of Godhead, being pleased,
145
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
showed Himself to that Kardama Muni and displayed His transcendental form, which can
be understood only through the Vedas.
PURPORT
Here two points are very significant. The first is that Kardama Muni attained success by
yoga practice in the beginning of Satya-yuga, when people used to live for one hundred
thousand years. Kardama Muni attained success, and the Lord, being pleased with him,
showed him His form, which is not imaginary. Sometimes the impersonalists recommend
that one can arbitrarily concentrate one's mind on some form he imagines or which
pleases him. But here it is very clearly said that the form which the Lord showed to
Kardama Muni by His divine grace is described in the Vedic literature. Çäbdaà brahma:
the forms of the Lord are clearly indicated in the Vedic literature. Kardama Muni did
not discover any imaginary form of God, as alleged by rascals; he actually saw the
eternal, blissful and transcendental form of the Lord.
SB 3.21.9
TEXT 9
Sa Ta& ivrJaMak-aR>a& iSaTaPaÚaeTPal/óJaMa( )
iòGDaNaql/al/k-v]aTav£-aBJa& ivrJaae_MbrMa( )) 9 ))
sa taà virajam arkäbhaà
sita-padmotpala-srajam
snigdha-nélälaka-vrätavakträbjaà
virajo 'mbaram
SYNONYMS
saù—that Kardama Muni; tam—Him; virajam—without contamination; arka-äbham—
effulgent like the sun; sita—white; padma—lotuses; utpala—water lilies; srajam—
garland; snigdha—slick; néla—blackish-blue; alaka—of locks of hair; vräta—an
abundance; vaktra—face; abjam—lotuslike; virajaù—spotless; ambaram—clothing.
TRANSLATION
Kardama Muni saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is free from material
contamination, in His eternal form, effulgent like the sun, wearing a garland of white
146
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
lotuses and water lilies. The Lord was clad in spotless yellow silk, and His lotus face was
fringed with slick dark locks of curly hair.
SB 3.21.10
TEXT 10
ik-rqi$=Na& ku-<@il/Na& Xa«c§-GadaDarMa( )
ìeTaaeTPal/§-I@Nak&- MaNa"SPaXaRiSMaTae+a<aMa( )) 10 ))
kiréöinaà kuëòalinaà
çaìkha-cakra-gadä-dharam
çvetotpala-kréòanakaà
manaù-sparça-smitekñaëam
SYNONYMS
kiréöinam—adorned with a crown; kuëòalinam—wearing earrings; çaìkha—conch;
cakra—disc; gadä—mace; dharam—holding; çveta—white; utpala—lily; kréòanakam—
plaything; manaù—heart; sparça—touching; smita—smiling; ékñaëam—and glancing.
TRANSLATION
Adorned with a crown and earrings, He held His characteristic conch, disc and mace in
three of His hands and a white lily in the fourth. He glanced about in a happy, smiling
mood whose sight captivates the hearts of all devotees.
SB 3.21.11
TEXT 11
ivNYaSTacr<aaM>aaeJaMa&SadeXae GaåTMaTa" )
d*îa %e_viSQaTa& v+a"ié[Ya& k-aESTau>ak-NDarMa( )) 11 ))
vinyasta-caraëämbhojam
aàsa-deçe garutmataù
dåñövä khe 'vasthitaà vakñaùçriyaà
kaustubha-kandharam
SYNONYMS
147
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
vinyasta—having been placed; caraëa-ambhojam—lotus feet; aàsa-deçe—on the
shoulders; garutmataù—of Garuòa; dåñövä—having seen; khe—in the air; avasthitam—
standing; vakñaù—on His chest; çriyam—auspicious mark; kaustubha—the Kaustubha
gem; kandharam—neck.
TRANSLATION
A golden streak on His chest, the famous Kaustubha gem suspended from His neck, He
stood in the air with His lotus feet placed on the shoulders of Garuòa.
PURPORT
The descriptions in verses 9-11 of the Lord in His transcendental, eternal form are
understood to be descriptions from the authoritative Vedic version. These descriptions
are certainly not the imagination of Kardama Muni. The decorations of the Lord are
beyond material conception, as admitted even by impersonalists like Çaìkaräcärya:
Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has nothing to do with the material
creation. The varieties of the transcendental Lord—His body, His form, His dress, His
instruction, His words—are not manufactured by the material energy, but are all
confirmed in the Vedic literature. By performance of yoga Kardama Muni actually saw
the Supreme Lord as He is. There was no point in seeing an imagined form of God after
practicing yoga for ten thousand years. The perfection of yoga, therefore, does not
terminate in voidness or impersonalism; on the contrary, the perfection of yoga is
attained when one actually sees the Personality of Godhead in His eternal form. The
process of Kåñëa consciousness is to deliver the form of Kåñëa directly. The form of
Kåñëa is described in the authoritative Vedic literature Brahma-saàhitä: His abode is
made of cintämaëi stone, and the Lord plays there as a cowherd boy and is served by
many thousands of gopés. These descriptions are authoritative, and a Kåñëa conscious
person takes them directly, acts on them, preaches them and practices devotional
service as enjoined in the authoritative scriptures.
SB 3.21.12
TEXT 12
JaaTahzaeR_PaTaNMaUDanaR i+aTaaE l/BDaMaNaaerQa" )
Gaqi>aRSTv>YaGa*<aaTPa[qiTaSv>aavaTMaa k*-TaaÅil/" )) 12 ))
148
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
jäta-harño 'patan mürdhnä
kñitau labdha-manorathaù
gérbhis tv abhyagåëät prétisvabhävätmä
kåtäïjaliù
SYNONYMS
jäta-harñaù—naturally jubilant; apatat—he fell down; mürdhnä—with his head;
kñitau—on the ground; labdha—having been achieved; manaù-rathaù—his desire;
gérbhiù—with prayers; tu—and; abhyagåëät—he satisfied; préti-svabhäva-ätmä—whose
heart is by nature always full of love; kåta-aïjaliù—with folded hands.
TRANSLATION
When Kardama Muni actually realized the Supreme Personality of Godhead in person, he
was greatly satisfied because his transcendental desire was fulfilled. He fell on the ground
with his head bowed to offer obeisances unto the lotus feet of the Lord. His heart
naturally full of love of God, with folded hands he satisfied the Lord with prayers.
PURPORT
The realization of the personal form of the Lord is the highest perfectional stage of yoga.
In the Sixth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä, where yoga practice is described, this realization
of the personal form of the Lord is called the perfection of yoga. After practicing the
sitting postures and other regulative principles of the system, one finally reaches the
stage of samädhi—absorption in the Supreme. In the samädhi stage one can see the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in His partial form as Paramätmä, or as He is. Samädhi
is described in authoritative yoga scriptures, such as the Pataïjali-sütras, to be a
transcendental pleasure. The yoga system described in the books of Pataïjali is
authoritative, and the modern so-called yogés who have manufactured their own ways,
not consulting the authorities, are simply ludicrous. The Pataïjali yoga system is called
añöäìga-yoga. Sometimes impersonalists pollute the Pataïjali yoga system because they
are monists. Pataïjali describes that the soul is transcendentally pleased when he meets
the Supersoul and sees Him. If the existence of the Supersoul and the individual is
admitted, then the impersonalist theory of monism is nullified. Therefore some
impersonalists and void philosophers twist the Pataïjali system in their own way and
pollute the whole yoga process.
149
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
According to Pataïjali, when one becomes free from all material desires he attains his
real, transcendental situation, and realization of that stage is called spiritual power. In
material activities a person engages in the modes of material nature. The aspirations of
such people are (1) to be religious, (2) to be economically enriched, (3) to be able to
gratify the senses and, at last, (4) to become one with the Supreme. According to the
monists, when a yogé becomes one with the Supreme and loses his individual existence,
he attains the highest stage, called kaivalya. But actually, the stage of realization of the
Personality of Godhead is kaivalya. The oneness of understanding that the Supreme
Lord is fully spiritual and that in full spiritual realization one can understand what He
is—the Supreme Personality of Godhead—is called kaivalya, or, in the language of
Pataïjali, realization of spiritual power. His proposal is that when one is freed from
material desires and fixed in spiritual realization of the self and the Superself, that is
called cit-çakti. In full spiritual realization there is a perception of spiritual happiness,
and that happiness is described in Bhagavad-gétä as the supreme happiness, which is
beyond the material senses. Trance is described to be of two kinds, samprajïäta and
asamprajïäta, or mental speculation and self-realization. In samädhi or asamprajïäta one
can realize, by his spiritual senses, the spiritual form of the Lord. That is the ultimate
goal of spiritual realization.
According to Pataïjali, when one is fixed in constant realization of the supreme form of
the Lord, one has attained the perfectional stage, as attained by Kardama Muni. Unless
one attains this stage of perfection—beyond the perfection of the preliminaries of the
yoga system—there is no ultimate realization. There are eight perfections in the
añöäìga-yoga system. One who has attained them can become lighter than the lightest
and greater than the greatest, and he can achieve whatever he likes. But even achieving
such material success in yoga is not the perfection or the ultimate goal. The ultimate
goal is described here: Kardama Muni saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His
eternal form. Devotional service begins with the relationship of the individual soul and
the Supreme Soul, or Kåñëa and Kåñëa's devotees, and when one attains it there is no
question of falling down. If, through the yoga system, one wants to attain the stage of
seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face, but is attracted instead to
attainment of some material power, then he is detoured from proceeding further.
Material enjoyment, as encouraged by bogus yogés, has nothing to do with the
transcendental realization of spiritual happiness. Real devotees of bhakti-yoga accept
only the material necessities of life absolutely needed to maintain the body and soul
together; they refrain completely from all exaggerated material sense gratification. They
are prepared to undergo all kinds of tribulation, provided they can make progress in the
150
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
realization of the Personality of Godhead.
SB 3.21.13
TEXT 13
‰izåvac
Jauí& bTaaÛai%l/SatvraXae"
Saa&iSaÖyMa+<aaeSTav dXaRNaaà" )
YaÕXaRNa& JaNMai>arq@y SaiÙ‚
raXaaSaTae YaaeiGaNaae æ!YaaeGaa" )) 13 ))
åñir uväca
juñöaà batädyäkhila-sattva-räçeù
säàsiddhyam akñëos tava darçanän naù
yad-darçanaà janmabhir éòya sadbhir
äçäsate yogino rüòha-yogäù
SYNONYMS
åñiù uväca—the great sage said; juñöam—is attained; bata—ah; adya—now; akhila—all;
sattva—of goodness; räçeù—who are the reservoir; säàsiddhyam—the complete success;
akñëoù—of the two eyes; tava—of You; darçanät—from the sight; naù—by us; yat—of
whom; darçanam—sight; janmabhiù—through births; éòya—O worshipable Lord;
sadbhiù—gradually elevated in position; äçäsate—aspire; yoginaù—yogés; rüòha-yogäù—
having obtained perfection in yoga.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Kardama said: O supreme worshipful Lord, my power of sight is now
fulfilled, having attained the greatest perfection of the sight of You, who are the reservoir
of all existences. Through many successive births of deep meditation, advanced yogés
aspire to see Your transcendental form.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described here as the reservoir of all goodness
and all pleasure. Unless one is situated in the mode of goodness, there is no real
151
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
pleasure. When, therefore, one's body, mind and activities are situated in the service of
the Lord, one is on the highest perfectional stage of goodness. Kardama Muni says, "Your
Lordship is the reservoir of all that can be understood by the nomenclature of goodness,
and by experiencing You face to face, eye to eye, the perfection of sight has now been
attained." These statements are the pure devotional situation; for a devotee, the
perfection of the senses is to engage in the service of the Lord. The sense of sight, when
engaged in seeing the beauty of the Lord, is perfected; the power to hear, when engaged
in hearing the glories of the Lord, is perfected; the power to taste, when one enjoys by
eating prasäda, is perfected. When all the senses engage in relationship with the
Personality of Godhead, one's perfection is technically called bhakti-yoga, which entails
detaching the senses from material indulgence and attaching them to the service of the
Lord. When one is freed from all designated conditional life and fully engages in the
service of the Lord, one's service is called bhakti-yoga. Kardama Muni admits that seeing
the Lord personally in bhakti-yoga is the perfection of sight. The exalted perfection of
seeing the Lord is not exaggerated by Kardama Muni. He gives evidence that those who
are actually elevated in yoga aspire in life after life to see this form of the Personality of
Godhead. He was not a fictitious yogé. Those who are actually on the advanced path
aspire only to see the eternal form of the Lord.
SB 3.21.14
TEXT 14
Yae MaaYaYaa Tae hTaMaeDaSaSTvTa(‚
PaadarivNd& >aviSaNDauPaaeTaMa( )
oPaaSaTae k-aMal/vaYa Taeza&
raSaqXa k-aMaaiàrYae_iPa Yae SYau" )) 14 ))
ye mäyayä te hata-medhasas tvatpädäravindaà
bhava-sindhu-potam
upäsate käma-laväya teñäà
räséça kämän niraye 'pi ye syuù
SYNONYMS
ye—those persons; mäyayä—by the deluding energy; te—of You; hata—has been lost;
medhasaù—whose intelligence; tvat—Your; päda-aravindam—lotus feet; bhava—of
152
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mundane existence; sindhu—the ocean; potam—the boat for crossing; upäsate—
worship; käma-laväya—for obtaining trivial pleasures; teñäm—their; räsi—You bestow;
éça—O Lord; kämän—desires; niraye—in hell; api—even; ye—which desires; syuù—can
be available.
TRANSLATION
Your lotus feet are the true vessel to take one across the ocean of mundane nescience.
Only persons deprived of their intelligence by the spell of the deluding energy will
worship those feet with a view to attain the trivial and momentary pleasures of the
senses, which even persons rotting in hell can attain. However, O my Lord, You are so
kind that You bestow mercy even upon them.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, Seventh Chapter, there are two kinds of devotees—those
who desire material pleasures and those who desire nothing but service to the Lord.
Material pleasures can be attained even by hogs and dogs, whose condition of life is
hellish. The hog also eats, sleeps and enjoys sex life to the full extent, and it is also very
satisfied with such hellish enjoyment of material existence. Modern yogés advise that
because one has senses, one must enjoy to the fullest extent like cats and dogs, yet one
can go on and practice yoga. This is condemned here by Kardama Muni; he says that
such material pleasures are available for cats and dogs in a hellish condition. The Lord is
so kind that if so-called yogés are satisfied by hellish pleasures, He can give them
facilities to attain all the material pleasures they desire, but they cannot attain the
perfectional stage attained by Kardama Muni.
Hellish and demoniac persons do not actually know what is the ultimate attainment in
perfection, and therefore they think that sense gratification is the highest goal of life.
They advise that one can satisfy the senses and at the same time, by reciting some
mantra and by some practice, can cheaply aspire for perfection. Such persons are
described here as hata-medhasaù, which means "those whose brains are spoiled." They
aspire for material enjoyment by perfection of yoga or meditation. In Bhagavad-gétä it is
stated by the Lord that the intelligence of those who worship the demigods has been
spoiled. Similarly, here too it is stated by Kardama Muni that one who aspires after
material enjoyment by practice of yoga has spoiled his brain substance and is fool
number one. Actually, the intelligent practitioner of yoga should aspire for nothing else
but to cross over the ocean of nescience by worshiping the Personality of Godhead and
153
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
to see the lotus feet of the Lord. The Lord is so kind, however, that even today persons
whose brain substance is spoiled are given the benediction to become cats, dogs or hogs
and enjoy material happiness from sex life and sense gratification. The Lord confirms
this benediction in Bhagavad-gétä: "Whatever a person aspires to receive from Me, I
offer him as he desires."
SB 3.21.15
TEXT 15
TaQaa Sa cah& Pairvae!uk-aMa"
SaMaaNaXaql/a& Ga*hMaeDaDaeNauMa( )
oPaeiYavaNMaUl/MaXaezMaUl&/
duraXaYa" k-aMadugaax(iga]PaSYa )) 15 ))
tathä sa cähaà parivoòhu-kämaù
samäna-çéläà gåhamedha-dhenum
upeyivän mülam açeña-mülaà
duräçayaù käma-dughäìghripasya
SYNONYMS
tathä—similarly; saù—myself; ca—also; aham—I; parivoòhu-kämaù—desiring to marry;
samäna-çéläm—a girl of like disposition; gåha-medha—in married life; dhenum—a cow of
plenty; upeyivän—have approached; mülam—the root (lotus feet); açeña—of everything;
mülam—the source; duräçayaù—with lustful desire; käma-dugha—yielding all desires;
aìghripasya—(of You) who are the tree.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, desiring to marry a girl of like disposition who may prove to be a veritable cow
of plenty in my married life, to satisfy my lustful desire I too have sought the shelter of
Your lotus feet, which are the source of everything, for You are like a desire tree.
PURPORT
In spite of his condemning persons who approach the Lord for material advantages,
Kardama Muni expressed his material inability and desire before the Lord by saying,
154
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
"Although I know that nothing material should be asked from You, I nevertheless desire
to marry a girl of like disposition." The phrase "like disposition" is very significant.
Formerly, boys and girls of similar dispositions were married; the similar natures of the
boy and girl were united in order to make them happy. Not more than twenty-five years
ago, and perhaps it is still current, parents in India used to consult the horoscope of the
boy and girl to see whether there would be factual union in their psychological
conditions. These considerations are very important. Nowadays marriage takes place
without such consultation, and therefore, soon after the marriage, there is divorce and
separation. Formerly husband and wife used to live together peacefully throughout their
whole lives, but nowadays it is a very difficult task.
Kardama Muni wanted to have a wife of like disposition because a wife is necessary to
assist in spiritual and material advancement. It is said that a wife yields the fulfillment
of all desires in religion, economic development and sense gratification. If one has a nice
wife, he is to be considered a most fortunate man. In astrology, a man is considered
fortunate who has great wealth, very good sons or a very good wife. Of these three, one
who has a very good wife is considered the most fortunate. Before marrying, one should
select a wife of like disposition and not be enamored by so-called beauty or other
attractive features for sense gratification. In the Bhägavatam, Twelfth Canto, it is said
that in the Kali-yuga marriage will be based on the consideration of sex life; as soon as
there is deficiency in sex life, the question of divorce will arise.
Kardama Muni could have asked his benediction from Umä, for it is recommended in
the scriptures that if anyone wants a good wife, he should worship Umä. But he
preferred to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead because it is recommended in
the Bhägavatam that everyone, whether he is full of desires, has no desire or desires
liberation, should worship the Supreme Lord. Of these three classes of men, one tries to
be happy by fulfillment of material desires, another wants to be happy by becoming one
with the Supreme, and another, the perfect man, is a devotee. He does not want
anything in return from the Personality of Godhead; he only wants to render
transcendental loving service. In any case, everyone should worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, for He will fulfill everyone's desire. The advantage of
worshiping the Supreme Person is that even if one has desires for material enjoyment, if
he worships Kåñëa he will gradually become a pure devotee and have no more material
hankering.
SB 3.21.16
TEXT 16
155
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Pa[JaaPaTaeSTae vcSaaDaqXa TaNTYaa
l/aek-" ik-l/aYa& k-aMahTaae_NaubÖ" )
Ah& c l/aek-aNauGaTaae vhaiMa
bil&/ c éu(c)-aiNaiMazaYa Tau>YaMa( )) 16 ))
prajäpates te vacasädhéça tantyä
lokaù kiläyaà käma-hato 'nubaddhaù
ahaà ca lokänugato vahämi
balià ca çuklänimiñäya tubhyam
SYNONYMS
prajäpateù—who are the master of all living entities; te—of You; vacasä—under the
direction; adhéça—O my Lord; tantyä—by a rope; lokaù—conditioned souls; kila—
indeed; ayam—these; käma-hataù—conquered by lusty desires; anubaddhaù—are bound;
aham—I; ca—and; loka-anugataù—following the conditioned souls; vahämi—offer;
balim—oblations; ca—and; çukla—O embodiment of religion; animiñäya—existing as
eternal time; tubhyam—to You.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, You are the master and leader of all living entities. Under Your direction, all
conditioned souls, as if bound by rope, are constantly engaged in satisfying their desires.
Following them, O embodiment of religion, I also bear oblations for You, who are eternal
time.
PURPORT
In the Kaöha Upaniñad it is stated that the Supreme Lord is the leader of all living
entities. He is their sustainer and the awarder of all their necessities and desires. No
living entity is independent; all are dependent on the mercy of the Supreme Lord.
Therefore the Vedic instruction is that one should enjoy life under the direction of the
supreme leader, the Personality of Godhead. Vedic literatures like Éçopaniñad direct that
since everything belongs to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one should not
encroach upon another's property, but should enjoy one's individual allotment. The best
program for every living entity is to take direction from the Supreme Lord and enjoy
156
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
material or spiritual life.
A question may be raised: Since Kardama Muni was advanced in spiritual life, why then
did he not ask the Lord for liberation? Why did he want to enjoy material life in spite of
his personally seeing and experiencing the Supreme Lord? The answer is that not
everyone is competent to be liberated from material bondage. It is everyone's duty,
therefore, to enjoy according to his present position, but under the direction of the Lord
or the Vedas. The Vedas are considered to be the direct words of the Lord. The Lord
gives us the opportunity to enjoy material life as we want, and at the same time He gives
directions for the modes and processes of abiding by the Vedas so that gradually one may
be elevated to liberation from material bondage. The conditioned souls who have come
to the material world to fulfill their desires to lord it over material nature are bound by
the laws of nature. The best course is to abide by the Vedic rules; that will help one to be
gradually elevated to liberation.
Kardama Muni addresses the Lord as çuka, which means "the leader of religion." One
who is pious should follow the rules of religion, for such rules are prescribed by the Lord
Himself. No one can manufacture or concoct a religion; "religion" refers to the
injunctions or laws of the Lord. In Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says that religion means to
surrender unto Him. Therefore one should follow the Vedic regulations and surrender
unto the Supreme Lord because that is the ultimate goal of perfection in human life.
One should live a life of piety, follow the religious rules and regulations, marry and live
peacefully for elevation to the higher status of spiritual realization.
SB 3.21.17
TEXT 17
l/aek-a&ê l/aek-aNauGaTaaNa( PaéU&ê
ihTva ié[TaaSTae cr<aaTaPa}aMa( )
ParSPar& Tvd(Gau<avadSaqDau‚
PaqYaUziNaYaaRiPaTadehDaMaaR" )) 17 ))
lokäàç ca lokänugatän paçüàç ca
hitvä çritäs te caraëätapatram
parasparaà tvad-guëa-väda-sédhupéyüña-
niryäpita-deha-dharmäù
SYNONYMS
157
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
lokän—worldly affairs; ca—and; loka-anugatän—the followers of worldly affairs;
paçün—beastly; ca—and; hitvä—having given up; çritäù—taken shelter; te—Your;
caraëa—of lotus feet; ätapatram—the umbrella; parasparam—with one another; tvat—
Your; guëa—of qualities; väda—by discussion; sédhu—intoxicating; péyüña—by the
nectar; niryäpita—extinguished; deha-dharmäù—the primary necessities of the body.
TRANSLATION
However, persons who have given up stereotyped worldly affairs and the beastly followers
of these affairs, and who have taken shelter of the umbrella of Your lotus feet by drinking
the intoxicating nectar of Your qualities and activities in discussions with one another,
can be freed from the primary necessities of the material body.
PURPORT
After describing the necessity of married life, Kardama Muni asserts that marriage and
other social affairs are stereotyped regulations for persons who are addicted to material
sense enjoyment. The principles of animal life—eating, sleeping, mating and
defending—are actually necessities of the body, but those who engage in transcendental
Kåñëa consciousness, giving up all the stereotyped activities of this material world, are
freed from social conventions. Conditioned souls are under the spell of material energy,
or eternal time—past, present and future—but as soon as one engages in Kåñëa
consciousness, he transcends the limits of past and present and becomes situated in the
eternal activities of the soul. One has to act in terms of the Vedic injunctions in order
to enjoy material life, but those who have taken to the devotional service of the Lord are
not afraid of the regulations of this material world. Such devotees do not care for the
conventions of material activities; they boldly take to that shelter which is like an
umbrella against the sun of repeated birth and death.
Constant transmigration of the soul from one body to another is the cause of suffering
in material existence. This conditional life in material existence is called saàsära. One
may perform good work and take his birth in a very nice material condition, but the
process under which birth and death take place is like a terrible fire. Çré Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura, in his prayer to the spiritual master, has described this. Saàsära, or
the repetition of birth and death, is compared to a forest fire. A forest fire takes place
automatically, without anyone's endeavor, by the friction of dried wood, and no fire
department or sympathetic person can extinguish it. The raging forest fire can be
extinguished only when there is a constant downpour of water from a cloud. The cloud
158
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
is compared to the mercy of the spiritual master. By the grace of the spiritual master the
cloud of the mercy of the Personality of Godhead is brought in, and then only, when the
rains of Kåñëa consciousness fall, can the fire of material existence be extinguished. This
is also explained here. In order to find freedom from the stereotyped conditional life of
material existence, one has to take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, not in the
manner in which the impersonalists indulge, but in devotional service, chanting and
hearing of the activities of the Lord. Only then can one be freed from the actions and
reactions of material existence. It is recommended here that one should give up the
conditional life of this material world and the association of so-called civilized human
beings who are simply following, in a polished way, the same stereotyped principles of
eating, sleeping, defending and mating. Chanting and hearing of the glories of the Lord
is described here as tvad-guëa-väda-sédhu. Only by drinking the nectar of chanting and
hearing the pastimes of the Lord can one forget the intoxication of material existence.
SB 3.21.18
TEXT 18
Na Tae_Jara+a>a]iMaraYaureza&
}aYaaedXaar& i}aXaTa& ziíPavR )
z<NaeMYaNaNTaC^id YaiT}a<aai>a
k-ral/óaeTaae JaGadaiC^Û DaavTa( )) 18 ))
na te 'jaräkña-bhramir äyur eñäà
trayodaçäraà tri-çataà ñañöi-parva
ñaë-nemy ananta-cchadi yat tri-ëäbhi
karäla-sroto jagad äcchidya dhävat
SYNONYMS
na—not; te—Your; ajara—of imperishable Brahman; akña—on the axle; bhramiù—
rotating; äyuù—span of life; eñäm—of the devotees; trayodaça—thirteen; aram—spokes;
tri-çatam—three hundred; ñañöi—sixty; parva—functions; ñaö—six; nemi—rims;
ananta—innumerable; chadi—leaves; yat—which; tri—three; näbhi—naves; karälasrotaù—
with tremendous velocity; jagat—the universe; äcchidya—cutting short;
dhävat—running.
159
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Your wheel, which has three naves, rotates around the axis of the imperishable Brahman.
It has thirteen spokes, 360 joints, six rims and numberless leaves carved upon it. Though
its revolution cuts short the life-span of the entire creation, this wheel of tremendous
velocity cannot touch the life-span of the devotees of the Lord.
PURPORT
The time factor cannot affect the span of life of the devotees. In Bhagavad-gétä it is
stated that a little execution of devotional service saves one from the greatest danger.
The greatest danger is transmigration of the soul from one body to another, and only
devotional service to the Lord can stop this process. It is stated in the Vedic literatures,
harià vinä na måtim taranti: without the mercy of the Lord, one cannot stop the cycle of
birth and death. In Bhagavad-gétä it is stated that only by understanding the
transcendental nature of the Lord and His activities, His appearance and disappearance,
can one stop the cycle of death and go back to Him. The time factor is divided into
many fractions of moments, hours, months, years, periods, seasons, etc. All the divisions
in this verse are determined according to the astronomical calculations of Vedic
literature. There are six seasons, called åtus, and there is the period of four months
called cäturmäsya. Three periods of four months complete one year. According to Vedic
astronomical calculations, there are thirteen months. The thirteenth month is called
adhi-mäsa or mala-mäsa and is added every third year. The time factor, however, cannot
touch the lifespan of the devotees. In another verse it is stated that when the sun rises
and sets it takes away the life of all living entities, but it cannot take away the life of
those who are engaged in devotional service. Time is compared here to a big wheel
which has 360 joints, six rims in the shape of seasons, and numberless leaves in the
shape of moments. It rotates on the eternal existence, Brahman.
SB 3.21.19
TEXT 19
Wk-" SvYa& SaÅGaTa" iSaSa*+aYaa‚
iÜTaqYaYaaTMaàiDaYaaeGaMaaYaYaa )
Sa*JaSYad" PaaiSa PauNaGa]RiSaZYaSae
YaQaae<aRNaai>a>aRGavNa( SvXai¢-i>a" )) 19 ))
160
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ekaù svayaà saï jagataù sisåkñayädvitéyayätmann
adhi-yogamäyayä
såjasy adaù päsi punar grasiñyase
yathorëa-näbhir bhagavan sva-çaktibhiù
SYNONYMS
ekaù—one; svayam—Yourself; san—being; jagataù—the universes; sisåkñayä—with a
desire to create; advitéyayä—without a second; ätman—in Yourself; adhi—controlling;
yoga-mäyayä—by yogamäyä; såjasi—You create; adaù—those universes; päsi—You
maintain; punaù—again; grasiñyase—You will wind up; yathä—like; ürëa-näbhiù—a
spider; bhagavan—O Lord; sva-çaktibhiù—by its own energy.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You alone create the universes. O Personality of Godhead, desiring to
create these universes, You create them, maintain them and again wind them up by Your
own energies, which are under the control of Your second energy, called yogamäyä, just
as a spider creates a cobweb by its own energy and again winds it up.
PURPORT
In this verse two important words nullify the impersonalist theory that everything is
God. Here Kardama says, "O Personality of Godhead, You are alone, but You have
various energies." The example of the spider is very significant also. The spider is an
individual living entity, and by its energy it creates a cobweb and plays on it, and
whenever it likes it winds up the cobweb, thus ending the play. When the cobweb is
manufactured by the saliva of the spider, the spider does not become impersonal.
Similarly, the creation and manifestation of the material or spiritual energy does not
render the creator impersonal. Here the very prayer suggests that God is sentient and
can hear the prayers and fulfill the desires of the devotee. Therefore, He is sac-cidänanda-
vigraha [Bs. 5.1], the form of bliss, knowledge and eternity.
SB 3.21.20
TEXT 20
NaETaØTaaDaqXa Pad& TaveiPSaTa&
YaNMaaYaYaa NaSTaNauze >aUTaSaU+MaMa( )
161
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ANauGa]haYaaSTviPa YaihR MaaYaYaa
l/Sataul/SYaa >aGavaNa( ivl/i+aTa" )) 20 ))
naitad batädhéça padaà tavepsitaà
yan mäyayä nas tanuñe bhüta-sükñmam
anugrahäyästv api yarhi mäyayä
lasat-tulasyä bhagavän vilakñitaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; etat—this; bata—indeed; adhéça—O Lord; padam—material world; tava—
Your; épsitam—desire; yat—which; mäyayä—by Your external energy; naù—for us;
tanuñe—You manifest; bhüta-sükñmam—the elements, gross and subtle; anugrahäya—
for bestowing mercy; astu—let it be; api—also; yarhi—when; mäyayä—through Your
causeless mercy; lasat—splendid; tulasyä—with a wreath of tulasé leaves; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; vilakñitaù—is perceived.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, although it is not Your desire, You manifest this creation of gross and
subtle elements just for our sensual satisfaction. Let Your causeless mercy be upon us, for
You have appeared before us in Your eternal form, adorned with a splendid wreath of
tulasé leaves.
PURPORT
It is clearly stated here that the material world is not created by the personal will of the
Supreme Lord; it is created by His external energy because the living entities want to
enjoy it. This material world is not created for those who do not want to enjoy sense
gratification, who constantly remain in transcendental loving service and who are
eternally Kåñëa conscious. For them, the spiritual world is eternally existing, and they
enjoy there. Elsewhere in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is stated that for those who have
taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this material
world is useless; because this material world is full of danger at every step, it is not meant
for the devotees but for living entities who want to lord it over the material energy at
their own risk. Kåñëa is so kind that He allows the sense-enjoying living entities a
separate world created by Him to enjoy as they like, yet at the same time He appears in
162
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
His personal form. The Lord unwillingly creates this material world, but He descends in
His personal form or sends one of His reliable sons or a servant or a reliable author like
Vyäsadeva to give instruction. He Himself also instructs in His speeches of Bhagavadgétä.
This propaganda work goes on side by side with the creation to convince the
misguided living entities who are rotting in this material world to come back to Him and
surrender unto Him. Therefore the last instruction of Bhagavad-gétä is this: "Give up all
your manufactured engagements in the material world and just surrender unto Me. I
shall protect you from all sinful reactions."
SB 3.21.21
TEXT 21
Ta& TvaNau>aUTYaaeParTai§-YaaQa|
SvMaaYaYaa viTaRTal/aek-TaN}aMa( )
NaMaaMYa>aq+<a& NaMaNaqYaPaad‚
SaraeJaMaLPaqYaiSa k-aMavzRMa( )) 21 ))
taà tvänubhütyoparata-kriyärthaà
sva-mäyayä vartita-loka-tantram
namämy abhékñëaà namanéya-pädasarojam
alpéyasi käma-varñam
SYNONYMS
tam—that; tvä—You; anubhütyä—by realizing; uparata—disregarded; kriyä—
enjoyment of fruitive activities; artham—in order that; sva-mäyayä—by Your own
energy; vartita—brought about; loka-tantram—the material worlds; namämi—I offer
obeisances; abhékñëam—continuously; namanéya—worshipable; päda-sarojam—lotus
feet; alpéyasi—on the insignificant; käma—desires; varñam—showering.
TRANSLATION
I continuously offer my respectful obeisances unto Your lotus feet, of which it is worthy
to take shelter, because You shower all benedictions on the insignificant. To give all
living entities detachment from fruitive activity by realizing You, You have expanded
these material worlds by Your own energy.
163
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Everyone, therefore, whether he desires material enjoyment, liberation or the
transcendental loving service of the Lord, should engage himself, offering obeisances
unto the Supreme Lord, because the Lord can award everyone his desired benediction.
In Bhagavad-gétä the Lord affirms, ye yathä mäà prapadyante: [Bg. 4.11] anyone who
desires to be a successful enjoyer in this material world is awarded that benediction by
the Lord, anyone who wants to be liberated from the entanglement of this material
world is given liberation by the Lord, and anyone who desires to constantly engage in
His service in full Kåñëa consciousness is awarded that benediction by the Lord. For
material enjoyment He has prescribed so many ritualistic sacrificial performances in the
Vedas, and thus people may take advantage of those instructions and enjoy material life
in higher planets or in a noble aristocratic family. These processes are mentioned in the
Vedas, and one can take advantage of them. It is similar with those who want to be
liberated from this material world.
Unless one is disgusted with the enjoyment of this material world, he cannot aspire for
liberation. Liberation is for one who is disgusted with material enjoyment. Vedänta-sütra
says, therefore, athäto brahma jijïäsä: those who have given up the attempt to be happy
in this material world can inquire about the Absolute Truth. For those who want to
know the Absolute Truth, the Vedänta-sütra is available, as is Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the
actual explanation of Vedänta-sütra. Since Bhagavad-gétä is also Vedänta-sütra, by
understanding Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Vedänta-sütra or Bhagavad-gétä one can obtain real
knowledge. When one obtains real knowledge, he becomes theoretically one with the
Supreme, and when he actually begins the service of Brahman, or Kåñëa consciousness,
he is not only liberated but situated in his spiritual life. Similarly, for those who want to
lord it over material nature, there are so many departments of material enjoyment;
material knowledge and material science are available, and the Lord provides for persons
who want to enjoy them. The conclusion is that one should worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead for any benediction. The word käma-varñam is very significant,
for it indicates that He satisfies the desires of anyone who approaches Him. But one who
sincerely loves Kåñëa and yet wants material enjoyment is in perplexity. Kåñëa, being
very kind toward him, gives him an opportunity to engage in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord, and so he gradually forgets the hallucination.
SB 3.21.22
TEXT 22
164
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
‰izåvac
wTYaVYal/Ik&- Pa[<auTaae_BJaNaa>a‚
STaMaab>aaze vcSaaMa*TaeNa )
SauPa<aRPa+aaePair raecMaaNa"
Pa[eMaiSMaTaaeÜq+a<aiv>a]Mad(>a]U" )) 22 ))
åñir uväca
ity avyalékaà praëuto 'bja-näbhas
tam äbabhäñe vacasämåtena
suparëa-pakñopari rocamänaù
prema-smitodvékñaëa-vibhramad-bhrüù
SYNONYMS
åñiù uväca—the great sage Maitreya said; iti—thus; avyalékam—sincerely; praëutaù—
having been praised; abja-näbhaù—Lord Viñëu; tam—to Kardama Muni; äbabhäñe—
replied; vacasä—with words; amåtena—as sweet as nectar; suparëa—of Garuòa; pakña—
the shoulders; upari—upon; rocamänaù—shining; prema—of affection; smita—with a
smile; udvékñaëa—looking; vibhramat—gracefully moving; bhrüù—eyebrows.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya resumed: Sincerely extolled in these words, Lord Viñëu, shining very
beautifully on the shoulders of Garuòa, replied with words as sweet as nectar. His
eyebrows moved gracefully as He looked at the sage with a smile full of affection.
PURPORT
The word vacasämåtena is significant. Whenever the Lord speaks, He speaks from the
transcendental world. He does not speak from the material world. Since He is
transcendental, His speech is also transcendental, as is His activity; everything in
relation to Him is transcendental. The word amåta refers to one who does not meet with
death. The words and activities of the Lord are deathless; therefore they are not
manufactured of this material world. The sound of this material world and that of the
spiritual world are completely different. The sound of the spiritual world is nectarean
and eternal, whereas the sound of the material world is hackneyed and subject to end.
165
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The sound of the holy name—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare—
everlastingly increases the enthusiasm of the chanter. If one repeats monotonous
material words, he will feel exhausted, but if he chants Hare Kåñëa twenty-four hours a
day, he will never feel exhausted; rather, he will feel encouraged to continue chanting
more and more. When the Lord replied to the sage Kardama, the word vacasämåtena is
specifically mentioned, since He spoke from the transcendental world. He replied in
transcendental words, and when He spoke His eyebrows moved with great affection.
When a devotee praises the glories of the Lord, the Lord is very satisfied, and He
bestows His transcendental benediction upon the devotee without reservation because
He is always causelessly merciful toward His devotee.
SB 3.21.23
TEXT 23
é[q>aGavaNauvac
ividTva Tav cETYa& Mae PaurEv SaMaYaaeiJa TaTa( )
YadQaRMaaTMaiNaYaMaESTvYaEvah& SaMaicRTa" )) 23 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
viditvä tava caityaà me
puraiva samayoji tat
yad-artham ätma-niyamais
tvayaivähaà samarcitaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Lord said; viditvä—understanding; tava—your;
caityam—mental condition; me—by Me; purä—previously; eva—certainly; samayoji—
was arranged; tat—that; yat-artham—for the sake of which; ätma—of the mind and
senses; niyamaiù—by discipline; tvayä—by you; eva—only; aham—I; samarcitaù—have
been worshiped.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord said: Having come to know what was in your mind, I have already
arranged for that for which you have worshiped Me well through your mental and
sensory discipline.
166
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead in His Paramätmä feature is situated in everyone's
heart. He knows, therefore, the past, present and future of every individual person as
well as his desires, activities and everything about him. It is stated in Bhagavad-gétä that
He is seated in the heart as a witness. The Personality of Godhead knew the heart's
desire of Kardama Muni, and He had already arranged for the fulfillment of his desires.
He never disappoints a sincere devotee, regardless of what he wants, but He never allows
anything which will be detrimental to the individual's devotional service.
SB 3.21.24
TEXT 24
Na vE JaaTau Ma*zEv SYaaTPa[JaaDYa+a MadhR<aMa( )
>aviÜDaeZviTaTara& MaiYa Sax(Ga*i>aTaaTMaNaaMa( )) 24 ))
na vai jätu måñaiva syät
prajädhyakña mad-arhaëam
bhavad-vidheñv atitaräà
mayi saìgåbhitätmanäm
SYNONYMS
na—not; vai—indeed; jätu—ever; måñä—useless; eva—only; syät—it may be; prajä—of
the living entities; adhyakña—O leader; mat-arhaëam—worship of Me; bhavat-vidheñu—
unto persons like you; atitaräm—entirely; mayi—on Me; saìgåbhita—are fixed;
ätmanäm—of those whose minds.
TRANSLATION
The Lord continued: My dear åñi, O leader of the living entities, for those who serve Me
in devotion by worshiping Me, especially persons like you who have given up everything
unto Me, there is never any question of frustration.
PURPORT
Even if he has some desires, one engaged in the service of the Lord is never frustrated.
Those engaged in His service are called sakäma and akäma. Those who approach the
167
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Supreme Personality of Godhead with desires for material enjoyment are called sakäma,
and those devotees who have no material desires for sense gratification but serve the
Supreme Lord out of spontaneous love for Him are called akäma. Sakäma devotees are
divided into four classes—those in distress, those in need of money, the inquisitive and
the wise. Someone worships the Supreme Lord because of bodily or mental distress,
someone else worships the Supreme Lord because he is in need of money, someone else
worships the Lord out of inquisitiveness to know Him as He is, and someone wants to
know the Lord as a philosopher can know Him, by the research work of his wisdom.
There is no frustration for any of these four classes of men; each is endowed with the
desired result of his worship.
SB 3.21.25
TEXT 25
Pa[JaaPaiTaSauTa" SaMa]a<MaNauivR:YaaTaMa(r)l/" )
b]øavTa| Yaae_iDavSaNa( XaaiSTa Saáa<aRva& MahqMa( )) 25 ))
prajäpati-sutaù samräë
manur vikhyäta-maìgalaù
brahmävartaà yo 'dhivasan
çästi saptärëaväà mahém
SYNONYMS
prajäpati-sutaù—the son of Lord Brahmä; samräö—the Emperor; manuù—Sväyambhuva
Manu; vikhyäta—well known; maìgalaù—whose righteous acts; brahmävartam—
Brahmävarta; yaù—he who; adhivasan—living in; çästi—rules; sapta—seven;
arëaväm—oceans; mahém—the earth.
TRANSLATION
The Emperor Sväyambhuva Manu, the son of Lord Brahmä, who is well known for his
righteous acts, has his seat in Brahmävarta and rules over the earth with its seven oceans.
PURPORT
Sometimes it is stated that Brahmävarta is a part of Kurukñetra or that Kurukñetra itself
is situated in Brahmävarta, because the demigods are recommended to perform spiritual
168
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ritualistic performances in Kurukñetra. But in others' opinion, Brahmävarta is a place in
Brahmaloka, where Sväyambhuva ruled. There are many places on the surface of this
earth which are also known in the higher planetary systems; we have places on this
planet like Våndävana, Dvärakä and Mathurä, but they are also eternally situated in
Kåñëaloka. There are many similar names on the surface of the earth, and it may be that
in the Boar age Sväyambhuva Manu ruled this planet, as stated here. The word
maìgalaù is significant. Maìgala means one who is elevated in every respect in the
opulences of religious performances, ruling power, cleanliness and all other good
qualities. Vikhyäta means "celebrated." Sväyambhuva Manu was celebrated for all good
qualities and opulences.
SB 3.21.26
TEXT 26
Sa ceh ivPa[ raJaizRMaRihZYaa XaTaæPaYaa )
AaYaaSYaiTa idd*+auSTva& Parìae DaMaRk-aeivd" )) 26 ))
sa ceha vipra räjarñir
mahiñyä çatarüpayä
äyäsyati didåkñus tväà
paraçvo dharma-kovidaù
SYNONYMS
saù—Sväyambhuva Manu; ca—and; iha—here; vipra—O holy brähmaëa; räja-åñiù—the
saintly king; mahiñyä—along with his queen; çatarüpayä—called Çatarüpä; äyäsyati—
will come; didåkñuù—desiring to see; tväm—you; paraçvaù—the day after tomorrow;
dharma—in religious activities; kovidaù—expert.
TRANSLATION
The day after tomorrow, O brähmaëa, that celebrated emperor, who is expert in religious
activities, will come here with his queen, Çatarüpä, wishing to see you.
SB 3.21.27
TEXT 27
AaTMaJaaMaiSaTaaPaa(r)q& vYa"Xaql/Gau<aaiNvTaaMa( )
169
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Ma*GaYaNTaq& PaiTa& daSYaTYaNauæPaaYa Tae Pa[>aae )) 27 ))
ätmajäm asitäpäìgéà
vayaù-çéla-guëänvitäm
mågayantéà patià däsyaty
anurüpäya te prabho
SYNONYMS
ätma-jäm—his own daughter; asita—black; apäìgém—eyes; vayaù—grown-up age;
çéla—with character; guëa—with good qualities; anvitäm—endowed; mågayantém—
searching for; patim—a husband; däsyati—he will give; anurüpäya—who are suitable;
te—unto you; prabho—My dear sir.
TRANSLATION
He has a grown-up daughter whose eyes are black. She is ready for marriage, and she has
good character and all good qualities. She is also searching for a good husband. My dear
sir, her parents will come to see you, who are exactly suitable for her, just to deliver their
daughter as your wife.
PURPORT
The selection of a good husband for a good girl was always entrusted to the parents.
Here it is clearly stated that Manu and his wife were coming to see Kardama Muni to
offer their daughter because the daughter was well qualified and the parents were
searching out a similarly qualified man. This is the duty of parents. Girls are never
thrown into the public street to search out their husband, for when girls are grown up
and are searching after a boy, they forget to consider whether the boy they select is
actually suitable for them. Out of the urge of sex desire, a girl may accept anyone, but if
the husband is chosen by the parents, they can consider who is to be selected and who is
not. According to the Vedic system, therefore, the girl is given over to a suitable boy by
the parents; she is never allowed to select her own husband independently.
SB 3.21.28
TEXT 28
SaMaaihTa& Tae ôdYa& Ya}aeMaaNa( PairvTSaraNa( )
170
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Saa Tva& b]øà*PavDaU" k-aMaMaaéu >aiJaZYaiTa )) 28 ))
samähitaà te hådayaà
yatremän parivatsarän
sä tväà brahman nåpa-vadhüù
kämam äçu bhajiñyati
SYNONYMS
samähitam—has been fixed; te—your; hådayam—heart; yatra—on whom; imän—for all
these; parivatsarän—years; sä—she; tväm—you; brahman—O brähmaëa; nåpa-vadhüù—
the princess; kämam—as you desire; äçu—very soon; bhajiñyati—will serve.
TRANSLATION
That princess, O holy sage, will be just the type you have been thinking of in your heart
for all these long years. She will soon be yours and will serve you to your heart's content.
PURPORT
The Lord awards all benedictions according to the heart's desire of a devotee, so the
Lord informed Kardama Muni, "The girl who is coming to be married with you is a
princess, the daughter of Emperor Sväyambhuva, and so just suitable for your purpose."
Only by God's grace can one get a nice wife just as he desires. Similarly, it is only by
God's grace that a girl gets a husband suitable to her heart. Thus it is said that if we pray
to the Supreme Lord in every transaction of our material existence, everything will be
done very nicely and just suitable to our heart's desire. In other words, in all
circumstances we must take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and depend
completely on His decision. Man proposes, God disposes. The fulfillment of desires,
therefore, should be entrusted to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; that is the nicest
solution. Kardama Muni desired only a wife, but because he was a devotee of the Lord,
the Lord selected a wife for him who was the Emperor's daughter, a princess. Thus
Kardama Muni got a wife beyond his expectation. If we depend on the choice of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, we will receive benedictions in greater opulence than
we desire.
It is also significantly noted here that Kardama Muni was a brähmaëa, whereas Emperor
Sväyambhuva was a kñatriya. Therefore, intercaste marriage was current even in those
171
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
days. The system was that a brähmaëa could marry the daughter of a kñatriya, but a
kñatriya could not marry the daughter of a brähmaëa. We have evidences from the
history of the Vedic age that Çukräcärya offered his daughter to Mahäräja Yayäti, but
the King had to refuse to marry the daughter of a brähmaëa; only with the special
permission of the brähmaëa could they marry. Intercaste marriage, therefore, was not
prohibited in the olden days, many millions of years ago, but there was a regular system
of social behavior.
SB 3.21.29
TEXT 29
Yaa Ta AaTMa>a*Ta& vqYa| NavDaa Pa[SaivZYaiTa )
vqYaeR TvdqYae ‰zYa AaDaaSYaNTYaÅSaaTMaNa" )) 29 ))
yä ta ätma-bhåtaà véryaà
navadhä prasaviñyati
vérye tvadéye åñaya
ädhäsyanty aïjasätmanaù
SYNONYMS
yä—she; te—by you; ätma-bhåtam—sown in her; véryam—the seed; nava-dhä—nine
daughters; prasaviñyati—will bring forth; vérye tvadéye—in the daughters begotten by
you; åñayaù—the sages; ädhäsyanti—will beget; aïjasä—in total; ätmanaù—children.
TRANSLATION
She will bring forth nine daughters from the seed sown in her by you, and through the
daughters you beget, the sages will duly beget children.
SB 3.21.30
TEXT 30
Tv& c SaMYaGaNauïaYa iNadeXa& Ma oXataMa" )
MaiYa TaqQask*-TaaXaezi§-YaaQaaeR Maa& Pa[PaTSYaSae )) 30 ))
tvaà ca samyag anuñöhäya
nideçaà ma uçattamaù
172
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mayi térthé-kåtäçeñakriyärtho
mäà prapatsyase
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; ca—and; samyak—properly; anuñöhäya—having carried out; nideçam—
command; me—My; uçattamaù—completely cleansed; mayi—unto Me; térthé-kåta—
having resigned; açeña—all; kriyä—of actions; arthaù—the fruits; mäm—to Me;
prapatsyase—you will attain.
TRANSLATION
With your heart cleansed by properly carrying out My command, resigning to Me the
fruits of all your acts, you will finally attain to Me.
PURPORT
Here the words térthé-kåtäçeña-kriyärthaù are significant. Tértha means a sanctified place
where charity is given. People used to go to places of pilgrimage and give munificently in
charity. This system is still current. Therefore the Lord said, "In order to sanctify your
activities and the results of your actions, you will offer everything unto Me." This is also
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä: "Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you
sacrifice, the result should be given to Me only." In another place in Bhagavad-gétä the
Lord said, "I am the enjoyer of all sacrifices, all penances and everything done for the
welfare of mankind or society." All activities, therefore, whether for the welfare of
family, society, country or humanity at large, must be performed in Kåñëa consciousness.
That is the instruction given by the Lord to Kardama Muni. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira
welcomed Närada Muni: "Wherever you are present, that place becomes sanctified
because the Lord Himself is always seated in your heart." Similarly, if we act in Kåñëa
consciousness under the direction of the Lord and His representative, then everything is
sanctified. This is the indication given to Kardama Muni, who acted on it and therefore
received the most excellent wife and child, as will be disclosed in later verses.
SB 3.21.31
TEXT 31
k*-Tva dYaa& c Jaqvezu dtva ca>aYaMaaTMavaNa( )
MaYYaaTMaaNa& Sah JaGad( d]+YaSYaaTMaiNa caiPa MaaMa( )) 31 ))
173
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kåtvä dayäà ca jéveñu
dattvä cäbhayam ätmavän
mayy ätmänaà saha jagad
drakñyasy ätmani cäpi mäm
SYNONYMS
kåtvä—having shown; dayäm—compassion; ca—and; jéveñu—toward living beings;
dattvä—having given; ca—and; abhayam—assurance of safety; ätma-vän—self-realized;
mayi—in Me; ätmänam—yourself; saha jagat—along with the universe; drakñyasi—you
will perceive; ätmani—in yourself; ca—and; api—also; mäm—Me.
TRANSLATION
Showing compassion to all living entities, you will attain self-realization. Giving assurance
of safety to all, you will perceive your own self as well as all the universes in Me, and
Myself in you.
PURPORT
The simple process of self-realization for every living entity is described here. The first
principle to be understood is that this world is a product of the supreme will. There is an
identity of this world with the Supreme Lord. This identity is accepted in a
misconceived way by the impersonalists; they say that the Supreme Absolute Truth,
transforming Himself into the universe, loses His separate existence. Thus they accept
the world and everything in it to be the Lord. That is pantheism, wherein everything is
considered to be the Lord. This is the view of the impersonalist. But those who are
personal devotees of the Lord take everything to be the property of the Supreme Lord.
Everything, whatever we see, is the manifestation of the Supreme Lord; therefore,
everything should be engaged in the service of the Lord. This is oneness. The difference
between the impersonalist and the personalist is that the impersonalist does not accept
the separate existence of the Lord, but the personalist accepts the Lord; he understands
that although He distributes Himself in so many ways, He has His separate personal
existence. This is described in Bhagavad-gétä: "I am spread all over the universe in My
impersonal form. Everything is resting on Me, but I am not present." There is a nice
example regarding the sun and the sunshine. The sun, by its sunshine, is spread all over
the universe, and all the planets rest on the sunshine. But all the planets are different
174
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
from the sun planet; one cannot say that because the planets are resting on the
sunshine, these planets are also the sun. Similarly, the impersonal or pantheistic view
that everything is God is not a very intelligent proposal. The real position, as explained
by the Lord Himself, is that although nothing can exist without Him, it is not a fact that
everything is Him. He is different from everything. So here also the Lord says: "You will
see everything in the world to be nondifferent from Me." This means that everything
should be considered a product of the Lord's energy, and therefore everything should be
employed in the service of the Lord. One's energy should be utilized for one's selfinterest.
That is the perfection of the energy.
This energy can be utilized for real self-interest if one is compassionate. A person in
Kåñëa consciousness, a devotee of the Lord, is always compassionate. He is not satisfied
that only he himself is a devotee, but he tries to distribute the knowledge of devotional
service to everyone. There are many devotees of the Lord who faced many risks in
distributing the devotional service of the Lord to people in general. That should be
done.
It is also said that a person who goes to the temple of the Lord and worships with great
devotion, but who does not show sympathy to people in general or show respect to other
devotees, is considered to be a third-class devotee. The second-class devotee is he who is
merciful and compassionate to the fallen soul. The second-class devotee is always
cognizant of his position as an eternal servant of the Lord; he therefore makes
friendships with devotees of the Lord, acts compassionately toward the general public in
teaching them devotional service, and refuses to cooperate or associate with
nondevotees. As long as one is not compassionate to people in general in his devotional
service to the Lord, he is a third-class devotee. The first-class devotee gives assurance to
every living being that there is no fear of this material existence: "Let us live in Kåñëa
consciousness and conquer the nescience of material existence."
It is indicated here that Kardama Muni was directed by the Lord to be very
compassionate and liberal in his householder life and to give assurance to the people in
his renounced life. A sannyäsé, one in the renounced order of life, is meant to give
enlightenment to the people. He should travel, going from home to home to enlighten.
The householder, by the spell of mäyä, becomes absorbed in family affairs and forgets his
relationship with Kåñëa. If he dies in forgetfulness, like the cats and dogs, then his life is
spoiled. It is the duty of a sannyäsé, therefore, to go and awaken the forgetful souls with
enlightenment of their eternal relationship with the Lord and to engage them in
devotional service. The devotee should show mercy to the fallen souls and also give
them the assurance of fearlessness. As soon as one becomes a devotee of the Lord, he is
175
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
convinced that he is protected by the Lord. Fear itself is afraid of the Lord; therefore,
what has he to do with fearfulness?
To award fearlessness to the common man is the greatest act of charity. A sannyäsé, or
one who is in the renounced order of life, should wander from door to door, from village
to village, from town to town and from country to country, all over the world as far as he
is able to travel, and enlighten the householders about Kåñëa consciousness. A person
who is a householder but is initiated by a sannyäsé has the duty to spread Kåñëa
consciousness at home; as far as possible, he should call his friends and neighbors to his
house and hold classes in Kåñëa consciousness. Holding a class means chanting the holy
name of Kåñëa and speaking from Bhagavad-gétä or Çrémad-Bhägavatam. There are
immense literatures for spreading Kåñëa consciousness, and it is the duty of each and
every householder to learn about Kåñëa from his sannyäsé spiritual master. There is a
division of labor in the Lord's service. The householder's duty is to earn money because a
sannyäsé is not supposed to earn money but is completely dependent on the householder.
The householder should earn money by business or by profession and spend at least fifty
percent of his income to spread Kåñëa consciousness; twenty-five percent he can spend
for his family, and twenty-five percent he should save to meet emergencies. This
example was shown by Rüpa Gosvämé, so devotees should follow it.
Actually, to be one with the Supreme Lord means to be one with the interest of the
Lord. Becoming one with the Supreme Lord does not imply becoming as great as the
Supreme Lord. It is impossible. The part is never equal to the whole. The living entity is
always a minute part. Therefore his oneness with the Lord is that he is interested in the
one interest of the Lord. The Lord wants every living entity to always think about Him,
to be His devotee and always worship Him. This is clearly stated in Bhagavad-gétä: manmanä
bhava mad-bhaktaù [Bg. 9.34]. Kåñëa wants everyone always to think of Him.
Everyone should always offer obeisances to Kåñëa. This is the will of the Supreme Lord,
and devotees should try to fulfill His desire. Since the Lord is unlimited, His desire is
also unlimited. There is no stoppage, and therefore the service of the devotee is also
unlimited. In the transcendental world there is unlimited competition between the Lord
and the servitor. The Lord wants to fulfill His desires unlimitedly, and the devotee also
serves Him to fulfill His unlimited desires. There is an unlimited oneness of interest
between the Lord and His devotee.
SB 3.21.32
TEXT 32
Sahah& Sva&Xak-l/Yaa TvÜqYaeR<a MahaMauNae )
176
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Tav +ae}ae devhUTYaa& Pa[<aeZYae TatvSa&ihTaaMa( )) 32 ))
sahähaà sväàça-kalayä
tvad-véryeëa mahä-mune
tava kñetre devahütyäà
praëeñye tattva-saàhitäm
SYNONYMS
saha—with; aham—I; sva-aàça-kalayä—My own plenary portion; tvat-véryeëa—by your
semen; mahä-mune—O great sage; tava kñetre—in your wife; devahütyäm—in Devahüti;
praëeñye—I shall instruct; tattva—of the ultimate principles; saàhitäm—the doctrine.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, I shall manifest My own plenary portion through your wife, Devahüti, along
with your nine daughters, and I shall instruct her in the system of philosophy that deals
with the ultimate principles or categories.
PURPORT
Herein the word sväàça-kalayä indicates that the Lord would appear as the son of
Devahüti and Kardama Muni as Kapiladeva, the first propounder of the Säìkhya
philosophy, which is mentioned here as tattva-saàhitä. The Lord foretold to Kardama
Muni that He would appear in His incarnation Kapiladeva and would propagate the
philosophy of Säìkhya. Säìkhya philosophy is very well known in the world as
propagated by another Kapiladeva, but that Säìkhya philosophy is different from the
Säìkhya which was propounded by the Lord Himself. There are two kinds of Säìkhya
philosophy: one is godless Säìkhya philosophy, and the other is godly Säìkhya
philosophy. The Säìkhya propagated by Kapiladeva, son of Devahüti, is godly
philosophy.
There are different manifestations of the Lord. He is one, but He has become many. He
divides Himself into two different expansions, one called kalä and the other
vibhinnäàça. Ordinary living entities are called vibhinnäàça expansions, and the
unlimited expansions of viñëu-tattva, such as Vämana, Govinda, Näräyaëa, Pradyumna,
Väsudeva and Ananta, are called sväàça-kalä. Sväàça refers to a direct expansion, and
kalä denotes an expansion from the expansion of the original Lord. Baladeva is an
177
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
expansion of Kåñëa, and from Baladeva the next expansion is Saìkarñaëa; thus
Saìkarñaëa is kalä, but Baladeva is sväàça. There is no difference, however, among
Them. This is very nicely explained in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.46): dépärcir eva hi
daçäntaram abhyupetya. With one candle one may light a second candle, with the second
a third and then a fourth, and in this way one can light up thousands of candles, and no
candle is inferior to another in distributing light. Every candle has the full potential
candlepower, but there is still the distinction that one candle is the first, another the
second, another the third and another the fourth. Similarly, there is no difference
between the immediate expansion of the Lord and His secondary expansion. The Lord's
names are considered in exactly the same way; since the Lord is absolute, His name, His
form, His pastimes, His paraphernalia and His quality all have the same potency. In the
absolute world, the name Kåñëa is the transcendental sound representation of the Lord.
There is no potential difference between His quality, name, form, etc. If we chant the
name of the Lord, Hare Kåñëa, that has as much potency as the Lord Himself. There is
no potential difference between the form of the Lord whom we worship and the form of
the Lord in the temple. One should not think that one is worshiping a doll or statue of
the Lord, even if others consider it to be a statue. Because there is not potential
difference, one gets the same result by worshiping the statue of the Lord or the Lord
Himself. This is the science of Kåñëa consciousness.
SB 3.21.33
TEXT 33
MaE}aeYa ovac
Wv& TaMaNau>aaZYaaQa >aGavaNa( Pa[TYaGa+aJa" )
JaGaaMa ibNduSarSa" SarSvTYaa Pairié[TaaTa( )) 33 ))
maitreya uväca
evaà tam anubhäñyätha
bhagavän pratyag-akñajaù
jagäma bindusarasaù
sarasvatyä pariçrität
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—the great sage Maitreya said; evam—thus; tam—to him; anubhäñya—
having spoken; atha—then; bhagavän—the Lord; pratyak—directly; akña—by senses;
178
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
jaù—who is perceived; jagäma—went away; bindu-sarasaù—from Lake Bindu-sarovara;
sarasvatyä—by the River Sarasvaté; pariçrität—encircled.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya went on: Thus having spoken to Kardama Muni, the Lord, who reveals Himself
only when the senses are in Kåñëa consciousness, departed from that lake called Bindusarovara,
which was encircled by the River Sarasvaté.
PURPORT
One word in this verse is very significant. The Lord is stated here to be pratyag-akñaja.
He is imperceptible to material senses, but still He can be seen. This appears to be
contradictory. We have material senses, but how can we see the Supreme Lord? He is
called adhokñaja, which means that He cannot be seen by the material senses. Akñaja
means "knowledge perceived by material senses." Because the Lord is not an object that
can be understood by speculation with our material senses, He is also called ajita; He will
conquer, but no one can conquer Him. What does it mean, then, that still He can be
seen? It is explained that no one can hear the transcendental name of Kåñëa, no one can
understand His transcendental form, and no one can assimilate His transcendental
pastimes. It is not possible. Then how is it possible that He can be seen and understood?
When one is trained in devotional service and renders service unto Him, gradually one's
senses are purified of material contamination. When one's senses are thus purified, then
one can see, one can understand, one can hear and so on. The purification of the
material senses and perception of the transcendental form, name and quality of Kåñëa
are combined together in one word, pratyag-akñaja, which is used here.
SB 3.21.34
TEXT 34
iNarq+aTaSTaSYa YaYaavXaez‚
iSaÖeìrai>aíuTaiSaÖMaaGaR" )
Aak-<aRYaNa( Pa}arQaeNd]Pa+aE‚
åÀairTa& STaaeMaMaudq<aRSaaMa )) 34 ))
nirékñatas tasya yayäv açeñasiddheçvaräbhiñöuta-
siddha-märgaù
179
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
äkarëayan patra-rathendra-pakñair
uccäritaà stomam udérëa-säma
SYNONYMS
nirékñataù tasya—while he was looking on; yayau—He left; açeña—all; siddha-éçvara—by
liberated souls; abhiñöuta—is praised; siddha-märgaù—the way to the spiritual world;
äkarëayan—hearing; patra-ratha-indra—of Garuòa (king of birds); pakñaiù—by the
wings; uccäritam—vibrated; stomam—hymns; udérëa-säma—forming the Säma Veda.
TRANSLATION
While the sage stood looking on, the Lord left by the pathway leading to Vaikuëöha, a
path extolled by all great liberated souls. The sage stood listening as the hymns forming
the basis of the Säma Veda were vibrated by the flapping wings of the Lord's carrier,
Garuòa.
PURPORT
In the Vedic literature it is stated that the two wings of the transcendental bird Garuòa,
who carries the Lord everywhere, are two divisions of the Säma Veda known as båhat
and rathäntara. Garuòa works as the carrier of the Lord; therefore he is considered the
transcendental prince of all carriers. With his two wings Garuòa began to vibrate the
Säma Veda, which is chanted by great sages to pacify the Lord. The Lord is worshiped by
Brahmä, by Lord Çiva, by Garuòa and other demigods with selected poems, and great
sages worship Him with the hymns of Vedic literatures, such as the Upaniñads and Säma
Veda. These Säma Veda utterances are automatically heard by the devotee when
another great devotee of the Lord, Garuòa, flaps his wings.
It is clearly stated here that the sage Kardama began to look to the path by which the
Lord was being carried to Vaikuëöha. It is thus confirmed that the Lord descends from
His abode, Vaikuëöha, in the spiritual sky, and is carried by Garuòa. The path which
leads to Vaikuëöha is not worshiped by the ordinary class of transcendentalists. Only
those who are already liberated from material bondage can become devotees of the Lord.
Those who are not liberated from material bondage cannot understand transcendental
devotional service. In Bhagavad-gétä it is clearly stated, yatatäm api siddhänäm [Bg. 7.3].
There are many persons who are trying to attain perfection by striving for liberation
from material bondage, and those who are actually liberated are called brahma-bhüta [SB
180
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
4.30.20] or siddha. Only the siddhas, or persons liberated from material bondage, can
become devotees. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä: anyone who is engaged in
Kåñëa consciousness, or devotional service, is already liberated from the influence of the
modes of material nature. Here it is also confirmed that the path of devotional service is
worshiped by liberated persons, not the conditioned souls. The conditioned soul cannot
understand the devotional service of the Lord. Kardama Muni was a liberated soul who
saw the Supreme Lord in person, face to face. There was no doubt that he was liberated,
and thus he could see Garuòa carrying the Lord on the way to Vaikuëöha and hear the
flapping of his wings vibrating the sound of Hare Kåñëa, the essence of the Säma Veda.
SB 3.21.35
TEXT 35
AQa SaMPa[iSQaTae éu(c)e- k-dRMaae >aGavaNa*iz" )
AaSTae SMa ibNduSariSa Ta& k-al&/ Pa[iTaPaal/YaNa( )) 35 ))
atha samprasthite çukle
kardamo bhagavän åñiù
äste sma bindusarasi
taà kälaà pratipälayan
SYNONYMS
atha—then; samprasthite çukle—when the Lord had gone; kardamaù—Kardama Muni;
bhagavän—the greatly powerful; åñiù—sage; äste sma—stayed; bindu-sarasi—on the
bank of Lake Bindu-sarovara; tam—that; kälam—time; pratipälayan—awaiting.
TRANSLATION
Then, after the departure of the Lord, the worshipful sage Kardama stayed on the bank of
Bindu-sarovara, awaiting the time of which the Lord had spoken.
SB 3.21.36
TEXT 36
MaNau" SYaNdNaMaaSQaaYa XaaTak-aEM>aPairC^dMa( )
AaraePYa Sva& duihTar& Sa>aaYaR" PaYaR$=NMahqMa( )) 36 ))
181
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
manuù syandanam ästhäya
çätakaumbha-paricchadam
äropya sväà duhitaraà
sa-bhäryaù paryaöan mahém
SYNONYMS
manuù—Sväyambhuva Manu; syandanam—the chariot; ästhäya—having mounted;
çätakaumbha—made of gold; paricchadam—the outer cover; äropya—putting on;
sväm—his own; duhitaram—daughter; sa-bhäryaù—along with his wife; paryaöan—
traveling all over; mahém—the globe.
TRANSLATION
Sväyambhuva Manu, with his wife, mounted his chariot, which was decorated with
golden ornaments. Placing his daughter on it with them, he began traveling all over the
earth.
PURPORT
The Emperor Manu, as the great ruler of the world, could have engaged an agent to find
a suitable husband for his daughter, but because he loved her just as a father should, he
himself left his state on a golden chariot, with only his wife, to find her a suitable
husband.
SB 3.21.37
TEXT 37
TaiSMaNa( SauDaNvàhiNa >aGavaNa( YaTSaMaaidXaTa( )
oPaaYaadaé[MaPad& MauNae" XaaNTav]TaSYa TaTa( )) 37 ))
tasmin sudhanvann ahani
bhagavän yat samädiçat
upäyäd äçrama-padaà
muneù çänta-vratasya tat
SYNONYMS
182
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tasmin—on that; su-dhanvan—O great bowman Vidura; ahani—on the day; bhagavän—
the Lord; yat—which; samädiçat—foretold; upäyät—he reached; äçrama-padam—the
holy hermitage; muneù—of the sage; çänta—completed; vratasya—whose vows of
austerity; tat—that.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, they reached the hermitage of the sage, who had just completed his vows of
austerity on the very day foretold by the Lord.
SB 3.21.38, SB 3.21.39, SB 3.21.38-39
TEXTS 38-39
YaiSMaNa( >aGavTaae Nae}aaNNYaPaTaàé[uibNdv" )
k*-PaYaa SaMParqTaSYa Pa[Paàe_iPaRTaYaa >a*XaMa( )) 38 ))
TaÜE ibNduSarae NaaMa SarSvTYaa PairPl/uTaMa( )
Pau<Ya& iXavaMa*TaJal&/ MahizRGa<aSaeivTaMa( )) 39 ))
yasmin bhagavato neträn
nyapatann açru-bindavaù
kåpayä samparétasya
prapanne 'rpitayä bhåçam
tad vai bindusaro näma
sarasvatyä pariplutam
puëyaà çivämåta-jalaà
maharñi-gaëa-sevitam
SYNONYMS
yasmin—in which; bhagavataù—of the Lord; neträt—from the eye; nyapatan—fell
down; açru-bindavaù—teardrops; kåpayä—by compassion; samparétasya—who was
overwhelmed; prapanne—on the surrendered soul (Kardama); arpitayä—placed upon;
bhåçam—extremely; tat—that; vai—indeed; bindu-saraù—lake of tears; näma—called;
sarasvatyä—by the River Sarasvaté; pariplutam—overflowed; puëyam—holy; çiva—
auspicious; amåta—nectar; jalam—water; mahä-åñi—of great sages; gaëa—by hosts;
sevitam—served.
183
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The holy Lake Bindu-sarovara, flooded by the waters of the River Sarasvaté, was resorted
to by hosts of eminent sages. Its holy water was not only auspicious but as sweet as
nectar. It was called Bindu-sarovara because drops of tears had fallen there from the eyes
of the Lord, who was overwhelmed by extreme compassion for the sage who had sought
His protection.
PURPORT
Kardama underwent austerities to gain the causeless mercy of the Lord, and when the
Lord arrived there He was so compassionate that in pleasure He shed tears, which
became Bindu-sarovara. Bindu-sarovara, therefore, is worshiped by great sages and
learned scholars because, according to the philosophy of the Absolute Truth, the Lord
and the tears from His eyes are not different. Just as drops of perspiration which fell
from the toe of the Lord became the sacred Ganges, so teardrops from the
transcendental eyes of the Lord became Bindu-sarovara. Both are transcendental
entities and are worshiped by great sages and scholars. The water of Bindu-sarovara is
described here as çivämåta jala. Çiva means "curing." Anyone who drinks the water of
Bindu-sarovara is cured of all material diseases; similarly, anyone who takes his bath in
the Ganges also is relieved of all material diseases. These claims are accepted by great
scholars and authorities and are still being acted upon even in this fallen age of Kali.
SB 3.21.40
TEXT 40
Pau<Yad]uMal/TaaJaalE/" kU-JaTPau<YaMa*GaiÜJaE" )
SavRTauRf-l/PauZPaa!y& vNaraiJaié[YaaiNvTaMa( )) 40 ))
puëya-druma-latä-jälaiù
küjat-puëya-måga-dvijaiù
sarvartu-phala-puñpäòhyaà
vana-räji-çriyänvitam
SYNONYMS
puëya—pious; druma—of trees; latä—of creepers; jälaiù—with clusters; küjat—uttering
cries; puëya—pious; måga—animals; dvijaiù—with birds; sarva—in all; åtu—seasons;
184
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
phala—in fruits; puñpa—in flowers; äòhyam—rich; vana-räji—of groves of trees; çriyä—
by the beauty; anvitam—adorned.
TRANSLATION
The shore of the lake was surrounded by clusters of pious trees and creepers, rich in
fruits and flowers of all seasons, that afforded shelter to pious animals and birds, which
uttered various cries. It was adorned by the beauty of groves of forest trees.
PURPORT
It is stated here that Bindu-sarovara was surrounded by pious trees and birds. As there
are different classes of men in human society, some pious and virtuous and some impious
and sinful, so also among trees and birds there are the pious and the impious. Trees
which do not bear nice fruit or flowers are considered impious, and birds which are very
nasty, such as crows, are considered impious. In the land surrounding Bindu-sarovara
there was not a single impious bird or tree. Every tree bore fruits and flowers, and every
bird sang the glories of the Lord—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/
Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare.
SB 3.21.41
TEXT 41
MataiÜJaGa<aEgauRí& Mata>a]Mariv>a]MaMa( )
MatabihRNa$=a$=aePaMaaûYaNMatak-aeik-l/Ma( )) 41 ))
matta-dvija-gaëair ghuñöaà
matta-bhramara-vibhramam
matta-barhi-naöäöopam
ähvayan-matta-kokilam
SYNONYMS
matta—overjoyed; dvija—of birds; gaëaiù—by flocks; ghuñöam—resounded; matta—
intoxicated; bhramara—of bees; vibhramam—wandering; matta—maddened; barhi—of
peacocks; naöa—of dancers; äöopam—pride; ähvayat—calling one another; matta—
merry; kokilam—cuckoos.
185
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The area resounded with the notes of overjoyed birds. Intoxicated bees wandered there,
intoxicated peacocks proudly danced, and merry cuckoos called one another.
PURPORT
The beauty of the pleasant sounds heard in the area surrounding Lake Bindu-sarovara is
described here. After drinking honey, the black bees became maddened, and they
hummed in intoxication. Merry peacocks danced just like actors and actresses, and
merry cuckoos called their mates very nicely.
SB 3.21.42-43
TEXTS 42-43
k-dMbcMPak-aXaaek-k-rÅbku-l/aSaNaE" )
ku-NdMaNdarku-$=JaEêUTaPaaeTaErl/x(k*-TaMa( )) 42 ))
k-ar<@vE" âvEh|SaE" ku-rrEJaRl/ku-Kku-$E=" )
SaarSaEê§-vakE-ê ck-aerEvRLGau kU-iJaTaMa( )) 43 ))
kadamba-campakäçokakaraïja-
bakuläsanaiù
kunda-mandära-kuöajaiç
cüta-potair alaìkåtam
käraëòavaiù plavair haàsaiù
kurarair jala-kukkuöaiù
särasaiç cakraväkaiç ca
cakorair valgu küjitam
SYNONYMS
kadamba—kadamba flowers; campaka—campaka flowers; açoka—açoka flowers;
karaïja—karaïja flowers; bakula—bakula flowers; äsanaiù—by äsana trees; kunda—
kunda; mandära-mandära; kuöajaiù—and by kuöaja trees; cüta-potaiù—by young mango
trees; alaìkåtam—adorned; käraëòavaiù—by käraëòava ducks; plavaiù—by plavas;
haàsaiù—by swans; kuraraiù—by ospreys; jala-kukkuöaiù—by waterfowl; särasaiù—by
cranes; cakraväkaiù—by cakraväka birds; ca—and; cakoraiù—by cakora birds; valgu—
186
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
pleasing; küjitam—vibration of birds' sounds.
TRANSLATION
Lake Bindu-sarovara was adorned by flowering trees such as kadamba, campaka, açoka,
karaïja, bakula, äsana, kunda, mandära, kuöaja and young mango trees. The air was filled
with the pleasing notes of käraëòava ducks, plavas, swans, ospreys, waterfowl, cranes,
cakraväkas and cakoras.
PURPORT
For most of the trees, flowers, fruits and birds mentioned here as surrounding Bindusarovara
Lake, English synonyms cannot be found. All the trees mentioned are very
pious in that they produce a nice aromatic flower, such as the campaka, kadamba and
bakula. The sweet sounds of waterfowl and cranes made the surrounding area as pleasant
as possible and created a very suitable spiritual atmosphere.
SB 3.21.44
TEXT 44
TaQaEv hir<aE" §-ae@E" ìaivÓvYaku-ÅrE" )
GaaePauC^EhRiri>aMaRkOE-NaRku-lE/NaaRi>ai>av*RTaMa( )) 44 ))
tathaiva hariëaiù kroòaiù
çvävid-gavaya-kuïjaraiù
gopucchair haribhir markair
nakulair näbhibhir våtam
SYNONYMS
tathä eva—likewise; hariëaiù—by deer; kroòaiù—by boars; çvävit—porcupines; gavaya—
a wild animal closely resembling the cow; kuïjaraiù—by elephants; gopucchaiù—by
baboons; haribhiù—by lions; markaiù—by monkeys; nakulaiù—by mongooses;
näbhibhiù—by musk deer; våtam—surrounded.
TRANSLATION
Its shores abounded with deer, boars, porcupines, gavayas, elephants, baboons, lions,
187
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
monkeys, mongooses and musk deer.
PURPORT
Musk deer are not found in every forest, but only in places like Bindu-sarovara. They are
always intoxicated by the aroma of musk secreted from their navels. Gavayas, the species
of cow mentioned herein, bear a bunch of hair at the end of their tails. This bunch of
hair is used in temple worship to fan the Deities. Gavayas are sometimes called camarés,
and they are considered very sacred. In India there are still gypsies or forest mercantile
people who flourish by trading kastüré, or musk, and the bunches of hair from the
camarés. These are always in great demand for the higher classes of Hindu population,
and such business still goes on in large cities and villages in India.
SB 3.21.45, SB 3.21.46, SB 3.21.47, SB 3.21.45-47
TEXTS 45-47
Pa[ivXYa TataqQaRvrMaaidraJa" SahaTMaJa" )
ddXaR MauiNaMaaSaqNa& TaiSMaNa( huTahuTaaXaNaMa( )) 45 ))
ivÛaeTaMaaNa& vPauza TaPaSYauGa]YauJaa icrMa( )
NaaiTa+aaMa& >aGavTa" iòGDaaPaa(r)avl/aek-NaaTa( )
TaÜyaôTaaMa*Tak-l/aPaqYaUzé[v<aeNa c )) 46 ))
Pa[a&éu& PaÚPal/aXaa+a& Jai$=l&/ cqrvaSaSaMa( )
oPaSa&ié[TYa Mail/Na& YaQaahR<aMaSa&Sk*-TaMa( )) 47 ))
praviçya tat tértha-varam
ädi-räjaù sahätmajaù
dadarça munim äsénaà
tasmin huta-hutäçanam
vidyotamänaà vapuñä
tapasy ugra-yujä ciram
nätikñämaà bhagavataù
snigdhäpäìgävalokanät
tad-vyähåtämåta-kaläpéyüña-
çravaëena ca
188
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
präàçuà padma-paläçäkñaà
jaöilaà céra-väsasam
upasaàçritya malinaà
yathärhaëam asaàskåtam
SYNONYMS
praviçya—entering; tat—that; tértha-varam—best of sacred places; ädi-räjaù—the first
monarch (Sväyambhuva Manu); saha-ätmajaù—along with his daughter; dadarça—saw;
munim—the sage; äsénam—sitting; tasmin—in the hermitage; huta—being offered
oblations; huta-açanam—the sacred fire; vidyotamänam—shining brilliantly; vapuñä—by
his body; tapasi—in penance; ugra—terribly; yujä—engaged in yoga; ciram—for a long
time; na—not; atikñämam—very emaciated; bhagavataù—of the Lord; snigdha—
affectionate; apäìga—sidelong; avalokanät—from the glance; tat—of Him; vyähåta—
from the words; amåta-kalä—moonlike; péyüña—the nectar; çravaëena—by hearing;
ca—and; präàçum—tall; padma—lotus flower; paläça—petal; akñam—eyes; jaöilam—
matted locks; céra-väsasam—having rags for clothes; upasaàçritya—having approached;
malinam—soiled; yathä—like; arhaëam—gem; asaàskåtam—unpolished.
TRANSLATION
Entering that most sacred spot with his daughter and going near the sage, the first
monarch, Sväyambhuva Manu, saw the sage sitting in his hermitage, having just
propitiated the sacred fire by pouring oblations into it. His body shone most brilliantly;
though he had engaged in austere penance for a long time, he was not emaciated, for the
Lord had cast His affectionate sidelong glance upon him and he had also heard the nectar
flowing from the moonlike words of the Lord. The sage was tall, his eyes were large, like
the petals of a lotus, and he had matted locks on his head. He was clad in rags.
Sväyambhuva Manu approached and saw him to be somewhat soiled, like an unpolished
gem.
PURPORT
Here are some descriptions of a brahmacäré-yogé. In the morning, the first duty of a
brahmacäré seeking spiritual elevation is huta-hutäçana, to offer sacrificial oblations to
the Supreme Lord. Those engaged in brahmacarya cannot sleep until seven or nine
o'clock in the morning. They must rise early in the morning, at least one and a half
189
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
hours before the sun rises, and offer oblations, or in this age, they must chant the holy
name of the Lord, Hare Kåñëa. As referred to by Lord Caitanya, kalau nästy eva nästy
eva nästy eva gatir anyathä: there is no other alternative, no other alternative, no other
alternative, in this age, to chanting the holy name of the Lord. The brahmacäré must rise
early in the morning and, after placing himself, should chant the holy name of the Lord.
From the very features of the sage, it appeared that he had undergone great austerities;
that is the sign of one observing brahmacarya, the vow of celibacy. If one lives otherwise,
it will be manifest in the lust visible in his face and body. The word vidyotamänam
indicates that the brahmacäré feature showed in his body. That is the certificate that one
has undergone great austerity in yoga. A drunkard or smoker or sex-monger can never
be eligible to practice yoga. Generally yogés look very skinny because of their not being
comfortably situated, but Kardama Muni was not emaciated, for he had seen the
Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face. Here the word snigdhäpäìgävalokanät
means that he was fortunate enough to see the Supreme Lord face to face. He looked
healthy because he had directly received the nectarean sound vibrations from the lotus
lips of the Personality of Godhead. Similarly, one who hears the transcendental sound
vibration of the holy name of the Lord, Hare Kåñëa, also improves in health. We have
actually seen that many brahmacärés and gåhasthas connected with the International
Society for Krishna Consciousness have improved in health, and a luster has come to
their faces. It is essential that a brahmacäré engaged in spiritual advancement look very
healthy and lustrous. The comparison of the sage to an unpolished gem is very
appropriate. Even if a gem just taken from a mine looks unpolished, the luster of the gem
cannot be stopped. Similarly, although Kardama was not properly dressed and his body
was not properly cleansed, his overall appearance was gemlike.
SB 3.21.48
TEXT 48
AQaae$=JaMauPaaYaaTa& Na*dev& Pa[<aTa& Paur" )
SaPaYaRYaa PaYaRGa*õaTPa[iTaNaNÛaNauæPaYaa )) 48 ))
athoöajam upäyätaà
nådevaà praëataà puraù
saparyayä paryagåhëät
pratinandyänurüpayä
190
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
atha—then; uöajam—the hermitage; upäyätam—approached; nådevam—the monarch;
praëatam—bowed down; puraù—in front; saparyayä—with honor; paryagåhëät—
received him; pratinandya—greeting him; anurüpayä—befitting the King's position.
TRANSLATION
Seeing that the monarch had come to his hermitage and was bowing before him, the sage
greeted him with benediction and received him with due honor.
PURPORT
Emperor Sväyambhuva Manu not only approached the cottage of dried leaves possessed
by the hermit Kardama but also offered respectful obeisances unto him. Similarly, it was
the duty of the hermit to offer blessings to kings who used to approach his hermitage in
the jungle.
SB 3.21.49
TEXT 49
Ga*hqTaahR<aMaaSaqNa& Sa&YaTa& Pa[q<aYaNMauiNa" )
SMarNa( >aGavdadeXaiMaTYaah ë+<aYaa iGara )) 49 ))
gåhétärhaëam äsénaà
saàyataà préëayan muniù
smaran bhagavad-ädeçam
ity äha çlakñëayä girä
SYNONYMS
gåhéta—received; arhaëam—honor; äsénam—seated; saàyatam—remained silent;
préëayan—delighting; muniù—the sage; smaran—remembering; bhagavat—of the Lord;
ädeçam—the order; iti—thus; äha—spoke; çlakñëayä—sweet; girä—with a voice.
TRANSLATION
After receiving the sage's attention, the King sat down and was silent. Recalling the
instructions of the Lord, Kardama then spoke to the King as follows, delighting him with
191
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
his sweet accents.
SB 3.21.50
TEXT 50
NaUNa& cx(k]-Ma<a& dev SaTaa& Sa&r+a<aaYa Tae )
vDaaYa caSaTaa& YaSTv& hre" Xai¢-ihR Paail/Naq )) 50 ))
nünaà caìkramaëaà deva
satäà saàrakñaëäya te
vadhäya cäsatäà yas tvaà
hareù çaktir hi päliné
SYNONYMS
nünam—surely; caìkramaëam—the tour; deva—O lord; satäm—of the virtuous;
saàrakñaëäya—for the protection; te—your; vadhäya—for killing; ca—and; asatäm—of
the demons; yaù—the person who; tvam—you; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; çaktiù—the energy; hi—since; päliné—protecting.
TRANSLATION
The tour you have undertaken, O lord, is surely intended to protect the virtuous and kill
the demons, since you embody the protecting energy of Çré Hari.
PURPORT
It appears from many Vedic literatures, especially histories like Çrémad-Bhägavatam and
the puräëas, that the pious kings of old used to tour their kingdoms in order to give
protection to the pious citizens and to chastise or kill the impious. Sometimes they used
to kill animals in the forests to practice the killing art because without such practice
they would not be able to kill the undesirable elements. Kñatriyas are allowed to commit
violence in that way because violence for a good purpose is a part of their duty. Here two
terms are clearly mentioned: vadhäya, "for the purpose of killing," and asatäm, "those
who are undesirable." The protecting energy of the king is supposed to be the energy of
the Supreme Lord. In Bhagavad-gétä (4.8) the Lord says, pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya
ca duñkåtäm. The Lord descends to give protection to the pious and to kill the demons.
The potency, therefore, to give protection to the pious and kill the demons or
192
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
undesirables is directly an energy from the Supreme Lord, and the king or the chief
executive of the state is supposed to possess such energy. In this age it is very difficult to
find such a head of state who is expert in killing the undesirables. Modern heads of state
sit very nicely in their palaces and try without reason to kill innocent persons.
SB 3.21.51
TEXT 51
Yaae_keR-NÜGanqNd]vaYaUNaa& YaMaDaMaRPa[ceTaSaaMa( )
æPaai<a SQaaNa AaDaTSae TaSMaE éu(c)-aYa Tae NaMa" )) 51 ))
yo 'rkendv-agnéndra-väyünäà
yama-dharma-pracetasäm
rüpäëi sthäna ädhatse
tasmai çukläya te namaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—you who; arka—of the sun; indu—of the moon; agni—of Agni, the fire-god;
indra—of Indra, the lord of heaven; väyünäm—of Väyu, the wind-god; yama—of Yama,
the god of punishment; dharma—of Dharma, the god of piety; pracetasäm—and of
Varuëa, the god of the waters; rüpäëi—the forms; sthäne—when necessary; ädhatse—
you assume; tasmai—unto Him; çukläya—unto Lord Viñëu; te—unto you; namaù—
obeisances.
TRANSLATION
You assume, when necessary, the part of the sun-god; the moon-god; Agni, the god of
fire; Indra, the lord of paradise; Väyu, the wind-god; Yama, the god of punishment;
Dharma, the god of piety; and Varuëa, the god presiding over the waters. All obeisances
to you, who are none other than Lord Viñëu!
PURPORT
Since the sage Kardama was a brähmaëa and Sväyambhuva was a kñatriya, the sage was
not supposed to offer obeisances to the King because socially his position was greater
than the King's. But he offered his obeisances to Sväyambhuva Manu because as Manu,
king and emperor, he was the representative of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord is
193
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
always worshipable, regardless of whether one is a brähmaëa, a kñatriya or a çüdra. As
the representative of the Supreme Lord, the King deserved respectful obeisances from
everyone.
SB 3.21.52, SB 3.21.53, SB 3.21.54, SB 3.21.52-54
TEXTS 52-54
Na Yada rQaMaaSQaaYa JaE}a& Mai<aGa<aaiPaRTaMa( )
ivSfU-JaRÀ<@k-aed<@ae rQaeNa }aaSaYaàgaaNa( )) 52 ))
SvSaENYacr<a+au<<a& vePaYaNMa<@l&/ >auv" )
ivk-zRNa( b*hTaq& SaeNaa& PaYaR$=SYa&éuMaaiNav )) 53 ))
TadEv SaeTav" SaveR v<aaRé[MaiNabNDaNaa" )
>aGavd]icTaa raJaNa( i>aÛerNa( bTa dSYaui>a" )) 54 ))
na yadä ratham ästhäya
jaitraà maëi-gaëärpitam
visphürjac-caëòa-kodaëòo
rathena träsayann aghän
sva-sainya-caraëa-kñuëëaà
vepayan maëòalaà bhuvaù
vikarñan båhatéà senäà
paryaöasy aàçumän iva
tadaiva setavaù sarve
varëäçrama-nibandhanäù
bhagavad-racitä räjan
bhidyeran bata dasyubhiù
SYNONYMS
na—not; yadä—when; ratham—the chariot; ästhäya—having mounted; jaitram—
victorious; maëi—of jewels; gaëa—with clusters; arpitam—bedecked; visphürjat—
twanging; caëòa—a fearful sound just to punish the criminals; kodaëòaù—bow;
rathena—by the presence of such a chariot; träsayan—threatening; aghän—all the
culprits; sva-sainya—of your soldiers; caraëa—by the feet; kñuëëam—trampled;
vepayan—causing to tremble; maëòalam—the globe; bhuvaù—of the earth; vikarñan—
194
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
leading; båhatém—huge; senäm—army; paryaöasi—you roam about; aàçumän—the
brilliant sun; iva—like; tadä—then; eva—certainly; setavaù—religious codes; sarve—all;
varëa—of varëas; äçrama—of äçramas; nibandhanäù—obligations; bhagavat—by the
Lord; racitäù—created; räjan—O King; bhidyeran—they would be broken; bata—alas;
dasyubhiù—by rogues.
TRANSLATION
If you did not mount your victorious jeweled chariot, whose mere presence threatens
culprits, if you did not produce fierce sounds by the twanging of your bow, and if you did
not roam about the world like the brilliant sun, leading a huge army whose trampling feet
cause the globe of the earth to tremble, then all the moral laws governing the varëas and
äçramas created by the Lord Himself would be broken by the rogues and rascals.
PURPORT
It is the duty of a responsible king to protect the social and spiritual orders in human
society. The spiritual orders are divided into four äçramas-brahmacarya, gåhastha,
vänaprastha and sannyäsa—and the social orders, according to work and qualification,
are made up of the brähmaëas, the kñatriyas, the vaiçyas and the çüdras. These social
orders, according to the different grades of work and qualification, are described in
Bhagavad-gétä. Unfortunately, for want of proper protection by responsible kings, the
system of social and spiritual orders has now become a hereditary caste system. But this
is not the actual system. Human society means that society which is making progress
toward spiritual realization. The most advanced human society was known as ärya; ärya
refers to those who are advancing. So the question is, "Which society is advancing?"
Advancement does not mean creating material "necessities" unnecessarily and thus
wasting human energy in aggravation over so-called material comforts. Real
advancement is advancement toward spiritual realization, and the community which
acted toward this end was known as the Äryan civilization. The intelligent men, the
brähmaëas, as exemplified by Kardama Muni, were engaged in advancing the spiritual
cause, and kñatriyas like Emperor Sväyambhuva used to rule the country and insure that
all facilities for spiritual realization were nicely provided. It is the duty of the king to
travel all over the country and see that everything is in order. Indian civilization on the
basis of the four varëas and äçramas deteriorated because of her dependency on
foreigners, or those who did not follow the civilization of varëäçrama. Thus the
varëäçrama system has now been degraded into the caste system.
195
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The institution of four varëas and four äçramas is confirmed herewith to be bhagavadracita,
which means "designed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead." In Bhagavadgétä
this is also confirmed: cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöam [Bg. 4.13]. The Lord says that the
institution of four varëas and four äçramas "is created by Me." Anything created by the
Lord cannot be closed or covered. The divisions of varëas and äçramas will continue to
exist, either in their original form or in degraded form, but because they are created by
the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they cannot be extinguished. They are
like the sun, a creation of God, and therefore will remain. Either covered by clouds or in
a clear sky, the sun will continue to exist. Similarly, when the varëäçrama system
becomes degraded, it appears as a hereditary caste system, but in every society there is an
intelligent class of men, a martial class, a mercantile class and a laborer class. When they
are regulated for cooperation among communities according to the Vedic principles,
then there is peace and spiritual advancement. But when there is hatred and
malpractice and mutual mistrust in the caste system, the whole system becomes
degraded, and as stated herein, it creates a deplorable state. At the present moment, the
entire world is in this deplorable condition because of giving rights to so many interests.
This is due to the degradation of the four castes of varëas and äçramas.
SB 3.21.55
TEXT 55
ADaMaRê SaMaeDaeTa l/aelu/PaEVYaRx(ku-XaENa*Ri>a" )
XaYaaNae TviYa l/aek-ae_Ya& dSYauGa]STaae ivNa&+YaiTa )) 55 ))
adharmaç ca samedheta
lolupair vyaìkuçair nåbhiù
çayäne tvayi loko 'yaà
dasyu-grasto vinaìkñyati
SYNONYMS
adharmaù—unrighteousness; ca—and; samedheta—would flourish; lolupaiù—simply
hankering after money; vyaìkuçaiù—uncontrolled; nåbhiù—by men; çayäne tvayi—
when you lie down for rest; lokaù—world; ayam—this; dasyu—by the miscreants;
grastaù—attacked; vinaìkñyati—it will perish.
TRANSLATION
196
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
If you gave up all thought of the world's situation, unrighteousness would flourish, for
men who hanker only after money would be unopposed. Such miscreants would attack,
and the world would perish.
PURPORT
Because the scientific division of four varëas and four äçramas is now being
extinguished, the entire world is being governed by unwanted men who have no
training in religion, politics or social order, and it is in a very deplorable condition. In
the institution of four varëas and four äçramas there are regular training principles for
the different classes of men. Just as, in the modern age, there is a necessity for engineers,
medical practitioners and electricians, and they are properly trained in different
scientific institutions, similarly, in former times, the higher social orders, namely the
intelligent class (the brähmaëas), the ruling class (the kñatriyas) and the mercantile class
(the vaiçyas), were properly trained. Bhagavad-gétä describes the duties of the
brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras. When there is no such training, one simply
claims that because he is born in a brähmaëa or kñatriya family, he is therefore a
brähmaëa or a kñatriya, even though he performs the duties of a çüdra. Such undue
claims to being a higher-caste man make the system of scientific social orders into a
caste system, completely degrading the original system. Thus society is now in chaos, and
there is neither peace nor prosperity. It is clearly stated herein that unless there is the
vigilance of a strong king, impious, unqualified men will claim a certain status in society,
and that will make the social order perish.
SB 3.21.56
TEXT 56
AQaaiPa Pa*C^e Tva& vqr YadQa| TviMahaGaTa" )
TaÜYa& iNaVYaRl/Ike-Na Pa[iTaPaÛaMahe ôda )) 56 ))
athäpi påcche tväà véra
yad-arthaà tvam ihägataù
tad vayaà nirvyalékena
pratipadyämahe hådä
SYNONYMS
197
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
atha api—in spite of all this; påcche—I ask; tväm—you; véra—O valiant King; yatartham—
the purpose; tvam—you; iha—here; ägataù—have come; tat—that; vayam—
we; nirvyalékena—without reservation; pratipadyämahe—we shall carry out; hådä—with
heart and soul.
TRANSLATION
In spite of all this, I ask you, O valiant King, the purpose for which you have come here.
Whatever it may be, we shall carry it out without reservation.
PURPORT
When a guest comes to a friend's house, it is understood that there is some special
purpose. Kardama Muni could understand that such a great king as Sväyambhuva,
although traveling to inspect the condition of his kingdom, must have had some special
purpose to come to his hermitage. Thus he prepared himself to fulfill the King's desire.
Formerly it was customary that the sages used to go to the kings and the kings used to
visit the sages in their hermitages; each was glad to fulfill the other's purpose. This
reciprocal relationship is called bhakti-kärya. There is a nice verse describing the
relationship of mutual beneficial interest between the brähmaëa and the kñatriya
(kñatraà dvijatvam). Kñatram means "the royal order," and dvijatvam means "the
brahminical order." The two were meant for mutual interest. The royal order would give
protection to the brähmaëas for the cultivation of spiritual advancement in society, and
the brähmaëas would give their valuable instruction to the royal order on how the state
and the citizens can gradually be elevated in spiritual perfection.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Twenty-first Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Conversation Between Manu and Kardama."
SB 3.22: The Marriage of Kardama Muni and Devahüti
22. The Marriage of Kardama Muni and Devahüti
SB 3.22.1
TEXT 1
198
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
MaE}aeYa ovac
WvMaaivZk*-TaaXaezGau<ak-MaaeRdYaae MauiNaMa( )
Sav]q@ wv Ta& SaMa]a@uPaarTaMauvac h )) 1 ))
maitreya uväca
evam äviñkåtäçeñaguëa-
karmodayo munim
savréòa iva taà samräò
upäratam uväca ha
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù—the great sage Maitreya; uväca—said; evam—thus; äviñkåta—having been
described; açeña—all; guëa—of the virtues; karma—of the activities; udayaù—the
greatness; munim—the great sage; sa-vréòaù—feeling modest; iva—as though; tam—him
(Kardama); samräö—Emperor Manu; upäratam—silent; uväca ha—addressed.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: After describing the greatness of the Emperor's manifold qualities and
activities, the sage became silent, and the Emperor, feeling modesty, addressed him as
follows.
SB 3.22.2
TEXT 2
MaNauåvac
b]øaSa*JaTSvMau%Taae YauZMaaNaaTMaParqPSaYaa )
^NdaeMaYaSTaPaaeivÛaYaaeGaYau¢-aNal/MPa$=aNa( )) 2 ))
manur uväca
brahmäsåjat sva-mukhato
yuñmän ätma-parépsayä
chandomayas tapo-vidyäyoga-
yuktän alampaöän
199
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
manuù—Manu; uväca—said; brahmä—Lord Brahmä; asåjat—created; sva-mukhataù—
from his face; yuñmän—you (brähmaëas); ätma-parépsayä—to protect himself by
expanding; chandaù-mayaù—the form of the Vedas; tapaù-vidyä-yoga-yuktän—full of
austerity, knowledge and mystic power; alampaöän—averse to sense gratification.
TRANSLATION
Manu replied: To expand himself in Vedic knowledge, Lord Brahmä, the personified
Veda, from his face created you, the brähmaëas, who are full of austerity, knowledge and
mystic power and are averse to sense gratification.
PURPORT
The purpose of the Vedas is to propagate the transcendental knowledge of the Absolute
Truth. The brähmaëas were created from the mouth of the Supreme Person, and
therefore they are meant to spread the knowledge of the Vedas in order to spread the
glories of the Lord. In Bhagavad-gétä also Lord Kåñëa says that all the Vedas are meant
for understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is especially mentioned here
(yoga-yuktän alampaöän) that brähmaëas are full of mystic power and are completely
averse to sense gratification. Actually there are two kinds of occupations. One
occupation, in the material world, is sense gratification, and the other occupation is
spiritual activity—to satisfy the Lord by His glorification. Those who engage in sense
gratification are called demons, and those who spread the glorification of the Lord or
satisfy the transcendental senses of the Lord are called demigods. It is specifically
mentioned here that the brähmaëas are created from the face of the cosmic personality,
or viräö-puruña; similarly the kñatriyas are said to be created from His arms, the vaiçyas
are created from His waist, and the çüdras are created from His legs. Brähmaëas are
especially meant for austerity, learning and knowledge and are averse to all kinds of
sense gratification.
SB 3.22.3
TEXT 3
TaT}aa<aaYaaSa*JaÀaSMaaNdae"SahóaTSahóPaaTa( )
ôdYa& TaSYa ih b]ø +a}aMa(r)& Pa[c+aTae )) 3 ))
200
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tat-träëäyäsåjac cäsmän
doù-sahasrät sahasra-pät
hådayaà tasya hi brahma
kñatram aìgaà pracakñate
SYNONYMS
tat-träëäya—for the protection of the brähmaëas; asåjat—created; ca—and; asmän—us
(kñatriyas); doù-sahasrät—from His thousand arms; sahasra-pät—the thousand-legged
Supreme Being (the universal form); hådayam—heart; tasya—His; hi—for; brahma—
brähmaëas; kñatram—the kñatriyas; aìgam—arms; pracakñate—are spoken of.
TRANSLATION
For the protection of the brähmaëas, the thousand-legged Supreme Being created us, the
kñatriyas, from His thousand arms. Hence the brähmaëas are said to be His heart and the
kñatriyas His arms.
PURPORT
Kñatriyas are specifically meant to maintain the brähmaëas because if the brähmaëas are
protected, then the head of civilization is protected. Brähmaëas are supposed to be the
head of the social body; if the head is clear and has not gone mad, then everything is in
proper position. The Lord is described thus: namo brahmaëya-deväya go-brähmaëahitäya
ca. The purport of this prayer is that the Lord specifically protects the brähmaëas
and the cows, and then He protects all other members of society (jagad-dhitäya). It is His
will that universal welfare work depends on the protection of cows and brähmaëas; thus
brahminical culture and cow protection are the basic principles for human civilization.
Kñatriyas are especially meant to protect the brähmaëas, as is the supreme will of the
Lord: go-brähmaëa-hitäya ca. As, within the body, the heart is a very important part, so
the brähmaëas are also the important element in human society. The kñatriyas are more
like the whole body; even though the whole body is bigger than the heart, the heart is
more important.
SB 3.22.4
TEXT 4
ATaae ùNYaaeNYaMaaTMaaNa& b]ø +a}a& c r+aTa" )
201
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
r+aiTa SMaaVYaYaae dev" Sa Ya" SadSadaTMak-" )) 4 ))
ato hy anyonyam ätmänaà
brahma kñatraà ca rakñataù
rakñati smävyayo devaù
sa yaù sad-asad-ätmakaù
SYNONYMS
ataù—hence; hi—certainly; anyonyam—each other; ätmänam—the self; brahma—the
brähmaëas; kñatram—the kñatriyas; ca—and; rakñataù—protect; rakñati sma—protects;
avyayaù—immutable; devaù—the Lord; saù—He; yaù—who; sat-asat-ätmakaù—the
form of the cause and effect.
TRANSLATION
That is why the brähmaëas and kñatriyas protect each other, as well as themselves; and
the Lord Himself, who is both the cause and effect and is yet immutable, protects them
through each other.
PURPORT
The entire social structure of varëa and äçrama is a cooperative system meant to uplift
all to the highest platform of spiritual realization. The brähmaëas are intended to be
protected by the kñatriyas, and the kñatriyas also are intended to be enlightened by the
brähmaëas. When the brähmaëas and kñatriyas cooperate nicely, the other subordinate
divisions, the vaiçyas, or mercantile people, and the çüdras, or laborer class,
automatically flourish. The entire elaborate system of Vedic society was therefore based
on the importance of the brähmaëas and kñatriyas. The Lord is the real protector, but
He is unattached to the affairs of protection. He creates brähmaëas for the protection of
the kñatriyas, and kñatriyas for the protection of the brähmaëas. He remains aloof from
all activities; therefore, He is called nirvikära, "without activity." He has nothing to do.
He is so great that He does not perform action personally, but His energies act. The
brähmaëas and kñatriyas, and anything that we see, are different energies acting upon
one another.
Although individual souls are all different, the Superself, or Supersoul, is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Individually one's self may differ from others in certain
202
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
qualities and may engage in different activities, such as those of a brähmaëa, kñatriya or
vaiçya, but when there is complete cooperation among different individual souls, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as Supersoul, Paramätmä, being one in every
individual soul, is pleased and gives them all protection. As stated before, the brähmaëas
are produced from the mouth of the Lord, and the kñatriyas are produced from the chest
or arms of the Lord. If the different castes or social sections, although apparently
differently occupied in different activities, nevertheless act in full cooperation, then the
Lord is pleased. This is the idea of the institution of four varëas and four äçramas. If the
members of different äçramas and varëas cooperate fully in Kåñëa consciousness, then
society is well protected by the Lord, without doubt.
In Bhagavad-gétä it is stated that the Lord is the proprietor of all different bodies. The
individual soul is the proprietor of his individual body, but the Lord clearly states, "My
dear Bhärata, you must know that I am also kñetra jïa. " Kñetra jïa means "the knower or
proprietor of the body." The individual soul is the proprietor of the individual body, but
the Supersoul, the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is the proprietor of all bodies
everywhere. He is the proprietor not only of human bodies but of birds, beasts and all
other entities, not only on this planet but on other planets also. He is the supreme
proprietor; therefore He does not become divided by protecting the different individual
souls. He remains one and the same. That the sun appears on top of everyone's head
when at the meridian does not imply that the sun becomes divided. One man thinks
that the sun is on his head only, whereas five thousand miles away another man is
thinking that the sun is only on his head. Similarly, the Supersoul, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is one, but He appears to individually oversee each individual
soul. This does not mean that the individual soul and the Supersoul are one. They are
one in quality, as spirit soul, but the individual soul and Supersoul are different.
SB 3.22.5
TEXT 5
Tav SaNdXaRNaadeviC^àa Mae SavRSa&XaYaa" )
YaTSvYa& >aGavaNa( Pa[qTYaa DaMaRMaah irri+azae" )) 5 ))
tava sandarçanäd eva
cchinnä me sarva-saàçayäù
yat svayaà bhagavän prétyä
dharmam äha rirakñiñoù
203
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
tava—your; sandarçanät—by sight; eva—only; chinnäù—resolved; me—my; sarvasaàçayäù—
all doubts; yat—inasmuch as; svayam—personally; bhagavän—Your
Lordship; prétyä—lovingly; dharmam—duty; äha—explained; rirakñiñoù—of a king
anxious to protect his subjects.
TRANSLATION
Now I have resolved all my doubts simply by meeting you, for Your Lordship has very
kindly and clearly explained the duty of a king who desires to protect his subjects.
PURPORT
Manu described herewith the result of seeing a great saintly person. Lord Caitanya says
that one should always try to associate with saintly persons because if one establishes a
proper association with a saintly person, even for a moment, one attains all perfection.
Somehow or other, if one meets a saintly person and achieves his favor, then the entire
mission of one's human life is fulfilled. In our personal experience we have actual proof
of this statement of Manu. Once we had the opportunity to meet Viñëupäda Çré Çrémad
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Gosvämé Mahäräja, and on first sight he requested this
humble self to preach his message in the Western countries. There was no preparation
for this, but somehow or other he desired it, and by his grace we are now engaged in
executing his order, which has given us a transcendental occupation and has saved and
liberated us from the occupation of material activities. Thus it is actually a fact that if
one meets a saintly person completely engaged in transcendental duties and achieves his
favor, then one's life mission becomes complete. What is not possible to achieve in
thousands of lives can be achieved in one moment if there is an opportunity to meet a
saintly person. It is therefore enjoined in Vedic literature that one should always try to
associate with saintly persons and try to disassociate oneself from the common man,
because by one word of a saintly person one can be liberated from material
entanglement. A saintly person has the power, because of his spiritual advancement, to
give immediate liberation to the conditioned soul. Here Manu admits that all his doubts
are now over because Kardama has very kindly described the different duties of
individual souls.
SB 3.22.6
TEXT 6
204
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
idíya Mae >aGavaNa( d*íae dudRXaaeR Yaae_k*-TaaTMaNaaMa( )
idíya PaadrJa" SPa*í& XaqZ<aaR Mae >avTa" iXavMa( )) 6 ))
diñöyä me bhagavän dåñöo
durdarço yo 'kåtätmanäm
diñöyä päda-rajaù spåñöaà
çérñëä me bhavataù çivam
SYNONYMS
diñöyä—by good fortune; me—my; bhagavän—all-powerful; dåñöaù—is seen; durdarçaù—
not easily seen; yaù—who; akåta-ätmanäm—of those who have not controlled the mind
and senses; diñöyä—by my good fortune; päda-rajaù—the dust of the feet; spåñöam—is
touched; çérñëä—by the head; me—my; bhavataù—your; çivam—causing all
auspiciousness.
TRANSLATION
It is my good fortune that I have been able to see you, for you cannot easily be seen by
persons who have not subdued the mind or controlled the senses. I am all the more
fortunate to have touched with my head the blessed dust of your feet.
PURPORT
The perfection of transcendental life can be achieved simply by touching the holy dust
of the lotus feet of a holy man. In the Bhägavatam it is said, mahat-päda-rajo-'bhiñekam,
which means to be blessed by the holy dust of the lotus feet of a mahat, a great devotee.
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, mahätmänas tu: those who are great souls are under the spell
of spiritual energy, and their symptom is that they fully engage in Kåñëa consciousness
for the service of the Lord. Therefore they are called mahat. Unless one is fortunate
enough to have the dust of the lotus feet of a mahätmä on one's head, there is no
possibility of perfection in spiritual life.
The paramparä system of disciplic succession is very important as a means of spiritual
success. One becomes a mahat by the grace of his mahat spiritual master. If one takes
shelter of the lotus feet of a great soul, there is every possibility of one's also becoming a
great soul. When Mahäräja Rahügaëa asked Jaòa Bharata about his wonderful
205
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
achievement of spiritual success, he replied to the King that spiritual success is not
possible simply by following the rituals of religion or simply by converting oneself into a
sannyäsé or offering sacrifices as recommended in the scriptures. These methods are
undoubtedly helpful for spiritual realization, but the real effect is brought about by the
grace of a mahätmä. In Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura's eight stanzas of prayer to the
spiritual master, it is clearly stated that simply by satisfying the spiritual master one can
achieve the supreme success in life, and in spite of executing all ritualistic performances,
if one cannot satisfy the spiritual master, one has no access to spiritual perfection. Here
the word akåtätmanäm is very significant. Ätmä means "body," "soul," or "mind," and
akåtätmä means the common man, who cannot control the senses or the mind. Because
the common man is unable to control the senses and the mind, it is his duty to seek the
shelter of a great soul or a great devotee of the Lord and just try to please him. That will
make his life perfect. A common man cannot rise to the topmost stage of spiritual
perfection simply by following the rituals and religious principles. He has to take shelter
of a bona fide spiritual master and work under his direction faithfully and sincerely;
then he becomes perfect, without a doubt.
SB 3.22.7
TEXT 7
idíya TvYaaNauiXaíae_h& k*-TaêaNauGa]hae MahaNa( )
APaav*TaE" k-<aRrNDa]EJauRía idíyaeXaTaqiGaRr" )) 7 ))
diñöyä tvayänuçiñöo 'haà
kåtaç cänugraho mahän
apävåtaiù karëa-randhrair
juñöä diñöyoçatér giraù
SYNONYMS
diñöyä—luckily; tvayä—by you; anuçiñöaù—instructed; aham—I; kåtaù—bestowed; ca—
and; anugrahaù—favor; mahän—great; apävåtaiù—open; karëa-randhraiù—with the
holes of the ears; juñöäù—received; diñöyä—by good fortune; uçatéù—pure; giraù—words.
TRANSLATION
I have fortunately been instructed by you, and thus great favor has been bestowed upon
206
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
me. I thank God that I have listened with open ears to your pure words.
PURPORT
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has given directions, in his Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, on how to
accept a bona fide spiritual master and how to deal with him. First, the desiring
candidate must find a bona fide spiritual master, and then he must very eagerly receive
instructions from him and execute them. This is reciprocal service. A bona fide spiritual
master or saintly person always desires to elevate a common man who comes to him.
Because everyone is under the delusion of mäyä and is forgetful of his prime duty, Kåñëa
consciousness, a saintly person always desires that everyone become a saintly person. It
is the function of a saintly person to invoke Kåñëa consciousness in every forgetful
common man.
Manu said that since he was advised and instructed by Kardama Muni, he was very
much favored. He considered himself lucky to receive the message by aural reception. It
is especially mentioned here that one should be very inquisitive to hear with open ears
from the authorized source of the bona fide spiritual master. How is one to receive? One
should receive the transcendental message by aural reception. The word karëarandhraiù
means "through the holes of the ears." The favor of the spiritual master is not
received through any other part of the body but the ears. This does not mean, however,
that the spiritual master gives a particular type of mantra through the ears in exchange
for some dollars and if the man meditates on that he achieves perfection and becomes
God within six months. Such reception through the ears is bogus. The real fact is that a
bona fide spiritual master knows the nature of a particular man and what sort of duties
he can perform in Kåñëa consciousness, and he instructs him in that way. He instructs
him through the ear, not privately, but publicly. "You are fit for such and such work in
Kåñëa consciousness. You can act in this way." One person is advised to act in Kåñëa
consciousness by working in the Deities' room, another is advised to act in Kåñëa
consciousness by performing editorial work, another is advised to do preaching work,
and another is advised to carry out Kåñëa consciousness in the cooking department.
There are different departments of activity in Kåñëa consciousness, and a spiritual
master, knowing the particular ability of a particular man, trains him in such a way that
by his tendency to act he becomes perfect. Bhagavad-gétä makes it clear that one can
attain the highest perfection of spiritual life simply by offering service according to his
ability, just as Arjuna served Kåñëa by his ability in the military art. Arjuna offered his
service fully as a military man, and he became perfect. Similarly, an artist can attain
207
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
perfection simply by performing artistic work under the direction of the spiritual master.
If one is a literary man, he can write articles and poetry for the service of the Lord under
the direction of the spiritual master. One has to receive the message of the spiritual
master regarding how to act in one's capacity, for the spiritual master is expert in giving
such instructions.
This combination, the instruction of the spiritual master and the faithful execution of
the instruction by the disciple, makes the entire process perfect. Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura describes in his explanation of the verse in Bhagavad-gétä,
vyavasäyätmikä buddhiù, that one who wants to be certain to achieve spiritual success
must take the instruction from the spiritual master as to what his particular function is.
He should faithfully try to execute that particular instruction and should consider that
his life and soul. The faithful execution of the instruction which he receives from the
spiritual master is the only duty of a disciple, and that will bring him perfection. One
should be very careful to receive the message from the spiritual master through the ears
and execute it faithfully. That will make one's life successful.
SB 3.22.8
TEXT 8
Sa >avaNduihTa*òehPairi(c)-íaTMaNaae MaMa )
é[aeTauMahRiSa dqNaSYa é[aivTa& k*-PaYaa MauNae )) 8 ))
sa bhavän duhitå-snehaparikliñöätmano
mama
çrotum arhasi dénasya
çrävitaà kåpayä mune
SYNONYMS
saù—yourself; bhavän—Your Honor; duhitå-sneha—by affection for my daughter;
parikliñöa-ätmanaù—whose mind is agitated; mama—my; çrotum—to listen; arhasi—be
pleased; dénasya—of my humble self; çrävitam—to the prayer; kåpayä—graciously;
mune—O sage.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, graciously be pleased to listen to the prayer of my humble self, for my mind
208
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
is troubled by affection for my daughter.
PURPORT
When a disciple is perfectly in consonance with the spiritual master, having received his
message and executed it perfectly and sincerely, he has a right to ask a particular favor
from the spiritual master. Generally a pure devotee of the Lord or a pure disciple of a
bona fide spiritual master does not ask any favor either from the Lord or the spiritual
master, but even if there is a need to ask a favor from the spiritual master, one cannot
ask that favor without satisfying him fully. Sväyambhuva Manu wanted to disclose his
mind regarding the function he wanted to execute due to affection for his daughter.
SB 3.22.9
TEXT 9
iPa[Yav]TaaetaaNaPadae" SvSaeYa& duihTaa MaMa )
AiNvC^iTa PaiTa& Yau¢&- vYa"Xaql/Gau<aaidi>a" )) 9 ))
priyavratottänapadoù
svaseyaà duhitä mama
anvicchati patià yuktaà
vayaù-çéla-guëädibhiù
SYNONYMS
priyavrata-uttänapadoù—of Priyavrata and Uttänapäda; svasä—sister; iyam—this;
duhitä—daughter; mama—my; anvicchati—is seeking; patim—husband; yuktam—
suited; vayaù-çéla-guëa-ädibhiù—by age, character, good qualities, etc.
TRANSLATION
My daughter is the sister of Priyavrata and Uttänapäda. She is seeking a suitable husband
in terms of age, character and good qualities.
PURPORT
The grown-up daughter of Sväyambhuva Manu, Devahüti, had good character and was
well qualified; therefore she was searching for a suitable husband just befitting her age,
209
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
qualities and character. The purpose of Manu's introducing his daughter as the sister of
Priyavrata and Uttänapäda, two great kings, was to convince the sage that the girl came
from a great family. She was his daughter and at the same time the sister of kñatriyas; she
did not come from a lower-class family. Manu therefore offered her to Kardama as just
suitable for his purpose. It is clear that although the daughter was mature in age and
qualities, she did not go out and find her husband independently. She expressed her
desire for a suitable husband corresponding to her character, age and quality, and the
father himself, out of affection for his daughter, took charge of finding such a husband.
SB 3.22.10
TEXT 10
Yada Tau >avTa" Xaql/é[uTaæPavYaaeGau<aaNa( )
Aé*<aaeàardadeza TvYYaaSaqTk*-TaiNaêYaa )) 10 ))
yadä tu bhavataù çélaçruta-
rüpa-vayo-guëän
açåëon näradäd eñä
tvayy äsét kåta-niçcayä
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; tu—but; bhavataù—your; çéla—noble character; çruta—learning; rüpa—
beautiful appearance; vayaù—youth; guëän—virtues; açåëot—heard; näradät—from
Närada Muni; eñä—Devahüti; tvayi—in you; äsét—became; kåta-niçcayä—fixed in
determination.
TRANSLATION
The moment she heard from the sage Närada of your noble character, learning, beautiful
appearance, youth and other virtues, she fixed her mind upon you.
PURPORT
The girl Devahüti did not personally see Kardama Muni, nor did she personally
experience his character or qualities, since there was no social intercourse by which she
could gain such understanding. But she heard about Kardama Muni from the authority
of Närada Muni. Hearing from an authority is a better experience than gaining personal
210
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
understanding. She heard from Närada Muni that Kardama Muni was just fit to be her
husband; therefore she became fixed in her heart that she would marry him, and she
expressed her desire to her father, who therefore brought her before him.
SB 3.22.11
TEXT 11
TaTPa[TaqC^ iÜJaaGY]aeMaa& é[ÖYaaePaôTaa& MaYaa )
SavaRTMaNaaNauæPaa& Tae Ga*hMaeiDazu k-MaRSau )) 11 ))
tat pratéccha dvijägryemäà
çraddhayopahåtäà mayä
sarvätmanänurüpäà te
gåhamedhiñu karmasu
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; pratéccha—please accept; dvija-agrya—O best of the brähmaëas; imäm—
her; çraddhayä—with faith; upahåtäm—offered as a presentation; mayä—by me; sarvaätmanä—
in every way; anurüpäm—suitable; te—for you; gåha-medhiñu—in the
household; karmasu—duties.
TRANSLATION
Therefore please accept her, O chief of the brähmaëas, for I offer her with faith and she
is in every respect fit to be your wife and take charge of your household duties.
PURPORT
The words gåhamedhiñu karmasu mean "in household duties." Another word is also used
here: sarvätmanänurüpäm. The purport is that a wife should not only be equal to her
husband in age, character and qualities, but must be helpful to him in his household
duties. The household duty of a man is not to satisfy his sense gratification, but to
remain with a wife and children and at the same time attain advancement in spiritual
life. One who does not do so is not a householder but a gåhamedhé. Two words are used in
Sanskrit literature; one is gåhastha, and the other is gåhamedhé. The difference between
gåhamedhé and gåhastha is that gåhastha is also an äçrama, or spiritual order, but if one
simply satisfies his senses as a householder, then he is a gåhamedhé. For a gåhamedhé, to
211
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
accept a wife means to satisfy the senses, but for a gåhastha a qualified wife is an assistant
in every respect for advancement in spiritual activities. It is the duty of the wife to take
charge of household affairs and not to compete with the husband. A wife is meant to
help, but she cannot help her husband unless he is completely equal to her in age,
character and quality.
SB 3.22.12
TEXT 12
oÛTaSYa ih k-aMaSYa Pa[iTavadae Na XaSYaTae )
AiPa iNaMauR¢-Sa(r)SYa k-aMar¢-SYa ik&- PauNa" )) 12 ))
udyatasya hi kämasya
prativädo na çasyate
api nirmukta-saìgasya
käma-raktasya kià punaù
SYNONYMS
udyatasya—which has come of itself; hi—in fact; kämasya—of material desire;
prativädaù—the denial; na—not; çasyate—to be praised; api—even; nirmukta—of one
who is free; saìgasya—from attachment; käma—to sensual pleasures; raktasya—of one
addicted; kim punaù—how much less.
TRANSLATION
To deny an offering that has come of itself is not commendable even for one absolutely
free from all attachment, much less one addicted to sensual pleasure.
PURPORT
In material life everyone is desirous of sense gratification; therefore, a person who gets
an object of sense gratification without endeavor should not refuse to accept it.
Kardama Muni was not meant for sense gratification, yet he aspired to marry and prayed
to the Lord for a suitable wife. This was known to Sväyambhuva Manu. He indirectly
convinced Kardama Muni: "You desire a suitable wife like my daughter, and she is now
present before you. You should not reject the fulfillment of your prayer; you should
accept my daughter."
212
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.22.13
TEXT 13
Ya oÛTaMaNaad*TYa k-INaaXaMai>aYaacTae )
+aqYaTae TaÛXa" Sf-ITa& MaaNaêavjYaa hTa" )) 13 ))
ya udyatam anädåtya
kénäçam abhiyäcate
kñéyate tad-yaçaù sphétaà
mänaç cävajïayä hataù
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; udyatam—an offering; anädåtya—rejecting; kénäçam—from a miser;
abhiyäcate—begs; kñéyate—is lost; tat—his; yaçaù—reputation; sphétam—widespread;
mänaù—honor; ca—and; avajïayä—by neglectful behavior; hataù—destroyed.
TRANSLATION
One who rejects an offering that comes of its own accord but later begs a boon from a
miser thus loses his widespread reputation, and his pride is humbled by the neglectful
behavior of others.
PURPORT
The general procedure of Vedic marriage is that a father offers his daughter to a suitable
boy. That is a very respectable marriage. A boy should not go to the girl's father and ask
for the hand of his daughter in marriage. That is considered to be humbling one's
respectable position. Sväyambhuva Manu wanted to convince Kardama Muni, since he
knew that the sage wanted to marry a suitable girl: "I am offering just such a suitable
wife. Do not reject the offer, or else, because you are in need of a wife, you will have to
ask for such a wife from someone else, who may not behave with you so well. In that case
your position will be humbled."
Another feature of this incident is that Sväyambhuva Manu was the emperor, but he
went to offer his qualified daughter to a poor brähmaëa. Kardama Muni had no worldly
possessions—he was a hermit living in the forest—but he was advanced in culture.
Therefore, in offering one's daughter to a person, the culture and quality are counted as
213
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
prominent, not wealth or any other material consideration.
SB 3.22.14
TEXT 14
Ah& Tvaé*<av& ivÜNa( ivvahaQa| SaMauÛTaMa( )
ATaSTvMauPaku-vaR<a" Pa[taa& Pa[iTaGa*ha<a Mae )) 14 ))
ahaà tväçåëavaà vidvan
vivähärthaà samudyatam
atas tvam upakurväëaù
prattäà pratigåhäëa me
SYNONYMS
aham—I; tvä—you; açåëavam—heard; vidvan—O wise man; viväha-artham—for the
sake of marriage; samudyatam—prepared; ataù—hence; tvam—you; upakurväëaù—not
taken a vow of perpetual celibacy; prattäm—offered; pratigåhäëa—please accept; me—of
me.
TRANSLATION
Sväyambhuva Manu continued: O wise man, I heard that you were prepared to marry.
Please accept her hand, which is being offered to you by me, since you have not taken a
vow of perpetual celibacy.
PURPORT
The principle of brahmacarya is celibacy. There are two kinds of brahmacärés. One is
called naiñöhika-brahmacäré, which means one who takes a vow of celibacy for his whole
life, whereas the other, the upakurväëa-brahmacäré, is a brahmacäré who takes the vow
of celibacy up to a certain age. For example, he may take the vow to remain celibate up
to twenty-five years of age; then, with the permission of his spiritual master, he enters
married life. Brahmacarya is student life, the beginning of life in the spiritual orders, and
the principle of brahmacarya is celibacy. Only a householder can indulge in sense
gratification or sex life, not a brahmacäré. Sväyambhuva Manu requested Kardama Muni
to accept his daughter, since Kardama had not taken the vow of naiñöhika-brahmacarya.
He was willing to marry, and the suitable daughter of a high royal family was presented.
214
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.22.15
TEXT 15
‰izåvac
ba!MauÜae!uk-aMaae_hMaPa[taa c TavaTMaJaa )
AavYaaerNauæPaae_SaavaÛae vEvaihk-ae iviDa" )) 15 ))
åñir uväca
bäòham udvoòhu-kämo 'ham
aprattä ca tavätmajä
ävayor anurüpo 'säv
ädyo vaivähiko vidhiù
SYNONYMS
åñiù—the great sage Kardama; uväca—said; bäòham—very well; udvoòhu-kämaù—
desirous to marry; aham—I; aprattä—not promised to anyone else; ca—and; tava—your;
ätma-jä—daughter; ävayoù—of us two; anurüpaù—proper; asau—this; ädyaù—first;
vaivähikaù—of marriage; vidhiù—ritualistic ceremony.
TRANSLATION
The great sage replied: Certainly I have a desire to marry, and your daughter has not yet
married or given her word to anyone. Therefore our marriage according to the Vedic
system can take place.
PURPORT
There were many considerations by Kardama Muni before accepting the daughter of
Sväyambhuva Manu. Most important is that Devahüti had first of all fixed her mind on
marrying him. She did not choose to have any other man as her husband. That is a great
consideration because female psychology dictates that when a woman offers her heart to
a man for the first time, it is very difficult for her to take it back. Also, she had not
married before; she was a virgin girl. All these considerations convinced Kardama Muni
to accept her. Therefore he said, "Yes, I shall accept your daughter under religious
regulations of marriage." There are different kinds of marriages, of which the first-class
marriage is held by inviting a suitable bridegroom for the daughter and giving her in
215
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
charity, well dressed and well decorated with ornaments, along with a dowry according
to the means of the father. There are other kinds of marriage, such as gändharva
marriage and marriage by love, which are also accepted as marriage. Even if one is
forcibly kidnapped and later on accepted as a wife, that is also accepted. But Kardama
Muni accepted the first-class way of marriage because the father was willing and the
daughter was qualified. She had never offered her heart to anyone else. All these
considerations made Kardama Muni agree to accept the daughter of Sväyambhuva
Manu.
SB 3.22.16
TEXT 16
k-aMa" Sa >aUYaaàrdev Tae_SYaa"
Pau}Yaa" SaMaaManaYaivDaaE Pa[TaqTa" )
k- Wv Tae TaNaYaa& Naaid]YaeTa
SvYaEv k-aNTYaa i+aPaTaqiMav ié[YaMa( )) 16 ))
kämaù sa bhüyän naradeva te 'syäù
putryäù samämnäya-vidhau pratétaù
ka eva te tanayäà nädriyeta
svayaiva käntyä kñipatém iva çriyam
SYNONYMS
kämaù—desire; saù—that; bhüyät—let it be fulfilled; nara-deva—O King; te—your;
asyäù—this; putryäù—of the daughter; samämnäya-vidhau—in the process of the Vedic
scriptures; pratétaù—recognized; kaù—who; eva—in fact; te—your; tanayäm—daughter;
na ädriyeta—would not adore; svayä—by her own; eva—alone; käntyä—bodily luster;
kñipatém—excelling; iva—as if; çriyam—ornaments.
TRANSLATION
Let your daughter's desire for marriage, which is recognized in the Vedic scriptures, be
fulfilled. Who would not accept her hand? She is so beautiful that by her bodily luster
alone she excels the beauty of her ornaments.
PURPORT
216
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Kardama Muni wanted to marry Devahüti in the recognized manner of marriage
prescribed in the scriptures. As stated in the Vedic scriptures, the first-class process is to
call the bridegroom to the home of the bride and hand her to him in charity with a
dowry of necessary ornaments, gold, furniture and other household paraphernalia. This
form of marriage is prevalent among higher-class Hindus even today and is declared in
the çästras to confer great religious merit on the bride's father. To give a daughter in
charity to a suitable son-in-law is considered to be one of the pious activities of a
householder. There are eight forms of marriage mentioned in the scripture Manu-småti,
but only one process of marriage, brähma or räjasika marriage, is now current. Other
kinds of marriage-by love, by exchange of garlands or by kidnapping the bride-are now
forbidden in this Kali age. Formerly, kñatriyas would, at their pleasure, kidnap a princess
from another royal house, and there would he a fight between the kñatriya and the girl's
family; then, if the kidnapper was the winner, the girl would be offered to him for
marriage. Even Kåñëa married Rukmiëé by that process, and some of His sons and
grandsons also married by kidnapping. Kåñëa's grandsons kidnapped Duryodhana's
daughter, which caused a fight between the Kuru and Yadu families. Afterward, an
adjustment was made by the elderly members of the Kuru family. Such marriages were
current in bygone ages, but at the present moment they are impossible because the strict
principles of kñatriya life have practically been abolished. Since India has become
dependent on foreign countries, the particular influences of her social orders have been
lost; now, according to the scriptures, everyone is a çüdra. The so-called brähmaëas,
kñatriyas and vaiçyas have forgotten their traditional activities, and in the absence of
these activities they are called çüdras. It is said in the scriptures, kalau çüdra-sambhavaù.
In the age of Kali everyone will be like çüdras. The traditional social customs are not
followed in this age, although formerly they were followed strictly.
SB 3.22.17
TEXT 17
Yaa& hMYaRPa*ïe Kv<adx(iga]Xaae>aa&
iv§-I@Taq& k-Nduk-ivûl/a+aqMa( )
ivìavSauNYaRPaTaTSvaiÜMaaNaa‚
iÜl/aeKYa SaMMaaehivMaU!ceTaa" )) 17 ))
yäà harmya-påñöhe kvaëad-aìghri-çobhäà
vikréòatéà kanduka-vihvaläkñém
217
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
viçvävasur nyapatat sväd vimänäd
vilokya sammoha-vimüòha-cetäù
SYNONYMS
yäm—whom; harmya-påñöhe—on the roof of the palace; kvaëat-aìghri-çobhäm—whose
beauty was heightened by the tinkling ornaments on her feet; vikréòatém—playing;
kanduka-vihvala-akñém—with eyes bewildered, following her ball; viçvävasuù—
Viçvävasu; nyapatat—fell down; svät—from his own; vimänät—from the airplane;
vilokya—seeing; sammoha-vimüòha-cetäù—whose mind was stupefied.
TRANSLATION
I have heard that Viçvävasu, the great Gandharva, his mind stupefied with infatuation,
fell from his airplane after seeing your daughter playing with a ball on the roof of the
palace, for she was indeed beautiful with her tinkling ankle bells and her eyes moving to
and fro.
PURPORT
It is understood that not only at the present moment but in those days also there were
skyscrapers. Herein we find the word harmya-påñöhe. Harmya means "a very big palatial
building." Sväd vimänät means "from his own airplane." It is suggested that private
airplanes or helicopters were also current in those days. The Gandharva Viçvävasu,
while flying in the sky, could see Devahüti playing ball on the roof of the palace. Ball
playing was also current, but aristocratic girls would not play in a public place. Ball
playing and other such pleasures were not meant for ordinary women and girls; only
princesses like Devahüti could indulge in such sports. It is described here that she was
seen from the flying airplane. This indicates that the palace was very high, otherwise
how could one see her from an airplane? The vision was so distinct that the Gandharva
Viçvävasu was bewildered by her beauty and by hearing the sound of her ankle bangles,
and being captivated by the sound and beauty, he fell down. Kardama Muni mentioned
the incident as he had heard it.
SB 3.22.18
TEXT 18
Taa& Pa[aQaRYaNTaq& l/l/Naal/l/aMa‚
218
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
MaSaeivTaé[qcr<aErd*íaMa( )
vTSaa& MaNaaeåÀPad" SvSaar&
k-ae NaaNauMaNYaeTa buDaae_i>aYaaTaaMa( )) 18 ))
täà prärthayantéà lalanä-lalämam
asevita-çré-caraëair adåñöäm
vatsäà manor uccapadaù svasäraà
ko nänumanyeta budho 'bhiyätäm
SYNONYMS
täm—her; prärthayantém—seeking; lalanä-lalämam—the ornament of women; asevitaçré-
caraëaiù—by those who have not worshiped the feet of Lakñmé; adåñöäm—not seen;
vatsäm—beloved daughter; manoù—of Sväyambhuva Manu; uccapadaù—of
Uttänapäda; svasäram—sister; kaù—what; na anumanyeta—would not welcome;
budhaù—wise man; abhiyätäm—who has come of her own accord.
TRANSLATION
What wise man would not welcome her, the very ornament of womanhood, the beloved
daughter of Sväyambhuva Manu and sister of Uttänapäda? Those who have not
worshiped the gracious feet of the goddess of fortune cannot even perceive her, yet she
has come of her own accord to seek my hand.
PURPORT
Kardama Muni praised the beauty and qualification of Devahüti in different ways.
Devahüti was actually the ornament of all ornamented beautiful girls. A girl becomes
beautiful by putting ornaments on her body, but Devahüti was more beautiful than the
ornaments; she was considered the ornament of the ornamented beautiful girls.
Demigods and Gandharvas were attracted by her beauty. Kardama Muni, although a
great sage, was not a denizen of the heavenly planets, but it is mentioned in the previous
verse that Viçvävasu, who came from heaven, was also attracted by the beauty of
Devahüti. Besides her personal beauty, she was the daughter of Emperor Sväyambhuva
and sister of King Uttänapäda. Who could refuse the hand of such a girl?
SB 3.22.19
219
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 19
ATaae >aiJaZYae SaMaYaeNa Saaßq&
YaavtaeJaae ib>a*YaadaTMaNaae Mae )
ATaae DaMaaRNa( PaarMah&SYaMau:YaaNa(
éu(c)-Pa[ae¢-aNa( bhu MaNYae_ivih&óaNa( )) 19 ))
ato bhajiñye samayena sädhvéà
yävat tejo bibhåyäd ätmano me
ato dharmän päramahaàsya-mukhyän
çukla-proktän bahu manye 'vihiàsrän
SYNONYMS
ataù—therefore; bhajiñye—I shall accept; samayena—on the conditions; sädhvém—the
chaste girl; yävat—until; tejaù—semen; bibhåyät—may bear; ätmanaù—from my body;
me—my; ataù—thereafter; dharmän—the duties; päramahaàsya-mukhyän—of the best
of the paramahaàsas; çukla-proktän—spoken by Lord Viñëu; bahu—much; manye—I
shall consider; avihiàsrän—free from envy.
TRANSLATION
Therefore I shall accept this chaste girl as my wife, on the condition that after she bears
semen from my body, I shall accept the life of devotional service accepted by the most
perfect human beings. That process was described by Lord Viñëu. It is free from envy.
PURPORT
Kardama Muni expressed his desire for a very beautiful wife to Emperor Sväyambhuva
and accepted the Emperor's daughter for marriage. Kardama Muni was in the hermitage
practicing complete celibacy as a brahmacäré, and although he had the desire to marry,
he did not want to be a householder for the whole span of his life because he was
conversant with the Vedic principles of human life. According to Vedic principles, the
first part of life should be utilized in brahmacarya for the development of character and
spiritual qualities. In the next part of life, one may accept a wife and beget children, but
one should not beget children like cats and dogs.
220
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Kardama Muni desired to beget a child who would be a ray of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. One should beget a child who can perform the duties of Viñëu, otherwise
there is no need to produce children. There are two kinds of children born of good
fathers: one is educated in Kåñëa consciousness so that he can be delivered from the
clutches of mäyä in that very life, and the other is a ray of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and teaches the world the ultimate goal of life. As will be described in later
chapters, Kardama Muni begot such a child-Kapila, the incarnation of the Personality of
Godhead who enunciated the philosophy of Säìkhya. Great householders pray to God
to send His representative so that there may be an auspicious movement in human
society. This is one reason to beget a child. Another reason is that a highly enlightened
parent can train a child in Kåñëa consciousness so that the child will not have to come
back again to this miserable world. Parents should see to it that the child born of them
does not enter the womb of a mother again. Unless one can train a child for liberation
in that life, there is no need to marry or produce children. If human society produces
children like cats and dogs for the disturbance of social order, then the world becomes
hellish, as it has in this age of Kali. In this age, neither parents nor their children are
trained; both are animalistic and simply eat, sleep, mate, defend, and gratify their senses.
This disorder in social life cannot bring peace to human society. Kardama Muni explains
beforehand that he would not associate with the girl Devahüti for the whole duration of
his life. He would simply associate with her until she had a child. In other words, sex life
should be utilized only to produce a nice child, not for any other purpose. Human life is
especially meant for complete devotion to the service of the Lord. That is the
philosophy of Lord Caitanya.
After fulfilling his responsibility to produce a nice child, one should take sannyäsa and
engage in the perfectional paramahaàsa stage. paramahaàsa refers to the most highly
elevated perfectional stage of life. There are four stages within sannyäsa life, and
paramahaàsa is the highest order. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam is called the paramahaàsasaàhitä,
the treatise for the highest class of human beings. The paramahaàsa is free
from envy. In other stages, even in the householder stage of life, there is competition
and envy, but since the activities of the human being in the paramahaàsa stage are
completely engaged in Kåñëa consciousness, or devotional service, there is no scope for
envy. In the same order as Kardama Muni, about one hundred years ago, Öhäkura
Bhaktivinoda also wanted to beget a child who could preach the philosophy and
teachings of Lord Caitanya to the fullest extent. By his prayers to the Lord he had as his
child Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Gosvämé Mahäräja, who at the present moment is
preaching the philosophy of Lord Caitanya throughout the entire world through his
221
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bona fide disciples.
SB 3.22.20
TEXT 20
YaTaae_>aviÜìiMad& ivic}a&
Sa&SQaaSYaTae Ya}a c vaviTaïTae )
Pa[JaaPaTaqNaa& PaiTarez Maù&
Par& Pa[Maa<a& >aGavaNaNaNTa" )) 20 ))
yato 'bhavad viçvam idaà vicitraà
saàsthäsyate yatra ca vävatiñöhate
prajäpaténäà patir eña mahyaà
paraà pramäëaà bhagavän anantaù
SYNONYMS
yataù—from whom; abhavat—emanated; viçvam—creation; idam—this; vicitram—
wonderful; saàsthäsyate—will dissolve; yatra—in whom; ca—and; vä—or; avatiñöhate—
presently exists; prajä-paténäm—of the Prajäpatis; patiù—the Lord; eñaù—this;
mahyam—to me; param—highest; pramäëam—authority; bhagavän—Supreme Lord;
anantaù—unlimited.
TRANSLATION
The highest authority for me is the unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead, from
whom this wonderful creation emanates and in whom its sustenance and dissolution rest.
He is the origin of all Prajäpatis, the personalities meant to produce living entities in this
world.
PURPORT
Kardama Muni was ordered by his father, Prajäpati, to produce children. In the
beginning of creation the Prajäpatis were meant to produce the large population which
was to reside in the planets of the gigantic universe. But Kardama Muni said that
although his father was Prajäpati, who desired him to produce children, actually his
origin was the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, because Viñëu is the origin of
222
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
everything; He is the actual creator of this universe, He is the actual maintainer, and
when everything is annihilated, it rests in Him only. That is the conclusion of Çrémad-
Bhägavatam. For creation, maintenance and annihilation there are the three deities
Brahmä, Viñëu and Maheçvara (Çiva), but Brahmä and Maheçvara are qualitative
expansions of Viñëu. Viñëu is the central figure. Viñëu, therefore, takes charge of
maintenance. No one can maintain the whole creation but He. There are innumerable
entities, and they have innumerable demands; no one but Viñëu can fulfill the
innumerable demands of all the innumerable living entities. Brahmä is ordered to
create, and Çiva is ordered to annihilate. The middle function, maintenance, is taken
charge of by Viñëu. Kardama Muni knew very well, by his power in progressive spiritual
life, that Viñëu, the Personality of Godhead, was his worshipable Deity. Whatever Viñëu
desired was his duty, and nothing else. He was not prepared to beget a number of
children. He would beget only one child, who would help the mission of Viñëu. As stated
in Bhagavad-gétä, whenever there is a discrepancy in the discharge of religious
principles, the Lord descends on the surface of the earth to protect religious principles
and to annihilate the miscreants.
Marrying and begetting a child is considered to liquidate one's debts to the family in
which one is born. There are many debts which are imposed upon a child just after his
birth. There are debts to the family in which one is born, debts to the demigods, debts to
the Pitäs, debts to the åñis, etc. But if someone engages only in the service of the
Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, who is actually worshipable, then even
without trying to liquidate other debts, one becomes free from all obligations. Kardama
Muni preferred to devote his life as a servant of the Lord in paramahaàsa knowledge
and to beget a child only for that purpose, not to beget numberless children to fill up the
vacancies in the universe.
SB 3.22.21
TEXT 21
MaE}aeYa ovac
Sa oGa]DaNviàYadevab>aaze
AaSaqÀ TaUZ<aqMarivNdNaa>aMa( )
iDaYaaePaGa*õNa( iSMaTaXaaei>aTaeNa
Mau%eNa ceTaae lu/lu/>ae devhUTYaa" )) 21 ))
maitreya uväca
223
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sa ugra-dhanvann iyad eväbabhäñe
äséc ca tüñëém aravinda-näbham
dhiyopagåhëan smita-çobhitena
mukhena ceto lulubhe devahütyäù
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù—the great sage Maitreya; uväca—said; saù—he (Kardama); ugra-dhanvan—
O great warrior Vidura; iyat—this much; eva—only; äbabhäñe—spoke; äsét—became;
ca—and; tüñëém—silent; aravinda-näbham—Lord Viñëu (whose navel is adorned by a
lotus); dhiyä—by thought; upagåhëan—seizing; smita-çobhitena—beautified by his smile;
mukhena—by his face; cetaù—the mind; lulubhe—was captivated; devahütyäù—of
Devahüti.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: O great warrior Vidura, the sage Kardama said this much only and
then became silent, thinking of his worshipable Lord Viñëu, who has a lotus on His
navel. As he silently smiled, his face captured the mind of Devahüti, who began to
meditate upon the great sage.
PURPORT
It appears that Kardama Muni was fully absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness because as soon
as he became silent, he at once began to think of Lord Viñëu. That is the way of Kåñëa
consciousness. Pure devotees are so absorbed in thought of Kåñëa that they have no
other engagement; although they may seem to think or act otherwise, they are always
thinking of Kåñëa. The smile of such a Kåñëa conscious person is so attractive that
simply by smiling he wins so many admirers, disciples and followers.
SB 3.22.22
TEXT 22
Saae_Nau jaTva VYaviSaTa& MaihZYaa duihTau" Sfu-$=Ma( )
TaSMaE Gau<aGa<aa!yaYa ddaE TauLYaa& Pa[hizRTa" )) 22 ))
so 'nu jïätvä vyavasitaà
mahiñyä duhituù sphuöam
224
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tasmai guëa-gaëäòhyäya
dadau tulyäà praharñitaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Emperor Manu); anu—afterward; jïätvä—having known; vyavasitam—the
fixed decision; mahiñyäù—of the Queen; duhituù—of his daughter; sphuöam—clearly;
tasmai—to him; guëa-gaëa-äòhyäya—who was endowed with a host of virtues; dadau—
gave away; tulyäm—who was equal (in good qualities); praharñitaù—extremely pleased.
TRANSLATION
After having unmistakably known the decision of the Queen, as well as that of Devahüti,
the Emperor most gladly gave his daughter to the sage, whose host of virtues was equaled
by hers.
SB 3.22.23
TEXT 23
XaTaæPaa Maharajq PaairbhaRNMahaDaNaaNa( )
dMPaTYaae" PaYaRdaTPa[qTYaa >aUzavaSa" PairC^daNa( )) 23 ))
çatarüpä mahä-räjïé
päribarhän mahä-dhanän
dampatyoù paryadät prétyä
bhüñä-väsaù paricchadän
SYNONYMS
çatarüpä—Empress Çatarüpä; mahä-räjïé—the Empress; päribarhän—dowry; mahädhanän—
valuable presents; dam-patyoù—to the bride and bridegroom; paryadät—gave;
prétyä—out of affection; bhüñä—ornaments; väsaù—clothes; paricchadän—articles for
household use.
TRANSLATION
Empress Çatarüpä lovingly gave most valuable presents, suitable for the occasion, such as
jewelry, clothes and household articles, in dowry to the bride and bridegroom.
225
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The custom of giving one's daughter in charity with a dowry is still current in India. The
gifts are given according to the position of the father of the bride. Päribarhän mahädhanän
means the dowry which must be awarded to the bridegroom at the time of
marriage. Here mahä-dhanän means greatly valuable gifts befitting the dowry of an
empress. The words bhüñä-väsaù paricchadän also appear here. Bhüñä means "ornaments,"
väsaù means "clothing," and paricchadän means "various household articles." All things
befitting the marriage ceremony of an emperor's daughter were awarded to Kardama
Muni, who was until now observing celibacy as a brahmacäré. The bride, Devahüti, was
very richly dressed with ornaments and clothing.
In this way Kardama Muni was married with full opulence to a qualified wife and was
endowed with the necessary paraphernalia for household life. In the Vedic way of
marriage such a dowry is still given to the bridegroom by the father of the bride; even in
poverty-stricken India there are marriages where hundreds and thousands of rupees are
spent for a dowry. The dowry system is not illegal, as some have tried to prove. The
dowry is a gift given to the daughter by the father to show good will, and it is
compulsory. In rare cases where the father is completely unable to give a dowry, it is
enjoined that he must at least give a fruit and a flower. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, God
can also be pleased even by a fruit and a flower. When there is financial inability and no
question of accumulating a dowry by another means, one can give a fruit and flower for
the satisfaction of the bridegroom.
SB 3.22.24
TEXT 24
Pa[taa& duihTar& SaMa]a$( Sad*+aaYa GaTaVYaQa" )
oPaGauù c bahu>YaaMaaETk-<#yaeNMaiQaTaaXaYa" )) 24 ))
prattäà duhitaraà samräö
sadåkñäya gata-vyathaù
upaguhya ca bähubhyäm
autkaëöhyonmathitäçayaù
SYNONYMS
prattäm—who was given; duhitaram—daughter; samräö—the Emperor (Manu);
226
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sadåkñäya—unto a suitable person; gata-vyathaù—relieved of his responsibility;
upaguhya—embracing; ca—and; bähubhyäm—with his two arms; autkaëöhya-unmathitaäçayaù—
having an anxious and agitated mind.
TRANSLATION
Thus relieved of his responsibility by handing over his daughter to a suitable man,
Sväyambhuva Manu, his mind agitated by feelings of separation, embraced his
affectionate daughter with both his arms.
PURPORT
A father always remains in anxiety until he can hand over his grownup daughter to a
suitable boy. A father and mother's responsibility for children continues until they
marry them to suitable spouses; when the father is able to perform that duty, he is
relieved of his responsibility.
SB 3.22.25
TEXT 25
AXa¥u-v&STaiÜrh& MauÄNa( baZPak-l/a& Mauhu" )
AaiSaÄdMb vTSaeiTa Nae}aaedEduRihTau" iXa%a" )) 25 ))
açaknuvaàs tad-virahaà
muïcan bäñpa-kaläà muhuù
äsiïcad amba vatseti
netrodair duhituù çikhäù
SYNONYMS
açaknuvan—being unable to bear; tat-viraham—separation from her; muïcan—
shedding; bäñpa-kaläm—tears; muhuù—again and again; äsiïcat—he drenched; amba—
my dear mother; vatsa—my dear daughter; iti—thus; netra-udaiù—by the water from his
eyes; duhituù—of his daughter; çikhäù—the locks of hair.
TRANSLATION
The Emperor was unable to bear the separation of his daughter. Therefore tears poured
227
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
from his eyes again and again, drenching his daughter's head as he cried, "My dear
mother! My dear daughter!"
PURPORT
The word amba is significant. A father sometimes addresses his daughter in affection as
"mother" and sometimes as "my darling." The feeling of separation occurs because until
the daughter is married she remains the daughter of the father, but after her marriage
she is no longer claimed as a daughter in the family; she must go to the husband's house,
for after marriage she becomes the property of the husband. According to Manusaàhitä,
a woman is never independent. She must remain the property of the father
while she is not married, and she must remain the property of the husband until she is
elderly and has grown-up children of her own. In old age, when the husband has taken
sannyäsa and left home, she remains the property of the sons. A woman is always
dependent, either upon the father, husband or elderly sons. That will be exhibited in the
life of Devahüti. Devahüti's father handed over responsibility for her to the husband,
Kardama Muni, and in the same way, Kardama Muni also left home, giving the
responsibility to his son, Kapiladeva. This narration will describe these events one after
another.
SB 3.22.26, SB 3.22.27, SB 3.22.26-27
TEXTS 26-27
AaMaN}Ya Ta& MauiNavrMaNaujaTa" SahaNauGa" )
Pa[TaSQae rQaMaaåù Sa>aaYaR" SvPaur& Na*Pa" )) 26 ))
o>aYaae‰Rizku-LYaaYaa" SarSvTYaa" SauraeDaSaae" )
‰zq<aaMauPaXaaNTaaNaa& PaXYaàaé[MaSaMPad" )) 27 ))
ämantrya taà muni-varam
anujïätaù sahänugaù
pratasthe ratham äruhya
sabhäryaù sva-puraà nåpaù
ubhayor åñi-kulyäyäù
sarasvatyäù surodhasoù
åñéëäm upaçäntänäà
paçyann äçrama-sampadaù
228
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
ämantrya—taking permission to go; tam—from him (Kardama); muni-varam—from the
best of sages; anujïätaù—being permitted to leave; saha-anugaù—along with his
retinue; pratasthe—started for; ratham äruhya—mounting his chariot; sa-bhäryaù—
along with his wife; sva-puram—his own capital; nåpaù—the Emperor; ubhayoù—on
both; åñi-kulyäyäù—agreeable to the sages; sarasvatyäù—of the River Sarasvaté; surodhasoù—
the charming banks; åñéëäm—of the great sages; upaçäntänäm—tranquil;
paçyan—seeing; äçrama-sampadaù—the prosperity of the beautiful hermitages.
TRANSLATION
After asking and obtaining the great sage's permission to leave, the monarch mounted his
chariot with his wife and started for his capital, followed by his retinue. Along the way he
saw the prosperity of the tranquil seers' beautiful hermitages on both the charming banks
of the Sarasvaté, the river so agreeable to saintly persons.
PURPORT
As cities are constructed in the modern age with great engineering and architectural
craftsmanship, so in days gone by there were neighborhoods called åñi-kulas, where great
saintly persons resided. In India there are still many magnificent places for spiritual
understanding; there are many åñis and saintly persons living in nice cottages on the
banks of the Ganges and Yamunä for purposes of spiritual cultivation. While passing
through the åñi-kulas the King and his party were very much satisfied with the beauty of
the cottages and hermitages. It is stated here, paçyann äçrama-sampadaù. The great sages
had no skyscrapers, but the hermitages were so beautiful that the King was very much
pleased at the sight.
SB 3.22.28
TEXT 28
TaMaaYaaNTaMai>aPa[eTYa b]øavTaaRTPa[Jaa" PaiTaMa( )
GaqTaSa&STauiTavaid}aE" Pa[TYaudqYau" Pa[hizRTaa" )) 28 ))
tam äyäntam abhipretya
brahmävartät prajäù patim
géta-saàstuti-väditraiù
229
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
pratyudéyuù praharñitäù
SYNONYMS
tam—him; äyäntam—who was arriving; abhipretya—knowing of; brahmävartät—from
Brahmävarta; prajäù—his subjects; patim—their lord; géta-saàstuti-väditraiù—with
songs, praise and instrumental music; pratyudéyuù—came forward to greet; praharñitäù—
overjoyed.
TRANSLATION
Overjoyed to know of his arrival, his subjects came forth from Brahmävarta to greet their
returning lord with songs, prayers and musical instruments.
PURPORT
It is the custom of the citizens of a kingdom's capital to receive the king when he returns
from a tour. There is a similar description when Kåñëa returned to Dvärakä after the
Battle of Kurukñetra. At that time He was received by all classes of citizens at the gate of
the city. Formerly, capital cities were surrounded by walls, and there were different gates
for regular entrance. Even in Delhi today there are old gates, and some other old cities
have such gates where citizens would gather to receive the king. Here also the citizens of
Barhiñmaté, the capital of Brahmävarta, the kingdom of Sväyambhuva, came nicely
dressed to receive the Emperor with decorations and musical instruments.
SB 3.22.29, SB 3.22.30, SB 3.22.29-30
TEXTS 29-30
bihRZMaTaq NaaMa Paurq SavRSaMPaTSaMaiNvTaa )
NYaPaTaNa( Ya}a raeMaai<a YajSYaa(r)& ivDauNvTa" )) 29 ))
ku-Xaa" k-aXaaSTa WvaSaNa( XaìÖirTavcRSa" )
‰zYaae YaE" Para>aaVYa YajganaNa( YajMaqiJare )) 30 ))
barhiñmaté näma puré
sarva-sampat-samanvitä
nyapatan yatra romäëi
yajïasyäìgaà vidhunvataù
230
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kuçäù käçäs ta eväsan
çaçvad-dharita-varcasaù
åñayo yaiù paräbhävya
yajïa-ghnän yajïam éjire
SYNONYMS
barhiñmaté—Barhiñmaté; näma—named; puré—city; sarva-sampat—all kinds of wealth;
samanvitä—full of; nyapatan—fell down; yatra—where; romäëi—the hairs; yajïasya—
of Lord Boar; aìgam—His body; vidhunvataù—shaking; kuçäù—kuça grass; käçäù—käça
grass; te—they; eva—certainly; äsan—became; çaçvat-harita—of evergreen; varcasaù—
having the color; åñayaù—the sages; yaiù—by which; paräbhävya—defeating; yajïaghnän—
the disturbers of the sacrificial performances; yajïam—Lord Viñëu; éjire—they
worshiped.
TRANSLATION
The city of Barhiñmaté, rich in all kinds of wealth, was so called because Lord Viñëu's
hair dropped there from His body when He manifested Himself as Lord Boar. As He
shook His body, this very hair fell and turned into blades of evergreen kuça grass and
käça [another kind of grass used for mats], by means of which the sages worshiped Lord
Viñëu after defeating the demons who had interfered with the performance of their
sacrifices.
PURPORT
Any place directly connected with the Supreme Lord is called péöha-sthäna. Barhiñmaté,
the capital of Sväyambhuva Manu, was exalted not because the city was very rich in
wealth and opulence, but because the hairs of Lord Varäha fell at this very spot. These
hairs of the Lord later grew as green grass, and the sages used to worship the Lord with
that grass after the time when the Lord killed the demon Hiraëyäkña. Yajïa means
Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gétä, karma is described as
yajïärtha. Yajïärtha-karma means "work done only for the satisfaction of Viñëu." If
something is done for sense gratification or any other purpose, it will be binding upon
the worker. If one wants to be freed from the reaction of his work, he must perform
everything for the satisfaction of Viñëu, or Yajïa. In the capital of Sväyambhuva Manu,
Barhiñmaté, these particular functions were being performed by the great sages and
231
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
saintly persons.
SB 3.22.31
TEXT 31
ku-Xak-aXaMaYa& bihRraSTaqYaR >aGavaNMaNau" )
AYaJaÛjPauåz& l/BDaa SQaaNa& YaTaae >auvMa( )) 31 ))
kuça-käçamayaà barhir
ästérya bhagavän manuù
ayajad yajïa-puruñaà
labdhä sthänaà yato bhuvam
SYNONYMS
kuça—of kuça grass; käça—and of käça grass; mayam—made; barhiù—a seat; ästérya—
having spread; bhagavän—the greatly fortunate; manuù—Sväyambhuva Manu; ayajat—
worshiped; yajïa-puruñam—Lord Viñëu; labdhä—had achieved; sthänam—the abode;
yataù—from whom; bhuvam—the earth.
TRANSLATION
Manu spread a seat of kuças and käças and worshiped the Lord, the Personality of
Godhead, by whose grace he had obtained the rule of the terrestrial globe.
PURPORT
Manu is the father of mankind, and therefore from Manu comes the word man, or, in
Sanskrit, manuñya. Those who are in a better position in the world, having sufficient
wealth, should especially take lessons from Manu, who acknowledged his kingdom and
opulence to be gifts from the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus always engaged
in devotional service. Similarly, the descendants of Manu, or human beings, especially
those who are situated in a well-to-do condition, must consider that whatever riches
they have are gifts from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Those riches should be
utilized for the service of the Lord in sacrifices performed to please Him. That is the way
of utilizing wealth and opulence. No one can achieve wealth, opulence, good birth, a
beautiful body or nice education without the mercy of the Supreme Lord. Therefore,
those who are in possession of such valuable facilities must acknowledge their
232
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
gratefulness to the Lord by worshiping Him and offering what they have received from
Him. When such acknowledgement is given, either by a family, nation or society, their
abode becomes almost like Vaikuëöha, and it becomes free from the operation of the
threefold miseries of this material world. In the modern age the mission of Kåñëa
consciousness is for everyone to acknowledge the supremacy of Lord Kåñëa; whatever
one has in his possession must be considered a gift by the grace of the Lord. Everyone,
therefore, should engage in devotional service through Kåñëa consciousness. If one
wants to be happy and peaceful in his position, either as a householder or citizen or
member of human society, one must promote devotional service for the pleasure of the
Lord.
SB 3.22.32
TEXT 32
bihRZMaTaq& NaaMa iv>auYaa| iNaivRXYa SaMaavSaTa( )
TaSYaa& Pa[ivíae >avNa& TaaPa}aYaivNaaXaNaMa( )) 32 ))
barhiñmatéà näma vibhur
yäà nirviçya samävasat
tasyäà praviñöo bhavanaà
täpa-traya-vinäçanam
SYNONYMS
barhiñmatém—the city Barhiñmaté; näma—named; vibhuù—the very powerful
Sväyambhuva Manu; yäm—which; nirviçya—having entered; samävasat—he lived in
previously; tasyäm—in that city; praviñöaù—entered; bhavanam—the palace; täpatraya—
the threefold miseries; vinäçanam—destroying.
TRANSLATION
Having entered the city of Barhiñmaté, in which he had previously lived, Manu entered
his palace, which was filled with an atmosphere that eradicated the three miseries of
material existence.
PURPORT
The material world, or material existential life, is filled with threefold miseries: miseries
233
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
pertaining to the body and mind, miseries pertaining to natural disturbances and
miseries inflicted by other living entities. Human society is meant to create a spiritual
atmosphere by spreading the spirit of Kåñëa consciousness. The miseries of material
existence cannot affect the status of Kåñëa consciousness. It is not that the miseries of
the material world completely vanish when one takes to Kåñëa consciousness, but for
one who is Kåñëa conscious the miseries of material existence have no effect. We cannot
stop the miseries of the material atmosphere, but Kåñëa consciousness is the antiseptic
method to protect us from being affected by the miseries of material existence. For a
Kåñëa conscious person, both living in heaven and living in hell are equal. How
Sväyambhuva Manu created an atmosphere wherein he was not affected by material
miseries is explained in the following verses.
SB 3.22.33
TEXT 33
Sa>aaYaR" SaPa[Ja" k-aMaaNa( bu>auJae_NYaaivraeDaTa" )
Sa(r)qYaMaaNaSaTk-IiTaR" Sañqi>a" SaurGaaYakE-" )
Pa[TYaUzeZvNaubÖeNa ôda é*<vNa( hre" k-Qaa" )) 33 ))
sabhäryaù saprajaù kämän
bubhuje 'nyävirodhataù
saìgéyamäna-sat-kértiù
sastrébhiù sura-gäyakaiù
praty-üñeñv anubaddhena
hådä çåëvan hareù kathäù
SYNONYMS
sa-bhäryaù—along with his wife; sa-prajaù—along with his subjects; kämän—the
necessities of life; bubhuje—he enjoyed; anya—from others; avirodhataù—without
disturbance; saìgéyamäna—being praised; sat-kértiù—reputation for pious activities; sastrébhiù—
along with their wives; sura-gäyakaiù—by celestial musicians; prati-üñeñu—at
every dawn; anubaddhena—being attached; hådä—with the heart; çåëvan—listening to;
hareù—of Lord Hari; kathäù—the topics.
TRANSLATION
234
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Emperor Sväyambhuva Manu enjoyed life with his wife and subjects and fulfilled his
desires without being disturbed by unwanted principles contrary to the process of
religion. Celestial musicians and their wives sang in chorus about the pure reputation of
the Emperor, and early in the morning, every day, he used to listen to the pastimes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead with a loving heart.
PURPORT
Human society is actually meant for realization of perfection in Kåñëa consciousness.
There is no restriction against living with a wife and children, but life should be so
conducted that one may not go against the principles of religion, economic
development, regulated sense enjoyment and, ultimately, liberation from material
existence. The Vedic principles are designed in such a way that the conditioned souls
who have come to this material existence may be guided in fulfilling their material
desires and at the same time be liberated and go back to Godhead, back home.
It is understood that Emperor Sväyambhuva Manu enjoyed his household life by
following these principles. It is stated here that early in the morning there were
musicians who used to sing with musical instruments about the glories of the Lord, and
the Emperor, with his family, personally used to hear about the pastimes of the Supreme
Person. This custom is still prevalent in India in some of the royal families and temples.
Professional musicians sing with çahnäés, and the sleeping members of the house
gradually get up from their beds in a pleasing atmosphere. During bedtime also the
singers sing songs in relationship with the pastimes of the Lord, with çahnäé
accompaniment, and the householders gradually fall asleep remembering the glories of
the Lord. In every house, in addition to the singing program, there is an arrangement for
Bhägavatam lectures in the evening; family members sit down, hold Hare Kåñëa kértana,
hear narrations from Çrémad-Bhägavatam and Bhagavad-gétä and enjoy music before
going to bed. The atmosphere created by this saìkértana movement lives in their hearts,
and while sleeping they also dream of the singing and glorification of the Lord. In such a
way, perfection of Kåñëa consciousness can be attained. This practice is very old, as
learned from this verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam; millions of years ago, Sväyambhuva
Manu used to avail himself of this opportunity to live householder life in the peace and
prosperity of a Kåñëa consciousness atmosphere.
As far as temples are concerned, in each and every royal palace or rich man's house,
inevitably there is a nice temple, and the members of the household rise early in the
morning and go to the temple to see the maìgalärätrika ceremony. The maìgalärätrika
235
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ceremony is the first worship of the morning. In the ärätrika ceremony a light is offered
in circles before the Deities, as are a conchshell and flowers and a fan. The Lord is
supposed to rise early in the morning and take some light refreshment and give audience
to the devotees. The devotees then go back to the house or sing the glories of the Lord
in the temple. The early morning ceremony still takes place in Indian temples and
palaces. Temples are meant for the assembly of the general public. Temples within
palaces are especially for the royal families, but in many of these palace temples the
public is also allowed to visit. The temple of the King of Jaipur is situated within the
palace, but the public is allowed to assemble; if one goes there, he will see that the
temple is always crowded with at least five hundred devotees. After the maìgalärätrika
ceremony they sit down together and sing the glories of the Lord with musical
instruments and thus enjoy life. Temple worship by the royal family is also mentioned in
Bhagavad-gétä, where it is stated that those who fail to achieve success in the bhakti-yoga
principles within one life are given a chance to take birth in the next life in a family of
rich men or in a royal family or family of learned brähmaëas or devotees. If one gets the
opportunity to take birth in these families, he can achieve the facilities of a Kåñëa
conscious atmosphere without difficulty. A child born in that Kåñëa atmosphere is sure
to develop Kåñëa consciousness. The perfection which he failed to attain in his last life
is again offered in this life, and he can make himself perfect without fail.
SB 3.22.34
TEXT 34
iNaZ<aaTa& YaaeGaMaaYaaSau MauiNa& SvaYaM>auv& MaNauMa( )
Yada>a]&XaiYaTau& >aaeGaa Na Xaeku->aRGavTParMa( )) 34 ))
niñëätaà yogamäyäsu
munià sväyambhuvaà manum
yad äbhraàçayituà bhogä
na çekur bhagavat-param
SYNONYMS
niñëätam—absorbed; yoga-mäyäsu—in temporary enjoyment; munim—who was equal to
a saint; sväyambhuvam—Sväyambhuva; manum—Manu; yat—from which;
äbhraàçayitum—to cause to deviate; bhogäù—material enjoyments; na—not; çekuù—
were able; bhagavat-param—who was a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of
236
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Thus Sväyambhuva Manu was a saintly king. Although absorbed in material happiness,
he was not dragged to the lowest grade of life, for he always enjoyed his material
happiness in a Kåñëa conscious atmosphere.
PURPORT
The kingly happiness of material enjoyment generally drags one to the lowest grade of
life, namely degradation to animal life, because of unrestricted sense enjoyment. But
Sväyambhuva Manu was considered as good as a saintly sage because the atmosphere
created in his kingdom and home was completely Kåñëa conscious. The case is similar
with the conditioned souls in general; they have come into this material life for sense
gratification, but if they are able to create a Kåñëa conscious atmosphere, as depicted
here or as prescribed in revealed scriptures, by temple worship and household Deity
worship, then in spite of their material enjoyment they can make advancement in pure
Kåñëa consciousness without a doubt. At the present moment, modern civilization is too
much attached to the material way of life, or sense gratification. Therefore, the Kåñëa
consciousness movement can give the people in general the best opportunity to utilize
their human life in the midst of material enjoyment. Kåñëa consciousness does not stop
them in their propensity for material enjoyment, but simply regulates their habits in the
life of sense enjoyment. In spite of their enjoying the material advantages, they can be
liberated in this very life by practicing Kåñëa consciousness by the simple method of
chanting the holy names of the Lord—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare
Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare.
SB 3.22.35
TEXT 35
AYaaTaYaaMaaSTaSYaaSaNa( YaaMaa" SvaNTarYaaPaNaa" )
é*<vTaae DYaaYaTaae ivZ<aae" ku-vRTaae b]uvTa" k-Qaa" )) 35 ))
ayäta-yämäs tasyäsan
yämäù sväntara-yäpanäù
çåëvato dhyäyato viñëoù
237
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kurvato bruvataù kathäù
SYNONYMS
ayäta-yämäù—time never lost; tasya—of Manu; äsan—were; yämäù—the hours; svaantara—
his duration of life; yäpanäù—bringing to an end; çåëvataù—hearing;
dhyäyataù—contemplating; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; kurvataù—acting; bruvataù—
speaking; kathäù—the topics.
TRANSLATION
Consequently, although his duration of life gradually came to an end, his long life,
consisting of a Manvantara era, was not spent in vain, since he ever engaged in hearing,
contemplating, writing down and chanting the pastimes of the Lord.
PURPORT
As freshly prepared food is very tasteful but if kept for three or four hours becomes stale
and tasteless, so the existence of material enjoyment can endure as long as life is fresh,
but at the fag end of life everything becomes tasteless, and everything appears to be vain
and painful. The life of Emperor Sväyambhuva Manu, however, was not tasteless; as he
grew older, his life remained as fresh as in the beginning because of his continued Kåñëa
consciousness. The life of a man in Kåñëa consciousness is always fresh. It is said that the
sun rises in the morning and sets in the evening and its business is to reduce the
duration of everyone's life. But the sunrise and sunset cannot diminish the life of one
who engages in Kåñëa consciousness. Sväyambhuva Manu's life did not become stale
after some time, for he engaged himself always in chanting about and meditating upon
Lord Viñëu. He was the greatest yogé because he never wasted his time. It is especially
mentioned here, viñëoù kurvato bruvataù kathäù. When he talked, he talked only of
Kåñëa and Viñëu, the Personality of Godhead; when he heard something, it was about
Kåñëa; when he meditated, it was upon Kåñëa and His activities.
It is stated that his life was very long, seventy-one yugas. One yuga is completed in
4,320,000 years, seventy-one of such yugas is the duration of the life of a Manu, and
fourteen such Manus come and go in one day of Brahma. For the entire duration of his
life - 4,320,000 x 71 years—Manu engaged in Kåñëa consciousness by chanting, hearing,
talking about and meditating upon Kåñëa. Therefore, his life was not wasted, nor did it
become stale.
238
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.22.36
TEXT 36
Sa Wv& SvaNTar& iNaNYae YauGaaNaaMaek-SaáiTaMa( )
vaSaudevPa[Sa(r)eNa Pair>aUTaGaiTa}aYa" )) 36 ))
sa evaà sväntaraà ninye
yugänäm eka-saptatim
väsudeva-prasaìgena
paribhüta-gati-trayaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Sväyambhuva Manu); evam—thus; sva-antaram—his own period; ninye—
passed; yugänäm—of the cycles of four ages; eka-saptatim—seventy-one; väsudeva—with
Väsudeva; prasaìgena—by topics connected; paribhüta—transcended; gati-trayaù—the
three destinations.
TRANSLATION
He passed his time, which lasted seventy-one cycles of the four ages [71 x 4,320,000
years], always thinking of Väsudeva and always engaged in matters regarding Väsudeva.
Thus he transcended the three destinations.
PURPORT
The three destinations are meant for persons who are under the control of the three
modes of material nature. These destinations are sometimes described as the awakened,
dreaming and unconscious stages. In Bhagavad-gétä the three destinations are described
as the destinations of persons in the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. It is
stated in the Gétä that those who are in the mode of goodness are promoted to better
living conditions in higher planets, and those who are in the mode of passion remain
within this material world on the earth or on heavenly planets, but those who are in the
mode of ignorance are degraded to an animal life on planets where life is lower than
human. But one who is Kåñëa conscious is above these three modes of material nature. It
is stated in Bhagavad-gétä that anyone who engages in devotional service to the Lord
automatically becomes transcendental to the three destinations of material nature and is
239
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
situated in the brahma-bhüta [SB 4.30.20], or self-realized, stage. Although Sväyambhuva
Manu, the ruler of this material world, appeared to be absorbed in material happiness, he
was neither in the mode of goodness nor in the modes of passion or ignorance, but in the
transcendental stage.
Therefore, one who fully engages in devotional service is always liberated. Bilvamaìgala
Öhäkura, a great devotee of the Lord, stated: "If I have unflinching devotion to the lotus
feet of Kåñëa, then Mother Liberation is always engaged in my service. The complete
perfection of material enjoyment, religion and economic development is at my
command." People are after dharma, artha, käma and mokña. Generally they perform
religious activities to achieve some material gain, and they engage in material activity
for sense gratification. After being frustrated in material sense gratification, one wants
to be liberated and become one with the Absolute Truth. These four principles form the
transcendental path for the less intelligent. Those who are actually intelligent engage in
Kåñëa consciousness, not caring for these four principles of the transcendental method.
They at once elevate themselves to the transcendental platform which is above
liberation. Liberation is not a very great achievement for a devotee, to say nothing of
the results of ritualistic performances in religion, economic development or the
materialistic life of sense gratification. Devotees do not care for these. They are situated
always on the transcendental platform of the brahma-bhüta [SB 4.30.20] stage of selfrealization.
SB 3.22.37
TEXT 37
Xaarqra MaaNaSaa idVYaa vEYaaSae Yae c MaaNauza" )
>aaEiTak-aê k-Qa& (c)e-Xaa baDaNTae hirSa&é[YaMa( )) 37 ))
çärérä mänasä divyä
vaiyäse ye ca mänuñäù
bhautikäç ca kathaà kleçä
bädhante hari-saàçrayam
SYNONYMS
çäréräù—pertaining to the body; mänasäù—pertaining to the mind; divyäù—pertaining
to supernatural powers (demigods); vaiyäse—O Vidura; ye—those; ca—and; mänuñäù—
pertaining to other men; bhautikäù—pertaining to other living beings; ca—and;
240
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
katham—how; kleçäù—miseries; bädhante—can trouble; hari-saàçrayam—one who has
taken shelter of Lord Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Vidura, how can persons completely under the shelter of Lord Kåñëa in
devotional service be put into miseries pertaining to the body, the mind, nature, and other
men and living creatures?
PURPORT
Every living entity within this material world is always afflicted by some kind of
miseries, pertaining either to the body, the mind or natural disturbances. Distresses due
to cold in winter and severe heat in summer always inflict miseries on the living entities
in this material world, but one who has completely taken shelter of the lotus feet of the
Lord in Kåñëa consciousness is in the transcendental stage; he is not disturbed by any
miseries, either due to the body, the mind, or natural disturbances of summer and
winter. He is transcendental to all these miseries.
SB 3.22.38
TEXT 38
Ya" Pa*íae MauiNai>a" Pa[ah DaMaaRàaNaaivDaaH^u>aaNa( )
Na*<aa& v<aaRé[Maa<aa& c SavR>aUTaihTa" Sada )) 38 ))
yaù påñöo munibhiù präha
dharmän nänä-vidhäï chubhän
nåëäà varëäçramäëäà ca
sarva-bhüta-hitaù sadä
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; påñöaù—being questioned; munibhiù—by the sages; präha—spoke;
dharmän—the duties; nänä-vidhän—many varieties; çubhän—auspicious; nåëäm—of
human society; varëa-äçramäëäm—of the varëas and äçramas; ca—and; sarva-bhüta—
for all living beings; hitaù—who does welfare; sadä—always.
TRANSLATION
241
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
In reply to questions asked by certain sages, he [Sväyambhuva Manu], out of compassion
for all living entities, taught the diverse sacred duties of men in general and the different
varëas and äçramas.
SB 3.22.39
TEXT 39
WTata AaidraJaSYa MaNaaeêirTaMad(>auTaMa( )
vi<aRTa& v<aRNaqYaSYa TadPaTYaaedYa& é*<au )) 39 ))
etat ta ädi-räjasya
manoç caritam adbhutam
varëitaà varëanéyasya
tad-apatyodayaà çåëu
SYNONYMS
etat—this; te—unto you; ädi-räjasya—of the first emperor; manoù—of Sväyambhuva
Manu; caritam—the character; adbhutam—wonderful; varëitam—described;
varëanéyasya—whose reputation is worthy of description; tat-apatya—of his daughter;
udayam—to the flourishing; çåëu—please listen.
TRANSLATION
I have spoken to you of the wonderful character of Sväyambhuva Manu, the original
king, whose reputation is worthy of description. Please hear as I speak of the flourishing
of his daughter Devahüti.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Twenty-second Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Marriage of Kardama Muni and Devahüti."
23. Devahüti's Lamentation
SB 3.23.1
242
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 1
MaE}aeYa ovac
iPaTa*>Yaa& Pa[iSQaTae Saaßq PaiTaiMai(r)Tak-aeivda )
iNaTYa& PaYaRcrTPa[qTYaa >avaNaqv >av& Pa[>auMa( )) 1 ))
maitreya uväca
pitåbhyäà prasthite sädhvé
patim iìgita-kovidä
nityaà paryacarat prétyä
bhavänéva bhavaà prabhum
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; pitåbhyäm—by the parents; prasthite—at the departure;
sädhvé—the chaste woman; patim—her husband; iìgita-kovidä—understanding the
desires; nityam—constantly; paryacarat—she served; prétyä—with great love; bhaväné—
the goddess Pärvaté; iva—like; bhavam—Lord Çiva; prabhum—her lord.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya continued: After the departure of her parents, the chaste woman Devahüti, who
could understand the desires of her husband, served him constantly with great love, as
Bhaväné, the wife of Lord Çiva, serves her husband.
PURPORT
The specific example of Bhaväné is very significant. Bhaväné means the wife of Bhava, or
Lord Çiva. Bhaväné, or Pärvaté, the daughter of the King of the Himalayas, selected Lord
Çiva, who appears to be just like a beggar, as her husband. In spite of her being a
princess, she undertook all kinds of tribulations to associate with Lord Çiva, who did not
even have a house, but was sitting underneath the trees and passing his time in
meditation. Although Bhaväné was the daughter of a very great king, she used to serve
Lord Çiva just like a poor woman. Similarly, Devahüti was the daughter of an emperor,
Sväyambhuva Manu, yet she preferred to accept Kardama Muni as her husband. She
served him with great love and affection, and she knew how to please him. Therefore,
she is designated here as sädhvé, which means "a chaste, faithful wife." Her rare example
243
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
is the ideal of Vedic civilization. Every woman is expected to be as good and chaste as
Devahüti or Bhaväné. Today in Hindu society, unmarried girls are still taught to worship
Lord Çiva with the idea that they may get husbands like him. Lord Çiva is the ideal
husband, not in the sense of riches or sense gratification, but because he is the greatest
of all devotees. Vaiñëavänäà yathä çambhuù: Çambhu, or Lord Çiva, is the ideal
Vaiñëava. He constantly meditates upon Lord Räma and chants Hare Räma, Hare Räma,
Räma Räma, Hare Hare. Lord Çiva has a Vaiñëava sampradäya, which is called the Viñëu
Svämé-sampradäya. Unmarried girls worship Lord Çiva so that they can expect a
husband who is as good a Vaiñëava as he. The girls are not taught to select a husband
who is very rich or very opulent for material sense gratification; rather, if a girl is
fortunate enough to get a husband as good as Lord Çiva in devotional service, then her
life becomes perfect. The wife is dependent on the husband, and if the husband is a
Vaiñëava, then naturally she shares the devotional service of the husband because she
renders him service. This reciprocation of service and love between husband and wife is
the ideal of a householder's life.
SB 3.23.2
TEXT 2
ivé[M>ae<aaTMaXaaEceNa GaaErve<a dMaeNa c )
éué[UzYaa SaaEôdeNa vaca MaDaurYaa c >aae" )) 2 ))
viçrambheëätma-çaucena
gauraveëa damena ca
çuçrüñayä sauhådena
väcä madhurayä ca bhoù
SYNONYMS
viçrambheëa—with intimacy; ätma-çaucena—with purity of mind and body;
gauraveëa—with great respect; damena—with control of the senses; ca—and;
çuçrüñayä—with service; sauhådena—with love; väcä—with words; madhurayä—sweet;
ca—and; bhoù—O Vidura.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, Devahüti served her husband with intimacy and great respect, with control of
244
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the senses, with love and with sweet words.
PURPORT
Here two words are very significant. Devahüti served her husband in two ways,
viçrambheëa and gauraveëa. These are two important processes in serving the husband
or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Viçrambheëa means "with intimacy," and
gauraveëa means "with great reverence." The husband is a very intimate friend;
therefore, the wife must render service just like an intimate friend, and at the same time
she must understand that the husband is superior in position, and thus she must offer
him all respect. A man's psychology and woman's psychology are different. As
constituted by bodily frame, a man always wants to be superior to his wife, and a woman,
as bodily constituted, is naturally inferior to her husband. Thus the natural instinct is
that the husband wants to post himself as superior to the wife, and this must be
observed. Even if there is some wrong on the part of the husband, the wife must tolerate
it, and thus there will be no misunderstanding between husband and wife. Viçrambheëa
means "with intimacy," but it must not be familiarity that breeds contempt. According
to the Vedic civilization, a wife cannot call her husband by name. In the present
civilization the wife calls her husband by name, but in Hindu civilization she does not.
Thus the inferiority and superiority complexes are recognized. Damena ca: a wife has to
learn to control herself even if there is a misunderstanding. Sauhådena väcä madhurayä
means always desiring good for the husband and speaking to him with sweet words. A
person becomes agitated by so many material contacts in the outside world; therefore, in
his home life he must be treated by his wife with sweet words.
SB 3.23.3
TEXT 3
ivSa*JYa k-aMa& dM>a& c Üez& l/ae>aMaga& MadMa( )
APa[MataaeÛTaa iNaTYa& TaeJaqYaa&SaMaTaaezYaTa( )) 3 ))
visåjya kämaà dambhaà ca
dveñaà lobham aghaà madam
apramattodyatä nityaà
tejéyäàsam atoñayat
SYNONYMS
245
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
visåjya—giving up; kämam—lust; dambham—pride; ca—and; dveñam—envy; lobham—
greed; agham—sinful activities; madam—vanity; apramattä—sane; udyatä—laboring
diligently; nityam—always; tejéyäàsam—her very powerful husband; atoñayat—she
pleased.
TRANSLATION
Working sanely and diligently, she pleased her very powerful husband, giving up all lust,
pride, envy, greed, sinful activities and vanity.
PURPORT
Here are some of the qualities of a great husband's great wife. Kardama Muni is great by
spiritual qualification. Such a husband is called tejéyäàsam, most powerful. Although a
wife may be equal to her husband in advancement in spiritual consciousness, she should
not be vainly proud. Sometimes it happens that the wife comes from a very rich family,
as did Devahüti, the daughter of Emperor Sväyambhuva Manu. She could have been
very proud of her parentage, but that is forbidden. The wife should not be proud of her
parental position. She must always be submissive to the husband and must give up all
vanity. As soon as the wife becomes proud of her parentage, her pride creates great
misunderstanding between the husband and wife, and their nuptial life is ruined.
Devahüti was very careful about that, and therefore it is said here that she gave up pride
completely. Devahüti was not unfaithful. The most sinful activity for a wife is to accept
another husband or another lover. Cäëakya Paëòita has described four kinds of enemies
at home. If the father is in debt he is considered to be an enemy; if the mother has
selected another husband in the presence of her grown-up children, she is considered to
be an enemy; if a wife does not live well with her husband but deals very roughly, then
she is an enemy; and if a son is a fool, he is also an enemy. In family life, father, mother,
wife and children are assets, but if the wife or mother accepts another husband in the
presence of her husband or son, then, according to Vedic civilization, she is considered
an enemy. A chaste and faithful woman must not practice adultery—that is a greatly
sinful act.
SB 3.23.4, SB 3.23.5, SB 3.23.4-5
TEXTS 4-5
Sa vE devizRvYaRSTaa& MaaNavq& SaMaNauv]TaaMa( )
246
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
dEvaÓrqYaSa" PaTYauraXaaSaaNaa& MahaiXaz" )) 4 ))
k-ale/Na >aUYaSaa +aaMaa& k-iXaRTaa& v]TacYaRYaa )
Pa[eMaGaÓdYaa vaca Paqi@Ta" k*-PaYaab]vqTa( )) 5 ))
sa vai devarñi-varyas täà
mänavéà samanuvratäm
daiväd garéyasaù patyur
äçäsänäà mahäçiñaù
kälena bhüyasä kñämäà
karçitäà vrata-caryayä
prema-gadgadayä väcä
péòitaù kåpayäbravét
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Kardama); vai—certainly; deva-åñi—of the celestial sages; varyaù—the
foremost; täm—her; mänavém—the daughter of Manu; samanuvratäm—fully devoted;
daivät—than providence; garéyasaù—who was greater; patyuù—from her husband;
äçäsänäm—expecting; mahä-äçiñaù—great blessings; kälena bhüyasä—for a long time;
kñämäm—weak; karçitäm—emaciated; vrata-caryayä—by religious observances;
prema—with love; gadgadayä—stammering; väcä—with a voice; péòitaù—overcome;
kåpayä—with compassion; abravét—he said.
TRANSLATION
The daughter of Manu, who was fully devoted to her husband, looked upon him as
greater even than providence. Thus she expected great blessings from him. Having served
him for a long time, she grew weak and emaciated due to her religious observances.
Seeing her condition, Kardama, the foremost of celestial sages, was overcome with
compassion and spoke to her in a voice choked with great love.
PURPORT
The wife is expected to be of the same category as the husband. She must be prepared to
follow the principles of the husband, and then there will be happy life. If the husband is
a devotee and the wife is materialistic, there cannot be any peace in the home. The wife
247
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
must see the tendencies of the husband and must be prepared to follow him. From
Mahäbhärata we learn that when Gändhäré understood that her would-be husband,
Dhåtaräñöra, was blind, she immediately began to practice blindness herself. Thus she
covered her eyes and played the part of a blind woman. She decided that since her
husband was blind, she must also act like a blind woman, otherwise she would be proud
of her eyes, and her husband would be seen as inferior. The word samanuvrata indicates
that it is the duty of a wife to adopt the special circumstances in which the husband is
situated. Of course, if the husband is as great as Kardama Muni, then a very good result
accrues from following him. But even if the husband is not a great devotee like Kardama
Muni, it is the wife's duty to adapt herself according to his mentality. That makes
married life very happy. It is also mentioned herein that by following the strict vows of a
chaste woman, Princess Devahüti became very skinny, and therefore her husband
became compassionate. He knew that she was the daughter of a great king and yet was
serving him just like an ordinary woman. She was reduced in health by such activities,
and he became compassionate and addressed her as follows.
SB 3.23.6
TEXT 6
k-dRMa ovac
Tauíae_hMaÛ Tav MaaNaiv MaaNadaYaa"
éué[UzYaa ParMaYaa ParYaa c >a¢-ya )
Yaae deihNaaMaYaMaTaqv SauôTSa dehae
Naavei+aTa" SaMauicTa" +aiPaTau& MadQaeR )) 6 ))
kardama uväca
tuñöo 'ham adya tava mänavi mänadäyäù
çuçrüñayä paramayä parayä ca bhaktyä
yo dehinäm ayam atéva suhåt sa deho
nävekñitaù samucitaù kñapituà mad-arthe
SYNONYMS
kardamaù uväca—the great sage Kardama said; tuñöaù—pleased; aham—I am; adya—
today; tava—with you; mänavi—O daughter of Manu; mäna-däyäù—who are respectful;
çuçrüñayä—by the service; paramayä—most excellent; parayä—highest; ca—and;
248
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bhaktyä—by the devotion; yaù—that which; dehinäm—to the embodied; ayam—this;
atéva—extremely; suhåt—dear; saù—that; dehaù—body; na—not; avekñitaù—taken care
of; samucitaù—properly; kñapitum—to expend; mat-arthe—on my account.
TRANSLATION
Kardama Muni said: O respectful daughter of Sväyambhuva Manu, today I am very much
pleased with you for your great devotion and most excellent loving service. Since the body
is so dear to embodied beings, I am astonished that you have neglected your own body to
use it on my behalf.
PURPORT
It is indicated here that one's body is very dear, yet Devahüti was so faithful to her
husband that not only did she serve him with great devotion, service and respect, but
she did not even care for her own health. That is called selfless service. It appears that
Devahüti had no sense pleasure, even with her husband, otherwise she would not have
deteriorated in health. Acting to facilitate Kardama Muni's engagement in spiritual
elevation, she continually assisted him, not caring for bodily comfort. It is the duty of a
faithful and chaste wife to help her husband in every respect, especially when the
husband is engaged in Kåñëa consciousness. In this case, the husband also amply
rewarded the wife. This is not to be expected by a woman who is the wife of an ordinary
person.
SB 3.23.7
TEXT 7
Yae Mae SvDaMaRiNarTaSYa TaPa"SaMaaiDa‚
ivÛaTMaYaaeGaiviJaTaa >aGavTPa[Saada" )
TaaNaev Tae MadNauSaevNaYaavåÖaNa(
d*ií& Pa[PaXYa ivTaraMYa>aYaaNaXaaek-aNa( )) 7 ))
ye me sva-dharma-niratasya tapaù-samädhividyätma-
yoga-vijitä bhagavat-prasädäù
tän eva te mad-anusevanayävaruddhän
dåñöià prapaçya vitarämy abhayän açokän
249
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
ye—those which; me—by me; sva-dharma—own religious life; niratasya—fully occupied
with; tapaù—in austerity; samädhi—in meditation; vidyä—in Kåñëa consciousness;
ätma-yoga—by fixing the mind; vijitäù—achieved; bhagavat-prasädäù—the blessings of
the Lord; tän—them; eva—even; te—by you; mat—to me; anusevanayä—by devoted
service; avaruddhän—obtained; dåñöim—transcendental vision; prapaçya—just see;
vitarämi—I am giving; abhayän—which are free from fear; açokän—which are free from
lamentation.
TRANSLATION
Kardama Muni continued: I have achieved the blessings of the Lord in discharging my
own religious life of austerity, meditation and Kåñëa consciousness. Although you have
not yet experienced these achievements, which are free from fear and lamentation, I shall
offer them all to you because you are engaged in my service. Now just look at them. I am
giving you the transcendental vision to see how nice they are.
PURPORT
Devahüti engaged only in the service of Kardama Muni. She was not supposed to be so
advanced in austerity, ecstasy, meditation or Kåñëa consciousness, but, imperceptibly,
she was sharing her husband's achievements, which she could neither see nor
experience. Automatically she achieved these graces of the Lord.
What are the graces of the Lord? It is stated here that the graces of the Lord are abhaya,
free from fearfulness. In the material world, if someone accumulates a million dollars, he
is always full of fear because he is always thinking, "What if the money is lost?" But the
benediction of the Lord, bhagavat-prasäda, is never to be lost. It is simply to be enjoyed.
There is no question of loss. One simply gains and enjoys gaining. Bhagavad-gétä also
confirms this: when one achieves the grace of the Lord, the result is that sarva-duùkhäni,
all distresses, are destroyed. When situated in the transcendental position, one is freed
from the two kinds of material diseases—hankering and lamentation. This is also stated
in Bhagavad-gétä. After devotional life begins, we can achieve the full result of love of
Godhead. Love of Kåñëa is the highest perfection of bhagavat-prasäda, or divine mercy.
This transcendental achievement is so greatly valuable that no material happiness can
compare to it. Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté said that if one achieves the grace of Lord
Caitanya he becomes so great that he does not care a fig even for the demigods, he
250
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
thinks of monism as hellish, and for him the perfection of controlling the senses is as
easy as anything. Heavenly pleasures become to him no more than stories. Actually,
there is no comparison between material happiness and transcendental happiness.
By the grace of Kardama Muni, Devahüti experienced actual realization simply by
serving. We get a similar example in the life of Närada Muni. In his previous life,
Närada was a maidservant's son, but his mother was engaged in the service of great
devotees. He got the opportunity to serve the devotees, and simply by eating the
remnants of their foodstuff and carrying out their orders he became so elevated that in
his next life he became the great personality Närada. For spiritual achievement the
easiest path is to take shelter of a bona fide spiritual master and to serve him with heart
and soul. That is the secret of success. As stated by Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura in
his eight stanzas of prayer to the spiritual master, yasya prasädäd bhagavat-prasädaù: **
by serving or receiving the grace of the spiritual master, one receives the grace of the
Supreme Lord. By serving her devotee husband, Kardama Muni, Devahüti shared in his
achievements. Similarly, a sincere disciple, simply by serving a bona fide spiritual
master, can achieve all the mercy of the Lord and the spiritual master simultaneously.
SB 3.23.8
TEXT 8
ANYae PauNa>aRGavTaae >a]uv oiÜJa*M>a‚
iv>a]&iXaTaaQaRrcNaa" ik-Mauå§-MaSYa )
iSaÖaiSa >au&+v iv>avaiàJaDaMaRdaehaNa(
idVYaaàrEduRriDaGaaà*Paivi§-Yaai>a" )) 8 ))
anye punar bhagavato bhruva udvijåmbhavibhraàçitärtha-
racanäù kim urukramasya
siddhäsi bhuìkñva vibhavän nija-dharma-dohän
divyän narair duradhigän nåpa-vikriyäbhiù
SYNONYMS
anye—others; punaù—again; bhagavataù—of the Lord; bhruvaù—of the eyebrows;
udvijåmbha—by the movement; vibhraàçita—annihilated; artha-racanäù—material
achievements; kim—what use; urukramasya—of Lord Viñëu (far-stepping); siddhä—
successful; asi—you are; bhuìkñva—enjoy; vibhavän—the gifts; nija-dharma—by your
251
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
own principles of devotion; dohän—gained; divyän—transcendental; naraiù—by
persons; duradhigän—difficult to obtain; nåpa-vikriyäbhiù—proud of aristocracy.
TRANSLATION
Kardama Muni continued: What is the use of enjoyments other than the Lord's grace?
All material achievements are subject to be annihilated simply by a movement of the
eyebrows of Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By your principles of
devotion to your husband, you have achieved and can enjoy transcendental gifts very
rarely obtained by persons proud of aristocracy and material possessions.
PURPORT
Lord Caitanya recommended that the greatest achievement of human life is to achieve
the grace of the Lord, love of God. He said, premä pumartho mahän: to achieve love of
Godhead is the highest perfection of life. The same perfection is recommended by
Kardama Muni to his wife. His wife belonged to a very aristocratic royal family.
Generally, those who are very materialistic or who possess material wealth and
prosperity are unable to appreciate the value of transcendental love of God. Although
Devahüti was a princess coming from a very great royal family, fortunately she was
under the supervision of her great husband, Kardama Muni, who offered her the best
gift which can be bestowed in human life—the grace of the Lord, or love of God. This
grace of the Lord was achieved by Devahüti by the good will and satisfaction of her
husband. She served her husband, who was a great devotee and saintly person, with
great sincerity, love, affection and service, and Kardama Muni was satisfied. He willingly
gave love of God, and he recommended that she accept it and enjoy it because he had
already achieved it.
Love of God is not an ordinary commodity. Caitanya Mahäprabhu was worshiped by
Rüpa Gosvämé because He distributed love of God, kåñëa-premä, to everyone. Rüpa
Gosvämé praised Him as mahä-vadänya, a greatly munificent personality, because He
was freely distributing to everyone love of Godhead, which is achieved by wise men only
after many, many births. Kåñëa-premä, Kåñëa consciousness, is the highest gift which
can be bestowed on anyone whom we presume to love.
One word used in this verse, nija-dharma-dohän, is very significant. Devahüti, as the
wife of Kardama Muni, achieved an invaluable gift from her husband because she was
very faithful to him. For a woman the first principle of religion is to be faithful to her
husband. If, fortunately, the husband is a great personality, then the combination is
252
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
perfect, and the lives of both the wife and the husband are at once fulfilled.
SB 3.23.9
TEXT 9
Wv& b]uva<aMabl/ai%l/YaaeGaMaaYaa‚
ivÛaivc+a<aMave+Ya GaTaaiDaraSaqTa( )
SaMPa[é[YaPa[<aYaivûl/Yaa iGarezd(‚
v]q@avl/aek-ivl/SaÖiSaTaaNaNaah )) 9 ))
evaà bruväëam abaläkhila-yogamäyävidyä-
vicakñaëam avekñya gatädhir äsét
sampraçraya-praëaya-vihvalayä gireñadvréòävaloka-
vilasad-dhasitänanäha
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; bruväëam—speaking; abalä—the woman; akhila—all; yoga-mäyä—of
transcendental science; vidyä-vicakñaëam—excelling in knowledge; avekñya—after
hearing; gata-ädhiù—satisfied; äsét—she became; sampraçraya—with humility;
praëaya—and with love; vihvalayä—choked up; girä—with a voice; éñat—slightly;
vréòä—bashful; avaloka—with a glance; vilasat—shining; hasita—smiling; änanä—her
face; äha—she spoke.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing the speaking of her husband, who excelled in knowledge of all kinds of
transcendental science, innocent Devahüti was very satisfied. Her smiling face shining
with a slightly bashful glance, she spoke in a choked voice because of great humility and
love.
PURPORT
It is said that if one is already engaged in Kåñëa consciousness and is rendering
transcendental loving service to the Lord, then it can be supposed that he has finished
all the recommended courses of austerity, penance, religion, sacrifice, mystic yoga and
meditation. Devahüti's husband was so expert in the transcendental science that there
253
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
was nothing for him to argue about, and when she heard him speak she was confident
that since he was very much advanced in devotional service he had already surpassed all
transcendental educational activities. She had no doubt about the gifts offered by her
husband; she knew that he was expert in offering such gifts, and when she understood
that he was offering the greatest gift, she was very satisfied. She was overwhelmed with
ecstatic love, and therefore she could not reply; then, with faltering language, just like
an attractive wife, she spoke the following words.
SB 3.23.10
TEXT 10
devhUiTaåvac
raÖ& bTa iÜJav*zETadMaaegaYaaeGa‚
MaaYaaiDaPae TviYa iv>aae TadvEiMa >aTaR" )
YaSTae_>YaDaaiYa SaMaYa" Sak*-d(r)Sa(r)ae
>aUYaaÓrqYaiSa Gau<a" Pa[Sav" SaTaqNaaMa( )) 10 ))
devahütir uväca
räddhaà bata dvija-våñaitad amogha-yogamäyädhipe
tvayi vibho tad avaimi bhartaù
yas te 'bhyadhäyi samayaù sakåd aìga-saìgo
bhüyäd garéyasi guëaù prasavaù saténäm
SYNONYMS
devahütiù uväca—Devahüti said; räddham—it has been achieved; bata—indeed; dvijavåña—
O best of the brähmaëas; etat—this; amogha—infallible; yoga-mäyä—of mystic
powers; adhipe—the master; tvayi—in you; vibho—O great one; tat—that; avaimi—I
know; bhartaù—O husband; yaù—that which; te—by you; abhyadhäyi—was given;
samayaù—promise; sakåt—once; aìga-saìgaù—bodily union; bhüyät—may be;
garéyasi—when very glorious; guëaù—a great quality; prasavaù—progeny; saténäm—of
chaste women.
TRANSLATION
Çré Devahüti said: My dear husband, O best of brähmaëas, I know that you have achieved
254
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
perfection and are the master of all the infallible mystic powers because you are under the
protection of yogamäyä, the transcendental nature. But you once made a promise that our
bodily union should now fulfill, since children are a great quality for a chaste woman who
has a glorious husband.
PURPORT
Devahüti expressed her happiness by uttering the word bata, for she knew that her
husband was in a highly elevated, transcendental position and was under the shelter of
yogamäyä. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, those who are great souls, mahätmäs, are not
under the control of the material energy. The Supreme Lord has two energies, material
and spiritual. The living entities are marginal energy. As marginal energy, a person may
be under the control of the material energy or the spiritual energy (yogamäyä). Kardama
Muni was a great soul, and therefore he was under the spiritual energy, which means
that he was directly connected with the Supreme Lord. The symptom of this is Kåñëa
consciousness, constant engagement in devotional service. This was known to Devahüti,
yet she was anxious to have a son by bodily union with the sage. She reminded her
husband of his promise to her parents: "I will remain only until the time of Devahüti's
pregnancy." She reminded him that for a chaste woman to have a child by a great
personality is most glorious. She wanted to be pregnant, and she prayed for that. The
word stré means "expansion." By bodily union of the husband and wife their qualities are
expanded: children born of good parents are expansions of the parents' personal
qualifications. Both Kardama Muni and Devahüti were spiritually enlightened;
therefore she desired from the beginning that first she be pregnant and then she be
empowered with the achievement of God's grace and love of God. For a woman it is a
great ambition to have a son of the same quality as a highly qualified husband. Since she
had the opportunity to have Kardama Muni as her husband, she also desired to have a
child by bodily union.
SB 3.23.11
TEXT 11
Ta}aeiTak*-TYaMauPaiXa+a YaQaaePadeXa&
YaeNaEz Mae k-iXaRTaae_iTairr&SaYaaTMaa )
iSaÖyeTa Tae k*-TaMaNaae>avDaizRTaaYaa
dqNaSTadqXa >avNa& Sad*Xa& ivc+v )) 11 ))
255
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tatreti-kåtyam upaçikña yathopadeçaà
yenaiña me karçito 'tiriraàsayätmä
siddhyeta te kåta-manobhava-dharñitäyä
dénas tad éça bhavanaà sadåçaà vicakñva
SYNONYMS
tatra—in that; iti-kåtyam—what is necessary to be done; upaçikña—perform; yathä—
according to; upadeçam—instruction in scripture; yena—by which; eñaù—this; me—my;
karçitaù—emaciated; atiriraà-sayä—due to intense passion not being satisfied; ätmä—
body; siddhyeta—it may he rendered fit; te—for you; kåta—excited; manaù-bhava—by
emotion; dharñitäyäù—who am struck; dénaù—poor; tat—therefore; éça—O my dear
lord; bhavanam—house; sadåçam—suitable; vicakñva—please think of.
TRANSLATION
Devahüti continued: My dear lord, I am struck by excited emotion for you. Therefore
kindly make what arrangements must be made according to the scriptures so that my
skinny body, emaciated through unsatisfied passion, may be rendered fit for you. Also,
my lord, please think of a suitable house for this purpose.
PURPORT
The Vedic literatures are not only full of spiritual instruction but are also instructive in
how to prosecute material existence very nicely, with the ultimate aim of spiritual
perfection. Devahüti asked her husband, therefore, how to prepare herself for sex life
according to the Vedic instructions. Sex life is especially meant for having good
children. The circumstances for creating good children are mentioned in käma-çästra,
the scripture in which suitable arrangements are prescribed for factually glorious sex
life. Everything needed is mentioned in the scriptures—what sort of house and
decorations there should be, what sort of dress the wife should have, how she should be
decorated with ointments, scents and other attractive features, etc. With these
requisites fulfilled, the husband will be attracted by her beauty, and a favorable mental
situation will be created. The mental situation at the time of sex life may then be
transferred into the womb of the wife, and good children can come out of that
pregnancy. Here is a special reference to Devahüti's bodily features. Because she had
become skinny, she feared that her body might have no attraction for Kardama. She
256
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
wanted to be instructed how to improve her bodily condition in order to attract her
husband. Sexual intercourse in which the husband is attracted to the wife is sure to
produce a male child, but sexual intercourse based on attraction of the wife for the
husband may produce a girl. That is mentioned in the Äyur-veda. When the passion of
the woman is greater, there is a chance of a girl's being born. When the passion of the
man is greater, then there is the possibility of a son. Devahüti wanted the passion of her
husband to be increased by the arrangement mentioned in the käma-çästra. She wanted
him to instruct her in that way, and she also requested that he arrange for a suitable
house because the hermitage in which Kardama Muni was living was very simple and
completely in the mode of goodness, and there was less possibility of passion's being
aroused in his heart.
SB 3.23.12
TEXT 12
MaE}aeYa ovac
iPa[YaaYaa" iPa[YaMaiNvC^Na( k-dRMaae YaaeGaMaaiSQaTa" )
ivMaaNa& k-aMaGa& +ataSTaùeRvaivrcqk-rTa( )) 12 ))
maitreya uväca
priyäyäù priyam anvicchan
kardamo yogam ästhitaù
vimänaà käma-gaà kñattas
tarhy eväviracékarat
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù—the great sage Maitreya; uväca—said; priyäyäù—of his beloved wife;
priyam—the pleasure; anvicchan—seeking; kardamaù—the sage Kardama; yogam—
yogic power; ästhitaù—exercised; vimänam—an airplane; käma-gam—moving at will;
kñattaù—O Vidura; tarhi—instantly; eva—quite; äviracékarat—he produced.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya continued: O Vidura, seeking to please his beloved wife, the sage Kardama
exercised his yogic power and instantly produced an aerial mansion that could travel at his
will.
257
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Here the words yogam ästhitaù are significant. The sage Kardama was completely perfect
in yoga. As the result of real yoga practice there are eight kinds of perfection: the yogé
can become smaller than the smallest, greater than the greatest or lighter than the
lightest, he can achieve anything he likes, he can create even a planet, he can establish
influence over anyone, etc. In this way yogic perfection is achieved, and after this one
can achieve the perfection of spiritual life. Thus it was not very wonderful for Kardama
Muni to create a mansion in the air, according to his own desire, to fulfill the desire of
his beloved wife. He at once created the palace, which is described in the following
verses.
SB 3.23.13
TEXT 13
SavRk-aMaduga& idVYa& SavRrÒSaMaiNvTaMa( )
SavRÖyuRPacYaaedk|- Mai<aSTaM>aEåPaSk*-TaMa( )) 13 ))
sarva-käma-dughaà divyaà
sarva-ratna-samanvitam
sarvarddhy-upacayodarkaà
maëi-stambhair upaskåtam
SYNONYMS
sarva—all; käma—desires; dugham—yielding; divyam—wonderful; sarva-ratna—all
sorts of jewels; samanvitam—bedecked with; sarva—all; åddhi—of wealth; upacaya—
increase; udarkam—gradual; maëi—of precious stones; stambhaiù—with pillars;
upaskåtam—adorned.
TRANSLATION
It was a wonderful structure, bedecked with all sorts of jewels, adorned with pillars of
precious stones, and capable of yielding whatever one desired. It was equipped with every
form of furniture and wealth, which tended to increase in the course of time.
PURPORT
258
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The castle created in the sky by Kardama Muni may be called "a castle in the air," but by
his mystic power of yoga Kardama Muni actually constructed a huge castle in the air. To
our feeble imagination, a castle in the sky is an impossibility, but if we scrutinizingly
consider the matter we can understand that it is not impossible at all. If the Supreme
Personality of Godhead can create so many planets, carrying millions of castles in the
air, a perfect yogé like Kardama Muni can easily construct one castle in the air. The
castle is described as sarva-käma-dugham, "yielding whatever one desired." It was full of
jewels. Even the pillars were made of pearls and valuable stones. These valuable jewels
and stones were not subject to deterioration, but were everlastingly and increasingly
opulent. We sometimes hear of castles thus bedecked on the surface of this earth also.
The castles constructed by Lord Kåñëa for His lamplight during the night.
SB 3.23.14, SB 3.23.15, SB 3.23.14-15
TEXTS 14-15
idVYaaePak-r<aaePaeTa& SavRk-al/Sau%avhMa( )
PaiÆk-ai>a" PaTaak-ai>aivRic}aai>arl/x(k*-TaMa( )) 14 ))
óiG>aivRic}aMaaLYaai>aMaRÅuiXaÅTz@x(iga]i>a" )
dukU-l/+aaEMak-aEXaeYaENaaRNaavñEivRraiJaTaMa( )) 15 ))
divyopakaraëopetaà
sarva-käla-sukhävaham
paööikäbhiù patäkäbhir
viciträbhir alaìkåtam
sragbhir vicitra-mälyäbhir
maïju-çiïjat-ñaò-aìghribhiù
duküla-kñauma-kauçeyair
nänä-vastrair viräjitam
SYNONYMS
divya—wonderful; upakaraëa—with paraphernalia; upetam—equipped; sarva-käla—in
all seasons; sukha-ävaham—bringing happiness; paööikäbhiù—with festoons;
patäkäbhiù—with flags; viciträbhiù—of various colors and fabrics; alaìkåtam—
decorated; sragbhiù—with wreaths; vicitra-mälyäbhiù—with charming flowers; maïju—
sweet; çiïjat—humming; ñaö-aìghribhiù—with bees; duküla—fine cloth; kñauma—linen;
259
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kauçeyaiù—of silk cloth; nänä—various; vastraiù—with tapestries; viräjitam—
embellished.
TRANSLATION
The castle was fully equipped with all necessary paraphernalia, and it was pleasing in all
seasons. It was decorated all around with flags, festoons and artistic work of variegated
colors. It was further embellished with wreaths of charming flowers that attracted sweetly
humming bees and with tapestries of linen, silk and various other fabrics.
SB 3.23.16
TEXT 16
oPaYauRPair ivNYaSTaiNal/Yaezu Pa*QaKPa*Qak(- )
i+aáE" k-iXaPaui>a" k-aNTa& PaYaRªVYaJaNaaSaNaE" )) 16 ))
upary upari vinyastanilayeñu
påthak påthak
kñiptaiù kaçipubhiù käntaà
paryaìka-vyajanäsanaiù
SYNONYMS
upari upari—one upon another; vinyasta—placed; nilayeñu—in stories; påthak påthak—
separately; kñiptaiù—arranged; kaçipubhiù—with beds; käntam—charming; paryaìka—
couches; vyajana—fans; äsanaiù—with seats.
TRANSLATION
The palace looked charming, with beds, couches, fans and seats, all separately arranged in
seven stories.
PURPORT
It is understood from this verse that the castle had many stories. The words upary upari
vinyasta indicate that skyscrapers are not newly invented. Even in those days, millions
of years ago, the idea of building many-storied houses was current. They contained not
merely one or two rooms, but many different apartments, and each was completely
260
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
decorated with cushions, bedsteads, sitting places and carpets.
SB 3.23.17
TEXT 17
Ta}a Ta}a iviNai+aáNaaNaaiXaLPaaePaXaaei>aTaMa( )
MahaMark-TaSQaLYaa Jauí& ivd]uMaveidi>a" )) 17 ))
tatra tatra vinikñiptanänä-
çilpopaçobhitam
mahä-marakata-sthalyä
juñöaà vidruma-vedibhiù
SYNONYMS
tatra tatra—here and there; vinikñipta—placed; nänä—various; çilpa—by artistic
engravings; upaçobhitam—extraordinarily beautiful; mahä-marakata—of great emeralds;
sthalyä—with a floor; juñöam—furnished; vidruma—of coral; vedibhiù—with raised
platforms (daises).
TRANSLATION
Its beauty was enhanced by artistic engravings here and there on the walls. The floor was
of emerald, with coral daises.
PURPORT
At the present moment people are very proud of their architectural art, yet floors are
generally decorated with colored cement. It appears, however, that the castle
constructed by the yogic powers of Kardama Muni had floors of emerald with coral
daises.
SB 3.23.18
TEXT 18
Üa"Sau ivd]uMadehLYaa >aaTa& vJa]k-Paa$=vTa( )
iXa%reiZvNd]Naqle/zu heMaku-M>aEriDaié[TaMa( )) 18 ))
261
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
dväùsu vidruma-dehalyä
bhätaà vajra-kapäöavat
çikhareñv indranéleñu
hema-kumbhair adhiçritam
SYNONYMS
dväùsu—in the entrances; vidruma—of coral; dehalyä—with a threshold; bhätam—
beautiful; vajra—bedecked with diamonds; kapäöa-vat—having doors; çikhareñu—on the
domes; indra-néleñu—of sapphires; hema-kumbhaiù—with gold pinnacles; adhiçritam—
crowned.
TRANSLATION
The palace was very beautiful, with its coral thresholds at the entrances and its doors
bedecked with diamonds. Gold pinnacles crowned its domes of sapphire.
SB 3.23.19
TEXT 19
c+auZMaTPaÚraGaaGY]aEvRJa]i>aitazu iNaiMaRTaE" )
Jauí& ivic}avETaaNaEMaRhahOE„heRMaTaaer<aE" )) 19 ))
cakñuñmat padmarägägryair
vajra-bhittiñu nirmitaiù
juñöaà vicitra-vaitänair
mahärhair hema-toraëaiù
SYNONYMS
cakñuù-mat—as if possessed of eyes; padma-räga—with rubies; agryaiù—choicest;
vajra—of diamond; bhittiñu—on the walls; nirmitaiù—set; juñöam—furnished; vicitra—
various; vaitänaiù—with canopies; mahä-arhaiù—greatly valuable; hema-toraëaiù—with
gates of gold.
TRANSLATION
With the choicest rubies set in its diamond walls, it appeared as though possessed of eyes.
262
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
It was furnished with wonderful canopies and greatly valuable gates of gold.
PURPORT
Artistic jewelry and decorations giving the appearance of eyes are not imaginary. Even
in recent times the Mogul emperors constructed their palaces with decorations of
jeweled birds with eyes made of valuable stones. The stones have been taken away by the
authorities, but the decorations are still present in some of the castles constructed by the
Mogul emperors in New Delhi. The royal palaces were built with jewels and rare stones
resembling eyes, and thus at night they would give off reflective light without need of
lamps.
SB 3.23.20
TEXT 20
h&SaPaaravTav]aTaESTa}a Ta}a iNakU-iJaTaMa( )
k*-i}aMaaNa( MaNYaMaaNaE" SvaNaiDaåùaiDaåù c )) 20 ))
haàsa-pärävata-vrätais
tatra tatra niküjitam
kåtrimän manyamänaiù svän
adhiruhyädhiruhya ca
SYNONYMS
haàsa—of swans; pärävata—of pigeons; vrätaiù—with multitudes; tatra tatra—here and
there; niküjitam—vibrated; kåtrimän—artificial; manyamänaiù—thinking; svän—
belonging to their own kind; adhiruhya adhiruhya—rising repeatedly; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Here and there in that palace were multitudes of live swans and pigeons, as well as
artificial swans and pigeons so lifelike that the real swans rose above them again and
again, thinking them live birds like themselves. Thus the palace vibrated with the sounds
of these birds.
SB 3.23.21
TEXT 21
263
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ivharSQaaNaivé[aMaSa&veXaPa[a(r)<aaiJarE" )
YaQaaePaJaaez& ricTaEivRSMaaPaNaiMavaTMaNa" )) 21 ))
vihära-sthäna-viçrämasaàveça-
präìgaëäjiraiù
yathopajoñaà racitair
vismäpanam ivätmanaù
SYNONYMS
vihära-sthäna—pleasure grounds; viçräma—resting chambers; saàveça—bedrooms;
präìgaëa—inner yards; ajiraiù—with outer yards; yathä-upajoñam—according to
comfort; racitaiù—which were designed; vismäpanam—causing astonishment; iva—
indeed; ätmanaù—to himself (Kardama).
TRANSLATION
The castle had pleasure grounds, resting chambers, bedrooms and inner and outer yards
designed with an eye to comfort. All this caused astonishment to the sage himself.
PURPORT
Kardama Muni, being a saintly person, was living in a humble hermitage, but when he
saw the palace constructed by his yogic powers, which was full of resting rooms, rooms
for sex enjoyment, and inner and outer yards, he himself was astonished. That is the way
of a God-gifted person. A devotee like Kardama Muni exhibited such opulence by his
yogic power at the request of his wife, but when the opulence was produced, he himself
could not understand how such manifestations could be possible. When a yogé's power is
exhibited, the yogé himself is sometimes astonished.
SB 3.23.22
TEXT 22
wRd*GGa*h& TaTPaXYaNTaq& NaaiTaPa[qTaeNa ceTaSaa )
SavR>aUTaaXaYaai>aj" Pa[avaecTk-dRMa" SvYaMa( )) 22 ))
édåg gåhaà tat paçyantéà
264
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nätiprétena cetasä
sarva-bhütäçayäbhijïaù
prävocat kardamaù svayam
SYNONYMS
édåk—such; gåham—house; tat—that; paçyantém—looking at; na atiprétena—not much
pleased; cetasä—with a heart; sarva-bhüta—of everyone; äçaya-abhijïaù—
understanding the heart; prävocat—he addressed; kardamaù—Kardama; svayam—
personally.
TRANSLATION
When he saw Devahüti looking at the gigantic, opulent palace with a displeased heart,
Kardama Muni could understand her feelings because he could study the heart of anyone.
Thus he personally addressed his wife as follows.
PURPORT
Devahüti had spent a long time in the hermitage, not taking much care of her body. She
was covered with dirt, and her clothing was not very nice. Kardama Muni was surprised
that he could produce such a palace, and similarly his wife, Devahüti, was also
astonished. How could she live in that opulent palace? Kardama Muni could understand
her astonishment, and thus he spoke as follows.
SB 3.23.23
TEXT 23
iNaMaJJYaaiSMaNa( h>aqå ivMaaNaiMadMaaåh )
wd& éu(c)-k*-Ta& TaqQaRMaaiXaza& YaaPak&- Na*<aaMa( )) 23 ))
nimajjyäsmin hrade bhéru
vimänam idam äruha
idaà çukla-kåtaà tértham
äçiñäà yäpakaà nåëäm
SYNONYMS
265
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nimajjya—after bathing; asmin—in this; hrade—in the lake; bhéru—O fearful one;
vimänam—airplane; idam—this; äruha—ascend; idam—this; çukla-kåtam—created by
Lord Viñëu; tértham—sacred lake; äçiñäm—the desires; yäpakam—bestowing; nåëäm—
of human beings.
TRANSLATION
My dear Devahüti, you look very much afraid. First bathe in Lake Bindu-sarovara,
created by Lord Viñëu Himself, which can grant all the desires of a human being, and
then mount this airplane.
PURPORT
It is still the system to go to places of pilgrimage and take a bath in the water there. In
Våndävana the people take baths in the River Yamunä. In other places, such as Prayäga,
they take baths in the River Ganges. The words tértham äçiñäà yäpakam refer to the
fulfillment of desires by bathing in a place of pilgrimage. Kardama Muni advised his
good wife to bathe in Lake Bindu-sarovara so that she could revive the former beauty
and luster of her body.
SB 3.23.24
TEXT 24
Saa TaÙTauR" SaMaadaYa vc" ku-vl/Yae+a<aa )
SarJa& ib>a]Taq vaSaae ve<aq>aUTaa&ê MaUDaRJaaNa( )) 24 ))
sä tad bhartuù samädäya
vacaù kuvalayekñaëä
sarajaà bibhraté väso
veëé-bhütäàç ca mürdhajän
SYNONYMS
sä—she; tat—then; bhartuù—of her husband; samädäya—accepting; vacaù—the words;
kuvalaya-ékñaëä—the lotus-eyed; sa-rajam—dirty; bibhraté—wearing; väsaù—clothing;
veëé-bhütän—matted; ca—and; mürdha-jän—hair.
TRANSLATION
266
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The lotus-eyed Devahüti accepted the order of her husband. Because of her dirty dress
and the locks of matted hair on her head, she did not look very attractive.
PURPORT
It appears that Devahüti's hair had remained uncombed for many years and had become
complicated in tangles. In other words, she neglected her bodily dress and comforts to
engage in the service of her husband.
SB 3.23.25
TEXT 25
A(r)& c Mal/PaªeNa SaH^à& Xabl/STaNaMa( )
AaivveXa SarSvTYaa" Sar" iXavJal/aXaYaMa( )) 25 ))
aìgaà ca mala-paìkena
saïchannaà çabala-stanam
äviveça sarasvatyäù
saraù çiva-jaläçayam
SYNONYMS
aìgam—body; ca—and; mala-paìkena—with dirt; saïchannam—covered; çabala—
discolored; stanam—breasts; äviveça—she entered; sarasvatyäù—of the River Sarasvaté;
saraù—the lake; çiva—sacred; jala—waters; äçayam—containing.
TRANSLATION
Her body was coated with a thick layer of dirt, and her breasts were discolored. She dove,
however, into the lake, which contained the sacred waters of the Sarasvaté.
SB 3.23.26
TEXT 26
SaaNTa" SariSa veXMaSQaa" XaTaaiNa dXa k-NYak-a" )
SavaR" ik-XaaervYaSaae ddXaaeRTPal/GaNDaYa" )) 26 ))
säntaù sarasi veçma-sthäù
267
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
çatäni daça kanyakäù
sarväù kiçora-vayaso
dadarçotpala-gandhayaù
SYNONYMS
sä—she; antaù—inside; sarasi—in the lake; veçma-sthäù—situated in a house; çatäni
daça—ten hundred; kanyakäù—girls; sarväù—all; kiçora-vayasaù—in the prime of
youth; dadarça—she saw; utpala—like lotuses; gandhayaù—fragrant.
TRANSLATION
In a house inside the lake she saw one thousand girls, all in the prime of youth and
fragrant like lotuses.
SB 3.23.27
TEXT 27
Taa& d*îa SahSaaeTQaaYa Pa[aecu" Pa[aÅl/Ya" iñYa" )
vYa& k-MaRk-rqSTau>Ya& XaaiDa Na" k-rvaMa ik-Ma( )) 27 ))
täà dåñövä sahasotthäya
procuù präïjalayaù striyaù
vayaà karma-karés tubhyaà
çädhi naù karaväma kim
SYNONYMS
täm—her; dåñövä—seeing; sahasä—suddenly; utthäya—rising; procuù—they said;
präïjalayaù—with folded hands; striyaù—the damsels; vayam—we; karma-karéù—
maidservants; tubhyam—for you; çädhi—please tell; naù—us; karaväma—we can do;
kim—what.
TRANSLATION
Seeing her, the damsels suddenly rose and said with folded hands, "We are your
maidservants. Tell us what we can do for you."
268
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
While Devahüti was thinking of what to do in that great palace in her dirty clothes,
there were at once, by the yogic powers of Kardama Muni, one thousand maidservants
prepared to serve her. They appeared before Devahüti within the water and presented
themselves as her maidservants, simply awaiting her orders.
SB 3.23.28
TEXT 28
òaNaeNa Taa& MahaheR<a òaPaiYaTva MaNaiSvNaqMa( )
dukU-le/ iNaMaRle/ NaUÒe ddurSYaE c MaaNada" )) 28 ))
snänena täà mahärheëa
snäpayitvä manasviném
duküle nirmale nütne
dadur asyai ca mänadäù
SYNONYMS
snänena—with bathing oils; täm—her; mahä-arheëa—very costly; snäpayitvä—after
bathing; manasviném—the virtuous wife; duküle—in fine cloth; nirmale—spotless;
nütne—new; daduù—they gave; asyai—to her; ca—and; mäna-däù—the respectful girls.
TRANSLATION
The girls, being very respectful to Devahüti, brought her forth, and after bathing her
with valuable oils and ointments, they gave her fine, new, spotless cloth to cover her
body.
SB 3.23.29
TEXT 29
>aUz<aaiNa ParaDYaaRiNa vrqYaa&iSa ÛuMaiNTa c )
Aà& SavRGau<aaePaeTa& PaaNa& cEvaMa*TaaSavMa( )) 29 ))
bhüñaëäni parärdhyäni
varéyäàsi dyumanti ca
269
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
annaà sarva-guëopetaà
pänaà caivämåtäsavam
SYNONYMS
bhüñaëäni—ornaments; para-ardhyäni—most valuable; varéyäàsi—very excellent;
dyumanti—splendid; ca—and; annam—food; sarva-guëa—all good qualities; upetam—
containing; pänam—beverages; ca—and; eva—also; amåta—sweet; äsavam—
intoxicating.
TRANSLATION
They then decorated her with very excellent and valuable jewels, which shone brightly.
Next they offered her food containing all good qualities, and a sweet, inebriating drink
called äsavam.
PURPORT
Äsavam is an Äyur-vedic medical preparation; it is not a liquor. It is especially made
from drugs and is meant to improve metabolism for the healthy condition of the body.
SB 3.23.30
TEXT 30
AQaadXaeR SvMaaTMaaNa& óiGv<a& ivrJaaMbrMa( )
ivrJa& k*-TaSvSTYaYaNa& k-NYaai>abRhuMaaiNaTaMa( )) 30 ))
athädarçe svam ätmänaà
sragviëaà virajämbaram
virajaà kåta-svastyayanaà
kanyäbhir bahu-mänitam
SYNONYMS
atha—then; ädarçe—in a mirror; svam ätmänam—her own reflection; srak-viëam—
adorned with a garland; viraja—unsullied; ambaram—robes; virajam—freed from all
bodily dirt; kåta-svasti-ayanam—decorated with auspicious marks; kanyäbhiù—by the
maids; bahu-mänitam—very respectfully served.
270
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Then in a mirror she beheld her own reflection. Her body was completely freed from all
dirt, and she was adorned with a garland. Dressed in unsullied robes and decorated with
auspicious marks of tilaka, she was served very respectfully by the maids.
SB 3.23.31
TEXT 31
òaTa& k*-TaiXar"òaNa& SavaR>ar<a>aUizTaMa( )
iNaZk-Ga]qv& vl/iYaNa& kU-JaTk-aÄNaNaUPaurMa( )) 31 ))
snätaà kåta-çiraù-snänaà
sarväbharaëa-bhüñitam
niñka-grévaà valayinaà
küjat-käïcana-nüpuram
SYNONYMS
snätam—bathed; kåta-çiraù—including the head; snänam—bathing; sarva—all over;
äbharaëa—with ornaments; bhüñitam—decorated; niñka—a gold necklace with a locket;
grévam—on the neck; valayinam—with bangles; küjat—tinkling; käïcana—made of
gold; nüpuram—ankle bells.
TRANSLATION
Her entire body, including her head, was completely bathed, and she was decorated all
over with ornaments. She wore a special necklace with a locket. There were bangles on
her wrists and tinkling anklets of gold about her ankles.
PURPORT
The word kåta-çiraù-snänam appears here. According to the småti-çästra's directions for
daily duties, ladies are allowed to bathe daily up to the neck. The hair on the head does
not necessarily have to be washed daily because the mass of wet hair may cause a cold.
For ladies, therefore, taking a bath up to the neck is ordinarily prescribed, and they take
a full bath only on certain occasions. On this occasion Devahüti took a full bath and
washed her hair very nicely. When a lady takes an ordinary bath it is called mala-snäna,
271
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
and when she takes a full bath, including the head, it is called çiraù-snäna. At this time
she needs sufficient oil to smear on her head. That is the direction of the commentators
of småti-çästra.
SB 3.23.32
TEXT 32
é[ae<YaaerDYaSTaYaa k-aHCYaa k-aÄNYaa bhurÒYaa )
hare<a c MahaheR<a åcke-Na c >aUizTaMa( )) 32 ))
çroëyor adhyastayä käïcyä
käïcanyä bahu-ratnayä
häreëa ca mahärheëa
rucakena ca bhüñitam
SYNONYMS
çroëyoù—on the hips; adhyastayä—worn; käïcyä—with a girdle; käïcanyä—made of
gold; bahu-ratnayä—decorated with numerous jewels; häreëa—with a pearl necklace;
ca—and; mahä-arheëa—precious; rucakena—with auspicious substances; ca—and;
bhüñitam—adorned.
TRANSLATION
About her hips she wore a girdle of gold, set with numerous jewels, and she was further
adorned with a precious pearl necklace and auspicious substances.
PURPORT
Auspicious substances include saffron, kuìkuma and sandalwood pulp. Before taking a
bath there are other auspicious substances, such as turmeric mixed with mustard seed
oil, which are smeared all over the body. All kinds of auspicious substances were used to
bathe Devahüti from top to toe.
SB 3.23.33
TEXT 33
SaudTaa Sau>a]uva ë+<aiòGDaaPaa(r)eNa c+auza )
272
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PaÚk-aeXaSPa*Daa NaqlE/rl/kE-ê l/SaNMau%Ma( )) 33 ))
sudatä subhruvä çlakñëasnigdhäpäìgena
cakñuñä
padma-koça-spådhä nélair
alakaiç ca lasan-mukham
SYNONYMS
su-datä—with beautiful teeth; su-bhruvä—with charming eyebrows; çlakñëa—lovely;
snigdha—moist; apäìgena—corners of eyes; cakñuñä—with eyes; padma-koça—lotus
buds; spådhä—defeating; nélaiù—bluish; alakaiù—with curling hair; ca—and; lasat—
shining; mukham—countenance.
TRANSLATION
Her countenance shone, with beautiful teeth and charming eyebrows. Her eyes,
distinguished by lovely moist corners, defeated the beauty of lotus buds. Her face was
surrounded by dark curling tresses.
PURPORT
According to Vedic culture, white teeth are very much appreciated. Devahüti's white
teeth increased the beauty of her face and made it look like a lotus flower. When a face
looks very attractive, the eyes are generally compared to lotus petals and the face to a
lotus flower.
SB 3.23.34
TEXT 34
Yada SaSMaar ‰z>aMa*zq<aa& diYaTa& PaiTaMa( )
Ta}a caSTae Sah ñqi>aYaR}aaSTae Sa Pa[JaaPaiTa" )) 34 ))
yadä sasmära åñabham
åñéëäà dayitaà patim
tatra cäste saha strébhir
yaträste sa prajäpatiù
273
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; sasmära—she thought of; åñabham—the foremost; åñéëäm—among the
åñis; dayitam—dear; patim—husband; tatra—there; ca—and; äste—she was present;
saha—along with; strébhiù—the maidservants; yatra—where; äste—was present; saù—
he; prajäpatiù—the Prajäpati (Kardama).
TRANSLATION
When she thought of her great husband, the best of the sages, Kardama Muni, who was
very dear to her, she, along with all the maidservants, at once appeared where he was.
PURPORT
It appears from this verse that in the beginning Devahüti thought herself to be dirty and
dressed in a very niggardly way. When her husband asked her to enter the lake, she saw
the maidservants, and they took care of her. Everything was done within the water, and
as soon as she thought of her beloved husband, Kardama, she was brought before him
without delay. These are some of the powers attained by perfect yogés; they can
immediately execute anything they desire.
SB 3.23.35
TEXT 35
>aTauR" PaurSTaadaTMaaNa& ñqSahóv*Ta& Tada )
iNaXaaMYa TaÛaeGaGaiTa& Sa&XaYa& Pa[TYaPaÛTa )) 35 ))
bhartuù purastäd ätmänaà
stré-sahasra-våtaà tadä
niçämya tad-yoga-gatià
saàçayaà pratyapadyata
SYNONYMS
bhartuù—of her husband; purastät—in the presence; ätmänam—herself; stré-sahasra—
by a thousand maids; våtam—surrounded; tadä—then; niçämya—seeing; tat—his; yogagatim—
yogic power; saàçayam pratyapadyata—she was amazed.
274
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
She was amazed to find herself surrounded by a thousand maids in the presence of her
husband and to witness his yogic power.
PURPORT
Devahüti saw everything miraculously done, yet when brought before her husband she
could understand that it was all due to his great yogic mystic power. She understood that
nothing was impossible for a yogé like Kardama Muni.
SB 3.23.36, SB 3.23.37, SB 3.23.36-37
TEXTS 36-37
Sa Taa& k*-TaMal/òaNaa& iv>a]aJaNTaqMaPaUvRvTa( )
AaTMaNaae ib>a]Taq& æPa& Sa&vqTaåicrSTaNaqMa( )) 36 ))
ivÛaDarqSahóe<a SaeVYaMaaNaa& SauvaSaSaMa( )
JaaTa>aavae ivMaaNa& TadaraehYadiMa}ahNa( )) 37 ))
sa täà kåta-mala-snänäà
vibhräjantém apürvavat
ätmano bibhratéà rüpaà
saàvéta-rucira-staném
vidyädharé-sahasreëa
sevyamänäà suväsasam
jäta-bhävo vimänaà tad
ärohayad amitra-han
SYNONYMS
saù—the sage; täm—her (Devahüti); kåta-mala-snänäm—bathed clean; vibhräjantém—
shining forth; apürva-vat—unprecedentedly; ätmanaù—her own; bibhratém—possessing;
rüpam—beauty; saàvéta—girded; rucira—charming; staném—with breasts; vidyädharé—
of Gandharva girls; sahasreëa—by a thousand; sevyamänäm—being waited upon; suväsasam—
dressed in excellent robes; jäta-bhävaù—struck with fondness; vimänam—
airplane like a mansion; tat—that; ärohayat—he put her on board; amitra-han—O
destroyer of the enemy.
275
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The sage could see that Devahüti had washed herself clean and was shining forth as
though no longer his former wife. She had regained her own original beauty as the
daughter of a prince. Dressed in excellent robes, her charming breasts duly girded, she
was waited upon by a thousand Gandharva girls. O destroyer of the enemy, his fondness
for her grew, and he placed her on the aerial mansion.
PURPORT
Before her marriage, when Devahüti was brought by her parents before the sage
Kardama, she was the perfectly beautiful princess, and Kardama Muni remembered her
former beauty. But after her marriage, when she was engaged in the service of Kardama
Muni, she neglected to care for her body like a princess, since there was no means for
such care; her husband was living in a cottage, and since she was always engaged in
serving him, her royal beauty disappeared, and she became just like an ordinary
maidservant. Now, after being bathed by the Gandharva girls by the order of Kardama
Muni's yogic power, she regained her beauty, and Kardama Muni felt attracted to the
beauty she had shown before the marriage. The real beauty of a young woman is her
breasts. When Kardama Muni saw the breasts of his wife so nicely decorated, increasing
her beauty many times, he was attracted, even though he was a great sage. Çrépäda
Çaìkaräcärya has therefore warned the transcendentalists that one who is after
transcendental realization should not be attracted by the raised breasts of a woman
because they are nothing but an interaction of fat and blood within the body.
SB 3.23.38
TEXT 38
TaiSMaàlu/áMaihMaa iPa[YaYaaNaur¢-ae
ivÛaDarqi>aåPacq<aRvPauivRMaaNae )
b>a]aJa oTk-cku-MauÓ<avaNaPaqCYa‚
STaarai>arav*Ta wvae@uPaiTaNaR>a"SQa" )) 38 ))
tasminn alupta-mahimä priyayänurakto
vidyädharébhir upacérëa-vapur vimäne
babhräja utkaca-kumud-gaëavän apécyas
täräbhir ävåta ivoòu-patir nabhaù-sthaù
276
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
tasmin—in that; alupta—not lost; mahimä—glory; priyayä—with his beloved consort;
anuraktaù—attached; vidyädharébhiù—by the Gandharva girls; upacérëa—waited upon;
vapuù—his person; vimäne—on the airplane; babhräja—he shone; utkaca—open;
kumut-gaëavän—the moon, which is followed by rows of lilies; apécyaù—very charming;
täräbhiù—by stars; ävåtaù—surrounded; iva—as; uòu-patiù—the moon (the chief of the
stars); nabhaù-sthaù—in the sky.
TRANSLATION
Though seemingly attached to his beloved consort while served by the Gandharva girls,
the sage did not lose his glory, which was mastery over his self. In the aerial mansion
Kardama Muni with his consort shone as charmingly as the moon in the midst of the stars
in the sky, which causes rows of lilies to open in ponds at night.
PURPORT
The mansion was in the sky, and therefore the comparison to the full moon and stars is
very beautifully composed in this verse. Kardama Muni looked like the full moon, and
the girls who surrounded his wife, Devahüti, seemed just like the stars. On a full-moon
night the stars and the moon together form a beautiful constellation; similarly, in that
aerial mansion in the sky, Kardama Muni with his beautiful wife and the damsels
surrounding them appeared like the moon and stars on a full-moon night.
SB 3.23.39
TEXT 39
TaeNaaíl/aek-Paivharku-l/acle/Nd]‚
d]ae<aqZvNa(r)Sa%MaaåTaSaaE>aGaaSau )
iSaÖENauRTaae ÛuDauiNaPaaTaiXavSvNaaSau
reMae icr& DaNadvçl/NaavæQaq )) 39 ))
tenäñöa-lokapa-vihära-kuläcalendradroëéñv
anaìga-sakha-märuta-saubhagäsu
siddhair nuto dyudhuni-päta-çiva-svanäsu
reme ciraà dhanadaval-lalanä-varüthé
277
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
tena—by that airplane; añöa-loka-pa—of the predominating deities of the eight heavenly
planets; vihära—the pleasure grounds; kula-acala-indra—of the king of the mountains
(Meru); droëéñu—in the valleys; anaìga—of passion; sakha—the companions; märuta—
with breezes; saubhagäsu—beautiful; siddhaiù—by the Siddhas; nutaù—being praised;
dyu-dhuni—of the Ganges; päta—of the downfall; çiva-svanäsu—vibrating with
auspicious sounds; reme—he enjoyed; ciram—for a long time; dhanada-vat—like
Kuvera; lalanä—by damsels; varüthé—surrounded.
TRANSLATION
In that aerial mansion he traveled to the pleasure valleys of Mount Meru, which were
rendered all the more beautiful by cool, gentle, fragrant breezes that stimulated passion.
In these valleys, the treasurer of the gods, Kuvera, surrounded by beautiful women and
praised by the Siddhas, generally enjoys pleasure. Kardama Muni also, surrounded by the
beautiful damsels and his wife, went there and enjoyed for many, many years.
PURPORT
Kuvera is one of the eight demigods who are in charge of different directions of the
universe. It is said that Indra is in charge of the eastern side of the universe, where the
heavenly planet, or paradise, is situated. Similarly, Agni is in charge of the southeastern
portion of the universe; Yama, the demigod who punishes sinners, is in charge of the
southern portion; Niråti is in charge of the southwestern part of the universe; Varuëa,
the demigod in charge of the waters, is in charge of the western portion; Väyu, who
controls the air and who has wings to travel in the air, is in charge of the northwestern
part of the universe; and Kuvera, the treasurer of the demigods, is in charge of the
northern part of the universe. All these demigods take pleasure in the valleys of Mount
Meru, which is situated somewhere between the sun and the earth. In the aerial
mansion, Kardama Muni traveled throughout the eight directions controlled by the
different demigods described above, and as the demigods go to Mount Meru, he also
went there to enjoy life. When one is surrounded by young, beautiful girls, sex
stimulation naturally becomes prominent. Kardama Muni was sexually stimulated, and
he enjoyed his wife for many, many years in that part of Mount Meru. But his sex
indulgence was praised by many, many Siddhas, beings who have attained perfection,
because it was intended to produce good progeny for the good of universal affairs.
278
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.23.40
TEXT 40
vEé[M>ake- SaurSaNae NaNdNae PauZPa>ad]ke- )
MaaNaSae cE}arQYae c Sa reMae raMaYaa rTa" )) 40 ))
vaiçrambhake surasane
nandane puñpabhadrake
mänase caitrarathye ca
sa reme rämayä rataù
SYNONYMS
vaiçrambhake—in the Vaiçrambhaka garden; surasane—in Surasana; nandane—in
Nandana; puñpabhadrake—in Puñpabhadraka; mänase—by the Mänasa-sarovara Lake;
caitrarathye—in Caitrarathya; ca—and; saù—he; reme—enjoyed; rämayä—by his wife;
rataù—satisfied.
TRANSLATION
Satisfied by his wife, he enjoyed in that aerial mansion not only on Mount Meru but in
different gardens known as Vaiçrambhaka, Surasana, Nandana, Puñpabhadraka and
Caitrarathya, and by the Mänasa-sarovara Lake.
SB 3.23.41
TEXT 41
>a]aiJaZ<auNaa ivMaaNaeNa k-aMaGaeNa MahqYaSaa )
vEMaaiNak-aNaTYaXaeTa crmçaek-aNa( YaQaaiNal/" )) 41 ))
bhräjiñëunä vimänena
käma-gena mahéyasä
vaimänikän atyaçeta
caraû lokän yathänilaù
SYNONYMS
bhräjiñëunä—splendid; vimänena—with the airplane; käma-gena—which flew
279
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
according to his desire; mahéyasä—very great; vaimänikän—the demigods in their
airplanes; atyaçeta—he surpassed; caran—traveling; lokän—through the planets;
yathä—like; anilaù—the air.
TRANSLATION
He traveled in that way through the various planets, as the air passes uncontrolled in
every direction. Coursing through the air in that great and splendid aerial mansion, which
could fly at his will, he surpassed even the demigods.
PURPORT
The planets occupied by the demigods are restricted to their own orbits, but Kardama
Muni, by his yogic power, could travel all over the different directions of the universe
without restriction. The living entities who are within the universe are called
conditioned souls; that is, they are not free to move everywhere. We are inhabitants of
this earthly globe; we cannot move freely to other planets. In the modern age, man is
trying to go to other planets, but so far he has been unsuccessful. It is not possible to
travel to any other planets because by the laws of nature even the demigods cannot
move from one planet to another. But Kardama Muni, by his yogic power, could surpass
the strength of the demigods and travel in space in all directions. The comparison here
is very suitable. The words yathä anilaù indicate that as the air is free to move anywhere
without restriction, so Kardama Muni unrestrictedly traveled in all directions of the
universe.
SB 3.23.42
TEXT 42
ik&- duraPaadNa& Taeza& Pau&SaaMauÕaMaceTaSaaMa( )
YaEraié[TaSTaqQaRPadêr<aae VYaSaNaaTYaYa" )) 42 ))
kià duräpädanaà teñäà
puàsäm uddäma-cetasäm
yair äçritas tértha-padaç
caraëo vyasanätyayaù
SYNONYMS
280
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kim—what; duräpädanam—difficult to achieve; teñäm—for those; puàsäm—men;
uddäma-cetasäm—who are determined; yaiù—by whom; äçritaù—taken refuge; térthapadaù—
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; caraëaù—feet; vyasana-atyayaù—
which vanquish dangers.
TRANSLATION
What is difficult to achieve for determined men who have taken refuge of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead's lotus feet? His feet are the source of sacred rivers like the
Ganges, which put an end to the dangers of mundane life.
PURPORT
The words yair äçritas tértha-padaç caraëaù are significant here. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is known as tértha-päda. The Ganges is called a sacred river
because it emanates from the toe of Viñëu. The Ganges is meant to eradicate all the
material distresses of the conditioned souls. For any living entity, therefore, who has
taken shelter of the holy lotus feet of the Lord, nothing is impossible. Kardama Muni is
special not because he was a great mystic, but because he was a great devotee. Therefore
it is said here that for a great devotee like Kardama Muni, nothing is impossible.
Although yogés can perform wonderful feats, as Kardama has already displayed, Kardama
was more than a yogé because he was a great devotee of the Lord; therefore he was more
glorious than an ordinary yogé. As it is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, "Out of the many
yogés, he who is a devotee of the Lord is first class." For a person like Kardama Muni
there is no question of being conditioned; he was already a liberated soul and better
than the demigods, who are also conditioned. Although he was enjoying with his wife
and many other women, he was above material, conditional life. Therefore the word
vyasanätyayaù is used to indicate that he was beyond the position of a conditioned soul.
He was transcendental to all material limitations.
SB 3.23.43
TEXT 43
Pa[e+aiYaTva >auvae Gaael&/ PaTNYaE YaavaNa( SvSa&SQaYaa )
bûaêYa| MahaYaaeGaq Svaé[MaaYa NYavTaRTa )) 43 ))
prekñayitvä bhuvo golaà
281
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
patnyai yävän sva-saàsthayä
bahv-äçcaryaà mahä-yogé
sväçramäya nyavartata
SYNONYMS
prekñayitvä—after showing; bhuvaù—of the universe; golam—the globe; patnyai—to his
wife; yävän—as much; sva-saàsthayä—with its arrangements; bahu-äçcaryam—full of
many wonders; mahä-yogé—the great yogé (Kardama); sva-äçramäya—to his own
hermitage; nyavartata—returned.
TRANSLATION
After showing his wife the globe of the universe and its different arrangements, full of
many wonders, the great yogé Kardama Muni returned to his own hermitage.
PURPORT
All the planets are here described as gola, round. Every planet is round, and each planet
is a different shelter, just like islands in the great ocean. Planets are sometimes called
dvépa or varña. This earth planet is called Bhärata-varña because it was ruled by King
Bharata. Another significant word used in this verse is bahv-äçcaryam, "many wonderful
things." This indicates that the different planets are distributed all over the universe in
the eight directions, and each and every one of them is wonderful in itself. Each planet
has its particular climatic influences and particular types of inhabitants and is
completely equipped with everything, including the beauty of the seasons. In the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.40) it is similarly stated, vibhüti-bhinnam: on each and every planet
there are different opulences. It cannot be expected that one planet is exactly like
another. By God's grace, by nature's law, each and every planet is made differently and
has different wonderful features. All such wonders were personally experienced by
Kardama Muni while he traveled with his wife, yet he could return again to his humble
hermitage. He showed his princess-wife that although he was living in the hermitage, he
had the power to go everywhere and do anything by mystic yoga. That is the perfection
of yoga. One cannot become a perfect yogé simply by showing some sitting postures, nor
by such sitting postures or so-called meditation can one become God, as is being
advertised. Foolish persons are misled into believing that simply by some caricature of
meditation and sitting postures one can become God within six months.
282
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Here is the example of a perfect yogé; he could travel all over the universe. Similarly,
there is a description of Durväsä Muni, who also traveled in space. Actually, the perfect
yogé can do that. But even if one can travel all over the universe and show wonderful
feats like Kardama Muni, he cannot be compared to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, whose power and inconceivable energy can never be attained by any
conditioned or liberated soul. By the actions of Kardama Muni we can understand that
in spite of his immense mystic power, he remained a devotee of the Lord. That is the
real position of every living entity.
SB 3.23.44
TEXT 44
iv>aJYa NavDaaTMaaNa& MaaNavq& SaurTaaeTSauk-aMa( )
raMaa& iNarMaYaNa( reMae vzRPaUGaaNMauhUTaRvTa( )) 44 ))
vibhajya navadhätmänaà
mänavéà suratotsukäm
rämäà niramayan reme
varña-pügän muhürtavat
SYNONYMS
vibhajya—having divided; nava-dhä—into nine; ätmänam—himself; mänavém—the
daughter of Manu (Devahüti); surata—for sex life; utsukäm—who was eager; rämäm—
to his wife; niramayan—giving pleasure; reme—he enjoyed; varña-pügän—for many
years; muhürtavat—like a moment.
TRANSLATION
After coming back to his hermitage, he divided himself into nine personalities just to give
pleasure to Devahüti, the daughter of Manu, who was eager for sex life. In that way he
enjoyed with her for many, many years, which passed just like a moment.
PURPORT
Here the daughter of Sväyambhuva Manu, Devahüti, is described as suratotsuka. After
traveling with her husband all over the universe, in Mount Meru and the beautiful
gardens of the heavenly kingdoms, she naturally became sexually stimulated, and in
283
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
order to satisfy her sexual desire, Kardama Muni expanded himself into nine forms.
Instead of one, he became nine, and nine persons had sexual intercourse with Devahüti
for many, many years. It is understood that the sexual appetite of a woman is nine times
greater than that of a man. That is clearly indicated here. Otherwise, Kardama Muni
would have had no reason to expand himself into nine. Here is another example of yogic
power. As the Supreme Personality of Godhead can expand Himself in millions of
forms, a yogé can also expand up to nine forms, but not more than that. Another
example is that of Saubhari Muni; he also expanded himself into eight forms. But
however powerful a yogé may be, he cannot expand himself into more than eight or nine
forms. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, however, can expand Himself into millions
of forms, ananta-rüpa—innumerable, countless forms—as stated in the Brahma-saàhitä.
No one can compare to the Supreme Personality of Godhead by any conceivable
energetic manifestation of power.
SB 3.23.45
TEXT 45
TaiSMaNa( ivMaaNa oTk*-ía& XaYYaa& riTak-rq& ié[Taa )
Na cabuDYaTa Ta& k-al&/ PaTYaaPaqCYaeNa Sa(r)Taa )) 45 ))
tasmin vimäna utkåñöäà
çayyäà rati-karéà çritä
na cäbudhyata taà kälaà
patyäpécyena saìgatä
SYNONYMS
tasmin—in that; vimäne—airplane; utkåñöäm—excellent; çayyäm—a bed; rati-karém—
increasing sexual desires; çritä—situated on; na—not; ca—and; abudhyata—she
noticed; tam—that; kälam—time; patyä—with her husband; apécyena—most handsome;
saìgatä—in company.
TRANSLATION
In that aerial mansion, Devahüti, in the company of her handsome husband, situated on
an excellent bed that increased sexual desires, could not realize how much time was
passing.
284
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Sex indulgence is so enjoyable for materialistic people that when they engage in such
activities they forget how time is passing. Saint Kardama and Devahüti, in their sex
indulgence, also forgot how time was passing by.
SB 3.23.46
TEXT 46
Wv& YaaeGaaNau>aaveNa dMPaTYaae rMaMaa<aYaae" )
XaTa& VYaTaqYau" Xard" k-aMal/al/SaYaaeMaRNaak(- )) 46 ))
evaà yogänubhävena
dam-patyo ramamäëayoù
çataà vyatéyuù çaradaù
käma-lälasayor manäk
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; yoga-anubhävena—by yogic powers; dam-patyoù—the couple;
ramamäëayoù—while enjoying themselves; çatam—a hundred; vyatéyuù—passed;
çaradaù—autumns; käma—sexual pleasure; lälasayoù—who were eagerly longing for;
manäk—like a short time.
TRANSLATION
While the couple, who eagerly longed for sexual pleasure, were thus enjoying themselves
by virtue of mystic powers, a hundred autumns passed like a brief span of time.
SB 3.23.47
TEXT 47
TaSYaaMaaData reTaSTaa& >aavYaàaTMaNaaTMaivTa( )
NaaeDaa ivDaaYa æPa& Sv& SavRSaªLPaiviÜ>au" )) 47 ))
tasyäm ädhatta retas täà
bhävayann ätmanätma-vit
nodhä vidhäya rüpaà svaà
285
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sarva-saìkalpa-vid vibhuù
SYNONYMS
tasyäm—in her; ädhatta—he deposited; retaù—semen; täm—her; bhävayan—regarding;
ätmanä—as half of himself; ätma-vit—a knower of spirit soul; nodhä—into nine;
vidhäya—having divided; rüpam—body; svam—his own; sarva-saìkalpa-vit—the
knower of all desires; vibhuù—the powerful Kardama.
TRANSLATION
The powerful Kardama Muni was the knower of everyone's heart, and he could grant
whatever one desired. Knowing the spiritual soul, he regarded her as half of his body.
Dividing himself into nine forms, he impregnated Devahüti with nine discharges of
semen.
PURPORT
Since Kardama Muni could understand that Devahüti wanted many children, at the
first chance he begot nine children at one time. He is described here as vibhu, the most
powerful master. By his yogic power he could at once produce nine daughters in the
womb of Devahüti.
SB 3.23.48
TEXT 48
ATa" Saa Sauzuve SaÛae devhUiTa" iñYa" Pa[Jaa" )
SavaRSTaaêaåSavaRx(GYaae l/aeihTaaeTPal/GaNDaYa" )) 48 ))
ataù sä suñuve sadyo
devahütiù striyaù prajäù
sarväs täç cäru-sarväìgyo
lohitotpala-gandhayaù
SYNONYMS
ataù—then; sä—she; suñuve—gave birth; sadyaù—on the same day; devahütiù—
Devahüti; striyaù—females; prajäù—progeny; sarväù—all; täù—they; cäru-sarva286
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
aìgyaù—charming in every limb; lohita—red; utpala—like the lotus; gandhayaù—
fragrant.
TRANSLATION
Immediately afterward, on the same day, Devahüti gave birth to nine female children, all
charming in every limb and fragrant with the scent of the red lotus flower.
PURPORT
Devahüti was too sexually excited, and therefore she discharged more ova, and nine
daughters were born. It is said in the småti-çästra as well as in the Äyur-veda that when
the discharge of the male is greater, male children are begotten, but when the discharge
of the female is greater, female children are begotten. It appears from the circumstances
that Devahüti was more sexually excited, and therefore she had nine daughters at once.
All the daughters, however, were very beautiful, and their bodies were nicely formed;
each resembled a lotus flower and was fragrant like a lotus.
SB 3.23.49
TEXT 49
PaiTa& Saa Pa[v]iJaZYaNTa& Tadal/+YaaeXaTaq bih" )
SMaYaMaaNaa iv(c)-veNa ôdYaeNa ivdUYaTaa )) 49 ))
patià sä pravrajiñyantaà
tadälakñyoçaté bahiù
smayamänä viklavena
hådayena vidüyatä
SYNONYMS
patim—her husband; sä—she; pravrajiñyantam—going to leave home; tadä—then;
älakñya—after seeing; uçaté—beautiful; bahiù—outwardly; smayamänä—smiling;
viklavena—agitated; hådayena—with a heart; vidüyatä—being distressed.
TRANSLATION
When she saw her husband about to leave home, she smiled externally, but at heart she
287
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
was agitated and distressed.
PURPORT
Kardama Muni finished his household affairs quickly by his mystic power. The building
of the castle in the air, traveling all over the universe with his wife in the company of
beautiful girls, and begetting of children were finished, and now, according to his
promise to leave home for his real concern of spiritual realization after impregnating his
wife, he was about to go away. Seeing her husband about to leave, Devahüti was very
disturbed, but to satisfy her husband she was smiling. The example of Kardama Muni
should be understood very clearly; a person whose main concern is Kåñëa consciousness,
even if he is entrapped in household life, should always be ready to leave household
enticement as soon as possible.
SB 3.23.50
TEXT 50
il/%NTYaDaaeMau%q >aUiMa& Pada Na%Mai<aié[Yaa )
ovac l/il/Taa& vac& iNaåDYaaé[uk-l/a& XaNaE" )) 50 ))
likhanty adho-mukhé bhümià
padä nakha-maëi-çriyä
uväca lalitäà väcaà
nirudhyäçru-kaläà çanaiù
SYNONYMS
likhanté—scratching; adhaù-mukhé—her head bent down; bhümim—the ground; padä—
with her foot; nakha—nails; maëi—gemlike; çriyä—with radiant; uväca—she spoke;
lalitäm—charming; väcam—accents; nirudhya—suppressing; açru-kaläm—tears;
çanaiù—slowly.
TRANSLATION
She stood and scratched the ground with her foot, which was radiant with the luster of
her gemlike nails. Her head bent down, she spoke in slow yet charming accents,
suppressing her tears.
288
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Devahüti was so beautiful that her toenails appeared just like pearls, and as she
scratched the ground it appeared as if pearls had been thrown on the ground. When a
woman scratches the ground with her foot, it is a sign that her mind is very disturbed.
These signs were sometimes exhibited by the gopés before Kåñëa. When the gopés came in
the dead of night and Kåñëa asked them to return to their homes, the gopés also
scratched the ground like this because their minds were very disturbed.
SB 3.23.51
TEXT 51
devhUiTaåvac
Sav| TaÙGavaNMaùMauPaaevah Pa[iTaé[uTaMa( )
AQaaiPa Mae Pa[PaàaYaa A>aYa& daTauMahRiSa )) 51 ))
devahütir uväca
sarvaà tad bhagavän mahyam
upoväha pratiçrutam
athäpi me prapannäyä
abhayaà dätum arhasi
SYNONYMS
devahütiù—Devahüti; uväca—said; sarvam—all; tat—that; bhagavän—Your Lordship;
mahyam—for me; upoväha—has been fulfilled; pratiçrutam—promised; atha api—yet;
me—unto me; prapannäyai—unto one who has surrendered; abhayam—fearlessness;
dätum—to give; arhasi—you deserve.
TRANSLATION
Çré Devahüti said: My lord, you have fulfilled all the promises you gave me, yet because I
am your surrendered soul, you should give me fearlessness too.
PURPORT
Devahüti requested her husband to grant her something without fear. As a wife, she was
a fully surrendered soul to her husband, and it is the responsibility of the husband to
289
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
give his wife fearlessness. How one awards fearlessness to his subordinate is mentioned
in the Fifth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. One who cannot get free from the clutches of
death is dependent, and he should not become a spiritual master, nor a husband, nor a
kinsman, nor a father, nor a mother, etc. It is the duty of the superior to give fearlessness
to the subordinate. To take charge of someone, therefore, either as father, mother,
spiritual master, relative or husband, one must accept the responsibility to give his ward
freedom from the fearful situation of material existence. Material existence is always
fearful and full of anxiety. Devahüti is saying, "You have given me all sorts of material
comforts by your yogic power, and since you are now prepared to go away, you must give
me your last award so that I may get free from this material, conditional life."
SB 3.23.52
TEXT 52
b]øNduihTa*i>aSTau>Ya& ivMa*GYaa" PaTaYa" SaMaa" )
k-iêTSYaaNMae ivXaaek-aYa TviYa Pa[v]iJaTae vNaMa( )) 52 ))
brahman duhitåbhis tubhyaà
vimågyäù patayaù samäù
kaçcit syän me viçokäya
tvayi pravrajite vanam
SYNONYMS
brahman—my dear brähmaëa; duhitåbhiù—by the daughters themselves; tubhyam—for
you; vimågyäù—to be found out; patayaù—husbands; samäù—suitable; kaçcit—someone;
syät—there should be; me—my; viçokäya—for solace; tvayi—when you; pravrajite—
departed; vanam—to the forest.
TRANSLATION
My dear brähmaëa, as far as your daughters are concerned, they will find their own
suitable husbands and go away to their respective homes. But who will give me solace
after your departure as a sannyäsé?
PURPORT
It is said that the father himself becomes the son in another form. The father and son
290
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
are therefore considered to be nondifferent. A widow who has her son is actually not a
widow, because she has the representative of her husband. Similarly, Devahüti is
indirectly asking Kardama Muni to leave a representative so that in his absence she
might be relieved of her anxieties by a suitable son. A householder is not expected to
remain at home for all his days. After getting his sons and daughters married, a
householder can retire from household life, leaving his wife in the charge of the grownup
sons. That is the social convention of the Vedic system. Devahüti is indirectly asking
that in his absence from home there be at least one male child to give her relief from her
anxieties. This relief means spiritual instruction. Relief does not mean material
comforts. Material comforts will end with the end of the body, but spiritual instruction
will not end; it will go on with the spirit soul. Instruction in spiritual advancement is
necessary, but without having a worthy son, how could Devahüti advance in spiritual
knowledge? It is the duty of the husband to liquidate his debt to his wife. The wife gives
her sincere service to the husband, and he becomes indebted to her because one cannot
accept service from his subordinate without giving him something in exchange. The
spiritual master cannot accept service from a disciple without awarding him spiritual
instruction. That is the reciprocation of love and duty. Thus Devahüti reminds her
husband, Kardama Muni, that she has rendered him faithful service. Even considering
the situation on the basis of liquidating his debt toward his wife, he must give a male
child before he leaves. Indirectly, Devahüti requests her husband to remain at home a
few days more, or at least until a male child is born.
SB 3.23.53
TEXT 53
WTaavTaal&/ k-ale/Na VYaiTa§-aNTaeNa Mae Pa[>aae )
wiNd]YaaQaRPa[Sa(r)eNa PairTYa¢-ParaTMaNa" )) 53 ))
etävatälaà kälena
vyatikräntena me prabho
indriyärtha-prasaìgena
parityakta-parätmanaù
SYNONYMS
etävatä—so much; alam—for nothing; kälena—time; vyatikräntena—passed by; me—
my; prabho—O my lord; indriya-artha—sense gratification; prasaìgena—in the matter
291
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of indulging; parityakta—disregarding; para-ätmanaù—knowledge of the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Until now we have simply wasted so much of our time in sense gratification, neglecting to
cultivate knowledge of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Human life is not meant to be wasted, like that of the animals, in sense gratificatory
activities. Animals always engage in sense gratification-eating, sleeping, fearing and
mating—but that is not the engagement of the human being, although, because of the
material body, there is need of sense gratification according to a regulative principle. So,
in effect, Devahüti said to her husband: "So far we have these daughters, and we have
enjoyed material life in the aerial mansion, traveling all over the universe. These boons
have come by your grace, but they have all been for sense gratification. Now there must
be something for my spiritual advancement."
SB 3.23.54
TEXT 54
wiNd]YaaQaeRzu SaÂNTYaa Pa[Sa(r)STviYa Mae k*-Ta" )
AJaaNaNTYaa Par& >aav& TaQaaPYaSTv>aYaaYa Mae )) 54 ))
indriyärtheñu sajjantyä
prasaìgas tvayi me kåtaù
ajänantyä paraà bhävaà
tathäpy astv abhayäya me
SYNONYMS
indriya-artheñu—to sense gratification; sajjantyä—being attached; prasaìgaù—affinity;
tvayi—for you; me—by me; kåtaù—was done; ajänantyä—not knowing; param
bhävam—your transcendent situation; tathä api—nonetheless; astu—let it be;
abhayäya—for fearlessness; me—my.
TRANSLATION
292
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Not knowing your transcendental situation, I have loved you while remaining attached to
the objects of the senses. Nonetheless, let the affinity I have developed for you rid me of
all fear.
PURPORT
Devahüti is lamenting her position. As a woman, she had to love someone. Somehow or
other, she came to love Kardama Muni, but without knowing of his spiritual
advancement. Kardama Muni could understand Devahüti's heart; generally all women
desire material enjoyment. They are called less intelligent because they are mostly prone
to material enjoyment. Devahüti laments because her husband had given her the best
kind of material enjoyment, but she did not know that he was so advanced in spiritual
realization. Her plea was that even though she did not know the glories of her great
husband, because she had taken shelter of him she must be delivered from material
entanglement. Association with a great personality is most important. In Caitanyacaritämåta
Lord Caitanya says that sädhu-saìga [Cc. Madhya 22.83], the association of a
great saintly person, is very important, because even if one is not advanced in
knowledge, simply by association with a great saintly person one can immediately make
considerable advancement in spiritual life. As a woman, as an ordinary wife, Devahüti
became attached to Kardama Muni in order to satisfy her sense enjoyment and other
material necessities, but actually she associated with a great personality. Now she
understood this, and she wanted to utilize the advantage of the association of her great
husband.
SB 3.23.55
TEXT 55
Sa(r)ae Ya" Sa&Sa*TaeheRTaurSaTSau ivihTaae_iDaYaa )
Sa Wv SaaDauzu k*-Taae iNa"Sa(r)TvaYa k-LPaTae )) 55 ))
saìgo yaù saàsåter hetur
asatsu vihito 'dhiyä
sa eva sädhuñu kåto
niùsaìgatväya kalpate
SYNONYMS
293
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
saìgaù—association; yaù—which; saàsåteù—of the cycle of birth and death; hetuù—the
cause; asatsu—with those engaged in sense gratification; vihitaù—done; adhiyä—
through ignorance; saù—the same thing; eva—certainly; sädhuñu—with saintly persons;
kåtaù—performed; niùsaìgatväya—to liberation; kalpate—leads.
TRANSLATION
Association for sense gratification is certainly the path of bondage. But the same type of
association, performed with a saintly person, leads to the path of liberation, even if
performed without knowledge.
PURPORT
The association of a saintly person in any way bears the same result. For example, Lord
Kåñëa met many kinds of living entities, and some treated Him as an enemy, and some
treated Him as an agent for sense gratification. It is generally said that the gopés were
attached to Kåñëa for sense attractions, and yet they became first-class devotees of the
Lord. Kaàsa, Çiçupäla, Dantavakra and other demons, however, were related to Kåñëa as
enemies. But whether they associated with Kåñëa as enemies or for sense gratification,
out of fear or as pure devotees, they all got liberation. That is the result of association
with the Lord. Even if one does not understand who He is, the results have the same
efficacy. Association with a great saintly person also results in liberation, just as whether
one goes toward fire knowingly or unknowingly, the fire will make one warm. Devahüti
expressed her gratefulness, for although she wanted to associate with Kardama Muni
only for sense gratification, because he was spiritually great she was sure to be liberated
by his benediction.
SB 3.23.56
TEXT 56
Naeh YaTk-MaR DaMaaRYa Na ivraGaaYa k-LPaTae )
Na TaqQaRPadSaevaYaE JaqvàiPa Ma*Taae ih Sa" )) 56 ))
neha yat karma dharmäya
na virägäya kalpate
na tértha-pada-seväyai
jévann api måto hi saù
294
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
na—not; iha—here; yat—which; karma—work; dharmäya—for perfection of religious
life; na—not; virägäya—for detachment; kalpate—leads; na—not; tértha-pada—of the
Lord's lotus feet; seväyai—to devotional service; jévan—living; api—although; måtaù—
dead; hi—indeed; saù—he.
TRANSLATION
Anyone whose work is not meant to elevate him to religious life, anyone whose religious
ritualistic performances do not raise him to renunciation, and anyone situated in
renunciation that does not lead him to devotional service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, must be considered dead, although he is breathing.
PURPORT
Devahüti's statement is that since she was attached to living with her husband for sense
gratification, which does not lead to liberation from material entanglement, her life was
simply a waste of time. Any work one performs that does not lead to the state of
religious life is useless activity. Everyone is by nature inclined to some sort of work, and
when that work leads one to religious life and religious life leads one to renunciation
and renunciation leads one to devotional service, one attains the perfection of work. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä, any work that does not lead ultimately to the standard of
devotional service is a cause of bondage in the material world. Yajïärthät karmaëo
'nyatra loko 'yaà karma-bandhanaù [Bg. 3.9]). Unless one is gradually elevated to the
position of devotional service, beginning from his natural activity, he is to be considered
a dead body. Work which does not lead one to the understanding of Kåñëa consciousness
is considered useless.
SB 3.23.57
TEXT 57
Saah& >aGavTaae NaUNa& viÄTaa MaaYaYaa d*!Ma( )
Yatva& ivMaui¢-d& Pa[aPYa Na MauMau+aeYa bNDaNaaTa( )) 57 ))
sähaà bhagavato nünaà
vaïcitä mäyayä dåòham
yat tväà vimuktidaà präpya
295
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
na mumukñeya bandhanät
SYNONYMS
sä—that very person; aham—I am; bhagavataù—of the Lord; nünam—surely; vaïcitä—
cheated; mäyayä—by the illusory energy; dåòham—solidly; yat—because; tväm—you;
vimukti-dam—who gives liberation; präpya—having attained; na mumukñeya—I have
not sought liberation; bandhanät—from material bondage.
TRANSLATION
My lord, surely I have been solidly cheated by the insurmountable illusory energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, for in spite of having obtained your association, which
gives liberation from material bondage, I did not seek such liberation.
PURPORT
An intelligent man should utilize good opportunities. The first opportunity is the human
form of life, and the second opportunity is to take birth in a suitable family where there
is cultivation of spiritual knowledge; this is rarely obtained. The greatest opportunity is
to have the association of a saintly person. Devahüti was conscious that she was born as
the daughter of an emperor. She was sufficiently educated and cultured, and at last she
got Kardama Muni, a saintly person and a great yogé, as her husband. Still, if she did not
get liberation from the entanglement of material energy, then certainly she would be
cheated by the insurmountable illusory energy. Actually, the illusory, material energy is
cheating everyone. People do not know what they are doing when they worship the
material energy in the form of goddess Kälé or Durgä for material boons. They ask,
"Mother, give me great riches, give me a good wife, give me fame, give me victory." But
such devotees of the goddess Mäyä, or Durgä, do not know that they are being cheated
by that goddess. Material achievement is actually no achievement because as soon as one
is illusioned by the material gifts, he becomes more and more entangled, and there is no
question of liberation. One should be intelligent enough to know how to utilize material
assets for the purpose of spiritual realization. That is called karma-yoga or jïäna-yoga.
Whatever we have we should use as service to the Supreme Person. It is advised in
Bhagavad-gétä sva-karmaëä tam abhyarcya: [Bg. 18.46] one should try to worship the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by one's assets. There are many forms of service to the
Supreme Lord, and anyone can render service unto Him according to the best of his
296
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ability.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Twenty-third Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Devahüti's Lamentation."
24. The Renunciation of Kardama Muni
SB 3.24.1
TEXT 1
MaE}aeYa ovac
iNaveRdvaidNaqMaev& MaNaaeduRihTar& MauiNa" )
dYaalu/" Xaail/NaqMaah éu(c)-ai>aVYaaôTa& SMarNa( )) 1 ))
maitreya uväca
nirveda-vädiném evaà
manor duhitaraà muniù
dayäluù çäliném äha
çukläbhivyähåtaà smaran
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù—the great sage Maitreya; uväca—said; nirveda-vädiném—who was speaking
words full of renunciation; evam—thus; manoù—of Sväyambhuva Manu; duhitaram—to
the daughter; muniù—the sage Kardama; dayäluù—merciful; çäliném—who was worthy
of praise; äha—replied; çukla—by Lord Viñëu; abhivyähåtam—what was said; smaran—
recalling.
TRANSLATION
Recalling the words of Lord Viñëu, the merciful sage Kardama replied as follows to
Sväyambhuva Manu's praiseworthy daughter, Devahüti, who was speaking words full of
renunciation.
297
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.24.2
TEXT 2
‰izåvac
Maa i%dae raJaPau}aqTQaMaaTMaaNa& Pa[TYaiNaiNdTae )
>aGava&STae_+arae Ga>aRMadUraTSaMPa[PaTSYaTae )) 2 ))
åñir uväca
mä khido räja-putréttham
ätmänaà praty anindite
bhagaväàs te 'kñaro garbham
adürät samprapatsyate
SYNONYMS
åñiù uväca—the sage said; mä khidaù—do not be disappointed; räja-putri—O princess;
ittham—in this way; ätmänam—yourself; prati—toward; anindite—O praiseworthy
Devahüti; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; te—your; akñaraù—
infallible; garbham—womb; adürät—without delay; samprapatsyate—will enter.
TRANSLATION
The sage said: Do not be disappointed with yourself, O princess. You are actually
praiseworthy. The infallible Supreme Personality of Godhead will shortly enter your
womb as your son.
PURPORT
Kardama Muni encouraged his wife not to be sorry, thinking herself unfortunate,
because the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by His incarnation, was going to come
from her body.
SB 3.24.3
TEXT 3
Da*Tav]TaaiSa >ad]& Tae dMaeNa iNaYaMaeNa c )
TaPaaed]iv<adaNaEê é[ÖYaa ceìr& >aJa )) 3 ))
298
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
dhåta-vratäsi bhadraà te
damena niyamena ca
tapo-draviëa-dänaiç ca
çraddhayä ceçvaraà bhaja
SYNONYMS
dhåta-vratä asi—you have undertaken sacred vows; bhadram te—may God bless you;
damena—by control of the senses; niyamena—by religious observances; ca—and;
tapaù—austerities; draviëa—of money; dänaiù—by giving in charity; ca—and;
çraddhayä—with great faith; ca—and; éçvaram—the Supreme Lord; bhaja—worship.
TRANSLATION
You have undertaken sacred vows. God will bless you. Hence you should worship the
Lord with great faith, through sensory control, religious observances, austerities and gifts
of your money in charity.
PURPORT
In order to spiritually advance or to achieve the mercy of the Lord, one must be selfcontrolled
in the following manner: he must be restrained in sense gratification and
must follow the rules and regulations of religious principles. Without austerity and
penance and without sacrificing one's riches, one cannot achieve the mercy of the
Supreme Lord. Kardama Muni advised his wife: "You have to factually engage in
devotional service with austerity and penance, following the religious principles and
giving charity. Then the Supreme Lord will be pleased with you, and He will come as
your son."
SB 3.24.4
TEXT 4
Sa TvYaaraiDaTa" éu(c)-ae ivTaNvNMaaMak&- YaXa" )
^etaa Tae ôdYaGa]iNQaMaaEdYaaeR b]ø>aavNa" )) 4 ))
sa tvayärädhitaù çuklo
vitanvan mämakaà yaçaù
chettä te hådaya-granthim
299
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
audaryo brahma-bhävanaù
SYNONYMS
saù—He; tvayä—by you; ärädhitaù—being worshiped; çuklaù—the Personality of
Godhead; vitanvan—spreading; mämakam—my; yaçaù—fame; chettä—He will cut; te—
your; hådaya—of the heart; granthim—knot; audaryaù—your son; brahma—knowledge
of Brahman; bhävanaù—teaching.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, being worshiped by you, will spread my name and fame. He
will vanquish the knot of your heart by becoming your son and teaching knowledge of
Brahman.
PURPORT
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead comes to disseminate spiritual knowledge
for the benefit of all people, He generally descends as the son of a devotee, being pleased
by the devotee's devotional service. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the father
of everyone. No one, therefore, is His father, but by His inconceivable energy He
accepts some of the devotees as His parents and descendants. It is explained here that
spiritual knowledge vanquishes the knot of the heart. Matter and spirit are knotted by
false ego. This identification of oneself with matter, which is called hådaya-granthi,
exists for all conditioned souls, and it becomes more and more tightened when there is
too much affection for sex life. The explanation was given by Lord Åñabha to His sons
that this material world is an atmosphere of attraction between male and female. That
attraction takes the shape of a knot in the heart, and by material affection it becomes
still more tight. For people who hanker after material possessions, society, friendship
and love, this knot of affection becomes very strong. It is only by brahma-bhävana—the
instruction by which spiritual knowledge is enhanced—that the knot in the heart is cut
to pieces. No material weapon is needed to cut this knot, but it requires bona fide
spiritual instruction. Kardama Muni instructed his wife, Devahüti, that the Lord would
appear as her son and disseminate spiritual knowledge to cut the knot of material
identification.
SB 3.24.5
TEXT 5
300
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
MaE}aeYa ovac
devhUTYaiPa SaNdeXa& GaaErve<a Pa[JaaPaTae" )
SaMYak(- é[ÖaYa Pauåz& kU-$=SQaMa>aJad(GauåMa( )) 5 ))
maitreya uväca
devahüty api sandeçaà
gauraveëa prajäpateù
samyak çraddhäya puruñaà
küöa-stham abhajad gurum
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; devahüté—Devahüti; api—also; sandeçam—the
direction; gauraveëa—with great respect; prajäpateù—of Kardama; samyak—complete;
çraddhäya—having faith in; puruñam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; küöastham—
situated in everyone's heart; abhajat—worshiped; gurum—most worshipable.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: Devahüti was fully faithful and respectful toward the direction of her
husband, Kardama, who was one of the Prajäpatis, or generators of human beings in the
universe. O great sage, she thus began to worship the master of the universe, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is situated in everyone's heart.
PURPORT
This is the process of spiritual realization; one has to receive instruction from a bona
fide spiritual master. Kardama Muni was Devahüti's husband, but because he instructed
her on how to achieve spiritual perfection, he naturally became her spiritual master also.
There are many instances wherein the husband becomes the spiritual master. Lord Çiva
also is the spiritual master of his consort, Pärvaté. A husband should be so enlightened
that he should become the spiritual master of his wife in order to enlighten her in the
advancement of Kåñëa consciousness. Generally stré, or woman, is less intelligent than
man; therefore, if the husband is intelligent enough, the woman gets a great opportunity
for spiritual enlightenment.
Here it is clearly said (samyak çraddhäya) that with great faith one should receive
301
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
knowledge from the spiritual master and with great faith execute the performance of
service. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, in his commentary on Bhagavad-gétä, has
especially stressed the instruction of the spiritual master. One should accept the
instruction of the spiritual master as one's life and soul. Whether one is liberated or not
liberated, one should execute the instruction of the spiritual master with great faith. It is
also stated that the Lord is situated in everyone's heart. One does not have to seek the
Lord outside; He is already there. One simply has to concentrate on one's worship in
good faith, as instructed by the bona fide spiritual master, and one's efforts will come out
successfully. It is also clear that the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not appear as
an ordinary child; He appears as He is. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, He appears by His
own internal potency, ätmä-mäyä. And how does He appear? He appears when pleased
by the worship of a devotee. A devotee may ask the Lord to appear as her son. The Lord
is already sitting within the heart, and if He comes out from the body of a devotee it
does not mean that the particular woman becomes His mother in the material sense. He
is always there, but in order to please His devotee, He appears as her son.
SB 3.24.6
TEXT 6
TaSYaa& bhuiTaQae k-ale/ >aGavaNMaDauSaUdNa" )
k-adRMa& vqYaRMaaPaàae Jaje_iGanirv daåi<a )) 6 ))
tasyäà bahu-tithe käle
bhagavän madhusüdanaù
kärdamaà véryam äpanno
jajïe 'gnir iva däruëi
SYNONYMS
tasyäm—in Devahüti; bahu-tithe käle—after many years; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; madhu-südanaù—the killer of the demon Madhu; kärdamam—
of Kardama; véryam—the semen; äpannaù—entered; jajïe—He appeared; agniù—fire;
iva—like; däruëi—in wood.
TRANSLATION
After many, many years, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Madhusüdana, the killer
302
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of the demon Madhu, having entered the semen of Kardama, appeared in Devahüti just as
fire comes from wood in a sacrifice.
PURPORT
It is clearly stated here that the Lord is always the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
although He appeared as the son of Kardama Muni. Fire is already present in wood, but
by a certain process, fire is kindled. Similarly, God is all-pervading. He is everywhere,
and since He may come out from everything, He appeared in His devotee's semen. Just
as an ordinary living entity takes his birth by taking shelter of the semen of a certain
living entity, the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepts the shelter of the semen of
His devotee and comes out as His son. This manifests His full independence to act in
any way, and it does not mean that He is an ordinary living entity forced to take birth in
a certain type of womb. Lord Nåsiàha appeared from the pillar of Hiraëyakaçipu's
palace, Lord Varäha appeared from the nostril of Brahmä, and Lord Kapila appeared
from the semen of Kardama, but this does not mean that the nostril of Brahmä or the
pillar of Hiraëyakaçipu's palace or the semen of Kardama Muni is the source of the
appearance of the Lord. The Lord is always the Lord. Bhagavän madhusüdanaù—He is
the killer of all kinds of demons, and He always remains the Lord, even if He appears as
the son of a particular devotee. The word kärdamam is significant, for it indicates that
the Lord had some devotional affection or relationship in devotional service with
Kardama and Devahüti. But we should not mistakenly understand that He was born just
like an ordinary living entity from the semen of Kardama Muni in the womb of
Devahüti.
SB 3.24.7
TEXT 7
AvadYa&STada VYaaeiMan vaid}aai<a gaNaagaNaa" )
GaaYaiNTa Ta& SMa GaNDavaR Na*TYaNTYaPSarSaae Mauda )) 7 ))
avädayaàs tadä vyomni
väditräëi ghanäghanäù
gäyanti taà sma gandharvä
nåtyanty apsaraso mudä
SYNONYMS
303
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
avädayan—sounded; tadä—at that time; vyomni—in the sky; väditräëi—musical
instruments; ghanäghanäù—the rain clouds; gäyanti—sang; tam—to Him; sma—
certainly; gandharväù—the Gandharvas; nåtyanti—danced; apsarasaù—the Apsaräs;
mudä—in joyful ecstasy.
TRANSLATION
At the time of His descent on earth, demigods in the form of raining clouds sounded
musical instruments in the sky. The celestial musicians, the Gandharvas, sang the glories
of the Lord, while celestial dancing girls known as Apsaräs danced in joyful ecstasy.
SB 3.24.8
TEXT 8
PaeTau" SauMaNaSaae idVYaa" %ecrErPaviJaRTaa" )
Pa[Saeduê idXa" SavaR AM>aa&iSa c MaNaa&iSa c )) 8 ))
petuù sumanaso divyäù
khe-carair apavarjitäù
praseduç ca diçaù sarvä
ambhäàsi ca manäàsi ca
SYNONYMS
petuù—fell; sumanasaù—flowers; divyäù—beautiful; khe-caraiù—by the demigods who
fly in the sky; apavarjitäù—dropped; praseduù—became satisfied; ca—and; diçaù—
directions; sarväù—all; ambhäàsi—waters; ca—and; manäàsi—minds; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
At the time of the Lord's appearance, the demigods flying freely in the sky showered
flowers. All the directions, all the waters and everyone's mind became very satisfied.
PURPORT
It is learned herewith that in the higher sky there are living entities who can travel
through the air without being hampered. Although we can travel in outer space, we are
hampered by so many impediments, but they are not. We learn from the pages of
304
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Çrémad-Bhägavatam that the inhabitants of the planet called Siddhaloka can travel in
space from one planet to another without impediment. They showered flowers on the
earth when Lord Kapila, the son of Kardama, appeared.
SB 3.24.9
TEXT 9
TaTk-dRMaaé[MaPad& SarSvTYaa Pairié[TaMa( )
SvYaM>aU" Saak-Ma*izi>aMaRrqCYaaidi>ar>YaYaaTa( )) 9 ))
tat kardamäçrama-padaà
sarasvatyä pariçritam
svayambhüù säkam åñibhir
marécy-ädibhir abhyayät
SYNONYMS
tat—that; kardama—of Kardama; äçrama-padam—to the place of the hermitage;
sarasvatyä—by the River Sarasvaté; pariçritam—surrounded; svayambhüù—Brahmä (the
self-born); säkam—along with; åñibhiù—the sages; maréci—the great sage Maréci;
ädibhiù—and others; abhyayät—he came there.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä, the first-born living being, went along with Maréci and other sages to the place
of Kardama's hermitage, which was surrounded by the River Sarasvaté.
PURPORT
Brahmä is called Svayambhü because he is not born of any material father and mother.
He is the first living creature and is born from the lotus which grows from the abdomen
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu. Therefore he is called
Svayambhü, self-born.
SB 3.24.10
TEXT 10
>aGavNTa& Par& b]ø SatveNaa&XaeNa Xa}auhNa( )
305
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TatvSa&:YaaNaivjPTYaE JaaTa& ivÜaNaJa" Svra$( )) 10 ))
bhagavantaà paraà brahma
sattvenäàçena çatru-han
tattva-saìkhyäna-vijïaptyai
jätaà vidvän ajaù svaräö
SYNONYMS
bhagavantam—the Lord; param—supreme; brahma—Brahman; sattvena—having an
uncontaminated existence; aàçena—by a plenary portion; çatru-han—O killer of the
enemy, Vidura; tattva-saìkhyäna—the philosophy of the twenty-four material elements;
vijïaptyai—for explaining; jätam—appeared; vidvän—knowing; ajaù—the unborn (Lord
Brahmä); sva-räö—independent.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya continued: O killer of the enemy, the unborn Lord Brahmä, who is almost
independent in acquiring knowledge, could understand that a portion of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, in His quality of pure existence, had appeared in the womb of
Devahüti just to explain the complete state of knowledge known as säìkhya-yoga.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä, Fifteenth Chapter, it is stated that the Lord Himself is the compiler of
Vedänta-sütra, and He is the perfect knower of Vedänta-sütra. Similarly, the Säìkhya
philosophy is compiled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His appearance as
Kapila. There is an imitation Kapila who has a Säìkhya philosophical system, but Kapila
the incarnation of God is different from that Kapila. Kapila the son of Kardama Muni,
in His system of Säìkhya philosophy, very explicitly explained not only the material
world but also the spiritual world. Brahmä could understand this fact because he is
svaräö, almost independent in receiving knowledge. He is called svaräö because he did
not go to any school or college to learn but learned everything from within. Because
Brahmä is the first living creature within this universe, he had no teacher; his teacher
was the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, who is seated in the heart of every
living creature. Brahmä acquired knowledge directly from the Supreme Lord within the
heart; therefore he is sometimes called svaräö and aja.
306
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Another important point is stated here. Sattvenäàçena: when the Supreme Personality
of Godhead appears, He brings with Him all His paraphernalia of Vaikuëöha; therefore
His name, His form, His quality, His paraphernalia and His entourage all belong to the
transcendental world. Real goodness is in the transcendental world. Here in the material
world, the quality of goodness is not pure. Goodness may exist, but there must also be
some tinges of passion and ignorance. In the spiritual world the unalloyed quality of
goodness prevails; there the quality of goodness is called çuddha-sattva, pure goodness.
Another name for çuddha-sattva is vasudeva because God is born from Vasudeva.
Another meaning is that when one is purely situated in the qualities of goodness, he can
understand the form, name, quality, paraphernalia and entourage of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The word aàçena also indicates that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Kåñëa, appeared as Kapiladeva in a portion of His portion. God expands
either as kalä or as aàça. Aàça means "direct expansion," and kalä means "expansion of
the expansion." There is no difference between the expansion, the expansion of the
expansion, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead directly, as there is no difference
between one candle and another—but still the candle from which the others are lit is
called the original. Kåñëa, therefore, is called the Parabrahman, or the ultimate
Godhead and cause of all causes.
SB 3.24.11
TEXT 11
Sa>aaJaYaNa( ivéuÖeNa ceTaSaa TaiÀk-IizRTaMa( )
Pa[ôZYaMaa<aErSaui>a" k-dRMa& cedMa>YaDaaTa( )) 11 ))
sabhäjayan viçuddhena
cetasä tac-cikérñitam
prahåñyamäëair asubhiù
kardamaà cedam abhyadhät
SYNONYMS
sabhäjayan—worshiping; viçuddhena—pure; cetasä—with a heart; tat—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; cikérñitam—the intended activities; prahåñyamäëaiù—
gladdened; asubhiù—with senses; kardamam—to Kardama Muni; ca—and Devahüti;
idam—this; abhyadhät—spoke.
307
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
After worshiping the Supreme Lord with gladdened senses and a pure heart for His
intended activities as an incarnation, Brahmä spoke as follows to Kardama and Devahüti.
PURPORT
As explained in Bhagavad-gétä, Fourth Chapter, anyone who understands the
transcendental activities, the appearance and the disappearance of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is to be considered liberated. Brahmä, therefore, is a liberated
soul. Although he is in charge of this material world, he is not exactly like the common
living entity. Since he is liberated from the majority of the follies of the common living
entities, he was in knowledge of the appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and he therefore worshiped the Lord's activities, and with a glad heart he also praised
Kardama Muni because the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as Kapila, had appeared as
his son. One who can become the father of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
certainly a great devotee. There is a verse spoken by a brähmaëa in which he says that
he does not know what the Vedas and what the puräëas are, but while others might be
interested in the Vedas or puräëas, he is interested in Nanda Mahäräja, who appeared as
the father of Kåñëa. The brähmaëa wanted to worship Nanda Mahäräja because the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, as a child, crawled in the yard of his house. These are
some of the good sentiments of devotees. If a recognized devotee brings forth the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as his son, how he should be praised! Brahmä,
therefore, not only worshiped the incarnation of Godhead Kapila but also praised His
so-called father, Kardama Muni.
SB 3.24.12
TEXT 12
b]øaevac
TvYaa Mae_PaiciTaSTaaTa k-iLPaTaa iNaVYaRl/Ik-Ta" )
YaNMae SaÅGa*he vaKYa& >avaNMaaNad MaaNaYaNa( )) 12 ))
brahmoväca
tvayä me 'pacitis täta
kalpitä nirvyalékataù
yan me saïjagåhe väkyaà
308
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bhavän mänada mänayan
SYNONYMS
brahmä—Lord Brahmä; uväca—said; tvayä—by you; me—my; apacitiù—worship; täta—
O son; kalpitä—is accomplished; nirvyalékataù—without duplicity; yat—since; me—my;
saïjagåhe—have completely accepted; väkyam—instructions; bhavän—you; mäna-da—
O Kardama (one who offers honor to others); mänayan—respecting.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: My dear son Kardama, since you have completely accepted my
instructions without duplicity, showing them proper respect, you have worshiped me
properly. Whatever instructions you took from me you have carried out, and thereby you
have honored me.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä, as the first living entity within the universe, is supposed to be the spiritual
master of everyone, and he is also the father, the creator, of all beings. Kardama Muni is
one of the Prajäpatis, or creators of the living entities, and he is also a son of Brahmä.
Brahmä praises Kardama because he carried out the orders of the spiritual master in toto
and without cheating. A conditioned soul in the material world has the disqualification
of cheating. He has four disqualifications: he is sure to commit mistakes, he is sure to be
illusioned, he is prone to cheat others, and his senses are imperfect. But if one carries
out the order of the spiritual master by disciplic succession, or the paramparä system, he
overcomes the four defects. Therefore, knowledge received from the bona fide spiritual
master is not cheating. Any other knowledge which is manufactured by the conditioned
soul is cheating only. Brahmä knew well that Kardama Muni exactly carried out the
instructions received from him and that he actually honored his spiritual master. To
honor the spiritual master means to carry out his instructions word for word.
SB 3.24.13
TEXT 13
WTaavTYaev éué[Uza k-aYaaR iPaTair Pau}akE-" )
ba!iMaTYaNauMaNYaeTa GaaErve<a GauraevRc" )) 13 ))
309
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
etävaty eva çuçrüñä
käryä pitari putrakaiù
bäòham ity anumanyeta
gauraveëa guror vacaù
SYNONYMS
etävaté—to this extent; eva—exactly; çuçrüñä—service; käryä—ought to be rendered;
pitari—to the father; putrakaiù—by the sons; bäòham iti—accepting, "Yes, sir";
anumanyeta—he should obey; gauraveëa—with due deference; guroù—of the guru;
vacaù—commands.
TRANSLATION
Sons ought to render service to their father exactly to this extent. One should obey the
command of his father or spiritual master with due deference, saying, "Yes, sir."
PURPORT
Two words in this verse are very important; one word is pitari, and another word is
guroù. The son or disciple should accept the words of his spiritual master and father
without hesitation. Whatever the father and the spiritual master order should be taken
without argument: "Yes." There should be no instance in which the disciple or the son
says, "This is not correct. I cannot carry it out." When he says that, he is fallen. The
father and the spiritual master are on the same platform because a spiritual master is the
second father. The higher classes are called dvija, twice-born. Whenever there is a
question of birth, there must be a father. The first birth is made possible by the actual
father, and the second birth is made possible by the spiritual master. Sometimes the
father and the spiritual master may be the same man, and sometimes they are different
men. In any case, the order of the father or the order of the spiritual master must be
carried out without hesitation, with an immediate yes. There should be no argument.
That is real service to the father and to the spiritual master. Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura has stated that the order of the spiritual master is the life and soul of the
disciples. As a man cannot separate his life from his body, a disciple cannot separate the
order of the spiritual master from his life. If a disciple follows the instruction of the
spiritual master in that way, he is sure to become perfect. This is confirmed in the
Upaniñads: the import of Vedic instruction is revealed automatically only to one who
310
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
has implicit faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead and in his spiritual master.
One may be materially considered an illiterate man, but if he has faith in the spiritual
master as well as in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then the meaning of scriptural
revelation is immediately manifested before him.
SB 3.24.14
TEXT 14
wMaa duihTar" SaTYaSTav vTSa SauMaDYaMaa" )
SaGaRMaeTa& Pa[>aavE" SvEb*|hiYaZYaNTYaNaek-Daa )) 14 ))
imä duhitaraù satyas
tava vatsa sumadhyamäù
sargam etaà prabhävaiù svair
båàhayiñyanty anekadhä
SYNONYMS
imäù—these; duhitaraù—daughters; satyaù—chaste; tava—your; vatsa—O my dear son;
su-madhyamäù—thin-waisted; sargam—creation; etam—this; prabhävaiù—by
descendants; svaiù—their own; båàhayiñyanti—they will increase; aneka-dhä—in
various ways.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä then praised Kardama Muni's nine daughters, saying: All your thin-waisted
daughters are certainly very chaste. I am sure they will increase this creation by their
own descendants in various ways.
PURPORT
In the beginning of creation, Brahmä was concerned more or less with increasing the
population, and when he saw that Kardama Muni had already begotten nine nice
daughters, he was hopeful that through the daughters many children would come who
would take charge of the creative principle of the material world. He was therefore
happy to see them. The word sumadhyamä means "a good daughter of a beautiful
woman." If she has a thin waist, a woman is considered very beautiful. All the daughters
of Kardama Muni were of the same beautiful feature.
311
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.24.15
TEXT 15
ATaSTvMa*izMau:Yae>Yaae YaQaaXaql&/ YaQaaåic )
AaTMaJaa" PairdeùÛ ivSTa*<aqih YaXaae >auiv )) 15 ))
atas tvam åñi-mukhyebhyo
yathä-çélaà yathä-ruci
ätmajäù paridehy adya
viståëéhi yaço bhuvi
SYNONYMS
ataù—therefore; tvam—you; åñi-mukhyebhyaù—unto the foremost sages; yathä-çélam—
according to temperament; yathä-ruci—according to taste; ätma-jäù—your daughters;
paridehi—please give away; adya—today; viståëéhi—spread; yaçaù—fame; bhuvi—over
the universe.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, today please give away your daughters to the foremost of the sages, with due
regard for the girls' temperaments and likings, and thereby spread your fame all over the
universe.
PURPORT
The nine principal åñis, or sages, are Maréci, Atri, Aìgirä, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu,
Bhågu, Vasiñöha and Atharvä. All these åñis are most important, and Brahmä desired
that the nine daughters already born of Kardama Muni be handed over to them. Here
two words are used very significantly-yathä-çélam and yathä-ruci. The daughters should
be handed over to the respective åñis, not blindly, but according to the combination of
character and taste. That is the art of combining a man and woman. Man and woman
should not be united simply on the consideration of sex life. There are many other
considerations, especially character and taste. If the taste and character differ between
the man and woman, their combination will be unhappy. Even about forty years ago, in
Indian marriages, the taste and character of the boy and girl were first of all matched,
and then they were allowed to marry. This was done under the direction of the
312
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
respective parents. The parents used to astrologically determine the character and tastes
of the boy and girl, and when they corresponded, the match was selected: "This girl and
this boy are just suitable, and they should be married." Other considerations were less
important. The same system was also advised in the beginning of the creation by
Brahmä: "Your daughters should be handed over to the åñis according to taste and
character."
According to astrological calculation, a person is classified according to whether he
belongs to the godly or demoniac quality. In that way the spouse was selected. A girl of
godly quality should be handed over to a boy of godly quality. A girl of demoniac quality
should be handed over to a boy of demoniac quality. Then they will be happy. But if the
girl is demoniac and the boy is godly, then the combination is incompatible; they cannot
be happy in such a marriage. At the present moment, because boys and girls are not
married according to quality and character, most marriages are unhappy, and there is
divorce.
It is foretold in the Twelfth Canto of the Bhägavatam that in this age of Kali married
life will be accepted on the consideration of sex only; when the boy and girl are pleased
in sex, they get married, and when there is deficiency in sex, they separate. That is not
actual marriage, but a combination of men and women like cats and dogs. Therefore, the
children produced in the modern age are not exactly human beings. Human beings must
be twice-born. A child is first born of a good father and mother, and then he is born
again of the spiritual master and the Vedas. The first mother and father bring about his
birth into the world; then the spiritual master and the Vedas become his second father
and mother. According to the Vedic system of marriage for producing children, every
man and woman was enlightened in spiritual knowledge, and at the time of their
combination to produce a child, everything was scrutinizingly and scientifically done.
SB 3.24.16
TEXT 16
vedahMaaÛ& PauåzMavTaq<a| SvMaaYaYaa )
>aUTaaNaa& XaeviDa& deh& ib>a]a<a& k-iPal&/ MauNae )) 16 ))
vedäham ädyaà puruñam
avatérëaà sva-mäyayä
bhütänäà çevadhià dehaà
bibhräëaà kapilaà mune
313
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
veda—know; aham—I; ädyam—the original; puruñam—enjoyer; avatérëam—
incarnated; sva-mäyayä—by His own internal energy; bhütänäm—of all the living
entities; çevadhim—the bestower of all desired, who is just like a vast treasure; deham—
the body; bibhräëam—assuming; kapilam—Kapila Muni; mune—O sage Kardama.
TRANSLATION
O Kardama, I know that the original Supreme Personality of Godhead has now appeared
as an incarnation by His internal energy. He is the bestower of all desired by the living
entities, and He has now assumed the body of Kapila Muni.
PURPORT
In this verse we find the words puruñam avatérëaà sva-mäyayä. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is everlastingly, eternally the form of puruña, the predominator
or enjoyer, and when He appears He never accepts anything of this material energy. The
spiritual world is a manifestation of His personal, internal potency, whereas the material
world is a manifestation of His material, or differentiated, energy. The word sva-mäyayä,
"by His own internal potency," indicates that whenever the Supreme Personality of
Godhead descends, He comes in His own energy. He may assume the body of a human
being, but that body is not material. In Bhagavad-gétä, therefore, it is clearly stated that
only fools and rascals, müòhas, consider the body of Kåñëa to be the body of a common
human being. The word çevadhim means that He is the original bestower of all the
necessities of life upon the living entities. In the Vedas also it is stated that He is the
chief living entity and that He bestows all the desired necessities of other living entities.
Because He is the bestower of the necessities of all others, He is called God. The
Supreme is also a living entity; He is not impersonal. As we are individual, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is also individual—but He is the supreme individual. That is the
difference between God and the ordinary living entities.
SB 3.24.17
TEXT 17
jaNaivjaNaYaaeGaeNa k-MaR<aaMauÖrNa( Ja$=a" )
ihr<Yake-Xa" PaÚa+a" PaÚMaud]aPadaMbuJa" )) 17 ))
314
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
jïäna-vijïäna-yogena
karmaëäm uddharan jaöäù
hiraëya-keçaù padmäkñaù
padma-mudrä-padämbujaù
SYNONYMS
jïäna—of scriptural knowledge; vijïäna—and application; yogena—by means of mystic
yoga; karmaëäm—of material actions; uddharan—uprooting; jaöäù—the roots; hiraëyakeçaù—
golden hair; padma-akñaù—lotus-eyed; padma-mudrä—marked with the sign of
the lotus; pada-ambujaù—having lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
By mystic yoga and the practical application of knowledge from the scriptures, Kapila
Muni, who is characterized by His golden hair, His eyes just like lotus petals and His
lotus feet, which bear the marks of lotus flowers, will uproot the deep-rooted desire for
work in this material world.
PURPORT
In this verse the activities and bodily features of Kapila Muni are very nicely described.
The activities of Kapila Muni are forecast herein: He will present the philosophy of
Säìkhya in such a way that by studying His philosophy people will be able to uproot the
deep-rooted desire for karma, fruitive activities. Everyone in this material world engages
in achieving the fruits of his labor. A man tries to be happy by achieving the fruits of his
own honest labor, but actually he becomes more and more entangled. One cannot get
out of this entanglement unless he has perfect knowledge, or devotional service.
Those who are trying to get out of the entanglement by speculation are also doing their
best, but in the Vedic scriptures we find that if one has taken to the devotional service
of the Lord in Kåñëa consciousness, he can very easily uproot the deep-rooted desire for
fruitive activities. Säìkhya philosophy will be broadcast by Kapila Muni for that
purpose. His bodily features are also described herein. Jïäna does not refer to ordinary
research work. Jïäna entails receiving knowledge from the scriptures through the
spiritual master by disciplic succession. In the modern age there is a tendency to do
research by mental speculation and concoction. But the man who speculates forgets that
he himself is subject to the four defects of nature: he is sure to commit mistakes, his
315
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
senses are imperfect, he is sure to fall into illusion, and he is cheating. Unless one has
perfect knowledge from disciplic succession, he simply puts forth some theories of his
own creation; therefore he is cheating people. Jïäna means knowledge received through
disciplic succession from the scriptures, and vijïäna means practical application of such
knowledge. Kapila Muni's Säìkhya system of philosophy is based on jïäna and vijïäna.
SB 3.24.18
TEXT 18
Wz MaaNaiv Tae Ga>a| Pa[iví" kE-$=>aadRNa" )
AivÛaSa&XaYaGa]iNQa& i^tva Gaa& ivcirZYaiTa )) 18 ))
eña mänavi te garbhaà
praviñöaù kaiöabhärdanaù
avidyä-saàçaya-granthià
chittvä gäà vicariñyati
SYNONYMS
eñaù—the same Supreme Personality of Godhead; mänavi—O daughter of Manu; te—
your; garbham—womb; praviñöaù—has entered; kaiöabha-ardanaù—the killer of the
demon Kaiöabha; avidyä—of ignorance; saàçaya—and of doubt; granthim—the knot;
chittvä—cutting off; gäm—the world; vicariñyati—He will travel over.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä then told Devahüti: My dear daughter of Manu, the same Supreme
Personality of Godhead who killed the demon Kaiöabha is now within your womb. He
will cut off all the knots of your ignorance and doubt. Then He will travel all over the
world.
PURPORT
Here the word avidyä is very significant. Avidyä means forgetfulness of one's identity.
Every one of us is a spirit soul, but we have forgotten. We think, "I am this body." This is
called avidyä. Saàçaya-granthi means "doubtfulness." The knot of doubtfulness is tied
when the soul identifies with the material world. That knot is also called ahaìkära, the
junction of matter and spirit. By proper knowledge received from the scriptures in
316
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
disciplic succession and by proper application of that knowledge, one can free himself
from this binding combination of matter and spirit. Brahmä assures Devahüti that her
son will enlighten her, and after enlightening her He will travel all over the world,
distributing the system of Säìkhya philosophy.
The word saàçaya means "doubtful knowledge." Speculative and pseudo yogic
knowledge is all doubtful. At the present moment the so-called yoga system is prosecuted
on the understanding that by agitation of the different stations of the bodily
construction one can find that he is God. The mental speculators think similarly, but
they are all doubtful. Real knowledge is expounded in Bhagavad-gétä: "Just become Kåñëa
conscious. Just worship Kåñëa and become a devotee of Kåñëa." That is real knowledge,
and anyone who follows that system becomes perfect without a doubt.
SB 3.24.19
TEXT 19
AYa& iSaÖGa<aaDaqXa" Saa&:YaacaYaOE" SauSaMMaTa" )
l/aeke- k-iPal/ wTYaa:Yaa& GaNTaa Tae k-IiTaRvDaRNa" )) 19 ))
ayaà siddha-gaëädhéçaù
säìkhyäcäryaiù susammataù
loke kapila ity äkhyäà
gantä te kérti-vardhanaù
SYNONYMS
ayam—this Personality of Godhead; siddha-gaëa—of the perfected sages; adhéçaù—the
head; säìkhya-äcäryaiù—by äcäryas expert in Säìkhya philosophy; su-sammataù—
approved according to Vedic principles; loke—in the world; kapilaù iti—as Kapila;
äkhyäm—celebrated; gantä—He will go about; te—your; kérti—fame; vardhanaù—
increasing.
TRANSLATION
Your son will be the head of all the perfected souls. He will be approved by the äcäryas
expert in disseminating real knowledge, and among the people He will be celebrated by
the name Kapila. As the son of Devahüti, He will increase your fame.
317
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Säìkhya philosophy is the philosophical system enunciated by Kapila, the son of
Devahüti. The other Kapila, who is not the son of Devahüti, is an imitation. This is the
statement of Brahmä, and because we belong to Brahmä's disciplic succession we should
accept his statement that the real Kapila is the son of Devahüti and that real Säìkhya
philosophy is the system of philosophy which He introduced and which will be accepted
by the äcäryas, the directors of spiritual discipline. The word susammata means
"accepted by persons who are counted upon to give their good opinion."
SB 3.24.20
TEXT 20
MaE}aeYa ovac
TaavaìaSYa JaGaTóía ku-MaarE" SahNaard" )
h&Saae h&SaeNa YaaNaeNa i}aDaaMaParMa& YaYaaE )) 20 ))
maitreya uväca
täv äçväsya jagat-srañöä
kumäraiù saha-näradaù
haàso haàsena yänena
tri-dhäma-paramaà yayau
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; tau—the couple; äçväsya—having reassured; jagatsrañöä—
the creator of the universe; kumäraiù—along with the Kumäras; sahanäradaù—
with Närada; haàsaù—Lord Brahmä; haàsena yänena—by his swan carrier;
tri-dhäma-paramam—to the highest planetary system; yayau—went.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: After thus speaking to Kardama Muni and his wife Devahüti, Lord
Brahmä, the creator of the universe, who is also known as Haàsa, went back to the
highest of the three planetary systems on his swan carrier with the four Kumäras and
Närada.
318
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The words haàsena yänena are very significant here. Haàsa-yäna, the airplane by
which Brahmä travels all over outer space, resembles a swan. Brahmä is also known as
Haàsa because he can grasp the essence of everything. His abode is called tri-dhämaparamam.
There are three divisions of the universe—the upper planetary system, the
middle planetary system and the lower planetary system—but his abode is above even
Siddhaloka, the upper planetary system. He returned to his own planet with the four
Kumäras and Närada because they were not going to be married. The other åñis who
came with him, such as Maréci and Atri, remained there because they were to be married
to the daughters of Kardama, but his other sons—Sanat, Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanätana
and Närada—went back with him in his swan-shaped airplane. The four Kumäras and
Närada are naiñöhika-brahmacärés. Naiñöhika-brahmacäré refers to one who never wastes
his semen at any time. They were not to attend the marriage ceremony of their other
brothers, Maréci and the other sages, and therefore they went back with their father,
Haàsa.
SB 3.24.21
TEXT 21
GaTae XaTaDa*TaaE +ata" k-dRMaSTaeNa caeidTa" )
YaQaaeidTa& SvduihTa›" Pa[adaiÜìSa*Jaa& TaTa" )) 21 ))
gate çata-dhåtau kñattaù
kardamas tena coditaù
yathoditaà sva-duhitèù
prädäd viçva-såjäà tataù
SYNONYMS
gate—after he departed; çata-dhåtau—Lord Brahmä; kñattaù—O Vidura; kardamaù—
Kardama Muni; tena—by him; coditaù—ordered; yathä-uditam—as told; sva-duhitèù—
his own daughters; prädät—handed over; viçva-såjäm—to the creators of the world's
population; tataù—thereafter.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, after the departure of Brahmä, Kardama Muni, having been ordered by
319
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Brahmä, handed over his nine daughters, as instructed, to the nine great sages who
created the population of the world.
SB 3.24.22, SB 3.24.23, SB 3.24.22-23
TEXTS 22-23
MarqcYae k-l/a& Pa[adadNaSaUYaaMaQaa}aYae )
é[ÖaMai(r)rSae_YaC^TPaul/STYaaYa hiv>auRvMa( )) 22 ))
Paul/haYa GaiTa& Yau¢-a& §-Tave c i§-Yaa& SaTaqMa( )
:YaaiTa& c >a*Gave_YaC^ÜiSaïaYaaPYaåNDaTaqMa( )) 23 ))
marécaye kaläà prädäd
anasüyäm athätraye
çraddhäm aìgirase 'yacchat
pulastyäya havirbhuvam
pulahäya gatià yuktäà
kratave ca kriyäà satém
khyätià ca bhågave 'yacchad
vasiñöhäyäpy arundhatém
SYNONYMS
marécaye—unto Maréci; kaläm—Kalä; prädät—he handed over; anasüyäm—Anasüyä;
atha—then; atraye—unto Atri; çraddhäm—Çraddhä; aìgirase—unto Aìgirä;
ayacchat—he gave away; pulastyäya—unto Pulastya; havirbhuvam—Havirbhü;
pulahäya—unto Pulaha; gatim—Gati; yuktäm—suitable; kratave—unto Kratu; ca—and;
kriyäm—Kriyä; satém—virtuous; khyätim—Khyäti; ca—and; bhågave—unto Bhågu;
ayacchat—he gave away; vasiñöhäya—unto the sage Vasiñöha; api—also; arundhatém—
Arundhaté.
TRANSLATION
Kardama Muni handed over his daughter Kalä to Maréci, and another daughter, Anasüyä,
to Atri. He delivered Çraddhä to Aìgirä, and Havirbhü to Pulastya. He delivered Gati to
Pulaha, the chaste Kriyä to Kratu, Khyäti to Bhågu, and Arundhaté to Vasiñöha.
SB 3.24.24
320
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 24
AQavR<ae_ddaC^aiNTa& YaYaa Yajae ivTaNYaTae )
ivPa[zR>aaNa( k*-TaaeÜahaNa( SadaraNa( SaMal/al/YaTa( )) 24 ))
atharvaëe 'dadäc chäntià
yayä yajïo vitanyate
viprarñabhän kåtodvähän
sadärän samalälayat
SYNONYMS
atharvaëe—to Atharvä; adadät—he gave away; çäntim—Çänti; yayä—by whom;
yajïaù—sacrifice; vitanyate—is performed; vipra-åñabhän—the foremost brähmaëas;
kåta-udvähän—married; sa-därän—with their wives; samalälayat—maintained them.
TRANSLATION
He delivered Çänti to Atharvä. Because of Çänti, sacrificial ceremonies are well
performed. Thus he got the foremost brähmaëas married, and he maintained them along
with their wives.
SB 3.24.25
TEXT 25
TaTaSTa ‰zYa" +ata" k*-Tadara iNaMaN}Ya TaMa( )
Pa[aiTaïàiNdMaaPaàa" Sv& SvMaaé[MaMa<@l/Ma( )) 25 ))
tatas ta åñayaù kñattaù
kåta-därä nimantrya tam
prätiñöhan nandim äpannäù
svaà svam äçrama-maëòalam
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; te—they; åñayaù—the sages; kñattaù—O Vidura; kåta-däräù—thus
married; nimantrya—taking leave of; tam—Kardama; prätiñöhan—they departed;
321
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nandim—joy; äpannäù—obtained; svam svam—each to his own; äçrama-maëòalam—
hermitage.
TRANSLATION
Thus married, the sages took leave of Kardama and departed full of joy, each for his own
hermitage, O Vidura.
SB 3.24.26
TEXT 26
Sa cavTaq<a| i}aYauGaMaajaYa ivbuDazR>aMa( )
iviv¢- oPaSa(r)MYa Pa[<aMYa SaMa>aazTa )) 26 ))
sa cävatérëaà tri-yugam
äjïäya vibudharñabham
vivikta upasaìgamya
praëamya samabhäñata
SYNONYMS
saù—the sage Kardama; ca—and; avatérëam—descended; tri-yugam—Viñëu; äjïäya—
having understood; vibudha-åñabham—the chief of the demigods; vivikte—in a secluded
place; upasaìgamya—having approached; praëamya—offering obeisances;
samabhäñata—he spoke.
TRANSLATION
When Kardama Muni understood that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the chief of
all the demigods, Viñëu, had descended, Kardama approached Him in a secluded place,
offered obeisances and spoke as follows.
PURPORT
Lord Viñëu is called tri-yuga. He appears in three yugas-Satya, Tretä and Dväpara—but
in Kali-yuga He does not appear. From the prayers of Prahläda Mahäräja, however, we
understand that He appears garbed as a devotee in Kali-yuga. Lord Caitanya is that
devotee. Kåñëa appeared in the form of a devotee, but although He never disclosed
322
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Himself, Rüpa Gosvämé could understand His identity, for the Lord cannot hide Himself
from a pure devotee. Rüpa Gosvämé detected Him when he offered his first obeisances
to Lord Caitanya. He knew that Lord Caitanya was Kåñëa Himself and therefore offered
his obeisances with the following words: "I offer my respects to Kåñëa, who has now
appeared as Lord Caitanya." This is also confirmed in the prayers of Prahläda Mahäräja:
in Kali-yuga He does not directly appear, but He appears as a devotee. Viñëu, therefore,
is known as tri-yuga. Another explanation of tri-yuga is that He has three pairs of divine
attributes, namely power and affluence, piety and renown, and wisdom and dispassion.
According to Çrédhara Svämé, His three pairs of opulences are complete riches and
complete strength, complete fame and complete beauty, and complete wisdom and
complete renunciation. There are different interpretations of tri-yuga, but it is accepted
by all learned scholars that tri-yuga means Viñëu. When Kardama Muni understood that
his son, Kapila, was Viñëu Himself, he wanted to offer his obeisances. Therefore, when
Kapila was alone he offered his respects and expressed his mind as follows.
SB 3.24.27
TEXT 27
Ahae PaaPaCYaMaaNaaNaa& iNarYae SvErMa(r)lE/" )
k-ale/Na >aUYaSaa NaUNa& Pa[SaqdNTaqh devTaa" )) 27 ))
aho päpacyamänänäà
niraye svair amaìgalaiù
kälena bhüyasä nünaà
prasédantéha devatäù
SYNONYMS
aho—oh; päpacyamänänäm—with those being much afflicted; niraye—in the hellish
material entanglement; svaiù—their own; amaìgalaiù—by misdeeds; kälena bhüyasä—
after a long time; nünam—indeed; prasédanti—they are pleased; iha—in this world;
devatäù—the demigods.
TRANSLATION
Kardama Muni said: Oh, after a long time the demigods of this universe have become
pleased with the suffering souls who are in material entanglement because of their own
323
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
misdeeds.
PURPORT
This material world is a place for suffering, which is due to the misdeeds of the
inhabitants, the conditioned souls themselves. The sufferings are not extraneously
imposed upon them; rather, the conditioned souls create their own suffering by their
own acts. In the forest, fire takes place automatically. It is not that someone has to go
there and set a fire; because of friction among various trees, fire occurs automatically.
When there is too much heat from the forest fire of this material world, the demigods,
including Brahmä himself, being harassed, approach the Supreme Lord, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and appeal to Him to alleviate the condition. Then the
Supreme Personality of Godhead descends. In other words, when the demigods become
distressed by the sufferings of the conditioned souls, they approach the Lord to remedy
the suffering, and the Personality of Godhead descends. When the Lord descends, all
the demigods become enlivened. Therefore Kardama Muni said, "After many, many
years of human suffering, all the demigods are now satisfied because Kapiladeva, the
incarnation of Godhead, has appeared."
SB 3.24.28
TEXT 28
bhuJaNMaivPaKveNa SaMYaGYaaeGaSaMaaiDaNaa )
d]íu& YaTaNTae YaTaYa" éUNYaaGaarezu YaTPadMa( )) 28 ))
bahu-janma-vipakvena
samyag-yoga-samädhinä
drañöuà yatante yatayaù
çünyägäreñu yat-padam
SYNONYMS
bahu—many; janma—after births; vipakvena—which is mature; samyak—perfect; yogasamädhinä—
by trance in yoga; drañöum—to see; yatante—they endeavor; yatayaù—the
yogés; çünya-agäreñu—in secluded places; yat—whose; padam—feet.
TRANSLATION
324
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
After many births, mature yogés, by complete trance in yoga, endeavor in secluded places
to see the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Some important things are mentioned here about yoga. The word bahu janma-vipakvena
means "after many, many births of mature yoga practice." And another word, samyagyoga-
samädhinä, means "by complete practice of the yoga system." Complete practice of
yoga means bhakti-yoga; unless one comes to the point of bhakti-yoga, or surrender unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one's yoga practice is not complete. This same
point is corroborated in the Çrémad Bhagavad-gétä. Bahünäà janmanäm ante: [Bg. 7.19]
after many, many births, the jïäné who has matured in transcendental knowledge
surrenders unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Kardama Muni repeats the same
statement. After many, many years and many, many births of complete practice of yoga,
one can see the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord in a secluded place. It is not that after
one practices some sitting postures he immediately becomes perfect. One has to perform
yoga a long time—"many, many births"—to become mature, and a yogé has to practice in
a secluded place. One cannot practice yoga in a city or in a public park and declare that
he has become God simply by some exchange of dollars. This is all bogus propaganda.
Those who are actually yogés practice in a secluded place, and after many, many births
they become successful, provided they surrender unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This is the completion of yoga.
SB 3.24.29
TEXT 29
Sa Wv >aGavaNaÛ hel/Na& NaGa<aYYa Na" )
Ga*hezu JaaTaae Ga]aMYaa<aa& Ya" SvaNaa& Pa+aPaaez<a" )) 29 ))
sa eva bhagavän adya
helanaà na gaëayya naù
gåheñu jäto grämyäëäà
yaù svänäà pakña-poñaëaù
SYNONYMS
saù eva—that very same; bhagavän—Supreme Personality of Godhead; adya—today;
325
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
helanam—negligence; na—not; gaëayya—considering high and low; naù—our;
gåheñu—in the houses; jätaù—appeared; grämyäëäm—of ordinary householders; yaù—
He who; svänäm—of His own devotees; pakña-poñaëaù—who supports the party.
TRANSLATION
Not considering the negligence of ordinary householders like us, that very same Supreme
Personality of Godhead appears in our homes just to support His devotees.
PURPORT
Devotees are so affectionate toward the Personality of Godhead that although He does
not appear before those who practice yoga in a secluded place even for many, many
births, He agrees to appear in a householder's home where devotees engage in devotional
service without material yoga practice. In other words, devotional service to the Lord is
so easy that even a householder can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead as one of
the members of his household, as his son, as Kardama Muni experienced. He was a
householder, although a yogé, but he had the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Kapila Muni as his son.
Devotional service is such a powerful transcendental method that it surpasses all other
methods of transcendental realization. The Lord says, therefore, that He lives neither in
Vaikuëöha nor in the heart of a yogé, but He lives where His pure devotees are always
chanting and glorifying Him. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is known as bhaktavatsala.
He is never described as jïäné-vatsala or yogé-vatsala. He is always described as
bhakta-vatsala because He is more inclined toward His devotees than toward other
transcendentalists. In Bhagavad-gétä it is confirmed that only a devotee can understand
Him as He is. Bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti: [Bg. 18.55] "One can understand Me only by
devotional service, not otherwise." That understanding alone is real because although
jïänés, mental speculators, can realize only the effulgence, or the bodily luster, of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and yogés can realize only the partial representation of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a bhakta not only realizes Him as He is but also
associates with the Personality of Godhead face to face.
SB 3.24.30
TEXT 30
SvqYa& vaKYaMa*Ta& k-TauRMavTaq<aaeR_iSa Mae Ga*he )
326
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ick-IzuR>aRGavaNa( jaNa& >a¢-aNaa& MaaNavDaRNa" )) 30 ))
svéyaà väkyam åtaà kartum
avatérëo 'si me gåhe
cikérñur bhagavän jïänaà
bhaktänäà mäna-vardhanaù
SYNONYMS
svéyam—Your own; väkyam—words; åtam—true; kartum—to make; avatérëaù—
descended; asi—You are; me gåhe—in my house; cikérñuù—desirous of disseminating;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; jïänam—knowledge; bhaktänäm—of the
devotees; mäna—the honor; vardhanaù—who increases.
TRANSLATION
Kardama Muni said: You, my dear Lord, who are always increasing the honor of Your
devotees, have descended in my home just to fulfill Your word and disseminate the
process of real knowledge.
PURPORT
When the Lord appeared before Kardama Muni after his mature yoga practice, He
promised that He would become Kardama's son. He descended as the son of Kardama
Muni in order to fulfill that promise. Another purpose of His appearance is cikérñur
bhagavän jïänam, to distribute knowledge. Therefore, He is called bhaktänäà mänavardhanaù,
"He who increases the honor of His devotees." By distributing Säìkhya He
would increase the honor of the devotees; therefore, Säìkhya philosophy is not dry
mental speculation. Säìkhya philosophy means devotional service. How could the honor
of the devotees be increased unless Säìkhya were meant for devotional service?
Devotees are not interested in speculative knowledge; therefore, the Säìkhya
enunciated by Kapila Muni is meant to establish one firmly in devotional service. Real
knowledge and real liberation is to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and engage in devotional service.
SB 3.24.31
TEXT 31
327
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TaaNYaev Tae_i>aæPaai<a æPaai<a >aGav&STav )
YaaiNa YaaiNa c raecNTae SvJaNaaNaaMaæiPa<a" )) 31 ))
täny eva te 'bhirüpäëi
rüpäëi bhagavaàs tava
yäni yäni ca rocante
sva-janänäm arüpiëaù
SYNONYMS
täni—those; eva—truly; te—Your; abhirüpäëi—suitable; rüpäëi—forms; bhagavan—O
Lord; tava—Your; yäni yäni—whichever; ca—and; rocante—are pleasing; svajanänäm—
to Your own devotees; arüpiëaù—of one with no material form.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, although You have no material form, You have Your own innumerable
forms. They truly are Your transcendental forms, which are pleasing to Your devotees.
PURPORT
In the Brahma-saàhitä it is stated that the Lord is one Absolute, but He has ananta, or
innumerable, forms. Advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam [Bs. 5.33]. The Lord is the
original form, but still He has multiforms. Those multiforms are manifested by Him
transcendentally, according to the tastes of His multidevotees. It is understood that once
Hanumän, the great devotee of Lord Rämacandra, said that he knew that Näräyaëa, the
husband of Lakñmé, and Räma, the husband of Sétä, are one and the same, and that there
is no difference between Lakñmé and Sétä, but as for himself, he liked the form of Lord
Räma. In a similar way, some devotees worship the original form of Kåñëa. When we say
"Kåñëa" we refer to all forms of the Lord—not only Kåñëa, but Räma, Nåsiàha, Varäha,
Näräyaëa, etc. The varieties of transcendental forms exist simultaneously. That is also
stated in the Brahma-saàhitä: rämädi-mürtiñu. .. nänävatäram. He already exists in
multiforms, but none of the forms are material. Çrédhara Svämé has commented that
arüpiëaù, "without form," means without material form. The Lord has form, otherwise
how can it be stated here, täny eva te 'bhirüpäëi rüpäëi bhagavaàs tava: "You have Your
forms, but they are not material. Materially You have no form, but spiritually,
transcendentally, You have multiforms"? Mäyävädé philosophers cannot understand
328
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
these transcendental forms of the Lord, and being disappointed, they say that the
Supreme Lord is impersonal. But that is not a fact; whenever there is form there is a
person. Many times in many Vedic literatures the Lord is described as puruña, which
means "the original form, the original enjoyer." The conclusion is that the Lord has no
material form, and yet, according to the liking of different grades of devotees, He
simultaneously exists in multiforms, such as Räma, Nåsiàha, Varäha, Näräyaëa and
Mukunda. There are many thousands and thousands of forms, but they are all viñëutattva,
Kåñëa.
SB 3.24.32
TEXT 32
Tva& SaUiri>aSTatvbu>auTSaYaaÖa
Sadai>avadahR<aPaadPaq#=Ma( )
WeìYaRvEraGYaYaXaae_vbaeDa‚
vqYaRié[Yaa PaUTaRMah& Pa[PaÛe )) 32 ))
tväà süribhis tattva-bubhutsayäddhä
sadäbhivädärhaëa-päda-péöham
aiçvarya-vairägya-yaço-'vabodhavérya-
çriyä pürtam ahaà prapadye
SYNONYMS
tväm—unto You; süribhiù—by the great sages; tattva—the Absolute Truth;
bubhutsayä—with a desire to understand; addhä—certainly; sadä—always; abhiväda—of
worshipful respects; arhaëa—which are worthy; päda—of Your feet; péöham—to the
seat; aiçvarya—opulence; vairägya—renunciation; yaçaù—fame; avabodha—knowledge;
vérya—strength; çriyä—with beauty; pürtam—who are full; aham—I; prapadye—
surrender.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, Your lotus feet are the reservoir that always deserves to receive worshipful
homage from all great sages eager to understand the Absolute Truth. You are full in
opulence, renunciation, transcendental fame, knowledge, strength and beauty, and
therefore I surrender myself unto Your lotus feet.
329
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Actually, those who are searching after the Absolute Truth must take shelter of the
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and worship Him. In Bhagavad-gétä
Lord Kåñëa advised Arjuna many times to surrender unto Him, especially at the end of
the Ninth Chapter—man-manä bhava mad-bhaktaù: "If you want to be perfect, just
always think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer your obeisances to Me. In
this way you will understand Me, the Personality of Godhead, and ultimately you will
come back to Me, back to Godhead, back home." Why is it so? The Lord is always full in
six opulences, as mentioned herein: wealth, renunciation, fame, knowledge, strength
and beauty. The word pürtam means "in full." No one can claim that all wealth belongs
to him, but Kåñëa can claim it, since He has full wealth. Similarly, He is full in
knowledge, renunciation, strength and beauty. He is full in everything, and no one can
surpass Him. Another one of Kåñëa's names is asamaurdhva, which means that no one is
equal to or greater than Him.
SB 3.24.33
TEXT 33
Par& Pa[DaaNa& Pauåz& MahaNTa&
k-al&/ k-iv& i}av*Ta& l/aek-Paal/Ma( )
AaTMaaNau>aUTYaaNauGaTaPa[PaÄ&
SvC^NdXai¢&- k-iPal&/ Pa[PaÛe )) 33 ))
paraà pradhänaà puruñaà mahäntaà
kälaà kavià tri-våtaà loka-pälam
ätmänubhütyänugata-prapaïcaà
svacchanda-çaktià kapilaà prapadye
SYNONYMS
param—transcendental; pradhänam—supreme; puruñam—person; mahäntam—who is
the origin of the material world; kälam—who is time; kavim—fully cognizant; trivåtam—
three modes of material nature; loka-pälam—who is the maintainer of all the
universes; ätma—in Himself; anubhütya—by internal potency; anugata—dissolved;
prapaïcam—whose material manifestations; sva-chanda—independently; çaktim—who
is powerful; kapilam—to Lord Kapila; prapadye—I surrender.
330
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
I surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, descended in the form of Kapila,
who is independently powerful and transcendental, who is the Supreme Person and the
Lord of the sum total of matter and the element of time, who is the fully cognizant
maintainer of all the universes under the three modes of material nature, and who absorbs
the material manifestations after their dissolution.
PURPORT
The six opulences—wealth, strength, fame, beauty, knowledge and renunciation—are
indicated here by Kardama Muni, who addresses Kapila Muni, his son, as param. The
word param is used in the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, in the phrase paraà satyam,
to refer to the summum bonum, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. param is
explained further by the next word, pradhänam, which means the chief, the origin, the
source of everything—sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1]—the cause of all causes. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead is not formless; He is puruñam, or the enjoyer, the
original person. He is the time element and is all-cognizant. He knows everything—past,
present and future—as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä. The Lord says, "I know
everything—present, past and future—in every corner of the universe." The material
world, which is moving under the spell of the three modes of nature, is also a
manifestation of His energy. paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate: everything that we see is
an interaction of His energies (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.8 [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]).
parasya brahmaëaù çaktis tathedam akhilaà jagat. This is the version of the Viñëu
Puräëa. We can understand that whatever we see is an interaction of the three modes of
material nature, but actually it is all an interaction of the Lord's energy. Loka-pälam: He
is actually the maintainer of all living entities. Nityo nityänäm: He is the chief of all
living entities; He is one, but He maintains many, many living entities. God maintains
all other living entities, but no one can maintain God. That is His svacchanda-çakti; He
is not dependent on others. Someone may call himself independent, but he is still
dependent on someone higher. The Personality of Godhead, however, is absolute; there
is no one higher than or equal to Him.
Kapila Muni appeared as the son of Kardama Muni, but because Kapila is an incarnation
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kardama Muni offered respectful obeisances
unto Him with full surrender. Another word in this verse is very important:
ätmänubhütyänugata-prapaïcam. The Lord descends either as Kapila or Räma, Nåsiàha
or Varäha, and whatever forms He assumes in the material world are all manifestations
331
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of His own personal internal energy. They are never forms of the material energy. The
ordinary living entities who are manifested in this material world have bodies created by
the material energy, but when Kåñëa or any one of His expansions or parts of the
expansions descends on this material world, although He appears to have a material
body, His body is not material. He always has a transcendental body. But fools and
rascals, who are called müòhas, consider Him one of them, and therefore they deride
Him. They refuse to accept Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead because they
cannot understand Him. In Bhagavad-gétä Kåñëa says, avajänanti mäà müòhäù: [Bg. 9.11]
"Those who are rascals and fools deride Me." When God descends in a form, this does
not mean that He assumes His form with the help of the material energy. He manifests
His spiritual form as He exists in His spiritual kingdom.
SB 3.24.34
TEXT 34
Aa SMaai>aPa*C^e_Û PaiTa& Pa[JaaNaa&
TvYaavTaq<aR<aR oTaaák-aMa" )
Pairv]JaTPadvqMaaiSQaTaae_h&
cirZYae Tva& ôid YauÅNa( ivXaaek-" )) 34 ))
ä smäbhipåcche 'dya patià prajänäà
tvayävatérëarëa utäpta-kämaù
parivrajat-padavém ästhito 'haà
cariñye tväà hådi yuïjan viçokaù
SYNONYMS
ä sma abhipåcche—I am inquiring; adya—now; patim—the Lord; prajänäm—of all
created beings; tvayä—by You; avatérëa-åëaù—free from debts; uta—and; äpta—
fulfilled; kämaù—desires; parivrajat—of an itinerant mendicant; padavém—the path;
ästhitaù—accepting; aham—I; cariñye—I shall wander; tväm—You; hådi—in my heart;
yuïjan—keeping; viçokaù—free from lamentation.
TRANSLATION
Today I have something to ask from You, who are the Lord of all living entities. Since I
have now been liberated by You from my debts to my father, and since all my desires are
332
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
fulfilled, I wish to accept the order of an itinerant mendicant. Renouncing this family life,
I wish to wander about, free from lamentation, thinking always of You in my heart.
PURPORT
Actually, sannyäsa, or renunciation of material household life, necessitates complete
absorption in Kåñëa consciousness and immersion in the self. One does not take
sannyäsa, freedom from family responsibility in the renounced order of life, to make
another family or to create an embarrassing transcendental fraud in the name of
sannyäsa. The sannyäsé's business is not to become proprietor of so many things and
amass money from the innocent public. A sannyäsé is proud that he is always thinking of
Kåñëa within himself. Of course, there are two kinds of devotees of the Lord. One is
called goñöhy-änandé, which means those who are preachers and have many followers for
preaching the glories of the Lord and who live among those many, many followers just to
organize missionary activities. Other devotees are ätmänandé, or self-satisfied, and do
not take the risk of preaching work. They remain, therefore, alone with God. In this
classification was Kardama Muni. He wanted to be free from all anxieties and remain
alone within his heart with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Parivräja means "an
itinerant mendicant." A mendicant sannyäsé should not live anywhere for more than
three days. He must be always moving because his duty is to move from door to door and
enlighten people about Kåñëa consciousness.
SB 3.24.35
TEXT 35
é[q>aGavaNauvac
MaYaa Pa[ae¢&- ih l/aek-SYa Pa[Maa<a& SaTYal/aEik-ke- )
AQaaJaiNa MaYaa Tau>Ya& YadvaecMa*Ta& MauNae )) 35 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
mayä proktaà hi lokasya
pramäëaà satya-laukike
athäjani mayä tubhyaà
yad avocam åtaà mune
SYNONYMS
333
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayä—by Me;
proktam—spoken; hi—in fact; lokasya—for the people; pramäëam—authority; satya—
spoken in scripture; laukike—and in ordinary speech; atha—therefore; ajani—there was
birth; mayä—by Me; tubhyam—to you; yat—that which; avocam—I said; åtam—true;
mune—O sage.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead Kapila said: Whatever I speak, whether directly or in the
scriptures, is authoritative in all respects for the people of the world. O Muni, because I
told you before that I would become your son, I have descended to fulfill this truth.
PURPORT
Kardama Muni was to leave his family life to completely engage in the service of the
Lord. But since he knew that the Lord Himself, as Kapila, had taken birth in his home as
his own son, why was he preparing to leave home to search out self-realization or God
realization? God Himself was present in his home—why should he leave home? Such a
question may certainly arise. But here it is said that whatever is spoken in the Vedas and
whatever is practiced in accordance with the injunctions of the Vedas is to be accepted
as authoritative in society. Vedic authority says that a householder must leave home
after his fiftieth year. Païcäçordhvaà vanaà vrajet: one must leave his family life and
enter the forest after the age of fifty. This is an authoritative statement of the Vedas,
based on the division of social life into four departments of activity—brahmacarya,
gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa.
Kardama Muni practiced yoga very rigidly as a brahmacäré before his marriage, and he
became so powerful and attained so much mystic power that his father, Brahmä, ordered
him to marry and beget children as a householder. Kardama did that also; he begot nine
good daughters and one son, Kapila Muni, and thus his householder duty was also
performed nicely, and now his duty was to leave. Even though he had the Supreme
Personality of Godhead as his son, he had to respect the authority of the Vedas. This is a
very important lesson. Even if one has God in his home as his son, one should still follow
the Vedic injunctions. It is stated, mahäjano yena gataù sa panthäù: [Cc. Madhya 17.186]
one should traverse the path which is followed by great personalities.
Kardama Muni's example is very instructive, for in spite of having the Supreme
Personality of Godhead as his son, he left home just to obey the authority of the Vedic
injunction. Kardama Muni states here the main purpose of his leaving home: while
334
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
traveling all over the world as a mendicant, he would always remember the Supreme
Personality of Godhead within his heart and thereby be freed from all the anxieties of
material existence. In this age of Kali-yuga sannyäsa is prohibited because persons in this
age are all çüdras and cannot follow the rules and regulations of sannyäsa life. It is very
commonly found that so-called sannyäsés are addicted to nonsense—even to having
private relationships with women. This is the abominable situation in this age. Although
they dress themselves as sannyäsés, they still cannot free themselves from the four
principles of sinful life, namely illicit sex life, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling.
Since they are not freed from these four principles, they are cheating the public by
posing as svämés.
In Kali-yuga the injunction is that no one should accept sannyäsa. Of course, those who
actually follow the rules and regulations must take sannyäsa. Generally, however, people
are unable to accept sannyäsa life, and therefore Caitanya Mahäprabhu stressed, kalau
nästy eva nästy eva na-sty eva gatir anyathä. In this age there is no other alternative, no
other alternative, no other alternative than to chant the holy name of the Lord: Hare
Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare. The main purpose of sannyäsa life is to be
in constant companionship with the Supreme Lord, either by thinking of Him within
the heart or hearing of Him through aural reception. In this age, hearing is more
important than thinking because one's thinking may be disturbed by mental agitation,
but if one concentrates on hearing, he will be forced to associate with the sound
vibration of Kåñëa. Kåñëa and the sound vibration "Kåñëa" are nondifferent, so if one
loudly vibrates Hare Kåñëa, he will be able to think of Kåñëa immediately. This process
of chanting is the best process of self-realization in this age; therefore Lord Caitanya
preached it so nicely for the benefit of all humanity.
SB 3.24.36
TEXT 36
WTaNMae JaNMa l/aeke-_iSMaNMauMau+aU<aa& duraXaYaaTa( )
Pa[Sa&:YaaNaaYa TatvaNaa& SaMMaTaaYaaTMadXaRNae )) 36 ))
etan me janma loke 'smin
mumukñüëäà duräçayät
prasaìkhyänäya tattvänäà
sammatäyätma-darçane
335
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
etat—this; me—My; janma—birth; loke—in the world; asmin—in this; mumukñüëäm—
by those great sages seeking liberation; duräçayät—from unnecessary material desires;
prasaìkhyänäya—for explaining; tattvänäm—of the truths; sammatäya—which is highly
esteemed; ätma-darçane—in self-realization.
TRANSLATION
My appearance in this world is especially to explain the philosophy of Säìkhya, which is
highly esteemed for self-realization by those desiring freedom from the entanglement of
unnecessary material desires.
PURPORT
Here the word duräçayät is very significant. Dur refers to trouble or duùkha, miseries.
Äçayät means "from the shelter." We conditioned souls have taken shelter of the
material body, which is full of troubles and miseries. Foolish people cannot understand
the situation, and this is called ignorance, illusion, or the spell of mäyä. Human society
should very seriously understand that the body itself is the source of all miserable life.
Modern civilization is supposed to be making advancement in scientific knowledge, but
what is this scientific knowledge? It is based on bodily comforts only, without knowledge
that however comfortably one maintains his body, the body is destructible. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä, antavanta ime dehäù: these bodies are destined to be destroyed.
Nityasyoktäù çarériëaù refers to the living soul, or the living spark, within the body. That
soul is eternal, but the body is not eternal. For our activity we must have a body; without
a body, without sense organs, there is no activity. But people are not inquiring whether
it is possible to have an eternal body. Actually they aspire for an eternal body because
even though they engage in sense enjoyment, that sense enjoyment is not eternal. They
are therefore in want of something which they can enjoy eternally, but they do not
understand how to attain that perfection. Säìkhya philosophy, therefore, as stated
herein by Kapiladeva, is tattvänäm. The Säìkhya philosophy system is designed to afford
understanding of the real truth. What is that real truth? The real truth is knowledge of
how to get out of the material body, which is the source of all trouble. Lord Kapila's
incarnation, or descent, is especially meant for this purpose. That is clearly stated here.
SB 3.24.37
TEXT 37
336
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Wz AaTMaPaQaae_VYa¢-ae Naí" k-ale/Na >aUYaSaa )
Ta& Pa[vTaRiYaTau& dehiMaMa& iviÖ MaYaa >a*TaMa( )) 37 ))
eña ätma-patho 'vyakto
nañöaù kälena bhüyasä
taà pravartayituà deham
imaà viddhi mayä bhåtam
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; ätma-pathaù—path of self-realization; avyaktaù—difficult to be known;
nañöaù—lost; kälena bhüyasä—in the course of time; tam—this; pravartayitum—to
introduce again; deham—body; imam—this; viddhi—please know; mayä—by Me;
bhåtam—assumed.
TRANSLATION
This path of self-realization, which is difficult to understand, has now been lost in the
course of time. Please know that I have assumed this body of Kapila to introduce and
explain this philosophy to human society again.
PURPORT
It is not true that Säìkhya philosophy is a new system of philosophy introduced by
Kapila as material philosophers introduce new kinds of mental speculative thought to
supersede that of another philosopher. On the material platform, everyone, especially
the mental speculator, tries to be more prominent than others. The field of activity of
the speculators is the mind; there is no limit to the different ways in which one can
agitate the mind. The mind can be unlimitedly agitated, and thus one can put forward
an unlimited number of theories. Säìkhya philosophy is not like that; it is not mental
speculation. It is factual, but at the time of Kapila it was lost.
In due course of time, a particular type of knowledge may be lost or may be covered for
the time being; that is the nature of this material world. A similar statement was made
by Lord Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä. Sa käleneha mahatä yogo nañöaù: "In course of time the
yoga system as stated in Bhagavad-gétä was lost." It was coming in paramparä, in disciplic
succession, but due to the passage of time it was lost. The time factor is so pressing that
337
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
in the course of time everything within this material world is spoiled or lost. The yoga
system of Bhagavad-gétä was lost before the meeting of Kåñëa and Arjuna. Therefore
Kåñëa again enunciated the same ancient yoga system to Arjuna, who could actually
understand Bhagavad-gétä. Similarly, Kapila also said that the system of Säìkhya
philosophy was not exactly being introduced by Him; it was already current, but in
course of time it was mysteriously lost, and therefore He appeared to reintroduce it.
That is the purpose of the incarnation of Godhead. Yadä yadä hi dharmasya glänir
bhavati bhärata [Bg. 4.7]. Dharma means the real occupation of the living entity. When
there is a discrepancy in the eternal occupation of the living entity, the Lord comes and
introduces the real occupation of life. Any so-called religious system that is not in the
line of devotional service is called adharma-saàsthäpana. When people forget their
eternal relationship with God and engage in something other than devotional service,
their engagement is called irreligion. How one can get out of the miserable condition of
material life is stated in Säìkhya philosophy, and the Lord Himself is explaining this
sublime system.
SB 3.24.38
TEXT 38
GaC^ k-aMa& MaYaaPa*íae MaiYa Sa&NYaSTak-MaR<aa )
iJaTva SauduJaRYa& Ma*TYauMaMa*TaTvaYa Maa& >aJa )) 38 ))
gaccha kämaà mayäpåñöo
mayi sannyasta-karmaëä
jitvä sudurjayaà måtyum
amåtatväya mäà bhaja
SYNONYMS
gaccha—go; kämam—as you wish; mayä—by Me; äpåñöaù—sanctioned; mayi—to Me;
sannyasta—completely surrendered; karmaëä—with your activities; jitvä—having
conquered; sudurjayam—insurmountable; måtyum—death; amåtatväya—for eternal life;
mäm—unto Me; bhaja—engage in devotional service.
TRANSLATION
Now, being sanctioned by Me, go as you desire, surrendering all your activities to Me.
338
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Conquering insurmountable death, worship Me for eternal life.
PURPORT
The purpose of Säìkhya philosophy is stated herein. If anyone wants real, eternal life,
he has to engage himself in devotional service, or Kåñëa consciousness. To become free
from birth and death is not an easy task. Birth and death are natural to this material
body. Sudurjayam means "very, very difficult to overcome." The modern so-called
scientists do not have sufficient means to understand the process of victory over birth
and death. Therefore, they set aside the question of birth and death; they do not
consider it. They simply engage in the problems of the material body, which is transient
and sure to end.
Actually, human life is meant for conquering the insurmountable process of birth and
death. That can be done as stated here. Mäà bhaja: one must engage in the devotional
service of the Lord. In Bhagavad-gétä also the Lord says, man-manä bhava mad-bhaktaù:
"Just become My devotee. Just worship Me." [Bg. 9.34] But foolish so-called scholars say
that it is not Kåñëa whom we must worship and to whom we must surrender; it is
something else. Without Kåñëa's mercy, therefore, no one can understand the Säìkhya
philosophy or any philosophy which is especially meant for liberation. Vedic knowledge
confirms that one becomes entangled in this material life because of ignorance and that
one can become free from material embarrassment by becoming situated in factual
knowledge. Säìkhya means that factual knowledge by which one can get out of the
material entanglement.
SB 3.24.39
TEXT 39
MaaMaaTMaaNa& SvYa&JYaaeiTa" SavR>aUTaGauhaXaYaMa( )
AaTMaNYaevaTMaNaa vq+Ya ivXaaek-ae_>aYaMa*C^iSa )) 39 ))
mäm ätmänaà svayaà-jyotiù
sarva-bhüta-guhäçayam
ätmany evätmanä vékñya
viçoko 'bhayam åcchasi
SYNONYMS
339
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mäm—Me; ätmänam—the Supreme Soul, or Paramätmä; svayam-jyotiù—self-effulgent;
sarva-bhüta—of all beings; guhä—in the hearts; äçayam—dwelling; ätmani—in your
own heart; eva—indeed; ätmanä—through your intellect; vékñya—always seeing, always
thinking; viçokaù—free from lamentation; abhayam—fearlessness; åcchasi—you will
achieve.
TRANSLATION
In your own heart, through your intellect, you will always see Me, the supreme selfeffulgent
soul dwelling within the hearts of all living entities. Thus you will achieve the
state of eternal life, free from all lamentation and fear.
PURPORT
People are very anxious to understand the Absolute Truth in various ways, especially by
experiencing the brahmajyoti, or Brahman effulgence, by meditation and by mental
speculation. But Kapiladeva uses the word mäm to emphasize that the Personality of
Godhead is the ultimate feature of the Absolute Truth. In Bhagavad-gétä the Personality
of Godhead always says mäm, "unto Me," but the rascals misinterpret the clear meaning.
Mäm is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one can see the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as He appears in different incarnations and understand that He has not
assumed a material body but is present in His own eternal, spiritual form, then one can
understand the nature of the Personality of Godhead. Since the less intelligent cannot
understand this point, it is stressed everywhere again and again. Simply by seeing the
form of the Lord as He presents Himself by His own internal potency as Kåñëa or Räma
or Kapila, one can directly see the brahmajyoti, because the brahmajyoti is no more than
the effulgence of His bodily luster. Since the sunshine is the luster of the sun planet, by
seeing the sun one automatically sees the sunshine; similarly, by seeing the Supreme
Personality of Godhead one simultaneously sees and experiences the Paramätmä feature
as well as the impersonal Brahman feature of the Supreme.
The Bhägavatam has already enunciated that the Absolute Truth is present in three
features—in the beginning as the impersonal Brahman, in the next stage as the
Paramätmä in everyone's heart, and, at last, as the ultimate realization of the Absolute
Truth, Bhagavän, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who sees the Supreme
Person can automatically realize the other features, namely the Paramätmä and
Brahman features of the Lord. The words used here are viçoko 'bhayam åcchasi. Simply
by seeing the Personality of Godhead one realizes everything, and the result is that one
340
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
becomes situated on the platform where there is no lamentation and no fear. This can
be attained simply by devotional service to the Personality of Godhead.
SB 3.24.40
TEXT 40
Maa}a AaDYaaiTMak-I& ivÛa& XaMaNaq& SavRk-MaR<aaMa( )
ivTairZYae YaYaa caSaaE >aYa& caiTaTairZYaiTa )) 40 ))
mätra ädhyätmikéà vidyäà
çamanéà sarva-karmaëäm
vitariñye yayä cäsau
bhayaà cätitariñyati
SYNONYMS
mätre—to My mother; ädhyätmikém—which opens the door of spiritual life; vidyäm—
knowledge; çamaném—ending; sarva-karmaëäm—all fruitive activities; vitariñye—I shall
give; yayä—by which; ca—also; asau—she; bhayam—fear; ca—also; atitariñyati—will
overcome.
TRANSLATION
I shall also describe this sublime knowledge, which is the door to spiritual life, to My
mother, so that she also can attain perfection and self-realization, ending all reactions to
fruitive activities. Thus she also will be freed from all material fear.
PURPORT
Kardama Muni was anxious about his good wife, Devahüti, while leaving home, and so
the worthy son promised that not only would Kardama Muni be freed from the material
entanglement, but Devahüti would also be freed by receiving instruction from her son.
A very good example is set here: the husband goes away, taking the sannyäsa order for
self-realization, but his representative, the son, who is equally educated, remains at home
to deliver the mother. A sannyäsé is not supposed to take his wife with him. At the
vänaprastha stage of retired life, or the stage midway between householder life and
renounced life, one may keep his wife as an assistant without sex relations, but in the
sannyäsa order of life one cannot keep his wife with him. Otherwise, a person like
341
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Kardama Muni could have kept his wife with him, and there would have been no
hindrance to his prosecution of self-realization.
Kardama Muni followed the Vedic injunction that no one in sannyäsa life can have any
kind of relationship with women. But what is the position of a woman who is left by her
husband? She is entrusted to the son, and the son promises that he will deliver his
mother from entanglement. A woman is not supposed to take sannyäsa. So-called
spiritual societies concocted in modern times give sannyäsa even to women, although
there is no sanction in the Vedic literature for a woman's accepting sannyäsa.
Otherwise, if it were sanctioned, Kardama Muni could have taken his wife and given
her sannyäsa. The woman must remain at home. She has only three stages of life:
dependency on the father in childhood, dependency on the husband in youth and, in
old age, dependency on the grown-up son, such as Kapila. In old age the progress of
woman depends on the grown-up son. The ideal son, Kapila Muni, is assuring His father
of the deliverance of His mother so that His father may go peacefully without anxiety
for his good wife.
SB 3.24.41
TEXT 41
MaE}aeYa ovac
Wv& SaMauidTaSTaeNa k-iPale/Na Pa[JaaPaiTa" )
di+a<aqk*-TYa Ta& Pa[qTaae vNaMaev JaGaaMa h )) 41 ))
maitreya uväca
evaà samuditas tena
kapilena prajäpatiù
dakñiëé-kåtya taà préto
vanam eva jagäma ha
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—the great sage Maitreya said; evam—thus; samuditaù—addressed;
tena—by Him; kapilena—by Kapila; prajäpatiù—the progenitor of human society;
dakñiëé-kåtya—having circumambulated; tam—Him; prétaù—being pacified; vanam—to
the forest; eva—indeed; jagäma—he left; ha—then.
TRANSLATION
342
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Çré Maitreya said: Thus when Kardama Muni, the progenitor of human society, was
spoken to in fullness by his son, Kapila, he circumambulated Him, and with a good,
pacified mind he at once left for the forest.
PURPORT
Going to the forest is compulsory for everyone. It is not a mental excursion upon which
one person goes and another does not. Everyone should go to the forest at least as a
vänaprastha. Forest—going means to take one-hundred—percent shelter of the
Supreme Lord, as explained by Prahläda Mahäräja in his talks with his father. Sadä
samudvigna-dhiyäm (SB 7.5.5). People who have accepted a temporary, material body are
always full of anxieties. One should not, therefore, be very much affected by this
material body, but should try to be freed. The preliminary process to become freed is to
go to the forest or give up family relationships and exclusively engage in Kåñëa
consciousness. That is the purpose of going to the forest. Otherwise, the forest is only a
place of monkeys and wild animals. To go to the forest does not mean to become a
monkey or a ferocious animal. It means to accept exclusively the shelter of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and engage oneself in full service. One does not actually have to
go to the forest. At the present moment this is not at all advisable for a man who has
spent his life all along in big cities. As explained by Prahläda Mahäräja (hitvätma-pätaà
gåham andha-küpam), one should not remain always engaged in the responsibilities of
family life because family life without Kåñëa consciousness is just like a blind well. Alone
in a field, if one falls into a blind well and no one is there to save him, he may cry for
years, and no one will see or hear where the crying is coming from. Death is sure.
Similarly, those who are forgetful of their eternal relationship with the Supreme Lord
are in the blind well of family life; their position is very ominous. Prahläda Mahäräja
advised that one should give up this well somehow or other and take to Kåñëa
consciousness and thus be freed from material entanglement, which is full of anxieties.
SB 3.24.42
TEXT 42
v]Ta& Sa AaiSQaTaae MaaENaMaaTMaEk-Xar<aae MauiNa" )
iNa"Sa(r)ae VYacrT+aae<aqMaNaiGanriNake-TaNa" )) 42 ))
vrataà sa ästhito maunam
ätmaika-çaraëo muniù
343
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
niùsaìgo vyacarat kñoëém
anagnir aniketanaù
SYNONYMS
vratam—vow; saù—he (Kardama); ästhitaù—accepted; maunam—silence; ätma—by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; eka—exclusively; çaraëaù—being sheltered; muniù—
the sage; niùsaìgaù—without association; vyacarat—he traveled; kñoëém—the earth;
anagniù—without fire; aniketanaù—without shelter.
TRANSLATION
The sage Kardama accepted silence as a vow in order to think of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and take shelter of Him exclusively. Without association, he traveled over the
surface of the globe as a sannyäsé, devoid of any relationship with fire or shelter.
PURPORT
Here the words anagnir aniketanaù are very significant. A sannyäsé should be completely
detached from fire and any residential quarters. A gåhastha has a relationship with fire,
either for offering sacrifices or for cooking, but a sannyäsé is freed from these two
responsibilities. He does not have to cook or offer fire for sacrifice because he is always
engaged in Kåñëa consciousness; therefore he has already accomplished all ritualistic
performances of religion. Aniketanaù means "without lodging." He should not have his
own house, but should depend completely on the Supreme Lord for his food and lodging.
He should travel.
Mauna means "silence." Unless one becomes silent, he cannot think completely about
the pastimes and activities of the Lord. It is not that because one is a fool and cannot
speak nicely he therefore takes the vow of mauna. Rather, one becomes silent so that
people will not disturb him. It is said by Cäëakya Paëòita that a rascal appears very
intelligent as long as he does not speak. But speaking is the test. The so-called silence of
a silent impersonalist svämé indicates that he has nothing to say; he simply wants to beg.
But the silence adopted by Kardama Muni was not like that. He became silent for relief
from nonsensical talk. One is called a muni when he remains grave and does not talk
nonsense. Mahäräja Ambaréña set a very good example; whenever he spoke, he spoke
about the pastimes of the Lord. Mauna necessitates refraining from nonsensical talking,
and engaging the talking facility in the pastimes of the Lord. In that way one can chant
344
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
and hear about the Lord in order to perfect his life. Vratam means that one should take
a vow as explained in Bhagavad-gétä, amänitvam adambhitvam, without hankering for
personal respect and without being proud of one's material position. Ahiàsä means not
being violent. There are eighteen processes for attaining knowledge and perfection, and
by his vow, Kardama Muni adopted all the principles of self-realization.
SB 3.24.43
TEXT 43
MaNaae b]øi<a YauÅaNaae YataTSadSaTa" ParMa( )
Gau<aav>aaSae ivGau<a Wk->a¢-yaNau>aaivTae )) 43 ))
mano brahmaëi yuïjäno
yat tat sad-asataù param
guëävabhäse viguëa
eka-bhaktyänubhävite
SYNONYMS
manaù—mind; brahmaëi—on the Supreme; yuïjänaù—fixing; yat—which; tat—that;
sat-asataù—cause and effect; param—beyond; guëa-avabhäse—who manifests the three
modes of material nature; viguëe—who is beyond the material modes; eka-bhaktyä—by
exclusive devotion; anubhävite—who is perceived.
TRANSLATION
He fixed his mind upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Parabrahman, who is
beyond cause and effect, who manifests the three modes of material nature, who is
beyond those three modes, and who is perceived only through unfailing devotional
service.
PURPORT
Whenever there is bhakti, there must be three things present—the devotee, the
devotion and the Lord. Without these three—bhakta, bhakti and Bhagavän—there is no
meaning to the word bhakti. Kardama Muni fixed his mind on the Supreme Brahman
and realized Him through bhakti, or devotional service. This indicates that he fixed his
mind on the personal feature of the Lord because bhakti cannot be executed unless one
345
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
has realization of the personal feature of the Absolute Truth. Guëävabhäse: He is
beyond the three modes of material nature, but it is due to Him that the three modes of
material nature are manifested. In other words, although the material energy is an
emanation of the Supreme Lord, He is not affected, as we are, by the modes of material
nature. We are conditioned souls, but He is not affected, although the material nature
has emanated from Him. He is the supreme living entity and is never affected by mäyä,
but we are subordinate, minute living entities, prone to be affected by the limitations of
mäyä. If he is in constant contact with the Supreme Lord by devotional service, the
conditioned living entity also becomes freed from the infection of mäyä. This is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä: sa guëän samatétyaitän [Bg. 14.26]. A person engaged in
Kåñëa consciousness is at once liberated from the influence of the three modes of
material nature. In other words, once the conditioned soul engages himself in devotional
service, he also becomes liberated like the Lord.
SB 3.24.44
TEXT 44
iNarhx(k*-iTaiNaRMaRMaê iNaÜRNÜ" SaMad*k(- Svd*k(- )
Pa[TYaKPa[XaaNTaDaqDasr" Pa[XaaNTaaeiMaRirvaediDa" )) 44 ))
nirahaìkåtir nirmamaç ca
nirdvandvaù sama-dåk sva-dåk
pratyak-praçänta-dhér dhéraù
praçäntormir ivodadhiù
SYNONYMS
nirahaìkåtiù—without false ego; nirmamaù—without material affection; ca—and;
nirdvandvaù—without duality; sama-dåk—seeing equality; sva-dåk—seeing himself;
pratyak—turned inward; praçänta—perfectly composed; dhéù—mind; dhéraù—sober, not
disturbed; praçänta—calmed; ürmiù—whose waves; iva—like; udadhiù—the ocean.
TRANSLATION
Thus he gradually became unaffected by the false ego of material identity and became free
from material affection. Undisturbed, equal to everyone and without duality, he could
indeed see himself also. His mind was turned inward and was perfectly calm, like an
346
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ocean unagitated by waves.
PURPORT
When one's mind is in full Kåñëa consciousness and one fully engages in rendering
devotional service to the Lord, he becomes just like an ocean unagitated by waves. This
very example is also cited in Bhagavad-gétä: one should become like the ocean. The
ocean is filled by many thousands of rivers, and millions of tons of its water evaporates
into clouds, yet the ocean is the same unagitated ocean. The laws of nature may work,
but if one is fixed in devotional service at the lotus feet of the Lord, he is not agitated,
for he is introspective. He does not look outside to material nature, but he looks in to
the spiritual nature of his existence; with a sober mind, he simply engages in the service
of the Lord. Thus he realizes his own self without false identification with matter and
without affection for material possessions. Such a great devotee is never in trouble with
others because he sees everyone from the platform of spiritual understanding; he sees
himself and others in the right perspective.
SB 3.24.45
TEXT 45
vaSaudeve >aGaviTa SavRje Pa[TYaGaaTMaiNa )
Pare<a >ai¢->aaveNa l/BDaaTMaa Mau¢-bNDaNa" )) 45 ))
väsudeve bhagavati
sarva-jïe pratyag-ätmani
pareëa bhakti-bhävena
labdhätmä mukta-bandhanaù
SYNONYMS
väsudeve—to Väsudeva; bhagavati—the Personality of Godhead; sarva-jïe—omniscient;
pratyak-ätmani—the Supersoul within everyone; pareëa—transcendental; bhaktibhävena—
by devotional service; labdha-ätmä—being situated in himself; muktabandhanaù—
liberated from material bondage.
TRANSLATION
He thus became liberated from conditioned life and became self-situated in transcendental
347
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
devotional service to the Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, the omniscient Supersoul
within everyone.
PURPORT
When one engages in the transcendental devotional service of the Lord one becomes
aware that his constitutional position, as an individual soul, is to be eternally a servitor
of the Supreme Lord, Väsudeva. Self-realization does not mean that because the
Supreme Soul and the individual soul are both souls they are equal in every respect. The
individual soul is prone to be conditioned, and the Supreme Soul is never conditioned.
When the conditioned soul realizes that he is subordinate to the Supreme Soul, his
position is called labdhätmä, self-realization, or mukta-bandhana, freedom from material
contamination. Material contamination continues as long as one thinks that he is as
good as the Supreme Lord or is equal with Him. This condition is the last snare of mäyä.
Mäyä always influences the conditioned soul. Even after much meditation and
speculation, if one continues to think himself one with the Supreme Lord, it is to be
understood that he is still in the last snares of the spell of mäyä.
The word pareëa is very significant. para means "transcendental, untinged by material
contamination." Full consciousness that one is an eternal servant of the Lord is called
parä bhakti. If one has any identification with material things and executes devotional
service for attainment of some material gain, that is viddhä bhakti, contaminated bhakti.
One can actually become liberated by execution of parä bhakti.
Another word mentioned here is sarva jïe. The Supersoul sitting within the heart is allcognizant.
He knows. I may forget my past activities due to the change of body, but
because the Supreme Lord as Paramätmä is sitting within me, He knows everything;
therefore the result of my past karma, or past activities, is awarded to me. I may forget,
but He awards me suffering or enjoyment for the misdeeds or good deeds of my past life.
One should not think that he is freed from reaction because he has forgotten the actions
of his past life. Reactions will take place, and what kind of reactions there will be is
judged by the Supersoul, the witness.
SB 3.24.46
TEXT 46
AaTMaaNa& SavR>aUTaezu >aGavNTaMaviSQaTaMa( )
APaXYaTSavR>aUTaaiNa >aGavTYaiPa caTMaiNa )) 46 ))
348
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ätmänaà sarva-bhüteñu
bhagavantam avasthitam
apaçyat sarva-bhütäni
bhagavaty api cätmani
SYNONYMS
ätmänam—the Supersoul; sarva-bhüteñu—in all living beings; bhagavantam—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; avasthitam—situated; apaçyat—he saw; sarvabhütäni—
all living beings; bhagavati—in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api—
moreover; ca—and; ätmani—on the Supersoul.
TRANSLATION
He began to see that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is seated in everyone's heart,
and that everyone is existing on Him, because He is the Supersoul of everyone.
PURPORT
That everyone is existing on the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not mean that
everyone is also Godhead. This is also explained in Bhagavad-gétä: everything is resting
on Him, the Supreme Lord, but that does not mean that the Supreme Lord is also
everywhere. This mysterious position has to be understood by highly advanced devotees.
There are three kinds of devotees—the neophyte devotee, the intermediate devotee and
the advanced devotee. The neophyte devotee does not understand the techniques of
devotional science, but simply offers devotional service to the Deity in the temple; the
intermediate devotee understands who God is, who is a devotee, who is a nondevotee
and who is innocent, and he deals with such persons differently. But a person who sees
that the Lord is sitting as Paramätmä in everyone's heart and that everything is
depending or existing on the transcendental energy of the Supreme Lord is in the
highest devotional position.
SB 3.24.47
TEXT 47
wC^aÜezivhqNaeNa SavR}a SaMaceTaSaa )
>aGavÙi¢-Yau¢e-Na Pa[aáa >aaGavTaq GaiTa" )) 47 ))
349
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
icchä-dveña-vihénena
sarvatra sama-cetasä
bhagavad-bhakti-yuktena
präptä bhägavaté gatiù
SYNONYMS
icchä—desire; dveña—and hatred; vihénena—freed from; sarvatra—everywhere; sama—
equal; cetasä—with the mind; bhagavat—unto the Personality of Godhead; bhaktiyuktena—
by discharging devotional service; präptä—was attained; bhägavaté gatiù—the
destination of the devotee (going back home, back to Godhead).
TRANSLATION
Freed from all hatred and desire, Kardama Muni, being equal to everyone because of
discharging uncontaminated devotional service, ultimately attained the path back to
Godhead.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, only by devotional service can one understand the
transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord and, after understanding Him perfectly in
His transcendental position, enter into the kingdom of God. The process of entering
into the kingdom of God is tri-päda-bhüti-gati, or the path back home, back to Godhead,
by which one can attain the ultimate goal of life. Kardama Muni, by his perfect
devotional knowledge and service, achieved this ultimate goal, which is known as
bhägavaté gatiù.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Twenty-fourth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Renunciation of Kardama Muni."
25. The Glories of Devotional Service
SB 3.25.1
350
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 1
XaaENak- ovac
k-iPal/STatvSa&:YaaTaa >aGavaNaaTMaMaaYaYaa )
JaaTa" SvYaMaJa" Saa+aadaTMaPa[jáYae Na*<aaMa( )) 1 ))
çaunaka uväca
kapilas tattva-saìkhyätä
bhagavän ätma-mäyayä
jätaù svayam ajaù säkñäd
ätma-prajïaptaye nåëäm
SYNONYMS
çaunakaù uväca—Çré Çaunaka said; kapilaù—Lord Kapila; tattva—of the truth;
saìkhyätä—the expounder; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ätmamäyayä—
by His internal potency; jätaù—took birth; svayam—Himself; ajaù—unborn;
säkñät—in person; ätma-prajïaptaye—to disseminate transcendental knowledge;
nåëäm—for the human race.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çaunaka said: Although He is unborn, the Supreme Personality of Godhead took
birth as Kapila Muni by His internal potency. He descended to disseminate
transcendental knowledge for the benefit of the whole human race.
PURPORT
The word ätma-prajïaptaye indicates that the Lord descends for the benefit of the
human race to give transcendental knowledge. Material necessities are quite sufficiently
provided for in the Vedic knowledge, which offers a program for good living conditions
and gradual elevation to the platform of goodness. In the mode of goodness one's
knowledge expands. On the platform of passion there is no knowledge, for passion is
simply an impetus to enjoy material benefits. On the platform of ignorance there is no
knowledge and no enjoyment, but simply life almost like that of animals.
The Vedas are meant to elevate one from the mode of ignorance to the platform of
goodness. When one is situated in the mode of goodness he is able to understand
351
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
knowledge of the self, or transcendental knowledge. This knowledge cannot be
appreciated by any ordinary man. Therefore, since a disciplic succession is required, this
knowledge is expounded either by the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself or by
His bona fide devotee. Çaunaka Muni also states here that Kapila, the incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, took birth, or appeared, simply to appreciate and
disseminate transcendental knowledge. Simply to understand that one is not matter but
spirit soul (ahaà brahmäsmi: "I am by nature Brahman") is not sufficient knowledge for
understanding the self and his activities. One must be situated in the activities of
Brahman. Knowledge of those activities is explained by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Himself. Such transcendental knowledge can be appreciated in human society
but not in animal society, as clearly indicated here by the word nåëäm, "for the human
beings." Human beings are meant for regulated life. By nature, there is regulation in
animal life also, but that is not like the regulative life as described in the scriptures or by
the authorities. Human life is regulated life, not animal life. In regulated life only can
one understand transcendental knowledge.
SB 3.25.2
TEXT 2
Na ùSYa vZMaR<a" Pau&Saa& virM<a" SavRYaaeiGaNaaMa( )
ivé[uTaaE é[uTadevSYa >aUir Ta*PYaiNTa Mae_Sav" )) 2 ))
na hy asya varñmaëaù puàsäà
varimëaù sarva-yoginäm
viçrutau çruta-devasya
bhüri tåpyanti me 'savaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—indeed; asya—about Him; varñmaëaù—the greatest; puàsäm—among
men; varimëaù—the foremost; sarva—all; yoginäm—of yogés; viçrutau—in hearing;
çruta-devasya—the master of the Vedas; bhüri—repeatedly; tåpyanti—are sated; me—
my; asavaù—senses.
TRANSLATION
Çaunaka continued: There is no one who knows more than the Lord Himself. No one is
352
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
more worshipable or more mature a yogé than He. He is therefore the master of the
Vedas, and to hear about Him always is the actual pleasure of the senses.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä it is stated that no one can be equal to or greater than the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This is confirmed in the Vedas also: eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti
kämän. He is the supreme living entity and is supplying the necessities of all other living
entities. Thus all other living entities, both viñëu-tattva and jéva-tattva, are subordinate
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. The same concept is confirmed here. Na
hy asya varñmaëaù puàsäm: amongst the living entities, no one can surpass the Supreme
Person because no one is richer, more famous, stronger, more beautiful, wiser or more
renounced than He. These qualifications make Him the Supreme Godhead, the cause of
all causes. Yogés are very proud of performing wonderful feats, but no one can compare
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Anyone who is associated with the Supreme Lord is accepted as a first-class yogé.
Devotees may not be as powerful as the Supreme Lord, but by constant association with
the Lord they become as good as the Lord Himself. Sometimes the devotees act more
powerfully than the Lord. Of course, that is the Lord's concession.
Also used here is the word varimëaù, meaning "the most worshipful of all yogés." To hear
from Kåñëa is the real pleasure of the senses; therefore He is known as Govinda, for by
His words, by His teachings, by His instruction—by everything connected with Him—
He enlivens the senses. Whatever He instructs is from the transcendental platform, and
His instructions, being absolute, are nondifferent from Him. Hearing from Kåñëa or His
expansion or plenary expansion like Kapila is very pleasing to the senses. Bhagavad-gétä
can be read or heard many times, but because it gives great pleasure, the more one reads
Bhagavad-gétä the more he gets the appetite to read and understand it, and each time he
gets new enlightenment. That is the nature of the transcendental message. Similarly, we
find that transcendental happiness in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The more we hear and
chant the glories of the Lord, the more we become happy.
SB 3.25.3
TEXT 3
YaÛiÜDatae >aGavaNa( SvC^NdaTMaaTMaMaaYaYaa )
TaaiNa Mae é[ÕDaaNaSYa k-ITaRNYaaNYaNauk-ITaRYa )) 3 ))
353
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yad yad vidhatte bhagavän
svacchandätmätma-mäyayä
täni me çraddadhänasya
kértanyäny anukértaya
SYNONYMS
yat yat—whatever; vidhatte—He performs; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; svachanda-
ätmä—full of self-desire; ätma-mäyayä—by His internal potency; täni—all of
them; me—to me; çraddadhänasya—faithful; kértanyäni—worthy of praise; anukértaya—
please describe.
TRANSLATION
Therefore please precisely describe all the activities and pastimes of the Personality of
Godhead, who is full of self-desire and who assumes all these activities by His internal
potency.
PURPORT
The word anukértaya is very significant. Anukértaya means to follow the description-not
to create a concocted mental description, but to follow. Çaunaka Åñi requested Süta
Gosvämé to describe what he had actually heard from his spiritual master, Çukadeva
Gosvämé, about the transcendental pastimes the Lord manifested by His internal energy.
Bhagavän, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has no material body, but He can
assume any kind of body by His supreme will. That is made possible by His internal
energy.
SB 3.25.4
TEXT 4
SaUTa ovac
ÜEPaaYaNaSa%STvev& MaE}aeYaae >aGava&STaQaa )
Pa[ahed& ivdur& Pa[qTa AaNvqi+aKYaa& Pa[caeidTa" )) 4 ))
süta uväca
dvaipäyana-sakhas tv evaà
maitreyo bhagaväàs tathä
354
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
prähedaà viduraà préta
änvékñikyäà pracoditaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; dvaipäyana-sakhaù—friend of Vyäsadeva; tu—then;
evam—thus; maitreyaù—Maitreya; bhagavän—worshipful; tathä—in that way; präha—
spoke; idam—this; viduram—to Vidura; prétaù—being pleased; änvékñikyäm—about
transcendental knowledge; pracoditaù—being asked.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: The most powerful sage Maitreya was a friend of Vyäsadeva.
Being encouraged and pleased by Vidura's inquiry about transcendental knowledge,
Maitreya spoke as follows.
PURPORT
Questions and answers are very satisfactorily dealt with when the inquirer is bona fide
and the speaker is also authorized. Here Maitreya is considered a powerful sage, and
therefore he is also described as bhagavän. This word can be used not only for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead but for anyone who is almost as powerful as the
Supreme Lord. Maitreya is addressed as bhagavän because he was spiritually far
advanced. He was a personal friend of Dvaipäyana Vyäsadeva, a literary incarnation of
the Lord. Maitreya was very pleased with the inquiries of Vidura because they were the
inquiries of a bona fide, advanced devotee. Thus Maitreya was encouraged to answer.
When there are discourses on transcendental topics between devotees of equal
mentality, the questions and answers are very fruitful and encouraging.
SB 3.25.5
TEXT 5
MaE}aeYa ovac
iPaTair Pa[iSQaTae_r<Ya& MaaTau" iPa[Yaick-IzRYaa )
TaiSMaNa( ibNduSare_vaTSaqÙGavaNa( k-iPal/" ik-l/ )) 5 ))
maitreya uväca
pitari prasthite 'raëyaà
355
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mätuù priya-cikérñayä
tasmin bindusare 'vätséd
bhagavän kapilaù kila
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; pitari—when the father; prasthite—left; araëyam—for
the forest; mätuù—His mother; priya-cikérñayä—with a desire to please; tasmin—on
that; bindusare—Lake Bindu-sarovara; avätsét—He stayed; bhagavän—the Lord;
kapilaù—Kapila; kila—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya said: When Kardama left for the forest, Lord Kapila stayed on the strand of the
Bindu-sarovara to please His mother, Devahüti.
PURPORT
In the absence of the father it is the duty of the grown son to take charge of his mother
and serve her to the best of his ability so that she will not feel separation from her
husband, and it is the duty of the husband to leave home as soon as there is a grown son
to take charge of his wife and family affairs. That is the Vedic system of household life.
One should not remain continually implicated in household affairs up to the time of
death. He must leave. Family affairs and the wife may be taken charge of by a grown son.
SB 3.25.6
TEXT 6
TaMaaSaqNaMak-MaaR<a& TatvMaaGaaRGa]dXaRNaMa( )
SvSauTa& devhUTYaah DaaTau" Sa&SMarTaq vc" )) 6 ))
tam äsénam akarmäëaà
tattva-märgägra-darçanam
sva-sutaà devahüty äha
dhätuù saàsmaraté vacaù
SYNONYMS
356
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tam—to Him (Kapila); äsénam—seated; akarmäëam—at leisure; tattva—of the Absolute
Truth; märga-agra—the ultimate goal; darçanam—who could show; sva-sutam—her son;
devahütiù—Devahüti; äha—said; dhätuù—of Brahmä; saàsmaraté—remembering;
vacaù—the words.
TRANSLATION
When Kapila, who could show her the ultimate goal of the Absolute Truth, was sitting
leisurely before her, Devahüti remembered the words Brahmä had spoken to her, and she
therefore began to question Kapila as follows.
SB 3.25.7
TEXT 7
devhUiTaåvac
iNaivR<<aa iNaTara& >aUMaàSaidiNd]YaTazR<aaTa( )
YaeNa SaM>aaVYaMaaNaeNa Pa[PaàaNDa& TaMa" Pa[>aae )) 7 ))
devahütir uväca
nirviëëä nitaräà bhümann
asad-indriya-tarñaëät
yena sambhävyamänena
prapannändhaà tamaù prabho
SYNONYMS
devahütiù uväca—Devahüti said; nirviëëä—disgusted; nitaräm—very; bhüman—O my
Lord; asat—impermanent; indriya—of the senses; tarñaëät—from agitation; yena—by
which; sambhävyamänena—being prevalent; prapannä—I have fallen; andham tamaù—
into the abyss of ignorance; prabho—O my Lord.
TRANSLATION
Devahüti said: I am very sick of the disturbance caused by my material senses, for
because of this sense disturbance, my Lord, I have fallen into the abyss of ignorance.
PURPORT
357
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Here the word asad-indriya-tarñaëät is significant. Asat means "impermanent,"
"temporary," and indriya means "senses." Thus asad-indriya-tarñaëät means "from being
agitated by the temporarily manifest senses of the material body." We are evolving
through different statuses of material bodily existence—sometimes in a human body,
sometimes in an animal body—and therefore the engagements of our material senses are
also changing. Anything which changes is called temporary, or asat. We should know
that beyond these temporary senses are our permanent senses, which are now covered by
the material body. The permanent senses, being contaminated by matter, are not acting
properly. Devotional service, therefore, involves freeing the senses from this
contamination. When the contamination is completely removed and the senses act in
the purity of unalloyed Kåñëa consciousness, we have reached sad-indriya, or eternal
sensory activities. Eternal sensory activities are called devotional service, whereas
temporary sensory activities are called sense gratification. Unless one becomes tired of
material sense gratification, there is no opportunity to hear transcendental messages
from a person like Kapila. Devahüti expressed that she was tired. Now that her husband
had left home, she wanted to get relief by hearing the instructions of Lord Kapila.
SB 3.25.8
TEXT 8
TaSYa Tv& TaMaSaae_NDaSYa duZPaarSYaaÛ PaarGaMa( )
SaÀ+auJaRNMaNaaMaNTae l/BDa& Mae TvdNauGa]haTa( )) 8 ))
tasya tvaà tamaso 'ndhasya
duñpärasyädya päragam
sac-cakñur janmanäm ante
labdhaà me tvad-anugrahät
SYNONYMS
tasya—that; tvam—You; tamasaù—ignorance; andhasya—darkness; duñpärasya—
difficult to cross; adya—now; pära-gam—crossing over; sat—transcendental; cakñuù—
eye; janmanäm—of births; ante—at the end; labdham—attained; me—my; tvatanugrahät—
by Your mercy.
TRANSLATION
358
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Your Lordship is my only means of getting out of this darkest region of ignorance because
You are my transcendental eye, which, by Your mercy only, I have attained after many,
many births.
PURPORT
This verse is very instructive, since it indicates the relationship between the spiritual
master and the disciple. The disciple or conditioned soul is put into this darkest region
of ignorance and therefore is entangled in the material existence of sense gratification.
It is very difficult to get out of this entanglement and attain freedom, but if one is
fortunate enough to get the association of a spiritual master like Kapila Muni or His
representative, then by his grace one can be delivered from the mire of ignorance. The
spiritual master is therefore worshiped as one who delivers the disciple from the mire of
ignorance with the light of the torch of knowledge. The word päragam is very
significant. päragam refers to one who can take the disciple to the other side. This side is
conditioned life; the other side is the life of freedom. The spiritual master takes the
disciple to the other side by opening his eyes with knowledge. We are suffering simply
because of ignorance. By the instruction of the spiritual master, the darkness of
ignorance is removed, and thus the disciple is enabled to go to the side of freedom. It is
stated in Bhagavad-gétä that after many, many births one surrenders to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Similarly, if, after many, many births, one is able to find a bona
fide spiritual master and surrender to such a bona fide representative of Kåñëa, one can
be taken to the side of light.
SB 3.25.9
TEXT 9
Ya AaÛae >aGavaNa( Pau&SaaMaqìrae vE >avaNa( ik-l/ )
l/aek-SYa TaMaSaaNDaSYa c+au" SaUYaR wvaeidTa" )) 9 ))
ya ädyo bhagavän puàsäm
éçvaro vai bhavän kila
lokasya tamasändhasya
cakñuù sürya ivoditaù
SYNONYMS
359
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yaù—He who; ädyaù—the origin; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
puàsäm—of all living entities; éçvaraù—the Lord; vai—in fact; bhavän—You; kila—
indeed; lokasya—of the universe; tamasä—by the darkness of ignorance; andhasya—
blinded; cakñuù—eye; süryaù—the sun; iva—like; uditaù—risen.
TRANSLATION
You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the origin and Supreme Lord of all living
entities. You have arisen to disseminate the rays of the sun in order to dissipate the
darkness of the ignorance of the universe.
PURPORT
Kapila Muni is accepted as an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa. Here the word ädyaù means "the origin of all living entities," and puàsäm éçvaraù
means "the Lord (éçvara) of the living entities" (éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù [Bs. 5.1]). Kapila
Muni is the direct expansion of Kåñëa, who is the sun of spiritual knowledge. As the sun
dissipates the darkness of the universe, so when the light of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead comes down, it at once dissipates the darkness of mäyä. We have our eyes, but
without the light of the sun our eyes are of no value. Similarly, without the light of the
Supreme Lord, or without the divine grace of the spiritual master, one cannot see things
as they are.
SB 3.25.10
TEXT 10
AQa Mae dev SaMMaaehMaPaa§-íu& TvMahRiSa )
Yaae_vGa]hae_h&MaMaeTaqTYaeTaiSMaNa( YaaeiJaTaSTvYaa )) 10 ))
atha me deva sammoham
apäkrañöuà tvam arhasi
yo 'vagraho 'haà mametéty
etasmin yojitas tvayä
SYNONYMS
atha—now; me—my; deva—O Lord; sammoham—delusion; apäkrañöum—to dispel;
tvam—You; arhasi—be pleased; yaù—which; avagrahaù—misconception; aham—I;
360
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mama—mine; iti—thus; iti—thus; etasmin—in this; yojitaù—engaged; tvayä—by You.
TRANSLATION
Now be pleased, my Lord, to dispel my great delusion. Due to my feeling of false ego, I
have been engaged by Your mäyä and have identified myself with the body and
consequent bodily relations.
PURPORT
The false ego of identifying one's body as one's self and of claiming things possessed in
relationship with this body is called mäyä. In Bhagavad-gétä, Fifteenth Chapter, the Lord
says, "I am sitting in everyone's heart, and from Me come everyone's remembrance and
forgetfulness." Devahüti has stated that false identification of the body with the self and
attachment for possessions in relation to the body are also under the direction of the
Lord. Does this mean that the Lord discriminates by engaging one in His devotional
service and another in sense gratification? If that were true, it would be an incongruity
on the part of the Supreme Lord, but that is not the actual fact. As soon as the living
entity forgets his real, constitutional position of eternal servitorship to the Lord and
wants instead to enjoy himself by sense gratification, he is captured by mäyä. This
capture by mäyä is the consciousness of false identification with the body and
attachment for the possessions of the body. These are the activities of mäyä, and since
mäyä is also an agent of the Lord, it is indirectly the action of the Lord. The Lord is
merciful; if anyone wants to forget Him and enjoy this material world, He gives him full
facility, not directly but through the agency of His material potency. Therefore, since
the material potency is the Lord's energy, indirectly it is the Lord who gives the facility
to forget Him. Devahüti therefore said, "My engagement in sense gratification was also
due to You. Now kindly get me free from this entanglement."
By the grace of the Lord one is allowed to enjoy this material world, but when one is
disgusted with material enjoyment and is frustrated, and when one sincerely surrenders
unto the lotus feet of the Lord, then the Lord is so kind that He frees one from
entanglement. Kåñëa says, therefore, in Bhagavad-gétä, "First of all surrender, and then I
will take charge of you and free you from all reactions of sinful activities." Sinful
activities are those activities performed in forgetfulness of our relationship with the
Lord. In this material world, activities for material enjoyment which are considered to
be pious are also sinful. For example, one sometimes gives something in charity to a
needy person with a view to getting back the money four times increased. Giving with
361
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the purpose of gaining something is called charity in the mode of passion. Everything
done here is done in the modes of material nature, and therefore all activities but
service to the Lord are sinful. Because of sinful activities we become attracted by the
illusion of material attachment, and we think, "I am this body." I think of the body as
myself and of bodily possessions as "mine." Devahüti requested Lord Kapila to free her
from that entanglement of false identification and false possession.
SB 3.25.11
TEXT 11
Ta& Tva GaTaah& Xar<a& Xar<Ya&
Sv>a*TYaSa&SaarTarae" ku-#=arMa( )
iJajaSaYaah& Pa[k*-Tae" PaUåzSYa
NaMaaiMa SaÖMaRivda& virïMa( )) 11 ))
taà tvä gatähaà çaraëaà çaraëyaà
sva-bhåtya-saàsära-taroù kuöhäram
jijïäsayähaà prakåteù püruñasya
namämi sad-dharma-vidäà variñöham
SYNONYMS
tam—that person; tvä—unto You; gatä—have gone; aham—I; çaraëam—shelter;
çaraëyam—worth taking shelter of; sva-bhåtya—for Your dependents; saàsära—of
material existence; taroù—of the tree; kuöhäram—the ax; jijïäsayä—with the desire to
know; aham—I; prakåteù—of matter (woman); püruñasya—of spirit (man); namämi—I
offer obeisances; sat-dharma—of the eternal occupation; vidäm—of the knowers;
variñöham—unto the greatest.
TRANSLATION
Devahüti continued: I have taken shelter of Your lotus feet because You are the only
person of whom to take shelter. You are the ax which can cut the tree of material
existence. I therefore offer my obeisances unto You, who are the greatest of all
transcendentalists, and I inquire from You as to the relationship between man and woman
and between spirit and matter.
362
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Säìkhya philosophy, as is well known, deals with prakåti and puruña. Puruña is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead or anyone who imitates the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as an enjoyer, and prakåti means "nature." In this material world, material
nature is being exploited by the puruñas, or the living entities. The intricacies in the
material world of the relationship of the prakåti and puruña, or the enjoyed and the
enjoyer, is called saàsära, or material entanglement. Devahüti wanted to cut the tree of
material entanglement, and she found the suitable weapon in Kapila Muni. The tree of
material existence is explained in the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä as an açvattha
tree whose root is upwards and whose branches are downwards. It is recommended there
that one has to cut the root of this material existential tree with the ax of detachment.
What is the attachment? The attachment involves prakåti and puruña. The living
entities are trying to lord it over material nature. Since the conditioned soul takes
material nature to be the object of his enjoyment and he takes the position of the
enjoyer, he is therefore called puruña.
Devahüti questioned Kapila Muni, for she knew that only He could cut her attachment
to this material world. The living entities, in the guises of men and women, are trying to
enjoy the material energy; therefore in one sense everyone is puruña because puruña
means "enjoyer" and prakåti means "enjoyed." In this material world both the so-called
man and so-called woman are imitating the real puruña; the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is actually the enjoyer in the transcendental sense, whereas all others are
prakåti. The living entities are considered prakåti. In Bhagavad-gétä, matter is analyzed as
aparä, or inferior nature, whereas beyond this inferior nature there is another, superior
nature—the living entities. Living entities are also prakåti, or enjoyed, but under the
spell of mäyä, the living entities are falsely trying to take the position of enjoyers. That
is the cause of saàsära-bandha, or conditional life. Devahüti wanted to get out of
conditional life and place herself in full surrender. The Lord is çaraëya, which means
"the only worthy personality to whom one can fully surrender," because He is full of all
opulences. If anyone actually wants relief, the best course is to surrender unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is also described here as sad-dharma-vidäà
variñöham. This indicates that of all transcendental occupations the best occupation is
eternal loving service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Dharma is sometimes
translated as "religion," but that is not exactly the meaning. Dharma actually means
"that which one cannot give up," "that which is inseparable from oneself." The warmth
of fire is inseparable from fire; therefore warmth is called the dharma, or nature, of fire.
363
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Similarly, sad-dharma means "eternal occupation." That eternal occupation is
engagement in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. The purpose of
Kapiladeva's Säìkhya philosophy is to propagate pure, uncontaminated devotional
service, and therefore He is addressed here as the most important personality amongst
those who know the transcendental occupation of the living entity.
SB 3.25.12
TEXT 12
MaE}aeYa ovac
wiTa SvMaaTauiNaRrvÛMaqiPSaTa&
iNaXaMYa Pau&SaaMaPavGaRvDaRNaMa( )
iDaYaai>aNaNÛaTMavTaa& SaTaa& GaiTa‚
bR>aaz wRziTSMaTaXaaei>aTaaNaNa" )) 12 ))
maitreya uväca
iti sva-mätur niravadyam épsitaà
niçamya puàsäm apavarga-vardhanam
dhiyäbhinandyätmavatäà satäà gatir
babhäña éñat-smita-çobhitänanaù
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; iti—thus; sva-mätuù—of His mother; niravadyam—
uncontaminated; épsitam—desire; niçamya—after hearing; puàsäm—of people;
apavarga—cessation of bodily existence; vardhanam—increasing; dhiyä—mentally;
abhinandya—having thanked; ätma-vatäm—interested in self-realization; satäm—of the
transcendentalists; gatiù—the path; babhäñe—He explained; éñat—slightly; smita—
smiling; çobhita—beautiful; änanaù—His face.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya said: After hearing of His mother's uncontaminated desire for transcendental
realization, the Lord thanked her within Himself for her questions, and thus, His face
smiling, He explained the path of the transcendentalists, who are interested in selfrealization.
364
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Devahüti has surrendered her confession of material entanglement and her desire to
gain release. Her questions to Lord Kapila are very interesting for persons who are
actually trying to get liberation from material entanglement and attain the perfectional
stage of human life. Unless one is interested in understanding his spiritual life, or his
constitutional position, and unless he also feels inconvenience in material existence, his
human form of life is spoiled. One who does not care for these transcendental
necessities of life and simply engages like an animal in eating, sleeping, fearing and
mating has spoiled his life. Lord Kapila was very much satisfied by His mother's
questions because the answers stimulate one's desire for liberation from the conditional
life of material existence. Such questions are called apavarga-vardhanam. Those who
have actual spiritual interest are called sat, or devotees. Satäm prasaìgät. Sat means "that
which eternally exists," and asat means "that which is not eternal." Unless one is situated
on the spiritual platform, he is not sat; he is asat. The asat stands on a platform which
will not exist, but anyone who stands on the spiritual platform will exist eternally. As
spirit soul, everyone exists eternally, but the asat has accepted the material world as his
shelter, and therefore he is full of anxiety. Asad-grähän, the incompatible situation of
the spirit soul who has the false idea of enjoying matter, is the cause of the soul's being
asat. Actually, the spirit soul is not asat. As soon as one is conscious of this fact and
takes to Kåñëa consciousness, he becomes sat. Satäà gatiù, the path of the eternal, is very
interesting to persons who are after liberation, and His Lordship Kapila began to speak
about that path.
SB 3.25.13
TEXT 13
é[q>aGavaNauvac
YaaeGa AaDYaaiTMak-" Pau&Saa& MaTaae iNa"é[eYaSaaYa Mae )
ATYaNTaaePariTaYaR}a du"%SYa c Sau%SYa c )) 13 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
yoga ädhyätmikaù puàsäà
mato niùçreyasäya me
atyantoparatir yatra
duùkhasya ca sukhasya ca
365
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Personality of Godhead said; yogaù—the yoga system;
ädhyätmikaù—relating to the soul; puàsäm—of living entities; mataù—is approved;
niùçreyasäya—for the ultimate benefit; me—by Me; atyanta—complete; uparatiù—
detachment; yatra—where; duùkhasya—from distress; ca—and; sukhasya—from
happiness; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead answered: The yoga system which relates to the Lord and
the individual soul, which is meant for the ultimate benefit of the living entity, and which
causes detachment from all happiness and distress in the material world, is the highest
yoga system.
PURPORT
In the material world, everyone is trying to get some material happiness, but as soon as
we get some material happiness, there is also material distress. In the material world one
cannot have unadulterated happiness. Any kind of happiness one has is contaminated
by distress also. For example, if we want to drink milk then we have to bother to
maintain a cow and keep her fit to supply milk. Drinking milk is very nice; it is also
pleasure. But for the sake of drinking milk one has to accept so much trouble. The yoga
system, as here stated by the Lord, is meant to end all material happiness and material
distress. The best yoga, as taught in Bhagavad-gétä by Kåñëa, is bhakti-yoga. It is also
mentioned in the Gétä that one should try to be tolerant and not be disturbed by
material happiness or distress. Of course, one may say that he is not disturbed by
material happiness, but he does not know that just after one enjoys so-called material
happiness, material distress will follow. This is the law of the material world. Lord Kapila
states that the yoga system is the science of the spirit. One practices yoga in order to
attain perfection on the spiritual platform. There is no question of material happiness or
distress. It is transcendental. Lord Kapila will eventually explain how it is
transcendental, but the preliminary introduction is given here.
SB 3.25.14
TEXT 14
TaiMaMa& Tae Pa[v+YaaiMa YaMavaec& PauraNagae )
366
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
‰zq<aa& é[aeTauk-aMaaNaa& YaaeGa& SavaR(r)NaEPau<aMa( )) 14 ))
tam imaà te pravakñyämi
yam avocaà puränaghe
åñéëäà çrotu-kämänäà
yogaà sarväìga-naipuëam
SYNONYMS
tam imam—that very; te—to you; pravakñyämi—I shall explain; yam—which; avocam—
I explained; purä—formerly; anaghe—O pious mother; åñéëäm—to the sages; çrotukämänäm—
eager to hear; yogam—yoga system; sarva-aìga—in all respects; naipuëam—
serviceable and practical.
TRANSLATION
O most pious mother, I shall now explain unto you the ancient yoga system, which I
explained formerly to the great sages. It is serviceable and practical in every way.
PURPORT
The Lord does not manufacture a new system of yoga. Sometimes it is claimed that
someone has become an incarnation of God and is expounding a new theological aspect
of the Absolute Truth. But here we find that although Kapila Muni is the Lord Himself
and is capable of manufacturing a new doctrine for His mother, He nevertheless says, "I
shall just explain the ancient system which I once explained to the great sages because
they were also anxious to hear about it." When we have a superexcellent process already
present in Vedic scriptures, there is no need to concoct a new system, to mislead the
innocent public. At present it has become a fashion to reject the standard system and
present something bogus in the name of a newly invented process of yoga.
SB 3.25.15
TEXT 15
ceTa" %LvSYa bNDaaYa Mau¢-Yae caTMaNaae MaTaMa( )
Gau<aezu Sa¢&- bNDaaYa rTa& va Pau&iSa Mau¢-Yae )) 15 ))
cetaù khalv asya bandhäya
367
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
muktaye cätmano matam
guëeñu saktaà bandhäya
rataà vä puàsi muktaye
SYNONYMS
cetaù—consciousness; khalu—indeed; asya—of him; bandhäya—for bondage;
muktaye—for liberation; ca—and; ätmanaù—of the living entity; matam—is
considered; guëeñu—in the three modes of nature; saktam—attracted; bandhäya—for
conditional life; ratam—attached; vä—or; puàsi—in the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; muktaye—for liberation.
TRANSLATION
The stage in which the consciousness of the living entity is attracted by the three modes
of material nature is called conditional life. But when that same consciousness is attached
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is situated in the consciousness of liberation.
PURPORT
There is a distinction here between Kåñëa consciousness and mäyä consciousness.
Guëeñu, or mäyä consciousness, involves attachment to the three material modes of
nature, under which one works sometimes in goodness and knowledge, sometimes in
passion and sometimes in ignorance. These different qualitative activities, with the
central attachment for material enjoyment, are the cause of one's conditional life. When
the same cetaù, or consciousness, is transferred to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa, or when one becomes Kåñëa conscious, he is on the path of liberation.
SB 3.25.16
TEXT 16
Ah& MaMaai>aMaaNaaeTQaE" k-aMal/ae>aaidi>aMaRlE/" )
vqTa& Yada MaNa" éuÖMadu"%MaSau%& SaMaMa( )) 16 ))
ahaà mamäbhimänotthaiù
käma-lobhädibhir malaiù
vétaà yadä manaù çuddham
aduùkham asukhaà samam
368
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
aham—I; mama—mine; abhimäna—from the misconception; utthaiù—produced;
käma—lust; lobha—greed; ädibhiù—and so on; malaiù—from the impurities; vétam—
freed; yadä—when; manaù—the mind; çuddham—pure; aduùkham—without distress;
asukham—without happiness; samam—equipoised.
TRANSLATION
When one is completely cleansed of the impurities of lust and greed produced from the
false identification of the body as "I" and bodily possessions as "mine," one's mind
becomes purified. In that pure state he transcends the stage of so-called material
happiness and distress.
PURPORT
Käma and lobha are the symptoms of material existence. Everyone always desires to
possess something. It is said here that desire and greed are the products of false
identification of oneself with the body. When one becomes free from this
contamination, then his mind and consciousness also become freed and attain their
original state. Mind, consciousness and the living entity exist. Whenever we speak of
the living entity, this includes the mind and consciousness. The difference between
conditional life and liberated life occurs when we purify the mind and the
consciousness. When they are purified, one becomes transcendental to material
happiness and distress.
In the beginning Lord Kapila has said that perfect yoga enables one to transcend the
platform of material distress and happiness. How this can be done is explained here: one
has to purify his mind and consciousness. This can be done by the bhakti-yoga system. As
explained in the Närada-païcarätra, one's mind and senses should be purified (tatparatvena
nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]). One's senses must be engaged in devotional
service to the Lord. That is the process. The mind must have some engagement. One
cannot make the mind vacant. Of course there are some foolish attempts to try to make
the mind vacant or void, but that is not possible. The only process that will purify the
mind is to engage it in Kåñëa. The mind must be engaged. If we engage our mind in
Kåñëa, naturally the consciousness becomes fully purified, and there is no chance of the
entrance of material desire and greed.
SB 3.25.17
369
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 17
Tada Pauåz AaTMaaNa& ke-vl&/ Pa[k*-Tae" ParMa( )
iNarNTar& SvYa&JYaaeiTari<aMaaNaMa%i<@TaMa( )) 17 ))
tadä puruña ätmänaà
kevalaà prakåteù param
nirantaraà svayaà-jyotir
aëimänam akhaëòitam
SYNONYMS
tadä—then; puruñaù—the individual soul; ätmänam—himself; kevalam—pure; prakåteù
param—transcendental to material existence; nirantaram—nondifferent; svayamjyotiù—
self-effulgent; aëimänam—infinitesimal; akhaëòitam—not fragmented.
TRANSLATION
At that time the soul can see himself to be transcendental to material existence and
always self-effulgent, never fragmented, although very minute in size.
PURPORT
In the state of pure consciousness, or Kåñëa consciousness, one can see himself as a
minute particle nondifferent from the Supreme Lord. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, the
jéva, or the individual soul, is eternally part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. Just as the
sun's rays are minute particles of the brilliant constitution of the sun, so a living entity is
a minute particle of the Supreme Spirit. The individual soul and the Supreme Lord are
not separated as in material differentiation. The individual soul is a particle from the
very beginning. One should not think that because the individual soul is a particle, it is
fragmented from the whole spirit. Mäyäväda philosophy enunciates that the whole spirit
exists, but a part of it, which is called the jéva, is entrapped by illusion. This philosophy,
however, is unacceptable because spirit cannot be divided like a fragment of matter.
That part, the jéva, is eternally a part. As long as the Supreme Spirit exists, His part and
parcel also exists. As long as the sun exists, the molecules of the sun's rays also exist.
The jéva particle is estimated in the Vedic literature to be one ten-thousandth the size of
the upper portion of a hair. It is therefore infinitesimal. The Supreme Spirit is infinite,
370
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
but the living entity, or the individual soul, is infinitesimal, although it is not different
in quality from the Supreme Spirit. Two words in this verse are to be particularly noted.
One is nirantaram, which means "nondifferent," or "of the same quality." The individual
soul is also expressed here as aëimänam. Aëimänam means "infinitesimal." The Supreme
Spirit is all-pervading, but the very small spirit is the individual soul. Akhaëòitam means
not exactly "fragmented" but "constitutionally always infinitesimal." No one can separate
the molecular parts of the sunshine from the sun, but at the same time the molecular
part of the sunshine is not as expansive as the sun itself. Similarly, the living entity, by
his constitutional position, is qualitatively the same as the Supreme Spirit, but he is
infinitesimal.
SB 3.25.18
TEXT 18
jaNavEraGYaYau¢e-Na >ai¢-Yau¢e-Na caTMaNaa )
PairPaXYaTYaudaSaqNa& Pa[k*-iTa& c hTaaEJaSaMa( )) 18 ))
jïäna-vairägya-yuktena
bhakti-yuktena cätmanä
paripaçyaty udäsénaà
prakåtià ca hataujasam
SYNONYMS
jïäna—knowledge; vairägya—renunciation; yuktena—equipped with; bhakti—
devotional service; yuktena—equipped with; ca—and; ätmanä—by the mind;
paripaçyati—one sees; udäsénam—indifferent; prakåtim—material existence; ca—and;
hata-ojasam—reduced in strength.
TRANSLATION
In that position of self-realization, by practice of knowledge and renunciation in
devotional service, one sees everything in the right perspective; he becomes indifferent to
material existence, and the material influence acts less powerfully upon him.
PURPORT
As the contamination of the germs of a particular disease can influence a weaker person,
371
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
similarly the influence of material nature, or illusory energy, can act on the weaker, or
conditioned, soul but not on the liberated soul. Self-realization is the position of the
liberated state. One understands his constitutional position by knowledge and vairägya,
renunciation. Without knowledge, one cannot have realization. The realization that one
is the infinitesimal part and parcel of the Supreme Spirit makes him unattached to
material, conditional life. That is the beginning of devotional service. Unless one is
liberated from material contamination, one cannot engage himself in the devotional
service of the Lord. In this verse, therefore, it is stated, jïäna-vairägya-yuktena: when
one is in full knowledge of one's constitutional position and is in the renounced order of
life, detached from material attraction, then, by pure devotional service, bhakti-yuktena,
he can engage himself as a loving servant of the Lord. Paripaçyati means that he can see
everything in its right perspective. Then the influence of material nature becomes
almost nil. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä. Brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä: [Bg.
18.54] when one is self-realized he becomes happy and free from the influence of
material nature, and at that time he is freed from lamentation and hankering. The Lord
states that position as mad-bhaktià labhate paräm [Bg. 18.54], the real state of beginning
devotional service. Similarly, it is confirmed in the Närada-païcarätra that when the
senses are purified they can then be engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. One
who is attached to material contamination cannot be a devotee.
SB 3.25.19
TEXT 19
Na YauJYaMaaNaYaa >a¢-ya >aGavTYai%l/aTMaiNa )
Sad*Xaae_iSTa iXav" PaNQaa YaaeiGaNaa& b]øiSaÖYae )) 19 ))
na yujyamänayä bhaktyä
bhagavaty akhilätmani
sadåço 'sti çivaù panthä
yoginäà brahma-siddhaye
SYNONYMS
na—not; yujyamänayä—being performed; bhaktyä—devotional service; bhagavati—
towards the Supreme Personality of Godhead; akhila-ätmani—the Supersoul; sadåçaù—
like; asti—there is; çivaù—auspicious; panthäù—path; yoginäm—of the yogés; brahmasiddhaye—
for perfection in self-realization.
372
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Perfection in self-realization cannot be attained by any kind of yogé unless he engages in
devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for that is the only auspicious
path.
PURPORT
That knowledge and renunciation are never perfect unless joined by devotional service
is explicitly explained here. Na yujyamänayä means "without being dovetailed." When
there is devotional service, then the question is where to offer that service. Devotional
service is to be offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the Supersoul of
everything, for that is the only reliable path of self-realization, or Brahman realization.
The word brahma-siddhaye means to understand oneself to be different from matter, to
understand oneself to be Brahman. The Vedic words are ahaà brahmäsmi. Brahmasiddhi
means that one should know that he is not matter; he is pure soul. There are
different kinds of yogés, but every yogé is supposed to engage in self-realization, or
Brahman realization. It is clearly stated here that unless one is fully engaged in the
devotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead one cannot have easy
approach to the path of brahma-siddhi.
In the beginning of the Second Chapter of Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is stated that when
one engages himself in the devotional service of Väsudeva, spiritual knowledge and
renunciation of the material world automatically become manifest. Thus a devotee does
not have to try separately for renunciation or knowledge. Devotional service itself is so
powerful that by one's service attitude, everything is revealed. It is stated here, çivaù
panthäù: this is the only auspicious path for self-realization. The path of devotional
service is the most confidential means for attaining Brahman realization. That
perfection in Brahman realization is attained through the auspicious path of devotional
service indicates that the so-called Brahman realization, or realization of the brahmajyoti
effulgence, is not brahma-siddhi. Beyond that brahmajyoti there is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In the Upaniñads a devotee prays to the Lord to kindly put aside
the effulgence, brahmajyoti, so that the devotee may see within the brahmajyoti the
actual, eternal form of the Lord. Unless one attains realization of the transcendental
form of the Lord, there is no question of bhakti. Bhakti necessitates the existence of the
recipient of devotional service and the devotee who renders devotional service. Brahmasiddhi
through devotional service is realization of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The understanding of the effulgent rays of the body of the Supreme Godhead is not the
373
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
perfect stage of brahma-siddhi, or Brahman realization. Nor is the realization of the
Paramätmä feature of the Supreme Person perfect, for Bhagavän, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is akhilätmä-He is the Supersoul. One who realizes the Supreme
Personality realizes the other features, namely the Paramätmä feature and the Brahman
feature, and that total realization is brahma-siddhi.
SB 3.25.20
TEXT 20
Pa[Sa(r)MaJar& PaaXaMaaTMaNa" k-vYaae ivdu" )
Sa Wv SaaDauzu k*-Taae Maae+aÜarMaPaav*TaMa( )) 20 ))
prasaìgam ajaraà päçam
ätmanaù kavayo viduù
sa eva sädhuñu kåto
mokña-dväram apävåtam
SYNONYMS
prasaìgam—attachment; ajaram—strong; päçam—entanglement; ätmanaù—of the
soul; kavayaù—learned men; viduù—know; saù eva—that same; sädhuñu—to the
devotees; kåtaù—applied; mokña-dväram—the door of liberation; apävåtam—opened.
TRANSLATION
Every learned man knows very well that attachment for the material is the greatest
entanglement of the spirit soul. But that same attachment, when applied to the selfrealized
devotees, opens the door of liberation.
PURPORT
Here it is clearly stated that attachment for one thing is the cause of bondage in
conditioned life, and the same attachment, when applied to something else, opens the
door of liberation. Attachment cannot be killed; it has simply to be transferred.
Attachment for material things is called material consciousness, and attachment for
Kåñëa or His devotee is called Kåñëa consciousness. Consciousness, therefore, is the
platform of attachment. It is clearly stated here that when we simply purify the
consciousness from material consciousness to Kåñëa consciousness, we attain liberation.
374
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Despite the statement that one should give up attachment, desirelessness is not possible
for a living entity. A living entity, by constitution, has the propensity to be attached to
something. We see that if someone has no object of attachment, if he has no children,
then he transfers his attachment to cats and dogs. This indicates that the propensity for
attachment cannot be stopped; it must be utilized for the best purpose. Our attachment
for material things perpetuates our conditional state, but the same attachment, when
transferred to the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His devotee, is the source of
liberation.
Here it is recommended that attachment should be transferred to the self-realized
devotees, the sädhus. And who is a sädhu? A sädhu is not just an ordinary man with a
saffron robe or long beard. A sädhu is described in Bhagavad-gétä as one who
unflinchingly engages in devotional service. Even though one is found not to be
following the strict rules and regulations of devotional service, if one simply has
unflinching faith in Kåñëa, the Supreme Person, he is understood to be a sädhu. Sädhur
eva sa mantavyaù [Bg. 9.30]. A sädhu is a strict follower of devotional service. It is
recommended here that if one at all wants to realize Brahman, or spiritual perfection,
his attachment should be transferred to the sädhu, or devotee. Lord Caitanya also
confirmed this. Lava-mätra sädhu-saìge sarva-siddhi haya: [Cc. Madhya 22.54] simply by
a moment's association with a sädhu, one can attain perfection.
Mahätmä is a synonym of sädhu. It is said that service to a mahätmä, or elevated devotee
of the Lord, is dväram ähur vimukteù, the royal road of liberation. Mahat-seväà dväram
ähur vimuktes tamo-dväraà yoñitäà saìgi-saìgam (SB 5.5.2). Rendering service to the
materialists has the opposite effect. If anyone offers service to a gross materialist, or a
person engaged only in sense enjoyment, then by association with such a person the
door to hell is opened. The same principle is confirmed here. Attachment to a devotee is
attachment to the service of the Lord because if one associates with a sädhu, the result
will be that the sädhu will teach him how to become a devotee, a worshiper and a sincere
servitor of the Lord. These are the gifts of a sädhu. If we want to associate with a sädhu,
we cannot expect him to give us instructions on how to improve our material condition,
but he will give us instructions on how to cut the knot of the contamination of material
attraction and how to elevate ourselves in devotional service. That is the result of
associating with a sädhu. Kapila Muni first of all instructs that the path of liberation
begins with such association.
SB 3.25.21
TEXT 21
375
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
iTaiTa+av" k-aåi<ak-a" Sauôd" SavRdeihNaaMa( )
AJaaTaXa}av" XaaNTaa" SaaDav" SaaDau>aUz<aa" )) 21 ))
titikñavaù käruëikäù
suhådaù sarva-dehinäm
ajäta-çatravaù çäntäù
sädhavaù sädhu-bhüñaëäù
SYNONYMS
titikñavaù—tolerant; käruëikäù—merciful; suhådaù—friendly; sarva-dehinäm—to all
living entities; ajäta-çatravaù—inimical to none; çäntäù—peaceful; sädhavaù—abiding
by scriptures; sädhu-bhüñaëäù—adorned with sublime characteristics.
TRANSLATION
The symptoms of a sädhu are that he is tolerant, merciful and friendly to all living
entities. He has no enemies, he is peaceful, he abides by the scriptures, and all his
characteristics are sublime.
PURPORT
A sädhu, as described above, is a devotee of the Lord. His concern, therefore, is to
enlighten people in devotional service to the Lord. That is his mercy. He knows that
without devotional service to the Lord, human life is spoiled. A devotee travels all over
the country, from door to door, preaching, "Be Kåñëa conscious. Be a devotee of Lord
Kåñëa. Don't spoil your life in simply fulfilling your animal propensities. Human life is
meant for self-realization, or Kåñëa consciousness." These are the preachings of a sädhu.
He is not satisfied with his own liberation. He always thinks about others. He is the most
compassionate personality towards all the fallen souls. One of his qualifications,
therefore, is käruëika, great mercy to the fallen souls. While engaged in preaching work,
he has to meet with so many opposing elements, and therefore the sädhu, or devotee of
the Lord, has to be very tolerant. Someone may ill-treat him because the conditioned
souls are not prepared to receive the transcendental knowledge of devotional service.
They do not like it; that is their disease. The sädhu has the thankless task of impressing
upon them the importance of devotional service. Sometimes devotees are personally
attacked with violence. Lord Jesus Christ was crucified, Haridäsa Öhäkura was caned in
376
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
twenty-two marketplaces, and Lord Caitanya's principal assistant, Nityänanda, was
violently attacked by Jagäi and Mädhäi. But still they were tolerant because their
mission was to deliver the fallen souls. One of the qualifications of a sädhu is that he is
very tolerant and is merciful to all fallen souls. He is merciful because he is the wellwisher
of all living entities. He is not only a well-wisher of human society, but a wellwisher
of animal society as well. It is said here, sarva-dehinäm, which indicates all living
entities who have accepted material bodies. Not only does the human being have a
material body, but other living entities, such as cats and dogs, also have material bodies.
The devotee of the Lord is merciful to everyone-the cats, dogs, trees, etc. He treats all
living entities in such a way that they can ultimately get salvation from this material
entanglement. Çivänanda Sena, one of the disciples of Lord Caitanya, gave liberation to
a dog by treating the dog transcendentally. There are many instances where a dog got
salvation by association with a sädhu, because a sädhu engages in the highest
philanthropic activities for the benediction of all living entities. Yet although a sädhu is
not inimical towards anyone, the world is so ungrateful that even a sädhu has many
enemies.
What is the difference between an enemy and a friend? It is a difference in behavior. A
sädhu behaves with all conditioned souls for their ultimate relief from material
entanglement. Therefore, no one can be more friendly than a sädhu in relieving a
conditioned soul. A sädhu is calm, and he quietly and peacefully follows the principles of
scripture. A sädhu means one who follows the principles of scripture and at the same
time is a devotee of the Lord. One who actually follows the principles of scripture must
be a devotee of God because all the çästras instruct us to obey the orders of the
Personality of Godhead. Sädhu, therefore, means a follower of the scriptural injunctions
and a devotee of the Lord. All these characteristics are prominent in a devotee. A
devotee develops all the good qualities of the demigods, whereas a nondevotee, even
though academically qualified, has no actual good qualifications or good characteristics
according to the standard of transcendental realization.
SB 3.25.22
TEXT 22
MaYYaNaNYaeNa >aaveNa >ai¢&- ku-vRiNTa Yae d*!aMa( )
MaTk*-Tae TYa¢-k-MaaR<aSTYa¢-SvJaNabaNDava" )) 22 ))
mayy ananyena bhävena
377
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bhaktià kurvanti ye dåòhäm
mat-kåte tyakta-karmäëas
tyakta-svajana-bändhaväù
SYNONYMS
mayi—unto Me; ananyena bhävena—with undeviated mind; bhaktim—devotional
service; kurvanti—perform; ye—those who; dåòhäm—staunch; mat-kåte—for My sake;
tyakta—renounced; karmäëaù—activities; tyakta—renounced; sva-jana—family
relationships; bändhaväù—friendly acquaintances.
TRANSLATION
Such a sädhu engages in staunch devotional service to the Lord without deviation. For the
sake of the Lord he renounces all other connections, such as family relationships and
friendly acquaintances within the world.
PURPORT
A person in the renounced order of life, a sannyäsé, is also called a sädhu because he
renounces everything—his home, his comfort, his friends, his relatives, and his duties to
friends and to family. He renounces everything for the sake of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. A sannyäsé is generally in the renounced order of life, but his renunciation
will be successful only when his energy is employed in the service of the Lord with great
austerity. It is said here, therefore, bhaktià kurvanti ye dåòhäm. A person who seriously
engages in the service of the Lord and is in the renounced order of life is a sädhu. A
sädhu is one who has given up all responsibility to society, family, and worldly
humanitarianism, simply for the service of the Lord. As soon as he takes his birth in the
world, a person has so many responsibilities and obligations—to the public, to the
demigods, to the great sages, to the general living beings, to his parents, to the family
forefathers and to many others. When he gives up all such obligations for the sake of the
service of the Supreme Lord, he is not punished for such renunciation of obligation. But
if for sense gratification a person renounces all such obligations, he is punished by the
law of nature.
SB 3.25.23
TEXT 23
378
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Madaé[Yaa" k-Qaa Ma*ía" é*<viNTa k-QaYaiNTa c )
TaPaiNTa ivivDaaSTaaPaa NaETaaNMaÓTaceTaSa" )) 23 ))
mad-äçrayäù kathä måñöäù
çåëvanti kathayanti ca
tapanti vividhäs täpä
naitän mad-gata-cetasaù
SYNONYMS
mat-äçrayäù—about Me; kathäù—stories; måñöäù—delightful; çåëvanti—they hear;
kathayanti—they chant; ca—and; tapanti—inflict suffering; vividhäù—various; täpäù—
the material miseries; na—do not; etän—unto them; mat-gata—fixed on Me; cetasaù—
their thoughts.
TRANSLATION
Engaged constantly in chanting and hearing about Me, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the sädhus do not suffer from material miseries because they are always filled
with thoughts of My pastimes and activities.
PURPORT
There are multifarious miseries in material existence—those pertaining to the body and
the mind, those imposed by other living entities and those imposed by natural
disturbances. But a sädhu is not disturbed by such miserable conditions because his mind
is always filled with Kåñëa consciousness, and thus he does not like to talk about
anything but the activities of the Lord. Mahäräja Ambaréña did not speak of anything
but the pastimes of the Lord. Vacäàsi vaikuëöha-guëänuvarëane (SB 9.4.18). He engaged
his words only in glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sädhus are
always interested in hearing about the activities of the Lord or His devotees. Since they
are filled with Kåñëa consciousness, they are forgetful of the material miseries. Ordinary
conditioned souls, being forgetful of the activities of the Lord, are always full of
anxieties and material tribulations. On the other hand, since the devotees always engage
in the topics of the Lord, they are forgetful of the miseries of material existence.
SB 3.25.24
TEXT 24
379
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Ta WTae SaaDav" Saaiß SavRSa(r)ivviJaRTaa" )
Sa(r)STaeZvQa Tae Pa[aQYaR" Sa(r)daezhra ih Tae )) 24 ))
ta ete sädhavaù sädhvi
sarva-saìga-vivarjitäù
saìgas teñv atha te prärthyaù
saìga-doña-harä hi te
SYNONYMS
te ete—those very; sädhavaù—devotees; sädhvi—virtuous lady; sarva—all; saìga—
attachments; vivarjitäù—freed from; saìgaù—attachment; teñu—unto them; atha—
hence; te—by you; prärthyaù—must be sought; saìga-doña—the pernicious effects of
material attachment; haräù—counteracters of; hi—indeed; te—they.
TRANSLATION
O My mother, O virtuous lady, these are the qualities of great devotees who are free from
all attachment. You must seek attachment to such holy men, for this counteracts the
pernicious effects of material attachment.
PURPORT
Kapila Muni herein advises His mother, Devahüti, that if she wants to be free from
material attachment, she should increase her attachment for the sädhus, or devotees
who are completely freed from all material attachment. In Bhagavad-gétä, Fifteenth
Chapter, verse 5, it is stated who is qualified to enter into the kingdom of Godhead. It is
said there, nirmäna-mohä jita-saìga-doñäù. This refers to one who is completely freed
from the puffed-up condition of material possessiveness. A person may be materially
very rich, opulent or respectable, but if he at all wants to transfer himself to the spiritual
kingdom, back home, back to Godhead, then he has to be freed from the puffed-up
condition of material possessiveness, because that is a false position.
The word moha used here means the false understanding that one is rich or poor. In this
material world, the conception that one is very rich or very poor—or any such
consciousness in connection with material existence—is false, because this body itself is
false, or temporary. A pure soul who is prepared to be freed from this material
380
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
entanglement must first of all be free from the association of the three modes of nature.
Our consciousness at the present moment is polluted because of association with the
three modes of nature; therefore in Bhagavad-gétä the same principle is stated. It is
advised, jita-saìga-doñäù: one should be freed from the contaminated association of the
three modes of material nature. Here also, in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, this is confirmed:
a pure devotee, who is preparing to transfer himself to the spiritual kingdom, is also
freed from the association of the three modes of material nature. We have to seek the
association of such devotees. For this reason we have begun the International Society
for Krishna Consciousness. There are many mercantile, scientific and other associations
in human society to develop a particular type of education or consciousness, but there is
no association which helps one to get free from all material association. If anyone has
reached the stage where he must become free from this material contamination, then he
has to seek the association of devotees, wherein Kåñëa consciousness is exclusively
cultured. One can thereby become freed from all material association.
Because a devotee is freed from all contaminated material association, he is not affected
by the miseries of material existence. Even though he appears to be in the material
world, he is not affected by the miseries of the material world. How is it possible? There
is a very good example in the activities of the cat. The cat carries her kittens in her
mouth, and when she kills a rat she also carries the booty in her mouth. Thus both are
carried in the mouth of the cat, but they are in different conditions. The kitten feels
comfort in the mouth of the mother, whereas when the rat is carried in the mouth of the
cat, the rat feels the blows of death. Similarly, those who are sädhavaù, or devotees
engaged in Kåñëa consciousness in the transcendental service of the Lord, do not feel
the contamination of material miseries, whereas those who are not devotees in Kåñëa
consciousness actually feel the miseries of material existence. One should therefore give
up the association of materialistic persons and seek the association of persons engaged in
Kåñëa consciousness, and by such association he will benefit in spiritual advancement.
By their words and instructions, he will be able to cut off his attachment to material
existence.
SB 3.25.25
TEXT 25
SaTaa& Pa[Sa(r)aNMaMa vqYaRSa&ivdae
>aviNTa ôTk-<aRrSaaYaNaa" k-Qaa" )
TaÂaez<aadaìPavGaRvTMaRiNa
381
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
é[Öa riTa>aRi¢-rNau§-iMaZYaiTa )) 25 ))
satäà prasaìgän mama vérya-saàvido
bhavanti håt-karëa-rasäyanäù kathäù
taj-joñaëäd äçv apavarga-vartmani
çraddhä ratir bhaktir anukramiñyati
SYNONYMS
satäm—of pure devotees; prasaìgät—through the association; mama—My; vérya—
wonderful activities; saàvidaù—by discussion of; bhavanti—become; håt—to the heart;
karëa—to the ear; rasa-ayanäù—pleasing; kathäù—the stories; tat—of that; joñaëät—by
cultivation; äçu—quickly; apavarga—of liberation; vartmani—on the path; çraddhä—
firm faith; ratiù—attraction; bhaktiù—devotion; anukramiñyati—will follow in order.
TRANSLATION
In the association of pure devotees, discussion of the pastimes and activities of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is very pleasing and satisfying to the ear and the heart.
By cultivating such knowledge one gradually becomes advanced on the path of liberation,
and thereafter he is freed, and his attraction becomes fixed. Then real devotion and
devotional service begin.
PURPORT
The process of advancing in Kåñëa consciousness and devotional service is described
here. The first point is that one must seek the association of persons who are Kåñëa
conscious and who engage in devotional service. Without such association one cannot
make advancement. Simply by theoretical knowledge or study one cannot make any
appreciable advancement. One must give up the association of materialistic persons and
seek the association of devotees because without the association of devotees one cannot
understand the activities of the Lord. Generally, people are convinced of the impersonal
feature of the Absolute Truth. Because they do not associate with devotees, they cannot
understand that the Absolute Truth can be a person and have personal activities. This is
a very difficult subject matter, and unless one has personal understanding of the
Absolute Truth, there is no meaning to devotion. Service or devotion cannot be offered
to anything impersonal. Service must be offered to a person. Nondevotees cannot
382
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
appreciate Kåñëa consciousness by reading the Çrémad-Bhägavatam or any other Vedic
literature wherein the activities of the Lord are described; they think that these
activities are fictional, manufactured stories because spiritual life is not explained to
them in the proper mood. To understand the personal activities of the Lord, one has to
seek the association of devotees, and by such association, when one contemplates and
tries to understand the transcendental activities of the Lord, the path to liberation is
open, and he is freed. One who has firm faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead
becomes fixed, and his attraction for association with the Lord and the devotees
increases. Association with devotees means association with the Lord. The devotee who
makes this association develops the consciousness for rendering service to the Lord, and
then, being situated in the transcendental position of devotional service, he gradually
becomes perfect.
SB 3.25.26
TEXT 26
>a¢-ya PauMaaÅaTaivraGa WeiNd]Yaad(
d*íé[uTaaNMad]cNaaNauicNTaYaa )
ictaSYa Yataae Ga]h<ae YaaeGaYau¢-ae
YaiTaZYaTae ‰Jaui>aYaaeRGaMaaGaOE" )) 26 ))
bhaktyä pumäï jäta-viräga aindriyäd
dåñöa-çrutän mad-racanänucintayä
cittasya yatto grahaëe yoga-yukto
yatiñyate åjubhir yoga-märgaiù
SYNONYMS
bhaktyä—by devotional service; pumän—a person; jäta-virägaù—having developed
distaste; aindriyät—for sense gratification; dåñöa—seen (in this world); çrutät—heard
(in the next world); mat-racana—My activities of creation and so on; anucintayä—by
constantly thinking about; cittasya—of the mind; yattaù—engaged; grahaëe—in the
control; yoga-yuktaù—situated in devotional service; yatiñyate—will endeavor; åjubhiù—
easy; yoga-märgaiù—by the processes of mystic power.
TRANSLATION
383
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Thus consciously engaged in devotional service in the association of devotees, a person
gains distaste for sense gratification, both in this world and in the next, by constantly
thinking about the activities of the Lord. This process of Kåñëa consciousness is the
easiest process of mystic power; when one is actually situated on that path of devotional
service, he is able to control the mind.
PURPORT
In all scriptures people are encouraged to act in a pious way so that they can enjoy sense
gratification not only in this life but also in the next. For example, one is promised
promotion to the heavenly kingdom of higher planets by pious fruitive activities. But a
devotee in the association of devotees prefers to contemplate the activities of the
Lord—how He has created this universe, how He is maintaining it, how the creation
dissolves, and how in the spiritual kingdom the Lord's pastimes are going on. There are
full literatures describing these activities of the Lord, especially Bhagavad-gétä, Brahmasaàhitä
and Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The sincere devotee who associates with devotees gets
the opportunity to hear and contemplate this subject of the pastimes of the Lord, and
the result is that he feels distaste for so-called happiness in this or that world, in heaven
or on other planets. The devotees are simply interested in being transferred to the
personal association of the Lord; they have no more attraction for temporary so-called
happiness. That is the position of one who is yoga-yukta. One who is fixed in mystic
power is not disturbed by the allurement of this world or that world; he is interested in
the matters of spiritual understanding or the spiritual situation. This sublime situation is
very easily attained by the easiest process, bhakti-yoga. Åjubhir yoga-märgaiù. A very
suitable word used here is åjubhiù, or "very easy." There are different processes of yogamärga,
attaining yoga perfection, but this process, devotional service to the Lord, is the
easiest. Not only is it the easiest process, but the result is sublime. Everyone, therefore,
should try to take this process of Kåñëa consciousness and reach the highest perfection
of life.
SB 3.25.27
TEXT 27
ASaevYaaYa& Pa[k*-TaeGauR<aaNaa&
jaNaeNa vEraGYaivJa*iM>aTaeNa )
YaaeGaeNa MaYYaiPaRTaYaa c >a¢-ya
384
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Maa& Pa[TYaGaaTMaaNaiMahavåNDae )) 27 ))
asevayäyaà prakåter guëänäà
jïänena vairägya-vijåmbhitena
yogena mayy arpitayä ca bhaktyä
mäà pratyag-ätmänam ihävarundhe
SYNONYMS
asevayä—by not engaging in the service; ayam—this person; prakåteù guëänäm—of the
modes of material nature; jïänena—by Knowledge; vairägya—with renunciation;
vijåmbhitena—developed; yogena—by practicing yoga; mayi—unto Me; arpitayä—fixed;
ca—and; bhaktyä—with devotion; mäm—unto Me; pratyak-ätmänam—the Absolute
Truth; iha—in this very life; avarundhe—one attains.
TRANSLATION
Thus by not engaging in the service of the modes of material nature but by developing
Kåñëa consciousness, knowledge in renunciation, and by practicing yoga, in which the
mind is always fixed in devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one
achieves My association in this very life, for I am the Supreme Personality, the Absolute
Truth.
PURPORT
When one engages in devotional service to the Lord in the nine different kinds of
bhakti-yoga, as enunciated in authoritative scriptures, such as hearing (çravaëam),
chanting (kértanam), remembering, offering worship, praying and offering personal
service—either in one of them, or two or three or all of them—he naturally has no
opportunity to engage in the service of the three modes of material nature. Unless one
has good engagements in spiritual service, it is not possible to get out of the attachment
to material service. Those who are not devotees, therefore, are interested in so-called
humanitarian or philanthropic work, such as opening a hospital or charitable
institution. These are undoubtedly good works in the sense that they are pious activities,
and their result is that the performer may get some opportunities for sense gratification,
either in this life or in the next. Devotional service, however, is beyond the boundary of
sense gratification. It is completely spiritual activity. When one engages in the spiritual
385
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
activities of devotional service, naturally he does not get any opportunity to engage in
sense gratificatory activities. Kåñëa conscious activities are performed not blindly but
with perfect understanding of knowledge and renunciation. This kind of yoga practice,
in which the mind is always fixed upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
devotion, results in liberation in this very life. The person who performs such acts gets
in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Caitanya, therefore, approved
the process of hearing from realized devotees about the pastimes of the Lord. It does not
matter to what category of this world the audience belongs. If one meekly and
submissively hears about the activities of the Lord from a realized soul, he will be able to
conquer the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is unconquerable by any other
process. Hearing or associating with devotees is the most important function for selfrealization.
SB 3.25.28
TEXT 28
devhUiTaåvac
k-aictvYYauicTaa >ai¢-" k-Id*Xaq MaMa Gaaecra )
YaYaa Pad& Tae iNavaR<aMaÅSaaNvaénva AhMa( )) 28 ))
devahütir uväca
käcit tvayy ucitä bhaktiù
kédåçé mama gocarä
yayä padaà te nirväëam
aïjasänväçnavä aham
SYNONYMS
devahütiù uväca—Devahüti said; käcit—what; tvayi—unto You; ucitä—proper;
bhaktiù—devotional service; kédåçé—what kind; mama—by me; go-carä—fit to be
practiced; yayä—by which; padam—feet; te—Your; nirväëam—liberation; aïjasä—
immediately; anväçnavai—shall attain; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
On hearing this statement of the Lord, Devahüti inquired: What kind of devotional
service is worth developing and practicing to help me easily and immediately attain the
386
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
service of Your lotus feet?
PURPORT
It is stated in Bhagavad-gétä that no one is barred from rendering service to the Lord.
Whether one is a woman or a laborer or a merchant, if he engages himself in the
devotional service of the Lord he is promoted to the highest perfectional state and goes
back home, back to Godhead. The devotional service most suitable for different types of
devotees is determined and fixed by the mercy of the spiritual master.
SB 3.25.29
TEXT 29
Yaae YaaeGaae >aGavØa<aae iNavaR<aaTMa&STvYaaeidTa" )
k-Id*Xa" k-iTa ca(r)aiNa YaTaSTatvavbaeDaNaMa( )) 29 ))
yo yogo bhagavad-bäëo
nirväëätmaàs tvayoditaù
kédåçaù kati cäìgäni
yatas tattvävabodhanam
SYNONYMS
yaù—which; yogaù—mystic yoga process; bhagavat-bäëaù—aiming at the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; nirväëa-ätman—O embodiment of nirväëa; tvayä—by You;
uditaù—explained; kédåçaù—of what nature; kati—how many; ca—and; aìgäni—
branches; yataù—by which; tattva—of the truth; avabodhanam—understanding.
TRANSLATION
The mystic yoga system, as You have explained, aims at the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and is meant for completely ending material existence. Please let me know the
nature of that yoga system. How many ways are there by which one can understand in
truth that sublime yoga?
PURPORT
There are different kinds of mystic yoga systems aiming for different phases of the
387
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Absolute Truth. The jïäna-yoga system aims at the impersonal Brahman effulgence, and
the haöha-yoga system aims at the localized personal aspect, the Paramätmä feature of
the Absolute Truth, whereas bhakti-yoga, or devotional service, which is executed in
nine different ways, headed by hearing and chanting, aims at complete realization of the
Supreme Lord. There are different methods of self-realization. But here Devahüti
especially refers to the bhakti-yoga system, which has already been primarily explained
by the Lord. The different parts of the bhakti-yoga system are hearing, chanting,
remembering, offering prayers, worshiping the Lord in the temple, accepting service to
Him, carrying out His orders, making friendship with Him and ultimately surrendering
everything for the service of the Lord. The word nirväëätman is very significant in this
verse. Unless one accepts the process of devotional service, one cannot end the
continuation of material existence. As far as jïänés are concerned, they are interested in
jïäna-yoga, but even if one elevates oneself, after a great performance of austerity, to
the Brahman effulgence, there is a chance of falling down again to the material world.
Therefore, jïäna-yoga does not actually end material existence. Similarly, regarding the
haöha-yoga system, which aims at the localized aspect of the Lord, Paramätmä, it has
been experienced that many yogés, such as Viçvämitra, fall down. But bhakti-yogés, once
approaching the Supreme Personality of Godhead, never come back to this material
world, as it is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä. Yad gatvä na nivartante: [Bg. 15.6] upon
going, one never comes back. Tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti: [Bg. 4.9] after giving up
this body, he never comes back again to accept a material body. Nirväëa does not finish
the existence of the soul. The soul is ever existing. Therefore nirväëa means to end one's
material existence, and to end material existence means to go back home, back to
Godhead.
Sometimes it is asked how the living entity falls down from the spiritual world to the
material world. Here is the answer. Unless one is elevated to the Vaikuëöha planets,
directly in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is prone to fall down,
either from the impersonal Brahman realization or from an ecstatic trance of
meditation. Another word in this verse, bhagavad-bäëaù, is very significant. Bäëaù
means "arrow." The bhakti-yoga system is just like an arrow aiming up to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The bhakti-yoga system never urges one towards the impersonal
Brahman effulgence or to the point of Paramätmä realization. This bäëaù, or arrow, is so
sharp and swift that it goes directly to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, penetrating
the regions of impersonal Brahman and localized Paramätmä.
SB 3.25.30
TEXT 30
388
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TadeTaNMae ivJaaNaqih YaQaah& MaNdDaqhRre )
Sau%& buÖyeYa dubaeRDa& Yaaeza >avdNauGa]haTa( )) 30 ))
tad etan me vijänéhi
yathähaà manda-dhér hare
sukhaà buddhyeya durbodhaà
yoñä bhavad-anugrahät
SYNONYMS
tat etat—that same; me—to me; vijänéhi—please explain; yathä—so that; aham—I;
manda—slow; dhéù—whose intelligence; hare—O my Lord; sukham—easily;
buddhyeya—may understand; durbodham—very difficult to understand; yoñä—a woman;
bhavat-anugrahät—by Your grace.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, Kapila, after all, I am a woman. It is very difficult for me to understand the
Absolute Truth because my intelligence is not very great. But if You will kindly explain
it to me, even though I am not very intelligent, I can understand it and thereby feel
transcendental happiness.
PURPORT
Knowledge of the Absolute Truth is not very easily understood by ordinary, less
intelligent men; but if the spiritual master is kind enough to the disciple, however
unintelligent the disciple may be, then by the divine grace of the spiritual master
everything is revealed. Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura therefore says, yasya prasädäd,
by the mercy of the spiritual master, the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
bhagavat-prasädaù, is revealed. Devahüti requested her great son to be merciful towards
her because she was a less intelligent woman and also His mother. By the grace of
Kapiladeva it was quite possible for her to understand the Absolute Truth, even though
the subject matter is very difficult for ordinary persons, especially women.
SB 3.25.31
TEXT 31
389
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
MaE}aeYa ovac
ividTvaQa| k-iPal/ae MaaTauirTQa&
JaaTaòehae Ya}a TaNvai>aJaaTa" )
TatvaManaYa& YaTPa[vdiNTa Saa&:Ya&
Pa[aevac vE >ai¢-ivTaaNaYaaeGaMa( )) 31 ))
maitreya uväca
viditvärthaà kapilo mätur itthaà
jäta-sneho yatra tanväbhijätaù
tattvämnäyaà yat pravadanti säìkhyaà
proväca vai bhakti-vitäna-yogam
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; viditvä—having known; artham—purpose; kapilaù—
Lord Kapila; mätuù—of His mother; ittham—thus; jäta-snehaù—became compassionate;
yatra—upon her; tanvä—from her body; abhijätaù—born; tattva-ämnäyam—truths
received by disciplic succession; yat—which; pravadanti—they call; säìkhyam—
Säìkhya philosophy; proväca—He described; vai—in fact; bhakti—devotional service;
vitäna—spreading; yogam—mystic yoga.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: After hearing the statement of His mother, Kapila could understand
her purpose, and He became compassionate towards her because of being born of her
body. He described the Säìkhya system of philosophy, which is a combination of
devotional service and mystic realization, as received by disciplic succession.
SB 3.25.32
TEXT 32
é[q>aGavaNauvac
devaNaa& Gau<ail/(r)aNaaMaaNaué[ivk-k-MaR<aaMa( )
Satv WvEk-MaNaSaae v*ita" Sva>aaivk-I Tau Yaa )
AiNaiMataa >aaGavTaq >ai¢-" iSaÖeGaRrqYaSaq )) 32 ))
390
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
çré-bhagavän uväca
devänäà guëa-liìgänäm
änuçravika-karmaëäm
sattva evaika-manaso
våttiù sväbhäviké tu yä
animittä bhägavaté
bhaktiù siddher garéyasé
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; devänäm—of the senses
or of the presiding deities of the senses; guëa-liìgänäm—which detect sense objects;
änuçravika—according to scripture; karmaëäm—which work; sattve—unto the mind or
unto the Lord; eva—only; eka-manasaù—of a man of undivided mind; våttiù—
inclination; sväbhäviké—natural; tu—in fact; yä—which; animittä—without motive;
bhägavaté—to the Personality of Godhead; bhaktiù—devotional service; siddheù—than
salvation; garéyasé—better.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kapila said: The senses are symbolic representations of the demigods, and their
natural inclination is to work under the direction of the Vedic injunctions. As the senses
are representatives of the demigods, so the mind is the representative of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The mind's natural duty is to serve. When that service spirit is
engaged in devotional service to the Personality of Godhead, without any motive, that is
far better even than salvation.
PURPORT
The senses of the living entity are always engaged in some occupation, either in
activities prescribed in the injunctions of the Vedas or in material activities. The
natural inclination of the senses is to work for something, and the mind is the center of
the senses. The mind is actually the leader of the senses; therefore it is called sattva.
Similarly, the leader of all the demigods who are engaged in the activities of this
material world—the sun-god, moon-god, Indra and others—is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
It is stated in the Vedic literature that the demigods are different limbs of the universal
391
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Our senses are also controlled by different
demigods; our senses are representations of various demigods, and the mind is the
representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The senses, led by the mind, act
under the influence of the demigods. When the service is ultimately aimed at the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the senses are in their natural position. The Lord is
called Håñékeça, for He is actually the proprietor and ultimate master of the senses. The
senses and the mind are naturally inclined to work, but when they are materially
contaminated they work for some material benefit or for the service of the demigods,
although actually they are meant to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
senses are called håñéka, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is called Håñékeça.
Indirectly, all the senses are naturally inclined to serve the Supreme Lord. That is called
bhakti.
Kapiladeva said that when the senses, without desire for material profit or other selfish
motives, are engaged in the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is
situated in devotional service. That spirit of service is far better than siddhi, salvation.
Bhakti, the inclination to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is in a
transcendental position far better than mukti, or liberation. Thus bhakti is the stage
after liberation. Unless one is liberated one cannot engage the senses in the service of
the Lord. When the senses are engaged either in material activities of sense gratification
or in the activities of the Vedic injunctions, there is some motive, but when the same
senses are engaged in the service of the Lord and there is no motive, that is called
animittä and is the natural inclination of the mind. The conclusion is that when the
mind, without being deviated either by Vedic injunctions or by material activities, is
fully engaged in Kåñëa consciousness, or devotional service to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, it is far better than the most aspired—for liberation from material
entanglement.
SB 3.25.33
TEXT 33
JarYaTYaaéu Yaa k-aeXa& iNaGaq<aRMaNal/ae YaQaa )) 33 ))
jarayaty äçu yä koçaà
nigérëam analo yathä
SYNONYMS
392
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
jarayati—dissolves; äçu—quickly; yä—which; koçam—the subtle body; nigérëam—
things eaten; analaù—fire; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
Bhakti, devotional service, dissolves the subtle body of the living entity without separate
effort, just as fire in the stomach digests all that we eat.
PURPORT
Bhakti is in a far higher position than mukti because a person's endeavor to get liberation
from the material encagement is automatically served in devotional service. The
example is given here that the fire in the stomach can digest whatever we eat. If the
digestive power is sufficient, then whatever we can eat will be digested by the fire in the
stomach. Similarly, a devotee does not have to try separately to attain liberation. That
very service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the process of his liberation
because to engage oneself in the service of the Lord is to liberate oneself from material
entanglement. Çré Bilvamaìgala Öhäkura explained this position very nicely. He said, "If
I have unflinching devotion unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, then mukti, or
liberation, serves me as my maidservant. Mukti, the maidservant, is always ready to do
whatever I ask."
For a devotee, liberation is no problem at all. Liberation takes place without separate
endeavor. Bhakti, therefore, is far better then mukti or the impersonalist position. The
impersonalists undergo severe penances and austerities to attain mukti, but the bhakta,
simply by engaging himself in the bhakti process, especially in chanting Hare Kåñëa,
Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare,
immediately develops control over the tongue by engaging it in chanting, and accepting
the remnants of foodstuff offered to the Personality of Godhead. As soon as the tongue
is controlled, naturally all other senses are controlled automatically. Sense control is the
perfection of the yoga principle, and one's liberation begins immediately as soon as he
engages himself in the service of the Lord. It is confirmed by Kapiladeva that bhakti, or
devotional service, is garéyasé, more glorious than siddhi, liberation.
SB 3.25.34
TEXT 34
NaEk-aTMaTaa& Mae SPa*hYaiNTa ke-icNa(
393
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
MaTPaadSaevai>arTaa Madqha" )
Yae_NYaaeNYaTaae >aaGavTaa" Pa[SaJYa
Sa>aaJaYaNTae MaMa PaaEåzai<a )) 34 ))
naikätmatäà me spåhayanti kecin
mat-päda-seväbhiratä mad-éhäù
ye 'nyonyato bhägavatäù prasajya
sabhäjayante mama pauruñäëi
SYNONYMS
na—never; eka-ätmatäm—merging into oneness; me—My; spåhayanti—they desire;
kecit—any; mat-päda-sevä—the service of My lotus feet; abhiratäù—engaged in; matéhäù—
endeavoring to attain Me; ye—those who; anyonyataù—mutually; bhägavatäù—
pure devotees; prasajya—assembling; sabhäjayante—glorify; mama—My; pauruñäëi—
glorious activities.
TRANSLATION
A pure devotee, who is attached to the activities of devotional service and who always
engages in the service of My lotus feet, never desires to become one with Me. Such a
devotee, who is unflinchingly engaged, always glorifies My pastimes and activities.
PURPORT
There are five kinds of liberation stated in the scriptures. One is to become one with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, or to forsake one's individuality and merge into the
Supreme Spirit. This is called ekätmatäm. A devotee never accepts this kind of
liberation. The other four liberations are: to be promoted to the same planet as God
(Vaikuëöha), to associate personally with the Supreme Lord, to achieve the same
opulence as the Lord and to attain the same bodily features as the Supreme Lord. A pure
devotee, as will be explained by Kapila Muni, does not aspire for any of the five
liberations. He especially despises as hellish the idea of becoming one with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Çré Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté, a great devotee of Lord Caitanya,
said, kaivalyaà narakäyate: "The happiness of becoming one with the Supreme Lord,
which is aspired for by the Mäyävädés, is considered hellish." That oneness is not for
394
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
pure devotees.
There are many so-called devotees who think that in the conditioned state we may
worship the Personality of Godhead but that ultimately there is no personality; they say
that since the Absolute Truth is impersonal, one can imagine a personal form of the
impersonal Absolute Truth for the time being, but as soon as one becomes liberated the
worship stops. That is the theory put forward by the Mäyäväda philosophy. Actually the
impersonalists do not merge into the existence of the Supreme Person but into His
personal bodily luster, which is called the brahmajyoti. Although that brahmajyoti is not
different from His personal body, that sort of oneness (merging into the bodily luster of
the Personality of Godhead) is not accepted by a pure devotee because the devotees
engage in greater pleasure than the so-called pleasure of merging into His existence. The
greatest pleasure is to serve the Lord. Devotees are always thinking about how to serve
Him; they are always designing ways and means to serve the Supreme Lord, even in the
midst of the greatest obstacles of material existence.
The Mäyävädés accept the description of the pastimes of the Lord as stories, but actually
they are not stories; they are historical facts. Pure devotees accept the narrations of the
pastimes of the Lord not as stories but as Absolute Truth. The words mama pauruñäëi
are significant. Devotees are very much attached to glorifying the activities of the Lord,
whereas the Mäyävädés cannot even think of these activities. According to them the
Absolute Truth is impersonal. Without personal existence, how can there be activity?
The impersonalists take the activities mentioned in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Bhagavadgétä
and other Vedic literatures as fictitious stories, and therefore they interpret them
most mischievously. The have no idea of the Personality of Godhead. They
unnecessarily poke their noses into the scripture and interpret it in a deceptive way in
order to mislead the innocent public. The activities of Mäyäväda philosophy are very
dangerous to the public, and therefore Lord Caitanya warned us never to hear from any
Mäyävädé about any scripture. They will spoil the entire process, and the person hearing
them will never be able to come to the path of devotional service to attain the highest
perfection, or will be able to do so only after a very long time.
It is clearly stated by Kapila Muni that bhakti activities, or activities in devotional
service, are transcendental to mukti. This is called païcama-puruñärtha. Generally,
people engage in the activities of religion, economic development and sense
gratification, and ultimately they work with an idea that they are going to become one
with the Supreme Lord (mukti). But bhakti is transcendental to all these activities. The
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, therefore, begins by stating that all kinds of pretentious religiosity
is completely eradicated from the Bhägavatam. Ritualistic activities for economic
395
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
development and sense gratification and, after frustration in sense gratification, the
desire to become one with the Supreme Lord, are all completely rejected in the
Bhägavatam. The Bhägavatam is especially meant for the pure devotees, who always
engage in Kåñëa consciousness, in the activities of the Lord, and always glorify these
transcendental activities. Pure devotees worship the transcendental activities of the
Lord in Våndävana, Dvärakä and Mathurä as they are narrated in the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam and other puräëas. The Mäyävädé philosophers completely reject them as
stories, but actually they are great and worshipable subject matters and thus are
relishable only for devotees. That is the difference between a Mäyävädé and a pure
devotee.
SB 3.25.35
TEXT 35
PaXYaiNTa Tae Mae åicra<YaMb SaNTa"
Pa[Saàv£-aå<al/aecNaaiNa )
æPaai<a idVYaaiNa vrPa[daiNa
Saak&- vac& SPa*h<aqYaa& vdiNTa )) 35 ))
paçyanti te me ruciräëy amba santaù
prasanna-vakträruëa-locanäni
rüpäëi divyäni vara-pradäni
säkaà väcaà spåhaëéyäà vadanti
SYNONYMS
paçyanti—see; te—they; me—My; ruciräëi—beautiful; amba—O mother; santaù—
devotees; prasanna—smiling; vaktra—face; aruëa—like the morning sun; locanäni—
eyes; rüpäëi—forms; divyäni—transcendental; vara-pradäni—benevolent; säkam—with
Me; väcam—words; spåhaëéyäm—favorable; vadanti—they speak.
TRANSLATION
O My mother, My devotees always see the smiling face of My form, with eyes like the
rising morning sun. They like to see My various transcendental forms, which are all
benevolent, and they also talk favorably with Me.
396
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Mäyävädés and atheists accept the forms of the Deities in the temple of the Lord as idols,
but devotees do not worship idols. They directly worship the Personality of Godhead in
His arcä incarnation. Arcä refers to the form which we can worship in our present
condition. Actually, in our present state it is not possible to see God in His spiritual
form because our material eyes and senses cannot conceive of a spiritual form. We
cannot even see the spiritual form of the individual soul. When a man dies we cannot
see how the spiritual form leaves the body. That is the defect of our material senses. In
order to be seen by our material senses, the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepts a
favorable form which is called arcä-vigraha. This arcä-vigraha, sometimes called the arcä
incarnation, is not different from Him. Just as the Supreme Personality of Godhead
accepts various incarnations, He takes on forms made out of matter—clay, wood, metal
and jewels.
There are many çästric injunctions which give instructions for carving forms of the
Lord. These forms are not material. If God is all-pervading, then He is also in the
material elements. There is no doubt about it. But the atheists think otherwise.
Although they preach that everything is God, when they go to the temple and see the
form of the Lord, they deny that He is God. According to their own theory, everything
is God. Then why is the Deity not God? Actually, they have no conception of God. The
devotees' vision, however, is different; their vision is smeared with love of God. As soon
as they see the Lord in His different forms, the devotees become saturated with love, for
they do not find any difference between the Lord and His form in the temple, as do the
atheists. The smiling face of the Deity in the temple is beheld by the devotees as
transcendental and spiritual, and the decoration of the body of the Lord is very much
appreciated by the devotees. It is the duty of the spiritual master to teach how to
decorate the Deity in the temple, how to cleanse the temple and how to worship the
Deity. There are different procedures and rules and regulations which are followed in
temples of Viñëu, and devotees go there and see the Deity, the vigraha, and spiritually
enjoy the form because all of the Deities are benevolent. The devotees express their
minds before the Deity, and in many instances the Deity also gives answers. But one
must be a very elevated devotee in order to be able to speak with the Supreme Lord.
Sometimes the Lord informs the devotee through dreams. These exchanges of feelings
between the Deity and the devotee are not understandable by atheists, but actually the
devotee enjoys them. Kapila Muni is explaining how the devotees see the decorated
body and face of the Deity and how they speak with Him in devotional service.
397
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.25.36
TEXT 36
TaEdRXaRNaqYaavYavEådar‚
ivl/aSahaSaei+aTavaMaSaU¢E-" )
ôTaaTMaNaae ôTaPa[a<aa&ê >ai¢-‚
riNaC^Taae Mae GaiTaMa<vq& Pa[Yau»e )) 36 ))
tair darçanéyävayavair udäraviläsa-
häsekñita-väma-süktaiù
håtätmano håta-präëäàç ca bhaktir
anicchato me gatim aëvéà prayuìkte
SYNONYMS
taiù—by those forms; darçanéya—charming; avayavaiù—whose limbs; udära—exalted;
viläsa—pastimes; häsa—smiling; ékñita—glances; väma—pleasing; süktaiù—whose
delightful words; håta—captivated; ätmanaù—their minds; håta—captivated; präëän—
their senses; ca—and; bhaktiù—devotional service; anicchataù—unwilling; me—My;
gatim—abode; aëvém—subtle; prayuìkte—secures.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing the charming forms of the Lord, smiling and attractive, and hearing His very
pleasing words, the pure devotee almost loses all other consciousness. His senses are freed
from all other engagements, and he becomes absorbed in devotional service. Thus in spite
of his unwillingness, he attains liberation without separate endeavor.
PURPORT
There are three divisions of devotees—first-class, second-class and third-class. Even the
third-class devotees are liberated souls. It is explained in this verse that although they do
not have knowledge, simply by seeing the beautiful decoration of the Deity in the
temple, the devotee is absorbed in thought of Him and loses all other consciousness.
Simply by fixing oneself in Kåñëa consciousness, engaging the senses in the service of
the Lord, one is imperceptibly liberated. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä. Simply
by discharging uncontaminated devotional service as prescribed in the scriptures, one
398
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
becomes equal to Brahman. In Bhagavad-gétä it is said, brahma-bhüyäya kalpate [Bg.
14.26] This means that the living entity in his original state is Brahman because he is
part and parcel of the Supreme Brahman. But simply because of his forgetfulness of his
real nature as an eternal servitor of the Lord, he is overwhelmed and captured by mäyä.
His forgetfulness of his real constitutional position is mäyä. Otherwise he is eternally
Brahman.
When one is trained to become conscious of his position, he understands that he is the
servitor of the Lord. "Brahman" refers to a state of self-realization. Even the third-class
devotee—who is not advanced in knowledge of the Absolute Truth but simply offers
obeisances with great devotion, thinks of the Lord, sees the Lord in the temple and
brings forth flowers and fruits to offer to the Deity—becomes imperceptibly liberated.
Çraddhayänvitäù: with great devotion the devotees offer worshipful respects and
paraphernalia to the Deity. The Deities of Rädhä and Kåñëa, Lakñmé and Näräyaëa, and
Räma and Sétä are very attractive to devotees, so much so that when they see the statue
decorated in the temple of the Lord they become fully absorbed in thought of the Lord.
That is the state of liberation. In other words, it is confirmed herewith that even a
third-class devotee is in the transcendental position, above those who are trying for
liberation by speculation or by other methods. Even great impersonalists like Çukadeva
Gosvämé and the four Kumäras were attracted by the beauty of the Deities in the
temple, by the decorations and by the aroma of tulasé offered to the Lord, and they
became devotees. Even though they were in the liberated state, instead of remaining
impersonalists they were attracted by the beauty of the Lord and became devotees.
Here the word viläsa is very important. Viläsa refers to the activities or pastimes of the
Lord. It is a prescribed duty in temple worship that not only should one visit the temple
to see the Deity nicely decorated, but at the same time he should hear the recitation of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Bhagavad-gétä or some similar literature, which is regularly recited
in the temple. It is the system in Våndävana that in every temple there is recitation of
the çästras. Even third-class devotees who have no literary knowledge or no time to read
Çrémad-Bhägavatam or Bhagavad-gétä get the opportunity to hear about the pastimes of
the Lord. In this way their minds may remain always absorbed in the thought of the
Lord—His form, His activities and His transcendental nature. This state of Kåñëa
consciousness is a liberated stage. Lord Caitanya, therefore, recommended five
important processes in the discharge of devotional service: (1) to chant the holy names
of the Lord, Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma,
Räma Räma, Hare Hare, (2) to associate with devotees and serve them as far as possible,
(3) to hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam, (4) to see the decorated temple and the Deity and, if
399
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
possible, (5) to live in a place like Våndävana or Mathurä. These five items alone can
help a devotee achieve the highest perfectional stage. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä
and here in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. That third-class devotees can also imperceptibly
achieve liberation is accepted in all Vedic literatures.
SB 3.25.37
TEXT 37
AQaae iv>aUiTa& MaMa MaaYaaivNaSTaa‚
MaEìYaRMaía(r)MaNauPa[v*taMa( )
ié[Ya& >aaGavTaq& vaSPa*hYaiNTa >ad]a&
ParSYa Mae Tae_énuvTae Tau l/aeke- )) 37 ))
atho vibhütià mama mäyävinas täm
aiçvaryam añöäìgam anupravåttam
çriyaà bhägavatéà väspåhayanti bhadräà
parasya me te 'çnuvate tu loke
SYNONYMS
atho—then; vibhütim—opulence; mama—of Me; mäyävinaù—of the Lord of mäyä;
täm—that; aiçvaryam—mystic perfection; añöa-aìgam—consisting of eight parts;
anupravåttam—following; çriyam—splendor; bhägavatém—of the kingdom of God; vä—
or; aspåhayanti—they do not desire; bhadräm—blissful; parasya—of the Supreme Lord;
me—of Me; te—those devotees; açnuvate—enjoy; tu—but; loke—in this life.
TRANSLATION
Thus because he is completely absorbed in thought of Me, the devotee does not desire
even the highest benediction obtainable in the upper planetary systems, including
Satyaloka. He does not desire the eight material perfections obtained from mystic yoga,
nor does he desire to be elevated to the kingdom of God. Yet even without desiring them,
the devotee enjoys, even in this life, all the offered benedictions.
PURPORT
The vibhüti, or opulences, offered by mäyä are of many varieties. We have experience of
400
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
different varieties of material enjoyment even on this planet, but if one is able to
promote himself to higher planets like Candraloka, the sun or, still higher, Maharloka,
Janaloka and Tapoloka, or even ultimately the highest planet, which is inhabited by
Brahmä and is called Satyaloka, there are immense possibilities for material enjoyment.
For example, the duration of life on higher planets is far, far greater than on this planet.
It is said that on the moon the duration of life is such that our six months are equal to
one day. We cannot even imagine the duration of life on the highest planet. It is stated
in Bhagavad-gétä that Brahmä's twelve hours are inconceivable even to our
mathematicians. These are all descriptions of the external energy of the Lord, or mäyä.
Besides these, there are other opulences which the yogés can achieve by their mystic
power. They are also material. A devotee does not aspire for all these material pleasures,
although they are available to him simply by wishing. By the grace of the Lord, a devotee
can achieve wonderful success simply by willing, but a real devotee does not like that.
Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu has taught that one should not desire material opulence or
material reputation, nor should one try to enjoy material beauty; one should simply
aspire to be absorbed in the devotional service of the Lord, even if one does not get
liberation but has to continue the process of birth and death unlimitedly. Actually,
however, to one who engages in Kåñëa consciousness, liberation is already guaranteed.
Devotees enjoy all the benefits of the higher planets and the Vaikuëöha planets also. It
is especially mentioned here, bhägavatéà bhadräm. In the Vaikuëöha planets everything
is eternally peaceful, yet a pure devotee does not even aspire to be promoted there. But
still he gets that advantage; he enjoys all the facilities of the material and spiritual
worlds, even during the present life-span.
SB 3.25.38
TEXT 38
Na k-ihRicNMaTPara" XaaNTaæPae
Na&+YaiNTa Naae Mae_iNaiMazae le/i! heiTa" )
YaezaMah& iPa[Ya AaTMaa SauTaê
Sa%a Gauå" Sauôdae dEviMaíMa( )) 38 ))
na karhicin mat-paräù çänta-rüpe
naìkñyanti no me 'nimiño leòhi hetiù
yeñäm ahaà priya ätmä sutaç ca
sakhä guruù suhådo daivam iñöam
401
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
na—not; karhicit—ever; mat-paräù—My devotees; çänta-rüpe—O mother; naìkñyanti—
will lose; no—not; me—My; animiñaù—time; leòhi—destroys; hetiù—weapon; yeñäm—of
whom; aham—I; priyaù—dear; ätmä—self; sutaù—son; ca—and; sakhä—friend;
guruù—preceptor; suhådaù—benefactor; daivam—Deity; iñöam—chosen.
TRANSLATION
The Lord continued: My dear mother, devotees who receive such transcendental
opulences are never bereft of them; neither weapons nor the change of time can destroy
such opulences. Because the devotees accept Me as their friend, their relative, their son,
preceptor, benefactor and Supreme Deity, they cannot be deprived of their possessions at
any time.
PURPORT
It is stated in Bhagavad-gétä that one may elevate himself to the higher planetary
systems, even up to Brahmaloka, by dint of pious activities, but when the effects of such
pious activities are finished, one again comes back to this earth to begin a new life of
activities. Thus even though one is promoted to the higher planetary system for
enjoyment and a long duration of life, still that is not a permanent settlement. But as far
as the devotees are concerned, their assets—the achievement of devotional service and
the consequent opulence of Vaikuëöha, even on this planet—are never destroyed. In
this verse Kapiladeva addresses His mother as çänta-rüpä, indicating that the opulences
of devotees are fixed because devotees are eternally fixed in the Vaikuëöha atmosphere,
which is called çänta-rüpa because it is in the mode of pure goodness, undisturbed by the
modes of passion and ignorance. Once one is fixed in the devotional service of the Lord,
his position of transcendental service cannot be destroyed, and the pleasure and service
simply increase unlimitedly. For the devotees engaged in Kåñëa consciousness, in the
Vaikuëöha atmosphere, there is no influence of time. In the material world the
influence of time destroys everything, but in the Vaikuëöha atmosphere there is no
influence of time or of the demigods because there are no demigods in the Vaikuëöha
planets. Here our activities are controlled by different demigods; even if we move our
hand and leg, the action is controlled by the demigods. But in the Vaikuëöha
atmosphere there is no influence of the demigods or of time; therefore there is no
question of destruction. When the time element is present, there is the certainty of
402
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
destruction, but when there is no time element—past, present or future—then
everything is eternal. Therefore this verse uses the words na naìkñyanti, indicating that
the transcendental opulences will never be destroyed.
The reason for freedom from destruction is also described. The devotees accept the
Supreme Lord as the most dear personality and reciprocate with Him in different
relationships. They accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the dearmost friend,
the dearmost relative, the dearmost son, the dearmost preceptor, the dearmost wellwisher
or the dearmost Deity. The Lord is eternal; therefore any relationship in which
we accept Him is also eternal. It is clearly confirmed herein that the relationships
cannot be destroyed, and therefore the opulences of those relationships are never
destroyed. Every living entity has the propensity to love someone. We can see that if
someone has no object of love, he generally directs his love to a pet animal like a cat or a
dog. Thus the eternal propensity for love in all living entities is always searching for a
place to reside. From this verse we can learn that we can love the Supreme Personality
of Godhead as our dearmost object—as a friend, as a son, as a preceptor or as a wellwisher—
and there will be no cheating and no end to such love. We shall eternally enjoy
the relationship with the Supreme Lord in different aspects. A special feature of this
verse is the acceptance of the Supreme Lord as the supreme preceptor. Bhagavad-gétä
was spoken directly by the Supreme Lord, and Arjuna accepted Kåñëa as guru, or
spiritual master. Similarly, we should accept only Kåñëa as the supreme spiritual master.
Kåñëa, of course, means Kåñëa and His confidential devotees; Kåñëa is not alone. When
we speak of Kåñëa, "Kåñëa" means Kåñëa in His name, in His form, in His qualities, in
His abode and in His associates. Kåñëa is never alone, for the devotees of Kåñëa are not
impersonalists. For example, a king is always associated with his secretary, his
commander, his servant and so much paraphernalia. As soon as we accept Kåñëa and His
associates as our preceptors, no ill effects can destroy our knowledge. In the material
world the knowledge which we acquire may change because of the influence of time, but
nevertheless the conclusions received from Bhagavad-gétä, directly from the speeches of
the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, can never change. There is no use interpreting Bhagavad-gétä;
it is eternal.
Kåñëa, the Supreme Lord, should be accepted as one's best friend. He will never cheat.
He will always give His friendly advice and friendly protection to the devotee. If Kåñëa
is accepted as a son, He will never die. Here we have a very loving son or child, but the
father and mother, or those who are affectionate towards him, always hope, "May my son
not die." But Kåñëa actually never will die. Therefore those who accept Kåñëa, or the
Supreme Lord, as their son will never be bereft of their son. In many instances devotees
403
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
have accepted the Deity as a son. In Bengal there are many such instances, and even
after the death of the devotee, the Deity performs the çräddha ceremony for the father.
The relationship is never destroyed. People are accustomed to worship different forms of
demigods, but in Bhagavad-gétä such a mentality is condemned; therefore one should be
intelligent enough to worship only the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His different
forms such as Lakñmé-Näräyaëa, Sétä-Räma and Rädhä-Kåñëa. Thus one will never be
cheated. By worshiping the demigods one may elevate himself to the higher planets, but
during the dissolution of the material world, the deity and the abode of the deity will be
destroyed. But one who worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead is promoted to
the Vaikuëöha planets, where there is no influence of time, destruction or annihilation.
The conclusion is that the time influence cannot act upon devotees who have accepted
the Supreme Personality of Godhead as everything.
SB 3.25.39, SB 3.25.40, SB 3.25.39-40
TEXTS 39-40
wMa& l/aek&- TaQaEvaMauMaaTMaaNaMau>aYaaiYaNaMa( )
AaTMaaNaMaNau Yae ceh Yae raYa" PaXavae Ga*ha" )) 39 ))
ivSa*JYa SavaRNaNYaa&ê MaaMaev& ivìTaaeMau%Ma( )
>aJaNTYaNaNYaYaa >a¢-ya TaaNMa*TYaaeriTaPaarYae )) 40 ))
imaà lokaà tathaivämum
ätmänam ubhayäyinam
ätmänam anu ye ceha
ye räyaù paçavo gåhäù
visåjya sarvän anyäàç ca
mäm evaà viçvato-mukham
bhajanty ananyayä bhaktyä
tän måtyor atipäraye
SYNONYMS
imam—this; lokam—world; tathä—accordingly; eva—certainly; amum—that world;
ätmänam—the subtle body; ubhaya—in both; ayinam—traveling; ätmänam—the body;
anu—in relationship with; ye—those who; ca—also; iha—in this world; ye—that which;
räyaù—wealth; paçavaù—cattle; gåhäù—houses; visåjya—having given up; sarvän—all;
404
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
anyän—other; ca—and; mäm—Me; evam—thus; viçvataù-mukham—the all-pervading
Lord of the universe; bhajanti—they worship; ananyayä—unflinching; bhaktyä—by
devotional service; tän—them; måtyoù—of death; atipäraye—I take to the other side.
TRANSLATION
Thus the devotee who worships Me, the all-pervading Lord of the universe, in
unflinching devotional service, gives up all aspirations to be promoted to heavenly planets
or to become happy in this world with wealth, children, cattle, home or anything in
relationship with the body. I take him to the other side of birth and death.
PURPORT
Unflinching devotional service, as described in these two verses, means engaging oneself
in full Kåñëa consciousness, or devotional service, accepting the Supreme Lord as all in
all. Since the Supreme Lord is all-inclusive, if anyone worships Him with unflinching
faith, he has automatically achieved all other opulences and performed all other duties.
The Lord promises herein that He takes His devotee to the other side of birth and death.
Lord Caitanya, therefore, recommended that one who aspires to go beyond birth and
death should have no material possessions. This means that one should not try to be
happy in this world or to be promoted to the heavenly world, nor should he try for
material wealth, children, houses or cattle.
How liberation is imperceptibly achieved by a pure devotee and what the symptoms are
have been explained. For the conditioned soul there are two statuses of living. One
status is in this present life, and the other is our preparation for the next life. If I am in
the mode of goodness then I may be preparing for promotion to the higher planets, if I
am in the mode of passion then I shall remain here in a society where activity is very
prominent, and if I am in the mode of ignorance I may be degraded to animal life or a
lower grade of human life. But for a devotee there is no concern for this life or the next
life because in any life he does not desire elevation in material prosperity or a high-grade
or low-grade life. He prays to the Lord, "My dear Lord, it does not matter where I am
born, but let me be born, even as an ant, in the house of a devotee." A pure devotee does
not pray to the Lord for liberation from this material bondage. Actually, the pure
devotee never thinks that he is fit for liberation. Considering his past life and his
mischievous activities, he thinks that he is fit to be sent to the lowest region of hell. If in
this life I am trying to become a devotee, this does not mean that in my many past lives I
was one-hundred-percent pious. That is not possible. A devotee, therefore, is always
405
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
conscious of his real position. Only by his full surrender to the Lord, by the Lord's grace,
are his sufferings made shorter. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, "Surrender unto Me, and I
will give you protection from all kinds of sinful reaction." That is His mercy. But this
does not mean that one who has surrendered to the lotus feet of the Lord has committed
no misdeeds in his past life. A devotee always prays, "For my misdeeds, may I be born
again and again, but my only prayer is that I may not forget Your service." The devotee
has that much mental strength, and he prays to the Lord: "May I be born again and
again, but let me be born in the home of Your pure devotee so that I may again get a
chance to develop myself."
A pure devotee is not anxious to elevate himself in his next birth. He has already given
up that sort of hope. In any life in which one is born, as a householder, or even as an
animal, one must have some children, some resources or some possessions, but a devotee
is not anxious to possess anything. He is satisfied with whatever is obtainable by God's
grace. He is not at all attached to improving his social status or improving the status of
education of his children. He is not neglectful—he is dutiful—but he does not spend too
much time on the upliftment of temporary household or social life. He fully engages in
the service of the Lord, and for other affairs he simply spares as much time as absolutely
necessary (yathärham upayuïjataù). Such a pure devotee does not care for what is going
to happen in the next life or in this life; he does not care even for family, children or
society. He fully engages in the service of the Lord in Kåñëa consciousness. It is stated in
Bhagavad-gétä that without the knowledge of the devotee, the Lord arranges for His
devotee to be immediately transferred to His transcendental abode just after leaving his
body. After quitting his body he does not go into the womb of another mother. The
ordinary common living entity, after death, is transferred to the womb of another
mother, according to his karma, or activities, to take another type of body. But as far as
the devotee is concerned, he is at once transferred to the spiritual world in the
association of the Lord. That is the Lord's special mercy. How it is possible is explained
in the following verses. Because He is all-powerful, the Lord can do anything and
everything. He can excuse all sinful reactions. He can immediately transfer a person to
Vaikuëöhaloka. That is the inconceivable power of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is favorably disposed to the pure devotees.
SB 3.25.41
TEXT 41
NaaNYa}a MaÙGavTa" Pa[DaaNaPauåzeìraTa( )
406
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
AaTMaNa" SavR>aUTaaNaa& >aYa& Taqv]& iNavTaRTae )) 41 ))
nänyatra mad bhagavataù
pradhäna-puruñeçvarät
ätmanaù sarva-bhütänäà
bhayaà tévraà nivartate
SYNONYMS
na—not; anyatra—otherwise; mat—than Myself; bhagavataù—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; pradhäna-puruña-éçvarät—the Lord of both prakåti and puruña; ätmanaù—
the soul; sarva-bhütänäm—of all living beings; bhayam—fear; tévram—terrible;
nivartate—is forsaken.
TRANSLATION
The terrible fear of birth and death can never be forsaken by anyone who resorts to any
shelter other than Myself, for I am the almighty Lord, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the original source of all creation, and also the Supreme Soul of all souls.
PURPORT
It is indicated herein that the cycle of birth and death cannot be stopped unless one is a
pure devotee of the Supreme Lord. It is said, harià vinä na måtim taranti. One cannot
surpass the cycle of birth and death unless one is favored by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The same concept is confirmed herewith: one may take to the system of
understanding the Absolute Truth by one's own imperfect sensory speculation, or one
may try to realize the self by the mystic yoga process; but whatever one may do, unless he
comes to the point of surrendering to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, no process
can give him liberation. One may ask if this means that those who are undergoing so
much penance and austerity by strictly following the rules and regulations are
endeavoring in vain. The answer is given by Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.2.32): ye 'nye
'ravindäkña vimukta-mäninaù. Lord Brahmä and other demigods prayed to the Lord
when Kåñëa was in the womb of Devaké: "My dear lotus-eyed Lord, there are persons
who are puffed up with the thought that they have become liberated or one with God or
have become God, but in spite of thinking in such a puffed-up way, their intelligence is
not laudable. They are less intelligent." It is stated that their intelligence, whether high
407
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
or low, is not even purified. In purified intelligence a living entity cannot think
otherwise than to surrender. Bhagavad-gétä, therefore, confirms that purified
intelligence arises in the person of a very wise man. Bahünäà janmanäm ante jïänavän
mäà prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. After many, many births, one who is actually advanced in
intelligence surrenders unto the Supreme Lord.
Without the surrendering process, one cannot achieve liberation. The Bhägavatam says,
"Those who are simply puffed up, thinking themselves liberated by some nondevotional
process, are not polished or clear in intelligence, for they have not yet surrendered unto
You. In spite of executing all kinds of austerities and penances or even arriving at the
brink of spiritual realization in Brahman realization, they think that they are in the
effulgence of Brahman, but actually, because they have no transcendental activities,
they fall down to material activities." One should not be satisfied simply with knowing
that one is Brahman. He must engage himself in the service of the Supreme Brahman;
that is bhakti. The engagement of Brahman should be the service of Parabrahman. It is
said that unless one becomes Brahman one cannot serve Brahman. The Supreme
Brahman is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the living entity is also Brahman.
Without realization that he is Brahman, spirit soul, an eternal servitor of the Lord, if
one simply thinks that he is Brahman, his realization is only theoretical. He has to
realize and at the same time engage himself in the devotional service of the Lord; then
he can exist in the Brahman status. Otherwise he falls down.
The Bhägavatam says that because nondevotees neglect the transcendental loving
service of the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead, their intelligence is not
sufficient, and therefore these persons fall down. The living entity must have some
activity. If he does not engage in the activity of transcendental service, he must fall
down to material activity. As soon as one falls down to material activity, there is no
rescue from the cycle of birth and death. It is stated here by Lord Kapila, "Without My
mercy" (nänyatra mad bhagavataù). The Lord is stated here to be Bhagavän, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, indicating that He is full of all opulences and is
therefore perfectly competent to deliver one from the cycle of birth and death. He is
also called pradhäna because He is the Supreme. He is equal to everyone, but to one who
surrenders to Him He is especially favorable. It is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä that
the Lord is equal to everyone; no one is His enemy and no one is His friend. But to one
who surrenders unto Him, He is especially inclined. By the grace of the Lord, simply by
surrendering unto Him one can get out of this cycle of birth and death. Otherwise, one
may go on in many, many lives and may many times attempt other processes for
liberation.
408
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.25.42
TEXT 42
MaÙYaaÜaiTa vaTaae_Ya& SaUYaRSTaPaiTa MaÙYaaTa( )
vzRTaqNd]ae dhTYaiGanMa*RTYauêriTa MaÙYaaTa( )) 42 ))
mad-bhayäd väti väto 'yaà
süryas tapati mad-bhayät
varñaténdro dahaty agnir
måtyuç carati mad-bhayät
SYNONYMS
mat-bhayät—out of fear of Me; väti—blows; vätaù—wind; ayam—this; süryaù—the sun;
tapati—shines; mat-bhayät—out of fear of Me; varñati—showers rain; indraù—Indra;
dahati—burns; agniù—fire; måtyuù—death; carati—goes; mat-bhayät—out of fear of
Me.
TRANSLATION
It is because of My supremacy that the wind blows, out of fear of Me; the sun shines out
of fear of Me, and the lord of the clouds, Indra, sends forth showers out of fear of Me.
Fire burns out of fear of Me, and death goes about taking its toll out of fear of Me.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, says in Bhagavad-gétä that the natural laws
being enacted are correct in all activities because of His superintendence. No one should
think that nature is working automatically, without superintendence. The Vedic
literature says that the clouds are controlled by the demigod Indra, heat is distributed by
the sun-god, the soothing moonlight is distributed by Candra, and the air is blowing
under the arrangement of the demigod Väyu. But above all these demigods, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the chief living entity. Nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm
(Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13). The demigods are also ordinary living entities, but due to their
faithfulness—their devotional service attitude—they have been promoted to such posts.
These different demigods, or directors, such as Candra, Varuëa and Väyu, are called
adhikäri-devatä. The demigods are departmental heads. The government of the Supreme
409
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Lord consists not only of one planet or two or three; there are millions of planets and
millions of universes. The Supreme Personality of Godhead has a huge government, and
He requires assistants. The demigods are considered His bodily limbs. These are the
descriptions of Vedic literature. Under these circumstances, the sun-god, the moon-god,
the fire-god and the air-god are working under the direction of the Supreme Lord. It is
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä, mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram [Bg. 9.10].
The natural laws are being conducted under His superintendence. Because He is in the
background, everything is being performed punctually and regularly.
One who has taken shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is completely
protected from all other influences. He no longer serves or is obliged to anyone else. Of
course he is not disobedient to anyone, but his full power of thought is absorbed in the
service of the Lord. The statements by the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kapila that
under His direction the air is blowing, the fire is burning and the sun is giving heat are
not sentimental. The impersonalist may say that the Bhägavatam devotees create and
imagine someone as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and assign qualifications to
Him; but actually it is neither imagination nor an imposition of artificial power in the
name of Godhead. In the Vedas it is said, bhéñäsmäd vätaù pavate/ bhéñodeti süryaù: "By
fear of the Supreme Lord the wind-god and the sun-god are acting." Bhéñäsmäd agniç
candraç ca/ måtyur dhävati païcamaù: "Agni, Indra and Måtyu are also acting under His
direction." These are the statements of the Vedas.
SB 3.25.43
TEXT 43
jaNavEraGYaYau¢e-Na >ai¢-YaaeGaeNa YaaeiGaNa" )
+aeMaaYa PaadMaUl&/ Mae Pa[ivXaNTYaku-Taae>aYaMa( )) 43 ))
jïäna-vairägya-yuktena
bhakti-yogena yoginaù
kñemäya päda-mülaà me
praviçanty akuto-bhayam
SYNONYMS
jïäna—with knowledge; vairägya—and renunciation; yuktena—equipped; bhaktiyogena—
by devotional service; yoginaù—the yogés; kñemäya—for eternal benefit; pädamülam—
feet; me—My; praviçanti—take shelter of; akutaù-bhayam—without fear.
410
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The yogés, equipped with transcendental knowledge and renunciation and engaged in
devotional service for their eternal benefit, take shelter of My lotus feet, and since I am
the Lord, they are thus eligible to enter into the kingdom of Godhead without fear.
PURPORT
One who actually wants to be liberated from the entanglement of this material world
and go back home, back to Godhead, is actually a mystic yogé. The words explicitly used
here are yuktena bhakti-yogena. Those yogés, or mystics, who engage in devotional service
are the first-class yogés. The first-class yogés, as described in Bhagavad-gétä, are those who
are constantly thinking of the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. These
yogés are not without knowledge and renunciation. To become a bhakti-yogé means to
automatically attain knowledge and renunciation. That is the consequent result of
bhakti-yoga. In the Bhägavatam, First Canto, Second Chapter, it is also confirmed that
one who engages in the devotional service of Väsudeva, Kåñëa, has complete
transcendental knowledge and renunciation, and there is no explanation for these
attainments. Ahaituké—without reason, they come. Even if a person is completely
illiterate, the transcendental knowledge of the scriptures is revealed unto him simply
because of his engagement in devotional service. That is also stated in the Vedic
literature. To anyone who has full faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the
spiritual master, all the import of the Vedic literatures is revealed. He does not have to
seek separately; the yogés who engage in devotional service are full in knowledge and
renunciation. If there is a lack of knowledge and renunciation, it is to be understood
that one is not in full devotional service. The conclusion is that one cannot be sure of
entrance into the spiritual realm—in either the impersonal brahmajyoti effulgence of
the Lord or the Vaikuëöha planets within that Brahman effulgence—unless he is
surrendered unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord. The surrendered souls are called
akuto-bhaya. They are doubtless and fearless, and their entrance into the spiritual
kingdom is guaranteed.
SB 3.25.44
TEXT 44
WTaavaNaev l/aeke-_iSMaNa( Pau&Saa& iNa"é[eYaSaaedYa" )
Taqv]e<a >ai¢-YaaeGaeNa MaNaae MaYYaiPaRTa& iSQarMa( )) 44 ))
411
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
etävän eva loke 'smin
puàsäà niùçreyasodayaù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
mano mayy arpitaà sthiram
SYNONYMS
etävän eva—only so far; loke asmin—in this world; puàsäm—of men; niùçreyasa—final
perfection of life; udayaù—the attainment of; tévreëa—intense; bhakti-yogena—by
practice of devotional service; manaù—mind; mayi—in Me; arpitam—fixed; sthiram—
steady.
TRANSLATION
Therefore persons whose minds are fixed on the Lord engage in the intensive practice of
devotional service. That is the only means for attainment of the final perfection of life.
PURPORT
Here the words mano mayy arpitam, which mean "the mind being fixed on Me," are
significant. One should fix his mind on the lotus feet of Kåñëa or His incarnation. To be
fixed steadily in that freedom is the way of liberation. Ambaréña Mahäräja is an example.
He fixed his mind on the lotus feet of the Lord, he spoke only on the pastimes of the
Lord, he smelled only the flowers and tulasé offered to the Lord, he walked only to the
temple of the Lord, he engaged his hands in cleansing the temple, he engaged his tongue
in tasting the foodstuff offered to the Lord, and he engaged his ears for hearing the great
pastimes of the Lord. In that way all his senses were engaged. First of all, the mind
should be engaged at the lotus feet of the Lord, very steadily and naturally. Because the
mind is the master of the senses, when the mind is engaged, all the senses become
engaged. That is bhakti-yoga. Yoga means controlling the senses. The senses cannot be
controlled in the proper sense of the term; they are always agitated. This is true also
with a child—how long can he be forced to sit down silently? It is not possible. Even
Arjuna said, caïcalaà hi manaù kåñëa: [Bg. 6.34] "The mind is always agitated." The best
course is to fix the mind on the lotus feet of the Lord. Mano mayy arpitaà sthiram. If one
seriously engages in Kåñëa consciousness, that is the highest perfectional stage. All
Kåñëa conscious activities are on the highest perfectional level of human life.
412
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Twenty-fifth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Glories of Devotional Service."
26. Fundamental Principles of Material Nature
SB 3.26.1
TEXT 1
é[q>aGavaNauvac
AQa Tae SaMPa[v+YaaiMa TatvaNaa& l/+a<a& Pa*Qak(- )
YaiÜidTva ivMauCYaeTa Pauåz" Pa[ak*-TaEGauR<aE" )) 1 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
atha te sampravakñyämi
tattvänäà lakñaëaà påthak
yad viditvä vimucyeta
puruñaù präkåtair guëaiù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Personality of Godhead said; atha—now; te—to you;
sampravakñyämi—I shall describe; tattvänäm—of the categories of the Absolute Truth;
lakñaëam—the distinctive features; påthak—one by one; yat—which; viditvä—knowing;
vimucyeta—one can be released; puruñaù—any person; präkåtaiù—of the material
nature; guëaiù—from the modes.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, Kapila, continued: My dear mother, now I shall describe
unto you the different categories of the Absolute Truth, knowing which any person can
be released from the influence of the modes of material nature.
PURPORT
413
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the Absolute Truth, only through devotional service (bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti [Bg.
18.55]). As stated in the Bhägavatam, the object of devotional service is mäm, Kåñëa.
And, as explained in the Caitanya-caritämåta, to understand Kåñëa means to understand
Kåñëa in His personal form with His internal energy, His external energy, His
expansions and His incarnations. There are many diverse departments of knowledge in
understanding Kåñëa. Säìkhya philosophy is especially meant for persons who are
conditioned by this material world. It is generally understood by the paramparä system,
or by disciplic succession, to be the science of devotional service. Preliminary studies of
devotional service have already been explained. Now the analytical study of devotional
service will be explained by the Lord, who says that by such an analytical study, one
becomes freed from the modes of material nature. The same assertion is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä. Tato mäà tattvato jïätvä: by understanding the Lord according to
various categories, one can become eligible to enter into the kingdom of God. This is
also explained here. By understanding the science of devotional service in Säìkhya
philosophy, one can become free from the modes of material nature. The eternal self,
after becoming freed from the spell of material nature, becomes eligible to enter into the
kingdom of God. As long as one has even a slight desire to enjoy or lord it over material
nature, there is no chance of his being freed from the influence of nature's material
modes. Therefore, one has to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead
analytically, as explained in the Säìkhya system of philosophy by Lord Kapiladeva.
SB 3.26.2
TEXT 2
jaNa& iNa"é[eYaSaaQaaRYa PauåzSYaaTMadXaRNaMa( )
YadahuvR<aRYae Tatae ôdYaGa]iNQa>aedNaMa( )) 2 ))
jïänaà niùçreyasärthäya
puruñasyätma-darçanam
yad ähur varëaye tat te
hådaya-granthi-bhedanam
SYNONYMS
jïänam—knowledge; niùçreyasa-arthäya—for the ultimate perfection; puruñasya—of a
man; ätma-darçanam—self-realization; yat—which; ähuù—they said; varëaye—I shall
414
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
explain; tat—that; te—to you; hådaya—in the heart; granthi—the knots; bhedanam—
cuts.
TRANSLATION
Knowledge is the ultimate perfection of self-realization. I shall explain that knowledge
unto you by which the knots of attachment to the material world are cut.
PURPORT
It is said that by proper understanding of the pure self, or by self-realization, one can be
freed from material attachment. Knowledge leads one to attain the ultimate perfection
of life and to see oneself as he is. The Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (3.8) also confirms this.
Tam eva viditväti-måtyum eti: simply by understanding one's spiritual position, or by
seeing oneself as he is, one can be freed from material entanglement. In various ways,
the seeing of oneself is described in the Vedic literatures, and it is confirmed in the
Bhägavatam (puruñasya ätma-darçanam) that one has to see oneself and know what he
is. As Kapiladeva explains to His mother, this "seeing" can be done by hearing from the
proper authoritative source. Kapiladeva is the greatest authority because He is the
Personality of Godhead, and if someone accepts whatever is explained as it is, without
interpretation, then he can see himself.
Lord Caitanya explained to Sanätana Gosvämé the real constitutional position of the
individual. He said directly that each and every individual soul is eternally a servitor of
Kåñëa. Jévera 'svarüpa' haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa': [Cc. Madhya 20.108] every individual
soul is eternally a servitor. When one is fixed in the understanding that he is part and
parcel of the Supreme Soul and that his eternal position is to serve in association with
the Supreme Lord, he becomes self-realized. This position of rightly understanding
oneself cuts the knot of material attraction (hådaya-granthi-bhedanam). Due to false ego,
or false identification of oneself with the body and the material world, one is entrapped
by mäyä, but as soon as one understands that he is qualitatively the same substance as
the Supreme Lord because he belongs to the same category of spirit soul, and that his
perpetual position is to serve, one attains ätma-darçanam and hådaya-granthi-bhedanam,
self-realization. When one can cut the knot of attachment to the material world, his
understanding is called knowledge. Ätma-darçanam means to see oneself by knowledge;
therefore, when one is freed from the false ego by the cultivation of real knowledge, he
sees himself, and that is the ultimate necessity of human life. The soul is thus isolated
from the entanglement of the twenty-four categories of material nature. Pursuit of the
415
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
systematic philosophic process called Säìkhya is called knowledge and self-revelation.
SB 3.26.3
TEXT 3
ANaaidraTMaa Pauåzae iNaGauR<a" Pa[k*-Tae" Par" )
Pa[TYaGDaaMaa SvYa&JYaaeiTaivRì& YaeNa SaMaiNvTaMa( )) 3 ))
anädir ätmä puruño
nirguëaù prakåteù paraù
pratyag-dhämä svayaà-jyotir
viçvaà yena samanvitam
SYNONYMS
anädiù—without a beginning; ätmä—the Supreme Soul; puruñaù—the Personality of
Godhead; nirguëaù—transcendental to the material modes of nature; prakåteù paraù—
beyond this material world; pratyak-dhämä—perceivable everywhere; svayam-jyotiù—
self-effulgent; viçvam—the entire creation; yena—by whom; samanvitam—is
maintained.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Supreme Soul, and He has no beginning. He
is transcendental to the material modes of nature and beyond the existence of this
material world. He is perceivable everywhere because He is self-effulgent, and by His
self-effulgent luster the entire creation is maintained.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described as being without beginning. He is
puruña, the Supreme Spirit. puruña means "person." When we think of a person in our
present experience, that person has a beginning. This means that he has taken birth and
that there is a history from the beginning of his life. But the Lord is particularly
mentioned here as anädi, beginningless. If we examine all persons, we will find that
everyone has a beginning, but when we approach a person who has no beginning, He is
the Supreme Person. That is the definition given in the Brahma-saàhitä. Éçvaraù
paramaù kåñëaù: [Bs. 5.1] the Supreme Personality of Godhead is Kåñëa, the supreme
416
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
controller; He is without beginning, and He is the beginning of everyone. This
definition is found in all Vedic literatures.
The Lord is described as the soul, or spirit. What is the definition of spirit? Spirit is
perceivable everywhere. Brahman means "great." His greatness is perceived everywhere.
And what is that greatness? Consciousness. We have personal experience of
consciousness, for it is spread all over the body; in every hair follicle of our body we can
feel consciousness. This is individual consciousness. Similarly, there is
superconsciousness. The example can be given of a small light and the sunlight. The
sunlight is perceived everywhere, even within the room or in the sky, but the small light
is experienced within a specific limit. Similarly, our consciousness is perceived within
the limit of our particular body, but the superconsciousness, or the existence of God, is
perceived everywhere. He is present everywhere by His energy. It is stated in the Viñëu
Puräëa that whatever we find, anywhere and everywhere, is the distribution of the
energy of the Supreme Lord. In Bhagavad-gétä also it is confirmed that the Lord is allpervading
and exists everywhere by His two kinds of energy, one spiritual and the other
material. Both the spiritual and material energies are spread everywhere, and that is the
proof of the existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The existence of consciousness everywhere is not temporary. It is without beginning,
and because it is without beginning, it is also without end. The theory that
consciousness develops at a certain stage of material combination is not accepted herein,
for the consciousness which exists everywhere is said to be without beginning. The
materialistic or atheistic theory stating that there is no soul, that there is no God and
that consciousness is the result of a combination of matter is not acceptable. Matter is
not beginningless; it has a beginning. As this material body has a beginning, the
universal body does also. And as our material body has begun on the basis of our soul,
the entire gigantic universal body has begun on the basis of the Supreme Soul. The
Vedänta-sütra says, janmädy asya [SB 1.1.1]. This entire material exhibition—its creation,
its growth, its maintenance and its dissolution—is an emanation from the Supreme
Person. In Bhagavad-gétä also, the Lord says, "I am the beginning, the source of birth of
everything."
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described here. He is not a temporary person,
nor does He have a beginning. He is without a cause, and He is the cause of all causes.
paraù means "transcendental," "beyond the creative energy." The Lord is the creator of
the creative energy. We can see that there is a creative energy in the material world, but
He is not under this energy. He is prakåti-paraù, beyond this energy. He is not subjected
to the threefold miseries created by the material energy because He is beyond it. The
417
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
modes of material nature do not touch Him. It is explained here, svayaà-jyotiù: He is
light Himself. We have experience in the material world of one light's being a reflection
of another, just as moonlight is a reflection of the sunlight. Sunlight is also the
reflection of the brahmajyoti. Similarly, brahmajyoti, the spiritual effulgence, is a
reflection of the body of the Supreme Lord. This is confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä:
yasya prabhä prabhavataù [Bs. 5.40]. The brahmajyoti, or Brahman effulgence, is due to
His bodily luster. Therefore it is said here, svayaà-jyotiù: He Himself is light. His light is
distributed in different ways, as the brahmajyoti, as sunlight and as moonlight. Bhagavadgétä
confirms that in the spiritual world there is no need of sunlight, moonlight or
electricity. The Upaniñads also confirm this; because the bodily luster of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is sufficient to illuminate the spiritual world, there is no need of
sunlight, moonlight or any other light or electricity. This self-illumination also
contradicts the theory that the spirit soul, or the spiritual consciousness, develops at a
certain point in material combination. The term svayaà-jyotiù indicates that there is no
tinge of anything material or any material reaction. It is confirmed here that the
concept of the Lord's all-pervasiveness is due to His illumination everywhere. We have
experience that the sun is situated in one place, but the sunlight is diffused all around
for millions and millions of miles. That is our practical experience. Similarly, although
the supreme light is situated in His personal abode, Vaikuëöha or Våndävana, His light
is diffused not only in the spiritual world but beyond that. In the material world also,
that light is reflected by the sun globe, and the sunlight is reflected by the moon globe.
Thus although He is situated in His own abode, His light is distributed all over the
spiritual and material worlds. The Brahma-saàhitä (5.37) confirms this. Goloka eva
nivasaty akhilätma-bhütaù: He is living in Goloka, but still He is present all over the
creation. He is the Supersoul of everything, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
He has innumerable transcendental qualities. It is also concluded that although He is
undoubtedly a person, He is not a puruña of this material world. Mäyävädé philosophers
cannot understand that beyond this material world there can be a person; therefore they
are impersonalists. But it is explained very nicely here that the Personality of Godhead
is beyond material existence.
SB 3.26.4
TEXT 4
Sa Wz Pa[k*-iTa& SaU+Maa& dEvq& Gau<aMaYaq& iv>au" )
Yad*C^YaEvaePaGaTaaMa>YaPaÛTa l/Il/Yaa )) 4 ))
418
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sa eña prakåtià sükñmäà
daivéà guëamayéà vibhuù
yadåcchayaivopagatäm
abhyapadyata lélayä
SYNONYMS
saù eñaù—that same Supreme Personality of Godhead; prakåtim—material energy;
sükñmäm—subtle; daivém—related to Viñëu; guëamayém—invested with the three
modes of material nature; vibhuù—the greatest of the great; yadåcchayä—of His own
will; iva—quite; upagatäm—obtained; abhyapadyata—He accepted; lélayä—as His
pastime.
TRANSLATION
As His pastime, that Supreme Personality of Godhead, the greatest of the great, accepted
the subtle material energy, which is invested with three material modes of nature and
which is related with Viñëu.
PURPORT
In this verse the word guëamayém is very significant. Daivém means "the energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead," and guëamayém means "invested with the three
modes of material nature." When the material energy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead appears, this guëamayém energy acts as a manifestation of the energies of the
three modes; it acts as a covering. The energy emanated from the Supreme Personality
of Godhead manifests in two ways—as an emanation from the Supreme Lord and as a
covering of the Lord's face. In Bhagavad-gétä it is said that because the whole world is
illusioned by the three modes of material nature, the common conditioned soul, being
covered by such energy, cannot see the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The example
of a cloud is very nicely given. All of a sudden there may appear a big cloud in the sky.
This cloud is perceived in two ways. To the sun the cloud is a creation of its energy, but
to the ordinary common man in the conditioned state, it is a covering to the eyes;
because of the cloud, the sun cannot be seen. It is not that the sun is actually covered by
the cloud; only the vision of the ordinary being is covered. Similarly, although mäyä
cannot cover the Supreme Lord, who is beyond mäyä, the material energy covers the
ordinary living entities. Those conditioned souls who are covered are individual living
419
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
entities, and He from whose energy mäyä is created is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
In another place in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, in the First Canto, Seventh Chapter, it is
stated that Vyäsadeva, by his spiritual vision, saw the Supreme Lord and the material
energy standing behind Him. This indicates that material energy cannot cover the Lord,
just as darkness cannot cover the sun. Darkness can cover a jurisdiction which is very
insignificant in comparison to that of the sun. Darkness can cover a small cave, but not
the open sky. Similarly, the covering capacity of the material energy is limited and
cannot act on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is therefore called vibhu. As
the appearance of a cloud is accepted by the sun, so the appearance of the material
energy at a certain interval is accepted by the Lord. Although His material energy is
utilized to create the material world, this does not mean that He is covered by that
energy. Those who are covered by the material energy are called conditioned souls. The
Lord accepts the material energy for His material pastimes in creation, maintenance and
dissolution. But the conditioned soul is covered; he cannot understand that beyond this
material energy there is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the cause of all
causes, just as a less intelligent person cannot understand that beyond the covering of
the clouds there is bright sunshine.
SB 3.26.5
TEXT 5
Gau<aEivRic}aa" Sa*JaTaq& SaæPaa" Pa[k*-iTa& Pa[Jaa" )
ivl/aeKYa MauMauhe SaÛ" Sa wh jaNaGaUhYaa )) 5 ))
guëair viciträù såjatéà
sa-rüpäù prakåtià prajäù
vilokya mumuhe sadyaù
sa iha jïäna-gühayä
SYNONYMS
guëaiù—by the threefold modes; viciträù—variegated; såjatém—creating; sa-rüpäù—
with forms; prakåtim—material nature; prajäù—living entities; vilokya—having seen;
mumuhe—was illusioned; sadyaù—at once; saù—the living entity; iha—in this world;
jïäna-gühayä—by the knowledge-covering feature.
420
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Divided into varieties by her threefold modes, material nature creates the forms of the
living entities, and the living entities, seeing this, are illusioned by the knowledge—
covering feature of the illusory energy.
PURPORT
Material energy has the power to cover knowledge, but this covering cannot be applied
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is applicable only to the prajäù, or those who
are born with material bodies, the conditioned souls. The different kinds of living
entities vary according to the modes of material nature, as explained in Bhagavad-gétä
and other Vedic literature. In Bhagavad-gétä (7.12) it is very nicely explained that
although the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance are born of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, He is not subject to them. In other words, the energy
emanating from the Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot act on Him; it acts on the
conditioned souls, who are covered by the material energy. The Lord is the father of all
living entities because He impregnates material energy with the conditioned souls.
Therefore, the conditioned souls get bodies created by the material energy, whereas the
father of the living entities is aloof from the three modes.
It is stated in the previous verse that the material energy was accepted by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in order that He might exhibit pastimes for the living entities
who wanted to enjoy and lord it over the material energy. This world was created
through the material energy of the Lord for the so-called enjoyment of such living
entities. Why this material world was created for the sufferings of the conditioned souls
is a very intricate question. There is a hint in the previous verse in the word lélayä,
which means "for the pastimes of the Lord." The Lord wants to rectify the enjoying
temperament of the conditioned souls. It is stated in Bhagavad-gétä that no one is the
enjoyer but the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This material energy is created,
therefore, for anyone who pretends to enjoy. An example can be cited here that there is
no necessity for the government's creation of a separate police department, but because
it is a fact that some of the citizens will not accept the state laws, a department to deal
with criminals is necessary. There is no necessity, but at the same time there is a
necessity. Similarly, there was no necessity to create this material world for the
sufferings of the conditioned souls, but at the same time there are certain living entities,
known as nitya-baddha, who are eternally conditioned. We say that they have been
conditioned from time immemorial because no one can trace out when the living entity,
421
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, became rebellious against the supremacy of the
Lord.
It is a fact that there are two classes of men—those who are obedient to the laws of the
Supreme Lord and those who are atheists or agnostics, who do not accept the existence
of God and who want to create their own laws. They want to establish that everyone
can create his own laws or his own religious path. Without tracing out the beginning of
the existence of these two classes, we can take it for granted that some of the living
entities revolted against the laws of the Lord. Such entities are called conditioned souls,
for they are conditioned by the three modes of material nature. Therefore the words
guëair viciträù are used here.
In this material world there are 8,400,000 species of life. As spirit souls, they are all
transcendental to this material world. Why, then, do they exhibit themselves in
different stages of life? The answer is given here: they are under the spell of the three
modes of material nature. Because they were created by the material energy, their bodies
are made of the material elements. Covered by the material body, the spiritual identity is
lost, and therefore the word mumuhe is used here, indicating that they have forgotten
their own spiritual identity. This forgetfulness of spiritual identity is present in the jévas,
or souls, who are conditioned, being subject to be covered by the energy of material
nature. Jïäna-gühayä is another word used. Gühä means "covering." Because the
knowledge of the minute conditioned souls is covered, they are exhibited in so many
species of life. It is said in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Seventh Chapter, First Canto, "The
living entities are illusioned by the material energy." In the Vedas also it is stated that
the eternal living entities are covered by different modes and that they are called
tricolored—red, white and blue—living entities. Red is the representation of the mode
of passion, white is the representation of the mode of goodness, and blue is the
representation of the mode of ignorance. These modes of material nature belong to the
material energy, and therefore the living entities under these different modes of
material nature have different kinds of material bodies. Because they are forgetful of
their spiritual identities, they think the material bodies to be themselves. To the
conditioned soul, "me" means the material body. This is called moha, or bewilderment.
It is repeatedly said in the Kaöha Upaniñad that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
never affected by the influence of material nature. It is, rather, the conditioned souls, or
the minute infinitesimal parts and parcels of the Supreme, who are affected by the
influence of material nature and who appear in different bodies under the material
modes.
SB 3.26.6
422
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 6
Wv& Parai>aDYaaNaeNa k-Ta*RTv& Pa[k*-Tae" PauMaaNa( )
k-MaRSau i§-YaMaa<aezu Gau<aEraTMaiNa MaNYaTae )) 6 ))
evaà paräbhidhyänena
kartåtvaà prakåteù pumän
karmasu kriyamäëeñu
guëair ätmani manyate
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; para—other; abhidhyänena—by identification; kartåtvam—the
performance of activities; prakåteù—of the material nature; pumän—the living entity;
karmasu kriyamäëeñu—while the activities are being performed; guëaiù—by the three
modes; ätmani—to himself; manyate—he considers.
TRANSLATION
Because of his forgetfulness, the transcendental living entity accepts the influence of
material energy as his field of activities, and thus actuated, he wrongly applies the
activities to himself.
PURPORT
The forgetful living entity can be compared to a man who is under the influence of
disease and has become mad or to a man haunted by ghosts, who acts without control
and yet thinks himself to be in control. Under the influence of material nature, the
conditioned soul becomes absorbed in material consciousness. In this consciousness,
whatever is done under the influence of the material energy is accepted by the
conditioned soul as self-actuated. Actually, the soul in his pure state of existence should
be in Kåñëa consciousness. When a person is not acting in Kåñëa consciousness, he is
understood to be acting in material consciousness. Consciousness cannot be killed, for
the symptom of the living entity is consciousness. The material consciousness simply has
to be purified. One becomes liberated by accepting Kåñëa, or the Supreme Lord, as
master and by changing the mode of consciousness from material consciousness to Kåñëa
consciousness.
423
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.26.7
TEXT 7
TadSYa Sa&Sa*iTabRNDa" PaarTaN}Ya& c TaTk*-TaMa( )
>avTYak-TauRrqXaSYa Saai+a<aae iNav*RTaaTMaNa" )) 7 ))
tad asya saàsåtir bandhaù
pära-tantryaà ca tat-kåtam
bhavaty akartur éçasya
säkñiëo nirvåtätmanaù
SYNONYMS
tat—from the misconception; asya—of the conditioned soul; saàsåtiù—conditioned life;
bandhaù—bondage; pära-tantryam—dependence; ca—and; tat-kåtam—made by that;
bhavati—is; akartuù—of the nondoer; éçasya—independent; säkñiëaù—the witness;
nirvåta-ätmanaù—joyful by nature.
TRANSLATION
Material consciousness is the cause of one's conditional life, in which conditions are
enforced upon the living entity by the material energy. Although the spirit soul does not
do anything and is transcendental to such activities, he is thus affected by conditional life.
PURPORT
The Mäyävädé philosopher, who does not differentiate between the Supreme Spirit and
the individual spirit, says that the conditional existence of the living entity is his lélä, or
pastime. But the word "pastime" implies employment in the activities of the Lord. The
Mäyävädés misuse the word and say that even if the living entity has become a stooleating
hog, he is also enjoying his pastimes. This is a most dangerous interpretation.
Actually the Supreme Lord is the leader and maintainer of all living entities. His
pastimes are transcendental to any material activity. Such pastimes of the Lord cannot
be dragged to the level of the conditional activities of the living entities. In conditional
life the living entity actually remains as if a captive in the hands of material energy.
Whatever the material energy dictates, the conditioned soul does. He has no
responsibility; he is simply the witness of the action, but he is forced to act in that way
424
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
due to his offense in his eternal relationship with Kåñëa. Lord Kåñëa therefore says in
Bhagavad-gétä that mäyä, His material energy, is so forceful that it is insurmountable.
But if a living entity simply understands that his constitutional position is to serve
Kåñëa and he tries to act on this principle, then however conditioned he may be, the
influence of mäyä immediately vanishes. This is clearly stated in Bhagavad-gétä, Seventh
Chapter: Kåñëa takes charge of anyone who surrenders to Him in helplessness, and thus
the influence of mäyä, or conditional life, is removed.
The spirit soul is actually sac-cid-änanda [Bs. 5.1]—eternal, full of bliss and full of
knowledge. Under the clutches of mäyä, however, he suffers from continued birth,
death, disease and old age. One has to be serious to cure this condition of material
existence and transfer himself to Kåñëa consciousness, for thus his long suffering may be
mitigated without difficulty. In summary, the suffering of the conditioned soul is due to
his attachment to material nature. This attachment should thus be transferred from
matter to Kåñëa.
SB 3.26.8
TEXT 8
k-aYaRk-ar<ak-Ta*RTve k-ar<a& Pa[k*-iTa& ivdu" )
>aae¢*-Tve Sau%du"%aNaa& Pauåz& Pa[k*-Tae" ParMa( )) 8 ))
kärya-käraëa-kartåtve
käraëaà prakåtià viduù
bhoktåtve sukha-duùkhänäà
puruñaà prakåteù param
SYNONYMS
kärya—the body; käraëa—the senses; kartåtve—regarding the demigods; käraëam—the
cause; prakåtim—material nature; viduù—the learned understand; bhoktåtve—regarding
the perception; sukha—of happiness; duùkhänäm—and of distress; puruñam—the spirit
soul; prakåteù—to material nature; param—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
The cause of the conditioned soul's material body and senses, and the senses' presiding
deities, the demigods, is the material nature. This is understood by learned men. The
425
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
feelings of happiness and distress of the soul, who is transcendental by nature, are caused
by the spirit soul himself.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä it is said that when the Lord descends to this material world, He comes
as a person by His own energy, ätma-mäyä. He is not forced by any superior energy. He
comes by His own will, and this can be called His pastime, or lélä. But here it is clearly
stated that the conditioned soul is forced to take a certain type of body and senses under
the three modes of material nature. That body is not received according to his own
choice. In other words, a conditioned soul has no free choice; he has to accept a certain
type of body according to his karma. But when there are bodily reactions as felt in
happiness and distress, it is to be understood that the cause is the spirit soul himself. If
he so desires, the spirit soul can change this conditional life of dualities by choosing to
serve Kåñëa. The living entity is the cause of his own suffering, but he can also be the
cause of his eternal happiness. When he wants to engage in Kåñëa consciousness, a
suitable body is offered to him by the internal potency, the spiritual energy of the Lord,
and when he wants to satisfy his senses, a material body is offered. Thus it is his free
choice to accept a spiritual body or a material body, but once the body is accepted he has
to enjoy or suffer the consequences. The Mäyävädé philosopher's presentation is that the
living entity enjoys his pastimes by accepting the body of a hog. This theory is not
acceptable, however, because the word "pastime" implies voluntary acceptance for
enjoyment. Therefore this interpretation is most misleading. When there is enforced
acceptance for suffering, it is not a pastime. The Lord's pastimes and the conditioned
living entity's acceptance of karmic reaction are not on the same level.
SB 3.26.9
TEXT 9
devhUiTaåvac
Pa[k*-Tae" PauåzSYaaiPa l/+a<a& PauåzaetaMa )
b]Uih k-ar<aYaaerSYa SadSaÀ YadaTMak-Ma( )) 9 ))
devahütir uväca
prakåteù puruñasyäpi
lakñaëaà puruñottama
brühi käraëayor asya
426
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sad-asac ca yad-ätmakam
SYNONYMS
devahütiù uväca—Devahüti said; prakåteù—of His energies; puruñasya—of the Supreme
Person; api—also; lakñaëam—characteristics; puruña-uttama—O Supreme Personality
of Godhead; brühi—kindly explain; käraëayoù—causes; asya—of this creation; satasat—
manifest and unmanifest; ca—and; yat-ätmakam—consisting of which.
TRANSLATION
Devahüti said: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, kindly explain the characteristics of
the Supreme Person and His energies, for both of these are the causes of this manifest
and unmanifest creation.
PURPORT
prakåti, or material nature, is connected with both the Supreme Lord and the living
entities, just as a woman is connected with her husband as a wife and with her children
as a mother. In Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says that He impregnates mother nature with
children, living entities, and thereafter all species of living entities become manifest.
The relationship of all living entities with material nature has been explained. Now an
understanding of the relationship between material nature and the Supreme Lord is
sought by Devahüti. The product of that relationship is stated to be the manifest and
unmanifest material world. The unmanifest material world is the subtle mahat-tattva,
and from that mahat-tattva the material manifestation has emerged.
In the Vedic literatures it is said that by the glance of the Supreme Lord the total
material energy is impregnated, and then everything is born of material nature. It is also
confirmed in the Ninth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä that under His glance, adhyakñeëa—
under His direction and by His will—nature is working. It is not that nature works
blindly. After understanding the position of the conditioned souls in relation to
material nature, Devahüti wanted to know how nature works under the direction of the
Lord and what the relationship is between the material nature and the Lord. In other
words, she wanted to learn the characteristics of the Supreme Lord in relation to the
material nature.
The relationship of the living entities with matter and that of the Supreme Lord with
matter are certainly not on the same level, although the Mäyävädés may interpret it in
427
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
that way. When it is said that the living entities are bewildered, the Mäyävädé
philosophers ascribe this bewilderment to the Supreme Lord. But that is not applicable.
The Lord is never bewildered. That is the difference between personalists and
impersonalists. Devahüti is not unintelligent. She has enough intelligence to understand
that the living entities are not on the level of the Supreme Lord. Because the living
entities are infinitesimal, they become bewildered or conditioned by material nature,
but this does not mean that the Supreme Lord is also conditioned or bewildered. The
difference between the conditioned soul and the Lord is that the Lord is the Lord, the
master of material nature, and He is therefore not subject to its control. He is controlled
neither by spiritual nature nor by material nature. He is the supreme controller Himself,
and He cannot be compared to the ordinary living entities, who are controlled by the
laws of material nature.
Two words used in this verse are sat and asat. The cosmic manifestation is asat—it does
not exist—but the material energy of the Supreme Lord is sat, or ever existing. Material
nature is ever existing in its subtle form as the energy of the Lord, but it sometimes
manifests this nonexistent or temporarily existent nature, the cosmos. An analogy may
be made with the father and mother: the mother and the father exist, but sometimes the
mother begets children. Similarly, this cosmic manifestation, which comes from the
unmanifest material nature of the Supreme Lord, sometimes appears and again
disappears. But the material nature is ever existing, and the Lord is the supreme cause
for both the subtle and gross manifestations of this material world.
SB 3.26.10
TEXT 10
é[q>aGavaNauvac
YataiT}aGau<aMaVYa¢&- iNaTYa& SadSadaTMak-Ma( )
Pa[DaaNa& Pa[k*-iTa& Pa[ahurivXaez& ivXaezvTa( )) 10 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
yat tat tri-guëam avyaktaà
nityaà sad-asad-ätmakam
pradhänaà prakåtià prähur
aviçeñaà viçeñavat
SYNONYMS
428
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; yat—now further; tat—
that; tri-guëam—combination of the three modes; avyaktam—unmanifested; nityam—
eternal; sat-asat-ätmakam—consisting of cause and effect; pradhänam—the pradhäna;
prakåtim-prakåti; prähuù—they call; aviçeñam—undifferentiated; viçeña-vat—possessing
differentiation.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The unmanifested eternal combination of the
three modes is the cause of the manifest state and is called pradhäna. It is called prakåti
when in the manifested stage of existence.
PURPORT
The Lord points out material nature in its subtle stage, which is called pradhäna, and He
analyzes this pradhäna. The explanation of pradhäna and prakåti is that pradhäna is the
subtle, undifferentiated sum total of all material elements. Although they are
undifferentiated, one can understand that the total material elements are contained
therein. When the total material elements are manifested by the interaction of the
three modes of material nature, the manifestation is called prakåti. Impersonalists say
that Brahman is without variegatedness and without differentiation. One may say that
pradhäna is the Brahman stage, but actually the Brahman stage is not pradhäna.
pradhäna is distinct from Brahman because in Brahman there is no existence of the
material modes of nature. One may argue that the mahat-tattva is also different from
pradhäna because in the mahat-tattva there are manifestations. The actual explanation
of pradhäna, however, is given here: when the cause and effect are not clearly
manifested (avyakta), the reaction of the total elements does not take place, and that
stage of material nature is called pradhäna. Pradhäna is not the time element because in
the time element there are actions and reactions, creation and annihilation. Nor is it
the jéva, or marginal potency of living entities, or designated, conditioned living entities,
because the designations of the living entities are not eternal. One adjective used in this
connection is nitya, which indicates eternality. Therefore the condition of material
nature immediately previous to its manifestation is called pradhäna.
SB 3.26.11
TEXT 11
PaÄi>a" PaÄi>ab]Rø cTaui>aRdRXai>aSTaQaa )
429
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
WTaÀTauiv|XaiTak&- Ga<a& Pa[aDaaiNak&- ivdu" )) 11 ))
païcabhiù païcabhir brahma
caturbhir daçabhis tathä
etac catur-viàçatikaà
gaëaà prädhänikaà viduù
SYNONYMS
païcabhiù—with the five (gross elements); païcabhiù—the five (subtle elements);
brahma—Brahman; caturbhiù—the four (internal senses); daçabhiù—the ten (five
senses for gathering knowledge and five organs of action); tathä—in that way; etat—
this; catuù-viàçatikam—consisting of twenty-four elements; gaëam—aggregate;
prädhänikam—comprising the pradhäna; viduù—they know.
TRANSLATION
The aggregate elements, namely the five gross elements, the five subtle elements, the four
internal senses, the five senses for gathering knowledge and the five outward organs of
action, are known as the pradhäna.
PURPORT
According to Bhagavad-gétä, the sum total of the twenty-four elements described herein
is called the yonir mahad brahma. The sum total of the living entities is impregnated into
this yonir mahad brahma, and they are born in different forms, beginning from Brahmä
down to the insignificant ant. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam and other Vedic literatures,
the sum total of the twenty-four elements, pradhäna, is also described as yonir mahad
brahma; it is the source of the birth and subsistence of all living entities.
SB 3.26.12
TEXT 12
Maha>aUTaaiNa PaÄEv >aUraPaae_iGanMaRåà>a" )
TaNMaa}aai<a c TaaviNTa GaNDaadqiNa MaTaaiNa Mae )) 12 ))
mahä-bhütäni païcaiva
430
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bhür äpo 'gnir marun nabhaù
tan-mäträëi ca tävanti
gandhädéni matäni me
SYNONYMS
mahä-bhütäni—the gross elements; païca—five; eva—exactly; bhüù—earth; äpaù—
water; agniù—fire; marut—air; nabhaù—ether; tat-mäträëi—the subtle elements; ca—
also; tävanti—so many; gandha-ädéni—smell and so on (taste, color, touch and sound);
matäni—considered; me—by Me.
TRANSLATION
There are five gross elements, namely earth, water, fire, air and ether. There are also five
subtle elements: smell, taste, color, touch and sound.
SB 3.26.13
TEXT 13
wiNd]Yaai<a dXa é[ae}a& TvGd*Ga]SaNaNaaiSak-a" )
va¡-raE cr<aaE Mae!\& PaaYaudRXaMa oCYaTae )) 13 ))
indriyäëi daça çrotraà
tvag dåg rasana-näsikäù
väk karau caraëau meòhraà
päyur daçama ucyate
SYNONYMS
indriyäëi—the senses; daça—ten; çrotram—the sense of hearing; tvak—the sense of
touch; dåk—the sense of sight; rasana—the sense of taste; näsikäù—the sense of smell;
väk—the organ of speech; karau—two hands; caraëau—the organs for traveling (legs);
meòhram—the generative organ; päyuù—the evacuating organ; daçamaù—the tenth;
ucyate—is called.
TRANSLATION
The senses for acquiring knowledge and the organs for action number ten, namely the
431
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
auditory sense, the sense of taste, the tactile sense, the sense of sight, the sense of smell,
the active organ for speaking, the active organs for working, and those for traveling,
generating and evacuating.
SB 3.26.14
TEXT 14
MaNaae buiÖrhªariêtaiMaTYaNTaraTMak-Ma( )
cTauDaaR l/+YaTae >aedae v*tYaa l/+a<aæPaYaa )) 14 ))
mano buddhir ahaìkäraç
cittam ity antar-ätmakam
caturdhä lakñyate bhedo
våttyä lakñaëa-rüpayä
SYNONYMS
manaù—the mind; buddhiù—intelligence; ahaìkäraù—ego; cittam—consciousness; iti—
thus; antaù-ätmakam—the internal, subtle senses; catuù-dhä—having four aspects;
lakñyate—is observed; bhedaù—the distinction; våttyä—by their functions; lakñaëarüpayä—
representing different characteristics.
TRANSLATION
The internal, subtle senses are experienced as having four aspects, in the shape of mind,
intelligence, ego and contaminated consciousness. Distinctions between them can be made
only by different functions, since they represent different characteristics.
PURPORT
The four internal senses, or subtle senses, described herein are defined by different
characteristics. When pure consciousness is polluted by material contamination and
when identification with the body becomes prominent, one is said to be situated under
false ego. Consciousness is the function of the soul, and therefore behind consciousness
there is soul. Consciousness polluted by material contamination is called ahaìkära.
SB 3.26.15
TEXT 15
432
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
WTaavaNaev Sa&:YaaTaae b]ø<a" SaGau<aSYa h )
SaiàveXaae MaYaa Pa[ae¢-ae Ya" k-al/" PaÄiv&Xak-" )) 15 ))
etävän eva saìkhyäto
brahmaëaù sa-guëasya ha
sanniveço mayä prokto
yaù kälaù païca-viàçakaù
SYNONYMS
etävän—so much; eva—just; saìkhyätaù—enumerated; brahmaëaù—of Brahman; saguëasya—
with material qualities; ha—indeed; sanniveçaù—arrangement; mayä—by Me;
proktaù—spoken; yaù—which; kälaù—time; païca-viàçakaù—the twenty-fifth.
TRANSLATION
All these are considered the qualified Brahman. The mixing element, which is known as
time, is counted as the twenty-fifth element.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic version there is no existence beyond Brahman. Sarvaà khalv
idaà brahma (Chändogya Upaniñad 3.14.1). It is stated also in the Viñëu Puräëa that
whatever we see is parasya brahmaëaù çaktiù; everything is an expansion of the energy
of the Supreme Absolute Truth, Brahman. When Brahman is mixed with the three
qualities goodness, passion and ignorance, there results the material expansion, which is
sometimes called saguëa Brahman and which consists of these twenty-five elements. In
the nirguëa Brahman, where there is no material contamination, or in the spiritual
world, the three modes—goodness, passion and ignorance—are not present. Where
nirguëa Brahman is found, simple unalloyed goodness prevails. Saguëa Brahman is
described by the Säìkhya system of philosophy as consisting of twenty-five elements,
including the time factor (past, present and future).
SB 3.26.16
TEXT 16
Pa[>aav& PaaEåz& Pa[ahu" k-al/Maeke- YaTaae >aYaMa( )
433
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
AhªarivMaU!SYa k-TauR" Pa[k*-iTaMaqYauz" )) 16 ))
prabhävaà pauruñaà prähuù
kälam eke yato bhayam
ahaìkära-vimüòhasya
kartuù prakåtim éyuñaù
SYNONYMS
prabhävam—the influence; pauruñam—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
prähuù—they have said; kälam—the time factor; eke—some; yataù—from which;
bhayam—fear; ahaìkära-vimüòhasya—deluded by false ego; kartuù—of the individual
soul; prakåtim—material nature; éyuñaù—having contacted.
TRANSLATION
The influence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is felt in the time factor, which
causes fear of death due to the false ego of the deluded soul who has contacted material
nature.
PURPORT
The living entity's fear of death is due to his false ego of identifying with the body.
Everyone is afraid of death. Actually there is no death for the spirit soul, but due to our
absorption in the identification of body as self, the fear of death develops. It is also
stated in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.2.37), bhayaà dvitéyäbhiniveçataù syät. Dvitéya refers
to matter, which is beyond spirit. Matter is the secondary manifestation of spirit, for
matter is produced from spirit. Just as the material elements described are caused by the
Supreme Lord, or the Supreme Spirit, the body is also a product of the spirit soul.
Therefore, the material body is called dvitéya, or "the second." One who is absorbed in
this second element or second exhibition of the spirit is afraid of death. When one is
fully convinced that he is not his body, there is no question of fearing death, since the
spirit soul does not die.
If the spirit soul engages in the spiritual activities of devotional service, he is completely
freed from the platform of birth and death. His next position is complete spiritual
freedom from a material body. The fear of death is the action of the käla, or the time
factor, which represents the influence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other
434
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
words, time is destructive. Whatever is created is subject to destruction and dissolution,
which is the action of time. Time is a representation of the Lord, and it reminds us also
that we must surrender unto the Lord. The Lord speaks to every conditioned soul as
time. He says in Bhagavad-gétä that if someone surrenders unto Him, then there is no
longer any problem of birth and death. We should therefore accept the time factor as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead standing before us. This is further explained in the
following verse.
SB 3.26.17
TEXT 17
Pa[k*-TaeGauR<aSaaMYaSYa iNaivRXaezSYa MaaNaiv )
ceía YaTa" Sa >aGavaNa( k-al/ wTYauPal/i+aTa" )) 17 ))
prakåter guëa-sämyasya
nirviçeñasya mänavi
ceñöä yataù sa bhagavän
käla ity upalakñitaù
SYNONYMS
prakåteù—of material nature; guëa-sämyasya—without interaction of the three modes;
nirviçeñasya—without specific qualities; mänavi—O daughter of Manu; ceñöä—
movement; yataù—from whom; saù—He; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; kälaù—time; iti—thus; upalakñitaù—is designated.
TRANSLATION
My dear mother, O daughter of Sväyambhuva Manu, the time factor, as I have explained,
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, from whom the creation begins as a result of the
agitation of the neutral, unmanifested nature.
PURPORT
The unmanifested state of material nature, pradhäna, is being explained. The Lord says
that when the unmanifested material nature is agitated by the glance of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, it begins to manifest itself in different ways. Before this
agitation, it remains in the neutral state, without interaction by the three modes of
435
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
material nature. In other words, material nature cannot produce any variety of
manifestations without the contact of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is very
nicely explained in Bhagavad-gétä. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of
the products of material nature. Without His contact, material nature cannot produce
anything.
In the Caitanya-caritämåta also, a very suitable example is given in this connection.
Although the nipples on a goat's neck appear to be breast nipples, they do not give milk.
Similarly, material nature appears to the material scientist to act and react in a
wonderful manner, but in reality it cannot act without the agitator, time, who is the
representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When time agitates the neutral
state of material nature, material nature begins to produce varieties of manifestations.
Ultimately it is said that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of creation.
As a woman cannot produce children unless impregnated by a man, material nature
cannot produce or manifest anything unless it is impregnated by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in the form of the time factor.
SB 3.26.18
TEXT 18
ANTa" PauåzæPae<a k-al/æPae<a Yaae bih" )
SaMaNveTYaez SatvaNaa& >aGavaNaaTMaMaaYaYaa )) 18 ))
antaù puruña-rüpeëa
käla-rüpeëa yo bahiù
samanvety eña sattvänäà
bhagavän ätma-mäyayä
SYNONYMS
antaù—within; puruña-rüpeëa—in the form of Supersoul; käla-rüpeëa—in the form of
time; yaù—He who; bahiù—without; samanveti—exists; eñaù—He; sattvänäm—of all
living entities; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ätma-mäyayä—by His
potencies.
TRANSLATION
By exhibiting His potencies, the Supreme Personality of Godhead adjusts all these
436
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
different elements, keeping Himself within as the Supersoul and without as time.
PURPORT
Here it is stated that within the heart the Supreme Personality of Godhead resides as
the Supersoul. This situation is also explained in Bhagavad-gétä: the Supersoul rests
beside the individual soul and acts as a witness. This is also confirmed elsewhere in the
Vedic literature: two birds are sitting on the same tree of the body; one is witnessing,
and the other is eating the fruits of the tree. This puruña, or Paramätmä, who resides
within the body of the individual soul, is described in Bhagavad-gétä (13.23) as the
upadrañöä, witness, and the anumantä, sanctioning authority. The conditioned soul
engages in the happiness and distress of the particular body given him by the
arrangement of the external energy of the Supreme Lord. But the supreme living being,
or the Paramätmä, is different from the conditioned soul. He is described in Bhagavadgétä
as maheçvara, or the Supreme Lord. He is Paramätmä, not jévätmä. Paramätmä
means the Supersoul, who is sitting by the side of the conditioned soul just to sanction
his activities. The conditioned soul comes to this material world in order to lord it over
material nature. Since one cannot do anything without the sanction of the Supreme
Lord, He lives with the jéva soul as witness and sanction-giver. He is also bhoktä; He
gives maintenance and sustenance to the conditioned soul.
Since the living entity is constitutionally part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the Lord is very affectionate to the living entities. Unfortunately, when the
living entity is bewildered or illusioned by the external energy, he becomes forgetful of
his eternal relationship with the Lord, but as soon as he becomes aware of his
constitutional position, he is liberated. The minute independence of the conditioned
soul is exhibited by his marginal position. If he likes, he can forget the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and come into the material existence with a false ego to lord it
over material nature, but if he likes he can turn his face to the service of the Lord. The
individual living entity is given that independence. His conditional life is ended and his
life becomes successful as soon as he turns his face to the Lord, but by misusing his
independence he enters into material existence. Yet the Lord is so kind that, as
Supersoul, He always remains with the conditioned soul. The concern of the Lord is
neither to enjoy nor to suffer from the material body. He remains with the jéva simply as
sanction-giver and witness so that the living entity can receive the results of his
activities, good or bad.
Outside the body of the conditioned soul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead remains
437
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
as the time factor. According to the Säìkhya system of philosophy, there are twentyfive
elements. The twenty-four elements already described plus the time factor make
twenty-five. According to some learned philosophers, the Supersoul is included to make
a total of twenty-six elements.
SB 3.26.19
TEXT 19
dEvaT+aui>aTaDaiMaR<Yaa& SvSYaa& YaaeNaaE Par" PauMaaNa( )
AaData vqYa| SaaSaUTa Mahtatv& ihr<MaYaMa( )) 19 ))
daivät kñubhita-dharmiëyäà
svasyäà yonau paraù pumän
ädhatta véryaà säsüta
mahat-tattvaà hiraëmayam
SYNONYMS
daivät—by the destiny of the conditioned souls; kñubhita—agitated; dharmiëyäm—
whose equilibrium of the modes; svasyäm—His own; yonau—in the womb (material
nature); paraù pumän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ädhatta—impregnated;
véryam—semen (His internal potency); sä—she (material nature); asüta—delivered;
mahat-tattvam—the sum total of cosmic intelligence; hiraëmayam—known as
Hiraëmaya.
TRANSLATION
After the Supreme Personality of Godhead impregnates material nature with His internal
potency, material nature delivers the sum total of the cosmic intelligence, which is known
as Hiraëmaya. This takes place in material nature when she is agitated by the
destinations of the conditioned souls.
PURPORT
This impregnation of material nature is described in Bhagavad-gétä, Fourteenth Chapter,
verse 3. Material nature's primal factor is the mahat-tattva, or breeding source of all
varieties. This part of material nature, which is called pradhäna as well as Brahman, is
impregnated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead and delivers varieties of living
438
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
entities. Material nature in this connection is called Brahman because it is a perverted
reflection of the spiritual nature.
It is described in the Viñëu Puräëa that the living entities belong to the spiritual nature.
The potency of the Supreme Lord is spiritual, and the living entities, although they are
called marginal potency, are also spiritual. If the living entities were not spiritual, this
description of impregnation by the Supreme Lord would not be applicable. The Supreme
Lord does not put His semen into that which is not spiritual, but it is stated here that
the Supreme Person puts His semen into material nature. This means that the living
entities are spiritual by nature. After impregnation, material nature delivers all kinds of
living entities, beginning from the greatest living creature, Lord Brahmä, down to the
insignificant ant, in all varieties of form. In Bhagavad-gétä (14.4) material nature is
clearly mentioned as sarva-yoniñu. This means that of all varieties of species—demigods,
human beings, animals, birds and beasts (whatever is manifested)—material nature is
the mother, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the seed-giving father.
Generally it is experienced that the father gives life to the child but the mother gives its
body; although the seed of life is given by the father, the body develops within the womb
of the mother. Similarly, the spiritual living entities are impregnated into the womb of
material nature, but the body, being supplied by material nature, takes on many
different species and forms of life. The theory that the symptoms of life are manifest by
the interaction of the twenty-four material elements is not supported here. The living
force comes directly from the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is completely
spiritual. Therefore, no material scientific advancement can produce life. The living
force comes from the spiritual world and has nothing to do with the interaction of the
material elements.
SB 3.26.20
TEXT 20
ivìMaaTMaGaTa& VYaÅNa( kU-$=SQaae JaGadx(ku-r" )
SvTaeJaSaaiPabtaqv]MaaTMaPa[SvaPaNa& TaMa" )) 20 ))
viçvam ätma-gataà vyaïjan
küöa-stho jagad-aìkuraù
sva-tejasäpibat tévram
ätma-prasväpanaà tamaù
439
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
viçvam—the universe; ätma-gatam—contained within itself; vyaïjan—manifesting;
küöa-sthaù—unchangeable; jagat-aìkuraù—the root of all cosmic manifestations; svatejasä—
by its own effulgence; apibat—swallowed; tévram—dense; ätma-prasväpanam—
which had covered the mahat-tattva; tamaù—darkness.
TRANSLATION
Thus, after manifesting variegatedness, the effulgent mahat-tattva, which contains all the
universes within itself, which is the root of all cosmic manifestations and which is not
destroyed at the time of annihilation, swallows the darkness that covered the effulgence at
the time of dissolution.
PURPORT
Since the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is ever existing, all-blissful and full of
knowledge, His different energies are also ever existing in the dormant stage. Thus when
the mahat-tattva was created, it manifested the material ego and swallowed up the
darkness which covered the cosmic manifestation at the time of dissolution. This idea
can be further explained. A person at night remains inactive, covered by the darkness of
night, but when he is awakened in the morning, the covering of night, or the
forgetfulness of the sleeping state, disappears. Similarly, when the mahat-tattva appears
after the night of dissolution, the effulgence is manifested to exhibit the variegatedness
of this material world.
SB 3.26.21
TEXT 21
YataTSatvGau<a& SvC^& XaaNTa& >aGavTa" PadMa( )
YadahuvaRSaudeva:Ya& icta& TaNMahdaTMak-Ma( )) 21 ))
yat tat sattva-guëaà svacchaà
çäntaà bhagavataù padam
yad ähur väsudeväkhyaà
cittaà tan mahad-ätmakam
SYNONYMS
440
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yat—which; tat—that; sattva-guëam—the mode of goodness; svaccham—clear;
çäntam—sober; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; padam—the status of
understanding; yat—which; ähuù—is called; väsudeva-äkhyam—by the name väsudeva;
cittam—consciousness; tat—that; mahat-ätmakam—manifest in the mahat-tattva.
TRANSLATION
The mode of goodness, which is the clear, sober status of understanding the Personality
of Godhead and which is generally called väsudeva, or consciousness, becomes manifest in
the mahat-tattva.
PURPORT
The väsudeva manifestation, or the status of understanding the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is called pure goodness, or çuddha-sattva. In the çuddha-sattva status there is
no infringement of the other qualities, namely passion and ignorance. In the Vedic
literature there is mention of the Lord's expansion as the four Personalities of
Godhead—Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. Here in the
reappearance of the mahat-tattva the four expansions of Godhead occur. He who is
seated within as Supersoul expands first as Väsudeva.
The väsudeva stage is free from infringement by material desires and is the status in
which one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, or the objective which
is described in the Bhagavad-gétä as adbhuta. This is another feature of the mahat-tattva.
The väsudeva expansion is also called Kåñëa consciousness, for it is free from all tinges of
material passion and ignorance. This clear state of understanding helps one to know the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The väsudeva status is also explained in Bhagavad-gétä
as kñetra-jïa, which refers to the knower of the field of activities as well as the
Superknower. The living being who has occupied a particular type of body knows that
body, but the Superknower, Väsudeva, knows not only a particular type of body but also
the field of activities in all the different varieties of bodies. In order to be situated in
clear consciousness, or Kåñëa consciousness, one must worship Väsudeva. Väsudeva is
Kåñëa alone. When Kåñëa, or Viñëu, is alone, without the accompaniment of His
internal energy, He is Väsudeva. When He is accompanied by His internal potency, He
is called Dvärakädhéça. To have clear consciousness, or Kåñëa consciousness, one has to
worship Väsudeva. It is also explained in Bhagavad-gétä that after many, many births one
surrenders to Väsudeva. Such a great soul is very rare.
In order to get release from the false ego, one has to worship Saìkarñaëa. Saìkarñaëa is
441
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
also worshiped through Lord Çiva; the snakes which cover the body of Lord Çiva are
representations of Saìkarñaëa, and Lord Çiva is always absorbed in meditation upon
Saìkarñaëa. One who is actually a worshiper of Lord Çiva as a devotee of Saìkarñaëa
can be released from false, material ego. If one wants to get free from mental
disturbances, one has to worship Aniruddha. For this purpose, worship of the moon
planet is also recommended in the Vedic literature. Similarly, to be fixed in one's
intelligence one has to worship Pradyumna, who is reached through the worship of
Brahmä. These matters are explained in Vedic literature.
SB 3.26.22
TEXT 22
SvC^TvMaivk-airTv& XaaNTaTviMaiTa ceTaSa" )
v*itai>alR/+a<a& Pa[ae¢&- YaQaaPaa& Pa[k*-iTa" Para )) 22 ))
svacchatvam avikäritvaà
çäntatvam iti cetasaù
våttibhir lakñaëaà proktaà
yathäpäà prakåtiù parä
SYNONYMS
svacchatvam—clarity; avikäritvam—freedom from all distraction; çäntatvam—serenity;
iti—thus; cetasaù—of consciousness; våttibhiù—by characteristics; lakñaëam—traits;
proktam—called; yathä—as; apäm—of water; prakåtiù—natural state; parä—pure.
TRANSLATION
After the manifestation of the mahat-tattva, these features appear simultaneously. As
water in its natural state, before coming in contact with earth, is clear, sweet and
unruffled, so the characteristic traits of pure consciousness are complete serenity, clarity,
and freedom from distraction.
PURPORT
The pure status of consciousness, or Kåñëa consciousness, exists in the beginning; just
after creation, consciousness is not polluted. The more one becomes materially
contaminated, however, the more consciousness becomes obscured. In pure
442
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
consciousness one can perceive a slight reflection of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. As in clear, unagitated water, free from impurities, one can see everything
clearly, so in pure consciousness, or Kåñëa consciousness, one can see things as they are.
One can see the reflection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and one can see his
own existence as well. This state of consciousness is very pleasing, transparent and
sober. In the beginning, consciousness is pure.
SB 3.26.23, SB 3.26.24, SB 3.26.23-24
TEXTS 23-24
MahtatvaiÜku-vaR<aaÙGavÜqYaRSaM>avaTa( )
i§-YaaXai¢-rhªariñivDa" SaMaPaÛTa )) 23 ))
vEk-airk-STaEJaSaê TaaMaSaê YaTaae >av" )
MaNaSaêeiNd]Yaa<aa& c >aUTaaNaa& MahTaaMaiPa )) 24 ))
mahat-tattväd vikurväëäd
bhagavad-vérya-sambhavät
kriyä-çaktir ahaìkäras
tri-vidhaù samapadyata
vaikärikas taijasaç ca
tämasaç ca yato bhavaù
manasaç cendriyäëäà ca
bhütänäà mahatäm api
SYNONYMS
mahat-tattvät—from the mahat-tattva; vikurväëät—undergoing a change; bhagavatvérya-
sambhavät—evolved from the Lord's own energy; kriyä-çaktiù—endowed with
active power; ahaìkäraù—the material ego; tri-vidhaù—of the three kinds;
samapadyata—sprang up; vaikärikaù—material ego in transformed goodness; taijasaù—
material ego in passion; ca—and; tämasaù—material ego in ignorance; ca—also; yataù—
from which; bhavaù—the origin; manasaù—of the mind; ca—and; indriyäëäm—of the
senses for perception and action; ca—and; bhütänäm mahatäm—of the five gross
elements; api—also.
TRANSLATION
443
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The material ego springs up from the mahat-tattva, which evolved from the Lord's own
energy. The material ego is endowed predominantly with active power of three kinds—
good, passionate and ignorant. It is from these three types of material ego that the mind,
the senses of perception, the organs of action, and the gross elements evolve.
PURPORT
In the beginning, from clear consciousness, or the pure state of Kåñëa consciousness, the
first contamination sprang up. This is called false ego, or identification of the body as
self. The living entity exists in the natural state of Kåñëa consciousness, but he has
marginal independence, and this allows him to forget Kåñëa. Originally, pure Kåñëa
consciousness exists, but because of misuse of marginal independence there is a chance
of forgetting Kåñëa. This is exhibited in actual life; there are many instances in which
someone acting in Kåñëa consciousness suddenly changes. In the Upaniñads it is stated,
therefore, that the path of spiritual realization is just like the sharp edge of a razor. The
example is very appropriate. One shaves his cheeks with a sharp razor very nicely, but as
soon as his attention is diverted from the activity, he immediately cuts his cheek because
he mishandles the razor.
Not only must one come to the stage of pure Kåñëa consciousness, but one must also be
very careful. Any inattentiveness or carelessness may cause falldown. This falldown is
due to false ego. From the status of pure consciousness, the false ego is born because of
misuse of independence. We cannot argue about why false ego arises from pure
consciousness. Factually, there is always the chance that this will happen, and therefore
one has to be very careful. False ego is the basic principle for all material activities,
which are executed in the modes of material nature. As soon as one deviates from pure
Kåñëa consciousness, he increases his entanglement in material reaction. The
entanglement of materialism is the material mind, and from this material mind, the
senses and material organs become manifest.
SB 3.26.25
TEXT 25
SahóiXarSa& Saa+aaÛMaNaNTa& Pa[c+aTae )
SaªzR<aa:Ya& Pauåz& >aUTaeiNd]YaMaNaaeMaYaMa( )) 25 ))
sahasra-çirasaà säkñäd
yam anantaà pracakñate
444
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
saìkarñaëäkhyaà puruñaà
bhütendriya-manomayam
SYNONYMS
sahasra-çirasam—with a thousand heads; säkñät—directly; yam—whom; anantam—
Ananta; pracakñate—they all; saìkarñaëa-äkhyam—Saìkarñaëa by name; puruñam—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhüta—the gross elements; indriya—the senses;
manaù-mayam—consisting of the mind.
TRANSLATION
The threefold ahaìkära, the source of the gross elements, the senses and the mind, is
identical with them because it is their cause. It is known by the name of Saìkarñaëa, who
is directly Lord Ananta with a thousand heads.
SB 3.26.26
TEXT 26
k-Ta*RTv& k-r<aTv& c k-aYaRTv& ceiTa l/+a<aMa( )
XaaNTagaaerivMaU!TviMaiTa va SYaadhx(k*-Tae" )) 26 ))
kartåtvaà karaëatvaà ca
käryatvaà ceti lakñaëam
çänta-ghora-vimüòhatvam
iti vä syäd ahaìkåteù
SYNONYMS
kartåtvam—being the doer; karaëatvam—being the instrument; ca—and; käryatvam—
being the effect; ca—also; iti—thus; lakñaëam—characteristic; çänta—serene; ghora—
active; vimüòhatvam—being dull; iti—thus; vä—or; syät—may be; ahaìkåteù—of the
false ego.
TRANSLATION
This false ego is characterized as the doer, as an instrument and as an effect. It is further
characterized as serene, active or dull according to how it is influenced by the modes of
445
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
goodness, passion and ignorance.
PURPORT
Ahaìkära, or false ego, is transformed into the demigods, the controlling directors of
material affairs. As an instrument, the false ego is represented as different senses and
sense organs, and as the result of the combination of the demigods and the senses,
material objects are produced. In the material world we are producing so many things,
and this is called advancement of civilization, but factually the advancement of
civilization is a manifestation of the false ego. By false ego all material things are
produced as objects of enjoyment. One has to cease increasing artificial necessities in
the form of material objects. One great äcärya, Narottama däsa Öhäkura, has lamented
that when one deviates from pure consciousness of Väsudeva, or Kåñëa consciousness,
he becomes entangled in material activities. The exact words he uses are, sat-saìga
chäòi' kainu asate viläsa/ te-käraëe lägila ye karma-bandha-phäìsa: "I have given up the
pure status of consciousness because I wanted to enjoy in the temporary, material
manifestation; therefore I have been entangled in the network of actions and reactions."
SB 3.26.27
TEXT 27
vEk-airk-aiÜku-vaR<aaNMaNaSTatvMaJaaYaTa )
YaTSaªLPaivk-LPaa>Yaa& vTaRTae k-aMaSaM>av" )) 27 ))
vaikärikäd vikurväëän
manas-tattvam ajäyata
yat-saìkalpa-vikalpäbhyäà
vartate käma-sambhavaù
SYNONYMS
vaikärikät—from the false ego of goodness; vikurväëät—undergoing transformation;
manaù—the mind; tattvam—principle; ajäyata—evolved; yat—whose; saìkalpa—
thoughts; vikalpäbhyäm—and by reflections; vartate—happens; käma-sambhavaù—the
rise of desire.
TRANSLATION
446
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
From the false ego of goodness, another transformation takes place. From this evolves the
mind, whose thoughts and reflections give rise to desire.
PURPORT
The symptoms of the mind are determination and rejection, which are due to different
kinds of desires. We desire that which is favorable to our sense gratification, and we
reject that which is not favorable to sense gratification. The material mind is not fixed,
but the very same mind can be fixed when engaged in the activities of Kåñëa
consciousness. Otherwise, as long as the mind is on the material platform, it is hovering,
and all this rejection and acceptance is asat, temporary. It is stated that he whose mind
is not fixed in Kåñëa consciousness must hover between acceptance and rejection.
However advanced a man is in academic qualifications, as long as he is not fixed in
Kåñëa consciousness he will simply accept and reject and will never be able to fix his
mind on a particular subject matter.
SB 3.26.28
TEXT 28
YaiÜduùRiNaåÖa:Ya& ôzqk-a<aaMaDaqìrMa( )
XaardeNdqvrXYaaMa& Sa&raDYa& YaaeiGai>a" XaNaE" )) 28 ))
yad vidur hy aniruddhäkhyaà
håñékäëäm adhéçvaram
çäradendévara-çyämaà
saàrädhyaà yogibhiù çanaiù
SYNONYMS
yat—which mind; viduù—is known; hi—indeed; aniruddha-äkhyam—by the name
Aniruddha; håñékäëäm—of the senses; adhéçvaram—the supreme ruler; çärada—
autumnal; indévara—like a blue lotus; çyämam—bluish; saàrädhyam—who is found;
yogibhiù—by the yogés; çanaiù—gradually.
TRANSLATION
The mind of the living entity is known by the name of Lord Aniruddha, the supreme
ruler of the senses. He possesses a bluish-black form resembling a lotus flower growing in
447
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the autumn. He is found slowly by the yogés.
PURPORT
The system of yoga entails controlling the mind, and the Lord of the mind is Aniruddha.
It is stated that Aniruddha is four-handed, with Sudarçana cakra, conchshell, club and
lotus flower. There are twenty-four forms of Viñëu, each differently named. Among
these twenty-four forms, Saìkarñaëa, Aniruddha, Pradyumna and Väsudeva are
depicted very nicely in the Caitanya-caritämåta, where it is stated that Aniruddha is
worshiped by the yogés. Meditation upon voidness is a modern invention of the fertile
brain of some speculator. Actually the process of yoga meditation, as prescribed in this
verse, should be fixed upon the form of Aniruddha. By meditating on Aniruddha one
can become free from the agitation of acceptance and rejection. When one's mind is
fixed upon Aniruddha, one gradually becomes God-realized; he approaches the pure
status of Kåñëa consciousness, which is the ultimate goal of yoga.
SB 3.26.29
TEXT 29
TaEJaSaatau ivku-vaR<aad( buiÖTatvMa>aUTSaiTa )
d]VYaSfu-r<aivjaNaiMaiNd]Yaa<aaMaNauGa]h" )) 29 ))
taijasät tu vikurväëäd
buddhi-tattvam abhüt sati
dravya-sphuraëa-vijïänam
indriyäëäm anugrahaù
SYNONYMS
taijasät—from the false ego in passion; tu—then; vikurväëät—undergoing
transformation; buddhi—intelligence; tattvam—principle; abhüt—took birth; sati—O
virtuous lady; dravya—objects; sphuraëa—coming into view; vijïänam—ascertaining;
indriyäëäm—to the senses; anugrahaù—giving assistance.
TRANSLATION
By transformation of the false ego in passion, intelligence takes birth, O virtuous lady.
The functions of intelligence are to help in ascertaining the nature of objects when they
448
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
come into view, and to help the senses.
PURPORT
Intelligence is the discriminating power to understand an object, and it helps the senses
make choices. Therefore intelligence is supposed to be the master of the senses. The
perfection of intelligence is attained when one becomes fixed in the activities of Kåñëa
consciousness. By the proper use of intelligence one's consciousness is expanded, and the
ultimate expansion of consciousness is Kåñëa consciousness.
SB 3.26.30
TEXT 30
Sa&XaYaae_Qa ivPaYaaRSaae iNaêYa" SMa*iTarev c )
SvaPa wTYauCYaTae buÖelR/+a<a& v*itaTa" Pa*Qak(- )) 30 ))
saàçayo 'tha viparyäso
niçcayaù småtir eva ca
sväpa ity ucyate buddher
lakñaëaà våttitaù påthak
SYNONYMS
saàçayaù—doubt; atha—then; viparyäsaù—misapprehension; niçcayaù—correct
apprehension; småtiù—memory; eva—also; ca—and; sväpaù—sleep; iti—thus; ucyate—
are said; buddheù—of intelligence; lakñaëam—characteristics; våttitaù—by their
functions; påthak—different.
TRANSLATION
Doubt, misapprehension, correct apprehension, memory and sleep, as determined by their
different functions, are said to be the distinct characteristics of intelligence.
PURPORT
Doubt is one of the important functions of intelligence; blind acceptance of something
does not give evidence of intelligence. Therefore the word saàçaya is very important; in
order to cultivate intelligence, one should be doubtful in the beginning. But doubting is
449
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
not very favorable when information is received from the proper source. In Bhagavadgétä
the Lord says that doubting the words of the authority is the cause of destruction.
As described in the Pataïjali yoga system, pramäëa-viparyaya-vikalpa-nidra-småtyaù. By
intelligence only one can understand things as they are. By intelligence only can one
understand whether or not he is the body. The study to determine whether one's
identity is spiritual or material begins in doubt. When one is able to analyze his actual
position, the false identification with the body is detected. This is viparyäsa. When false
identification is detected, then real identification can be understood. Real
understanding is described here as niçcayaù, or proved experimental knowledge. This
experimental knowledge can be achieved when one has understood the false knowledge.
By experimental or proved knowledge, one can understand that he is not the body but
spirit soul.
Småti means "memory," and sväpa means "sleep." Sleep is also necessary to keep the
intelligence in working order. If there is no sleep, the brain cannot work nicely. In
Bhagavad-gétä it is especially mentioned that persons who regulate eating, sleeping and
other necessities of the body in the proper proportion become very successful in the yoga
process. These are some of the aspects of the analytical study of intelligence as described
in both the Pataïjali yoga system and the Säìkhya philosophy system of Kapiladeva in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
SB 3.26.31
TEXT 31
TaEJaSaaNaqiNd]Yaa<Yaev i§-YaajaNaiv>aaGaXa" )
Pa[a<aSYa ih i§-YaaXai¢-buRÖeivRjaNaXai¢-Taa )) 31 ))
taijasänéndriyäëy eva
kriyä-jïäna-vibhägaçaù
präëasya hi kriyä-çaktir
buddher vijïäna-çaktitä
SYNONYMS
taijasäni—produced from egoism in the mode of passion; indriyäëi—the senses; eva—
certainly; kriyä—action; jïäna—knowledge; vibhägaçaù—according to; präëasya—of
the vital energy; hi—indeed; kriyä-çaktiù—the senses of action; buddheù—of the
intelligence; vijïäna-çaktitä—the senses for acquiring knowledge.
450
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Egoism in the mode of passion produces two kinds of senses—the senses for acquiring
knowledge and the senses of action. The senses of action depend on the vital energy, and
the senses for acquiring knowledge depend on intelligence.
PURPORT
It has been explained in the previous verses that mind is the product of ego in goodness
and that the function of the mind is acceptance and rejection according to desire. But
here intelligence is said to be the product of ego in passion. That is the distinction
between mind and intelligence; mind is a product of egoism in goodness, and
intelligence is a product of egoism in passion. The desire to accept something and reject
something is a very important factor of the mind. Since mind is a product of the mode of
goodness, if it is fixed upon the Lord of the mind, Aniruddha, then the mind can be
changed to Kåñëa consciousness. It is stated by Narottama däsa Öhäkura that we always
have desires. Desire cannot be stopped. But if we transfer our desires to please the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, that is the perfection of life. As soon as the desire is
transferred to lording it over material nature, it becomes contaminated by matter.
Desire has to be purified. In the beginning, this purification process has to be carried out
by the order of the spiritual master, since the spiritual master knows how the disciple's
desires can be transformed into Kåñëa consciousness. As far as intelligence is concerned,
it is clearly stated here that it is a product of egoism in passion. By practice one comes to
the point of the mode of goodness, and by surrendering or fixing the mind upon the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, one becomes a very great personality, or mahätmä. In
Bhagavad-gétä it is clearly said, sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù: "Such a great soul is very rare."
In this verse it is clear that both kinds of senses, the senses for acquiring knowledge and
the senses for action, are products of egoism in the mode of passion. And because the
sense organs for activity and for acquiring knowledge require energy, the vital energy, or
life energy, is also produced by egoism in the mode of passion. We can actually see,
therefore, that those who are very passionate can improve in material acquisition very
quickly. It is recommended in the Vedic scriptures that if one wants to encourage a
person in acquiring material possessions, one should also encourage him in sex life. We
naturally find that those who are addicted to sex life are also materially advanced
because sex life or passionate life is the impetus for the material advancement of
civilization. For those who want to make spiritual advancement, there is almost no
existence of the mode of passion. Only the mode of goodness is prominent. We find that
451
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
those who engage in Kåñëa consciousness are materially poor, but one who has eyes can
see who is the greater. Although he appears to be materially poor, a person in Kåñëa
consciousness is not actually a poor man, but the person who has no taste tor Kåñëa
consciousness and appears to be very happy with material possessions is actually poor.
Persons infatuated by material consciousness are very intelligent in discovering things
for material comforts, but they have no access to understanding the spirit soul and
spiritual life. Therefore, if anyone wants to advance in spiritual life, he has to come back
to the platform of purified desire, the purified desire for devotional service. As stated in
the Närada-païcarätra, engagement in the service of the Lord when the senses are
purified in Kåñëa consciousness is called pure devotion.
SB 3.26.32
TEXT 32
TaaMaSaaÀ ivku-vaR<aaÙGavÜqYaRcaeidTaaTa( )
XaBdMaa}aMa>aUtaSMaaà>a" é[ae}a& Tau XaBdGaMa( )) 32 ))
tämasäc ca vikurväëäd
bhagavad-vérya-codität
çabda-mätram abhüt tasmän
nabhaù çrotraà tu çabdagam
SYNONYMS
tämasät—from egoism in ignorance; ca—and; vikurväëät—undergoing transformation;
bhagavat-vérya—by the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; codität—
impelled; çabda-mätram—the subtle element sound; abhüt—was manifested; tasmät—
from that; nabhaù—ether; çrotram—the sense of hearing; tu—then; çabda-gam—which
catches sound.
TRANSLATION
When egoism in ignorance is agitated by the sex energy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the subtle element sound is manifested, and from sound come the ethereal sky
and the sense of hearing.
PURPORT
452
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
It appears from this verse that all the objects of our sense gratification are the products
of egoism in ignorance. It is understood from this verse that by agitation of the element
of egoism in ignorance, the first thing produced was sound, which is the subtle form of
ether. It is stated also in the Vedänta-sütra that sound is the origin of all objects of
material possession and that by sound one can also dissolve this material existence.
Anävåttiù çabdät means "liberation by sound." The entire material manifestation began
from sound, and sound can also end material entanglement, if it has a particular
potency. The particular sound capable of doing this is the transcendental vibration Hare
Kåñëa. Our entanglement in material affairs has begun from material sound. Now we
must purify that sound in spiritual understanding. There is sound in the spiritual world
also. If we approach that sound, then our spiritual life begins, and the other
requirements for spiritual advancement can be supplied. We have to understand very
clearly that sound is the beginning of the creation of all material objects for our sense
gratification. Similarly, if sound is purified, our spiritual necessities also are produced
from sound.
Here it is said that from sound the ether became manifested and that the air became
manifested from ether. How the ethereal sky comes from sound, how the air comes from
sky and how fire comes from air will be explained later on. Sound is the cause of the sky,
and sky is the cause of çrotram, the ear. The ear is the first sense for receiving
knowledge. One must give aural reception to any knowledge one wants to receive, either
material or spiritual. Therefore çrotram is very important. The Vedic knowledge is called
çruti; knowledge has to be received by hearing. By hearing only can we have access to
either material or spiritual enjoyment.
In the material world, we manufacture many things for our material comfort simply by
hearing. They are already there, but just by hearing, one can transform them. If we want
to build a very high skyscraper, this does not mean that we have to create it. The
materials for the skyscraper—wood, metal, earth, etc.—are already there, but we make
our intimate relationship with those already created material elements by hearing how
to utilize them. Modern economic advancement for creation is also a product of hearing,
and similarly one can create a favorable field of spiritual activities by hearing from the
right source. Arjuna was a gross materialist in the bodily conception of life and was
suffering from the bodily concept very acutely. But simply by hearing, Arjuna became a
spiritualized, Kåñëa conscious person. Hearing is very important, and that hearing is
produced from the sky. By hearing only can we make proper use of that which already
exists. The principle of hearing to properly utilize preconceived materials is applicable to
spiritual paraphernalia as well. We must hear from the proper spiritual source.
453
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.26.33
TEXT 33
AQaaRé[YaTv& XaBdSYa d]íuilR/(r)TvMaev c )
TaNMaa}aTv& c Na>aSaae l/+a<a& k-vYaae ivdu" )) 33 ))
arthäçrayatvaà çabdasya
drañöur liìgatvam eva ca
tan-mätratvaà ca nabhaso
lakñaëaà kavayo viduù
SYNONYMS
artha-äçrayatvam—that which conveys the meaning of an object; çabdasya—of sound;
drañöuù—of the speaker; liìgatvam—that which indicates the presence; eva—also; ca—
and; tat-mätratvam—the subtle element; ca—and; nabhasaù—of ether; lakñaëam—
definition; kavayaù—learned persons; viduù—know.
TRANSLATION
Persons who are learned and who have true knowledge define sound as that which
conveys the idea of an object, indicates the presence of a speaker screened from our view
and constitutes the subtle form of ether.
PURPORT
It is very clear herein that as soon as we speak of hearing, there must be a speaker;
without a speaker there is no question of hearing. Therefore the Vedic knowledge,
which is known as çruti, or that which is received by hearing, is also called apauruña.
Apauruña means "not spoken by any person materially created." It is stated in the
beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, tene brahma hådä. The sound of Brahman, or Veda,
was first impregnated into the heart of Brahmä, the original learned man (ädi-kavaye).
How did he become learned? Whenever there is learning, there must be a speaker and
the process of hearing. But Brahmä was the first created being. Who spoke to him? Since
no one was there, who was the spiritual master to give knowledge? He was the only
living creature; therefore the Vedic knowledge was imparted within his heart by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is seated within everyone as Paramätmä. Vedic
454
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
knowledge is understood to be spoken by the Supreme Lord, and therefore it is free from
the defects of material understanding. Material understanding is defective. If we hear
something from a conditioned soul, it is full of defects. All material and mundane
information is tainted by illusion, error, cheating and imperfection of the senses.
Because Vedic knowledge was imparted by the Supreme Lord, who is transcendental to
material creation, it is perfect. If we receive that Vedic knowledge from Brahmä in
disciplic succession, then we receive perfect knowledge.
Every word we hear has a meaning behind it. As soon as we hear the word "water," there
is a substance—water—behind the word. Similarly, as soon as we hear the word "God,"
there is a meaning to it. If we receive that meaning and explanation of "God" from God
Himself, then it is perfect. But if we speculate about the meaning of "God," it is
imperfect. Bhagavad-gétä, which is the science of God, is spoken by the Personality of
Godhead Himself. This is perfect knowledge. Mental speculators or so-called
philosophers who are researching what is actually God will never understand the nature
of God. The science of God has to be understood in disciplic succession from Brahmä,
who was first instructed about knowledge of God by God Himself. We can understand
the knowledge of God by hearing Bhagavad-gétä from a person authorized in the disciplic
succession.
When we speak of seeing, there must be form. By our sense perception, the beginning
experience is the sky. Sky is the beginning of form. And from the sky, other forms
emanate. The objects of knowledge and sense perception begin, therefore, from the sky.
SB 3.26.34
TEXT 34
>aUTaaNaa& i^d]daTa*Tv& bihrNTarMaev c )
Pa[a<aeiNd]YaaTMaiDaZ<YaTv& Na>aSaae v*ital/+a<aMa( )) 34 ))
bhütänäà chidra-dätåtvaà
bahir antaram eva ca
präëendriyätma-dhiñëyatvaà
nabhaso våtti-lakñaëam
SYNONYMS
bhütänäm—of all living entities; chidra-dätåtvam—the accommodation of room; bahiù—
external; antaram—internal; eva—also; ca—and; präëa—of the vital air; indriya—the
455
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
senses; ätma—and the mind; dhiñëyatvam—being the field of activities; nabhasaù—of
the ethereal element; våtti—activities; lakñaëam—characteristics.
TRANSLATION
The activities and characteristics of the ethereal element can be observed as
accommodation for the room for the external and internal existences of all living entities,
namely the field of activities of the vital air, the senses and the mind.
PURPORT
The mind, the senses and the vital force, or living entity, have forms, although they are
not visible to the naked eye. Form rests in subtle existence in the sky, and internally it is
perceived as the veins within the body and the circulation of the vital air. Externally
there are invisible forms of sense objects. The production of the invisible sense objects is
the external activity of the ethereal element, and the circulation of vital air and blood is
its internal activity. That subtle forms exist in the ether has been proven by modern
science by transmission of television, by which forms or photographs of one place are
transmitted to another place by the action of the ethereal element. That is very nicely
explained here. This verse is the potential basis of great scientific research work, for it
explains how subtle forms are generated from the ethereal element, what their
characteristics and actions are, and how the tangible elements, namely air, fire, water
and earth, are manifested from the subtle form. Mental activities, or psychological
actions of thinking, feeling and willing, are also activities on the platform of ethereal
existence. The statement in Bhagavad-gétä that the mental situation at the time of death
is the basis of the next birth is also corroborated in this verse. Mental existence
transforms into tangible form as soon as there is an opportunity due to contamination or
development of the gross elements from subtle form.
SB 3.26.35
TEXT 35
Na>aSa" XaBdTaNMaa}aaTk-al/GaTYaa ivku-vRTa" )
SPaXaaeR_>avtaTaae vaYauSTvk(- SPaXaRSYa c Sa°h" )) 35 ))
nabhasaù çabda-tanmäträt
käla-gatyä vikurvataù
456
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sparço 'bhavat tato väyus
tvak sparçasya ca saìgrahaù
SYNONYMS
nabhasaù—from ether; çabda-tanmäträt—which evolves from the subtle element sound;
käla-gatyä—under the impulse of time; vikurvataù—undergoing transformation;
sparçaù—the subtle element touch; abhavat—evolved; tataù—thence; väyuù—air;
tvak—the sense of touch; sparçasya—of touch; ca—and; saìgrahaù—perception.
TRANSLATION
From ethereal existence, which evolves from sound, the next transformation takes place
under the impulse of time, and thus the subtle element touch and thence the air and sense
of touch become prominent.
PURPORT
In the course of time, when the subtle forms are transformed into gross forms, they
become the objects of touch. The objects of touch and the tactile sense also develop
after this evolution in time. Sound is the first sense object to exhibit material existence,
and from the perception of sound, touch perception evolves and from touch perception
the perception of sight. That is the way of the gradual evolution of our perceptive
objects.
SB 3.26.36
TEXT 36
Ma*duTv& k-i#=NaTv& c XaETYaMauZ<aTvMaev c )
WTaTSPaXaRSYa SPaXaRTv& TaNMaa}aTv& Na>aSvTa" )) 36 ))
mådutvaà kaöhinatvaà ca
çaityam uñëatvam eva ca
etat sparçasya sparçatvaà
tan-mätratvaà nabhasvataù
SYNONYMS
457
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mådutvam—softness; kaöhinatvam—hardness; ca—and; çaityam—cold; uñëatvam—heat;
eva—also; ca—and; etat—this; sparçasya—of the subtle element touch; sparçatvam—the
distinguishing attributes; tat-mätratvam—the subtle form; nabhasvataù—of air.
TRANSLATION
Softness and hardness and cold and heat are the distinguishing attributes of touch, which
is characterized as the subtle form of air.
PURPORT
Tangibility is the proof of form. In actuality, objects are perceived in two different ways.
They are either soft or hard, cold or hot, etc. This tangible action of the tactile sense is
the result of the evolution of air, which is produced from the sky.
SB 3.26.37
TEXT 37
cal/Na& VYaUhNa& Pa[aiáNaeRTa*Tv& d]VYaXaBdYaae" )
SaveRiNd]Yaa<aaMaaTMaTv& vaYaae" k-MaaRi>al/+a<aMa( )) 37 ))
cälanaà vyühanaà präptir
netåtvaà dravya-çabdayoù
sarvendriyäëäm ätmatvaà
väyoù karmäbhilakñaëam
SYNONYMS
cälanam—moving; vyühanam—mixing; präptiù—allowing approach; netåtvam—
carrying; dravya-çabdayoù—particles of substances and sound; sarva-indriyäëäm—of all
the senses; ätmatvam—providing for the proper functioning; väyoù—of air; karma—by
actions; abhilakñaëam—the distinct characteristics.
TRANSLATION
The action of the air is exhibited in movements, mixing, allowing approach to the objects
of sound and other sense perceptions, and providing for the proper functioning of all
other senses.
458
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
We can perceive the action of the air when the branches of a tree move or when dry
leaves on the ground collect together. Similarly, it is only by the action of the air that a
body moves, and when the air circulation is impeded, many diseases result. Paralysis,
nervous breakdowns, madness and many other diseases are actually due to an
insufficient circulation of air. In the Äyur-vedic system these diseases are treated on the
basis of air circulation. If from the beginning one takes care of the process of air
circulation, such diseases cannot take place. From the Äyur-veda as well as from the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is clear that so many activities are going on internally and
externally because of air alone, and as soon as there is some deficiency in the air
circulation, these activities cannot take place. Here it is clearly stated, netåtvaà dravyaçabdayoù.
Our sense of proprietorship over action is also due to the activity of the air. If
the air circulation is stifled, we cannot approach a place after hearing. If someone calls
us, we hear the sound because of the air circulation, and we approach that sound or the
place from which the sound comes. It is clearly said in this verse that these are all
movements of the air. The ability to detect odors is also due to the action of the air.
SB 3.26.38
TEXT 38
vaYaaeê SPaXaRTaNMaa}aad]UPa& dEveirTaad>aUTa( )
SaMauiTQaTa& TaTaSTaeJaê+aU æPaaePal/M>aNaMa( )) 38 ))
väyoç ca sparça-tanmäträd
rüpaà daiveritäd abhüt
samutthitaà tatas tejaç
cakñü rüpopalambhanam
SYNONYMS
väyoù—from air; ca—and; sparça-tanmäträt—which evolves from the subtle element
touch; rüpam—form; daiva-érität—according to destiny; abhüt—evolved; samutthitam—
arose; tataù—from that; tejaù—fire; cakñuù—sense of sight; rüpa—color and form;
upalambhanam—perceiving.
TRANSLATION
459
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
By interactions of the air and the sensations of touch, one receives different forms
according to destiny. By evolution of such forms, there is fire, and the eye sees different
forms in color.
PURPORT
Because of destiny, the touch sensation, the interactions of air, and the situation of the
mind, which is produced of the ethereal element, one receives a body according to his
previous activities. Needless to say, a living entity transmigrates from one form to
another. His form changes according to destiny and by the arrangement of a superior
authority which controls the interaction of air and the mental situation. Form is the
combination of different types of sense perception. Predestined activities are the plans
of the mental situation and the interaction of air.
SB 3.26.39
TEXT 39
d]VYaak*-iTaTv& Gau<aTaa VYai¢-Sa&SQaaTvMaev c )
TaeJaSTv& TaeJaSa" Saaiß æPaMaa}aSYa v*taYa" )) 39 ))
dravyäkåtitvaà guëatä
vyakti-saàsthätvam eva ca
tejastvaà tejasaù sädhvi
rüpa-mätrasya våttayaù
SYNONYMS
dravya—of an object; äkåtitvam—dimension; guëatä—quality; vyakti-saàsthätvam—
individuality; eva—also; ca—and; tejastvam—effulgence; tejasaù—of fire; sädhvi—O
virtuous lady; rüpa-mätrasya—of the subtle element form; våttayaù—the characteristics.
TRANSLATION
My dear mother, the characteristics of form are understood by dimension, quality and
individuality. The form of fire is appreciated by its effulgence.
PURPORT
460
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Every form that we appreciate has its particular dimensions and characteristics. The
quality of a particular object is appreciated by its utility. But the form of sound is
independent. Forms which are invisible can be understood only by touch; that is the
independent appreciation of invisible form. Visible forms are understood by analytical
study of their constitution. The constitution of a certain object is appreciated by its
internal action. For example, the form of salt is appreciated by the interaction of salty
tastes, and the form of sugar is appreciated by the interaction of sweet tastes. Tastes and
qualitative constitution are the basic principles in understanding the form of an object.
SB 3.26.40
TEXT 40
ÛaeTaNa& PacNa& PaaNaMadNa& ihMaMadRNaMa( )
TaeJaSaae v*taYaSTveTaa" Xaaez<a& +auta*@ev c )) 40 ))
dyotanaà pacanaà pänam
adanaà hima-mardanam
tejaso våttayas tv etäù
çoñaëaà kñut tåò eva ca
SYNONYMS
dyotanam—illumination; pacanam—cooking, digesting; pänam—drinking; adanam—
eating; hima-mardanam—destroying cold; tejasaù—of fire; våttayaù—functions; tu—
indeed; etäù—these; çoñaëam—evaporating; kñut—hunger; tåö—thirst; eva—also; ca—
and.
TRANSLATION
Fire is appreciated by its light and by its ability to cook, to digest, to destroy cold, to
evaporate, and to give rise to hunger, thirst, eating and drinking.
PURPORT
The first symptoms of fire are distribution of light and heat, and the existence of fire is
also perceived in the stomach. Without fire we cannot digest what we eat. Without
digestion there is no hunger and thirst or power to eat and drink. When there is
insufficient hunger and thirst, it is understood that there is a shortage of fire within the
461
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
stomach, and the Äyur-vedic treatment is performed in connection with the fire
element, agni-mändyam. Since fire is increased by the secretion of bile, the treatment is
to increase bile secretion. The Äyur-vedic treatment thus corroborates the statements in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The characteristic of fire in subduing the influence of cold is
known to everyone. Severe cold can always be counteracted by fire.
SB 3.26.41
TEXT 41
æPaMaa}aaiÜku-vaR<aataeJaSaae dEvcaeidTaaTa( )
rSaMaa}aMa>aUtaSMaadM>aae iJaûa rSaGa]h" )) 41 ))
rüpa-mäträd vikurväëät
tejaso daiva-codität
rasa-mätram abhüt tasmäd
ambho jihvä rasa-grahaù
SYNONYMS
rüpa-mäträt—which evolves from the subtle element form; vikurväëät—undergoing
transformation; tejasaù—from fire; daiva-codität—under a superior arrangement; rasamätram—
the subtle element taste; abhüt—became manifested; tasmät—from that;
ambhaù—water; jihvä—the sense of taste; rasa-grahaù—which perceives taste.
TRANSLATION
By the interaction of fire and the visual sensation, the subtle element taste evolves under
a superior arrangement. From taste, water is produced, and the tongue, which perceives
taste, is also manifested.
PURPORT
The tongue is described here as the instrument for acquiring knowledge of taste.
Because taste is a product of water, there is always saliva on the tongue.
SB 3.26.42
TEXT 42
k-zaYaae MaDauriSTa¢-" k-Èã wiTa NaEk-Daa )
462
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
>aaEiTak-aNaa& ivk-are<a rSa Wk-ae ivi>aÛTae )) 42 ))
kañäyo madhuras tiktaù
kaöv amla iti naikadhä
bhautikänäà vikäreëa
rasa eko vibhidyate
SYNONYMS
kañäyaù—astringent; madhuraù—sweet; tiktaù—bitter; kaöu—pungent; amlaù—sour;
iti—thus; na-ekadhä—manifoldly; bhautikänäm—of other substances; vikäreëa—by
transformation; rasaù—the subtle element taste; ekaù—originally one; vibhidyate—is
divided.
TRANSLATION
Although originally one, taste becomes manifold as astringent, sweet, bitter, pungent,
sour and salty due to contact with other substances.
SB 3.26.43
TEXT 43
(c)e-dNa& iPa<@Na& Ta*iá" Pa[a<aNaaPYaaYaNaaeNdNaMa( )
TaaPaaPaNaaedae >aUYaSTvMaM>aSaae v*taYaiSTvMaa" )) 43 ))
kledanaà piëòanaà tåptiù
präëanäpyäyanondanam
täpäpanodo bhüyastvam
ambhaso våttayas tv imäù
SYNONYMS
kledanam—moistening; piëòanam—coagulating; tåptiù—causing satisfaction; präëana—
maintaining life; äpyäyana—refreshing; undanam—softening; täpa—heat; apanodaù—
driving away; bhüyastvam—being in abundance; ambhasaù—of water; våttayaù—the
characteristic functions; tu—in fact; imäù—these.
463
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The characteristics of water are exhibited by its moistening other substances, coagulating
various mixtures, causing satisfaction, maintaining life, softening things, driving away
heat, incessantly supplying itself to reservoirs of water, and refreshing by slaking thirst.
PURPORT
Starvation can be mitigated by drinking water. It is sometimes found that if a person
who has taken a vow to fast takes a little water at intervals, the exhaustion of fasting is
at once mitigated. In the Vedas it is also stated, äpomayaù präëaù: "Life depends on
water." With water, anything can be moistened or dampened. Flour dough can be
prepared with a mixture of water. Mud is made by mixing earth with water. As stated in
the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, water is the cementing ingredient of different
material elements. If we build a house, water is actually the constituent in making the
bricks. Fire, water and air are the exchanging elements for the entire material
manifestation, but water is most prominent. Also, excessive heat can be reduced simply
by pouring water on the heated field.
SB 3.26.44
TEXT 44
rSaMaa}aaiÜku-vaR<aadM>aSaae dEvcaeidTaaTa( )
GaNDaMaa}aMa>aUtaSMaaTPa*Qvq ga]a<aSTau GaNDaGa" )) 44 ))
rasa-mäträd vikurväëäd
ambhaso daiva-codität
gandha-mätram abhüt tasmät
påthvé ghräëas tu gandhagaù
SYNONYMS
rasa-mäträt—which evolves from the subtle element taste; vikurväëät—undergoing
transformation; ambhasaù—from water; daiva-codität—by a superior arrangement;
gandha-mätram—the subtle element odor; abhüt—became manifest; tasmät—from that;
påthvé—earth; ghräëaù—the olfactory sense; tu—in fact; gandha-gaù—which perceives
aromas.
464
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Due to the interaction of water with the taste perception, the subtle element odor evolves
under superior arrangement. Thence the earth and the olfactory sense, by which we can
variously experience the aroma of the earth, become manifest.
SB 3.26.45
TEXT 45
k-rM>aPaUiTaSaaEr>YaXaaNTaaeGa]aãaidi>a" Pa*Qak(- )
d]VYaavYavvEzMYaaÓNDa Wk-ae ivi>aÛTae )) 45 ))
karambha-püti-saurabhyaçäntogrämlädibhiù
påthak
dravyävayava-vaiñamyäd
gandha eko vibhidyate
SYNONYMS
karambha—mixed; püti—offensive; saurabhya—fragrant; çänta—mild; ugra—strong,
pungent; amla—acid; ädibhiù—and so on; påthak—separately; dravya—of substance;
avayava—of portions; vaiñamyät—according to diversity; gandhaù—odor; ekaù—one;
vibhidyate—is divided.
TRANSLATION
Odor, although one, becomes many—as mixed, offensive, fragrant, mild, strong, acidic
and so on—according to the proportions of associated substances.
PURPORT
Mixed smell is sometimes perceived in foodstuffs prepared from various ingredients,
such as vegetables mixed with different kinds of spices and asafoetida. Bad odors are
perceived in filthy places, good smells are perceived from camphor, menthol and similar
other products, pungent smells are perceived from garlic and onions, and acidic smells
are perceived from turmeric and similar sour substances. The original aroma is the odor
emanating from the earth, and when it is mixed with different substances, this odor
appears in different ways.
465
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.26.46
TEXT 46
>aavNa& b]ø<a" SQaaNa& Daar<a& SaiÜXaez<aMa( )
SavRSatvGau<aaeÙed" Pa*iQavqv*ital/+a<aMa( )) 46 ))
bhävanaà brahmaëaù sthänaà
dhäraëaà sad-viçeñaëam
sarva-sattva-guëodbhedaù
påthivé-våtti-lakñaëam
SYNONYMS
bhävanam—modeling forms; brahmaëaù—of the Supreme Brahman; sthänam—
constructing places of residence; dhäraëam—containing substances; sat-viçeñaëam—
distinguishing the open space; sarva—all; sattva—of existence; guëa—qualities;
udbhedaù—the place for manifestation; påthivé—of earth; våtti—of the functions;
lakñaëam—the characteristics.
TRANSLATION
The characteristics of the functions of earth can be perceived by modeling forms of the
Supreme Brahman, by constructing places of residence, by preparing pots to contain
water, etc. In other words, the earth is the place of sustenance for all elements.
PURPORT
Different elements, such as sound, sky, air, fire and water, can be perceived in the earth.
Another feature of the earth especially mentioned here is that earth can manifest
different forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By this statement of Kapila's it
is confirmed that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Brahman, has innumerable
forms, which are described in the scriptures. By manipulation of earth and its products,
such as stone, wood and jewels, these forms of the Supreme Lord can be present before
our eyes. When a form of Lord Kåñëa or Lord Viñëu is manifested by presentation of a
statue made of earth, it is not imaginary. The earth gives shape to the Lord's forms as
described in the scriptures.
In the Brahma-saàhitä there is description of Lord Kåñëa's lands, the variegatedness of
466
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the spiritual abode, and the forms of the Lord playing a flute with His spiritual body. All
these forms are described in the scriptures, and when they are thus presented they
become worshipable. They are not imaginary as the Mäyäväda philosophy says.
Sometimes the word bhävana is misinterpreted as "imagination." But bhävana does not
mean "imagination;" it means giving actual shape to the description of Vedic literature.
Earth is the ultimate transformation of all living entities and their respective modes of
material nature.
SB 3.26.47
TEXT 47
Na>aaeGau<aivXaezae_QaaeR YaSYa TaC^\ae}aMauCYaTae )
vaYaaeGauR<aivXaezae_QaaeR YaSYa TaTSPaXaRNa& ivdu" )) 47 ))
nabho-guëa-viçeño 'rtho
yasya tac chrotram ucyate
väyor guëa-viçeño 'rtho
yasya tat sparçanaà viduù
SYNONYMS
nabhaù-guëa-viçeñaù—the distinctive characteristic of sky (sound); arthaù—object of
perception; yasya—whose; tat—that; çrotram—the auditory sense; ucyate—is called;
väyoù guëa-viçeñaù—the distinctive characteristic of air (touch); arthaù—object of
perception; yasya—whose; tat—that; sparçanam—the tactile sense; viduù—they know.
TRANSLATION
The sense whose object of perception is sound is called the auditory sense, and that whose
object of perception is touch is called the tactile sense.
PURPORT
Sound is one of the qualifications of the sky and is the subject matter for hearing.
Similarly, touch is the qualification of the air and is the subject of the touch sensation.
SB 3.26.48
TEXT 48
467
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TaeJaaeGau<aivXaezae_QaaeR YaSYa TaÀ+auåCYaTae )
AM>aaeGau<aivXaezae_QaaeR YaSYa Tad]SaNa& ivdu" )
>aUMaeGauR<aivXaezae_QaaeR YaSYa Sa ga]a<a oCYaTae )) 48 ))
tejo-guëa-viçeño 'rtho
yasya tac cakñur ucyate
ambho-guëa-viçeño 'rtho
yasya tad rasanaà viduù
bhümer guëa-viçeño 'rtho
yasya sa ghräëa ucyate
SYNONYMS
tejaù-guëa-viçeñaù—the distinctive characteristic of fire (form); arthaù—object of
perception; yasya—whose; tat—that; cakñuù—the sense of sight; ucyate—is called;
ambhaù-guëa-viçeñaù—the distinctive characteristic of water (taste); arthaù—object of
perception; yasya—whose; tat—that; rasanam—the sense of taste; viduù—they know;
bhümeù guëa-viçeñaù—the distinctive characteristic of earth (odor); arthaù—object of
perception; yasya—whose; saù—that; ghräëaù—the sense of smell; ucyate—is called.
TRANSLATION
The sense whose object of perception is form, the distinctive characteristic of fire, is the
sense of sight. The sense whose object of perception is taste, the distinctive characteristic
of water, is known as the sense of taste. Finally, the sense whose object of perception is
odor, the distinctive characteristic of earth, is called the sense of smell.
SB 3.26.49
TEXT 49
ParSYa d*XYaTae DaMaaeR ùPariSMaNa( SaMaNvYaaTa( )
ATaae ivXaezae >aavaNaa& >aUMaavevaePal/+YaTae )) 49 ))
parasya dåçyate dharmo
hy aparasmin samanvayät
ato viçeño bhävänäà
468
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bhümäv evopalakñyate
SYNONYMS
parasya—of the cause; dåçyate—is observed; dharmaù—the characteristics; hi—indeed;
aparasmin—in the effect; samanvayät—in order; ataù—hence; viçeñaù—the distinctive
characteristic; bhävänäm—of all the elements; bhümau—in earth; eva—alone;
upalakñyate—is observed.
TRANSLATION
Since the cause exists in its effect as well, the characteristics of the former are observed
in the latter. That is why the peculiarities of all the elements exist in the earth alone.
PURPORT
Sound is the cause of the sky, sky is the cause of the air, air is the cause of fire, fire is the
cause of water, and water is the cause of earth. In the sky there is only sound; in the air
there are sound and touch; in the fire there are sound, touch and form; in water there
are sound, touch, form and taste; and in the earth there are sound, touch, form, taste
and smell. Therefore earth is the reservoir of all the qualities of the other elements.
Earth is the sum total of all other elements. The earth has all five qualities of the
elements, water has four qualities, fire has three, air has two, and the sky has only one
quality, sound.
SB 3.26.50
TEXT 50
WTaaNYaSa&hTYa Yada MahdadqiNa Saá vE )
k-al/k-MaRGau<aaePaeTaae JaGadaidåPaaivXaTa( )) 50 ))
etäny asaàhatya yadä
mahad-ädéni sapta vai
käla-karma-guëopeto
jagad-ädir upäviçat
SYNONYMS
469
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
etäni—these; asaàhatya—being unmixed; yadä—when; mahat-ädéni—the mahat-tattva,
false ego and five gross elements; sapta—all together seven; vai—in fact; käla—time;
karma—work; guëa—and the three modes of material nature; upetaù—accompanied by;
jagat-ädiù—the origin of creation; upäviçat—entered.
TRANSLATION
When all these elements were unmixed, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the origin
of creation, along with time, work, and the qualities of the modes of material nature,
entered into the universe with the total material energy in seven divisions.
PURPORT
After stating the generation of the causes, Kapiladeva speaks about the generation of
the effects. At that time when the causes were unmixed, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, in His feature of Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, entered within each universe.
Accompanying Him were all of the seven primary elements—the five material elements,
the total energy (mahat-tattva) and the false ego. This entrance of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead involves His entering even the atoms of the material world.
This is confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.35): aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntarastham.
He is not only within the universe, but within the atoms also. He is within the
heart of every living entity. Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, entered into everything.
SB 3.26.51
TEXT 51
TaTaSTaeNaaNauivÖe>Yaae Yau¢e->Yaae_<@MaceTaNaMa( )
oiTQaTa& Pauåzae YaSMaadudiTaïdSaaE ivra$( )) 51 ))
tatas tenänuviddhebhyo
yuktebhyo 'ëòam acetanam
utthitaà puruño yasmäd
udatiñöhad asau viräö
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; tena—by the Lord; anuviddhebhyaù—from these seven principles, roused
470
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
into activity; yuktebhyaù—united; aëòam—an egg; acetanam—unintelligent; utthitam—
arose; puruñaù—Cosmic Being; yasmät—from which; udatiñöhat—appeared; asau—that;
viräö—celebrated.
TRANSLATION
From these seven principles, roused into activity and united by the presence of the Lord,
an unintelligent egg arose, from which appeared the celebrated Cosmic Being.
PURPORT
In sex life, the combination of matter from the parents, which involves emulsification
and secretion, creates the situation whereby a soul is received within matter, and the
combination of matter gradually develops into a complete body. The same principle
exists in the universal creation: the ingredients were present, but only when the Lord
entered into the material elements was matter actually agitated. That is the cause of
creation. We can see this in our ordinary experience. Although we may have clay, water
and fire, the elements take the shape of a brick only when we labor to combine them.
Without the living energy, there is no possibility that matter can take shape. Similarly,
this material world does not develop unless agitated by the Supreme Lord as the viräöpuruña.
Yasmäd udatiñöhad asau viräö: by His agitation, space was created, and the
universal form of the Lord also manifested therein.
SB 3.26.52
TEXT 52
WTad<@& ivXaeza:Ya& §-Mav*ÖEdRXaaetarE" )
TaaeYaaidi>a" Pairv*Ta& Pa[DaaNaeNaav*TaEbRih" )
Ya}a l/aek-ivTaaNaae_Ya& æPa& >aGavTaae hre" )) 52 ))
etad aëòaà viçeñäkhyaà
krama-våddhair daçottaraiù
toyädibhiù parivåtaà
pradhänenävåtair bahiù
yatra loka-vitäno 'yaà
rüpaà bhagavato hareù
471
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
etat—this; aëòam—egg; viçeña-äkhyam—called viçeña; krama—one after another;
våddhaiù—increased; daça—ten times; uttaraiù—greater; toya-ädibhiù—by water and so
on; parivåtam—enveloped; pradhänena—by pradhäna; ävåtaiù—covered; bahiù—on the
outside; yatra—where; loka-vitänaù—the extension of the planetary systems; ayam—
this; rüpam—form; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hareù—of
Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
This universal egg, or the universe in the shape of an egg, is called the manifestation of
material energy. Its layers of water, air, fire, sky, ego and mahat-tattva increase in
thickness one after another. Each layer is ten times bigger than the previous one, and the
final outside layer is covered by pradhäna. Within this egg is the universal form of Lord
Hari, of whose body the fourteen planetary systems are parts.
PURPORT
This universe, or the universal sky which we can visualize with its innumerable planets,
is shaped just like an egg. As an egg is covered by a shell, the universe is also covered by
various layers. The first layer is water, the next is fire, then air, then sky, and the
ultimate holding crust is pradhäna. Within this egglike universe is the universal form of
the Lord as the viräö-puruña. All the different planetary situations are parts of His body.
This is already explained in the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Second Canto. The
planetary systems are considered to form different bodily parts of that universal form of
the Lord. Persons who cannot directly engage in the worship of the transcendental form
of the Lord are advised to think of and worship this universal form. The lowest
planetary system, Pätäla, is considered to be the sole of the Supreme Lord, and the earth
is considered to be the belly of the Lord. Brahmaloka, or the highest planetary system,
where Brahmä lives, is considered to be the head of the Lord.
This viräö-puruña is considered an incarnation of the Lord. The original form of the
Lord is Kåñëa, as confirmed in Brahma-saàhitä: ädi-puruña. The viräö-puruña is also
puruña, but He is not ädi-puruña. The ädi-puruña is Kåñëa. Éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù saccid-
änanda-vigrahaù/ anädir ädir govindaù [Bs. 5.1]. In Bhagavad-gétä Kåñëa is also
accepted as the ädi-puruña, the original. Kåñëa says, "No one is greater than I." There are
innumerable expansions of the Lord, and all of them are puruñas, or enjoyers, but
472
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
neither the viräö-puruña nor the puruña-avatäras—Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu,
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu—nor any of the many other
expansions, is the original. In each universe there are Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, the viräöpuruña
and Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. The active manifestation of the viräö-puruña is
described here. persons who are in the lower grade of understanding regarding the
Supreme Personality of Godhead may think of the universal form of the Lord, for that is
advised in the Bhägavatam.
The dimensions of the universe are estimated here. The outer covering is made of layers
of water, air, fire, sky, ego and mahat-tattva, and each layer is ten times greater than the
one previous. The space within the hollow of the universe cannot be measured by any
human scientist or anyone else, and beyond the hollow there are seven coverings, each
one ten times greater than the one preceding it. The layer of water is ten times greater
than the diameter of the universe, and the layer of fire is ten times greater than that of
water. Similarly, the layer of air is ten times greater than that of fire. These dimensions
are all inconceivable to the tiny brain of a human being.
It is also stated that this description is of only one egglike universe. There are
innumerable universes besides this one, and some of them are many, many times greater.
It is considered, in fact, that this universe is the smallest; therefore the predominating
superintendent, or Brahmä, has only four heads for management. In other universes,
which are far greater than this one, Brahmä has more heads. In the Caitanya-caritämåta
it is stated that all these Brahmäs were called one day by Lord Kåñëa on the inquiry of
the small Brahmä, who, after seeing all the larger Brahmäs, was thunderstruck. That is
the inconceivable potency of the Lord. No one can measure the length and breadth of
God by speculation or by false identification with God. These attempts are symptoms of
lunacy.
SB 3.26.53
TEXT 53
ihr<MaYaad<@k-aeXaaduTQaaYa Sail/le/XaYaaTa( )
TaMaaivXYa Mahadevae bhuDaa iNaibR>aed %Ma( )) 53 ))
hiraëmayäd aëòa-koçäd
utthäya salile çayät
tam äviçya mahä-devo
bahudhä nirbibheda kham
473
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
hiraëmayät—golden; aëòa-koçät—from the egg; utthäya—arising; salile—on the water;
çayät—lying; tam—in it; äviçya—having entered; mahä-devaù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; bahudhä—in many ways; nirbibheda—divided; kham—
apertures.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the viräö-puruña, situated Himself in that golden
egg, which was lying on the water, and He divided it into many departments.
SB 3.26.54
TEXT 54
iNari>aÛTaaSYa Pa[QaMa& Mau%& va<aq TaTaae_>avTa( )
va<Yaa viörQaae NaaSae Pa[a<aaeTaae ga]a<a WTaYaae" )) 54 ))
nirabhidyatäsya prathamaà
mukhaà väëé tato 'bhavat
väëyä vahnir atho näse
präëoto ghräëa etayoù
SYNONYMS
nirabhidyata—appeared; asya—of Him; prathamam—first of all; mukham—a mouth;
väëé—the organ of speech; tataù—then; abhavat—came forth; väëyä—with the organ
of speech; vahniù—the god of fire; athaù—then; näse—the two nostrils; präëa—the
vital air; utaù—joined; ghräëaù—the olfactory sense; etayoù—in them.
TRANSLATION
First of all a mouth appeared in Him, and then came forth the organ of speech, and with
it the god of fire, the deity who presides over that organ. Then a pair of nostrils appeared,
and in them appeared the olfactory sense, as well as präëa, the vital air.
PURPORT
With the manifestation of speech, fire also became manifested, and with the
474
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
manifestation of nostrils the vital air, the breathing process and the sense of smell also
became manifested.
SB 3.26.55
TEXT 55
ga]a<aaÜaYauri>aÛeTaaMai+a<aq c+aureTaYaae" )
TaSMaaTSaUYaaeR NYai>aÛeTaa& k-<aaOE é[ae}a& TaTaae idXa" )) 55 ))
ghräëäd väyur abhidyetäm
akñiëé cakñur etayoù
tasmät süryo nyabhidyetäà
karëau çrotraà tato diçaù
SYNONYMS
ghräëät—from the olfactory sense; väyuù—the wind-god; abhidyetäm—appeared;
akñiëé—the two eyes; cakñuù—the sense of sight; etayoù—in them; tasmät—from that;
süryaù—the sun-god; nyabhidyetäm—appeared; karëau—the two ears; çrotram—the
auditory sense; tataù—from that; diçaù—the deities presiding over the directions.
TRANSLATION
In the wake of the olfactory sense came the wind-god, who presides over that sense.
Thereafter a pair of eyes appeared in the universal form, and in them the sense of sight.
In the wake of this sense came the sun-god, who presides over it. Next there appeared in
Him a pair of ears, and in them the auditory sense and in its wake the Dig-devatäs, or the
deities who preside over the directions.
PURPORT
The appearance of different bodily parts of the Lord's universal form and the
appearance of the presiding deities of those bodily parts is being described. As in the
womb of a mother a child gradually grows different bodily parts, so in the universal
womb the universal form of the Lord gives rise to the creation of various paraphernalia.
The senses appear, and over each of them there is a presiding deity. It is corroborated by
this statement of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and also by Brahma-saàhitä, that the sun
appeared after the appearance of the eyes of the universal form of the Lord. The sun is
475
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
dependent on the eyes of the universal form. The Brahma-saàhitä also says that the sun
is the eye of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Yac-cakñur eña savitä. Savitä
means "the sun." The sun is the eye of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Actually,
everything is created by the universal body of the Supreme Godhead. Material nature is
simply the supplier of materials. The creation is actually done by the Supreme Lord, as
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10). Mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram: "Under
My direction does material nature create all moving and nonmoving objects in the
cosmic creation."
SB 3.26.56
TEXT 56
iNaibR>aed ivraJaSTvGa]aeMaXMaè...vadYaSTaTa" )
TaTa AaezDaYaêaSaNa( iXaén& iNaibRi>ade TaTa" )) 56 ))
nirbibheda viräjas tvagroma-
çmaçrv-ädayas tataù
tata oñadhayaç cäsan
çiçnaà nirbibhide tataù
SYNONYMS
nirbibheda—appeared; viräjaù—of the universal form; tvak—skin; roma—hair;
çmaçru—beard, mustache; ädayaù—and so on; tataù—then; tataù—thereupon;
oñadhayaù—the herbs and drugs; ca—and; äsan—appeared; çiçnam—genitals;
nirbibhide—appeared; tataù—after this.
TRANSLATION
Then the universal form of the Lord, the viräö-puruña, manifested His skin, and
thereupon the hair, mustache and beard appeared. After this all the herbs and drugs
became manifested, and then His genitals also appeared.
PURPORT
The skin is the site of the touch sensation. The demigods who control the production of
herbs and medicinal drugs are the deities presiding over the tactile sense.
SB 3.26.57
476
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 57
reTaSTaSMaadaPa AaSaiàri>aÛTa vE GaudMa( )
GaudadPaaNaae_PaaNaaÀ Ma*TYaul/aeRk->aYaªr" )) 57 ))
retas tasmäd äpa äsan
nirabhidyata vai gudam
gudäd apäno 'pänäc ca
måtyur loka-bhayaìkaraù
SYNONYMS
retaù—semen; tasmät—from that; äpaù—the god who presides over the waters; äsan—
appeared; nirabhidyata—was manifested; vai—indeed; gudam—an anus; gudät—from
the anus; apänaù—the organ of defecation; apänät—from the organ of defecation; ca—
and; måtyuù—death; loka-bhayam-karaù—causing fear throughout the universe.
TRANSLATION
After this, semen (the faculty of procreation) and the god who presides over the waters
appeared. Next appeared an anus and then the organs of defecation and thereupon the god
of death, who is feared throughout the universe.
PURPORT
It is understood herewith that the faculty to discharge semen is the cause of death.
Therefore, yogés and transcendentalists who want to live for greater spans of life
voluntarily restrain themselves from discharging semen. The more one can restrain the
discharge of semen, the more one can be aloof from the problem of death. There are
many yogés living up to three hundred or seven hundred years by this process, and in the
Bhägavatam it is clearly stated that discharging semen is the cause of horrible death. The
more one is addicted to sexual enjoyment, the more susceptible he is to a quick death.
SB 3.26.58
TEXT 58
hSTaaE c iNari>aÛeTaa& bl&/ Taa>Yaa& TaTa" Svra$( )
477
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PaadaE c iNari>aÛeTaa& GaiTaSTaa>Yaa& TaTaae hir" )) 58 ))
hastau ca nirabhidyetäà
balaà täbhyäà tataù svaräö
pädau ca nirabhidyetäà
gatis täbhyäà tato hariù
SYNONYMS
hastau—the two hands; ca—and; nirabhidyetäm—were manifested; balam—power;
täbhyäm—from them; tataù—thereafter; svaräö—Lord Indra; pädau—the two feet; ca—
and; nirabhidyetäm—became manifested; gatiù—the process of movement; täbhyäm—
from them; tataù—then; hariù—Lord Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the two hands of the universal form of the Lord became manifested, and with
them the power of grasping and dropping things, and after that Lord Indra appeared. Next
the legs became manifested, and with them the process of movement, and after that Lord
Viñëu appeared.
PURPORT
The deity presiding over the hands is Indra, and the presiding deity of movement is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu. Viñëu appeared on the appearance of the legs
of the viräö-puruña.
SB 3.26.59
TEXT 59
Naa@yae_SYa iNari>aÛNTa Taa>Yaae l/aeihTaMaa>a*TaMa( )
NaÛSTaTa" SaMa>avàudr& iNari>aÛTa )) 59 ))
näòyo 'sya nirabhidyanta
täbhyo lohitam äbhåtam
nadyas tataù samabhavann
udaraà nirabhidyata
478
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
näòyaù—the veins; asya—of the universal form; nirabhidyanta—became manifested;
täbhyaù—from them; lohitam—blood; äbhåtam—was produced; nadyaù—the rivers;
tataù—from that; samabhavan—appeared; udaram—the stomach; nirabhidyata—
became manifested.
TRANSLATION
The veins of the universal body became manifested and thereafter the red corpuscles, or
blood. In their wake came the rivers (the deities presiding over the veins), and then
appeared an abdomen.
PURPORT
Blood veins are compared to rivers; when the veins were manifested in the universal
form, the rivers in the various planets were also manifested. The controlling deity of the
rivers is also the controlling deity of the nervous system. In Äyur-vedic treatment, those
who are suffering from the disease of nervous instability are recommended to take a
bath by dipping into a flowing river.
SB 3.26.60
TEXT 60
+auiTPaPaaSae TaTa" SYaaTaa& SaMaud]STveTaYaaer>aUTa( )
AQaaSYa ôdYa& i>aà& ôdYaaNMaNa oiTQaTaMa( )) 60 ))
kñut-pipäse tataù syätäà
samudras tv etayor abhüt
athäsya hådayaà bhinnaà
hådayän mana utthitam
SYNONYMS
kñut-pipäse—hunger and thirst; tataù—then; syätäm—appeared; samudraù—the ocean;
tu—then; etayoù—in their wake; abhüt—appeared; atha—then; asya—of the universal
form; hådayam—a heart; bhinnam—appeared; hådayät—from the heart; manaù—the
mind; utthitam—appeared.
479
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Next grew feelings of hunger and thirst, and in their wake came the manifestation of the
oceans. Then a heart became manifest, and in the wake of the heart the mind appeared.
PURPORT
The ocean is considered to be the presiding deity of the abdomen, where the feelings of
hunger and thirst originate. When there is an irregularity in hunger and thirst, one is
advised, according to Äyur-vedic treatment, to take a bath in the ocean.
SB 3.26.61
TEXT 61
MaNaSaêNd]Maa JaaTaae buiÖbuRÖeiGaRra& PaiTa" )
AhªarSTaTaae åd]iêta& cETYaSTaTaae_>avTa( )) 61 ))
manasaç candramä jäto
buddhir buddher giräà patiù
ahaìkäras tato rudraç
cittaà caityas tato 'bhavat
SYNONYMS
manasaù—from the mind; candramäù—the moon; jätaù—appeared; buddhiù—
intelligence; buddheù—from intelligence; giräm patiù—the lord of speech (Brahmä);
ahaìkäraù—false ego; tataù—then; rudraù—Lord Çiva; cittam—consciousness;
caityaù—the deity presiding over consciousness; tataù—then; abhavat—appeared.
TRANSLATION
After the mind, the moon appeared. Intelligence appeared next, and after intelligence,
Lord Brahmä appeared. Then the false ego appeared and then Lord Çiva, and after the
appearance of Lord Çiva came consciousness and the deity presiding over consciousness.
PURPORT
The moon appeared after the appearance of mind, and this indicates that the moon is
the presiding deity of mind. Similarly, Lord Brahmä, appearing after intelligence, is the
480
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
presiding deity of intelligence, and Lord Çiva, who appears after false ego, is the
presiding deity of false ego. In other words, it is indicated that the moon-god is in the
mode of goodness, whereas Lord Brahmä is in the mode of passion and Lord Çiva is in
the mode of ignorance. The appearance of consciousness after the appearance of false
ego indicates that, from the beginning, material consciousness is under the mode of
ignorance and that one therefore has to purify himself by purifying his consciousness.
This purificatory process is called Kåñëa consciousness. As soon as the consciousness is
purified, the false ego disappears. Identification of the body with the self is called false
identification, or false ego. Lord Caitanya confirms this in His Çikñäñöaka. He states that
the first result of chanting the mahä-mantra, Hare Kåñëa, is that dirt is cleared from the
consciousness, or the mirror of the mind, and then at once the blazing fire of material
existence is over. The blazing fire of material existence is due to false ego, but as soon as
the false ego is removed, one can understand his real identity. At that point he is
actually liberated from the clutches of mäyä. As soon as one is freed from the clutches of
false ego, his intelligence also becomes purified, and then his mind is always engaged
upon the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared on the full-moon day as Gauracandra, or
the spotless transcendental moon. The material moon has spots on it, but on the
transcendental moon, Gauracandra, there are no spots. In order to fix the purified mind
in the service of the Supreme Lord, one has to worship the spotless moon, Gauracandra.
Those who are materially passionate or those who want to exhibit their intelligence for
material advancement in life are generally worshipers of Lord Brahmä, and persons who
are in the gross ignorance of identifying with the body worship Lord Çiva. Materialists
like Hiraëyakaçipu and Rävaëa are worshipers of Lord Brahmä or Lord Çiva, but
Prahläda and other devotees in the service of Kåñëa consciousness worship the Supreme
Lord, the Personality of Godhead.
SB 3.26.62
TEXT 62
WTae ù>YauiTQaTaa deva NaEvaSYaaeTQaaPaNae_Xak-Na( )
PauNaraivivéu" %aiNa TaMauTQaaPaiYaTau& §-MaaTa( )) 62 ))
ete hy abhyutthitä devä
naiväsyotthäpane 'çakan
punar äviviçuù khäni
481
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tam utthäpayituà kramät
SYNONYMS
ete—these; hi—indeed; abhyutthitäù—manifested; deväù—demigods; na—not; eva—at
all; asya—of the viräö-puruña; utthäpane—in waking; açakan—were able; punaù—again;
äviviçuù—they entered; khäni—the apertures of the body; tam—Him; utthäpayitum—to
awaken; kramät—one after another.
TRANSLATION
When the demigods and presiding deities of the various senses were thus manifested, they
wanted to wake their origin of appearance. But upon failing to do so, they reentered the
body of the viräö-puruña one after another in order to wake Him.
PURPORT
In order to wake the sleeping Deity-controller within, one has to rechannel the sense
activities from concentration on the outside to concentration inside. In the following
verses, the sense activities which are required to wake the viräö-puruña will be explained
very nicely.
SB 3.26.63
TEXT 63
viövaRca Mau%& >aeJae NaaediTaïtada ivra$( )
ga]a<aeNa NaaiSake- vaYauNaaeRdiTaïtada ivra$( )) 63 ))
vahnir väcä mukhaà bheje
nodatiñöhat tadä viräö
ghräëena näsike väyur
nodatiñöhat tadä viräö
SYNONYMS
vahniù—the god of fire; väcä—with the organ of speech; mukham—the mouth; bheje—
entered; na—not; udatiñöhat—did arise; tadä—then; viräö—the viräö-puruña;
ghräëena—with the olfactory sense; näsike—into His two nostrils; väyuù—the god of
482
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the winds; na—not; udatiñöhat—did arise; tadä—then; viräö—the viräö-puruña.
TRANSLATION
The god of fire entered His mouth with the organ of speech, but the viräö-puruña could
not be aroused. Then the god of wind entered His nostrils with the sense of smell, but
still the viräö-puruña refused to be awakened.
SB 3.26.64
TEXT 64
Ai+a<aq c+auzaidTYaae NaaediTaïtada ivra$( )
é[ae}ae<a k-<aaOE c idXaae NaaediTaïtada ivra$( )) 64 ))
akñiëé cakñuñädityo
nodatiñöhat tadä viräö
çrotreëa karëau ca diço
nodatiñöhat tadä viräö
SYNONYMS
akñiëé—His two eyes; cakñuñä—with the sense of sight; ädityaù—the sun-god; na—not;
udatiñöhat—did arise; tadä—then; viräö—the viräö-puruña; çrotreëa—with the sense of
hearing; karëau—His two ears; ca—and; diçaù—the deities presiding over the
directions; na—not; udatiñöhat—did arise; tadä—then; viräö—the viräö-puruña.
TRANSLATION
The sun-god entered the eyes of the viräö-puruña with the sense of sight, but still the
viräö-puruña did not get up. Similarly, the predominating deities of the directions entered
through His ears with the sense of hearing, but still He did not get up.
SB 3.26.65
TEXT 65
Tvc& raeMai>araezDYaae NaaediTaïtada ivra$( )
reTaSaa iXaénMaaPaSTau NaaediTaïtada ivra$( )) 65 ))
483
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tvacaà romabhir oñadhyo
nodatiñöhat tadä viräö
retasä çiçnam äpas tu
nodatiñöhat tadä viräö
SYNONYMS
tvacam—the skin of the viräö-puruña; romabhiù—with the hair on the body; oñadhyaù—
the deities presiding over the herbs and plants; na—not; udatiñöhat—did arise; tadä—
then; viräö—the viräö-puruña; retasä—with the faculty of procreation; çiçnam—the
organ of generation; äpaù—the water-god; tu—then; na—not; udatiñöhat—did arise;
tadä—then; viräö—the viräö-puruña.
TRANSLATION
The predominating deities of the skin, herbs and seasoning plants entered the skin of the
viräö-puruña with the hair of the body, but the Cosmic Being refused to get up even then.
The god predominating over water entered His organ of generation with the faculty of
procreation, but the viräö-puruña still would not rise.
SB 3.26.66
TEXT 66
Gaud& Ma*TYaurPaaNaeNa NaaediTaïtada ivra$( )
hSTaaivNd]ae ble/NaEv NaaediTaïtada ivra$( )) 66 ))
gudaà måtyur apänena
nodatiñöhat tadä viräö
hastäv indro balenaiva
nodatiñöhat tadä viräö
SYNONYMS
gudam—His anus; måtyuù—the god of death; apänena—with the organ of defecation;
na—not; udatiñöhat—did arise; tadä—even then; viräö—the viräö-puruña; hastau—the
two hands; indraù—Lord Indra; balena—with their power to grasp and drop things;
eva—indeed; na—not; udatiñöhat—did arise; tadä—even then; viräö—the viräö-puruña.
484
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The god of death entered His anus with the organ of defecation, but the viräö-puruña
could not be spurred to activity. The god Indra entered the hands with their power of
grasping and dropping things, but the viräö-puruña would not get up even then.
SB 3.26.67
TEXT 67
ivZ<auGaRTYaEv cr<aaE NaaediTaïtada ivra$( )
Naa@qNaRÛae l/aeihTaeNa NaaediTaïtada ivra$( )) 67 ))
viñëur gatyaiva caraëau
nodatiñöhat tadä viräö
näòér nadyo lohitena
nodatiñöhat tadä viräö
SYNONYMS
viñëuù—Lord Viñëu; gatyä—with the faculty of locomotion; eva—indeed; caraëau—His
two feet; na—not; udatiñöhat—did arise; tadä—even then; viräö—the viräö-puruña;
näòéù—His blood vessels; nadyaù—the rivers or river-gods; lohitena—with the blood,
with the power of circulation; na—not; udatiñöhat—did stir; tadä—even then; viräö—
the viräö-puruña.
TRANSLATION
Lord Viñëu entered His feet with the faculty of locomotion, but the viräö-puruña refused
to stand up even then. The rivers entered His blood vessels with the blood and the power
of circulation, but still the Cosmic Being could not be made to stir.
SB 3.26.68
TEXT 68
+auta*ÌyaMaudr& iSaNDauNaaeRdiTaïtada ivra$( )
ôdYa& MaNaSaa cNd]ae NaaediTaïtada ivra$( )) 68 ))
kñut-tåòbhyäm udaraà sindhur
485
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nodatiñöhat tadä viräö
hådayaà manasä candro
nodatiñöhat tadä viräö
SYNONYMS
kñut-tåòbhyäm—with hunger and thirst; udaram—His abdomen; sindhuù—the ocean or
ocean-god; na—not; udatiñöhat—did arise; tadä—even then; viräö—the viräö-puruña;
hådayam—His heart; manasä—with the mind; candraù—the moon-god; na—not;
udatiñöhat—did arise; tadä—even then; viräö—the viräö-puruña.
TRANSLATION
The ocean entered His abdomen with hunger and thirst, but the Cosmic Being refused to
rise even then. The moon-god entered His heart with the mind, but the Cosmic Being
would not be roused.
SB 3.26.69
TEXT 69
buÖya b]øaiPa ôdYa& NaaediTaïtada ivra$( )
åd]ae_i>aMaTYaa ôdYa& NaaediTaïtada ivra$( )) 69 ))
buddhyä brahmäpi hådayaà
nodatiñöhat tadä viräö
rudro 'bhimatyä hådayaà
nodatiñöhat tadä viräö
SYNONYMS
buddhyä—with intelligence; brahmä—Lord Brahmä; api—also; hådayam—His heart;
na—not; udatiñöhat—did arise; tadä—even then; viräö—the viräö-puruña; rudraù—Lord
Çiva; abhimatyä—with the ego; hådayam—His heart; na—not; udatiñöhat—did arise;
tadä—even then; viräö—the viräö-puruña.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä also entered His heart with intelligence, but even then the Cosmic Being could
486
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
not be prevailed upon to get up. Lord Rudra also entered His heart with the ego, but even
then the Cosmic Being did not stir.
SB 3.26.70
TEXT 70
ictaeNa ôdYa& cETYa" +ae}aj" Pa[aivXaÛda )
ivra$( TadEv Pauåz" Sail/l/adudiTaïTa )) 70 ))
cittena hådayaà caityaù
kñetra-jïaù präviçad yadä
viräö tadaiva puruñaù
saliläd udatiñöhata
SYNONYMS
cittena—along with reason, consciousness; hådayam—the heart; caityaù—the deity
presiding over consciousness; kñetra-jïaù—the knower of the field; präviçat—entered;
yadä—when; viräö—the viräö-puruña; tadä—then; eva—just; puruñaù—the Cosmic
Being; salilät—from the water; udatiñöhata—arose.
TRANSLATION
However, when the inner controller, the deity presiding over consciousness, entered the
heart with reason, at that very moment the Cosmic Being arose from the causal waters.
SB 3.26.71
TEXT 71
YaQaa Pa[Sauá& Pauåz& Pa[a<aeiNd]YaMaNaaeiDaYa" )
Pa[>aviNTa ivNaa YaeNa NaaeTQaaPaiYaTauMaaeJaSaa )) 71 ))
yathä prasuptaà puruñaà
präëendriya-mano-dhiyaù
prabhavanti vinä yena
notthäpayitum ojasä
SYNONYMS
487
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yathä—just as; prasuptam—sleeping; puruñam—a man; präëa—the vital air; indriya—
the senses for working and recording knowledge; manaù—the mind; dhiyaù—the
intelligence; prabhavanti—are able; vinä—without; yena—whom (the Supersoul); na—
not; utthäpayitum—to arouse; ojasä—by their own power.
TRANSLATION
When a man is sleeping, all his material assets—namely the vital energy, the senses for
recording knowledge, the senses for working, the mind and the intelligence—cannot
arouse him. He can be aroused only when the Supersoul helps him.
PURPORT
The explanation of Säìkhya philosophy is described here in detail in the sense that the
viräö-puruña, or the universal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the
original source of all the various sense organs and their presiding deities. The
relationship between the viräö-puruña and the presiding deities or the living entities is so
intricate that simply by exercising the sense organs, which are related to their presiding
deities, the viräö-puruña cannot be aroused. It is not possible to arouse the viräö-puruña or
to link with the Supreme Absolute Personality of Godhead by material activities. Only
by devotional service and detachment can one perform the process of linking with the
Absolute.
SB 3.26.72
TEXT 72
TaMaiSMaNa( Pa[TYaGaaTMaaNa& iDaYaa YaaeGaPa[v*taYaa )
>a¢-ya ivr¢-ya jaNaeNa ivivCYaaTMaiNa icNTaYaeTa( )) 72 ))
tam asmin pratyag-ätmänaà
dhiyä yoga-pravåttayä
bhaktyä viraktyä jïänena
vivicyätmani cintayet
SYNONYMS
tam—upon Him; asmin—in this; pratyak-ätmänam—the Supersoul; dhiyä—with the
mind; yoga-pravåttayä—engaged in devotional service; bhaktyä—through devotion;
488
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
viraktyä—through detachment; jïänena—through spiritual knowledge; vivicya—
considering carefully; ätmani—in the body; cintayet—one should contemplate.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, through devotion, detachment and advancement in spiritual knowledge
acquired through concentrated devotional service, one should contemplate that Supersoul
as present in this very body although simultaneously apart from it.
PURPORT
One can realize the Supersoul within oneself. He is within one's body but apart from the
body, or transcendental to the body. Although sitting in the same body as the individual
soul, the Supersoul has no affection for the body, whereas the individual soul does. One
has to detach himself, therefore, from this material body, by discharging devotional
service. It is clearly mentioned here (bhaktyä) that one has to execute devotional service
to the Supreme. As it is stated in the First Canto, Second Chapter, of Çrémad-
Bhägavatam (1.2.7), väsudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogaù prayojitaù. When Väsudeva, the allpervading
Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is served in completely pure
devotion, detachment from the material world immediately begins. The purpose of
Säìkhya is to detach oneself from material contamination. This can be achieved simply
by devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
When one is detached from the attraction of material prosperity, one can actually
concentrate his mind upon the Supersoul. As long as the mind is distracted towards the
material, there is no possibility of concentrating one's mind and intelligence upon the
Supreme Personality of Godhead or His partial representation, Supersoul. In other
words, one cannot concentrate one's mind and energy upon the Supreme unless one is
detached from the material world. Following detachment from the material world, one
can actually attain transcendental knowledge of the Absolute Truth. As long as one is
entangled in sense enjoyment, or material enjoyment, it is not possible to understand
the Absolute Truth. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (18.54). One who is freed
from material contamination is joyful and can enter into devotional service, and by
devotional service he can be liberated.
In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, First Canto, it is stated that one becomes joyful by
discharging devotional service. In that joyful attitude, one can understand the science of
God, or Kåñëa consciousness; otherwise it is not possible. The analytical study of the
elements of material nature and the concentration of the mind upon the Supersoul are
489
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the sum and substance of the Säìkhya philosophical system. The perfection of this
säìkhya-yoga culminates in devotional service unto the Absolute Truth.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Twenty-sixth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Fundamental Principles of Material Nature."
27. Understanding Material Nature
SB 3.27.1
TEXT 1
é[q>aGavaNauvac
Pa[k*-iTaSQaae_iPa Pauåzae NaaJYaTae Pa[ak*-TaEGauR<aE" )
Aivk-aradk-Ta*RTvaiàGauR<aTvaÂl/akR-vTa( )) 1 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
prakåti-stho 'pi puruño
näjyate präkåtair guëaiù
avikäräd akartåtvän
nirguëatväj jalärkavat
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Personality of Godhead said; prakåti-sthaù—residing in the
material body; api—although; puruñaù—the living entity; na—not; ajyate—is affected;
präkåtaiù—of material nature; guëaiù—by the modes; avikärät—from being without
change; akartåtvät—by freedom from proprietorship; nirguëatvät—from being
unaffected by the qualities of material nature; jala—on water; arkavat—like the sun.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead Kapila continued: When the living entity is thus unaffected
by the modes of material nature, because he is unchanging and does not claim
490
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
proprietorship, he remains apart from the reactions of the modes, although abiding in a
material body, just as the sun remains aloof from its reflection on water.
PURPORT
In the previous chapter Lord Kapiladeva has concluded that simply by beginning the
discharge of devotional service one can attain detachment and transcendental
knowledge for understanding the science of God. Here the same principle is confirmed.
A person who is detached from the modes of material nature remains just like the sun
reflected on water. When the sun is reflected on water, the movement of the water or
the coolness or unsteadiness of the water cannot affect the sun. Similarly, väsudeve
bhagavati bhakti-yogaù prayojitaù (SB 1.2.7): when one engages fully in the activities of
devotional service, bhakti-yoga, he becomes just like the sun reflected on water.
Although a devotee appears to be in the material world, actually he is in the
transcendental world. As the reflection of the sun appears to be on the water but is
many millions of miles away from the water, so one engaged in the bhakti-yoga process is
nirguëa, or unaffected by the qualities of material nature.
Avikära means "without change." It is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä that each and every
living entity is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, and thus his eternal position is to
cooperate or to dovetail his energy with the Supreme Lord. That is his unchanging
position. As soon as he employs his energy and activities for sense gratification, this
change of position is called vikära. Similarly, even in this material body, when he
practices devotional service under the direction of the spiritual master, he comes to the
position which is without change because that is his natural duty. As stated in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, liberation means reinstatement in one's original position. The
original position is one of rendering service to the Lord (bhakti-yogena, bhaktyä). When
one becomes detached from material attraction and engages fully in devotional service,
that is changlessness. Akartåtvät means not doing anything for sense gratification. When
one does something at his own risk, there is a sense of proprietorship and therefore a
reaction, but when one does everything for Kåñëa, there is no proprietorship over the
activities. By changlessness and by not claiming the proprietorship of activities, one can
immediately situate himself in the transcendental position in which one is not touched
by the modes of material nature, just as the reflection of the sun is unaffected by the
water.
SB 3.27.2
TEXT 2
491
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Sa Wz YaihR Pa[k*-TaeGauR<aeZvi>aivzÂTae )
Ahx(ik]-YaaivMaU!aTMaa k-TaaRSMaqTYai>aMaNYaTae )) 2 ))
sa eña yarhi prakåter
guëeñv abhiviñajjate
ahaìkriyä-vimüòhätmä
kartäsméty abhimanyate
SYNONYMS
saù—that very living entity; eñaù—this; yarhi—when; prakåteù—of material nature;
guëeñu—in the modes; abhiviñajjate—is absorbed; ahaìkriyä—by false ego; vimüòha—
bewildered; ätmä—the individual soul; kartä—the doer; asmi—I am; iti—thus;
abhimanyate—he thinks.
TRANSLATION
When the soul is under the spell of material nature and false ego, identifying his body as
the self, he becomes absorbed in material activities, and by the influence of false ego he
thinks that he is the proprietor of everything.
PURPORT
Actually the conditioned soul is forced to act under the pressure of the modes of
material nature. The living entity has no independence. When he is under the direction
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead he is free, but when, under the impression that
he is satisfying his senses, he engages in sense gratificatory activities, he is actually under
the spell of material nature. In Bhagavad-gétä it is said, prakåteù kriyamäëäni: [Bg. 3.27]
one acts according to the particular modes of nature he has acquired. Guëa refers to the
qualities of nature. He is under the qualities of nature, but he falsely thinks that he is
the proprietor. This false sense of proprietorship can be avoided simply by engaging
oneself in devotional service under the direction of the Supreme Lord or His bona fide
representative. Arjuna, in Bhagavad-gétä, was trying to accept for himself the
responsibility for killing his grandfather and teacher in the fight, but he became freed
from that proprietorship of action when he acted under the direction of Kåñëa. He
fought, but he was actually freed from the reactions of fighting, although in the
492
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
beginning, when he was nonviolent, unwilling to fight, the entire responsibility was
upon him. That is the difference between liberation and conditioning. A conditioned
soul may be very good and act in the mode of goodness, but still he is conditioned under
the spell of material nature. A devotee, however, acts completely under the direction of
the Supreme Lord. Thus his actions may not appear to be of a very high quality to the
common man, but the devotee has no responsibility.
SB 3.27.3
TEXT 3
TaeNa Sa&SaarPadvqMavXaae_>YaeTYaiNav*RTa" )
Pa[aSai(r)kE-" k-MaRdaezE" SadSaiNMaé[YaaeiNazu )) 3 ))
tena saàsära-padavém
avaço 'bhyety anirvåtaù
präsaìgikaiù karma-doñaiù
sad-asan-miçra-yoniñu
SYNONYMS
tena—by this; saàsära—of repeated birth and death; padavém—the path; avaçaù—
helplessly; abhyeti—he undergoes; anirvåtaù—discontented; präsaìgikaiù—resulting
from association with material nature; karma-doñaiù—by faulty actions; sat—good;
asat—bad; miçra—mixed; yoniñu—in different species of life.
TRANSLATION
The conditioned soul therefore transmigrates into different species of life, higher and
lower, because of his association with the modes of material nature. Unless he is relieved
of material activities, he has to accept this position because of his faulty work.
PURPORT
Here the word karma-doñaiù means "by faulty actions." This refers to any activity, good
or bad, performed in this material world—they are all contaminated, faulty actions
because of material association. The foolish conditioned soul may think that he is
offering charity by opening hospitals for material benefit or by opening an educational
institution for material education, but he does not know that all such work is also faulty
493
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
because it will not give him relief from the process of transmigration from one body to
another. It is clearly stated here, sad-asan-miçra-yoniñu. This means that one may take
birth in a very high family or he may take his birth in higher planets, among the
demigods, for his so-called pious activities in the material world. But this work is also
faulty because it does not give liberation. To take birth in a nice place or a high family
does not mean that one avoids undergoing the material tribulations, the pangs of birth,
death, old age and disease. A conditioned soul under the spell of material nature cannot
understand that any action he performs for sense gratification is faulty and that only his
activities in devotional service to the Lord can give him release from the reaction of
faulty activities. Because he does not cease such faulty activities, he has to change to
different bodies, some high and some low. That is called saàsära-padavém, which means
this material world, from which there is no release. One who desires material liberation
has to turn his activities to devotional service. There is no alternative.
SB 3.27.4
TEXT 4
AQaeR ùivÛMaaNae_iPa Sa&Sa*iTaNaR iNavTaRTae )
DYaaYaTaae ivzYaaNaSYa SvPane_NaQaaRGaMaae YaQaa )) 4 ))
arthe hy avidyamäne 'pi
saàsåtir na nivartate
dhyäyato viñayän asya
svapne 'narthägamo yathä
SYNONYMS
arthe—real cause; hi—certainly; avidyamäne—not existing; api—although; saàsåtiù—
the material existential condition; na—not; nivartate—does cease; dhyäyataù—
contemplating; viñayän—objects of the senses; asya—of the living entity; svapne—in a
dream; anartha—of disadvantages; ägamaù—arrival; yathä—like.
TRANSLATION
Actually a living entity is transcendental to material existence, but because of his
mentality of lording it over material nature, his material existential condition does not
cease, and just as in a dream, he is affected by all sorts of disadvantages.
494
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The example of a dream is very appropriate. Due to different mental conditions, in
dreams we are put into advantageous and disadvantageous positions. Similarly, the spirit
soul has nothing to do with this material nature, but because of his mentality of lording
it over, he is put into the position of conditional existence.
Conditional existence is described here as dhyäyato viñayän asya. Viñaya means "an
object of enjoyment." As long as one continues to think that he can enjoy material
advantages, he is in conditioned life, but as soon as he comes to his senses, he develops
the knowledge that he is not the enjoyer, for the only enjoyer is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (5.29), He is the beneficiary for
all the results of sacrifices and penances (bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäm), and He is the
proprietor of all the three worlds (sarva-loka-maheçvaram). He is the actual friend of all
living entities. But instead of leaving proprietorship, enjoyment and the actual position
as the friend of all living entities to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we claim that
we are the proprietors, the enjoyers and the friends. We perform philanthropic work,
thinking that we are the friends of human society. Someone may proclaim himself to be
a very good national worker, the best friend of the people and of the country, but
actually he cannot be the greatest friend of everyone. The only friend is Kåñëa. One
should try to raise the consciousness of the conditioned soul to the platform of
understanding that Kåñëa is his actual friend. If one makes friendship with Kåñëa, one
will never be cheated, and he will get all help needed. Arousing this consciousness of the
conditioned soul is the greatest service, not posing oneself as a great friend of another
living entity. The power of friendship is limited. Although one claims to be a friend, he
cannot be a friend unlimitedly. There are an unlimited number of living entities, and
our resources are limited; therefore we cannot be of any real benefit to the people in
general. The best service to the people in general is to awaken them to Kåñëa
consciousness so that they may know that the supreme enjoyer, the supreme proprietor
and the supreme friend is Kåñëa. Then this illusory dream of lording it over material
nature will vanish.
SB 3.27.5
TEXT 5
ATa Wv XaNaEiêta& Pa[Sa¢-MaSaTaa& PaiQa )
>ai¢-YaaeGaeNa Taqv]e<a ivr¢-ya c NaYaeÜXaMa( )) 5 ))
495
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ata eva çanaiç cittaà
prasaktam asatäà pathi
bhakti-yogena tévreëa
viraktyä ca nayed vaçam
SYNONYMS
ataù eva—therefore; çanaiù—gradually; cittam—mind, consciousness; prasaktam—
attached; asatäm—of material enjoyments; pathi—on the path; bhakti-yogena—by
devotional service; tévreëa—very serious; viraktyä—without attachment; ca—and;
nayet—he must bring; vaçam—under control.
TRANSLATION
It is the duty of every conditioned soul to engage his polluted consciousness, which is
now attached to material enjoyment, in very serious devotional service with detachment.
Thus his mind and consciousness will be under full control.
PURPORT
The process of liberation is very nicely explained in this verse. The cause of one's
becoming conditioned by material nature is his thinking himself the enjoyer, the
proprietor or the friend of all living entities. This false thinking is a result of
contemplation on sense enjoyment. When one thinks that he is the best friend to his
countrymen, to society or to humanity and he engages in various nationalistic,
philanthropic and altruistic activities, all that is just so much concentration on sense
gratification. The so-called national leader or humanist does not serve everyone; he
serves his senses only. That is a fact. But the conditioned soul cannot understand this
because he is bewildered by the spell of material nature. It is therefore recommended in
this verse that one engage very seriously in the devotional service of the Lord. This
means that one should not think that he is the proprietor, benefactor, friend or enjoyer.
He should always be cognizant that the real enjoyer is Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; that is the basic principle of bhakti-yoga. One must be firmly convinced of
these three principles: one should always think that Kåñëa is the proprietor, Kåñëa is the
enjoyer and Kåñëa is the friend. Not only should he understand these principles himself,
but he should try to convince others and propagate Kåñëa consciousness.
As soon as one engages in such serious devotional service of the Lord, naturally the
496
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
propensity to falsely claim lordship over material nature disappears. That detachment is
called vairägya. Instead of being absorbed in so-called material lordship, one engages in
Kåñëa consciousness; that is control of consciousness. The yoga process necessitates
controlling the senses. Yoga indriya-saàyamaù. Since the senses are always active, their
activities should be engaged in devotional service—one cannot stop their activities. If
one wants to artificially stop the activities of the senses, his attempt will be a failure.
Even the great yogé Viçvämitra, who was trying to control his senses by the yoga process,
fell victim to the beauty of Menakä. There are many such instances. Unless one's mind
and consciousness are fully engaged in devotional service, there is always the
opportunity for the mind to become occupied with desires for sense gratification.
One particular point mentioned in this verse is very significant. It is said here,
prasaktam asatäà pathi: the mind is always attracted by asat, the temporary, material
existence. Because we have been associated with material nature since time immemorial,
we have become accustomed to our attachment to this temporary material nature. The
mind has to be fixed at the eternal lotus feet of the Supreme Lord. Sa vai manaù kåñëapadäravindayoù
[SB 9.4.18]. One has to fix the mind at the lotus feet of Kåñëa; then
everything will be very nice. Thus the seriousness of bhakti-yoga is stressed in this verse.
SB 3.27.6
TEXT 6
YaMaaidi>aYaaeRGaPaQaEr>YaSaHa( é[ÖYaaiNvTa" )
MaiYa >aaveNa SaTYaeNa MaTk-Qaaé[v<aeNa c )) 6 ))
yamädibhir yoga-pathair
abhyasaï çraddhayänvitaù
mayi bhävena satyena
mat-kathä-çravaëena ca
SYNONYMS
yama-ädibhiù—beginning with yama; yoga-pathaiù—by the yoga system; abhyasan—
practicing; çraddhayä anvitaù—with great faith; mayi—unto Me; bhävena—with
devotion; satyena—unalloyed; mat-kathä—stories about Me; çravaëena—by hearing;
ca—and.
TRANSLATION
497
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
One has to become faithful by practicing the controlling process of the yoga system and
must elevate himself to the platform of unalloyed devotional service by chanting and
hearing about Me.
PURPORT
Yoga is practiced in eight different stages: yama, niyama, äsana, präëäyäma, pratyähära,
dhäraëä, dhyäna and samädhi. Yama and niyama mean practicing the controlling process
by following strict regulations, and äsana refers to the sitting postures. These help raise
one to the standard of faithfulness in devotional service. The practice of yoga by
physical exercise is not the ultimate goal; the real end is to concentrate and to control
the mind and train oneself to be situated in faithful devotional service.
Bhävena, or bhäva, is a very important factor in the practice of yoga or in any spiritual
process. Bhäva is explained in Bhagavad-gétä (10.8). Budhä bhäva-samanvitäù: one should
be absorbed in the thought of love of Kåñëa. When one knows that Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is the source of everything and that everything emanates from
Him (ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù [Bg. 10.8]), then one understands the Vedänta aphorism
janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1] ("the original source of everything"), and then he can
become absorbed in bhäva, or the preliminary stage of love of Godhead.
Rüpa Gosvämé explains very nicely in Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu how this bhäva, or
preliminary stage of love of God, is achieved. He states that one first of all has to become
faithful (çraddhayänvitaù). Faith is attained by controlling the senses, either by yoga
practice, following the rules and regulations and practicing the sitting postures, or by
engaging directly in bhakti-yoga, as recommended in the previous verse. Of the nine
different items of bhakti-yoga, the first and foremost is to chant and hear about the
Lord. That is also mentioned here. Mat-kathä-çravaëena ca. One may come to the
standard of faithfulness by following the rules and regulations of the yoga system, and
the same goal can be achieved simply by chanting and hearing about the transcendental
activities of the Lord. The word ca is significant. Bhakti-yoga is direct, and the other
process is indirect. But even if the indirect process is taken, there is no success unless
one comes fully to the direct process of hearing and chanting the glories of the Lord.
Therefore the word satyena is used here. In this connection Svämé Çrédhara comments
that satyena means niñkapaöena, "without duplicity." The impersonalists are full of
duplicity. Sometimes they pretend to execute devotional service, but their ultimate idea
is to become one with the Supreme. This is duplicity, kapaöa. The Bhägavatam does not
allow this duplicity. In the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is clearly stated, paramo
498
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nirmatsaräëäm: [SB 1.1.2] "This treatise Çrémad-Bhägavatam is meant for those who are
completely free from envy." The same point is again stressed here. Unless one is
completely faithful to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engages himself in the
process of hearing and chanting the glories of the Lord, there is no possibility for
liberation.
SB 3.27.7
TEXT 7
SavR>aUTaSaMaTveNa iNavOE„re<aaPa[Sa(r)Ta" )
b]øcYaeR<a MaaENaeNa SvDaMaeR<a bl/IYaSaa )) 7 ))
sarva-bhüta-samatvena
nirvaireëäprasaìgataù
brahmacaryeëa maunena
sva-dharmeëa baléyasä
SYNONYMS
sarva—all; bhüta—living entities; samatvena—by seeing equally; nirvaireëa—without
enmity; aprasaìgataù—without intimate connections; brahma-caryeëa—by celibacy;
maunena—by silence; sva-dharmeëa—by one's occupation; baléyasä—by offering the
result.
TRANSLATION
In executing devotional service, one has to see every living entity equally, without enmity
towards anyone yet without intimate connections with anyone. One has to observe
celibacy, be grave and execute his eternal activities, offering the results to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
A devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead who seriously engages in devotional
service is equal to all living entities. There are various species of living entities, but a
devotee does not see the outward covering; he sees the inner soul inhabiting the body.
Because each and every soul is part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
he does not see any difference. That is the vision of a learned devotee. As explained in
499
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Bhagavad-gétä, a devotee or a learned sage does not see any difference between a learned
brähmaëa, a dog, an elephant or a cow because he knows that the body is the outer
covering only and that the soul is actually part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. A
devotee has no enmity towards any living entity, but that does not mean that he mixes
with everyone. That is prohibited. Aprasaìgataù means "not to be in intimate touch
with everyone." A devotee is concerned with his execution of devotional service, and he
should therefore mix with devotees only, in order to advance his objective. He has no
business mixing with others, for although he does not see anyone as his enemy, his
dealings are only with persons who engage in devotional service.
A devotee should observe the vow of celibacy. Celibacy does not necessitate that one be
absolutely free from sex life; satisfaction with one's wife is permitted also under the vow
of celibacy. The best policy is to avoid sex life altogether. That is preferable. Otherwise,
a devotee can get married under religious principles and live peacefully with a wife.
A devotee should not speak needlessly. A serious devotee has no time to speak of
nonsense. He is always busy in Kåñëa consciousness. Whenever he speaks, he speaks
about Kåñëa. Mauna means "silence." Silence does not mean that one should not speak
at all, but that he should not speak of nonsense. He should be very enthusiastic in
speaking about Kåñëa. Another important item described here is sva-dharmeëa, or being
exclusively occupied in one's eternal occupation, which is to act as the eternal servitor
of the Lord, or to act in Kåñëa consciousness. The next word, baléyasä, means "offering
the results of all activities to the Supreme Personality of Godhead." A devotee does not
act on his personal account for sense gratification. Whatever he earns, whatever he eats
and whatever he does, he offers for the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
SB 3.27.8
TEXT 8
Yad*C^YaaePal/BDaeNa SaNTauíae iMaTa>aux( MauiNa" )
iviv¢-Xar<a" XaaNTaae MaE}a" k-å<a AaTMavaNa( )) 8 ))
yadåcchayopalabdhena
santuñöo mita-bhuì muniù
vivikta-çaraëaù çänto
maitraù karuëa ätmavän
500
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
yadåcchayä—without difficulty; upalabdhena—with what is obtained; santuñöaù—
satisfied; mita—little; bhuk—eating; muniù—thoughtful; vivikta-çaraëaù—living in a
secluded place; çäntaù—peaceful; maitraù—friendly; karuëaù—compassionate; ätmavän—
self-possessed, self-realized.
TRANSLATION
For his income a devotee should be satisfied with what he earns without great difficulty.
He should not eat more than what is necessary. He should live in a secluded place and
always be thoughtful, peaceful, friendly, compassionate and self-realized.
PURPORT
Everyone who has accepted a material body must maintain the necessities of the body by
acting or earning some livelihood. A devotee should only work for such income as is
absolutely necessary. He should be satisfied always with such income and should not
endeavor to earn more and more simply to accumulate the unnecessary. A person in the
conditioned state who has no money is always found working very hard to earn some
with the object of lording it over material nature. Kapiladeva instructs that we should
not endeavor hard for things which may come automatically, without extraneous labor.
The exact word used in this connection, yadåcchayä, means that every living entity has a
predestined happiness and distress in his present body; this is called the law of karma. It
is not possible that simply by endeavors to accumulate more money a person will be able
to do so, otherwise almost everyone would be on the same level of wealth. In reality
everyone is earning and acquiring according to his predestined karma. According to the
Bhägavatam conclusion, we are sometimes faced with dangerous or miserable conditions
without endeavoring for them, and similarly we may have prosperous conditions without
endeavoring for them. We are advised to let these things come as predestined. We
should engage our valuable time in prosecuting Kåñëa consciousness. In other words, one
should be satisfied by his natural condition. If by predestination one is put into a certain
condition of life which is not very prosperous in comparison to another's position, one
should not be disturbed. He should simply try to utilize his valuable time to advance in
Kåñëa consciousness. Advancement in Kåñëa consciousness does not depend on any
materially prosperous or distressed condition; it is free from the conditions imposed by
material life. A very poor man can execute Kåñëa consciousness as effectively as a very
501
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
rich man. One should therefore be very satisfied with his position as offered by the Lord.
Another word here is mita-bhuk. This means that one should eat only as much as
necessary to maintain the body and soul together. One should not be gluttonous to
satisfy the tongue. Grains, fruits, milk and similar foods are allotted for human
consumption. One should not be excessively eager to satisfy the tongue and eat that
which is not meant for humanity. Particularly, a devotee should eat only prasäda, or
food which is offered to the Personality of Godhead. His position is to accept the
remnants of those foodstuffs. Innocent foods like grains, vegetables, fruits, flowers and
milk preparations are offered to the Lord, and therefore there is no scope for offering
foods which are in the modes of passion and ignorance. A devotee should not be greedy.
It is also recommended that the devotee should be muni, or thoughtful; he should always
think of Kåñëa and how to render better service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
That should be his only anxiety. As a materialist is always thoughtful about improving
his material condition, a devotee's thoughts should always be engaged in improving his
condition in Kåñëa consciousness; therefore he should be a muni.
The next item recommended is that a devotee should live in a secluded place. Generally
a common man is interested in pounds, shillings and pence, or materialistic
advancement in life, which is unnecessary for a devotee. A devotee should select a place
of residence where everyone is interested in devotional service. Generally, therefore, a
devotee goes to a sacred place of pilgrimage where devotees live. It is recommended that
he live in a place where there is no large number of ordinary men. It is very important to
live in a secluded place (vivikta-çaraëa). The next item is çänta, or peacefulness. The
devotee should not be agitated. He should be satisfied with his natural income, eat only
as much as he needs to keep his health, live in a secluded place and always remain
peaceful. Peace of mind is necessary for prosecuting Kåñëa consciousness.
The next item is maitra, friendliness. A devotee should be friendly to everyone, but his
intimate friendship should be with devotees only. With others he should be official. He
may say, "Yes, sir, what you say is all right," but he is not intimate with them. A devotee
should, however, have compassion for persons who are innocent, who are neither
atheistic nor very much advanced in spiritual realization. A devotee should be
compassionate towards them and instruct them as far as possible in making
advancement in Kåñëa consciousness. A devotee should always remain ätmavän, or
situated in his spiritual position. He should not forget that his main concern is to make
advancement in spiritual consciousness, or Kåñëa consciousness, and he should not
ignorantly identify himself with the body or the mind. Ätmä means the body or the
mind, but here the word ätmavän especially means that one should be self-possessed. He
502
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
should always remain in the pure consciousness that he is spirit soul and not the
material body or the mind. That will make him progress confidently in Kåñëa
consciousness.
SB 3.27.9
TEXT 9
SaaNaubNDae c dehe_iSMaàku-vRàSadaGa]hMa( )
jaNaeNa d*íTatveNa Pa[k*-Tae" PauåzSYa c )) 9 ))
sänubandhe ca dehe 'sminn
akurvann asad-ägraham
jïänena dåñöa-tattvena
prakåteù puruñasya ca
SYNONYMS
sa-anubandhe—with bodily relationships; ca—and; dehe—towards the body; asmin—
this; akurvan—not doing; asat-ägraham—bodily concept of life; jïänena—through
knowledge; dåñöa—having seen; tattvena—the reality; prakåteù—of matter; puruñasya—
of spirit; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
One's seeing power should be increased through knowledge of spirit and matter, and one
should not unnecessarily identify himself with the body and thus become attracted by
bodily relationships.
PURPORT
The conditioned souls are eager to identify with the body and consider that the body is
"myself" and that anything in relationship with the body or possessions of the body is
"mine." In Sanskrit this is called aham-mamatä, and it is the root cause of all conditional
life. A person should see things as the combination of matter and spirit. He should
distinguish between the nature of matter and the nature of spirit, and his real
identification should be with spirit, not with matter. By this knowledge, one should
avoid the false, bodily concept of life.
SB 3.27.10
503
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 10
iNav*tabuÖyvSQaaNaae dUrq>aUTaaNYadXaRNa" )
oPal/>YaaTMaNaaTMaaNa& c+auzevakR-MaaTMad*k(- )) 10 ))
nivåtta-buddhy-avasthäno
düré-bhütänya-darçanaù
upalabhyätmanätmänaà
cakñuñevärkam ätma-dåk
SYNONYMS
nivåtta—transcended; buddhi-avasthänaù—the stages of material consciousness; dürébhüta—
far off; anya—other; darçanaù—conceptions of life; upalabhya—having realized;
ätmanä—by his purified intellect; ätmänam—his own self; cakñuñä—with his eyes; iva—
as; arkam—the sun; ätma-dåk—the self-realized.
TRANSLATION
One should be situated in the transcendental position, beyond the stages of material
consciousness, and should be aloof from all other conceptions of life. Thus realizing
freedom from false ego, one should see his own self just as he sees the sun in the sky.
PURPORT
Consciousness acts in three stages under the material conception of life. When we are
awake, consciousness acts in a particular way, when we are asleep it acts in a different
way, and when we are in deep sleep, consciousness acts in still another way. To become
Kåñëa conscious, one has to become transcendental to these three stages of
consciousness. Our present consciousness should be freed from all perceptions of life
other than consciousness of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is called
düré-bhütänya-darçanaù, which means that when one attains perfect Kåñëa
consciousness he does not see anything but Kåñëa. In the Caitanya-caritämåta it is said
that the perfect devotee may see many movable and immovable objects, but in
everything he sees that the energy of Kåñëa is acting. As soon as he remembers the
energy of Kåñëa, he immediately remembers Kåñëa in His personal form. Therefore in all
his observations he sees Kåñëa only. In the Brahma-saàhitä (5.38) it is stated that when
504
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
one's eyes are smeared with love of Kåñëa (premäïjana-cchurita), he always sees Kåñëa,
outside and inside. This is confirmed here; one should be freed from all other vision, and
in that way he is freed from the false egoistic identification and sees himself as the
eternal servitor of the Lord. Cakñuñevärkam: as we can see the sun without a doubt, one
who is fully developed in Kåñëa consciousness sees Kåñëa and His energy. By this vision
one becomes ätma-dåk, or self-realized. When the false ego of identifying the body with
the self is removed, actual vision of life is perceivable. The senses, therefore, also become
purified. Real service of the Lord begins when the senses are purified. One does not
have to stop the activities of the senses, but the false ego of identifying with the body
has to be removed. Then the senses automatically become purified, and with purified
senses one can actually discharge devotional service.
SB 3.27.11
TEXT 11
Mau¢-il/(r)& Sada>aaSaMaSaiTa Pa[iTaPaÛTae )
SaTaae bNDauMaSaÀ+au" SavaRNauSYaUTaMaÜYaMa( )) 11 ))
mukta-liìgaà sad-äbhäsam
asati pratipadyate
sato bandhum asac-cakñuù
sarvänusyütam advayam
SYNONYMS
mukta-liìgam—transcendental; sat-äbhäsam—manifest as a reflection; asati—in the
false ego; pratipadyate—he realizes; sataù bandhum—the support of the material cause;
asat-cakñuù—the eye (revealer) of the illusory energy; sarva-anusyütam—entered into
everything; advayam—without a second.
TRANSLATION
A liberated soul realizes the Absolute Personality of Godhead, who is transcendental and
who is manifest as a reflection even in the false ego. He is the support of the material
cause and He enters into everything. He is absolute, one without a second, and He is the
eyes of the illusory energy.
505
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
A pure devotee can see the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
everything materially manifested. He is present there only as a reflection, but a pure
devotee can realize that in the darkness of material illusion the only light is the Supreme
Lord, who is its support. It is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä that the background of the
material manifestation is Lord Kåñëa. And, as confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä, Kåñëa
is the cause of all causes. In the Brahma-saàhitä it is stated that the Supreme Lord, by
His partial or plenary expansion, is present not only within this universe and each and
every universe, but in every atom, although He is one without a second. The word
advayam, "without a second," which is used in this verse, indicates that although the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is represented in everything, including the atoms, He
is not divided. His presence in everything is explained in the next verse.
SB 3.27.12
TEXT 12
YaQaa Jal/SQa Aa>aaSa" SQal/SQaeNaavd*XYaTae )
Sva>aaSaeNa TaQaa SaUYaaeR Jal/SQaeNa idiv iSQaTa" )) 12 ))
yathä jala-stha äbhäsaù
sthala-sthenävadåçyate
sväbhäsena tathä süryo
jala-sthena divi sthitaù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; jala-sthaù—situated on water; äbhäsaù—a reflection; sthala-sthena—situated
on the wall; avadåçyate—is perceived; sva-äbhäsena—by its reflection; tathä—in that
way; süryaù—the sun; jala-sthena—situated on the water; divi—in the sky; sthitaù—
situated.
TRANSLATION
The presence of the Supreme Lord can be realized just as the sun is realized first as a
reflection on water, and again as a second reflection on the wall of a room, although the
sun itself is situated in the sky.
506
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The example given herewith is perfect. The sun is situated in the sky, far, far away from
the surface of the earth, but its reflection can be seen in a pot of water in the corner of a
room. The room is dark, and the sun is far away in the sky, but the sun's reflection on
the water illuminates the darkness of the room. A pure devotee can realize the presence
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in everything by the reflection of His energy. In
the Viñëu Puräëa it is stated that as the presence of fire is understood by heat and light,
so the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although one without a second, is perceived
everywhere by the diffusion of His different energies. It is confirmed in the Éçopaniñad
that the presence of the Lord is perceived everywhere by the liberated soul, just as the
sunshine and the reflection can be perceived everywhere although the sun is situated far
away from the surface of the globe.
SB 3.27.13
TEXT 13
Wv& i}av*dhªarae >aUTaeiNd]YaMaNaaeMaYaE" )
Sva>aaSaElR/i+aTaae_NaeNa Sada>aaSaeNa SaTYad*k(- )) 13 ))
evaà trivåd-ahaìkäro
bhütendriya-manomayaiù
sväbhäsair lakñito 'nena
sad-äbhäsena satya-dåk
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; tri-våt—the threefold; ahaìkäraù—false ego; bhüta-indriya-manaùmayaiù—
consisting of body, senses and mind; sva-äbhäsaiù—by its own reflections;
lakñitaù—is revealed; anena—by this; sat-äbhäsena—by a reflection of Brahman; satyadåk—
the self-realized soul.
TRANSLATION
The self-realized soul is thus reflected first in the threefold ego and then in the body,
senses and mind.
PURPORT
507
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The conditioned soul thinks, "I am this body," but a liberated soul thinks, "I am not this
body. I am spirit soul." This "I am" is called ego, or identification of the self. "I am this
body" or "Everything in relationship to the body is mine" is called false ego, but when
one is self-realized and thinks that he is an eternal servitor of the Supreme Lord, that
identification is real ego. One conception is in the darkness of the threefold qualities of
material nature—goodness, passion and ignorance—and the other is in the pure state of
goodness, called çuddha-sattva or väsudeva. When we say that we give up our ego, this
means that we give up our false ego, but real ego is always present. When one is reflected
through the material contamination of the body and mind in false identification, he is
in the conditional state, but when he is reflected in the pure stage he is called liberated.
The identification of oneself with one's material possessions in the conditional stage
must be purified, and one must identify himself in relationship with the Supreme Lord.
In the conditioned state one accepts everything as an object of sense gratification, and
in the liberated state one accepts everything for the service of the Supreme Lord. Kåñëa
consciousness, devotional service, is the actual liberated stage of a living entity.
Otherwise, both accepting and rejecting on the material platform or in voidness or
impersonalism are imperfect conditions for the pure soul.
By the understanding of the pure soul, called satya-dåk, one can see everything as a
reflection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A concrete example can be given in
this connection. A conditioned soul sees a very beautiful rose, and he thinks that the
nice aromatic flower should be used for his own sense gratification. This is one kind of
vision. A liberated soul, however, sees the same flower as a reflection of the Supreme
Lord. He thinks, "This beautiful flower is made possible by the superior energy of the
Supreme Lord; therefore it belongs to the Supreme Lord and should be utilized in His
service." These are two kinds of vision. The conditioned soul sees the flower for his own
enjoyment, and the devotee sees the flower as an object to be used in the service of the
Lord. In the same way, one can see the reflection of the Supreme Lord in one's own
senses, mind and body—in everything. With that correct vision, one can engage
everything in the service of the Lord. It is stated in the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu that one
who has engaged everything—his vital energy, his wealth, his intelligence and his
words—in the service of the Lord, or who desires to engage all these in the service of the
Lord, no matter how he is situated, is to be considered a liberated soul, or satya-dåk.
Such a man has understood things as they are.
SB 3.27.14
TEXT 14
508
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
>aUTaSaU+MaeiNd]YaMaNaaebuÖyaidiZvh iNad]Yaa )
l/INaeZvSaiTa YaSTa}a iviNad]ae iNarhx(ik]-Ya" )) 14 ))
bhüta-sükñmendriya-manobuddhy-
ädiñv iha nidrayä
léneñv asati yas tatra
vinidro nirahaìkriyaù
SYNONYMS
bhüta—the material elements; sükñma—the objects of enjoyment; indriya—the material
senses; manaù—mind; buddhi—intelligence; ädiñu—and so on; iha—here; nidrayä—by
sleep; léneñu—merged; asati—in the unmanifest; yaù—who; tatra—there; vinidraù—
awake; nirahaìkriyaù—freed from false ego.
TRANSLATION
Although a devotee appears to be merged in the five material elements, the objects of
material enjoyment, the material senses and material mind and intelligence, he is
understood to be awake and to be freed from the false ego.
PURPORT
The explanation by Rüpa Gosvämé in the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu of how a person can
be liberated even in this body is more elaborately explained in this verse. The living
entity who has become satya-dåk, who realizes his position in relationship with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, may remain apparently merged in the five elements of
matter, the five material sense objects, the ten senses and the mind and intelligence, but
still he is considered to be awake and to be freed from the reaction of false ego. Here the
word léna is very significant. The Mäyävädé philosophers recommend merging in the
impersonal effulgence of Brahman; that is their ultimate goal, or destination. That
merging is also mentioned here. But in spite of merging, one can keep his individuality.
The example given by Jéva Gosvämé is that a green bird that enters a green tree appears
to merge in the color of greenness, but actually the bird does not lose its individuality.
Similarly, a living entity merged either in the material nature or in the spiritual nature
does not give up his individuality. Real individuality is to understand oneself to be the
eternal servitor of the Supreme Lord. This information is received from the mouth of
509
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Lord Caitanya. He said clearly, upon the inquiry of Sanätana Gosvämé, that a living
entity is the servitor of Kåñëa eternally. Kåñëa also confirms in Bhagavad-gétä that the
living entity is eternally His part and parcel. The part and parcel is meant to serve the
whole. This is individuality. It is so even in this material existence, when the living
entity apparently merges in matter. His gross body is made up of five elements, his subtle
body is made of mind, intelligence, false ego and contaminated consciousness, and he
has five active senses and five knowledge-acquiring senses. In this way he merges in
matter. But even while merged in the twenty-four elements of matter, he can keep his
individuality as the eternal servitor of the Lord. Either in the spiritual nature or in the
material nature, such a servitor is to be considered a liberated soul. That is the
explanation of the authorities, and it is confirmed in this verse.
SB 3.27.15
TEXT 15
MaNYaMaaNaSTadaTMaaNaMaNaíae NaívNMa*za )
Naíe_hªr<ae d]ía Naíivta wvaTaur" )) 15 ))
manyamänas tadätmänam
anañöo nañöavan måñä
nañöe 'haìkaraëe drañöä
nañöa-vitta iväturaù
SYNONYMS
manyamänaù—thinking; tadä—then; ätmänam—himself; anañöaù—although not lost;
nañöa-vat—as lost; måñä—falsely; nañöe ahaìkaraëe—because of the disappearance of
the ego; drañöä—the seer; nañöa-vittaù—one who has lost his fortune; iva—like;
äturaù—distressed.
TRANSLATION
The living entity can vividly feel his existence as the seer, but because of the
disappearance of the ego during the state of deep sleep, he falsely takes himself to be lost,
like a man who has lost his fortune and feels distressed, thinking himself to be lost.
PURPORT
510
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Only in ignorance does a living entity think that he is lost. If by attainment of
knowledge he comes to the real position of his eternal existence, he knows that he is not
lost. An appropriate example is mentioned herein: nañöa-vitta iväturaù. A person who
has lost a great sum of money may think that he is lost, but actually he is not lost-only
his money is lost. But due to his absorption in the money or identification with the
money, he thinks that he is lost. Similarly, when we falsely identify with matter as our
field of activities, we think that we are lost, although actually we are not. As soon as a
person is awakened to the pure knowledge of understanding that he is an eternal
servitor of the Lord, his own real position is revived. A living entity can never be lost.
When one forgets his identity in deep sleep, he becomes absorbed in dreams, and he may
think himself a different person or may think himself lost. But actually his identity is
intact. This concept of being lost is due to false ego, and it continues as long as one is
not awakened to the sense of his existence as an eternal servitor of the Lord. The
Mäyävädé philosophers' concept of becoming one with the Supreme Lord is another
symptom of being lost in false ego. One may falsely claim that he is the Supreme Lord,
but actually he is not. This is the last snare of mäyä's influence upon the living entity.
To think oneself equal with the Supreme Lord or to think oneself to be the Supreme
Lord Himself is also due to false ego.
SB 3.27.16
TEXT 16
Wv& Pa[TYavMa*XYaaSaavaTMaaNa& Pa[iTaPaÛTae )
SaahªarSYa d]VYaSYa Yaae_vSQaaNaMaNauGa]h" )) 16 ))
evaà pratyavamåçyäsäv
ätmänaà pratipadyate
sähaìkärasya dravyasya
yo 'vasthänam anugrahaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; pratyavamåçya—after understanding; asau—that person; ätmänam—his
self; pratipadyate—realizes; sa-ahaìkärasya—accepted under false ego; dravyasya—of
the situation; yaù—who; avasthänam—resting place; anugrahaù—the manifester.
TRANSLATION
511
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
When, by mature understanding, one can realize his individuality, then the situation he
accepts under false ego becomes manifest to him.
PURPORT
The Mäyävädé philosophers' position is that at the ultimate issue the individual is lost,
everything becomes one, and there is no distinction between the knower, the knowable
and knowledge. But by minute analysis we can see that this is not correct. Individuality
is never lost, even when one thinks that the three different principles, namely the
knower, the knowable and knowledge, are amalgamated or merged into one. The very
concept that the three merge into one is another form of knowledge, and since the
perceiver of the knowledge still exists, how can one say that the knower, knowledge and
knowable have become one? The individual soul who is perceiving this knowledge still
remains an individual. Both in material existence and in spiritual existence the
individuality continues; the only difference is in the quality of the identity. In the
material identity, the false ego acts, and because of false identification, one takes things
to be different from what they actually are. That is the basic principle of conditional
life. Similarly, when the false ego is purified, one takes everything in the right
perspective. That is the state of liberation.
It is stated in the Éçopaniñad that everything belongs to the Lord. Éçäväsyam idaà sarvam
[Éço mantra 1]. Everything exists on the energy of the Supreme Lord. This is also
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä. Because everything is produced of His energy and exists on
His energy, the energy is not different from Him—but still the Lord declares, "I am not
there." When one clearly understands one's constitutional position, everything becomes
manifest. False egoistic acceptance of things conditions one, whereas acceptance of
things as they are makes one liberated. The example given in the previous verse is
applicable here: due to absorption of one's identity in his money, when the money is lost
he thinks that he is also lost. But actually he is not identical with the money, nor does
the money belong to him. When the actual situation is revealed, we understand that the
money does not belong to any individual person or living entity, nor is it produced by
man. Ultimately the money is the property of the Supreme Lord, and there is no
question of its being lost. But as long as one falsely thinks, "I am the enjoyer," or "I am
the Lord," this concept of life continues, and one remains conditioned. As soon as this
false ego is eliminated, one is liberated. As confirmed in the Bhägavatam, situation in
one's real constitutional position is called mukti, or liberation.
SB 3.27.17
512
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 17
devhUiTaåvac
Pauåz& Pa[k*-iTab]Røà ivMauÄiTa k-ihRicTa( )
ANYaaeNYaaPaaé[YaTvaÀ iNaTYaTvadNaYaae" Pa[>aae )) 17 ))
devahütir uväca
puruñaà prakåtir brahman
na vimuïcati karhicit
anyonyäpäçrayatväc ca
nityatväd anayoù prabho
SYNONYMS
devahütiù uväca—Devahüti said; puruñam—the spirit soul; prakåtiù—material nature;
brahman—O brähmaëa; na—not; vimuïcati—does release; karhicit—at any time;
anyonya—to one another; apäçrayatvät—from attraction; ca—and; nityatvät—from
eternality; anayoù—of them both; prabho—O my Lord.
TRANSLATION
Çré Devahüti inquired: My dear brähmaëa, does material nature ever give release to the
spirit soul? Since one is attracted to the other eternally, how is their separation possible?
PURPORT
Devahüti, the mother of Kapiladeva, here makes her first inquiry. Although one may
understand that spirit soul and matter are different, their actual separation is not
possible, either by philosophical speculation or by proper understanding. The spirit soul
is the marginal potency of the Supreme Lord, and matter is the external potency of the
Lord. The two eternal potencies have somehow or other been combined, and since it is
so difficult to separate one from the other, how is it possible for the individual soul to
become liberated? By practical experience one can see that when the soul is separated
from the body, the body has no real existence, and when the body is separated from the
soul one cannot perceive the existence of the soul. As long as the soul and the body are
combined, we can understand that there is life. But when they are separated, there is no
manifested existence of the body or the soul. This question asked by Devahüti of
513
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Kapiladeva is more or less impelled by the philosophy of voidism. The voidists say that
consciousness is a product of a combination of matter and that as soon as the
consciousness is gone, the material combination dissolves, and therefore there is
ultimately nothing but voidness. This absence of consciousness is called nirväëa in
Mäyäväda philosophy.
SB 3.27.18
TEXT 18
YaQaa GaNDaSYa >aUMaeê Na >aavae VYaiTarek-Ta" )
APaa& rSaSYa c YaQaa TaQaa buÖe" ParSYa c )) 18 ))
yathä gandhasya bhümeç ca
na bhävo vyatirekataù
apäà rasasya ca yathä
tathä buddheù parasya ca
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; gandhasya—of aroma; bhümeù—of earth; ca—and; na—no; bhävaù—
existence; vyatirekataù—separate; apäm—of water; rasasya—of taste; ca—and; yathä—
as; tathä—so; buddheù—of intelligence; parasya—of consciousness, spirit; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
As there is no separate existence of the earth and its aroma or of water and its taste, there
cannot be any separate existence of intelligence and consciousness.
PURPORT
The example is given here that anything material has an aroma. The flower, the earth—
everything—has an aroma. If the aroma is separated from the matter, the matter cannot
be identified. If there is no taste to water, the water has no meaning; if there is no heat
in the fire, the fire has no meaning. Similarly, when there is want of intelligence, spirit
has no meaning.
SB 3.27.19
TEXT 19
514
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Ak-TauR" k-MaRbNDaae_Ya& PauåzSYa Yadaé[Ya" )
Gau<aezu SaTSau Pa[k*-Tae" kE-vLYa& TaeZvTa" k-QaMa( )) 19 ))
akartuù karma-bandho 'yaà
puruñasya yad-äçrayaù
guëeñu satsu prakåteù
kaivalyaà teñv ataù katham
SYNONYMS
akartuù—of the passive performer, the nondoer; karma-bandhaù—bondage to fruitive
activities; ayam—this; puruñasya—of the soul; yat-äçrayaù—caused by attachment to
the modes; guëeñu—while the modes; satsu—are existing; prakåteù—of material nature;
kaivalyam—freedom; teñu—those; ataù—hence; katham—how.
TRANSLATION
Hence even though he is the passive performer of all activities, how can there be freedom
for the soul as long as material nature acts on him and binds him?
PURPORT
Although the living entity desires freedom from the contamination of matter, he is not
given release. Actually, as soon as a living entity puts himself under the control of the
modes of material nature, his acts are influenced by the qualities of material nature, and
he becomes passive. It is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, prakåteù kriyamäëäni guëaiù: [Bg.
3.27] the living entity acts according to the qualities or modes of material nature. He
falsely thinks that he is acting, but unfortunately he is passive. In other words, he has no
opportunity to get out of the control of material nature because it has already
conditioned him. In Bhagavad-gétä it is also stated that it is very difficult to get out of
the clutches of material nature. One may try in different ways to think that everything
is void in the ultimate issue, that there is no God and that even if the background of
everything is spirit, it is impersonal. This speculation may go on, but actually it is very
difficult to get out of the clutches of material nature. Devahüti poses the question that
although one may speculate in many ways, where is liberation as long as one is under the
spell of material nature? The answer is also found in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14): only one who
has surrendered himself unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord Kåñëa (mäm eva ye
515
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
prapadyante) can be freed from the clutches of mäyä.
Since Devahüti is gradually coming to the point of surrender, her questions are very
intelligent. How can one be liberated? How can one be in a pure state of spiritual
existence as long as he is strongly held by the modes of material nature? This is also an
indication to the false meditator. There are many so-called meditators who think, "I am
the Supreme Spirit Soul. I am conducting the activities of material nature. Under my
direction the sun is moving and the moon is rising." They think that by such
contemplation or meditation they can become free, but it is seen that just three minutes
after finishing such nonsensical meditation, they are immediately captured by the modes
of material nature. Immediately after his high-sounding meditation, a "meditator"
becomes thirsty and wants to smoke or drink. He is under the strong grip of material
nature, yet he thinks that he is already free from the clutches of mäyä. This question of
Devahüti's is for such a person who falsely claims that he is everything, that ultimately
everything is void, and that there are no sinful or pious activities. These are all atheistic
inventions. Actually, unless a living entity surrenders unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as instructed in Bhagavad-gétä, there is no liberation or freedom from the
clutches of mäyä.
SB 3.27.20
TEXT 20
KvicTa( TatvavMaXaeRNa iNav*ta& >aYaMauLb<aMa( )
AiNav*taiNaiMataTvaTPauNa" Pa[TYaviTaïTae )) 20 ))
kvacit tattvävamarçena
nivåttaà bhayam ulbaëam
anivåtta-nimittatvät
punaù pratyavatiñöhate
SYNONYMS
kvacit—in a certain case; tattva—the fundamental principles; avamarçena—by
reflecting upon; nivåttam—avoided; bhayam—fear; ulbaëam—great; anivåtta—not
ceased; nimittatvät—since the cause; punaù—again; pratyavatiñöhate—it appears.
TRANSLATION
516
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Even if the great fear of bondage is avoided by mental speculation and inquiry into the
fundamental principles, it may still appear again, since its cause has not ceased.
PURPORT
Material bondage is caused by putting oneself under the control of matter because of the
false ego of lording it over material nature. Bhagavad-gétä (7.27) states, icchä-dveñasamutthena.
Two kinds of propensities arise in the living entity. One propensity is icchä,
which means desire to lord it over material nature or to be as great as the Supreme Lord.
Everyone desires to be the greatest personality in this material world. Dveña means
"envy." When one becomes envious of Kåñëa, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
one thinks, "Why should Kåñëa be the all and all? I'm as good as Kåñëa." These two items,
desire to be the Lord and envy of the Lord, are the beginning cause of material bondage.
As long as a philosopher, salvationist or voidist has some desire to be supreme, to be
everything, or to deny the existence of God, the cause remains, and there is no question
of his liberation.
Devahüti very intelligently says, "One may theoretically analyze and say that by
knowledge he has become freed, but actually, as long as the cause exists, he is not free."
Bhagavad-gétä confirms that after performing such speculative activities for many, many
births, when one actually comes to his real consciousness and surrenders unto the
Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, then the fulfillment of his research in knowledge is actually
achieved. There is a gulf of difference between theoretical freedom and actual freedom
from material bondage. The Bhägavatam (10.14.4) says that if one gives up the auspicious
path of devotional service and simply tries to know things by speculation, one wastes his
valuable time (kliçyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye). The result of such a labor of love is
simply labor; there is no other result. The labor of speculation is ended only by
exhaustion. The example is given that there is no benefit in husking the skin of an
empty paddy; the rice is already gone. Similarly, simply by the speculative process one
cannot be freed from material bondage, for the cause still exists. One has to nullify the
cause, and then the effect will be nullified. This is explained by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in the following verses.
SB 3.27.21
TEXT 21
é[q>aGavaNauvac
AiNaiMataiNaiMataeNa SvDaMaeR<aaMal/aTMaNaa )
517
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Taqv]Yaa MaiYa >a¢-ya c é[uTaSaM>a*TaYaa icrMa( )) 21 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
animitta-nimittena
sva-dharmeëämalätmanä
tévrayä mayi bhaktyä ca
çruta-sambhåtayä ciram
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; animitta-nimittena—
without desiring the fruits of activities; sva-dharmeëa—by executing one's prescribed
duties; amala-ätmanä—with a pure mind; tévrayä—serious; mayi—unto Me; bhaktyä—
by devotional service; ca—and; çruta—hearing; sambhåtayä—endowed with; ciram—for
a long time.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: One can get liberation by seriously
discharging devotional service unto Me and thereby hearing for a long time about Me or
from Me. By thus executing one's prescribed duties, there will be no reaction, and one
will be freed from the contamination of matter.
PURPORT
Çrédhara Svämé comments in this connection that by association with material nature
alone one does not become conditioned. Conditional life begins only after one is
infected by the modes of material nature. If someone is in contact with the police
department, that does not mean that he is a criminal. As long as one does not commit
criminal acts, even though there is a police department, he is not punished. Similarly,
the liberated soul is not affected, although he is in the material nature. Even the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is supposed to be in association with material nature
when He descends, but He is not affected. One has to act in such a way that in spite of
being in the material nature he is not affected by contamination. Although the lotus
flower is in association with water, it does not mix with the water. That is how one has
to live, as described here by the Personality of Godhead Kapiladeva (animitta-nimittena
sva-dharmeëämalätmanä).
518
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
One can be liberated from all adverse circumstances simply by seriously engaging in
devotional service. How this devotional service develops and becomes mature is
explained here. In the beginning one has to perform his prescribed duties with a clean
mind. Clean consciousness means Kåñëa consciousness. One has to perform his
prescribed duties in Kåñëa consciousness. There is no necessity of changing one's
prescribed duties; one simply has to act in Kåñëa consciousness. In discharging Kåñëa
conscious duties, one should determine whether, by his professional or occupational
duties, Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is satisfied. In another place in the
Bhägavatam it is said, svanuñöhitasya dharmasya saàsiddhir hari-toñaëam: [SB 1.2.13]
everyone has some prescribed duties to perform, but the perfection of such duties will be
reached only if the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is satisfied by such actions.
For example, Arjuna's prescribed duty was to fight, and the perfection of his fighting
was tested by the satisfaction of Kåñëa. Kåñëa wanted him to fight, and when he fought
for the satisfaction of the Lord, that was the perfection of his professional devotional
duty. On the other hand, when, contrary to the wish of Kåñëa, he was not willing to
fight, that was imperfect.
If one wants to perfect his life, he should discharge his prescribed duties for the
satisfaction of Kåñëa. One must act in Kåñëa consciousness, for such action will never
produce any reaction (animitta-nimittena). This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä.
Yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra: all activities should be performed simply for Yajïa, or the
satisfaction of Viñëu. Anything done otherwise, without the satisfaction of Viñëu, or
Yajïa, produces bondage, so here it is also prescribed by Kapila Muni that one can
transcend material entanglement by acting in Kåñëa consciousness, which means
seriously engaging in devotional service. This serious devotional service can develop by
hearing for long periods of time. Chanting and hearing is the beginning of the process of
devotional service. One should associate with devotees and hear from them about the
Lord's transcendental appearance, activities, disappearance, instructions, etc.
There are two kinds of çruti, or scripture. One is spoken by the Lord, and the other is
spoken about the Lord and His devotees. Bhagavad-gétä is the former and Çrémad-
Bhägavatam the latter. One must hear these scriptures repeatedly from reliable sources
in order to become fixed in serious devotional service. Through engagement in such
devotional service, one becomes freed from the contamination of mäyä. It is stated in
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam that hearing about the Supreme Personality of Godhead
cleanses the heart of all contamination caused by the influence of the three modes of
material nature. By continuous, regular hearing, the effects of the contamination of lust
and greed to enjoy or lord it over material nature diminish, and when lust and greed
519
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
diminish, one then becomes situated in the mode of goodness. This is the stage of
Brahman realization, or spiritual realization. In this way one becomes fixed on the
transcendental platform. Remaining fixed on the transcendental platform is liberation
from material entanglement.
SB 3.27.22
TEXT 22
jaNaeNa d*íTatveNa vEraGYae<a bl/IYaSaa )
TaPaaeYau¢e-Na YaaeGaeNa Taqv]e<aaTMaSaMaaiDaNaa )) 22 ))
jïänena dåñöa-tattvena
vairägyeëa baléyasä
tapo-yuktena yogena
tévreëätma-samädhinä
SYNONYMS
jïänena—in knowledge; dåñöa-tattvena—with vision of the Absolute Truth;
vairägyeëa—with renunciation; baléyasä—very strong; tapaù-yuktena—by engagement
in austerity; yogena—by mystic yoga; tévreëa—firmly fixed; ätma-samädhinä—by selfabsorption.
TRANSLATION
This devotional service has to be performed strongly in perfect knowledge and with
transcendental vision. One must be strongly renounced and must engage in austerity and
perform mystic yoga in order to be firmly fixed in self-absorption.
PURPORT
Devotional service in Kåñëa consciousness cannot be performed blindly due to material
emotion or mental concoction. It is specifically mentioned here that one has to perform
devotional service in full knowledge by visualizing the Absolute Truth. We can
understand about the Absolute Truth by evolving transcendental knowledge, and the
result of such transcendental knowledge will be manifested by renunciation. That
renunciation is not temporary or artificial, but is very strong. It is said that development
of Kåñëa consciousness is exhibited by proportionate material detachment, or vairägya. If
520
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
one does not separate himself from material enjoyment, it is to be understood that he is
not advancing in Kåñëa consciousness. Renunciation in Kåñëa consciousness is so strong
that it cannot be deviated by any attractive illusion. One has to perform devotional
service in full tapasya, austerity. One should fast on the two Ekädaçé days, which fall on
the eleventh day of the waxing and waning moon, and on the birthdays of Lord Kåñëa,
Lord Räma and Caitanya Mahäprabhu. There are many such fasting days. Yogena means
"by controlling the senses and mind." Yoga indriya-saàyamaù. Yogena implies that one is
seriously absorbed in the self and is able, by development of knowledge, to understand
his constitutional position in relationship with the Superself. In this way one becomes
fixed in devotional service, and his faith cannot be shaken by any material allurement.
SB 3.27.23
TEXT 23
Pa[k*-iTa" PauåzSYaeh dùMaaNaa TvhiNaRXaMa( )
iTarae>aiv}aq XaNakE-rGaneYaaeRiNairvari<a" )) 23 ))
prakåtiù puruñasyeha
dahyamänä tv ahar-niçam
tiro-bhavitré çanakair
agner yonir iväraëiù
SYNONYMS
prakåtiù—the influence of material nature; puruñasya—of the living entity; iha—here;
dahyamänä—being consumed; tu—but; ahaù-niçam—day and night; tiraù-bhavitré—
disappearing; çanakaiù—gradually; agneù—of fire; yoniù—the cause of appearance;
iva—as; araëiù—wooden sticks.
TRANSLATION
The influence of material nature has covered the living entity, and thus it is as if the
living entity were always in a blazing fire. But by the process of seriously discharging
devotional service, this influence can be removed, just as wooden sticks which cause a fire
are themselves consumed by it.
PURPORT
521
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Fire is conserved in wooden sticks, and when circumstances are favorable, the fire is
ignited. But the wooden sticks which are the cause of the fire are also consumed by the
fire if it is properly dealt with. Similarly, the living entity's conditional life of material
existence is due to his desire to lord it over material nature and due to his envy of the
Supreme Lord. Thus his main diseases are that he wants to be one with the Supreme
Lord or he wants to become the lord of material nature. The karmés try to utilize the
resources of material nature and thus become its lord and enjoy sense gratification, and
the jïänés, the salvationists, who have become frustrated in enjoying the material
resources, want to become one with the Supreme Personality of Godhead or merge into
the impersonal effulgence. These two diseases are due to material contamination.
Material contamination can be consumed by devotional service because in devotional
service these two diseases, namely the desire to lord it over material nature and the
desire to become one with the Supreme Lord, are absent. Therefore the cause of
material existence is at once consumed by the careful discharge of devotional service in
Kåñëa consciousness.
A devotee in full Kåñëa consciousness appears superficially to be a great karmé, always
working, but the inner significance of the devotee's activities is that they are meant for
the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. This is called bhakti, or devotional service. Arjuna
was apparently a fighter but when by his fighting he satisfied the senses of Lord Kåñëa,
he became a devotee. Since a devotee also engages in philosophical research to
understand the Supreme Person as He is, his activities may thus appear to be like those
of a mental speculator, but actually he is trying to understand the spiritual nature and
transcendental activities. Thus although the tendency for philosophical speculation
exists, the material effects of fruitive activities and empiric speculation do not, because
this activity is meant for the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
SB 3.27.24
TEXT 24
>au¢->aaeGaa PairTYa¢-a d*ídaeza c iNaTYaXa" )
NaeìrSYaaéu>a& Datae Sve MaihiMan iSQaTaSYa c )) 24 ))
bhukta-bhogä parityaktä
dåñöa-doñä ca nityaçaù
neçvarasyäçubhaà dhatte
sve mahimni sthitasya ca
522
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
bhukta—enjoyed; bhogä—enjoyment; parityaktä—given up; dåñöa—discovered; doñä—
faultiness; ca—and; nityaçaù—always; na—not; éçvarasya—of the independent;
açubham—harm; dhatte—she inflicts; sve mahimni—in his own glory; sthitasya—
situated; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
By discovering the faultiness of his desiring to lord it over material nature and by
therefore giving it up, the living entity becomes independent and stands in his own glory.
PURPORT
Because the living entity is not actually the enjoyer of the material resources, his
attempt to lord it over material nature is, at the ultimate issue, frustrated. As a result of
frustration, he desires more power than the ordinary living entity and thus wants to
merge into the existence of the supreme enjoyer. In this way he develops a plan for
greater enjoyment.
When one is actually situated in devotional service, that is his independent position.
Less intelligent men cannot understand the position of the eternal servant of the Lord.
Because the word "servant" is used, they become confused; they cannot understand that
this servitude is not the servitude of this material world. To be the servant of the Lord is
the greatest position. If one can understand this and can thus revive one's original
nature of eternal servitorship of the Lord, one stands fully independent. A living entity's
independence is lost by material contact. In the spiritual field he has full independence,
and therefore there is no question of becoming dependent upon the three modes of
material nature. This position is attained by a devotee, and therefore he gives up the
tendency for material enjoyment after seeing its faultiness.
The difference between a devotee and an impersonalist is that an impersonalist tries to
become one with the Supreme so that he can enjoy without impediment, whereas a
devotee gives up the entire mentality of enjoying and engages in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord. That is his constitutional glorified position. At that time he is
éçvara, fully independent. The real éçvara or éçvaraù paramaù, the supreme éçvara, or
supreme independent, is Kåñëa. The living entity is éçvara only when engaged in the
service of the Lord. In other words, transcendental pleasure derived from loving service
to the Lord is actual independence.
523
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.27.25
TEXT 25
YaQaa ùPa[iTabuÖSYa Pa[SvaPaae bûNaQaR>a*Ta( )
Sa Wv Pa[iTabuÖSYa Na vE MaaehaYa k-LPaTae )) 25 ))
yathä hy apratibuddhasya
prasväpo bahv-anartha-bhåt
sa eva pratibuddhasya
na vai mohäya kalpate
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; hi—indeed; apratibuddhasya—of one who is sleeping; prasväpaù—the dream;
bahu-anartha-bhåt—bearing many inauspicious things; saù eva—that very dream;
pratibuddhasya—of one who is awake; na—not; vai—certainly; mohäya—for
bewildering; kalpate—is capable.
TRANSLATION
In the dreaming state one's consciousness is almost covered, and one sees many
inauspicious things, but when he is awakened and fully conscious, such inauspicious
things cannot bewilder him.
PURPORT
In the condition of dreaming, when one's consciousness is almost covered, one may see
many unfavorable things which cause disturbance or anxiety, but upon awakening,
although he remembers what happened in the dream, he is not disturbed. Similarly the
position of self-realization, or understanding of one's real relationship with the Supreme
Lord, makes one completely satisfied, and the three modes of material nature, which are
the cause of all disturbances, cannot affect him. In contaminated consciousness one sees
everything to be for his own enjoyment, but in pure consciousness, or Kåñëa
consciousness, he sees that everything exists for the enjoyment of the supreme enjoyer.
That is the difference between the dream state and wakefulness. The state of
contaminated consciousness is compared to dream consciousness, and Kåñëa
consciousness is compared to the awakened stage of life. Actually, as stated in Bhagavad524
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
gétä, the only absolute enjoyer is Kåñëa. One who can understand that Kåñëa is the
proprietor of all the three worlds and that He is the friend of everyone is peaceful and
independent. As long as a conditioned soul does not have this knowledge, he wants to be
the enjoyer of everything; he wants to become a humanitarian or philanthropist and
open hospitals and schools for his fellow human beings. This is all illusion, for one
cannot benefit anyone by such material activities. If one wishes to benefit his fellow
brother, he must awaken his dormant Kåñëa consciousness. The Kåñëa conscious
position is that of pratibuddha, which means "pure consciousness."
SB 3.27.26
TEXT 26
Wv& ividTaTatvSYa Pa[k*-iTaMaRiYa MaaNaSaMa( )
YauÅTaae NaaPaku-åTa AaTMaaraMaSYa k-ihRicTa( )) 26 ))
evaà vidita-tattvasya
prakåtir mayi mänasam
yuïjato näpakuruta
ätmärämasya karhicit
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; vidita-tattvasya—to one who knows the Absolute Truth; prakåtiù—material
nature; mayi—on Me; mänasam—the mind; yuïjataù—fixing; na—not; apakurute—can
do harm; ätma-ärämasya—to one who rejoices in the self; karhicit—at any time.
TRANSLATION
The influence of material nature cannot harm an enlightened soul, even though he
engages in material activities, because he knows the truth of the Absolute, and his mind
is fixed on the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Lord Kapila says that mayi mänasam, a devotee whose mind is always fixed upon the
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is called ätmäräma or vidita-tattva.
Ätmäräma means "one who rejoices in the self," or "one who enjoys in the spiritual
atmosphere." Ätmä, in the material sense, means the body or the mind, but when
525
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
referring to one whose mind is fixed on the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, ätmäräma
means "one who is fixed in spiritual activities in relationship with the Supreme Soul."
The Supreme Soul is the Personality of Godhead, and the individual soul is the living
entity. When they engage in reciprocation of service and benediction, the living entity
is said to be in the ätmäräma position. This ätmäräma position can be attained by one
who knows the truth as it is. The truth is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the enjoyer and that the living entities are meant for His service and enjoyment. One
who knows this truth, and who tries to engage all resources in the service of the Lord,
escapes all material reactions and influences of the modes of material nature.
An example may be cited in this connection. Just as a materialist engages in
constructing a big skyscraper, a devotee engages in constructing a big temple for Viñëu.
Superficially, the skyscraper constructor and temple constructor are on the same level,
for both are collecting wood, stone, iron and other building materials. But the person
who constructs a skyscraper is a materialist, and the person who constructs a temple of
Viñëu is ätmäräma. The materialist tries to satisfy himself in relation to his body by
constructing a skyscraper, but the devotee tries to satisfy the Superself, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, by constructing the temple. Although both are engaged in the
association of material activities, the devotee is liberated, and the materialist is
conditioned. This is because the devotee, who is constructing the temple, has fixed his
mind upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the nondevotee, who is
constructing the skyscraper, has his mind fixed in sense gratification. If, while
performing any activity, even in material existence, one's mind is fixed upon the lotus
feet of the Personality of Godhead, one will not be entangled or conditioned. The
worker in devotional service, in full Kåñëa consciousness, is always independent of the
influence of material nature.
SB 3.27.27
TEXT 27
YadEvMaDYaaTMarTa" k-ale/Na bhuJaNMaNaa )
SavR}a JaaTavEraGYa Aab]ø>auvNaaNMauiNa" )) 27 ))
yadaivam adhyätma-rataù
kälena bahu-janmanä
sarvatra jäta-vairägya
äbrahma-bhuvanän muniù
526
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; evam—thus; adhyätma-rataù—engaged in self-realization; kälena—for
many years; bahu-janmanä—for many births; sarvatra—everywhere; jäta-vairägyaù—
detachment is born; ä-brahma-bhuvanät—up to Brahmaloka; muniù—a thoughtful
person.
TRANSLATION
When a person thus engages in devotional service and self-realization for many, many
years and births, he becomes completely reluctant to enjoy any one of the material
planets, even up to the highest planet, which is known as Brahmaloka; he becomes fully
developed in consciousness.
PURPORT
Anyone engaged in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is known
as a devotee, but there is a distinction between pure devotees and mixed devotees. A
mixed devotee engages in devotional service for the spiritual benefit of being eternally
engaged in the transcendental abode of the Lord in full bliss and knowledge. In material
existence, when a devotee is not completely purified, he expects material benefit from
the Lord in the form of relief from material miseries, or he wants material gain,
advancement in knowledge of the relationship between the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and the living entity, or knowledge as to the real nature of the Supreme Lord.
When a person is transcendental to these conditions, he is called a pure devotee. He
does not engage himself in the service of the Lord for any material benefit or for
understanding of the Supreme Lord. His one interest is that he loves the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and he spontaneously engages in satisfying Him.
The highest example of pure devotional service is that of the gopés in Våndävana. They
are not interested in understanding Kåñëa, but only in loving Him. That platform of
love is the pure state of devotional service. Unless one is advanced to this pure state of
devotional service, there is a tendency to desire elevation to a higher material position.
A mixed devotee may desire to enjoy a comfortable life on another planet with a greater
span of life, such as on Brahmaloka. These are material desires, but because a mixed
devotee engages in the service of the Lord, ultimately, after many, many lives of material
enjoyment, he undoubtedly develops Kåñëa consciousness, and the symptom of this
Kåñëa consciousness is that he is no longer interested in any sort of materially elevated
527
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
life. He does not even aspire to become a personality like Lord Brahmä.
SB 3.27.28, SB 3.27.29, SB 3.27.28-29
TEXTS 28-29
MaÙ¢-" Pa[iTabuÖaQaaeR MaTPa[SaadeNa >aUYaSaa )
iNa"é[eYaSa& SvSa&SQaaNa& kE-vLYaa:Ya& Madaé[YaMa( )) 28 ))
Pa[aPanaeTaqhaÅSaa Daqr" Svd*XaaiC^àSa&XaYa" )
YaÓTva Na iNavTaeRTa YaaeGaq il/(r)aiÜiNaGaRMae )) 29 ))
mad-bhaktaù pratibuddhärtho
mat-prasädena bhüyasä
niùçreyasaà sva-saàsthänaà
kaivalyäkhyaà mad-äçrayam
präpnotéhäïjasä dhéraù
sva-dåçä cchinna-saàçayaù
yad gatvä na nivarteta
yogé liìgäd vinirgame
SYNONYMS
mat-bhaktaù—My devotee; pratibuddha-arthaù—self-realized; mat-prasädena—by My
causeless mercy; bhüyasä—unlimited; niùçreyasam—the ultimate perfectional goal; svasaàsthänam—
his abode; kaivalya-äkhyam—called kaivalya; mat-äçrayam—under My
protection; präpnoti—attains; iha—in this life; aïjasä—truly; dhéraù—steady; svadåçä—
by knowledge of the self; chinna-saàçayaù—freed from doubts; yat—to that
abode; gatvä—having gone; na—never; nivarteta—comes back; yogé—the mystic
devotee; liìgät—from the subtle and gross material bodies; vinirgame—after departing.
TRANSLATION
My devotee actually becomes self-realized by My unlimited causeless mercy, and thus,
when freed from all doubts, he steadily progresses towards his destined abode, which is
directly under the protection of My spiritual energy of unadulterated bliss. That is the
ultimate perfectional goal of the living entity. After giving up the present material body,
the mystic devotee goes to that transcendental abode and never comes back.
528
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Actual self-realization means becoming a pure devotee of the Lord. The existence of a
devotee implies the function of devotion and the object of devotion. Self-realization
ultimately means to understand the Personality of Godhead and the living entities; to
know the individual self and the reciprocal exchanges of loving service between the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and the living entity is real self-realization. This
cannot be attained by the impersonalists or other transcendentalists; they cannot
understand the science of devotional service. Devotional service is revealed to the pure
devotee by the unlimited causeless mercy of the Lord. This is especially spoken of here
by the Lord—mat-prasädena, "by My special grace." This is also confirmed in Bhagavadgétä.
Only those who engage in devotional service with love and faith receive the
necessary intelligence from the Supreme Personality of Godhead so that gradually and
progressively they can advance to the abode of the Personality of Godhead.
Niùçreyasa means "the ultimate destination." Sva-saàsthäna indicates that the
impersonalists have no particular place to stay. The impersonalists sacrifice their
individuality so that the living spark can merge into the impersonal effulgence
emanating from the transcendental body of the Lord, but the devotee has a specific
abode. The planets rest in the sunshine, but the sunshine itself has no particular resting
place. When one reaches a particular planet, then he has a resting place. The spiritual
sky, which is known as kaivalya, is simply blissful light on all sides, and it is under the
protection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (14.27),
brahmaëo hi pratiñöhäham: the impersonal Brahman effulgence rests on the body of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other words, the bodily effulgence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is kaivalya, or impersonal Brahman. In that impersonal
effulgence there are spiritual planets, which are known as Vaikuëöhas, chief of which is
Kåñëaloka. Some devotees are elevated to the Vaikuëöha planets, and some are elevated
to the planet Kåñëaloka. According to the desire of the particular devotee, he is offered
a particular abode, which is known as sva-saàsthäna, his desired destination. By the
grace of the Lord, the self-realized devotee engaged in devotional service understands
his destination even while in the material body. He therefore performs his devotional
activities steadily, without doubting, and after quitting his material body he at once
reaches the destination for which he has prepared himself. After reaching that abode,
he never comes back to this material world.
The words liìgäd vinirgame, which are used here, mean "after being freed from the two
kinds of material bodies, subtle and gross." The subtle body is made of mind, intelligence,
529
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
false ego and contaminated consciousness, and the gross body is made of five elements—
earth, water, fire, air and ether. When one is transferred to the spiritual world, he gives
up both the subtle and gross bodies of this material world. He enters the spiritual sky in
his pure, spiritual body and is stationed in one of the spiritual planets. Although the
impersonalists also reach that spiritual sky after giving up the subtle and gross material
bodies, they are not placed in the spiritual planets; as they desire, they are allowed to
merge in the spiritual effulgence emanating from the transcendental body of the Lord.
The word sva-saàsthänam is also very significant. As a living entity prepares himself, so
he attains his abode. The impersonal Brahman effulgence is offered to the
impersonalists, but those who want to associate with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in His transcendental form as Näräyaëa in the Vaikuëöhas, or with Kåñëa in
Kåñëaloka, go to those abodes, wherefrom they never return.
SB 3.27.30
TEXT 30
Yada Na YaaeGaaePaicTaaSau ceTaae
MaaYaaSau iSaÖSYa ivzÂTae_(r) )
ANaNYaheTauZvQa Mae GaiTa" SYaad(
AaTYaiNTak-I Ya}a Na Ma*TYauhaSa" )) 30 ))
yadä na yogopacitäsu ceto
mäyäsu siddhasya viñajjate 'ìga
ananya-hetuñv atha me gatiù syäd
ätyantiké yatra na måtyu-häsaù
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; na—not; yoga-upacitäsu—to powers developed by yoga; cetaù—the
attention; mäyäsu—manifestations of mäyä; siddhasya—of a perfect yogé; viñajjate—is
attracted; aìga—My dear mother; ananya-hetuñu—having no other cause; atha—then;
me—to Me; gatiù—his progress; syät—becomes; ätyantiké—unlimited; yatra—where;
na—not; måtyu-häsaù—power of death.
TRANSLATION
When a perfect yogé's attention is no longer attracted to the by-products of mystic
530
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
powers, which are manifestations of the external energy, his progress towards Me
becomes unlimited, and thus the power of death cannot overcome him.
PURPORT
Yogés are generally attracted to the by-products of mystic yogic power, for they can
become smaller than the smallest or greater than the greatest, achieve anything they
desire, have power even to create a planet, or bring anyone they like under their
subjection. Yogés who have incomplete information of the result of devotional service
are attracted by these powers, but these powers are material; they have nothing to do
with spiritual progress. As other material powers are created by the material energy,
mystic yogic powers are also material. A perfect yogés mind is not attracted by any
material power, but is simply attracted by unalloyed service to the Supreme Lord. For a
devotee, the process of merging into the Brahman effulgence is considered to be hellish,
and yogic power or the preliminary perfection of yogic power, to be able to control the
senses, is automatically achieved. As for elevation to higher planets, a devotee considers
this to be simply hallucinatory. A devotee's attention is concentrated only upon the
eternal loving service of the Lord, and therefore the power of death has no influence
over him. In such a devotional state, a perfect yogé can attain the status of immortal
knowledge and bliss.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Twenty-seventh Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Understanding Material Nature."
28. Kapila's Instructions on the Execution of Devotional Service
SB 3.28.1
TEXT 1
é[q>aGavaNauvac
YaaeGaSYa l/+a<a& v+Yae SabqJaSYa Na*PaaTMaJae )
MaNaae YaeNaEv iviDaNaa Pa[Saà& YaaiTa SaTPaQaMa( )) 1 ))
531
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
çré-bhagavän uväca
yogasya lakñaëaà vakñye
sabéjasya nåpätmaje
mano yenaiva vidhinä
prasannaà yäti sat-patham
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Personality of Godhead said; yogasya—of the yoga system;
lakñaëam—description; vakñye—I shall explain; sabéjasya—authorized; nåpa-ätma-je—O
daughter of the King; manaù—the mind; yena—by which; eva—certainly; vidhinä—by
practice; prasannam—joyful; yäti—attains; sat-patham—the path of the Absolute
Truth.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead said: My dear mother, O daughter of the King, now I shall
explain to you the system of yoga, the object of which is to concentrate the mind. By
practicing this system one can become joyful and progressively advance towards the path
of the Absolute Truth.
PURPORT
The yoga process explained by Lord Kapiladeva in this chapter is authorized and
standard, and therefore these instructions should be followed very carefully. To begin,
the Lord says that by yoga practice one can make progress towards understanding the
Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the previous chapter it has
been clearly stated that the desired result of yoga is not to achieve some wonderful
mystic power. One should not be at all attracted by such mystic power, but should attain
progressive realization on the path of understanding the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, which states in the last verse of the
Sixth Chapter that the greatest yogé is he who constantly thinks of Kåñëa within
himself, or he who is Kåñëa conscious.
It is stated here that by following the system of yoga one can become joyful. Lord Kapila,
the Personality of Godhead, who is the highest authority on yoga, here explains the yoga
system known as añöäìga-yoga, which comprises eight different practices, namely yama,
niyama, äsana, präëäyäma, pratyähära, dhäraëä, dhyäna and samädhi. By all these stages
532
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of practice one must realize Lord Viñëu, who is the target of all yoga. There are so-called
yoga practices in which one concentrates the mind on voidness or on the impersonal,
but this is not approved by the authorized yoga system as explained by Kapiladeva. Even
Pataïjali explains that the target of all yoga is Viñëu. Añöäìga-yoga is therefore part of
Vaiñëava practice because its ultimate goal is realization of Viñëu. The achievement of
success in yoga is not acquisition of mystic power, which is condemned in the previous
chapter, but, rather, freedom from all material designations and situation in one's
constitutional position. That is the ultimate achievement in yoga practice.
SB 3.28.2
TEXT 2
SvDaMaaRcr<a& Xa¢-ya ivDaMaaRÀ iNavTaRNaMa( )
dEvaçBDaeNa SaNTaaez AaTMaivÀr<aacRNaMa( )) 2 ))
sva-dharmäcaraëaà çaktyä
vidharmäc ca nivartanam
daiväl labdhena santoña
ätmavic-caraëärcanam
SYNONYMS
sva-dharma-äcaraëam—executing one's prescribed duties; çaktyä—to the best of one's
ability; vidharmät—unauthorized duties; ca—and; nivartanam—avoiding; daivät—by
the grace of the Lord; labdhena—with what is achieved; santoñaù—satisfied; ätma-vit—
of the self-realized soul; caraëa—the feet; arcanam—worshiping.
TRANSLATION
One should execute his prescribed duties to the best of his ability and avoid performing
duties not allotted to him. One should be satisfied with as much gain as he achieves by
the grace of the Lord, and one should worship the lotus feet of a spiritual master.
PURPORT
In this verse there are many important words which could be very elaborately explained,
but we shall briefly discuss the important aspects of each. The final statement is ätmaviccaraëärcanam.
Ätma-vit means a self-realized soul or bona fide spiritual master. Unless
533
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
one is self-realized and knows what his relationship with the Supersoul is, he cannot be a
bona fide spiritual master. Here it is recommended that one should seek out a bona fide
spiritual master and surrender unto him (arcanam), for by inquiring from and
worshiping him one can learn spiritual activities.
The first recommendation is sva-dharmäcaraëam. As long as we have this material body
there are various duties prescribed for us. Such duties are divided by a system of four
social orders: brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra. These particular duties are
mentioned in the çästra, and particularly in Bhagavad-gétä. Sva-dharmäcaraëam means
that one must discharge the prescribed duties of his particular division of society
faithfully and to the best of his ability. One should not accept another's duty. If one is
born in a particular society or community, he should perform the prescribed duties for
that particular division. If, however, one is fortunate enough to transcend the
designation of birth in a particular society or community by being elevated to the
standard of spiritual identity, then his sva-dharma, or duty, is solely that of serving the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The actual duty of one who is advanced in Kåñëa
consciousness is to serve the Lord. As long as one remains in the bodily concept of life,
he may act according to the duties of social convention, but if one is elevated to the
spiritual platform, he must simply serve the Supreme Lord; that is the real execution of
sva-dharma.
SB 3.28.3
TEXT 3
Ga]aMYaDaMaRiNav*itaê Maae+aDaMaRriTaSTaQaa )
iMaTaMaeDYaadNa& XaìiÜiv¢-+aeMaSaevNaMa( )) 3 ))
grämya-dharma-nivåttiç ca
mokña-dharma-ratis tathä
mita-medhyädanaà çaçvad
vivikta-kñema-sevanam
SYNONYMS
grämya—conventional; dharma—religious practice; nivåttiù—ceasing; ca—and;
mokña—for salvation; dharma—religious practice; ratiù—being attracted to; tathä—in
that way; mita—little; medhya—pure; adanam—eating; çaçvat—always; vivikta—
secluded; kñema—peaceful; sevanam—dwelling.
534
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
One should cease performing conventional religious practices and should be attracted to
those which lead to salvation. One should eat very frugally and should always remain
secluded so that he can achieve the highest perfection of life.
PURPORT
It is recommended herein that religious practice for economic development or the
satisfaction of sense desires should be avoided. Religious practices should be executed
only to gain freedom from the clutches of material nature. It is stated in the beginning
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam that the topmost religious practice is that by which one can
attain to the transcendental devotional service of the Lord, without reason or cause.
Such religious practice is never hampered by any impediments, and by its performance
one actually becomes satisfied. Here this is recommended as mokña-dharma, religious
practice for salvation, or transcendence of the clutches of material contamination.
Generally people execute religious practices for economic development or sense
gratification, but that is not recommended for one who wants to advance in yoga.
The next important phrase is mita-medhyädanam, which means that one should eat very
frugally. It is recommended in the Vedic literatures that a yogé eat only half what he
desires according to his hunger. If one is so hungry that he could devour one pound of
foodstuffs, then instead of eating one pound, he should consume only half a pound and
supplement this with four ounces of water; one fourth of the stomach should be left
empty for passage of air in the stomach. If one eats in this manner, he will avoid
indigestion and disease. The yogé should eat in this way, as recommended in the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam and all other standard scriptures. The yogé should live in a secluded place,
where his yoga practice will not be disturbed.
SB 3.28.4
TEXT 4
Aih&Saa SaTYaMaSTaeYa& YaavdQaRPairGa]h" )
b]øcYa| TaPa" XaaEc& SvaDYaaYa" PauåzacRNaMa( )) 4 ))
ahiàsä satyam asteyaà
yävad-artha-parigrahaù
brahmacaryaà tapaù çaucaà
535
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
svädhyäyaù puruñärcanam
SYNONYMS
ahiàsä—nonviolence; satyam—truthfulness; asteyam—refraining from theft; yävatartha—
as much as necessary; parigrahaù—possessing; brahmacaryam—celibacy; tapaù—
austerity; çaucam—cleanliness; sva-adhyäyaù—study of the Vedas; puruña-arcanam—
worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
One should practice nonviolence and truthfulness, should avoid thieving and be satisfied
with possessing as much as he needs for his maintenance. He should abstain from sex life,
perform austerity, be clean, study the Vedas and worship the supreme form of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The word puruñärcanam in this verse means worshiping the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, especially the form of Lord Kåñëa. In Bhagavad-gétä it is confirmed by Arjuna
that Kåñëa is the original puruña, or Personality of Godhead, puruñaà çäçvatam.
Therefore in yoga practice one not only must concentrate his mind on the person of
Kåñëa, but must also worship the form or Deity of Kåñëa daily.
A brahmacäré practices celibacy, controlling his sex life. One cannot enjoy unrestricted
sex life and practice yoga; this is rascaldom. So-called yogés advertise that one can go on
enjoying as one likes and simultaneously become a yogé, but this is totally unauthorized.
It is very clearly explained here that one must observe celibacy. Brahmacaryam means
that one leads his life simply in relationship with Brahman, or in full Kåñëa
consciousness. Those who are too addicted to sex life cannot observe the regulations
which will lead them to Kåñëa consciousness. Sex life should be restricted to persons
who are married. A person whose sex life is restricted in marriage is also called a
brahmacäré.
The word asteyam is also very important for a yogé. Asteyam means "to refrain from
theft." In the broader sense, everyone who accumulates more than he needs is a thief.
According to spiritual communism, one cannot possess more than he needs for his
personal maintenance. That is the law of nature. Anyone who accumulates more money
or more possessions than he needs is called a thief, and one who simply accumulates
536
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
wealth without spending for sacrifice or for worship of the Personality of Godhead is a
great thief.
Svädhyäyaù means "reading the authorized Vedic scriptures." Even if one is not Kåñëa
conscious and is practicing the yoga system, he must read standard Vedic literatures in
order to understand. Performance of yoga alone is not sufficient. Narottama däsa
Öhäkura, a great devotee and äcärya in the Gauòéya Vaiñëava-sampradäya, says that all
spiritual activities should be understood from three sources, namely saintly persons,
standard scriptures and the spiritual master. These three guides are very important for
progress in spiritual life. The spiritual master prescribes standard literature for the
prosecution of the yoga of devotional service, and he himself speaks only from scriptural
reference. Therefore reading standard scriptures is necessary for executing yoga.
Practicing yoga without reading the standard literatures is simply a waste of time.
SB 3.28.5
TEXT 5
MaaENa& SadaSaNaJaYa" SQaEYa| Pa[a<aJaYa" XaNaE" )
Pa[TYaaharêeiNd]Yaa<aa& ivzYaaNMaNaSaa ôid )) 5 ))
maunaà sad-äsana-jayaù
sthairyaà präëa-jayaù çanaiù
pratyähäraç cendriyäëäà
viñayän manasä hådi
SYNONYMS
maunam—silence; sat—good; äsana—yogic postures; jayaù—controlling; sthairyam—
steadiness; präëa-jayaù—controlling the vital air; çanaiù—gradually; pratyähäraù—
withdrawal; ca—and; indriyäëäm—of the senses; viñayät—from the sense objects;
manasä—with the mind; hådi—on the heart.
TRANSLATION
One must observe silence, acquire steadiness by practicing different yogic postures,
control the breathing of the vital air, withdraw the senses from sense objects and thus
concentrate the mind on the heart.
537
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The yogic practices in general and haöha-yoga in particular are not ends in themselves;
they are means to the end of attaining steadiness. First one must be able to sit properly,
and then the mind and attention will become steady enough for practicing yoga.
Gradually, one must control the circulation of vital air, and with such control he will be
able to withdraw the senses from sense objects. In the previous verse it is stated that one
must observe celibacy. The most important aspect of sense control is controlling sex life.
That is called brahmacarya. By practicing the different sitting postures and controlling
the vital air, one can control and restrain the senses from unrestricted sense enjoyment.
SB 3.28.6
TEXT 6
SviDaZ<YaaNaaMaek-deXae MaNaSaa Pa[a<aDaar<aMa( )
vEku-<#=l/Il/ai>aDYaaNa& SaMaaDaaNa& TaQaaTMaNa" )) 6 ))
sva-dhiñëyänäm eka-deçe
manasä präëa-dhäraëam
vaikuëöha-léläbhidhyänaà
samädhänaà tathätmanaù
SYNONYMS
sva-dhiñëyänäm—within the vital air circles; eka-deçe—in one spot; manasä—with the
mind; präëa—the vital air; dhäraëam—fixing; vaikuëöha-lélä—on the pastimes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; abhidhyänam—concentration; samädhänam—
samädhi; tathä—thus; ätmanaù—of the mind.
TRANSLATION
Fixing the vital air and the mind in one of the six circles of vital air circulation within the
body, thus concentrating one's mind on the transcendental pastimes of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is called samädhi, or samädhäna, of the mind.
PURPORT
There are six circles of vital air circulation within the body. The first circle is within the
538
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
belly, the second circle is in the area of the heart, the third is in the area of the lungs,
the fourth is on the palate, the fifth is between the eyebrows, and the highest, the sixth
circle, is above the brain. One has to fix his mind and the circulation of the vital air and
thus think of the transcendental pastimes of the Supreme Lord. It is never mentioned
that one should concentrate on the impersonal or void. It is clearly stated, vaikuëöha-lélä.
Lélä means "pastimes." Unless the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, has
transcendental activities, where is the scope for thinking of these pastimes? It is through
the processes of devotional service, chanting and hearing of the pastimes of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, that one can achieve this concentration. As described in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the Lord appears and disappears according to His relationships with
different devotees. The Vedic literatures contain many narrations of the Lord's
pastimes, including the Battle of Kurukñetra and historical facts relating to the life and
precepts of devotees like Prahläda Mahäräja, Dhruva Mahäräja and Ambaréña Mahäräja.
One need only concentrate his mind on one such narration and become always absorbed
in its thought. Then he will be in samädhi. Samädhi is not an artificial bodily state; it is
the state achieved when the mind is virtually absorbed in thoughts of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
SB 3.28.7
TEXT 7
WTaErNYaEê PaiQai>aMaRNaae duíMaSaTPaQaMa( )
buÖya YauÅqTa XaNakE-iJaRTaPa[a<aae ùTaiNd]Ta" )) 7 ))
etair anyaiç ca pathibhir
mano duñöam asat-patham
buddhyä yuïjéta çanakair
jita-präëo hy atandritaù
SYNONYMS
etaiù—by these; anyaiù—by other; ca—and; pathibhiù—processes; manaù—the mind;
duñöam—contaminated; asat-patham—on the path of material enjoyment; buddhyä—by
the intelligence; yuïjéta—one must control; çanakaiù—gradually; jita-präëaù—the life
air being fixed; hi—indeed; atandritaù—alert.
TRANSLATION
539
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
By these processes, or any other true process, one must control the contaminated,
unbridled mind, which is always attracted by material enjoyment, and thus fix himself in
thought of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Etair anyaiç ca. The general yoga process entails observing the rules and regulations,
practicing the different sitting postures, concentrating the mind on the vital circulation
of the air and then thinking of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His Vaikuëöha
pastimes. This is the general process of yoga. This same concentration can be achieved
by other recommended processes, and therefore anyaiç ca, other methods, also can be
applied. The essential point is that the mind, which is contaminated by material
attraction, has to be bridled and concentrated on the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
It cannot be fixed on something void or impersonal. For this reason, so-called yoga
practices of voidism and impersonalism are not recommended in any standard yogaçästra.
The real yogé is the devotee because his mind is always concentrated on the
pastimes of Lord Kåñëa. Therefore Kåñëa consciousness is the topmost yoga system.
SB 3.28.8
TEXT 8
éucaE deXae Pa[iTaïaPYa iviJaTaaSaNa AaSaNaMa( )
TaiSMaNa( SviSTa SaMaaSaqNa ‰Jauk-aYa" SaMa>YaSaeTa( )) 8 ))
çucau deçe pratiñöhäpya
vijitäsana äsanam
tasmin svasti samäséna
åju-käyaù samabhyaset
SYNONYMS
çucau deçe—in a sanctified place; pratiñöhäpya—after placing; vijita-äsanaù—controlling
the sitting postures; äsanam—a seat; tasmin—in that place; svasti samäsénaù—sitting in
an easy posture; åju-käyaù—keeping the body erect; samabhyaset—one should practice.
TRANSLATION
After controlling one's mind and sitting postures, one should spread a seat in a secluded
540
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
and sanctified place, sit there in an easy posture, keeping the body erect, and practice
breath control.
PURPORT
Sitting in an easy posture is called svasti samäsénaù. It is recommended in the yoga
scripture that one should put the soles of the feet between the two thighs and ankles and
sit straight; that posture will help one to concentrate his mind on the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This very process is also recommended in Bhagavad-gétä, Sixth
Chapter. It is further suggested that one sit in a secluded, sanctified spot. The seat
should consist of deerskin and kuça grass, topped with cotton.
SB 3.28.9
TEXT 9
Pa[a<aSYa XaaeDaYaeNMaaGa| PaUrku-M>ak-reckE-" )
Pa[iTakU-le/Na va icta& YaQaa iSQarMacÄl/Ma( )) 9 ))
präëasya çodhayen märgaà
püra-kumbhaka-recakaiù
pratikülena vä cittaà
yathä sthiram acaïcalam
SYNONYMS
präëasya—of vital air; çodhayet—one should clear; märgam—the passage; pürakumbhaka-
recakaiù—by inhaling, retaining and exhaling; pratikülena—by reversing;
vä—or; cittam—the mind; yathä—so that; sthiram—steady; acaïcalam—free from
disturbances.
TRANSLATION
The yogé should clear the passage of vital air by breathing in the following manner: first
he should inhale very deeply, then hold the breath in, and finally exhale. Or, reversing
the process, the yogi can first exhale, then hold the breath outside, and finally inhale.
This is done so that the mind may become steady and free from external disturbances.
PURPORT
541
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
These breathing exercises are performed to control the mind and fix it on the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù: [SB 9.4.18] the devotee
Ambaréña Mahäräja fixed his mind on the lotus feet of Kåñëa twenty-four hours a day.
The process of Kåñëa consciousness is to chant Hare Kåñëa and to hear the sound
attentively so that the mind is fixed upon the transcendental vibration of Kåñëa's name,
which is nondifferent from Kåñëa the personality. The real purpose of controlling the
mind by the prescribed method of clearing the passage of the life air is achieved
immediately if one fixes his mind directly on the lotus feet of Kåñëa. The haöha-yoga
system, or breathing system, is especially recommended for those who are very absorbed
in the concept of bodily existence, but one who can perform the simple process of
chanting Hare Kåñëa can fix the mind more easily.
Three different activities are recommended for clearing the passage of breath: püraka,
kumbhaka and recaka. Inhaling the breath is called püraka, sustaining it within is called
kumbhaka, and finally exhaling it is called recaka. These recommended processes can
also be performed in the reverse order. After exhaling, one can keep the air outside for
some time and then inhale. The nerves through which inhalation and exhalation are
conducted are technically called iòä and piìgalä. The ultimate purpose of clearing the
iòä and piìgalä passages is to divert the mind from material enjoyment. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä, one's mind is his enemy, and one's mind is also his friend; its position
varies according to the different dealings of the living entity. If we divert our mind to
thoughts of material enjoyment, then our mind becomes an enemy, and if we
concentrate our mind on the lotus feet of Kåñëa, then our mind is a friend. By the yoga
system of püraka, kumbhaka and recaka or by directly fixing the mind on the sound
vibration of Kåñëa or on the form of Kåñëa, the same purpose is achieved. In Bhagavadgétä
it is said that one must practice the breathing exercise (abhyäsa-yoga-yuktena [Bg.
8.8]). by virtue of these processes of control, the mind cannot wander to external
thoughts (cetasä nänya-gäminä). Thus one can fix his mind constantly on the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and can attain (yäti) Him.
Practicing the yoga system of exercise and breath control is very difficult for a person in
this age, and therefore Lord Caitanya recommended, kértanéyaù sadä hariù: [Cc. Ädi
17.31] one should always chant the holy name of the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, because
Kåñëa is the most suitable name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The name
Kåñëa and the Supreme Person Kåñëa are nondifferent. Therefore, if one concentrates
his mind on hearing and chanting Hare Kåñëa, the same result is achieved.
SB 3.28.10
TEXT 10
542
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
MaNaae_icraTSYaaiÜrJa& iJaTaìaSaSYa YaaeiGaNa" )
vaYviGan>Yaa& YaQaa l/aeh& DMaaTa& TYaJaiTa vE Mal/Ma( )) 10 ))
mano 'cirät syäd virajaà
jita-çväsasya yoginaù
väyv-agnibhyäà yathä lohaà
dhmätaà tyajati vai malam
SYNONYMS
manaù—the mind; acirät—soon; syät—can be; virajam—free from disturbances; jitaçväsasya—
whose breathing is controlled; yoginaù—of the yogé; väyu-agnibhyäm—by air
and fire; yathä—just as; loham—gold; dhmätam—fanned; tyajati—becomes freed from;
vai—certainly; malam—impurity.
TRANSLATION
The yogés who practice such breathing exercises are very soon freed from all mental
disturbances, just as gold, when put into fire and fanned with air, becomes free from all
impurities.
PURPORT
This process of purifying the mind is also recommended by Lord Caitanya; He says that
one should chant Hare Kåñëa. He says further, paraà vijayate: "All glories to Çré Kåñëa
saìkértana!" All glories are given to the chanting of the holy names of Kåñëa because as
soon as one begins this process of chanting, the mind becomes purified. Ceto-darpaëamärjanam:
[Cc. Antya 20.12] by chanting the holy name of Kåñëa one is cleansed of the
dirt that accumulates in the mind. One can purify the mind either by the breathing
process or by the chanting process, just as one can purify gold by putting it in a fire and
fanning it with a bellows.
SB 3.28.11
TEXT 11
Pa[a<aaYaaMaEdRheÕaezaNDaar<aai>aê ik-iLbzaNa( )
Pa[TYaahare<a Sa&SaGaaRNDYaaNaeNaaNaqìraNa( Gau<aaNa( )) 11 ))
543
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
präëäyämair dahed doñän
dhäraëäbhiç ca kilbiñän
pratyähäreëa saàsargän
dhyänenänéçvarän guëän
SYNONYMS
präëäyämaiù—by practice of präëäyäma; dahet—one can eradicate; doñän—
contaminations; dhäraëäbhiù—by concentrating the mind; ca—and; kilbiñän—sinful
activities; pratyähäreëa—by restraining the senses; saàsargän—material association;
dhyänena—by meditating; anéçvarän guëän—the modes of material nature.
TRANSLATION
By practicing the process of präëäyäma, one can eradicate the contamination of his
physiological condition, and by concentrating the mind one can become free from all
sinful activities. By restraining the senses one can free himself from material association,
and by meditating on the Supreme Personality of Godhead one can become free from the
three modes of material attachment.
PURPORT
According to Äyur-vedic medical science the three items kapha, pitta and väyu (phlegm,
bile and air) maintain the physiological condition of the body. Modern medical science
does not accept this physiological analysis as valid, but the ancient Äyur-vedic process of
treatment is based upon these items. Äyur-vedic treatment concerns itself with the
cause of these three elements, which are mentioned in many places in the Bhägavatam
as the basic conditions of the body. Here it is recommended that by practicing the
breathing process of präëäyäma one can be released from contamination created by the
principal physiological elements, by concentrating the mind one can become free from
sinful activities, and by withdrawing the senses one can free himself from material
association.
Ultimately, one has to meditate on the Supreme Personality of Godhead in order to be
elevated to the transcendental position where he is no longer affected by the three
modes of material nature. It is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä that one who engages
himself in unalloyed devotional service at once becomes transcendental to the three
modes of material nature and immediately realizes his identification with Brahman. Sa
544
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
guëän samatétyaitän brahma-bhüyäya kalpate [Bg. 14.26]. For every item in the yoga
system there is a parallel activity in bhakti-yoga, but the practice of bhakti-yoga is easier
for this age. What was introduced by Lord Caitanya is not a new interpretation. Bhaktiyoga
is a feasible process that begins with chanting and hearing. Bhakti-yoga and other
yogas have as their ultimate goal the same Personality of Godhead, but one is practical,
and the others are difficult. One has to purify his physiological condition by
concentration and by restraint of the senses; then he can fix his mind upon the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is called samädhi.
SB 3.28.12
TEXT 12
Yada MaNa" Sv& ivrJa& YaaeGaeNa SauSaMaaihTaMa( )
k-aïa& >aGavTaae DYaaYaeTSvNaaSaaGa]avl/aek-Na" )) 12 ))
yadä manaù svaà virajaà
yogena susamähitam
käñöhäà bhagavato dhyäyet
sva-näsägrävalokanaù
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; manaù—the mind; svam—own; virajam—purified; yogena—by yoga
practice; su-samähitam—controlled; käñöhäm—the plenary expansion; bhagavataù—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dhyäyet—one should meditate upon; sva-näsäagra—
the tip of one's nose; avalokanaù—looking at.
TRANSLATION
When the mind is perfectly purified by this practice of yoga, one should concentrate on
the tip of the nose with half-closed eyes and see the form of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
PURPORT
It is clearly mentioned here that one has to meditate upon the expansion of Viñëu. The
word kañöhäm refers to Paramätmä, the expansion of the expansion of Viñëu. Bhagavataù
refers to Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Godhead is
545
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Kåñëa; from Him comes the first expansion, Baladeva, and from Baladeva come
Saìkarñaëa, Aniruddha and many other forms, followed by the puruña-avatäras. As
mentioned in the previous verses (puruñärcanam), this puruña is represented as the
Paramätmä, or Supersoul. A description of the Supersoul, upon whom one must
meditate, will be given in the following verses. In this verse it is clearly stated that one
must meditate by fixing the vision on the tip of the nose and concentrating one's mind
on the kalä, or the plenary expansion, of Viñëu.
SB 3.28.13
TEXT 13
Pa[SaàvdNaaM>aaeJa& PaÚGa>aaRå<ae+a<aMa( )
Naql/aeTPal/dl/XYaaMa& Xa«c§-GadaDarMa( )) 13 ))
prasanna-vadanämbhojaà
padma-garbhäruëekñaëam
nélotpala-dala-çyämaà
çaìkha-cakra-gadä-dharam
SYNONYMS
prasanna—cheerful; vadana—countenance; ambhojam—lotuslike; padma-garbha—the
interior of a lotus; aruëa—ruddy; ékñaëam—with eyes; néla-utpala—blue lotus; dala—
petals; çyämam—swarthy; çaìkha—conch; cakra—discus; gadä—club; dharam—
bearing.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has a cheerful, lotuslike countenance with ruddy
eyes like the interior of a lotus and a swarthy body like the petals of a blue lotus. He
bears a conch, discus and mace in three of His hands.
PURPORT
It is definitely recommended herein that one concentrate his mind upon the form of
Viñëu. There are twelve different forms of Viñëu, which are described in Teachings of
Lord Caitanya. One cannot concentrate his mind on anything void or impersonal; the
mind should be fixed on the personal form of the Lord, whose attitude is cheerful, as
546
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
described in this verse. Bhagavad-gétä states that meditation on the impersonal or void
features is very troublesome to the meditator. Those who are attached to the impersonal
or void features of meditation have to undergo a difficult process because we are not
accustomed to concentrating our minds upon anything impersonal. Actually such
concentration is not even possible. Bhagavad-gétä also confirms that one should
concentrate his mind on the Personality of Godhead.
The color of the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is described here as nélotpala-dala,
meaning that it is like that of a lotus flower with petals tinted blue and white. People
always ask why Kåñëa is blue. The color of the Lord has not been imagined by an artist.
It is described in authoritative scripture. In the Brahma-saàhitä also, the color of Kåñëa's
body is compared to that of a bluish cloud. The color of the Lord is not poetical
imagination. There are authoritative descriptions in the Brahma-saàhitä, Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, Bhagavad-gétä and many of the puräëas of the Lord's body, His weapons
and all other paraphernalia. The Lord's appearance is described here as padmagarbhäruëekñaëam.
His eyes resemble the inside of a lotus flower, and in His four hands
He holds the four symbols: conchshell, discus, mace and lotus.
SB 3.28.14
TEXT 14
l/SaTPaªJaik-ÅLk-PaqTak-aEXaeYavaSaSaMa( )
é[qvTSav+aSa& >a]aJaTk-aESTau>aaMau¢-k-NDarMa( )) 14 ))
lasat-paìkaja-kiïjalkapéta-
kauçeya-väsasam
çrévatsa-vakñasaà bhräjat
kaustubhämukta-kandharam
SYNONYMS
lasat—shining; paìkaja—of a lotus; kiïjalka—filaments; péta—yellow; kauçeya—silk
cloth; väsasam—whose garment; çrévatsa—bearing the mark of Çrévatsa; vakñasam—
breast; bhräjat—brilliant; kaustubha—Kaustubha gem; ämukta—put on; kandharam—
His neck.
TRANSLATION
547
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
His loins are covered by a shining cloth, yellowish like the filaments of a lotus. On His
breast He bears the mark of Çrévatsa, a curl of white hair. The brilliant Kaustubha gem is
suspended from His neck.
PURPORT
The exact color of the garment of the Supreme Lord is described as saffron-yellow, just
like the pollen of a lotus flower. The Kaustubha gem hanging on His chest is also
described. His neck is beautifully decorated with jewels and pearls. The Lord is full in six
opulences, one of which is wealth. He is very richly dressed with valuable jewels which
are not visible within this material world.
SB 3.28.15
TEXT 15
MataiÜref-k-l/Yaa ParqTa& vNaMaal/Yaa )
ParaDYaRharvl/Yaik-rq$=a(r)dNaUPaurMa( )) 15 ))
matta-dvirepha-kalayä
parétaà vana-mälayä
parärdhya-hära-valayakiréöäìgada-
nüpuram
SYNONYMS
matta—intoxicated; dvi-repha—with bees; kalayä—humming; parétam—garlanded;
vana-mälayä—with a garland of forest flowers; parärdhya—priceless; hära—pearl
necklace; valaya—bracelets; kiréöa—a crown; aìgada—armlets; nüpuram—anklets.
TRANSLATION
He also wears around His neck a garland of attractive sylvan flowers, and a swarm of
bees, intoxicated by its delicious fragrance, hums about the garland. He is further
superbly adorned with a pearl necklace, a crown and pairs of armlets, bracelets and
anklets.
PURPORT
548
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
From this description it appears that the flower garland of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is fresh. Actually, in Vaikuëöha, or the spiritual sky, there is nothing but
freshness. Even the flowers picked from the trees and plants remain fresh, for
everything in the spiritual sky retains its originality and does not fade. The fragrance of
the flowers picked from the trees and made into garlands does not fade, for both the
trees and the flowers are spiritual. When the flower is taken from the tree, it remains
the same; it does not lose its aroma. The bees are equally attracted to the flowers
whether they are on the garland or on the trees. The significance of spirituality is that
everything is eternal and inexhaustible. Everything taken from everything remains
everything, or, as has been stated, in the spiritual world one minus one equals one, and
one plus one equals one. The bees hum around the fresh flowers, and their sweet sound
is enjoyed by the Lord. The Lord's bangles, necklace, crown and anklets are all bedecked
with invaluable jewels. Since the jewels and pearls are spiritual, there is no material
calculation of their value.
SB 3.28.16
TEXT 16
k-aÄqGau<aaeçSaC^\aei<a& ôdYaaM>aaeJaivírMa( )
dXaRNaqYaTaMa& XaaNTa& MaNaaeNaYaNavDaRNaMa( )) 16 ))
käïcé-guëollasac-chroëià
hådayämbhoja-viñöaram
darçanéyatamaà çäntaà
mano-nayana-vardhanam
SYNONYMS
käïcé—girdle; guëa—quality; ullasat—brilliant; çroëim—His loins and hips; hådaya—
heart; ambhoja—lotus; viñöaram—whose seat; darçanéya-tamam—most charming to look
at; çäntam—serene; manaù—minds, hearts; nayana—eyes; vardhanam—gladdening.
TRANSLATION
His loins and hips encircled by a girdle, He stands on the lotus of His devotee's heart. He
is most charming to look at, and His serene aspect gladdens the eyes and souls of the
devotees who behold Him.
549
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The word darçanéyatamam, which is used in this verse, means that the Lord is so
beautiful that the devotee-yogé does not wish to see anything else. His desire to see
beautiful objects is completely satisfied by the sight of the Lord. In the material world we
want to see beauty, but the desire is never satisfied. Because of material contamination,
all the propensities we feel in the material world are ever unsatisfied. But when our
desires to see, hear, touch, etc., are dovetailed for the satisfaction of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, they are on the level of the topmost perfection.
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His eternal form is so beautiful and
pleasing to the heart of the devotee, He does not attract the impersonalists, who want to
meditate on His impersonal aspect. Such impersonal meditation is simply fruitless labor.
The actual yogés, with half-closed eyes, fix on the form of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, not upon anything void or impersonal.
SB 3.28.17
TEXT 17
APaqCYadXaRNa& XaìTSavRl/aek-NaMaSk*-TaMa( )
SaNTa& vYaiSa kE-Xaaere >a*TYaaNauGa]hk-aTarMa( )) 17 ))
apécya-darçanaà çaçvat
sarva-loka-namaskåtam
santaà vayasi kaiçore
bhåtyänugraha-kätaram
SYNONYMS
apécya-darçanam—very beautiful to see; çaçvat—eternal; sarva-loka—by all the
inhabitants of every planet; namaù-kåtam—worshipable; santam—situated; vayasi—in
youth; kaiçore—in boyhood; bhåtya—upon His devotee; anugraha—to bestow blessings;
kätaram—eager.
TRANSLATION
The Lord is eternally very beautiful, and He is worshipable by all the inhabitants of every
planet. He is ever youthful and always eager to bestow His blessing upon His devotees.
550
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The word sarva-loka-namaskåtam means that He is worshipable by everyone on every
planet. There are innumerable planets in the material world and innumerable planets in
the spiritual world as well. On each planet there are innumerable inhabitants who
worship the Lord, for the Lord is worshipable by all but the impersonalists. The Supreme
Lord is very beautiful. The word çaçvat is significant. It is not that He appears beautiful
to the devotees but is ultimately impersonal. Çaçvat means "ever existing." That beauty is
not temporary. It is ever existing—He is always youthful. In the Brahma-saàhitä (5.33)
it is also stated: advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà navayauvanaà
ca. The original person is one without a second, yet He never appears old; He
always appears as ever fresh as a blooming youth.
The Lord's facial expression always indicates that He is ready to show favor and
benediction to the devotees; for the nondevotees, however, He is silent. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä, although He acts equally to everyone because He is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and because all living entities are His sons, He is especially
inclined to those engaged in devotional service. The same fact is confirmed here: He is
always anxious to show favor to the devotees. Just as the devotees are always eager to
render service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord is also very eager to
bestow benediction upon the pure devotees.
SB 3.28.18
TEXT 18
k-ITaRNYaTaqQaRYaXaSa& Pau<Yaëaek-YaXaSk-rMa( )
DYaaYaeÕev& SaMaGa]a(r)& Yaavà CYavTae MaNa" )) 18 ))
kértanya-tértha-yaçasaà
puëya-çloka-yaçaskaram
dhyäyed devaà samagräìgaà
yävan na cyavate manaù
SYNONYMS
kértanya—worth singing; tértha-yaçasam—the glories of the Lord; puëya-çloka—of the
devotees; yaçaù-karam—enhancing the glory; dhyäyet—one should meditate; devam—
upon the Lord; samagra-aìgam—all the limbs; yävat—as much as; na—not; cyavate—
551
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
deviates; manaù—the mind.
TRANSLATION
The glory of the Lord is always worth singing, for His glories enhance the glories of His
devotees. One should therefore meditate upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
upon His devotees. One should meditate on the eternal form of the Lord until the mind
becomes fixed.
PURPORT
One has to fix his mind on the Supreme Personality of Godhead constantly. When one
is accustomed to thinking of one of the innumerable forms of the Lord—Kåñëa, Viñëu,
Räma, Näräyaëa, etc.—he has reached the perfection of yoga. This is confirmed in the
Brahma-saàhitä: a person who has developed pure love for the Lord, and whose eyes are
smeared with the ointment of transcendental loving exchange, always sees within his
heart the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The devotees especially see the Lord in the
beautiful blackish form of Çyämasundara. That is the perfection of yoga. This yoga
system should be continued until the mind does not vacillate for a moment. Oà tad
viñëoù paramaà padaà sadä paçyanti sürayaù: the form of Viñëu is the highest
individuality and is always visible to sages and saintly persons.
The same purpose is served when a devotee worships the form of the Lord in the temple.
There is no difference between devotional service in the temple and meditation on the
form of the Lord, since the form of the Lord is the same whether He appears within the
mind or in some concrete element. There are eight kinds of forms recommended for the
devotees to see. The forms may be made out of sand, clay, wood or stone, they may be
contemplated within the mind or made of jewels, metal or painted colors, but all the
forms are of the same value. It is not that one who meditates on the form within the
mind sees differently from one who worships the form in the temple. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is absolute, and there is therefore no difference between the
two. The impersonalists, who desire to disregard the eternal form of the Lord, imagine
some round figure. They especially prefer the oàkära, which also has form. In Bhagavadgétä
it is stated that oàkära is the letter form of the Lord. Similarly, there are statue
forms and painting forms of the Lord.
Another significant word in this verse is puëya-çloka-yaçaskaram. The devotee is called
puëya-çloka. As one becomes purified by chanting the holy name of the Lord, so one can
become purified simply by chanting the name of a holy devotee. The pure devotee of the
552
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Lord and the Lord Himself are nondifferent. It is sometimes feasible to chant the name
of a holy devotee. This is a very sanctified process. Lord Caitanya was once chanting the
holy names of the gopés when His students criticized Him: "Why are You chanting the
names of the gopés? Why not 'Kåñëa'?" Lord Caitanya was irritated by the criticism, and
so there was some misunderstanding between Him and His students. He wanted to
chastise them for desiring to instruct Him on the transcendental process of chanting.
The beauty of the Lord is that the devotees who are connected with His activities are
also glorified. Arjuna, Prahläda, Janaka Mahäräja, Bali Mahäräja and many other
devotees were not even in the renounced order of life, but were householders. Some of
them, such as Prahläda Mahäräja and Bali Mahäräja, were born of demoniac families.
Prahläda Mahäräja's father was a demon, and Bali Mahäräja was the grandson of
Prahläda Mahäräja, but still they have become famous because of their association with
the Lord. Anyone who is eternally associated with the Lord is glorified with the Lord.
The conclusion is that a perfect yogé should always be accustomed to seeing the form of
the Lord, and unless the mind is fixed in that way, he should continue practicing yoga.
SB 3.28.19
TEXT 19
iSQaTa& v]JaNTaMaaSaqNa& XaYaaNa& va GauhaXaYaMa( )
Pa[e+a<aqYaeihTa& DYaaYaeC^uÖ>aaveNa ceTaSaa )) 19 ))
sthitaà vrajantam äsénaà
çayänaà vä guhäçayam
prekñaëéyehitaà dhyäyec
chuddha-bhävena cetasä
SYNONYMS
sthitam—standing; vrajantam—moving; äsénam—sitting; çayänam—lying down; vä—or;
guhä-äçayam—the Lord dwelling in the heart; prekñaëéya—beautiful; éhitam—pastimes;
dhyäyet—he should visualize; çuddha-bhävena—pure; cetasä—by the mind.
TRANSLATION
Thus always merged in devotional service, the yogé visualizes the Lord standing, moving,
lying down or sitting within him, for the pastimes of the Supreme Lord are always
553
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
beautiful and attractive.
PURPORT
The process of meditating on the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead within
oneself and the process of chanting the glories and pastimes of the Lord are the same.
The only difference is that hearing and fixing the mind on the pastimes of the Lord is
easier than visualizing the form of the Lord within one's heart because as soon as one
begins to think of the Lord, especially in this age, the mind becomes disturbed, and due
to so much agitation, the process of seeing the Lord within the mind is interrupted.
When there is sound vibrated praising the transcendental pastimes of the Lord,
however, one is forced to hear. That hearing process enters into the mind, and the
practice of yoga is automatically performed. For example, even a child can hear and
derive the benefit of meditating on the pastimes of the Lord simply by listening to a
reading from the Bhägavatam that describes the Lord as He is going to the pasturing
ground with His cows and friends. Hearing includes applying the mind. In this age of
Kali-yuga, Lord Caitanya has recommended that one should always engage in chanting
and hearing Bhagavad-gétä. The Lord also says that the mahätmäs, or great souls, always
engage in the process of chanting the glories of the Lord, and just by hearing, others
derive the same benefit. Yoga necessitates meditation on the transcendental pastimes of
the Lord, whether He is standing, moving, lying down, etc.
SB 3.28.20
TEXT 20
TaiSMmaçBDaPad& icta& SavaRvYavSa&iSQaTaMa( )
ivl/+YaEk-}a Sa&YauJYaad(r)e >aGavTaae MauiNa" )) 20 ))
tasmiû labdha-padaà cittaà
sarvävayava-saàsthitam
vilakñyaikatra saàyujyäd
aìge bhagavato muniù
SYNONYMS
tasmin—on the form of the Lord; labdha-padam—fixed; cittam—the mind; sarva—all;
avayava—limbs; saàsthitam—fixed upon; vilakñya—having distinguished; ekatra—in
554
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
one place; saàyujyät—should fix the mind; aìge—on each limb; bhagavataù—of the
Lord; muniù—the sage.
TRANSLATION
In fixing his mind on the eternal form of the Lord, the yogé should not take a collective
view of all His limbs, but should fix the mind on each individual limb of the Lord.
PURPORT
The word muni is very significant. Muni means one who is very expert in mental
speculation or in thinking, feeling and willing. He is not mentioned here as a devotee or
yogé. Those who try to meditate on the form of the Lord are called munis, or less
intelligent, whereas those who render actual service to the Lord are called bhakti-yogés.
The thought process described below is for the education of the muni. In order to
convince the yogé that the Absolute Truth, or Supreme Personality of Godhead, is never
impersonal at any time, the following verses prescribe observing the Lord in His
personal form, limb after limb. To think of the Lord as a whole may sometimes be
impersonal; therefore, it is recommended here that one first think of His lotus feet, then
His ankles, then the thighs, then the waist, then the chest, then the neck, then the face
and so on. One should begin from the lotus feet and gradually rise to the upper limbs of
the transcendental body of the Lord.
SB 3.28.21
TEXT 21
SaiÄNTaYaeÙGavTaêr<aarivNd&
vJa]ax(ku-XaßJaSaraeåhl/aH^Naa!yMa( )
otau(r)r¢-ivl/Saà%c§-val/‚
JYaaeTòai>arahTaMahd(Da*dYaaNDak-arMa( )) 21 ))
saïcintayed bhagavataç caraëäravindaà
vajräìkuça-dhvaja-saroruha-läïchanäòhyam
uttuìga-rakta-vilasan-nakha-cakravälajyotsnäbhir
ähata-mahad-dhådayändhakäram
SYNONYMS
555
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
saïcintayet—he should concentrate; bhagavataù—of the Lord; caraëa-aravindam—on
the lotus feet; vajra—thunderbolt; aìkuça—goad (rod for driving elephants); dhvaja—
banner; saroruha—lotus; läïchana—marks; äòhyam—adorned with; uttuìga—
prominent; rakta—red; vilasat—brilliant; nakha—nails; cakraväla—the circle of the
moon; jyotsnäbhiù—with splendor; ähata—dispelled; mahat—thick; hådaya—of the
heart; andhakäram—darkness.
TRANSLATION
The devotee should first concentrate his mind on the Lord's lotus feet, which are adorned
with the marks of a thunderbolt, a goad, a banner and a lotus. The splendor of their
beautiful ruby nails resembles the orb of the moon and dispels the thick gloom of one's
heart.
PURPORT
The Mäyävädé says that because one is unable to fix his mind on the impersonal
existence of the Absolute Truth, one can imagine any form he likes and fix his mind on
that imaginary form; but such a process is not recommended here. Imagination is always
imagination and results only in further imagination.
A concrete description of the eternal form of the Lord is given here. The Lord's sole is
depicted with distinctive lines resembling a thunderbolt, a flag, a lotus flower and a
goad. The luster of His toenails, which are brilliantly prominent, resembles the light of
the moon. If a yogé looks upon the marks of the Lord's sole and on the blazing brilliance
of His nails, then he can be freed from the darkness of ignorance in material existence.
This liberation is not achieved by mental speculation, but by seeing the light emanating
from the lustrous toenails of the Lord. In other words, one has to fix his mind first on
the lotus feet of the Lord if he wants to be freed from the darkness of ignorance in
material existence.
SB 3.28.22
TEXT 22
YaC^aEciNa"Sa*TaSairTPa[vraedke-Na
TaqQaeRNa MaUDNYaRiDak*-TaeNa iXav" iXavae_>aUTa( )
DYaaTauMaRNa"XaMal/XaEl/iNaSa*ívJa]&
DYaaYaeiÀr& >aGavTaêr<aarivNdMa( )) 22 ))
556
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yac-chauca-niùsåta-sarit-pravarodakena
térthena mürdhny adhikåtena çivaù çivo 'bhüt
dhyätur manaù-çamala-çaila-nisåñöa-vajraà
dhyäyec ciraà bhagavataç caraëäravindam
SYNONYMS
yat—the Lord's lotus feet; çauca—washing; niùsåta—gone forth; sarit-pravara—of the
Ganges; udakena—by the water; térthena—holy; mürdhni—on his head; adhikåtena—
borne; çivaù—Lord Çiva; çivaù—auspicious; abhüt—became; dhyätuù—of the meditator;
manaù—in the mind; çamala-çaila—the mountain of sin; nisåñöa—hurled; vajram—
thunderbolt; dhyäyet—one should meditate; ciram—for a long time; bhagavataù—of the
Lord; caraëa-aravindam—on the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
The blessed Lord Çiva becomes all the more blessed by bearing on his head the holy
waters of the Ganges, which has its source in the water that washed the Lord's lotus feet.
The Lord's feet act like thunderbolts hurled to shatter the mountain of sin stored in the
mind of the meditating devotee. One should therefore meditate on the lotus feet of the
Lord for a long time.
PURPORT
In this verse the position of Lord Çiva is specifically mentioned. The impersonalist
suggests that the Absolute Truth has no form and that one can therefore equally
imagine the form of Viñëu or Lord Çiva or the goddess Durgä or their son Gaëeça. But
actually the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the supreme master of everyone. In the
Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 5.142) it is said, ekale éçvara kåñëa, ara saba bhåtya: the
Supreme Lord is Kåñëa, and everyone else, including Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä—not
to mention other demigods—is a servant of Kåñëa. The same principle is described here.
Lord Çiva is important because he is holding on his head the holy Ganges water, which
has its origin in the foot-wash of Lord Viñëu. In the Hari-bhakti-viläsa, by Sanätana
Gosvämé, it is said that anyone who puts the Supreme Lord and the demigods, including
Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä, on the same level, at once becomes a päñaëòé, or atheist.
We should never consider that the Supreme Lord Viñëu and the demigods are on an
equal footing.
557
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Another significant point of this verse is that the mind of the conditioned soul, on
account of its association with the material energy from time immemorial, contains
heaps of dirt in the form of desires to lord it over material nature. This dirt is like a
mountain, but a mountain can be shattered when hit by a thunderbolt. Meditating on
the lotus feet of the Lord acts like a thunderbolt on the mountain of dirt in the mind of
the yogé. If a yogé wants to shatter the mountain of dirt in his mind, he should
concentrate on the lotus feet of the Lord and not imagine something void or impersonal.
Because the dirt has accumulated like a solid mountain, one must meditate on the lotus
feet of the Lord for quite a long time. For one who is accustomed to thinking of the lotus
feet of the Lord constantly, however, it is a different matter. The devotees are so fixed
on the lotus feet of the Lord that they do not think of anything else. Those who practice
the yoga system must meditate on the lotus feet of the Lord for a long time after
following the regulative principles and thereby controlling the senses.
It is specifically mentioned here, bhagavataç caraëäravindam: one has to think of the
lotus feet of the Lord. The Mäyävädés imagine that one can think of the lotus feet of
Lord Çiva or Lord Brahmä or the goddess Durgä to achieve liberation, but this is not so.
Bhagavataù is specifically mentioned. Bhagavataù means "of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Viñëu," and no one else. Another significant phrase in this verse is çivaù çivo
'bhüt. By his constitutional position, Lord Çiva is always great and auspicious, but since
he has accepted on his head the Ganges water, which emanated from the lotus feet of
the Lord, he has become even more auspicious and important. The stress is on the lotus
feet of the Lord. A relationship with the lotus feet of the Lord can even enhance the
importance of Lord Çiva, what to speak of other, ordinary living entities.
SB 3.28.23
TEXT 23
JaaNauÜYa& Jal/Jal/aecNaYaa JaNaNYaa
l/+MYaai%l/SYa SaurviNdTaYaa ivDaaTau" )
OvaeRiNaRDaaYa k-rPaçvraeicza YaTa(
Sa&l/ail/Ta& ôid iv>aaer>avSYa ku-YaaRTa( )) 23 ))
jänu-dvayaà jalaja-locanayä jananyä
lakñmyäkhilasya sura-vanditayä vidhätuù
ürvor nidhäya kara-pallava-rociñä yat
saàlälitaà hådi vibhor abhavasya kuryät
558
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
jänu-dvayam—up to the knees; jalaja-locanayä—lotus-eyed; jananyä—mother;
lakñmyä—by Lakñmé; akhilasya—of the entire universe; sura-vanditayä—worshiped by
the demigods; vidhätuù—of Brahmä; ürvoù—at the thighs; nidhäya—having placed;
kara-pallava-rociñä—with her lustrous fingers; yat—which; saàlälitam—massaged;
hådi—in the heart; vibhoù—of the Lord; abhavasya—transcendental to material
existence; kuryät—one should meditate.
TRANSLATION
The yogé should fix in his heart the activities of Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune, who is
worshiped by all demigods and is the mother of the supreme person, Brahmä. She can
always be found massaging the legs and thighs of the transcendental Lord, very carefully
serving Him in this way.
PURPORT
Brahmä is the appointed lord of the universe. Because his father is Garbhodakaçäyé
Viñëu, Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune, is automatically his mother. Lakñméjé is worshiped
by all demigods and by the inhabitants of other planets as well. Human beings are also
eager to receive favor from the goddess of fortune. Lakñmé is always engaged in
massaging the legs and thighs of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Näräyaëa, who is
lying on the ocean of Garbha within the universe. Brahmä is described here as the son
of the goddess of fortune, but actually he was not born of her womb. Brahmä takes his
birth from the abdomen of the Lord Himself. A lotus flower grows from the abdomen of
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, and Brahmä is born there. Therefore Lakñméjé's massaging of the
thighs of the Lord should not be taken as the behavior of an ordinary wife. The Lord is
transcendental to the behavior of the ordinary male and female. The word abhavasya is
very significant, for it indicates that He could produce Brahmä without the assistance of
the goddess of fortune.
Since transcendental behavior is different from mundane behavior, it should not be
taken that the Lord receives service from His wife just as a demigod or human being
might receive service from his wife. It is advised here that the yogé always keep this
picture in his heart. The devotee always thinks of this relationship between Lakñmé and
Näräyaëa; therefore he does not meditate on the mental plane as impersonalists and
voidists do.
559
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Bhava means "one who accepts a material body," and abhava means "one who does not
accept a material body but descends in the original, spiritual body." Lord Näräyaëa is not
born of anything material. Matter is generated from matter, but He is not born of
matter. Brahmä is born after the creation, but since the Lord existed before the creation,
the Lord has no material body.
SB 3.28.24
TEXT 24
Oæ SauPa<aR>auJaYaaeriDaXaae>aMaaNaa‚
vaeJaaeiNaDaq ATaiSak-aku-SauMaav>aaSaaE )
VYaal/iMbPaqTavrvaSaiSa vTaRMaaNa‚
k-aÄqk-l/aPaPairriM>a iNaTaMbibMbMa( )) 24 ))
ürü suparëa-bhujayor adhi çobhamänäv
ojo-nidhé atasikä-kusumävabhäsau
vyälambi-péta-vara-väsasi vartamänakäïcé-
kaläpa-parirambhi nitamba-bimbam
SYNONYMS
ürü—the two thighs; suparëa—of Garuòa; bhujayoù—the two shoulders; adhi—on;
çobhamänau—beautiful; ojaù-nidhé—the storehouse of all energy; atasikä-kusuma—of
the linseed flower; avabhäsau—like the luster; vyälambi—extending down; péta—yellow;
vara—exquisite; väsasi—on the cloth; vartamäna—being; käïcé-kaläpa—by a girdle;
parirambhi—encircled; nitamba-bimbam—His rounded hips.
TRANSLATION
Next, the yogi should fix his mind in meditation on the Personality of Godhead's thighs,
the storehouse of all energy. The Lord's thighs are whitish blue, like the luster of the
linseed flower, and appear most graceful when the Lord is carried on the shoulders of
Garuòa. Also the yogé should contemplate His rounded hips, which are encircled by a
girdle that rests on the exquisite yellow silk cloth that extends down to His ankles.
PURPORT
560
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The Personality of Godhead is the reservoir of all strength, and His strength rests on the
thighs of His transcendental body. His whole body is full of opulences: all riches, all
strength, all fame, all beauty, all knowledge and all renunciation. The yogé is advised to
meditate upon the transcendental form of the Lord, beginning from the soles of the feet
and then gradually rising to the knees, to the thighs, and finally arriving at the face. The
system of meditating on the Supreme Personality of Godhead begins from His feet.
The description of the transcendental form of the Lord is exactly represented in the
arcä-vigraha, the statue in the temples. Generally, the lower part of the body of the
statue of the Lord is covered with yellow silk. That is the Vaikuëöha dress, or the dress
the Lord wears in the spiritual sky. This cloth extends down to the Lord's ankles. Thus,
since the yogé has so many transcendental objectives on which to meditate, there is no
reason for his meditating on something imaginary, as is the practice of the so-called yogés
whose objective is impersonal.
SB 3.28.25
TEXT 25
Naai>ah>auvNak-aeXaGauhaedrSQa&
Ya}aaTMaYaaeiNaiDaz<aai%l/l/aek-PaÚMa( )
VYaU!& hirNMai<av*zSTaNaYaaerMauZYa
DYaaYaed( ÜYa& ivXadharMaYaU%GaaErMa( )) 25 ))
näbhi-hradaà bhuvana-koça-guhodara-sthaà
yaträtma-yoni-dhiñaëäkhila-loka-padmam
vyüòhaà harin-maëi-våña-stanayor amuñya
dhyäyed dvayaà viçada-hära-mayükha-gauram
SYNONYMS
näbhi-hradam—the navel lake; bhuvana-koça—of all the worlds; guhä—the foundation;
udara—on the abdomen; stham—situated; yatra—where; ätma-yoni—of Brahmä;
dhiñaëa—residence; akhila-loka—containing all planetary systems; padmam—lotus;
vyüòham—sprang up; harit-maëi—like emeralds; våña—most exquisite; stanayoù—of
nipples; amuñya—of the Lord; dhyäyet—he should meditate on; dvayam—the pair;
viçada—white; hära—of pearl necklaces; mayükha—from the light; gauram—whitish.
561
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
The yogé should then meditate on His moonlike navel in the center of His abdomen.
From His navel, which is the foundation of the entire universe, sprang the lotus stem
containing all the different planetary systems. The lotus is the residence of Brahmä, the
first created being. In the same way, the yogé should concentrate his mind on the Lord's
nipples, which resemble a pair of most exquisite emeralds and which appear whitish
because of the rays of the milk-white pearl necklaces adorning His chest.
PURPORT
The yogé is advised next to meditate upon the navel of the Lord, which is the foundation
of all material creation. Just as a child is connected to his mother by the umbilical cord,
so the first-born living creature, Brahmä, by the supreme will of the Lord, is connected
to the Lord by a lotus stem. In the previous verse it was stated that the goddess of
fortune, Lakñmé, who engages in massaging the legs, ankles and thighs of the Lord, is
called the mother of Brahmä, but actually Brahmä is born from the abdomen of the
Lord, not from the abdomen of his mother. These are inconceivable conceptions of the
Lord, and one should not think materially, "How can the father give birth to a child?"
It is explained in the Brahma-saàhitä that each limb of the Lord has the potency of
every other limb; because everything is spiritual, His parts are not conditioned. The
Lord can see with His ears. The material ear can hear but cannot see, but we understand
from the Brahma-saàhitä that the Lord can also see with His ears and hear with His
eyes. Any organ of His transcendental body can function as any other organ. His
abdomen is the foundation of all the planetary systems. Brahmä holds the post of the
creator of all planetary systems, but his engineering energy is generated from the
abdomen of the Lord. Any creative function in the universe always has a direct
connecting link with the Lord. The necklace of pearls which decorates the upper
portion of the Lord's body is also spiritual, and therefore the yogé is advised to gaze at the
whitish luster of the pearls decorating His chest.
SB 3.28.26
TEXT 26
v+aae_iDavaSaMa*z>aSYa Mahaiv>aUTae"
Pau&Saa& MaNaaeNaYaNaiNav*RiTaMaadDaaNaMa( )
k-<#&= c k-aESTau>aMa<aeriDa>aUz<aaQa|
562
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ku-YaaRNMaNaSYai%l/l/aek-NaMaSk*-TaSYa )) 26 ))
vakño 'dhiväsam åñabhasya mahä-vibhüteù
puàsäà mano-nayana-nirvåtim ädadhänam
kaëöhaà ca kaustubha-maëer adhibhüñaëärthaà
kuryän manasy akhila-loka-namaskåtasya
SYNONYMS
vakñaù—the chest; adhiväsam—the abode; åñabhasya—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; mahä-vibhüteù—of Mahä-Lakñmé; puàsäm—of persons; manaù—to the mind;
nayana—to the eyes; nirvåtim—transcendental pleasure; ädadhänam—bestowing;
kaëöham—the neck; ca—also; kaustubha-maëeù—of the Kaustubha gem; adhibhüñaëaartham—
which enhances the beauty; kuryät—he should meditate on; manasi—in the
mind; akhila-loka—by the entire universe; namaskåtasya—who is adored.
TRANSLATION
The yogé should then meditate on the chest of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
abode of goddess Mahä-Lakñmé. The Lord's chest is the source of all transcendental
pleasure for the mind and full satisfaction for the eyes. The yogé should then imprint on
his mind the neck of the Personality of Godhead, who is adored by the entire universe.
The neck of the Lord serves to enhance the beauty of the Kaustubha gem, which hangs
on His chest.
PURPORT
In the Upaniñads it is said that the various energies of the Lord are working to create,
destroy and maintain. These inconceivable varieties of energy are stored in the bosom of
the Lord. As people generally say, God is all-powerful. That prowess is represented by
Mahä-Lakñmé, the reservoir of all energies, who is situated on the bosom of the
transcendental form of the Lord. The yogé who can meditate perfectly on that spot on
the transcendental form of the Lord can derive many material powers, which comprise
the eight perfections of the yoga system.
It is stated herein that the beauty of the neck of the Lord enhances the beauty of the
Kaustubha gem rather than vice versa. The gem itself becomes more beautiful because it
is situated on the neck of the Lord. A yogé is therefore recommended to meditate upon
563
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the Lord's neck. The Lord's transcendental form can either be meditated upon in the
mind or placed in a temple in the form of a statue and decorated in such a way that
everyone can contemplate it. Temple worship, therefore, is meant for persons who are
not so advanced that they can meditate upon the form of the Lord. There is no
difference between constantly visiting the temple and directly seeing the transcendental
form of the Lord; they are of equal value. The advantageous position of the yogé is that
he can sit anywhere in a solitary place and meditate upon the form of the Lord. A less
advanced person, however, has to go to the temple, and as long as he does not go to the
temple he is unable to see the form of the Lord. Either by hearing, seeing or meditating,
the objective is the transcendental form of the Lord; there is no question of voidness or
impersonalism. The Lord can bestow the blessings of transcendental pleasure upon
either the visitor of the temple, the meditator-yogé or one who hears about the Lord's
transcendental form from scriptures like the Çrémad-Bhägavatam or Bhagavad-gétä.
There are nine processes for executing devotional service, of which smaraëam, or
meditation, is one. Yogés take advantage of the process of smaraëam, whereas bhaktiyogés
take special advantage of the process of hearing and chanting.
SB 3.28.27
TEXT 27
bahU&ê MaNdriGare" PairvTaRNaeNa
iNai<aR¢-bahuvl/YaaNaiDal/aek-Paal/aNa( )
SaiÄNTaYaeÕXaXaTaarMaSaùTaeJa"
Xa«& c TaTk-rSaraeåhraJah&SaMa( )) 27 ))
bähüàç ca mandara-gireù parivartanena
nirëikta-bähu-valayän adhiloka-pälän
saïcintayed daça-çatäram asahya-tejaù
çaìkhaà ca tat-kara-saroruha-räja-haàsam
SYNONYMS
bähün—the arms; ca—and; mandara-gireù—of Mount Mandara; parivartanena—by the
revolving; nirëikta—polished; bähu-valayän—the arm ornaments; adhiloka-pälän—the
source of the controllers of the universe; saïcintayet—one should meditate on; daçaçata-
aram—the Sudarçana disc (ten hundred spokes); asahya-tejaù—dazzling luster;
564
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
çaìkham—the conch; ca—also; tat-kara—in the hand of the Lord; saroruha—lotuslike;
räja-haàsam—like a swan.
TRANSLATION
The yogé should further meditate upon the Lord's four arms, which are the source of all
the powers of the demigods who control the various functions of material nature. Then
the yogi should concentrate on the polished ornaments, which were burnished by Mount
Mandara as it revolved. He should also duly contemplate the Lord's discus, the Sudarçana
cakra, which contains one thousand spokes and a dazzling luster, as well as the conch,
which looks like a swan in His lotuslike palm.
PURPORT
All departments of law and order emanate from the arms of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The law and order of the universe is directed by different demigods, and it is
here said to emanate from the Lord's arms. Mandara Hill is mentioned here because
when the ocean was churned by the demons on one side and the demigods on the other,
Mandara Hill was taken as the churning rod. The Lord in His tortoise incarnation
became the pivot for the churning rod, and thus His ornaments were polished by the
turning of Mandara Hill. In other words, the ornaments on the arms of the Lord are as
brilliant and lustrous as if they had been polished very recently. The wheel in the hand
of the Lord, called the Sudarçana cakra, has one thousand spokes. The yogé is advised to
meditate upon each of the spokes. He should meditate upon each and every one of the
component parts of the transcendental form of the Lord.
SB 3.28.28
TEXT 28
k-aEMaaedk-I& >aGavTaae diYaTaa& SMareTa
idGDaaMaraiTa>a$=Xaaei<aTak-dRMaeNa )
Maal/a& MaDauv]TavæQaiGaraePagauía&
cETYaSYa TatvMaMal&/ Mai<aMaSYa k-<#e= )) 28 ))
kaumodakéà bhagavato dayitäà smareta
digdhäm aräti-bhaöa-çoëita-kardamena
mäläà madhuvrata-varütha-giropaghuñöäà
565
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
caityasya tattvam amalaà maëim asya kaëöhe
SYNONYMS
kaumodakém—the club named Kaumodaké; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead;
dayitäm—very dear; smareta—one should remember; digdhäm—smeared; aräti—of the
enemies; bhaöa—soldiers; çoëita-kardamena—with the bloodstains; mäläm—the garland;
madhuvrata—of bumblebees; varütha—of a swarm; girä—with the sound; upaghuñöäm—
surrounded; caityasya—of the living entity; tattvam—principle, truth; amalam—pure;
maëim—the pearl necklace; asya—of the Lord; kaëöhe—on the neck.
TRANSLATION
The yogé should meditate upon His club, which is named Kaumodaké and is very dear to
Him. This club smashes the demons, who are always inimical soldiers, and is smeared
with their blood. One should also concentrate on the nice garland on the neck of the
Lord, which is always surrounded by bumblebees, with their nice buzzing sound, and one
should meditate upon the pearl necklace on the Lord's neck, which is considered to
represent the pure living entities who are always engaged in His service.
PURPORT
The yogé must contemplate the different parts of the transcendental body of the Lord.
Here it is stated that the constitutional position of the living entities should be
understood. There are two kinds of living entities mentioned here. One is called the
aräti. They are averse to understanding the pastimes of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. For them, the Lord appears with His hand clutching the terrible mace, which
is always smeared with bloodstains from His killing of demons. Demons are also sons of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, all the different
species of living entities are sons of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There are,
however, two classes of living entities, who act in two different ways. The Supreme Lord
keeps on His neck those living entities who are pure, as one protects the jewels and
pearls on the bosom and neck of one's body. Those living entities in pure Kåñëa
consciousness are symbolized by the pearls on His neck. Those who are demons and are
inimical towards the pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are punished by
His mace, which is always smeared with the blood of such fallen living entities. The club
of the Lord is very dear to Him because He uses this instrument to smash the bodies of
566
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the demons and mix their blood. As mud is kneaded with water and earth, so the earthly
bodies of the enemies of the Lord, or the atheists, are smashed by the club of the Lord,
which becomes muddied with the blood of such demons.
SB 3.28.29
TEXT 29
>a*TYaaNauk-iMPaTaiDaYaeh Ga*hqTaMaUTaeR"
SaiÄNTaYaeÙGavTaae vdNaarivNdMa( )
YaiÜSfu-rNMak-rku-<@l/viLGaTaeNa
ivÛaeiTaTaaMal/k-Paael/MaudarNaaSaMa( )) 29 ))
bhåtyänukampita-dhiyeha gåhéta-mürteù
saïcintayed bhagavato vadanäravindam
yad visphuran-makara-kuëòala-valgitena
vidyotitämala-kapolam udära-näsam
SYNONYMS
bhåtya—for the devotees; anukampita-dhiyä—out of compassion; iha—in this world;
gåhéta-mürteù—who presents different forms; saïcintayet—one should meditate on;
bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; vadana—countenance; aravindam—
lotuslike; yat—which; visphuran—glittering; makara—alligator-shaped; kuëòala—of His
earrings; valgitena—by the oscillation; vidyotita—illuminated; amala—crystal clear;
kapolam—His cheeks; udära—prominent; näsam—His nose.
TRANSLATION
The yogé should then meditate on the lotuslike countenance of the Lord, who presents
His different forms in this world out of compassion for the anxious devotees. His nose is
prominent, and His crystal-clear cheeks are illuminated by the oscillation of His glittering
alligator-shaped earrings.
PURPORT
The Lord descends to the material world out of His deep compassion for His devotees.
There are two reasons for the Lord's appearance or incarnation in the material world.
567
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Whenever there is a discrepancy in the discharge of religious principles and there is
prominence of irreligion, the Lord descends for the protection of the devotees and the
destruction of the nondevotees. When He appears, His main purpose is to give solace to
His devotees. He does not have to come Himself to destroy the demons, for He has many
agents; even the external energy, mäyä, has sufficient strength to kill them. But when
He comes to show compassion to His devotees, He kills the nondevotees as a matter of
course.
The Lord appears in the particular form loved by a particular type of devotee. There are
millions of forms of the Lord, but they are one Absolute. As stated in the Brahmasaàhitä,
advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam: [Bs. 5.33] all the different forms of the
Lord are one, but some devotees want to see Him in the form of Rädhä and Kåñëa,
others prefer Him as Sétä and Rämacandra, others would see Him as Lakñmé-Näräyaëa,
and others want to see Him as four-handed Näräyaëa, Väsudeva. The Lord has
innumerable forms, and He appears in a particular form as preferred by a particular type
of devotee. A yogé is advised to meditate upon the forms that are approved by devotees.
A yogé cannot imagine a form for meditation. Those so-called yogés who manufacture a
circle or target are engaged in nonsense. Actually, a yogé must meditate upon the form of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead that has been experienced by the Lord's pure
devotees. Yogé means devotee. Yogés who are not actually pure devotees should follow in
the footsteps of devotees. It is especially mentioned here that the yogé should meditate
upon the form which is thus approved; he cannot manufacture a form of the Lord.
SB 3.28.30
TEXT 30
YaC^\qiNake-TaMail/i>a" PairSaeVYaMaaNa&
>aUTYaa SvYaa ku-i$=l/ku-NTal/v*NdJauíMa( )
MaqNaÜYaaé[YaMaiDai+aPadBJaNae}a&
DYaaYaeNMaNaaeMaYaMaTaiNd]Ta oçSad(>a]u )) 30 ))
yac chré-niketam alibhiù parisevyamänaà
bhütyä svayä kuöila-kuntala-vånda-juñöam
ména-dvayäçrayam adhikñipad abja-netraà
dhyäyen manomayam atandrita ullasad-bhru
SYNONYMS
568
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yat—which face of the Lord; çré-niketam—a lotus; alibhiù—by bees; parisevyamänam—
surrounded; bhütyä—by elegance; svayä—its; kuöila—curly; kuntala—of hair; vånda—by
a multitude; juñöam—adorned; ména—of fish; dvaya—a pair; äçrayam—dwelling;
adhikñipat—putting to shame; abja—a lotus; netram—having eyes; dhyäyet—one should
meditate on; manaù-mayam—formed in the mind; atandritaù—attentive; ullasat—
dancing; bhru—having eyebrows.
TRANSLATION
The yogi then meditates upon the beautiful face of the Lord, which is adorned with curly
hair and decorated by lotuslike eyes and dancing eyebrows. A lotus surrounded by
swarming bees and a pair of swimming fish would be put to shame by its elegance.
PURPORT
One important statement here is dhyäyen manomayam. Manomayam is not imagination.
Impersonalists think that the yogé can imagine any form he likes, but, as stated here, the
yogé must meditate upon the form of the Lord which is experienced by devotees.
Devotees never imagine a form of the Lord. They are not satisfied by something
imaginary. The Lord has different eternal forms; each devotee likes a particular form
and thus engages himself in the service of the Lord by worshiping that form. The Lord's
form is depicted in different ways according to scriptures. As already discussed, there are
eight kinds of representations of the original form of the Lord. These representations
can be produced by the use of clay, stone, wood, paint, sand, etc., depending upon the
resources of the devotee.
Manomayam is a carving of the form of the Lord within the mind. This is included as
one of the eight different carvings of the form of the Lord. It is not imagination.
Meditation on the actual form of the Lord may be manifested in different manners, but
one should not conclude that one has to imagine a form. There are two comparisons in
this verse: first the Lord's face is compared to a lotus, and then His black hair is
compared to humming bees swarming around the lotus, and His two eyes are compared
to two fish swimming about. A lotus flower on the water is very beautiful when
surrounded by humming bees and fish. The Lord's face is self-sufficient and complete.
His beauty defies the natural beauty of a lotus.
SB 3.28.31
TEXT 31
569
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TaSYaavl/aek-MaiDak&- k*-PaYaaiTagaaer‚
TaaPa}aYaaePaXaMaNaaYa iNaSa*íMa+<aae" )
iòGDaiSMaTaaNauGaui<aTa& ivPaul/Pa[Saad&
DYaaYaeiÀr& ivPaul/>aavNaYaa GauhaYaaMa( )) 31 ))
tasyävalokam adhikaà kåpayätighoratäpa-
trayopaçamanäya nisåñöam akñëoù
snigdha-smitänuguëitaà vipula-prasädaà
dhyäyec ciraà vipula-bhävanayä guhäyäm
SYNONYMS
tasya—of the Personality of Godhead; avalokam—glances; adhikam—frequent;
kåpayä—with compassion; atighora—most fearful; täpa-traya—threefold agonies;
upaçamanäya—soothing; nisåñöam—cast; akñëoù—from His eyes; snigdha—loving;
smita—smiles; anuguëitam—accompanied by; vipula—abundant; prasädam—full of
grace; dhyäyet—he should contemplate; ciram—for a long time; vipula—full;
bhävanayä—with devotion; guhäyäm—in the heart.
TRANSLATION
The yogés should contemplate with full devotion the compassionate glances frequently
cast by the Lord's eyes, for they soothe the most fearful threefold agonies of His devotees.
His glances, accompanied by loving smiles, are full of abundant grace.
PURPORT
As long as one is in conditional life, in the material body, it is natural that he will suffer
from anxieties and agonies. One cannot avoid the influence of material energy, even
when one is on the transcendental plane. Sometimes disturbances come, but the agonies
and anxieties of the devotees are at once mitigated when they think of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in His beautiful form or the smiling face of the Lord. The Lord
bestows innumerable favors upon His devotee, and the greatest manifestation of His
grace is His smiling face, which is full of compassion for His pure devotees.
SB 3.28.32
TEXT 32
570
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
haSa& hrervNaTaai%l/l/aek-Taqv]‚
Xaaek-aé[uSaaGarivXaaez<aMaTYaudarMa( )
SaMMaaehNaaYa ricTa& iNaJaMaaYaYaaSYa
>a]UMa<@l&/ MauiNak*-Tae Mak-rßJaSYa )) 32 ))
häsaà harer avanatäkhila-loka-tévraçokäçru-
sägara-viçoñaëam atyudäram
sammohanäya racitaà nija-mäyayäsya
bhrü-maëòalaà muni-kåte makara-dhvajasya
SYNONYMS
häsam—the smile; hareù—of Lord Çré Hari; avanata—bowed; akhila—all; loka—for
persons; tévra-çoka—caused by intense grief; açru-sägara—the ocean of tears;
viçoñaëam—drying up; ati-udäram—most benevolent; sammohanäya—for charming;
racitam—manifested; nija-mäyayä—by His internal potency; asya—His; bhrümaëòalam—
arched eyebrows; muni-kåte—for the good of the sages; makara-dhvajasya—
of the sex-god.
TRANSLATION
A yogé should similarly meditate on the most benevolent smile of Lord Çré Hari, a smile
which, for all those who bow to Him, dries away the ocean of tears caused by intense
grief. The yogé should also meditate on the Lord's arched eyebrows, which are manifested
by His internal potency in order to charm the sex-god for the good of the sages.
PURPORT
The entire universe is full of miseries, and therefore the inhabitants of this material
universe are always shedding tears out of intense grief. There is a great ocean of water
made from such tears, but for one who surrenders unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the ocean of tears is at once dried up. One need only see the charming smile
of the Supreme Lord. In other words, the bereavement of material existence
immediately subsides when one sees the charming smile of the Lord.
It is stated in this verse that the charming eyebrows of the Lord are so fascinating that
571
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
they cause one to forget the charms of sense attraction. The conditioned souls are
shackled to material existence because they are captivated by the charms of sense
gratification, especially sex life. The sex-god is called Makara-dhvaja. The charming
brows of the Supreme Personality of Godhead protect the sages and devotees from being
charmed by material lust and sex attraction. Yämunäcärya, a great äcärya, said that ever
since he had seen the charming pastimes of the Lord, the charms of sex life had become
abominable for him, and the mere thought of sex enjoyment would cause him to spit and
turn his face. Thus if anyone wants to be aloof from sex attraction, he must see the
charming smile and fascinating eyebrows of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
SB 3.28.33
TEXT 33
DYaaNaaYaNa& Pa[hiSaTa& bhul/aDaraeï‚
>aaSaaå<aaiYaTaTaNauiÜJaku-NdPai» )
DYaaYaeTSvdehku-hre_viSaTaSYa ivZ<aae‚
>aR¢-yad]RYaaiPaRTaMaNaa Na Pa*QaiGdd*+aeTa( )) 33 ))
dhyänäyanaà prahasitaà bahulädharoñöhabhäsäruëäyita-
tanu-dvija-kunda-paìkti
dhyäyet svadeha-kuhare 'vasitasya viñëor
bhaktyärdrayärpita-manä na påthag didåkñet
SYNONYMS
dhyäna-ayanam—easily meditated upon; prahasitam—the laughter; bahula—abundant;
adhara-oñöha—of His lips; bhäsa—by the splendor; aruëäyita—rendered rosy; tanu—
small; dvija—teeth; kunda-paìkti—like a row of jasmine buds; dhyäyet—he should
meditate upon; sva-deha-kuhare—in the core of his heart; avasitasya—who resides;
viñëoù—of Viñëu; bhaktyä—with devotion; ärdrayä—steeped in love; arpita-manäù—
his mind being fixed; na—not; påthak—anything else; didåkñet—he should desire to see.
TRANSLATION
With devotion steeped in love and affection, the yogé should meditate within the core of
his heart upon the laughter of Lord Viñëu. The laughter of Viñëu is so captivating that it
can be easily meditated upon. When the Supreme Lord is laughing, one can see His small
572
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
teeth, which resemble jasmine buds rendered rosy by the splendor of His lips. Once
devoting his mind to this, the yogé should no longer desire to see anything else.
PURPORT
It is recommended that the yogé visualize the laughter of the Lord after studying His
smile very carefully. These particular descriptions of meditation on the smile, laughter,
face, lips and teeth all indicate conclusively that God is not impersonal. It is described
herein that one should meditate on the laughter or smiling of Viñëu. There is no other
activity that can completely cleanse the heart of the devotee. The exceptional beauty of
the laughter of Lord Viñëu is that when He smiles His small teeth, which resemble the
buds of jasmine flowers, at once become reddish, reflecting His rosy lips. If the yogé is
able to place the beautiful face of the Lord in the core of his heart, he will be completely
satisfied. In other words, when one is absorbed in seeing the beauty of the Lord within
himself, the material attraction can no longer disturb him.
SB 3.28.34
TEXT 34
Wv& hraE >aGaviTa Pa[iTal/BDa>aavae
>a¢-ya d]vd(Da*dYa oTPaul/k-" Pa[MaaedaTa( )
AaETk-<#ybaZPak-l/Yaa MauhurÛRMaaNa‚
STaÀaiPa ictabi@Xa& XaNakE-ivRYau»e )) 34 ))
evaà harau bhagavati pratilabdha-bhävo
bhaktyä dravad-dhådaya utpulakaù pramodät
autkaëöhya-bäñpa-kalayä muhur ardyamänas
tac cäpi citta-baòiçaà çanakair viyuìkte
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; harau—towards Lord Hari; bhagavati—the Personality of Godhead;
pratilabdha—developed; bhävaù—pure love; bhaktyä—by devotional service; dravat—
melting; hådayaù—his heart; utpulakaù—experiencing standing of the hairs of the body;
pramodät—from excessive joy; autkaëöhya—occasioned by intense love; bäñpa-kalayä—
by a stream of tears; muhuù—constantly; ardyamänaù—being afflicted; tat—that; ca—
and; api—even; citta—the mind; baòiçam—hook; çanakaiù—gradually; viyuìkte—
573
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
withdraws.
TRANSLATION
By following this course, the yogé gradually develops pure love for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Hari. In the course of his progress in devotional service, the
hairs on his body stand erect through excessive joy, and he is constantly bathed in a
stream of tears occasioned by intense love. Gradually, even the mind, which he used as a
means to attract the Lord, as one attracts a fish to a hook, withdraws from material
activity.
PURPORT
Here it is clearly mentioned that meditation, which is an action of the mind, is not the
perfect stage of samädhi, or absorption. In the beginning the mind is employed in
attracting the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but in the higher stages
there is no question of using the mind. A devotee becomes accustomed to serving the
Supreme Lord by purification of his senses. In other words, the yoga principles of
meditation are required as long as one is not situated in pure devotional service. The
mind is used to purify the senses, but when the senses are purified by meditation, there
is no need to sit in a particular place and try to meditate upon the form of the Lord. One
becomes so habituated that he automatically engages in the personal service of the Lord.
When the mind forcibly is engaged upon the form of the Lord, this is called nirbéja-yoga,
or lifeless yoga, for the yogé does not automatically engage in the personal service of the
Lord. But when he is constantly thinking of the Lord, that is called sabéja-yoga, or living
yoga. One has to be promoted to the platform of living yoga.
One should engage in the service of the Lord twenty-four hours a day, as confirmed in
the Brahma-saàhitä. The stage of premäïjana-cchurita can be attained by developing
complete love. When one's love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead in devotional
service is fully developed, one always sees the Lord, even without artificially meditating
on His form. His vision is divine because he has no other engagement. At this stage of
spiritual realization it is not necessary to engage the mind artificially. Since the
meditation recommended in the lower stages is a means to come to the platform of
devotional service, those already engaged in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord are above such meditation. This stage of perfection is called Kåñëa consciousness.
SB 3.28.35
TEXT 35
574
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Mau¢-aé[Ya& YaihR iNaivRzYa& ivr¢&-
iNavaR<aMa*C^iTa MaNa" SahSaa YaQaaicR" )
AaTMaaNaMa}a Pauåzae_VYavDaaNaMaek-‚
MaNvq+aTae Pa[iTaiNav*taGau<aPa[vah" )) 35 ))
muktäçrayaà yarhi nirviñayaà viraktaà
nirväëam åcchati manaù sahasä yathärciù
ätmänam atra puruño 'vyavadhänam ekam
anvékñate pratinivåtta-guëa-pravähaù
SYNONYMS
mukta-äçrayam—situated in liberation; yarhi—at which time; nirviñayam—detached
from sense objects; viraktam—indifferent; nirväëam—extinction; åcchati—obtains;
manaù—the mind; sahasä—immediately; yathä—like; arciù—the flame; ätmänam—the
mind; atra—at this time; puruñaù—a person; avyavadhänam—without separation;
ekam—one; anvékñate—experiences; pratinivåtta—freed; guëa-pravähaù—from the flow
of material qualities.
TRANSLATION
When the mind is thus completely freed from all material contamination and detached
from material objectives, it is just like the flame of a lamp. At that time the mind is
actually dovetailed with that of the Supreme Lord and is experienced as one with Him
because it is freed from the interactive flow of the material qualities.
PURPORT
In the material world the activities of the mind are acceptance and rejection. As long as
the mind is in material consciousness, it must be forcibly trained to accept meditation
on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but when one is actually elevated to loving the
Supreme Lord, the mind is automatically absorbed in thought of the Lord. In such a
position a yogé has no other thought than to serve the Lord. This dovetailing of the mind
with the desires of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is called nirväëa, or making the
mind one with the Supreme Lord.
575
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The best example of nirväëa is cited in Bhagavad-gétä. In the beginning the mind of
Arjuna deviated from Kåñëa's. Kåñëa wanted Arjuna to fight, but Arjuna did not want
to, so there was disagreement. But after hearing Bhagavad-gétä from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Arjuna dovetailed his mind with Kåñëa's desire. This is called
oneness. This oneness, however, did not cause Arjuna and Kåñëa to lose their
individualities. The Mäyävädé philosophers cannot understand this. They think that
oneness necessitates loss of individuality. Actually, however, we find in Bhagavad-gétä
that individuality is not lost. When the mind is completely purified in love of Godhead,
the mind becomes the mind of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The mind at that
time does not act separately, nor does it act without inspiration to fulfill the desire of
the Lord. The individual liberated soul has no other activity. pratinivåtta-guëa-pravähaù.
In the conditioned state the mind is always engaged in activity impelled by the three
modes of the material world, but in the transcendental stage, the material modes cannot
disturb the mind of the devotee. The devotee has no other concern than to satisfy the
desires of the Lord. That is the highest stage of perfection, called nirväëa or nirväëamukti.
At this stage the mind becomes completely free from material desire.
Yathärciù. Arciù means "flame." When a lamp is broken or the oil is finished, we see that
the flame of the lamp goes out. But according to scientific understanding, the flame is
not extinguished; it is conserved. This is conservation of energy. Similarly, when the
mind stops functioning on the material platform, it is conserved in the activities of the
Supreme Lord. The Mäyävädé philosophers' conception of cessation of the functions of
the mind is explained here: cessation of the mental functions means cessation of
activities conducted under the influence of the three modes of material nature.
SB 3.28.36
TEXT 36
Saae_PYaeTaYaa crMaYaa MaNaSaae iNav*tYaa
TaiSMaNMaihMNYaviSaTa" Sau%du"%baùe )
heTauTvMaPYaSaiTa k-TaRir du"%YaaeYaRTa(
SvaTMaNa( ivData oPal/BDaParaTMak-aï" )) 36 ))
so 'py etayä caramayä manaso nivåttyä
tasmin mahimny avasitaù sukha-duùkha-bähye
hetutvam apy asati kartari duùkhayor yat
svätman vidhatta upalabdha-parätma-käñöhaù
576
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
saù—the yogé; api—moreover; etayä—by this; caramayä—ultimate; manasaù—of the
mind; nivåttyä—by cessation of material reaction; tasmin—in his; mahimni—ultimate
glory; avasitaù—situated; sukha-duùkha-bähye—outside of happiness and distress;
hetutvam—the cause; api—indeed; asati—a product of ignorance; kartari—in the false
ego; duùkhayoù—of pleasure and pain; yat—which; sva-ätman—to his own self;
vidhatte—he attributes; upalabdha—realized; para-ätma—of the Personality of
Godhead; käñöhaù—the highest truth.
TRANSLATION
Thus situated in the highest transcendental stage, the mind ceases from all material
reaction and becomes situated in its own glory, transcendental to all material conceptions
of happiness and distress. At that time the yogé realizes the truth of his relationship with
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He discovers that pleasure and pain as well as their
interactions, which he attributed to his own self, are actually due to the false ego, which
is a product of ignorance.
PURPORT
Forgetfulness of one's relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead is a
product of ignorance. By yoga practice one can eradicate this ignorance of thinking
oneself independent of the Supreme Lord. One's actual relationship is eternally that of
love. The living entity is meant to render transcendental loving service to the Lord.
Forgetfulness of that sweet relationship is called ignorance, and in ignorance one is
impelled by the three material modes of nature to think himself the enjoyer. When the
devotee's mind is purified and he understands that his mind has to be dovetailed with
the desires of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he has attained the perfectional,
transcendental stage, which is beyond the perception of material distress and happiness.
As long as one acts on his own account, he is subject to all the material perceptions of
so-called happiness and distress. Actually there is no happiness. Just as there is no
happiness in any of the activities of a madman, so in material activities the mental
concoctions of happiness and distress are false. Actually everything is distress.
When the mind is dovetailed to act according to the desire of the Lord, one has attained
the transcendental stage. The desire to lord it over material nature is the cause of
ignorance, and when that desire is completely extinguished and the desires are
577
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
dovetailed with those of the Supreme Lord, one has reached the perfectional stage.
Upalabdha-parätma-käñöhaù. Upalabdha means "realization." Realization necessarily
indicates individuality. In the perfectional, liberated stage, there is actual realization.
Nivåttyä means that the living entity keeps his individuality; oneness means that he
realizes happiness in the happiness of the Supreme Lord. In the Supreme Lord there is
nothing but happiness. Änandamayo 'bhyäsät: the Lord is by nature full of
transcendental happiness. In the liberated stage, oneness with the Supreme Lord means
that one has no realization other than happiness. But the individual still exists,
otherwise this word upalabdha, indicating individual realization of transcendental
happiness, would not have been used.
SB 3.28.37
TEXT 37
deh& c Ta& Na crMa" iSQaTaMauiTQaTa& va
iSaÖae ivPaXYaiTa YaTaae_DYaGaMaTSvæPaMa( )
dEvaduPaeTaMaQa dEvvXaadPaeTa&
vaSaae YaQaa Pairk*-Ta& MaidraMadaNDa" )) 37 ))
dehaà ca taà na caramaù sthitam utthitaà vä
siddho vipaçyati yato 'dhyagamat svarüpam
daiväd upetam atha daiva-vaçäd apetaà
väso yathä parikåtaà madirä-madändhaù
SYNONYMS
deham—material body; ca—and; tam—that; na—not; caramaù—last; sthitam—sitting;
utthitam—rising; vä—or; siddhaù—the realized soul; vipaçyati—can conceive; yataù—
because; adhyagamat—he has achieved; sva-rüpam—his real identity; daivät—according
to destiny; upetam—arrived; atha—moreover; daiva-vaçät—according to destiny;
apetam—departed; väsaù—clothing; yathä—as; parikåtam—put on; madirä-madaandhaù—
one who is blinded by intoxication.
TRANSLATION
Because he has achieved his real identity, the perfectly realized soul has no conception of
how the material body is moving or acting, just as an intoxicated person cannot
578
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
understand whether or not he has clothing on his body.
PURPORT
This stage of life is explained by Rüpa Gosvämé in his Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu. A person
whose mind is completely dovetailed with the desire of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and who engages one hundred percent in the service of the Lord, forgets his
material bodily demands.
SB 3.28.38
TEXT 38
dehae_iPa dEvvXaGa" %lu/ k-MaR YaavTa(
SvarM>ak&- Pa[iTaSaMaq+aTa Wv SaaSau" )
Ta& SaPa[PaÄMaiDaæ!SaMaaiDaYaaeGa"
SvaPan& PauNaNaR >aJaTae Pa[iTabuÖvSTau" )) 38 ))
deho 'pi daiva-vaçagaù khalu karma yävat
svärambhakaà pratisamékñata eva säsuù
taà sa-prapaïcam adhirüòha-samädhi-yogaù
sväpnaà punar na bhajate pratibuddha-vastuù
SYNONYMS
dehaù—the body; api—moreover; daiva-vaça-gaù—under the control of the Personality
of Godhead; khalu—indeed; karma—activities; yävat—as much as; sva-ärambhakam—
begun by himself; pratisamékñate—continues to function; eva—certainly; sa-asuù—
along with the senses; tam—the body; sa-prapaïcam—with its expansions; adhirüòhasamädhi-
yogaù—being situated in samädhi by yoga practice; sväpnam—born in a dream;
punaù—again; na—not; bhajate—he does accept as his own; pratibuddha—awake;
vastuù—to his constitutional position.
TRANSLATION
The body of such a liberated yogé, along with the senses, is taken charge of by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and it functions until its destined activities are finished.
The liberated devotee, being awake to his constitutional position and thus situated in
579
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
samädhi, the highest perfectional stage of yoga, does not accept the by-products of the
material body as his own. Thus he considers his bodily activities to be like the activities of
a body in a dream.
PURPORT
The following questions may be posed. As long as the liberated soul is in contact with
the body, why don't the bodily activities affect him? Doesn't he actually become
contaminated by the action and reaction of material activities? In answer to such
questions, this verse explains that the material body of a liberated soul is taken charge of
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is not acting due to the living force of the
living entity; it is simply acting as a reaction to past activities. Even after being switched
off, an electric fan moves for some time. That movement is not due to the electric
current, but is a continuation of the last movement; similarly, although a liberated soul
appears to be acting just like an ordinary man, his actions are to be accepted as the
continuation of past activities. In a dream one may see himself expanded through many
bodies, but when awake he can understand that those bodies were all false. Similarly,
although a liberated soul has the by-products of the body-children, wife, house, etc.—he
does not identify himself with those bodily expansions. He knows that they are all
products of the material dream. The gross body is made of the gross elements of matter,
and the subtle body is made of mind, intelligence, ego and contaminated consciousness.
If one can accept the subtle body of a dream as false and not identify oneself with that
body, then certainly an awake person need not identify with the gross body. As one who
is awake has no connection with the activities of the body in a dream, an awakened,
liberated soul has no connection with the activities of the present body. In other words,
because he is acquainted with his constitutional position, he never accepts the bodily
concept of life.
SB 3.28.39
TEXT 39
YaQaa Pau}aaÀ ivtaaÀ Pa*Qax(MaTYaR" Pa[TaqYaTae )
APYaaTMaTveNaai>aMaTaaÕehade" PauåzSTaQaa )) 39 ))
yathä puträc ca vittäc ca
påthaì martyaù pratéyate
apy ätmatvenäbhimatäd
580
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
dehädeù puruñas tathä
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; puträt—from a son; ca—and; vittät—from wealth; ca—also; påthak—
differently; martyaù—a mortal man; pratéyate—is understood; api—even; ätmatvena—
by nature; abhimatät—for which one has affection; deha-ädeù—from his material body,
senses and mind; puruñaù—the liberated soul; tathä—similarly.
TRANSLATION
Because of great affection for family and wealth, one accepts a son and some money as his
own, and due to affection for the material body, one thinks that it is his. But actually, as
one can understand that his family and wealth are different from him, the liberated soul
can understand that he and his body are not the same.
PURPORT
The status of real knowledge is explained in this verse. There are many children, but we
accept some children as our sons and daughters because of our affection for them,
although we know very well that these children are different from us. Similarly, because
of great affection for money, we accept some amount of wealth in the bank as ours. In
the same way, we claim that the body is ours because of affection for it. I say that it is
"my" body. I then extend that possessive concept and say, "It is my hand, my leg," and
further, "It is my bank balance, my son, my daughter." But actually I know that the son
and the money are separate from me. It is the same with the body; I am separate from my
body. It is a question of understanding, and the proper understanding is called
pratibuddha. By obtaining knowledge in devotional service, or Kåñëa consciousness, one
can become a liberated soul.
SB 3.28.40
TEXT 40
YaQaaeLMauk-aiÜSfu-il/(r)ad(DaUMaaÜaiPa SvSaM>avaTa( )
APYaaTMaTveNaai>aMaTaaÛQaaiGan" Pa*QaGauLMauk-aTa( )) 40 ))
yatholmukäd visphuliìgäd
dhümäd väpi sva-sambhavät
581
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
apy ätmatvenäbhimatäd
yathägniù påthag ulmukät
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; ulmukät—from the flames; visphuliìgät—from the sparks; dhümät—from the
smoke; vä—or; api—even; sva-sambhavät—produced from itself; api—although;
ätmatvena—by nature; abhimatät—intimately connected; yathä—as; agniù—the fire;
påthak—different; ulmukät—from the flames.
TRANSLATION
The blazing fire is different from the flames, from the sparks and from the smoke,
although all are intimately connected because they are born from the same blazing wood.
PURPORT
Although the blazing firewood, the sparks, the smoke and the flame cannot stay apart
because each of them is part and parcel of the fire, still they are different from one
another. A less intelligent person accepts the smoke as fire, although fire and smoke are
completely different. The heat and light of the fire are separate, although one cannot
differentiate fire from heat and light.
SB 3.28.41
TEXT 41
>aUTaeiNd]YaaNTa"k-r<aaTPa[DaaNaaÂqvSa&ijTaaTa( )
AaTMaa TaQaa Pa*QaGd]ía >aGavaNa( b]øSa&ijTa" )) 41 ))
bhütendriyäntaù-karaëät
pradhänäj jéva-saàjïität
ätmä tathä påthag drañöä
bhagavän brahma-saàjïitaù
SYNONYMS
bhüta—the five elements; indriya—the senses; antaù-karaëät—from the mind;
pradhänät—from the pradhäna; jéva-saàjïität—from the jéva soul; ätmä—the
582
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Paramätmä; tathä—so; påthak—different; drañöä—the seer; bhagavän—the Personality
of Godhead; brahma-saàjïitaù—called Brahman.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is known as Parambrahma, is the seer. He is
different from the jéva soul, or individual living entity, who is combined with the senses,
the five elements and consciousness.
PURPORT
A clear conception of the complete whole is given herewith. The living entity is
different from the material elements, and the supreme living entity, the Personality of
Godhead, who is the creator of the material elements, is also different from the
individual living entity. This philosophy is propounded by Lord Caitanya as acintyabhedäbheda-
tattva. Everything is simultaneously one with and different from everything
else. The cosmic manifestation created by the Supreme Lord by His material energy is
also simultaneously different and nondifferent from Him. The material energy is
nondifferent from the Supreme Lord, but at the same time, because that energy is acting
in a different way, it is different from Him. Similarly, the individual living entity is one
with and different from the Supreme Lord. This "simultaneously one and different"
philosophy is the perfect conclusion of the Bhägavata school, as confirmed here by
Kapiladeva.
Living entities are compared to the sparks of a fire. As stated in the previous verse, fire,
flame, smoke and firewood are combined together. Here the living entity, the material
elements and the Supreme Personality of Godhead are combined together. The exact
position of the living entities is just like that of the sparks of a fire; they are part and
parcel. The material energy is compared to the smoke. The fire is also part and parcel of
the Supreme Lord. In the Viñëu Puräëa it is said that whatever we can see or
experience, either in the material or spiritual world, is an expansion of the different
energies of the Supreme Lord. As fire distributes its light and heat from one place, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead distributes His different energies all over His creation.
The four principles of the Vaiñëava philosophic doctrine are çuddha-advaita (purified
oneness), dvaita-advaita (simultaneous oneness and difference), viçiñöa-advaita and
dvaita. All four principles of Vaiñëava philosophy are based on the thesis of Çrémad-
Bhägavatam explained in these two verses.
SB 3.28.42
583
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 42
SavR>aUTaezu caTMaaNa& SavR>aUTaaiNa caTMaiNa )
wR+aeTaaNaNYa>aaveNa >aUTaeiZvv TadaTMaTaaMa( )) 42 ))
sarva-bhüteñu cätmänaà
sarva-bhütäni cätmani
ékñetänanya-bhävena
bhüteñv iva tad-ätmatäm
SYNONYMS
sarva-bhüteñu—in all manifestations; ca—and; ätmänam—the soul; sarva-bhütäni—all
manifestations; ca—also; ätmani—in the Supreme Spirit; ékñeta—he should see; ananyabhävena—
with equal vision; bhüteñu—in all manifestations; iva—as; tat-ätmatäm—the
nature of itself.
TRANSLATION
A yogi should see the same soul in all manifestations, for all that exists is a manifestation
of different energies of the Supreme. In this way the devotee should see all living entities
without distinction. That is realization of the Supreme Soul.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä, not only does the Supreme Soul enter each and every
universe, but He enters even the atoms. The Supreme Soul is present everywhere in the
dormant stage, and when one can see the presence of the Supreme Soul everywhere, one
is liberated from material designations.
The word sarva-bhüteñu is to be understood as follows. There are four different divisions
of species-living entities which sprout from the earth, living entities born of
fermentation or germination, living entities which come from eggs and living entities
which come from the embryo. These four divisions of living entities are expanded in
8,400,000 species of life. A person who is freed from material designations can see the
same quality of spirit present everywhere or in every manifested living entity. Less
intelligent men think that plants and grass grow out of the earth automatically, but one
who is actually intelligent and has realized the self can see that this growth is not
584
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
automatic; the cause is the soul, and the forms come out in material bodies under
different conditions. By fermentation in the laboratory many germs are born, but this is
due to the presence of the soul. The material scientist thinks that eggs are lifeless, but
that is not a fact. From Vedic scripture we can understand that living entities in
different forms are generated under different conditions. Birds evolve from eggs, and
beasts and human beings are born from the embryo. The perfect vision of the yogé or
devotee is that he sees the presence of the living entity everywhere.
SB 3.28.43
TEXT 43
SvYaaeiNazu YaQaa JYaaeiTarek&- NaaNaa Pa[TaqYaTae )
YaaeNaqNaa& Gau<avEzMYaataQaaTMaa Pa[k*-TaaE iSQaTa" )) 43 ))
sva-yoniñu yathä jyotir
ekaà nänä pratéyate
yonénäà guëa-vaiñamyät
tathätmä prakåtau sthitaù
SYNONYMS
sva-yoniñu—in forms of wood; yathä—as; jyotiù—fire; ekam—one; nänä—differently;
pratéyate—is exhibited; yonénäm—of different wombs; guëa-vaiñamyät—from the
different conditions of the modes; tathä—so; ätmä—the spirit soul; prakåtau—in the
material nature; sthitaù—situated.
TRANSLATION
As fire is exhibited in different forms of wood, so, under different conditions of the
modes of material nature, the pure spirit soul manifests itself in different bodies.
PURPORT
It is to be understood that the body is designated. Prakåti is an interaction by the three
modes of material nature, and according to these modes, someone has a small body, and
someone has a very large body. For example, the fire in a big piece of wood appears very
big, and in a stick the fire appears small. Actually, the quality of fire is the same
everywhere, but the manifestation of material nature is such that according to the fuel,
585
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the fire appears bigger and smaller. Similarly, the soul in the universal body, although of
the same quality, is different from the soul in the smaller body.
The small particles of soul are just like sparks of the larger soul. The greatest soul is the
Supersoul, but the Supersoul is quantitatively different from the small soul. The
Supersoul is described in the Vedic literature as the supplier of all necessities of the
smaller soul (nityo nityänäm). One who understands this distinction between the
Supersoul and the individual soul is above lamentation and is in a peaceful position.
When the smaller soul thinks himself quantitatively as big as the larger soul, he is under
the spell of mäyä, for that is not his constitutional position. No one can become the
greater soul simply by mental speculation.
The smallness or greatness of different souls is described in the Varäha Puräëa as
sväàça-vibhinnäàça. The sväàça soul is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the
vibhinnäàça souls, or small particles, are eternally small particles, as confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (mamaiväàço jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù [Bg. 15.7]). The small living
entities are eternally part and parcel, and therefore it is not possible for them to be
quantitatively as great as the Supersoul.
SB 3.28.44
TEXT 44
TaSMaaidMaa& Sva& Pa[k*-iTa& dEvq& SadSadaiTMak-aMa( )
duivR>aaVYaa& Para>aaVYa SvæPae<aaviTaïTae )) 44 ))
tasmäd imäà sväà prakåtià
daivéà sad-asad-ätmikäm
durvibhävyäà paräbhävya
svarüpeëävatiñöhate
SYNONYMS
tasmät—thus; imäm—this; sväm—own; prakåtim—material energy; daivém—divine; satasat-
ätmikäm—consisting of cause and effect; durvibhävyäm—difficult to understand;
paräbhävya—after conquering; sva-rüpeëa—in the self-realized position; avatiñöhate—he
remains.
TRANSLATION
586
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Thus the yogé can be in the self-realized position after conquering the insurmountable
spell of mäyä, who presents herself as both the cause and effect of this material
manifestation and is therefore very difficult to understand.
PURPORT
It is stated in Bhagavad-gétä that the spell of mäyä, which covers the knowledge of the
living entity, is insurmountable. However, one who surrenders unto Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, can conquer this seemingly insurmountable spell of mäyä. Here
also it is stated that the daivé prakåti, or the external energy of the Supreme Lord, is
durvibhävyä, very difficult to understand and very difficult to conquer. One must,
however, conquer this insurmountable spell of mäyä, and this is possible, by the grace of
the Lord, when God reveals Himself to the surrendered soul. It is also stated here,
svarüpeëävatiñöhate. Svarüpa means that one has to know that he is not the Supreme
Soul, but rather, part and parcel of the Supreme Soul; that is self-realization. To think
falsely that one is the Supreme Soul and that one is all-pervading is not svarüpa. This is
not realization of his actual position. The real position is that one is part and parcel. It is
recommended here that one remain in that position of actual self-realization. In
Bhagavad-gétä this understanding is defined as Brahman realization.
After Brahman realization, one can engage in the activities of Brahman. As long as one
is not self-realized, he engages in activities based on false identification with the body.
When one is situated in his real self, then the activities of Brahman realization begin.
The Mäyävädé philosophers say that after Brahman realization, all activities stop, but
that is not actually so. If the soul is so active in its abnormal condition, existing under
the covering of matter, how can one deny its activity when free? An example may be
cited here. If a man in a diseased condition is very active, how can one imagine that
when he is free from the disease he will be inactive? Naturally the conclusion is that
when one is free from all disease his activities are pure. It may be said that the activities
of Brahman realization are different from those of conditional life, but that does not
stop activity. This is indicated in Bhagavad-gétä (18.54): after one realizes oneself to be
Brahman, devotional service begins. Mad-bhaktià labhate paräm: [Bg. 18.54] after
Brahman realization, one can engage in the devotional service of the Lord. Therefore
devotional service of the Lord is activity in Brahman realization.
For those who engage in devotional service there is no spell of mäyä, and their situation
is all-perfect. The duty of the living entity, as a part and parcel of the whole, is to render
devotional service to the whole. That is the ultimate perfection of life.
587
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Twenty-eighth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Kapila's Instructions on the Execution of Devotional
Service."
29. Explanation of Devotional Service by Lord Kapila
SB 3.29.1, SB 3.29.2, SB 3.29.1-2
TEXTS 1-2
devhUiTaåvac
l/+a<a& MahdadqNaa& Pa[k*-Tae" PauåzSYa c )
SvæPa& l/+YaTae_Maqza& YaeNa TaTPaarMaaiQaRk-Ma( )) 1 ))
YaQaa Saa&:Yaezu k-iQaTa& YaNMaUl&/ TaTPa[c+aTae )
>ai¢-YaaeGaSYa Mae MaaGa| b]Uih ivSTarXa" Pa[>aae )) 2 ))
devahütir uväca
lakñaëaà mahad-ädénäà
prakåteù puruñasya ca
svarüpaà lakñyate 'méñäà
yena tat-päramärthikam
yathä säìkhyeñu kathitaà
yan-mülaà tat pracakñate
bhakti-yogasya me märgaà
brühi vistaraçaù prabho
SYNONYMS
devahütiù uväca—Devahüti said; lakñaëam—symptoms; mahat-ädénäm—of the mahattattva
and so on; prakåteù—of material nature; puruñasya—of the spirit; ca—and;
svarüpam—the nature; lakñyate—is described; améñäm—of those; yena—by which; tatpärama-
arthikam—the true nature of them; yathä—as; säìkhyeñu—in Säìkhya
philosophy; kathitam—is explained; yat—of which; mülam—ultimate end; tat—that;
588
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
pracakñate—they call; bhakti-yogasya—of devotional service; me—to me; märgam—the
path; brühi—please explain; vistaraçaù—at length; prabho—my dear Lord Kapila.
TRANSLATION
Devahüti inquired: My dear Lord, You have already very scientifically described the
symptoms of the total material nature and the characteristics of the spirit according to the
Säìkhya system of philosophy. Now I shall request You to explain the path of devotional
service, which is the ultimate end of all philosophical systems.
PURPORT
In this Twenty-ninth Chapter, the glories of devotional service are elaborately
explained, and the influence of time on the conditioned soul is also described. The
purpose of elaborately describing the influence of time is to detach the conditioned soul
from his material activities, which are considered to be simply a waste of time. In the
previous chapter, material nature, the spirit and the Supreme Lord, or Supersoul, are
analytically studied, and in this chapter the principles of bhakti-yoga, or devotional
service—the execution of activities in the eternal relationship between the living
entities and the Personality of Godhead—are explained.
Bhakti-yoga, devotional service, is the basic principle of all systems of philosophy; all
philosophy which does not aim for devotional service to the Lord is considered merely
mental speculation. But of course bhakti-yoga with no philosophical basis is more or less
sentiment. There are two classes of men. Some consider themselves intellectually
advanced and simply speculate and meditate, and others are sentimental and have no
philosophical basis for their propositions. Neither of these can achieve the highest goal
of life-or, if they do, it will take them many, many years. Vedic literature therefore
suggests that there are three elements-namely the Supreme Lord, the living entity and
their eternal relationship-and the goal of life is to follow the principles of bhakti, or
devotional service, and ultimately attain to the planet of the Supreme Lord in full
devotion and love as an eternal servitor of the Lord.
Säìkhya philosophy is the analytical study of all existence. One has to understand
everything by examining its nature and characteristics. This is called acquirement of
knowledge. But one should not simply acquire knowledge without reaching the goal of
life or the basic principle for acquiring knowledge-bhakti-yoga. If we give up bhakti-yoga
and simply busy ourselves in the analytical study of the nature of things as they are, then
the result will be practically nil. It is stated in the Bhägavatam that such engagement is
589
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
something like husking a paddy. There is no use beating the husk if the grain has already
been removed. By the scientific study of material nature, the living entity and the
Supersoul, one has to understand the basic principle of devotional service to the Lord.
SB 3.29.3
TEXT 3
ivraGaae YaeNa Pauåzae >aGavNa( SavRTaae >aveTa( )
Aac+v Jaqvl/aek-SYa ivivDaa MaMa Sa&Sa*Taq" )) 3 ))
virägo yena puruño
bhagavan sarvato bhavet
äcakñva jéva-lokasya
vividhä mama saàsåtéù
SYNONYMS
virägaù—detached; yena—by which; puruñaù—a person; bhagavan—my dear Lord;
sarvataù—completely; bhavet—may become; äcakñva—please describe; jéva-lokasya—for
the people in general; vividhäù—manifold; mama—for myself; saàsåtéù—repetition of
birth and death.
TRANSLATION
Devahüti continued: My dear Lord, please also describe in detail, both for me and for
people in general, the continual process of birth and death, for by hearing of such
calamities we may become detached from the activities of this material world.
PURPORT
In this verse the word saàsåtéù is very important. Çreyaù-såti means the prosperous path
of advancement towards the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and saàsåti means the
continued journey on the path of birth and death towards the darkest region of material
existence. People who have no knowledge of this material world, God and their actual
intimate relationship with Him are actually going to the darkest region of material
existence in the name of progress in the material advancement of civilization. To enter
the darkest region of material existence means to enter into a species of life other than
the human species. Ignorant men do not know that after this life they are completely
590
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
under the grip of material nature and will be offered a life which may not be very
congenial. How a living entity gets different kinds of bodies will be explained in the
next chapter. This continual change of bodies in birth and death is called saàsära.
Devahüti requests her glorious son, Kapila Muni, to explain about this continued
journey to impress upon the conditioned souls that they are undergoing a path of
degradation by not understanding the path of bhakti-yoga, devotional service.
SB 3.29.4
TEXT 4
k-al/SYaeìræPaSYa Pareza& c ParSYa Tae )
SvæPa& bTa ku-vRiNTa YaÖeTaae" ku-Xal&/ JaNaa" )) 4 ))
kälasyeçvara-rüpasya
pareñäà ca parasya te
svarüpaà bata kurvanti
yad-dhetoù kuçalaà janäù
SYNONYMS
kälasya—of time; éçvara-rüpasya—a representation of the Lord; pareñäm—of all others;
ca—and; parasya—the chief; te—of You; svarüpam—the nature; bata—oh; kurvanti—
perform; yat-hetoù—by whose influence; kuçalam—pious activities; janäù—people in
general.
TRANSLATION
Please also describe eternal time, which is a representation of Your form and by whose
influence people in general engage in the performance of pious activities.
PURPORT
However ignorant one may be regarding the path of good fortune and the path down to
the darkest region of ignorance, everyone is aware of the influence of eternal time,
which devours all the effects of our material activities. The body is born at a certain
time, and immediately the influence of time acts upon it. From the date of the birth of
the body, the influence of death is also acting; the advancement of age entails the
influence of time on the body. If a man is thirty or fifty years old, then the influence of
591
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
time has already devoured thirty or fifty years of the duration of his life.
Everyone is conscious of the last stage of life, when he will meet the cruel hands of
death, but some consider their age and circumstances, concern themselves with the
influence of time and thus engage in pious activities so that in the future they will not
be put into a low family or an animal species. Generally, people are attached to sense
enjoyment and so aspire for life on the heavenly planets. Therefore, they engage
themselves in charitable or other pious activities, but actually, as stated in Bhagavadgétä,
one cannot get relief from the chain of birth and death even if he goes to the
highest planet, Brahmaloka, because the influence of time is present everywhere within
this material world. In the spiritual world, however, the time factor has no influence.
SB 3.29.5
TEXT 5
l/aek-SYa iMaQYaai>aMaTaerc+auz‚
iêr& Pa[SauáSYa TaMaSYaNaaé[Yae )
é[aNTaSYa k-MaRSvNauivÖYaa iDaYaa
TvMaaivraSaq" ik-l/ YaaeGa>aaSk-r" )) 5 ))
lokasya mithyäbhimater acakñuñaç
ciraà prasuptasya tamasy anäçraye
çräntasya karmasv anuviddhayä dhiyä
tvam äviräséù kila yoga-bhäskaraù
SYNONYMS
lokasya—of the living entities; mithyä-abhimateù—deluded by false ego; acakñuñaù—
blind; ciram—for a very long time; prasuptasya—sleeping; tamasi—in darkness;
anäçraye—without shelter; çräntasya—fatigued; karmasu—to material activities;
anuviddhayä—attached; dhiyä—with the intelligence; tvam—You; äviräséù—have
appeared; kila—indeed; yoga—of the yoga system; bhäskaraù—the sun.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You are just like the sun, for You illuminate the darkness of the
conditional life of the living entities. Because their eyes of knowledge are not open, they
are sleeping eternally in that darkness without Your shelter, and therefore they are falsely
592
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
engaged by the actions and reactions of their material activities, and they appear to be
very fatigued.
PURPORT
It appears that Çrématé Devahüti, the glorious mother of Lord Kapiladeva, is very
compassionate for the regrettable condition of people in general, who, not knowing the
goal of life, are sleeping in the darkness of illusion. It is the general feeling of the
Vaiñëava, or devotee of the Lord, that he should awaken them. Similarly, Devahüti is
requesting her glorious son to illuminate the lives of the conditioned souls so that their
most regrettable conditional life may be ended. The Lord is described herein as yogabhäskara,
the sun of the system of all yoga. Devahüti has already requested her glorious
son to describe bhakti-yoga, and the Lord has described bhakti-yoga as the ultimate yoga
system.
Bhakti-yoga is the sunlike illumination for delivering the conditioned souls, whose
general condition is described here. They have no eyes to see their own interests. They
do not know that the goal of life is not to increase the material necessities of existence,
because the body will not exist more than a few years. The living beings are eternal, and
they have their eternal need. If one engages only in caring for the necessities of the
body, not caring for the eternal necessities of life, then he is part of a civilization whose
advancement puts the living entities in the darkest region of ignorance. Sleeping in that
darkest region, one does not get any refreshment, but, rather, gradually becomes
fatigued. He invents many processes to adjust this fatigued condition, but he fails and
thus remains confused. The only path for mitigating his fatigue in the struggle for
existence is the path of devotional service, or the path of Kåñëa consciousness.
SB 3.29.6
TEXT 6
MaE}aeYa ovac
wiTa MaaTauvRc" ë+<a& Pa[iTaNaNÛ MahaMauiNa" )
Aab>aaze ku-åé[eï Pa[qTaSTaa& k-å<aaidRTa" )) 6 ))
maitreya uväca
iti mätur vacaù çlakñëaà
pratinandya mahä-muniù
äbabhäñe kuru-çreñöha
593
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
prétas täà karuëärditaù
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; iti—thus; mätuù—of His mother; vacaù—the words;
çlakñëam—gentle; pratinandya—welcoming; mahä-muniù—the great sage Kapila;
äbabhäñe—spoke; kuru-çreñöha—O best among the Kurus, Vidura; prétaù—pleased;
täm—to her; karuëä—with compassion; arditaù—moved.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: O best amongst the Kurus, the great sage Kapila, moved by great
compassion and pleased by the words of His glorious mother, spoke as follows.
PURPORT
Lord Kapila was very satisfied by the request of His glorious mother because she was
thinking not only in terms of her personal salvation but in terms of all the fallen
conditioned souls. The Lord is always compassionate towards the fallen souls of this
material world, and therefore He comes Himself or sends His confidential servants to
deliver them. Since He is perpetually compassionate towards them, if some of His
devotees also become compassionate towards them, He is very pleased with the devotees.
In Bhagavad-gétä it is clearly stated that persons who are trying to elevate the condition
of the fallen souls by preaching the conclusion of Bhagavad-gétä—namely, full surrender
unto the Personality of Godhead—are very dear to Him. Thus when the Lord saw that
His beloved mother was very compassionate towards the fallen souls, He was pleased,
and He also became compassionate towards her.
SB 3.29.7
TEXT 7
é[q>aGavaNauvac
>ai¢-YaaeGaae bhuivDaae MaaGaOE>aaRiMaiNa >aaVYaTae )
Sv>aavGau<aMaaGaeR<a Pau&Saa& >aavae ivi>aÛTae )) 7 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
bhakti-yogo bahu-vidho
märgair bhämini bhävyate
594
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
svabhäva-guëa-märgeëa
puàsäà bhävo vibhidyate
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Personality of Godhead replied; bhakti-yogaù—devotional
service; bahu-vidhaù—multifarious; märgaiù—with paths; bhämini—O noble lady;
bhävyate—is manifest; svabhäva—nature; guëa—qualities; märgeëa—in terms of
behavior; puàsäm—of the executors; bhävaù—the appearance; vibhidyate—is divided.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kapila, the Personality of Godhead, replied: O noble lady, there are multifarious
paths of devotional service in terms of the different qualities of the executor.
PURPORT
Pure devotional service in Kåñëa consciousness is one because in pure devotional service
there is no demand from the devotee to be fulfilled by the Lord. But generally people
take to devotional service with a purpose. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, people who are
not purified take to devotional service with four purposes. A person who is distressed
because of material conditions becomes a devotee of the Lord and approaches the Lord
for mitigation of his distress. A person in need of money approaches the Lord to ask for
some improvement in his monetary condition. Others, who are not in distress or in need
of monetary assistance but are seeking knowledge in order to understand the Absolute
Truth, also take to devotional service, and they inquire into the nature of the Supreme
Lord. This is very nicely described in Bhagavad-gétä (7.16). Actually the path of
devotional service is one without a second, but according to the devotees' condition,
devotional service appears in multifarious varieties, as will be nicely explained in the
following verses.
SB 3.29.8
TEXT 8
Ai>aSaNDaaYa Yaae ih&Saa& dM>a& MaaTSaYaRMaev va )
Sa&rM>aq i>aàd*G>aav& MaiYa ku-YaaRTSa TaaMaSa" )) 8 ))
abhisandhäya yo hiàsäà
595
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
dambhaà mätsaryam eva vä
saàrambhé bhinna-dåg bhävaà
mayi kuryät sa tämasaù
SYNONYMS
abhisandhäya—having in view; yaù—he who; hiàsäm—violence; dambham—pride;
mätsaryam—envy; eva—indeed; vä—or; saàrambhé—angry; bhinna—separate; dåk—
whose vision; bhävam—devotional service; mayi—to Me; kuryät—may do; saù—he;
tämasaù—in the mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATION
Devotional service executed by a person who is envious, proud, violent and angry, and
who is a separatist, is considered to be in the mode of darkness.
PURPORT
It has already been stated in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, First Canto, Second Chapter, that
the highest, most glorious religion is the attainment of causeless, unmotivated
devotional service. In pure devotional service, the only motive should be to please the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is not actually a motive; that is the pure
condition of the living entity. In the conditioned stage, when one engages in devotional
service, he should follow the instruction of the bona fide spiritual master in full
surrender. The spiritual master is the manifested representation of the Supreme Lord
because he receives and presents the instructions of the Lord, as they are, by disciplic
succession. It is described in Bhagavad-gétä that the teachings therein should be received
by disciplic succession, otherwise there is adulteration. To act under the direction of a
bona fide spiritual master with a motive to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is pure devotional service. But if one has a motive for personal sense gratification, his
devotional service is manifested differently. Such a man may be violent, proud, envious
and angry, and his interests are separate from the Lord's.
One who approaches the Supreme Lord to render devotional service, but who is proud
of his personality, envious of others or vengeful, is in the mode of anger. He thinks that
he is the best devotee. Devotional service executed in this way is not pure; it is mixed
and is of the lowest grade, tämasaù. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura advises that a
Vaiñëava who is not of good character should be avoided. A Vaiñëava is one who has
596
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
taken the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the ultimate goal of life, but if one is not
pure and still has motives, then he is not a Vaiñëava of the first order of good character.
One may offer his respects to such a Vaiñëava because he has accepted the Supreme
Lord as the ultimate goal of life, but one should not keep company with a Vaiñëava who
is in the mode of ignorance.
SB 3.29.9
TEXT 9
ivzYaaNai>aSaNDaaYa YaXa WeìYaRMaev va )
AcaRdavcRYaeÛae Maa& Pa*QaG>aav" Sa raJaSa" )) 9 ))
viñayän abhisandhäya
yaça aiçvaryam eva vä
arcädäv arcayed yo mäà
påthag-bhävaù sa räjasaù
SYNONYMS
viñayän—sense objects; abhisandhäya—aiming at; yaçaù—fame; aiçvaryam—opulence;
eva—indeed; vä—or; arcä-ädau—in worship of the Deity and so on; arcayet—may
worship; yaù—he who; mäm—Me; påthak-bhävaù—a separatist; saù—he; räjasaù—in
the mode of passion.
TRANSLATION
The worship of Deities in the temple by a separatist, with a motive for material
enjoyment, fame and opulence, is devotion in the mode of passion.
PURPORT
The word "separatist" must be understood carefully. The Sanskrit words in this
connection are bhinna-dåk and påthag-bhävaù. A separatist is one who sees his interest as
separate from that of the Supreme Lord. Mixed devotees, or devotees in the modes of
passion and ignorance, think that the interest of the Supreme Lord is supplying the
orders of the devotee; the interest of such devotees is to draw from the Lord as much as
possible for their sense gratification. This is the separatist mentality. Actually, pure
devotion is explained in the previous chapter: the mind of the Supreme Lord and the
597
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mind of the devotee should be dovetailed. A devotee should not wish anything but to
execute the desire of the Supreme. That is oneness. When the devotee has an interest or
will different from the interest of the Supreme Lord, his mentality is that of a separatist.
When the so-called devotee desires material enjoyment, without reference to the
interest of the Supreme Lord, or he wants to become famous or opulent by utilizing the
mercy or grace of the Supreme Lord, he is in the mode of passion.
Mäyävädés, however, interpret this word "separatist" in a different way. They say that
while worshiping the Lord, one should think himself one with the Supreme Lord. This is
another adulterated form of devotion within the modes of material nature. The
conception that the living entity is one with the Supreme is in the mode of ignorance.
Oneness is actually based on oneness of interest. A pure devotee has no interest but to
act on behalf of the Supreme Lord. When one has even a tinge of personal interest, his
devotion is mixed with the three modes of material nature.
SB 3.29.10
TEXT 10
k-MaRiNahaRrMauiÕXYa PariSMaNa( va TadPaR<aMa( )
YaJaeÛíVYaiMaiTa va Pa*QaG>aav" Sa Saaitvk-" )) 10 ))
karma-nirhäram uddiçya
parasmin vä tad-arpaëam
yajed yañöavyam iti vä
påthag-bhävaù sa sättvikaù
SYNONYMS
karma—fruitive activities; nirhäram—freeing himself from; uddiçya—with the purpose
of; parasmin—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vä—or; tat-arpaëam—offering
the result of activities; yajet—may worship; yañöavyam—to be worshiped; iti—thus; vä—
or; påthak-bhävaù—separatist; saù—he; sättvikaù—in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
When a devotee worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead and offers the results of
his activities in order to free himself from the inebrieties of fruitive activities, his
devotion is in the mode of goodness.
598
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
The brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras, along with the brahmacärés, gåhasthas,
vänaprasthas and sannyäsés, are the members of the eight divisions of varëas and
äçramas, and they have their respective duties to perform for the satisfaction of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. When such activities are performed and the results
are offered to the Supreme Lord, they are called karmärpaëam, duties performed for the
satisfaction of the Lord. If there is any inebriety or fault, it is atoned for by this offering
process. But if this offering process is in the mode of goodness rather than in pure
devotion, then the interest is different. The four äçramas and the four varëas act for
some benefit in accordance with their personal interests. Therefore such activities are in
the mode of goodness; they cannot be counted in the category of pure devotion. Pure
devotional service as described by Rüpa Gosvämé is free from all material desires.
Anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. There can be no excuse for personal or
material interest. Devotional activities should be transcendental to fruitive activities
and empiric philosophical speculation. Pure devotional service is transcendental to all
material qualities.
Devotional service in the modes of ignorance, passion and goodness can be divided into
eighty-one categories. There are different devotional activities, such as hearing,
chanting, remembering, worshiping, offering prayer, rendering service and surrendering
everything, and each of them can be divided into three qualitative categories. There is
hearing in the mode of passion, in the mode of ignorance and in the mode of goodness.
Similarly, there is chanting in the mode of ignorance, passion and goodness, etc. Three
multiplied by nine equals twenty-seven, and when again multiplied by three it becomes
eighty-one. One has to transcend all such mixed materialistic devotional service in order
to reach the standard of pure devotional service, as explained in the next verses.
SB 3.29.11, SB 3.29.12, SB 3.29.11-12
TEXTS 11-12
Mad(Gau<aé[uiTaMaa}ae<a MaiYa SavRGauhaXaYae )
MaNaaeGaiTariviC^àa YaQaa Ga(r)aM>aSaae_MbuDaaE )) 11 ))
l/+a<a& >ai¢-YaaeGaSYa iNaGauR<aSYa ùudaôTaMa( )
AhETauKYaVYavihTaa Yaa >ai¢-" PauåzaetaMae )) 12 ))
mad-guëa-çruti-mätreëa
599
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mayi sarva-guhäçaye
mano-gatir avicchinnä
yathä gaìgämbhaso 'mbudhau
lakñaëaà bhakti-yogasya
nirguëasya hy udähåtam
ahaituky avyavahitä
yä bhaktiù puruñottame
SYNONYMS
mat—of Me; guëa—qualities; çruti—by hearing; mätreëa—just; mayi—towards Me;
sarva-guhä-äçaye—residing in everyone's heart; manaù-gatiù—the heart's course;
avicchinnä—continuous; yathä—as; gaìgä—of the Ganges; ambhasaù—of the water;
ambudhau—towards the ocean; lakñaëam—the manifestation; bhakti-yogasya—of
devotional service; nirguëasya—unadulterated; hi—indeed; udähåtam—exhibited;
ahaituké—causeless; avyavahitä—not separated; yä—which; bhaktiù—devotional
service; puruña-uttame—towards the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The manifestation of unadulterated devotional service is exhibited when one's mind is at
once attracted to hearing the transcendental name and qualities of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is residing in everyone's heart. Just as the water of the
Ganges flows naturally down towards the ocean, such devotional ecstasy, uninterrupted
by any material condition, flows towards the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
The basic principle of this unadulterated, pure devotional service is love of Godhead.
Mad-guëa-çruti-mätreëa means "just after hearing about the transcendental qualities of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead." These qualities are called nirguëa. The Supreme
Lord is uncontaminated by the modes of material nature; therefore He is attractive to
the pure devotee. There is no need to practice meditation to attain such attraction; the
pure devotee is already in the transcendental stage, and the affinity between him and
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is natural and is compared to the Ganges water
flowing towards the sea. The flow of the Ganges water cannot be stopped by any
condition; similarly, a pure devotee's attraction for the transcendental name, form and
600
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
pastimes of the Supreme Godhead cannot be stopped by any material condition. The
word avicchinnä, "without interruptions," is very important in this connection. No
material condition can stop the flow of the devotional service of a pure devotee.
The word ahaituké means "without reason." A pure devotee does not render loving
service to the Personality of Godhead for any cause or for any benefit, material or
spiritual. This is the first symptom of unalloyed devotion. Anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam: [Cc.
Madhya 19.167] he has no desire to fulfill by rendering devotional service. Such
devotional service is meant for the puruñottama, the Supreme Personality, and not for
anyone else. Sometimes pseudodevotees show devotion to many demigods, thinking the
forms of the demigods to be the same as the Supreme Personality of Godhead's form. It is
specifically mentioned herein, however, that bhakti, devotional service, is meant only
for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, Viñëu, or Kåñëa, not for anyone
else.
Avyavahitä means "without cessation." A pure devotee must engage in the service of the
Lord twenty-four hours a day, without cessation; his life is so molded that at every
minute and every second he engages in some sort of devotional service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Another meaning of the word avyavahitä is that the interest of
the devotee and the interest of the Supreme Lord are on the same level. The devotee has
no interest but to fulfill the transcendental desire of the Supreme Lord. Such
spontaneous service unto the Supreme Lord is transcendental and is never
contaminated by the material modes of nature. These are the symptoms of pure
devotional service, which is free from all contamination of material nature.
SB 3.29.13
TEXT 13
Saal/aeKYaSaaiíRSaaMaqPYaSaaæPYaEk-TvMaPYauTa )
dqYaMaaNa& Na Ga*õiNTa ivNaa MaTSaevNa& JaNaa" )) 13 ))
sälokya-särñöi-sämépyasärüpyaikatvam
apy uta
déyamänaà na gåhëanti
vinä mat-sevanaà janäù
SYNONYMS
sälokya—living on the same planet; särñöi—having the same opulence; sämépya—to be a
601
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
personal associate; särüpya—having the same bodily features; ekatvam—oneness; api—
also; uta—even; déyamänam—being offered; na—not; gåhëanti—do accept; vinä—
without; mat—My; sevanam—devotional service; janäù—pure devotees.
TRANSLATION
A pure devotee does not accept any kind of liberation—sälokya, särñöi, sämépya, särüpya
or ekatva—even though they are offered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Lord Caitanya teaches us how to execute pure devotional service out of spontaneous
love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Çikñäñöaka, He prays to the Lord:
"O Lord, I do not wish to gain from You any wealth, nor do I wish to have a beautiful
wife, nor do I wish to have many followers. All I want from You is that in life after life I
may remain a pure devotee at Your lotus feet." There is a similarity between the prayers
of Lord Caitanya and the statements of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Lord Caitanya prays, "in
life after life," indicating that a devotee does not even desire the cessation of birth and
death. The yogés and empiric philosophers desire cessation of the process of birth and
death, but a devotee is satisfied to remain even in this material world and execute
devotional service.
It is clearly stated herein that a pure devotee does not desire ekatva, oneness with the
Supreme Lord, as desired by the impersonalists, the mental speculators and the
meditators. To become one with the Supreme Lord is beyond the dream of a pure
devotee. Sometimes he may accept promotion to the Vaikuëöha planets to serve the
Lord there, but he will never accept merging into the Brahman effulgence, which he
considers worse than hellish. Such ekatva, or merging into the effulgence of the
Supreme Lord, is called kaivalya, but the happiness derived from kaivalya is considered
by the pure devotee to be hellish. The devotee is so fond of rendering service to the
Supreme Lord that the five kinds of liberation are not important to him. If one is
engaged in pure transcendental loving service to the Lord, it is understood that he has
already achieved the five kinds of liberation.
When a devotee is promoted to the spiritual world, Vaikuëöha, he receives four kinds of
facilities. One of these is sälokya, living on the same planet as the Supreme Personality.
The Supreme Person, in His different plenary expansions, lives on innumerable
Vaikuëöha planets, and the chief planet is Kåñëaloka. Just as within the material
universe the chief planet is the sun, in the spiritual world the chief planet is Kåñëaloka.
602
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
From Kåñëaloka, the bodily effulgence of Lord Kåñëa is distributed not only to the
spiritual world but to the material world as well; it is covered by matter, however, in the
material world. In the spiritual world there are innumerable Vaikuëöha planets, and on
each one the Lord is the predominating Deity. A devotee can be promoted to one such
Vaikuëöha planet to live with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
In särñöi liberation the opulence of the devotee is equal to the opulence of the Supreme
Lord. Sämépya means to be a personal associate of the Supreme Lord. In särüpya
liberation the bodily features of the devotee are exactly like those of the Supreme
Person but for two or three symptoms found exclusively on the transcendental body of
the Lord. Çrévatsa, for example, the hair on the chest of the Lord, particularly
distinguishes Him from His devotees.
A pure devotee does not accept these five kinds of spiritual existence, even if they are
offered, and he certainly does not hanker after material benefits, which are all
insignificant in comparison with spiritual benefits. When Prahläda Mahäräja was
offered some material benefit, he stated: "My Lord, I have seen that my father achieved
all kinds of material benefits, and even the demigods were afraid of his opulence, but
still, in a second, You have finished his life and all his material prosperity." For a devotee
there is no question of desiring any material or spiritual prosperity. He simply aspires to
serve the Lord. That is his highest happiness.
SB 3.29.14
TEXT 14
Sa Wv >ai¢-YaaeGaa:Ya AaTYaiNTak- odaôTa" )
YaeNaaiTav]JYa i}aGau<a& MaÙavaYaaePaPaÛTae )) 14 ))
sa eva bhakti-yogäkhya
ätyantika udähåtaù
yenätivrajya tri-guëaà
mad-bhäväyopapadyate
SYNONYMS
saù—this; eva—indeed; bhakti-yoga—devotional service; äkhyaù—called; ätyantikaù—
the highest platform; udähåtaù—explained; yena—by which; ativrajya—overcoming; triguëam—
the three modes of material nature; mat-bhäväya—to My transcendental stage;
upapadyate—one attains.
603
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
By attaining the highest platform of devotional service, as I have explained, one can
overcome the influence of the three modes of material nature and be situated in the
transcendental stage, as is the Lord.
PURPORT
Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya, who is supposed to be the leader of the impersonalist school of
philosophers, has admitted in the beginning of his comments on Bhagavad-gétä that
Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is beyond the material creation; except
for Him, everything is within the material creation. It is also confirmed in the Vedic
literature that before the creation there was only Näräyaëa; neither Lord Brahmä nor
Lord Çiva existed. Only Näräyaëa, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, or
Kåñëa, is always in the transcendental position, beyond the influence of material
creation.
The material qualities of goodness, passion and ignorance cannot affect the position of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore He is called nirguëa (free from all tinges
of material qualities). Here the same fact is confirmed by Lord Kapila: one who is
situated in pure devotional service is transcendentally situated, as is the Lord. Just as the
Lord is unaffected by the influence of the material modes, so too are His pure devotees.
One who is not affected by the three modes of material nature is called a liberated soul,
or brahma-bhüta soul [SB 4.30.20]. Brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä [Bg. 18.54] is the stage of
liberation. Ahaà brahmäsmi: "I am not this body." This is applicable only to the person
who constantly engages in the devotional service of Kåñëa and is thus in the
transcendental stage; he is above the influence of the three modes of material nature.
It is the misconception of the impersonalists that one can worship any imaginary form
of the Lord, or Brahman, and at the end merge in the Brahman effulgence. Of course, to
merge into the bodily effulgence (Brahman) of the Supreme Lord is also liberation, as
explained in the previous verse. Ekatva is also liberation, but that sort of liberation is
never accepted by any devotee, for qualitative oneness is immediately attained as soon
as one is situated in devotional service. For a devotee, that qualitative equality, which is
the result of impersonal liberation, is already attained; he does not have to try for it
separately. It is clearly stated here that simply by pure devotional service one becomes
qualitatively as good as the Lord Himself.
SB 3.29.15
TEXT 15
604
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
iNazeivTaeNaaiNaiMataeNa SvDaMaeR<a MahqYaSaa )
i§-YaaYaaeGaeNa XaSTaeNa NaaiTaih&óe<a iNaTYaXa" )) 15 ))
niñevitenänimittena
sva-dharmeëa mahéyasä
kriyä-yogena çastena
nätihiàsreëa nityaçaù
SYNONYMS
niñevitena—executed; animittena—without attachment to the result; sva-dharmeëa—by
one's prescribed duties; mahéyasä—glorious; kriyä-yogena—by devotional activities;
çastena—auspicious; na—without; atihiàsreëa—excessive violence; nityaçaù—regularly.
TRANSLATION
A devotee must execute his prescribed duties, which are glorious, without material profit.
Without excessive violence, one should regularly perform one's devotional activities.
PURPORT
One has to execute his prescribed duties according to his social position as a brähmaëa,
kñatriya, vaiçya or çüdra. The prescribed duties of the four classes of men in human
society are also described in Bhagavad-gétä. The activities of brähmaëas are to control
the senses and to become simple, clean, learned devotees. The kñatriyas have the spirit
for ruling, they are not afraid on the battlefield, and they are charitable. The vaiçyas, or
the mercantile class of men, trade in commodities, protect cows and develop agricultural
produce. The çüdras, or laborer class, serve the higher classes because they themselves
are not very intelligent.
From every position, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, sva-karmaëä tam abhyarcya: [Bg.
18.46] one can serve the Supreme Lord by performing one's prescribed duty. It is not that
only the brähmaëas can serve the Supreme Lord and not the çüdras. Anyone can serve
the Supreme Lord by performing his prescribed duties under the direction of a spiritual
master, or representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No one should think
that his prescribed duties are inferior. A brähmaëa can serve the Lord by using his
intelligence, and the kñatriya can serve the Supreme Lord by using his military arts, just
605
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
as Arjuna served Kåñëa. Arjuna was a warrior; he had no time to study Vedänta or other
highly intellectual books. The damsels in Vrajadhäma were girls born of the vaiçya class,
and they engaged in protecting cows and producing agriculture. Kåñëa's foster father,
Nanda Mahäräja, and his associates were all vaiçyas. They were not at all educated, but
they could serve Kåñëa by loving Him and by offering everything to Him. Similarly,
there are many instances in which caëòälas, or those lower than çüdras, have served
Kåñëa. Also, the sage Vidura was considered a çüdra because his mother happened to be
çüdra. There are no distinctions, for it is declared by the Lord in Bhagavad-gétä that
anyone engaged specifically in devotional service is elevated to the transcendental
position without a doubt. Everyone's prescribed duty is glorious if it is performed in
devotional service of the Lord, without desire for profit. Such loving service must be
performed without reason, without impediment, and spontaneously. Kåñëa is lovable,
and one has to serve Him in whatever capacity one can. That is pure devotional service.
Another significant phrase in this verse is nätihiàsreëa ("with minimum violence or
sacrifice of life"). Even if a devotee has to commit violence, it should not be done
beyond what is necessary. Sometimes the question is put before us: "You ask us not to eat
meat, but you are eating vegetables. Do you think that is not violence?" The answer is
that eating vegetables is violence, and vegetarians are also committing violence against
other living entities because vegetables also have life. Nondevotees are killing cows,
goats and so many other animals for eating purposes, and a devotee, who is vegetarian, is
also killing. But here, significantly, it is stated that every living entity has to live by
killing another entity; that is the law of nature. Jévo jévasya jévanam: one living entity is
the life for another living entity. But for a human being, that violence should be
committed only as much as necessary.
A human being is not to eat anything which is not offered to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Yajïa-çiñöäçinaù santaù: one becomes freed from all sinful reactions by
eating foodstuffs which are offered to Yajïa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A
devotee therefore eats only prasäda, or foodstuffs offered to the Supreme Lord, and
Kåñëa says that when a devotee offers Him foodstuffs from the vegetable kingdom, with
devotion, He eats that. A devotee is to offer to Kåñëa foodstuffs prepared from
vegetables. If the Supreme Lord wanted foodstuffs prepared from animal food, the
devotee could offer this, but He does not order to do that.
We have to commit violence; that is a natural law. We should not, however, commit
violence extravagantly, but only as much as ordered by the Lord. Arjuna engaged in the
art of killing, and although killing is, of course, violence, he killed the enemy simply on
Kåñëa's order. In the same way, if we commit violence as it is necessary, by the order of
606
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the Lord, that is called nätihiàsä. We cannot avoid violence, for we are put into a
conditional life in which we have to commit violence, but we should not commit more
violence than necessary or than ordered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
SB 3.29.16
TEXT 16
MaiÖZ<YadXaRNaSPaXaRPaUJaaSTauTYai>avNdNaE" )
>aUTaezu MaÙavNaYaa SatveNaaSa(r)MaeNa c )) 16 ))
mad-dhiñëya-darçana-sparçapüjä-
stuty-abhivandanaiù
bhüteñu mad-bhävanayä
sattvenäsaìgamena ca
SYNONYMS
mat—My; dhiñëya—statue; darçana—seeing; sparça—touching; püjä—worshiping;
stuti—praying to; abhivandanaiù—by offering obeisances; bhüteñu—in all living entities;
mat—of Me; bhävanayä—with thought; sattvena—by the mode of goodness;
asaìgamena—with detachment; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The devotee should regularly see My statues in the temple, touch My lotus feet and offer
worshipable paraphernalia and prayer. He should see in the spirit of renunciation, from
the mode of goodness, and see every living entity as spiritual.
PURPORT
Temple worship is one of the duties of a devotee. It is especially recommended for
neophytes, but those who are advanced should not refrain from temple worship. There is
a distinction in the manner a neophyte and an advanced devotee appreciate the Lord's
presence in the temple. A neophyte considers the arcä-vigraha (the statue of the Lord)
to be different from the original Personality of Godhead; he considers it a
representation of the Supreme Lord in the form of a Deity. But an advanced devotee
accepts the Deity in the temple as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He does not see
any difference between the original form of the Lord and the statue, or arcä form of the
607
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Lord, in the temple. This is the vision of a devotee whose devotional service is in the
highest stage of bhäva, or love of Godhead, whereas a neophyte's worship in the temple
is a matter of routine duty.
Temple Deity worship is one of the functions of a devotee. He goes regularly to see the
Deity nicely decorated, and with veneration and respect he touches the lotus feet of the
Lord and presents offerings of worship, such as fruits, flowers and prayers. At the same
time, to advance in devotional service, a devotee should see other living entities as
spiritual sparks, parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. A devotee is to offer respect to
every entity that has a relationship with the Lord. Because every living entity originally
has a relationship with the Lord as part and parcel, a devotee should try to see all living
entities on the same equal level of spiritual existence. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, a
paëòita, one who is learned, sees equally a very learned brähmaëa, a çüdra, a hog, a dog
and a cow. He does not see the body, which is only an outward dress. He does not see the
dress of a brähmaëa, or that of a cow or of a hog. He sees the spiritual spark, part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord. If a devotee does not see every living entity as part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord, he is considered präkåta-bhakta, a materialistic devotee. He
is not completely situated on the spiritual platform; rather, he is in the lowest stage of
devotion. He does, however, show all respect to the Deity.
Although a devotee sees all living entities on the level of spiritual existence, he is not
interested in associating with everyone. Simply because a tiger is part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord does not mean that we embrace him because of his spiritual relationship
with the Supreme Lord. We must associate only with persons who have developed Kåñëa
consciousness.
We should befriend and offer special respect to persons who are developed in Kåñëa
consciousness. Other living entities are undoubtedly part and parcel of the Supreme
Lord, but because their consciousness is still covered and not developed in Kåñëa
consciousness, we should renounce their association. It is said by Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura that even if one is a Vaiñëava, if he is not of good character his company
should be avoided, although he may be offered the respect of a Vaiñëava. Anyone who
accepts Viñëu as the Supreme Personality of Godhead is accepted as a Vaiñëava, but a
Vaiñëava is expected to develop all the good qualities of the demigods.
The exact meaning of the word sattvena is given by Çrédhara Svämé as being synonymous
with dhairyeëa, or patience. One must perform devotional service with great patience.
One should not give up the execution of devotional service because one or two attempts
have not been successful. One must continue. Çré Rüpa Gosvämé also confirms that one
should be very enthusiastic and execute devotional service with patience and
608
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
confidence. Patience is necessary for developing the confidence that "Kåñëa will
certainly accept me because I am engaging in devotional service." One has only to
execute service according to the rules and regulations to insure success.
SB 3.29.17
TEXT 17
MahTaa& bhuMaaNaeNa dqNaaNaaMaNauk-MPaYaa )
MaE}Yaa cEvaTMaTauLYaezu YaMaeNa iNaYaMaeNa c )) 17 ))
mahatäà bahu-mänena
dénänäm anukampayä
maitryä caivätma-tulyeñu
yamena niyamena ca
SYNONYMS
mahatäm—to the great souls; bahu-mänena—with great respect; dénänäm—to the poor;
anukampayä—with compassion; maitryä—with friendship; ca—also; eva—certainly;
ätma-tulyeñu—to persons who are equals; yamena—with control of the senses;
niyamena—with regulation; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The pure devotee should execute devotional service by giving the greatest respect to the
spiritual master and the äcäryas. He should be compassionate to the poor and make
friendship with persons who are his equals, but all his activities should be executed under
regulation and with control of the senses.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä, Thirteenth Chapter, it is clearly stated that one should execute
devotional service and advance on the path of spiritual knowledge by accepting the
äcärya. Äcäryopäsanam: one should worship an äcärya, a spiritual master who knows
things as they are. The spiritual master must be in the disciplic succession from Kåñëa.
The predecessors of the spiritual master are his spiritual master, his grand spiritual
master, his great-grand spiritual master and so on, who form the disciplic succession of
äcäryas.
609
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
It is recommended herewith that all the äcäryas be given the highest respect. It is stated,
guruñu nara-matiù. Guruñu means "unto the äcäryas," and nara-matiù means "thinking
like a common man." To think of the Vaiñëavas, the devotees, as belonging to a
particular caste or community, to think of the äcäryas as ordinary men or to think of the
Deity in the temple as being made of stone, wood or metal, is condemned. Niyamena:
one should offer the greatest respect to the äcäryas according to the standard
regulations. A devotee should also be compassionate to the poor. This does not refer to
those who are poverty-stricken materially. According to devotional vision, a man is poor
if he is not in Kåñëa consciousness. A man may be very rich materially, but if he is not
Kåñëa conscious, he is considered poor. On the other hand, many äcäryas, such as Rüpa
Gosvämé and Sanätana Gosvämé, used to live beneath trees every night. Superficially it
appeared that they were poverty-stricken, but from their writings we can understand
that in spiritual life they were the richest personalities.
A devotee shows compassion to those poor souls who are wanting in spiritual knowledge
by enlightening them in order to elevate them to Kåñëa consciousness. That is one of
the duties of a devotee. He should also make friendship with persons who are on an
equal level with himself or who have the same understanding that he does. For a
devotee, there is no point in making friendships with ordinary persons; he should make
friendship with other devotees so that by discussing among themselves, they may elevate
one another on the path of spiritual understanding. This is called iñöa-goñöhé.
In Bhagavad-gétä there is reference to bodhayantaù parasparam, "discussing among
themselves." Generally pure devotees utilize their valuable time in chanting and
discussing various activities of Lord Kåñëa or Lord Caitanya amongst themselves. There
are innumerable books, such as the puräëas, Mahäbhärata, Bhägavatam, Bhagavad-gétä
and Upaniñads, which contain countless subjects for discussion among two devotees or
more. Friendship should be cemented between persons with mutual interests and
understanding. Such persons are said to be sva jäti, "of the same caste." The devotee
should avoid a person whose character is not fixed in the standard understanding; even
though he may be a Vaiñëava, or a devotee of Kåñëa, if his character is not correctly
representative, then he should be avoided. One should steadily control the senses and
the mind and strictly follow the rules and regulations, and he should make friendship
with persons of the same standard.
SB 3.29.18
TEXT 18
AaDYaaiTMak-aNaué[v<aaàaMaSaªqTaRNaaÀ Mae )
610
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
AaJaRveNaaYaRSa(r)eNa iNarhx(ik]-YaYaa TaQaa )) 18 ))
ädhyätmikänuçravaëän
näma-saìkértanäc ca me
ärjavenärya-saìgena
nirahaìkriyayä tathä
SYNONYMS
ädhyätmika—spiritual matters; anuçravaëät—from hearing; näma-saìkértanät—from
chanting the holy name; ca—and; me—My; ärjavena—with straightforward behavior;
ärya-saìgena—with association of saintly persons; nirahaìkriyayä—without false ego;
tathä—thus.
TRANSLATION
A devotee should always try to hear about spiritual matters and should always utilize his
time in chanting the holy name of the Lord. His behavior should always be
straightforward and simple, and although he is not envious but friendly to everyone, he
should avoid the company of persons who are not spiritually advanced.
PURPORT
In order to advance in spiritual understanding, one has to hear from authentic sources
about spiritual knowledge. One can understand the reality of spiritual life by following
strict regulative principles and by controlling the senses. To have control it is necessary
that one be nonviolent and truthful, refrain from stealing, abstain from sex life and
possess only that which is absolutely necessary for keeping the body and soul together.
One should not eat more than necessary, he should not collect more paraphernalia than
necessary, he should not talk unnecessarily with common men, and he should not follow
the rules and regulations without purpose. He should follow the rules and regulations so
that he may actually make advancement.
There are eighteen qualifications mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä, among which is
simplicity. One should be without pride; one should not demand unnecessary respect
from others, and one should be nonviolent. Amänitvam adambhitvam ahiàsä [Bg. 13.8].
One should be very tolerant and simple, one should accept the spiritual master, and one
should control the senses. These are mentioned here and in Bhagavad-gétä as well. One
611
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
should hear from authentic sources how to advance in spiritual life; such instructions
should be taken from the äcärya and should be assimilated.
It is especially mentioned here, näma-saìkértanäc ca: one should chant the holy names
of the Lord—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare
Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare—either individually or with others. Lord Caitanya has
given special stress to chanting of these holy names of the Lord as the basic principle of
spiritual advancement. Another word used here is ärjavena, meaning "without
diplomacy." A devotee should not make plans out of self-interest. Of course, preachers
sometimes have to make some plan to execute the mission of the Lord under proper
guidance, but regarding personal self-interest, a devotee should always be without
diplomacy, and he should avoid the company of persons who are not advancing in
spiritual life. Another word is ärya. Äryans are persons who are advancing in knowledge
of Kåñëa consciousness as well as in material prosperity. The difference between the
Äryan and non-Äryan, the sura and asura, is in their standards of spiritual
advancement. Association with persons who are not spiritually advanced is forbidden.
Lord Caitanya advised, asat-saìga-tyäga: one should avoid persons who are attached to
the temporary. Asat is one who is too materially attached, who is not a devotee of the
Lord and who is too attached to women or enjoyable material things. Such a person,
according to Vaiñëava philosophy, is a persona non grata.
A devotee should not be proud of his acquisitions. The symptoms of a devotee are
meekness and humility. Although spiritually very advanced, he will always remain meek
and humble, as Kaviräja Gosvämé and all the other Vaiñëavas have taught us by personal
example. Caitanya Mahäprabhu taught that one should be humbler than the grass on
the street and more tolerant than the tree. One should not be proud or falsely puffed up.
In this way one will surely advance in spiritual life.
SB 3.29.19
TEXT 19
MaÖMaR<aae Gau<aEreTaE" PairSa&éuÖ AaXaYa" )
PauåzSYaaÅSaa>YaeiTa é[uTaMaa}aGau<a& ih MaaMa( )) 19 ))
mad-dharmaëo guëair etaiù
parisaàçuddha äçayaù
puruñasyäïjasäbhyeti
çruta-mätra-guëaà hi mäm
612
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
mat-dharmaëaù—of My devotee; guëaiù—with the attributes; etaiù—these;
parisaàçuddhaù—completely purified; äçayaù—consciousness; puruñasya—of a person;
aïjasä—instantly; abhyeti—approaches; çruta—by hearing; mätra—simply; guëam—
quality; hi—certainly; mäm—Me.
TRANSLATION
When one is fully qualified with all these transcendental attributes and his consciousness
is thus completely purified, he is immediately attracted simply by hearing My name or
hearing of My transcendental quality.
PURPORT
In the beginning of this instruction, the Lord explained to His mother that mad-guëaçruti-
mätreëa, simply by hearing of the name, quality, form, etc., of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, one is immediately attracted. A person becomes fully qualified
with all transcendental qualities by following the rules and regulations, as recommended
in different scriptures. We have developed certain unnecessary qualities by material
association, and by following the above process we become free from that
contamination. To develop transcendental qualities, as explained in the previous verse,
one must become free from these contaminated qualities.
SB 3.29.20
TEXT 20
YaQaa vaTarQaae ga]a<aMaav*»e GaNDa AaXaYaaTa( )
Wv& YaaeGarTa& ceTa AaTMaaNaMaivk-air YaTa( )) 20 ))
yathä väta-ratho ghräëam
ävåìkte gandha äçayät
evaà yoga-rataà ceta
ätmänam avikäri yat
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; väta—of air; rathaù—the chariot; ghräëam—sense of smell; ävåìkte—
613
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
catches; gandhaù—aroma; äçayät—from the source; evam—similarly; yoga-ratam—
engaged in devotional service; cetaù—consciousness; ätmänam—the Supreme Soul;
avikäri—unchanging; yat—which.
TRANSLATION
As the chariot of air carries an aroma from its source and immediately catches the sense
of smell, similarly, one who constantly engages in devotional service, in Kåñëa
consciousness, can catch the Supreme Soul, who is equally present everywhere.
PURPORT
As a breeze carrying a pleasant fragrance from a garden of flowers at once captures the
organ of smell, so one's consciousness, saturated with devotion, can at once capture the
transcendental existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who, in His
Paramätmä feature, is present everywhere, even in the heart of every living being. It is
stated in Bhagavad-gétä that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is kñetra jïa, present
within this body, but He is also simultaneously present in every other body. Since the
individual soul is present only in a particular body, he is altered when another
individual soul does not cooperate with him. The Supersoul, however, is equally present
everywhere. Individual souls may disagree, but the Supersoul, being equally present in
every body, is called unchanging, or avikäri. The individual soul, when fully saturated
with Kåñëa consciousness, can understand the presence of the Supersoul. It is confirmed
in Bhagavad-gétä that (bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti [Bg. 18.55]) a person saturated with
devotional service in full Kåñëa consciousness can understand the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, either as Supersoul or as the Supreme Person.
SB 3.29.21
TEXT 21
Ah& SaveRzu >aUTaezu >aUTaaTMaaviSQaTa" Sada )
TaMavjaYa Maa& MaTYaR" ku-åTae_caRiv@MbNaMa( )) 21 ))
ahaà sarveñu bhüteñu
bhütätmävasthitaù sadä
tam avajïäya mäà martyaù
kurute 'rcä-viòambanam
614
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
aham—I; sarveñu—in all; bhüteñu—living entities; bhüta-ätmä—the Supersoul in all
beings; avasthitaù—situated; sadä—always; tam—that Supersoul; avajïäya—
disregarding; mäm—Me; martyaù—a mortal man; kurute—performs; arcä—of worship
of the Deity; viòambanam—imitation.
TRANSLATION
I am present in every living entity as the Supersoul. If someone neglects or disregards
that Supersoul everywhere and engages himself in the worship of the Deity in the temple,
that is simply imitation.
PURPORT
In purified consciousness, or Kåñëa consciousness, one sees the presence of Kåñëa
everywhere. If, therefore, one only engages in Deity worship in the temple and does not
consider other living entities, then he is in the lowest grade of devotional service. One
who worships the Deity in the temple and does not show respect to others is a devotee
on the material platform, in the lowest stage of devotional service. A devotee should try
to understand everything in relationship with Kåñëa and try to serve everything in that
spirit. To serve everything means to engage everything in the service of Kåñëa. If a
person is innocent and does not know his relationship with Kåñëa, an advanced devotee
should try to engage him in the service of Kåñëa. One who is advanced in Kåñëa
consciousness can engage not only the living being but everything in the service of
Kåñëa.
SB 3.29.22
TEXT 22
Yaae Maa& SaveRzu >aUTaezu SaNTaMaaTMaaNaMaqìrMa( )
ihTvaca| >aJaTae MaaE!yaÙSMaNYaev JauhaeiTa Sa" )) 22 ))
yo mäà sarveñu bhüteñu
santam ätmänam éçvaram
hitvärcäà bhajate mauòhyäd
bhasmany eva juhoti saù
615
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; mäm—Me; sarveñu—in all; bhüteñu—living entities; santam—being
present; ätmänam—the Paramätmä; éçvaram—the Supreme Lord; hitvä—disregarding;
arcäm—the Deity; bhajate—worships; mauòhyät—because of ignorance; bhasmani—
into ashes; eva—only; juhoti—offers oblations; saù—he.
TRANSLATION
One who worships the Deity of Godhead in the temples but does not know that the
Supreme Lord, as Paramätmä, is situated in every living entity's heart, must be in
ignorance and is compared to one who offers oblations into ashes.
PURPORT
It is stated clearly herein that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His plenary
expansion of Supersoul, is present in all living entities. The living entities have
8,400,000 different kinds of bodies, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is living in
every body both as the individual soul and as the Supersoul. Since the individual soul is
part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, in that sense the Lord is living in every body, and,
as Supersoul, the Lord is also present as a witness. In both cases the presence of God in
every living entity is essential. Therefore persons who profess to belong to some religious
sect but who do not feel the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in every
living entity, and everywhere else, are in the mode of ignorance.
If, without this preliminary knowledge of the Lord's omnipresence, one simply attaches
himself to the rituals in a temple, church or mosque, it is as if he were offering butter
into ashes rather than into the fire. One offers sacrifices by pouring clarified butter into
a fire and chanting Vedic mantras, but even if there are Vedic mantras and all
conditions are favorable, if the clarified butter is poured on ashes, then such a sacrifice
will be useless. In other words, a devotee should not ignore any living entity. The
devotee must know that in every living entity, however insignificant he may be, even in
an ant, God is present, and therefore every living entity should be kindly treated and
should not be subjected to any violence. In modern civilized society, slaughterhouses are
regularly maintained and supported by a certain type of religious principle. But without
knowledge of the presence of God in every living entity, any so-called advancement of
human civilization, either spiritual or material, is to be understood as being in the mode
of ignorance.
616
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.29.23
TEXT 23
iÜzTa" Park-aYae Maa& MaaiNaNaae i>aàdiXaRNa" )
>aUTaezu bÖvErSYa Na MaNa" XaaiNTaMa*C^iTa )) 23 ))
dviñataù para-käye mäà
mänino bhinna-darçinaù
bhüteñu baddha-vairasya
na manaù çäntim åcchati
SYNONYMS
dviñataù—of one who is envious; para-käye—towards the body of another; mäm—unto
Me; mäninaù—offering respect; bhinna-darçinaù—of a separatist; bhüteñu—towards
living entities; baddha-vairasya—of one who is inimical; na—not; manaù—the mind;
çäntim—peace; åcchati—attains.
TRANSLATION
One who offers Me respect but is envious of the bodies of others and is therefore a
separatist never attains peace of mind, because of his inimical behavior towards other
living entities.
PURPORT
In this verse, two phrases, bhüteñu baddha-vairasya ("inimical towards others") and
dviñataù para-käye ("envious of another's body"), are significant. One who is envious of
or inimical towards others never experiences any happiness. A devotee's vision,
therefore, must be perfect. He should ignore bodily distinctions and should see only the
presence of the part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, and the Lord Himself in His
plenary expansion as Supersoul. That is the vision of a pure devotee. The bodily
expression of a particular type of living entity is always ignored by the devotee.
It is expressed herein that the Lord is always eager to deliver the conditioned souls, who
have been encaged within material bodies. Devotees are expected to carry the message
or desire of the Lord to such conditioned souls and enlighten them with Kåñëa
consciousness. Thus they may be elevated to transcendental, spiritual life, and the
617
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mission of their lives will be successful. Of course this is not possible for living entities
who are lower than human beings, but in human society it is feasible that all living
entities can be enlightened with Kåñëa consciousness. Even living entities who are lower
than human can be raised to Kåñëa consciousness by other methods. For example,
Çivänanda Sena, a great devotee of Lord Caitanya, delivered a dog by feeding him
prasäda. Distribution of prasäda, or remnants of foodstuffs offered to the Lord, even to
the ignorant masses of people and to animals, gives such living entities the chance for
elevation to Kåñëa consciousness. Factually it happened that the same dog, when met by
Lord Caitanya at Puré, was liberated from the material condition.
It is especially mentioned here that a devotee must be free from all violence (jévähiàsä).
Lord Caitanya has recommended that a devotee not commit violence to any living
entity. Sometimes the question is raised that since vegetables also have life and devotees
take vegetable foodstuffs, isn't that violence? Firstly, however, taking some leaves, twigs
or fruit from a tree or plant does not kill the plant. Besides that, jévähiàsä means that
since every living entity has to pass through a particular type of body according to his
past karma, although every living entity is eternal, he should not be disturbed in his
gradual evolution. A devotee has to execute the principles of devotional service exactly
as they are, and he must know that however insignificant a living entity may be, the
Lord is present within him. A devotee must realize this universal presence of the Lord.
SB 3.29.24
TEXT 24
AhMauÀavcEd]RVYaE" i§-YaYaaeTPaàYaaNagae )
NaEv TauZYae_icRTaae_caRYaa& >aUTaGa]aMaavMaaiNaNa" )) 24 ))
aham uccävacair dravyaiù
kriyayotpannayänaghe
naiva tuñye 'rcito 'rcäyäà
bhüta-grämävamäninaù
SYNONYMS
aham—I; ucca-avacaiù—with various; dravyaiù—paraphernalia; kriyayä—by religious
rituals; utpannayä—accomplished; anaghe—O sinless mother; na—not; eva—certainly;
tuñye—am pleased; arcitaù—worshiped; arcäyäm—in the Deity form; bhüta-gräma—to
other living entities; avamäninaù—with those who are disrespectful.
618
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
My dear Mother, even if he worships with proper rituals and paraphernalia, a person who
is ignorant of My presence in all living entities never pleases Me by the worship of My
Deities in the temple.
PURPORT
There are sixty-four different prescriptions for worship of the Deity in the temple.
There are many items offered to the Deity, some valuable and some less valuable. It is
prescribed in Bhagavad-gétä: "If a devotee offers Me a small flower, a leaf, some water or
a little fruit, I will accept it." The real purpose is to exhibit one's loving devotion to the
Lord; the offerings themselves are secondary. If one has not developed loving devotion
to the Lord and simply offers many kinds of foodstuffs, fruits and flowers without real
devotion, the offering will not be accepted by the Lord. We cannot bribe the Personality
of Godhead. He is so great that our bribery has no value. Nor has He any scarcity; since
He is full in Himself, what can we offer Him? Everything is produced by Him. We simply
offer to show our love and gratitude to the Lord.
This gratitude and love for God is exhibited by a pure devotee, who knows that the Lord
lives in every living entity. As such, temple worship necessarily includes distribution of
prasäda. It is not that one should create a temple in his private apartment or private
room, offer something to the Lord, and then eat. Of course, that is better than simply
cooking foodstuffs and eating without understanding one's relationship with the
Supreme Lord; people who act in this manner are just like animals. But the devotee who
wants to elevate himself to the higher level of understanding must know that the Lord is
present in every living entity, and, as stated in the previous verse, one should be
compassionate to other living entities. A devotee should worship the Supreme Lord, be
friendly to persons who are on the same level and be compassionate to the ignorant.
One should exhibit his compassion for ignorant living entities by distributing prasäda.
Distribution of prasäda to the ignorant masses of people is essential for persons who
make offerings to the Personality of Godhead.
Real love and devotion is accepted by the Lord. Many valuable foodstuffs may be
presented to a person, but if the person is not hungry, all such offerings are useless for
him. Similarly, we may offer many valuable items to the Deity, but if we have no real
sense of devotion and no real sense of the Lord's presence everywhere, then we are
lacking in devotional service; in such a state of ignorance, we cannot offer anything
acceptable to the Lord.
619
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.29.25
TEXT 25
AcaRdavcRYaetaavdqìr& Maa& Svk-MaRk*-Ta( )
Yaavà ved Svôid SavR>aUTaeZvviSQaTaMa( )) 25 ))
arcädäv arcayet tävad
éçvaraà mäà sva-karma-kåt
yävan na veda sva-hådi
sarva-bhüteñv avasthitam
SYNONYMS
arcä-ädau—beginning with worship of the Deity; arcayet—one should worship; tävat—
so long; éçvaram—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mäm—Me; sva—his own;
karma—prescribed duties; kåt—performing; yävat—as long as; na—not; veda—he
realizes; sva-hådi—in his own heart; sarva-bhüteñu—in all living entities; avasthitam—
situated.
TRANSLATION
Performing his prescribed duties, one should worship the Deity of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead until one realizes My presence in his own heart and in the hearts
of other living entities as well.
PURPORT
Worship of the Deity of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is prescribed herewith
even for persons who are simply discharging their prescribed duties. There are
prescribed duties for the different social classes of men—the brähmaëas, the vaiçyas, the
kñatriyas and the çüdras—and for the different äçramas-brahmacarya, gåhastha,
vänaprastha and sannyäsa. One should worship the Deity of the Lord until one
appreciates the presence of the Lord in every living entity. In other words, one should
not be satisfied simply by discharging his duties properly; he must realize his relationship
and the relationship of all other living entities with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. If he does not understand this, then even though he discharges his prescribed
duties properly, it is to be understood that he is simply laboring without profit.
620
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The word sva-karma-kåt in this verse is very significant. Sva-karma-kåt is one who
engages in discharging his prescribed duties. It is not that one who has become a devotee
of the Lord or who engages in devotional service should give up his prescribed duties. No
one should be lazy under the plea of devotional service. One has to execute devotional
service according to his prescribed duties. Sva-karma-kåt means that one should
discharge the duties prescribed for him without neglect.
SB 3.29.26
TEXT 26
AaTMaNaê ParSYaaiPa Ya" k-raeTYaNTaraedrMa( )
TaSYa i>aàd*Xaae Ma*TYauivRdDae >aYaMauLb<aMa( )) 26 ))
ätmanaç ca parasyäpi
yaù karoty antarodaram
tasya bhinna-dåço måtyur
vidadhe bhayam ulbaëam
SYNONYMS
ätmanaù—of himself; ca—and; parasya—of another; api—also; yaù—one who; karoti—
discriminates; antarä—between; udaram—the body; tasya—of him; bhinna-dåçaù—
having a differential outlook; måtyuù—as death; vidadhe—I cause; bhayam—fear;
ulbaëam—great.
TRANSLATION
As the blazing fire of death, I cause great fear to whoever makes the least discrimination
between himself and other living entities because of a differential outlook.
PURPORT
There are bodily differentiations among all varieties of living entities, but a devotee
should not distinguish between one living entity and another on such a basis; a devotee's
outlook should be that both the soul and Supersoul are equally present in all varieties of
living entities.
SB 3.29.27
TEXT 27
621
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
AQa Maa& SavR>aUTaezu >aUTaaTMaaNa& k*-Taal/YaMa( )
AhRYaeÕaNaMaaNaa>Yaa& MaE}Yaai>aàeNa c+auza )) 27 ))
atha mäà sarva-bhüteñu
bhütätmänaà kåtälayam
arhayed däna-mänäbhyäà
maitryäbhinnena cakñuñä
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; mäm—Me; sarva-bhüteñu—in all creatures; bhüta-ätmänam—the Self
in all beings; kåta-älayam—abiding; arhayet—one should propitiate; däna-mänäbhyäm—
through charity and respect; maitryä—through friendship; abhinnena—equal; cakñuñä—
by viewing.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, through charitable gifts and attention, as well as through friendly behavior and
by viewing all to be alike, one should propitiate Me, who abide in all creatures as their
very Self.
PURPORT
It should not be misunderstood that because the Supersoul is dwelling within the heart
of a living entity, the individual soul has become equal to Him. The equality of the
Supersoul and the individual soul is misconceived by the impersonalist. Here it is
distinctly mentioned that the individual soul should be recognized in relationship with
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The method of worshiping the individual soul is
described here as either giving charitable gifts or behaving in a friendly manner, free
from any separatist outlook. The impersonalist sometimes accepts a poor individual soul
as being daridra-näräyaëa, meaning that Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, has become poor. This is a contradiction. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is full in all opulences. He can agree to live with a poor soul or even with an
animal, but this does not make Him poor.
There are two Sanskrit words used here, mäna and däna. Mäna indicates a superior, and
däna indicates one who gives charitable gifts or is compassionate towards an inferior.
622
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
We cannot treat the Supreme Personality of Godhead as an inferior who is dependent
on our charitable gifts. When we give charity, it is to a person who is inferior in his
material or economic condition. Charity is not given to a rich man. Similarly, it is
explicitly stated here that mäna, respect, is offered to a superior, and charity is offered to
an inferior. The living entities, according to different results of fruitive activities, may
become rich or poor, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead is unchangeable; He is
always full in six opulences. Treating a living entity equally does not mean treating him
as one would treat the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Compassion and friendliness
do not necessitate falsely elevating someone to the exalted position of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. We should not, at the same time, misunderstand that the
Supersoul situated in the heart of an animal like a hog and the Supersoul situated in the
heart of a learned brähmaëa are different. The Supersoul in all living entities is the
same Supreme Personality of Godhead. By His omnipotency, He can live anywhere, and
He can create His Vaikuëöha situation everywhere. That is His inconceivable potency.
Therefore, when Näräyaëa is living in the heart of a hog, He does not become a hog-
Näräyaëa. He is always Näräyaëa and is unaffected by the body of the hog.
SB 3.29.28
TEXT 28
Jaqva"é[eïa ùJaqvaNaa& TaTa" Pa[a<a>a*Ta" éu>ae )
TaTa" Saictaa" Pa[vraSTaTaêeiNd]Yav*taYa" )) 28 ))
jéväù çreñöhä hy ajévänäà
tataù präëa-bhåtaù çubhe
tataù sa-cittäù pravaräs
tataç cendriya-våttayaù
SYNONYMS
jéväù—living entities; çreñöhäù—better; hi—indeed; ajévänäm—than inanimate objects;
tataù—than them; präëa-bhåtaù—entities with life symptoms; çubhe—O blessed mother;
tataù—than them; sa-cittäù—entities with developed consciousness; pravaräù—better;
tataù—than them; ca—and; indriya-våttayaù—those with sense perception.
TRANSLATION
623
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Living entities are superior to inanimate objects, O blessed mother, and among them,
living entities who display life symptoms are better. Animals with developed
consciousness are better than them, and better still are those who have developed sense
perception.
PURPORT
In the previous verse it was explained that living entities should be honored by
charitable gifts and friendly behavior, and in this verse and in the following verses, the
description of different grades of living entities is given so that one can know when to
behave friendly and when to give charity. For example, a tiger is a living entity, part and
parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the Supreme Lord is living in the
heart of the tiger as Supersoul. But does this mean that we have to treat the tiger in a
friendly manner? Certainly not. We have to treat him differently, giving him charity in
the form of prasäda. The many saintly persons in the jungles do not treat the tigers in a
friendly way, but they supply prasäda foodstuffs to them. The tigers come, take the food
and go away, just as a dog does. According to the Vedic system, a dog is not allowed to
enter the house. Because of their uncleanliness, cats and dogs are not allowed within the
apartment of a gentleman, but are so trained that they stand outside. The compassionate
householder will supply prasäda to the dogs and cats, who eat outside and then go away.
We must treat the lower living entities compassionately, but this does not mean that we
have to treat them in the same way we treat other human beings. The feeling of equality
must be there, but the treatment should be discriminating. Just how discrimination
should be maintained is given in the following six verses concerning the different grades
of living conditions.
The first division is made between dead, stonelike matter and the living organism. A
living organism is sometimes manifested even in stone. Experience shows that some hills
and mountains grow. This is due to the presence of the soul within that stone. Above
that, the next manifestation of the living condition is development of consciousness,
and the next manifestation is the development of sense perception. In the Mokñadharma
section of the Mahäbhärata it is stated that trees have developed sense
perception; they can see and smell. We know by experience that trees can see.
Sometimes in its growth a large tree changes its course of development to avoid some
hindrances. This means that a tree can see, and according to Mahäbhärata, a tree can
also smell. This indicates the development of sense perception.
SB 3.29.29
624
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 29
Ta}aaiPa SPaXaRveid>Ya" Pa[vra rSaveidNa" )
Tae>Yaae GaNDaivd" é[eïaSTaTa" XaBdivdae vra" )) 29 ))
taträpi sparça-vedibhyaù
pravarä rasa-vedinaù
tebhyo gandha-vidaù çreñöhäs
tataù çabda-vido varäù
SYNONYMS
tatra—among them; api—moreover; sparça-vedibhyaù—than those perceiving touch;
pravaräù—better; rasa-vedinaù—those perceiving taste; tebhyaù—than them; gandhavidaù—
those perceiving smell; çreñöhäù—better; tataù—than them; çabda-vidaù—those
perceiving sound; varäù—better.
TRANSLATION
Among the living entities who have developed sense perception, those who have
developed the sense of taste are better than those who have developed only the sense of
touch. Better than them are those who have developed the sense of smell, and better still
are those who have developed the sense of hearing.
PURPORT
Although Westerners accept that Darwin first expounded the doctrine of evolution, the
science of anthropology is not new. The development of the evolutionary process was
known long before from the Bhägavatam, which was written five thousand years ago.
There are records of the statements of Kapila Muni, who was present almost in the
beginning of the creation. This knowledge has existed since the Vedic time, and all
these sequences are disclosed in Vedic literature; the theory of gradual evolution or
anthropology is not new to the Vedas.
It is said here that amongst the trees there are also evolutionary processes; the different
kinds of trees have touch perception. It is said that better than the trees are the fish
because fish have developed the sense of taste. Better than the fish are the bees, who
have developed the sense of smell, and better than them are the serpents because
625
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
serpents have developed the sense of hearing. In the darkness of night a snake can find
its eatables simply by hearing the frog's very pleasant cry. The snake can understand,
"There is the frog," and he captures the frog simply because of its sound vibration. This
example is sometimes given for persons who vibrate sounds simply for death. One may
have a very nice tongue that can vibrate sound like the frogs, but that kind of vibration
is simply calling death. The best use of the tongue and of sound vibration is to chant
Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma,
Hare Hare. That will protect one from the hands of cruel death.
SB 3.29.30
TEXT 30
æPa>aedivdSTa}a TaTaêae>aYaTaaedTa" )
Taeza& bhuPada" é[eïaêTauZPaadSTaTaae iÜPaaTa( )) 30 ))
rüpa-bheda-vidas tatra
tataç cobhayato-dataù
teñäà bahu-padäù çreñöhäç
catuñ-pädas tato dvi-pät
SYNONYMS
rüpa-bheda—distinctions of form; vidaù—those who perceive; tatra—than them;
tataù—than them; ca—and; ubhayataù—in both jaws; dataù—those with teeth; teñäm—
of them; bahu-padäù—those who have many legs; çreñöhäù—better; catuù-pädaù—fourlegged;
tataù—than them; dvi-pät—two-legged.
TRANSLATION
Better than those living entities who can perceive sound are those who can distinguish
between one form and another. Better than them are those who have developed upper and
lower sets of teeth, and better still are those who have many legs. Better than them are
the quadrupeds, and better still are the human beings.
PURPORT
It is said that certain birds, such as crows, can distinguish one form from another. Living
entities that have many legs, like the wasp, are better than plants and grasses, which
626
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
have no legs. Four-legged animals are better than many-legged living entities, and better
than the animals is the human being, who has only two legs.
SB 3.29.31
TEXT 31
TaTaae v<aaRê cTvarSTaeza& b]aø<a otaMa" )
b]aø<aeZviPa vedjae ùQaRjae_>YaiDak-STaTa" )) 31 ))
tato varëäç ca catväras
teñäà brähmaëa uttamaù
brähmaëeñv api veda-jïo
hy artha-jïo 'bhyadhikas tataù
SYNONYMS
tataù—among them; varëäù—classes; ca—and; catväraù—four; teñäm—of them;
brähmaëaù—a brähmaëa; uttamaù—best; brähmaëeñu—among the brähmaëas; api—
moreover; veda—the Vedas; jïaù—one who knows; hi—certainly; artha—the purpose;
jïaù—one who knows; abhyadhikaù—better; tataù—than him.
TRANSLATION
Among human beings, the society which is divided according to quality and work is best,
and in that society, the intelligent men, who are designated as brähmaëas, are best.
Among the brähmaëas, one who has studied the Vedas is the best, and among the
brähmaëas who have studied the Vedas, one who knows the actual purport of Veda is the
best.
PURPORT
The system of four classifications in human society according to quality and work is very
scientific. This system of brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras has now become
vitiated as the present caste system in India, but it appears that this system has been
current a very long time, since it is mentioned in Çrémad-Bhägavatam and Bhagavad-gétä.
Unless there is such a division of the social orders in human society, including the
intelligent class, the martial class, the mercantile class and the laborer class, there is
always confusion as to who is to work for what purpose. A person trained to the stage of
627
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
understanding the Absolute Truth is a brähmaëa, and when such a brähmaëa is veda jïa,
he understands the purpose of Veda. The purpose of Veda is to understand the Absolute.
One who understands the Absolute Truth in three phases, namely Brahman, Paramätmä
and Bhagavän, and who understands the term Bhagavän to mean the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is considered to be the best of the brähmaëas, or a Vaiñëava.
SB 3.29.32
TEXT 32
AQaRjaTSa&XaYaC^etaa TaTa" é[eYaaNa( Svk-MaRk*-Ta( )
Mau¢-Sa(r)STaTaae >aUYaaNadaeGDaa DaMaRMaaTMaNa" )) 32 ))
artha-jïät saàçaya-cchettä
tataù çreyän sva-karma-kåt
mukta-saìgas tato bhüyän
adogdhä dharmam ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
artha-jïät—than one who knows the purpose of the Vedas; saàçaya—doubts; chettä—
one who cuts off; tataù—than him; çreyän—better; sva-karma—his prescribed duties;
kåt—one who executes; mukta-saìgaù—liberated from material association; tataù—than
him; bhüyän—better; adogdhä—not executing; dharmam—devotional service;
ätmanaù—for himself.
TRANSLATION
Better than the brähmaëa who knows the purpose of the Vedas is he who can dissipate all
doubts, and better than him is one who strictly follows the brahminical principles. Better
than him is one who is liberated from all material contamination, and better than him is a
pure devotee, who executes devotional service without expectation of reward.
PURPORT
Artha jïa brähmaëa refers to one who has made a thorough analytical study of the
Absolute Truth and who knows that the Absolute Truth is realized in three different
phases, namely Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän. If someone not only has this
knowledge but is able to clear all doubts if questioned about the Absolute Truth, he is
628
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
considered better. Further, there may be a learned brähmaëa-Vaiñëava who can explain
clearly and eradicate all doubts, but if he does not follow the Vaiñëava principles, then
he is not situated on a higher level. One must be able to clear all doubts and
simultaneously be situated in the brahminical characteristics. Such a person, who knows
the purpose of the Vedic injunctions, who can employ the principles laid down in the
Vedic literatures and who teaches his disciples in that way, is called an äcärya. The
position of an äcärya is that he executes devotional service with no desire for elevation
to a higher position of life.
The highest perfectional brähmaëa is the Vaiñëava. A Vaiñëava who knows the science
of the Absolute Truth but is not able to preach such knowledge to others is described as
being in the lower stage, one who not only understands the principles of the science of
God but can also preach is in the second stage, and one who not only can preach but
who also sees everything in the Absolute Truth and the Absolute Truth in everything is
in the highest class of Vaiñëavas. It is mentioned here that a Vaiñëava is already a
brähmaëa; in fact, the highest stage of brahminical perfection is reached when one
becomes a Vaiñëava.
SB 3.29.33
TEXT 33
TaSMaaNMaYYaiPaRTaaXaezi§-YaaQaaRTMaa iNarNTar" )
MaYYaiPaRTaaTMaNa" Pau&Saae MaiYa Sa&NYaSTak-MaR<a" )
Na PaXYaaiMa Par& >aUTaMak-TauR" SaMadXaRNaaTa( )) 33 ))
tasmän mayy arpitäçeñakriyärthätmä
nirantaraù
mayy arpitätmanaù puàso
mayi sannyasta-karmaëaù
na paçyämi paraà bhütam
akartuù sama-darçanät
SYNONYMS
tasmät—than him; mayi—unto Me; arpita—offered; açeña—all; kriyä—actions; artha—
wealth; ätmä—life, soul; nirantaraù—without cessation; mayi—unto Me; arpita—
offered; ätmanaù—whose mind; puàsaù—than a person; mayi—unto Me; sannyasta—
dedicated; karmaëaù—whose activities; na—not; paçyämi—I see; param—greater;
629
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bhütam—living entity; akartuù—without proprietorship; sama—same; darçanät—whose
vision.
TRANSLATION
Therefore I do not find a greater person than he who has no interest outside of Mine and
who therefore engages and dedicates all his activities and all his life—everything—unto
Me without cessation.
PURPORT
In this verse the word sama-darçanät means that he no longer has any separate interest;
the devotee's interest and the Supreme Personality of Godhead's interest are one. For
example, Lord Caitanya, in the role of a devotee, also preached the same philosophy. He
preached that Kåñëa is the worshipful Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
that the interest of His pure devotees is the same as His own.
Sometimes Mäyävädé philosophers, due to a poor fund of knowledge, define the word
sama-darçanät to mean that a devotee should see himself as one with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This is foolishness. When one thinks himself one with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no question of serving Him. When there is
service, there must be a master. Three things must be present for there to be service: the
master, the servant and the service. Here it is clearly stated that he who has dedicated
his life, all his activities, his mind and his soul—everything—for the satisfaction of the
Supreme Lord, is considered to be the greatest person.
The word akartuù means "without any sense of proprietorship." Everyone wants to act as
the proprietor of his actions so that he can enjoy the result. A devotee, however, has no
such desire; he acts because the Personality of Godhead wants him to act in a particular
way. He has no personal motive. When Lord Caitanya preached Kåñëa consciousness, it
was not with the purpose that people would call Him Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; rather, He preached that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
should be worshiped as such. A devotee who is a most confidential servant of the Lord
never does anything for his personal account, but does everything for the satisfaction of
the Supreme Lord. It is clearly stated, therefore, mayi sannyasta-karmaëaù: the devotee
works, but he works for the Supreme. It is also stated, mayy arpitätmanaù: "He gives his
mind unto Me." These are the qualifications of a devotee, who, according to this verse, is
accepted as the highest of all human beings.
SB 3.29.34
630
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 34
MaNaSaETaaiNa >aUTaaiNa Pa[<aMaeØhu MaaNaYaNa( )
wRìrae Jaqvk-l/Yaa Pa[ivíae >aGavaiNaiTa )) 34 ))
manasaitäni bhütäni
praëamed bahu-mänayan
éçvaro jéva-kalayä
praviñöo bhagavän iti
SYNONYMS
manasä—with the mind; etäni—to these; bhütäni—living entities; praëamet—he offers
respects; bahu-mänayan—showing regard; éçvaraù—the controller; jéva—of the living
entities; kalayä—by His expansion as the Supersoul; praviñöaù—has entered;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Such a perfect devotee offers respects to every living entity because he is under the firm
conviction that the Supreme Personality of Godhead has entered the body of every living
entity as the Supersoul, or controller.
PURPORT
A perfect devotee, as described above, does not make the mistake of thinking that
because the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Paramätmä has entered into the body of
every living entity, every living entity has become the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
This is foolishness. Suppose a person enters into a room; that does not mean that the
room has become that person. Similarly, that the Supreme Lord has entered into each of
the 8,400,000 particular types of material bodies does not mean that each of these bodies
has become the Supreme Lord. Because the Supreme Lord is present, however, a pure
devotee accepts each body as the temple of the Lord, and since the devotee offers
respect to such temples in full knowledge, he gives respect to every living entity in
relationship with the Lord. Mäyävädé philosophers wrongly think that because the
Supreme Person has entered the body of a poor man, the Supreme Lord has become
daridra-näräyaëa, or poor Näräyaëa. These are all blasphemous statements of atheists
631
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
and nondevotees.
SB 3.29.35
TEXT 35
>ai¢-YaaeGaê YaaeGaê MaYaa MaaNaVYaudqirTa" )
YaYaaerek-Tare<aEv Pauåz" Pauåz& v]JaeTa( )) 35 ))
bhakti-yogaç ca yogaç ca
mayä mänavy udéritaù
yayor ekatareëaiva
puruñaù puruñaà vrajet
SYNONYMS
bhakti-yogaù—devotional service; ca—and; yogaù—mystic yoga; ca—also; mayä—by
Me; mänavi—O daughter of Manu; udéritaù—described; yayoù—of which two;
ekatareëa—by either one; eva—alone; puruñaù—a person; puruñam—the Supreme
Person; vrajet—can achieve.
TRANSLATION
My dear mother, O daughter of Manu, a devotee who applies the science of devotional
service and mystic yoga in this way can achieve the abode of the Supreme Person simply
by that devotional service.
PURPORT
Herein the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kapiladeva perfectly explains that the
mystic yoga system, consisting of eight different kinds of yoga activities, has to be
performed with the aim of coming to the perfectional stage of bhakti-yoga. It is not
acceptable for one to be satisfied simply by practicing the sitting postures and thinking
himself complete. By meditation one must attain the stage of devotional service. As
previously described, a yogé is advised to meditate on the form of Lord Viñëu from point
to point, from the ankles to the legs to the knees to the thighs to the chest to the neck,
and in this way gradually up to the face and then to the ornaments. There is no question
of impersonal meditation.
When, by meditation on the Supreme Personality of Godhead in all detail, one comes to
632
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the point of love of God, that is the point of bhakti-yoga, and at that point he must
actually render service to the Lord out of transcendental love. Anyone who practices
yoga and comes to the point of devotional service can attain the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in His transcendental abode. Here it is clearly stated, puruñaù puruñaà vrajet:
the puruña, the living entity, goes to the Supreme Person. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead and the living entity are qualitatively one; both are defined as puruña. The
quality of puruña exists both in the Supreme Godhead and in the living entity. puruña
means "enjoyer," and the spirit of enjoyment is present both in the living entity and in
the Supreme Lord. The difference is that the quantity of enjoyment is not equal. The
living entity cannot experience the same quantity of enjoyment as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. An analogy may be made with a rich man and a poor man: the
propensity for enjoyment is present in both, but the poor man cannot enjoy in the same
quantity as the rich man. When the poor man dovetails his desires with those of the rich
man, however, and when there is cooperation between the poor man and the rich man,
or between the big and the small man, then the enjoyment is shared equally. That is like
bhakti-yoga. puruñaù puruñaà vrajet: when the living entity enters into the kingdom of
God and cooperates with the Supreme Lord by giving Him enjoyment, he enjoys the
same facility or the same amount of pleasure as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
On the other hand, when the living entity wants to enjoy by imitating the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, his desire is called mäyä, and it puts him in the material
atmosphere. A living entity who wants to enjoy on his personal account and not
cooperate with the Supreme Lord is engaged in materialistic life. As soon as he dovetails
his enjoyment with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is engaged in spiritual life.
An example may be cited here: The different limbs of the body cannot enjoy life
independently; they must cooperate with the whole body and supply food to the
stomach. In so doing, all the different parts of the body enjoy equally in cooperation
with the whole body. That is the philosophy of acintya-bhedäbheda, simultaneous
oneness and difference. The living entity cannot enjoy life in opposition to the Supreme
Lord; he has to dovetail his activities with the Lord by practicing bhakti-yoga.
It is said herein that one can approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead by either
the yoga process or the bhakti-yoga process. This indicates that factually there is no
difference between yoga and bhakti-yoga because the target of both is Viñëu. In the
modern age, however, a yoga process has been manufactured which aims at something
void and impersonal. Actually, yoga means meditation on the form of Lord Viñëu. If the
yoga practice is actually performed according to the standard direction, there is no
difference between yoga and bhakti-yoga.
633
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.29.36
TEXT 36
WTaÙGavTaae æPa& b]ø<a" ParMaaTMaNa" )
Par& Pa[DaaNa& Pauåz& dEv& k-MaRivceiíTaMa( )) 36 ))
etad bhagavato rüpaà
brahmaëaù paramätmanaù
paraà pradhänaà puruñaà
daivaà karma-viceñöitam
SYNONYMS
etat—this; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rüpam—form;
brahmaëaù—of Brahman; parama-ätmanaù—of Paramätmä; param—transcendental;
pradhänam—chief; puruñam—personality; daivam—spiritual; karma-viceñöitam—whose
activities.
TRANSLATION
This puruña whom the individual soul must approach is the eternal form of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is known as Brahman and Paramätmä. He is the
transcendental chief personality, and His activities are all spiritual.
PURPORT
In order to distinguish the personality whom the individual soul must approach, it is
described herein that this puruña, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the chief
amongst all living entities and is the ultimate form of the impersonal Brahman
effulgence and Paramätmä manifestation. Since He is the origin of the Brahman
effulgence and Paramätmä manifestation, He is described herewith as the chief
personality. It is confirmed in the Kaöha Upaniñad, nityo nityänäm: there are many
eternal living entities, but He is the chief maintainer. This is confirmed in Bhagavadgétä
also, where Lord Kåñëa says, ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù: [Bg. 10.8] "I am the origin of
everything, including the Brahman effulgence and Paramätmä manifestation." His
activities are transcendental, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä. Janma karma ca me divyam:
[Bg. 4.9] the activities and the appearance and disappearance of the Supreme Personality
634
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of Godhead are transcendental; they are not to be considered material. Anyone who
knows this fact—that the appearance, disappearance and activities of the Lord are
beyond material activities or material conception—is liberated. Yo vetti tattvataù/
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma: [Bg. 4.9] such a person, after quitting his body, does not
come back again to this material world, but goes to the Supreme Person. It is confirmed
here, puruñaù puruñaà vrajet: the living entity goes to the Supreme Personality simply by
understanding His transcendental nature and activities.
SB 3.29.37
TEXT 37
æPa>aedaSPad& idVYa& k-al/ wTYai>aDaqYaTae )
>aUTaaNaa& MahdadqNaa& YaTaae i>aàd*Xaa& >aYaMa( )) 37 ))
rüpa-bhedäspadaà divyaà
käla ity abhidhéyate
bhütänäà mahad-ädénäà
yato bhinna-dåçäà bhayam
SYNONYMS
rüpa-bheda—of the transformation of forms; äspadam—the cause; divyam—divine;
kälaù—time; iti—thus; abhidhéyate—is known; bhütänäm—of living entities; mahatädénäm—
beginning with Lord Brahmä; yataù—because of which; bhinna-dåçäm—with
separate vision; bhayam—fear.
TRANSLATION
The time factor, who causes the transformation of the various material manifestations, is
another feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Anyone who does not know that
time is the same Supreme Personality is afraid of the time factor.
PURPORT
Everyone is afraid of the activities of time, but a devotee who knows that the time factor
is another representation or manifestation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead has
nothing to fear from the influence of time. The phrase rüpa-bhedäspadam is very
significant. By the influence of time, so many forms are changing. For example, when a
635
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
child is born his form is small, but in the course of time that form changes into a larger
form, the body of a boy, and then the body of a young man. Similarly, everything is
changed and transformed by the time factor, or by the indirect control of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Usually, we do not see any difference between the body of a
child and the body of a boy or young man because we know that these changes are due
to the action of the time factor. There is cause for fear for a person who does not know
how time acts.
SB 3.29.38
TEXT 38
Yaae_NTa" Pa[ivXYa >aUTaaiNa >aUTaErtYai%l/aé[Ya" )
Sa ivZ<va:Yaae_iDaYajae_SaaE k-al/" k-l/YaTaa& Pa[>au" )) 38 ))
yo 'ntaù praviçya bhütäni
bhütair atty akhiläçrayaù
sa viñëv-äkhyo 'dhiyajïo 'sau
kälaù kalayatäà prabhuù
SYNONYMS
yaù—He who; antaù—within; praviçya—entering; bhütäni—living entities; bhütaiù—by
living entities; atti—annihilates; akhila—of everyone; äçrayaù—the support; saù—He;
viñëu—Viñëu; äkhyaù—named; adhiyajïaù—the enjoyer of all sacrifices; asau—that;
kälaù—time factor; kalayatäm—of all masters; prabhuù—the master.
TRANSLATION
Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the enjoyer of all sacrifices, is
the time factor and the master of all masters. He enters everyone's heart, He is the
support of everyone, and He causes every being to be annihilated by another.
PURPORT
Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is clearly described in this passage. He
is the supreme enjoyer, and all others are working as His servants. As stated in the
Caitanya caritämåta (Ädi 5.14), ekale éçvara kåñëa: the only Supreme Lord is Viñëu. Ära
saba bhåtya: all others are His servants. Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva and other demigods are
636
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
all servants. The same Viñëu enters everyone's heart as Paramätmä, and He causes the
annihilation of every being through another being.
SB 3.29.39
TEXT 39
Na caSYa k-iêÕiYaTaae Na ÜeZYaae Na c baNDav" )
AaivXaTYaPa[Mataae_SaaE Pa[Mata& JaNaMaNTak*-Ta( )) 39 ))
na cäsya kaçcid dayito
na dveñyo na ca bändhavaù
äviçaty apramatto 'sau
pramattaà janam anta-kåt
SYNONYMS
na—not; ca—and; asya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kaçcit—anyone;
dayitaù—dear; na—not; dveñyaù—enemy; na—not; ca—and; bändhavaù—friend;
äviçati—approaches; apramattaù—attentive; asau—He; pramattam—inattentive;
janam—persons; anta-kåt—the destroyer.
TRANSLATION
No one is dear to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, nor is anyone His enemy or
friend. But He gives inspiration to those who have not forgotten Him and destroys those
who have.
PURPORT
Forgetfulness of one's relationship with Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is the cause of one's repeated birth and death. A living entity is as eternal as
the Supreme Lord, but due to his forgetfulness he is put into this material nature and
transmigrates from one body to another, and when the body is destroyed, he thinks that
he is also destroyed. Actually, this forgetfulness of his relationship with Lord Viñëu is
the cause of his destruction. Anyone who revives his consciousness of the original
relationship receives inspiration from the Lord. This does not mean that the Lord is
someone's enemy and someone else's friend. He helps everyone; one who is not
bewildered by the influence of material energy is saved, and one who is bewildered is
637
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
destroyed. It is said, therefore, harià vinä na måtim taranti: no one can be saved from the
repetition of birth and death without the help of the Supreme Lord. It is therefore the
duty of all living entities to take shelter of the lotus feet of Viñëu and thus save
themselves from the cycle of birth and death.
SB 3.29.40
TEXT 40
YaÙYaaÜaiTa vaTaae_Ya& SaUYaRSTaPaiTa YaÙYaaTa( )
YaÙYaaÜzRTae devae >aGa<aae >aaiTa YaÙYaaTa( )) 40 ))
yad-bhayäd väti väto 'yaà
süryas tapati yad-bhayät
yad-bhayäd varñate devo
bha-gaëo bhäti yad-bhayät
SYNONYMS
yat—of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); bhayät—out of fear; väti—blows;
vätaù—the wind; ayam—this; süryaù—sun; tapati—shines; yat—of whom; bhayät—out
of fear; yat—of whom; bhayät—out of fear; varñate—sends rains; devaù—the god of rain;
bha-gaëaù—the host of heavenly bodies; bhäti—shine; yat—of whom; bhayät—out of
fear.
TRANSLATION
Out of fear of the Supreme Personality of Godhead the wind blows, out of fear of Him
the sun shines, out of fear of Him the rain pours forth showers, and out of fear of Him
the host of heavenly bodies shed their luster.
PURPORT
The Lord states in Bhagavad-gétä, mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate: [Bg. 9.10] "Nature is
working under My direction." The foolish person thinks that nature is working
automatically, but such an atheistic theory is not supported in the Vedic literature.
Nature is working under the superintendence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
That is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, and we also find here that the sun shines under the
direction of the Lord, and the cloud pours forth showers of rain under the direction of
638
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the Lord. All natural phenomena are under superintendence of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Viñëu.
SB 3.29.41
TEXT 41
YaÜNaSPaTaYaae >aqTaa l/TaaêaEziDai>a" Sah )
Sve Sve k-ale/_i>aGa*õiNTa PauZPaai<a c f-l/aiNa c )) 41 ))
yad vanaspatayo bhétä
latäç cauñadhibhiù saha
sve sve käle 'bhigåhëanti
puñpäëi ca phaläni ca
SYNONYMS
yat—because of whom; vanaù-patayaù—the trees; bhétäù—fearful; latäù—creepers; ca—
and; oñadhibhiù—herbs; saha—with; sve sve käle—each in its own season;
abhigåhëanti—bear; puñpäëi—flowers; ca—and; phaläni—fruits; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Out of fear of the Supreme Personality of Godhead the trees, creepers, herbs and seasonal
plants and flowers blossom and fructify, each in its own season.
PURPORT
As the sun rises and sets and the seasonal changes ensue at their appointed times by the
superintendence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, so the seasonal plants, flowers,
herbs and trees all grow under the direction of the Supreme Lord. It is not that plants
grow automatically, without any cause, as the atheistic philosophers say. Rather, they
grow in pursuance of the supreme order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is
confirmed in the Vedic literature that the Lord's diverse energies are working so nicely
that it appears that everything is being done automatically.
SB 3.29.42
TEXT 42
óviNTa SairTaae >aqTaa NaaeTSaPaRTYaudiDaYaRTa" )
639
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
AiGanirNDae SaiGairi>a>aURNaR MaÂiTa YaÙYaaTa( )) 42 ))
sravanti sarito bhétä
notsarpaty udadhir yataù
agnir indhe sa-giribhir
bhür na majjati yad-bhayät
SYNONYMS
sravanti—flow; saritaù—rivers; bhétäù—fearful; na—not; utsarpati—overflows; udadhiù—
the ocean; yataù—because of whom; agniù—fire; indhe—burns; sa-giribhiù—with
its mountains; bhüù—the earth; na—not; majjati—sinks; yat—of whom; bhayät—out of
fear.
TRANSLATION
Out of fear of the Supreme Personality of Godhead the rivers flow, and the ocean never
overflows. Out of fear of Him only does fire burn and does the earth, with its mountains,
not sink in the water of the universe.
PURPORT
We can understand from the Vedic literature that this universe is half filled with water,
on which Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu is lying. From His abdomen a lotus flower has grown,
and within the stem of that lotus flower all the different planets exist. The material
scientist explains that all these different planets are floating because of the law of
gravity or some other law; but the actual lawmaker is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. When we speak of law, we must understand that there must be a lawmaker.
The material scientists can discover laws of nature, but they are unable to recognize the
lawmaker. From Çrémad-Bhägavatam and Bhagavad-gétä we can know who the lawmaker
is: the lawmaker is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
It is said here that the planets do not sink. Since they are floating under the order or
energy of the Supreme Godhead, they do not fall down into the water which covers half
the universe. All the planets are heavy, with their various mountains, seas, oceans,
cities, palaces and buildings, and yet they are floating. It is understood from this passage
that all the other planets that are floating in the air have oceans and mountains similar
to those on this planet.
640
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.29.43
TEXT 43
Na>aae ddaiTa ìSaTaa& Pad& YaiàYaMaadd" )
l/aek&- Svdeh& TaNauTae MahaNa( Saái>arav*TaMa( )) 43 ))
nabho dadäti çvasatäà
padaà yan-niyamäd adaù
lokaà sva-dehaà tanute
mahän saptabhir ävåtam
SYNONYMS
nabhaù—the sky; dadäti—gives; çvasatäm—to the living entities; padam—abode; yat—
of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); niyamät—under the control; adaù—
that; lokam—the universe; sva-deham—own body; tanute—expands; mahän—the
mahat-tattva; saptabhiù—with the seven (layers); ävåtam—covered.
TRANSLATION
Subject to the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the sky allows outer space
to accommodate all the various planets, which hold innumerable living entities. The total
universal body expands with its seven coverings under His supreme control.
PURPORT
It is understood from this verse that all the planets in outer space are floating, and they
all hold living entities. The word çvasatäm means "those who breathe," or the living
entities. In order to accommodate them, there are innumerable planets. Every planet is a
residence for innumerable living entities, and the necessary space is provided in the sky
by the supreme order of the Lord. It is also stated here that the total universal body is
increasing. It is covered by seven layers, and as there are five elements within the
universe, so the total elements, in layers, cover the outside of the universal body. The
first layer is of earth, and it is ten times greater in size than the space within the
universe; the second layer is water, and that is ten times greater than the earthly layer;
the third covering is fire, which is ten times greater than the water covering. In this way
each layer is ten times greater than the previous one.
641
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.29.44
TEXT 44
Gau<aai>aMaaiNaNaae deva" SaGaaRidZvSYa YaÙYaaTa( )
vTaRNTae_NauYauGa& Yaeza& vXa WTaÀracrMa( )) 44 ))
guëäbhimänino deväù
sargädiñv asya yad-bhayät
vartante 'nuyugaà yeñäà
vaça etac caräcaram
SYNONYMS
guëa—the modes of material nature; abhimäninaù—in charge of; deväù—the demigods;
sarga-ädiñu—in the matter of creation and so on; asya—of this world; yat-bhayät—out
of fear of whom; vartante—carry out functions; anuyugam—according to the yugas;
yeñäm—of whom; vaçe—under the control; etat—this; cara-acaram—everything
animate and inanimate.
TRANSLATION
Out of fear of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the directing demigods in charge of
the modes of material nature carry out the functions of creation, maintenance and
destruction; everything animate and inanimate within this material world is under their
control.
PURPORT
The three modes of material nature, namely goodness, passion and ignorance, are under
the control of three deities—Brahmä, Viñëu and Lord Çiva. Lord Viñëu is in charge of
the mode of goodness, Lord Brahmä is in charge of the mode of passion, and Lord Çiva is
in charge of the mode of ignorance. Similarly, there are many other demigods in charge
of the air department, the water department, the cloud department, etc. Just as the
government has many different departments, so, within this material world, the
government of the Supreme Lord has many departments, and all these departments
function in proper order out of fear of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Demigods
are undoubtedly controlling all matter, animate and inanimate, within the universe, but
642
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
above them the supreme controller is the Personality of Godhead. Therefore in the
Brahma-saàhitä it is said, éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù [Bs. 5.1]. Undoubtedly there are many
controllers in the departmental management of this universe, but the supreme
controller is Kåñëa.
There are two kinds of dissolutions. One kind of dissolution takes place when Brahmä
goes to sleep during his night, and the final dissolution takes place when Brahmä dies.
As long as Brahmä does not die, creation, maintenance and destruction are actuated by
different demigods under the superintendence of the Supreme Lord.
SB 3.29.45
TEXT 45
Saae_NaNTaae_NTak-r" k-al/ae_Naaidraidk*-dVYaYa" )
JaNa& JaNaeNa JaNaYaNMaarYaNMa*TYauNaaNTak-Ma( )) 45 ))
so 'nanto 'nta-karaù kälo
'nädir ädi-kåd avyayaù
janaà janena janayan
märayan måtyunäntakam
SYNONYMS
saù—that; anantaù—endless; anta-karaù—destroyer; kälaù—time; anädiù—without
beginning; ädi-kåt—the creator; avyayaù—not liable to change; janam—persons;
janena—by persons; janayan—creating; märayan—destroying; måtyunä—by death;
antakam—the lord of death.
TRANSLATION
The eternal time factor has no beginning and no end. It is the representative of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the maker of the criminal world. It brings about the
end of the phenomenal world, it carries on the work of creation by bringing one
individual into existence from another, and likewise it dissolves the universe by
destroying even the lord of death, Yamaräja.
PURPORT
By the influence of eternal time, which is a representative of the Supreme Personality of
643
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Godhead, the father begets a son, and the father dies by the influence of cruel death.
But by time's influence, even the lord of cruel death is killed. In other words, all the
demigods within the material world are temporary, like ourselves. Our lives last for one
hundred years at the most, and similarly, although their lives may last for millions and
billions of years, the demigods are not eternal. No one can live within this material
world eternally. The phenomenal world is created, maintained and destroyed by the
finger signal of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore a devotee does not
desire anything in this material world. A devotee desires only to serve the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This servitude exists eternally; the Lord exists eternally, His
servitor exists eternally, and the service exists eternally.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Twenty-ninth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Explanation of Devotional Service by Lord Kapila."
30. Description by Lord Kapila of Adverse Fruitive Activities
SB 3.30.1
TEXT 1
k-iPal/ ovac
TaSYaETaSYa JaNaae NaUNa& NaaYa& vedaeåiv§-MaMa( )
k-aLYaMaaNaae_iPa bil/Naae vaYaaeirv gaNaavil/" )) 1 ))
kapila uväca
tasyaitasya jano nünaà
näyaà vedoru-vikramam
kälyamäno 'pi balino
väyor iva ghanävaliù
SYNONYMS
kapilaù uväca—Lord Kapila said; tasya etasya—of this very time factor; janaù—person;
nünam—certainly; na—not; ayam—this; veda—knows; uru-vikramam—the great
644
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
strength; kälyamänaù—being carried off; api—although; balinaù—powerful; väyoù—of
the wind; iva—like; ghana—of clouds; ävaliù—a mass.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead said: As a mass of clouds does not know the powerful
influence of the wind, a person engaged in material consciousness does not know the
powerful strength of the time factor, by which he is being carried.
PURPORT
The great politician-paëòita named Cäëakya said that even one moment of time cannot
be returned even if one is prepared to pay millions of dollars. One cannot calculate the
amount of loss there is in wasting valuable time. Either materially or spiritually, one
should be very alert in utilizing the time which he has at his disposal. A conditioned soul
lives in a particular body for a fixed measurement of time, and it is recommended in the
scriptures that within that small measurement of time one has to finish Kåñëa
consciousness and thus gain release from the influence of the time factor. But,
unfortunately, those who are not in Kåñëa consciousness are carried away by the strong
power of time without their knowledge, as clouds are carried by the wind.
SB 3.30.2
TEXT 2
Ya& YaMaQaRMauPaadtae du"%eNa Sau%heTave )
Ta& Ta& DauNaaeiTa >aGavaNa( PauMaaH^aeciTa YaTk*-Tae )) 2 ))
yaà yam artham upädatte
duùkhena sukha-hetave
taà taà dhunoti bhagavän
pumäï chocati yat-kåte
SYNONYMS
yam yam—whatever; artham—object; upädatte—one acquires; duùkhena—with
difficulty; sukha-hetave—for happiness; tam tam—that; dhunoti—destroys; bhagavän—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pumän—the person; çocati—laments; yat-kåte—
for which reason.
645
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Whatever is produced by the materialist with great pain and labor for so-called happiness,
the Supreme Personality, as the time factor, destroys, and for this reason the conditioned
soul laments.
PURPORT
The main function of the time factor, which is a representative of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is to destroy everything. The materialists, in material
consciousness, are engaged in producing so many things in the name of economic
development. They think that by advancing in satisfying the material needs of man they
will be happy, but they forget that everything they have produced will be destroyed in
due course of time. From history we can see that there were many powerful empires on
the surface of the globe that were constructed with great pain and great perseverance,
but in due course of time they have all been destroyed. Still the foolish materialists
cannot understand that they are simply wasting time in producing material necessities,
which are destined to be vanquished in due course of time. This waste of energy is due to
the ignorance of the mass of people, who do not know that they are eternal and that
they have an eternal engagement also. They do not know that this span of life in a
particular type of body is but a flash in the eternal journey. Not knowing this fact, they
take the small flash of life to be everything, and they waste time in improving economic
conditions.
SB 3.30.3
TEXT 3
YadDa]uvSYa dehSYa SaaNaubNDaSYa duMaRiTa" )
Da]uvai<a MaNYaTae Maaehad( Ga*h+ae}avSaUiNa c )) 3 ))
yad adhruvasya dehasya
sänubandhasya durmatiù
dhruväëi manyate mohäd
gåha-kñetra-vasüni ca
SYNONYMS
yat—because; adhruvasya—temporary; dehasya—of the body; sa-anubandhasya—with
646
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
that which is related; durmatiù—a misguided person; dhruväëi—permanent; manyate—
thinks; mohät—because of ignorance; gåha—home; kñetra—land; vasüni—wealth; ca—
and.
TRANSLATION
The misguided materialist does not know that his very body is impermanent and that the
attractions of home, land and wealth, which are in relationship to that body, are also
temporary. Out of ignorance only, he thinks that everything is permanent.
PURPORT
The materialist thinks that persons engaged in Kåñëa consciousness are crazy fellows
wasting time by chanting Hare Kåñëa, but actually he does not know that he himself is
in the darkest region of craziness because of accepting his body as permanent. And, in
relation to his body, he accepts his home, his country, his society and all other
paraphernalia as permanent. This materialistic acceptance of the permanency of home,
land, etc., is called the illusion of mäyä. This is clearly mentioned here. Mohäd gåhakñetra-
vasüni: out of illusion only does the materialist accept his home, his land and his
money as permanent. Out of this illusion, the family life, national life and economic
development, which are very important factors in modern civilization, have grown. A
Kåñëa conscious person knows that this economic development of human society is but
temporary illusion.
In another part of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the acceptance of the body as oneself, the
acceptance of others as kinsmen in relationship to this body and the acceptance of the
land of one's birth as worshipable are declared to be the products of an animal
civilization. When, however, one is enlightened in Kåñëa consciousness, he can use
these for the service of the Lord. That is a very suitable proposition. Everything has a
relationship with Kåñëa. When all economic development and material advancement
are utilized to advance the cause of Kåñëa consciousness, a new phase of progressive life
arises.
SB 3.30.4
TEXT 4
JaNTauvOE >av WTaiSMaNa( Yaa& Yaa& YaaeiNaMaNauv]JaeTa( )
TaSYaa& TaSYaa& Sa l/>aTae iNav*RiTa& Na ivrJYaTae )) 4 ))
647
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
jantur vai bhava etasmin
yäà yäà yonim anuvrajet
tasyäà tasyäà sa labhate
nirvåtià na virajyate
SYNONYMS
jantuù—the living entity; vai—certainly; bhave—in worldly existence; etasmin—this;
yäm yäm—whatever; yonim—species; anuvrajet—he may obtain; tasyäm tasyäm—in
that; saù—he; labhate—achieves; nirvåtim—satisfaction; na—not; virajyate—is averse.
TRANSLATION
The living entity, in whatever species of life he appears, finds a particular type of
satisfaction in that species, and he is never averse to being situated in such a condition.
PURPORT
The satisfaction of the living entity in a particular type of body, even if it is most
abominable, is called illusion. A man in a higher position may feel dissatisfaction with
the standard of life of a lower-grade man, but the lower-grade man is satisfied in that
position because of the spell of mäyä, the external energy. Mäyä has two phases of
activities. One is called prakñepätmikä, and the other is called ävaraëätmikä.
Ävaraëätmikä means "covering," and prakñepätmikä means "pulling down." In any
condition of life, the materialistic person or animal will be satisfied because his
knowledge is covered by the influence of mäyä. In the lower grade or lower species of
life, the development of consciousness is so poor that one cannot understand whether
he is happy or distressed. This is called ävaraëätmikä. Even a hog, who lives by eating
stool, finds himself happy, although a person in a higher mode of life sees that the hog is
eating stool. How abominable that life is!
SB 3.30.5
TEXT 5
Nark-SQaae_iPa deh& vE Na PauMaa&STYa¢u-iMaC^iTa )
NaarKYaa& iNav*RTaaE SaTYaa& devMaaYaaivMaaeihTa" )) 5 ))
naraka-stho 'pi dehaà vai
648
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
na pumäàs tyaktum icchati
närakyäà nirvåtau satyäà
deva-mäyä-vimohitaù
SYNONYMS
naraka—in hell; sthaù—situated; api—even; deham—body; vai—indeed; na—not;
pumän—person; tyaktum—to leave; icchati—wishes; närakyäm—hellish; nirvåtau—
enjoyment; satyäm—when existing; deva-mäyä—by the illusory energy of Viñëu;
vimohitaù—deluded.
TRANSLATION
The conditioned living entity is satisfied in his own particular species of life; while
deluded by the covering influence of the illusory energy, he feels little inclined to cast off
his body, even when in hell, for he takes delight in hellish enjoyment.
PURPORT
It is said that once Indra, the King of heaven, was cursed by his spiritual master,
Båhaspati, on account of his misbehavior, and he became a hog on this planet. After
many days, when Brahmä wanted to recall him to his heavenly kingdom, Indra, in the
form of a hog, forgot everything of his royal position in the heavenly kingdom, and he
refused to go back. This is the spell of mäyä. Even Indra forgets his heavenly standard of
life and is satisfied with the standard of a hog's life. By the influence of mäyä the
conditioned soul becomes so affectionate towards his particular type of body that if he is
offered, "Give up this body, and immediately you will have a king's body," he will not
agree. This attachment strongly affects all conditioned living entities. Lord Kåñëa is
personally canvassing, "Give up everything in this material world. Come to Me, and I
shall give you all protection," but we are not agreeable. We think, "We are quite all right.
Why should we surrender unto Kåñëa and go back to His kingdom?" This is called
illusion, or mäyä. Everyone is satisfied with his standard of living, however abominable
it may be.
SB 3.30.6
TEXT 6
AaTMaJaaYaaSauTaaGaarPaéud]iv<abNDauzu )
649
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
iNaæ!MaUl/ôdYa AaTMaaNa& bhu MaNYaTae )) 6 ))
ätma-jäyä-sutägärapaçu-
draviëa-bandhuñu
nirüòha-müla-hådaya
ätmänaà bahu manyate
SYNONYMS
ätma—body; jäyä—wife; suta—children; agära—home; paçu—animals; draviëa—
wealth; bandhuñu—in friends; nirüòha-müla—deep-rooted; hådayaù—his heart;
ätmänam—himself; bahu—highly; manyate—he thinks.
TRANSLATION
Such satisfaction with one's standard of living is due to deep-rooted attraction for body,
wife, home, children, animals, wealth and friends. In such association, the conditioned
soul thinks himself quite perfect.
PURPORT
This so-called perfection of human life is a concoction. Therefore, it is said that the
materialist, however materially qualified he may be, is worthless because he is hovering
on the mental plane, which will drag him again to the material existence of temporary
life. One who acts on the mental plane cannot get promotion to the spiritual. Such a
person is always sure to glide down again to material life. In the association of so-called
society, friendship and love, the conditioned soul appears completely satisfied.
SB 3.30.7
TEXT 7
SaNdùMaaNaSavaR(r) WzaMauÜhNaaiDaNaa )
k-raeTYaivrTa& MaU!ae duirTaaiNa duraXaYa" )) 7 ))
sandahyamäna-sarväìga
eñäm udvahanädhinä
karoty avirataà müòho
duritäni duräçayaù
650
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
sandahyamäna—burning; sarva—all; aìgaù—his limbs; eñäm—these family members;
udvahana—for maintaining; ädhinä—with anxiety; karoti—he performs; aviratam—
always; müòhaù—the fool; duritäni—sinful activities; duräçayaù—evil-minded.
TRANSLATION
Although he is always burning with anxiety, such a fool always performs all kinds of
mischievous activities, with a hope which is never to be fulfilled, in order to maintain his
so-called family and society.
PURPORT
It is said that it is easier to maintain a great empire than to maintain a small family,
especially in these days, when the influence of Kali-yuga is so strong that everyone is
harassed and full of anxieties because of accepting the false presentation of mäyä's
family. The family we maintain is created by mäyä; it is the perverted reflection of the
family in Kåñëaloka. In Kåñëaloka there are also family, friends, society, father and
mother; everything is there, but they are eternal. Here, as we change bodies, our family
relationships also change. Sometimes we are in a family of human beings, sometimes in a
family of demigods, sometimes a family of cats, or sometimes a family of dogs. Family,
society and friendship are flickering, and so they are called asat. It is said that as long as
we are attached to this asat, temporary, nonexisting society and family, we are always
full of anxieties. The materialists do not know that the family, society and friendship
here in this material world are only shadows, and thus they become attached. Naturally
their hearts are always burning, but in spite of all inconvenience, they still work to
maintain such false families because they have no information of the real family
association with Kåñëa.
SB 3.30.8
TEXT 8
Aai+aáaTMaeiNd]Ya" ñq<aaMaSaTaqNaa& c MaaYaYaa )
rhaericTaYaal/aPaE" iXaéUNaa& k-l/>aaiz<aaMa( )) 8 ))
äkñiptätmendriyaù stréëäm
asaténäà ca mäyayä
651
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
raho racitayäläpaiù
çiçünäà kala-bhäñiëäm
SYNONYMS
äkñipta—charmed; ätma—heart; indriyaù—his senses; stréëäm—of women; asaténäm—
false; ca—and; mäyayä—by mäyä; rahaù—in a solitary place; racitayä—displayed;
äläpaiù—by the talking; çiçünäm—of the children; kala-bhäñiëäm—with sweet words.
TRANSLATION
He gives heart and senses to a woman, who falsely charms him with mäyä. He enjoys
solitary embraces and talking with her, and he is enchanted by the sweet words of the
small children.
PURPORT
Family life within the kingdom of illusory energy, mäyä, is just like a prison for the
eternal living entity. In prison a prisoner is shackled by iron chains and iron bars.
Similarly, a conditioned soul is shackled by the charming beauty of a woman, by her
solitary embraces and talks of so-called love, and by the sweet words of his small
children. Thus he forgets his real identity.
In this verse the words stréëäm asaténäm indicate that womanly love is just to agitate the
mind of man. Actually, in the material world there is no love. Both the woman and the
man are interested in their sense gratification. For sense gratification a woman creates
an illusory love, and the man becomes enchanted by such false love and forgets his real
duty. When there are children as the result of such a combination, the next attraction is
to the sweet words of the children. The love of the woman at home and the talk of the
children make one a secure prisoner, and thus he cannot leave his home. Such a person
is termed, in Vedic language, a gåhamedhé, which means "one whose center of attraction
is home." Gåhastha refers to one who lives with family, wife and children, but whose real
purpose of living is to develop Kåñëa consciousness. One is therefore advised to become
a gåhastha and not a gåhamedhé. The gåhastha's concern is to get out of the family life
created by illusion and enter into real family life with Kåñëa, whereas the gåhamedhi s
business is to repeatedly chain himself to so-called family life, in one life after another,
and perpetually remain in the darkness of mäyä.
SB 3.30.9
652
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 9
Ga*hezu kU-$=DaMaeRzu du"%TaN}aeZvTaiNd]Ta" )
ku-vRNdu"%Pa[Taqk-ar& Sau%vNMaNYaTae Ga*hq )) 9 ))
gåheñu küöa-dharmeñu
duùkha-tantreñv atandritaù
kurvan duùkha-pratékäraà
sukhavan manyate gåhé
SYNONYMS
gåheñu—in family life; küöa-dharmeñu—involving the practice of falsehood; duùkhatantreñu—
spreading miseries; atandritaù—attentive; kurvan—doing; duùkhapratékäram—
counteraction of miseries; sukha-vat—as happiness; manyate—thinks;
gåhé—the householder.
TRANSLATION
The attached householder remains in his family life, which is full of diplomacy and
politics. Always spreading miseries and controlled by acts of sense gratification, he acts
just to counteract the reactions of all his miseries, and if he can successfully counteract
such miseries, he thinks that he is happy.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä the Personality of Godhead Himself certifies the material world as an
impermanent place that is full of miseries. There is no question of happiness in this
material world, either individually or in terms of family, society or country. If something
is going on in the name of happiness, that is also illusion. Here in this material world,
happiness means successful counteraction to the effects of distress. The material world is
so made that unless one becomes a clever diplomat, his life will be a failure. Not to speak
of human society, even the society of lower animals, the birds and bees, cleverly manages
its bodily demands of eating, sleeping and mating. Human society competes nationally or
individually, and in the attempt to be successful the entire human society becomes full
of diplomacy. We should always remember that in spite of all diplomacy and all
intelligence in the struggle for our existence, everything will end in a second by the
653
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
supreme will. Therefore, all our attempts to become happy in this material world are
simply a delusion offered by mäyä.
SB 3.30.10
TEXT 10
AQaOEraPaaidTaEGauRVYaaR ih&SaYaeTaSTaTaê TaaNa( )
PauZ<aaiTa Yaeza& Paaeze<a Xaez>auGYaaTYaDa" SvYaMa( )) 10 ))
arthair äpäditair gurvyä
hiàsayetas-tataç ca tän
puñëäti yeñäà poñeëa
çeña-bhug yäty adhaù svayam
SYNONYMS
arthaiù—by wealth; äpäditaiù—secured; gurvyä—great; hiàsayä—by violence; itaùtataù—
here and there; ca—and; tän—them (family members); puñëäti—he maintains;
yeñäm—of whom; poñeëa—because of the maintenance; çeña—remnants; bhuk—eating;
yäti—he goes; adhaù—downwards; svayam—himself.
TRANSLATION
He secures money by committing violence here and there, and although he employs it in
the service of his family, he himself eats only a little portion of the food thus purchased,
and he goes to hell for those for whom he earned the money in such an irregular way.
PURPORT
There is a Bengali proverb, "The person for whom I have stolen accuses me of being a
thief." The family members, for whom an attached person acts in so many criminal ways,
are never satisfied. In illusion an attached person serves such family members, and by
serving them he is destined to enter into a hellish condition of life. For example, a thief
steals something to maintain his family, and he is caught and imprisoned. This is the
sum and substance of material existence and attachment to material society, friendship
and love. Although an attached family man is always engaged in getting money by hook
or by crook for the maintenance of his family, he cannot enjoy more than what he could
consume even without such criminal activities. A man who eats eight ounces of
654
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
foodstuffs may have to maintain a big family and earn money by any means to support
that family, but he himself is not offered more than what he can eat, and sometimes he
eats the remnants that are left after his family members are fed. Even by earning money
by unfair means, he cannot enjoy life for himself. That is called the covering illusion of
mäyä.
The process of illusory service to society, country and community is exactly the same
everywhere; the same principle is applicable even to big national leaders. A national
leader who is very great in serving his country is sometimes killed by his countrymen
because of irregular service. In other words, one cannot satisfy his dependents by this
illusory service, although one cannot get out of the service because servant is his
constitutional position. A living entity is constitutionally part and parcel of the
Supreme Being, but he forgets that he has to render service to the Supreme Being and
diverts his attention to serving others; this is called mäyä. By serving others he falsely
thinks that he is master. The head of a family thinks of himself as the master of the
family, or the leader of a nation thinks of himself as the master of the nation, whereas
actually he is serving, and by serving mäyä he is gradually going to hell. Therefore, a
sane man should come to the point of Kåñëa consciousness and engage in the service of
the Supreme Lord, applying his whole life, all of his wealth, his entire intelligence and
his full power of speaking.
SB 3.30.11
TEXT 11
vaTaaRYaa& lu/PYaMaaNaaYaaMaarBDaaYaa& PauNa" PauNa" )
l/ae>aai>a>aUTaae iNa"Satv" ParaQaeR ku-åTae SPa*haMa( )) 11 ))
värtäyäà lupyamänäyäm
ärabdhäyäà punaù punaù
lobhäbhibhüto niùsattvaù
parärthe kurute spåhäm
SYNONYMS
värtäyäm—when his occupation; lupyamänäyäm—is hampered; ärabdhäyäm—
undertaken; punaù punaù—again and again; lobha—by greed; abhibhütaù—
overwhelmed; niùsattvaù—ruined; para-arthe—for the wealth of others; kurute
spåhäm—he longs.
655
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
When he suffers reverses in his occupation, he tries again and again to improve himself,
but when he is baffled in all attempts and is ruined, he accepts money from others
because of excessive greed.
SB 3.30.12
TEXT 12
ku-$u=Mb>ar<aak-LPaae MaNd>aaGYaae v*QaaeÛMa" )
ié[Yaa ivhqNa" k*-Pa<aae DYaaYaH^(viSaiTa MaU!Daq" )) 12 ))
kuöumba-bharaëäkalpo
manda-bhägyo våthodyamaù
çriyä vihénaù kåpaëo
dhyäyaï chvasiti müòha-dhéù
SYNONYMS
kuöumba—his family; bharaëa—in maintaining; akalpaù—unable; manda-bhägyaù—the
unfortunate man; våthä—in vain; udyamaù—whose effort; çriyä—beauty, wealth;
vihénaù—bereft of; kåpaëaù—wretched; dhyäyan—grieving; çvasiti—he sighs; müòha—
bewildered; dhéù—his intelligence.
TRANSLATION
Thus the unfortunate man, unsuccessful in maintaining his family members, is bereft of
all beauty. He always thinks of his failure, grieving very deeply.
SB 3.30.13
TEXT 13
Wv& Sv>ar<aak-LPa& TaTk-l/}aadYaSTaQaa )
Naaid]YaNTae YaQaaPaUv| k-INaaXaa wv GaaeJarMa( )) 13 ))
evaà sva-bharaëäkalpaà
tat-kalaträdayas tathä
nädriyante yathä pürvaà
656
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kénäçä iva go-jaram
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; sva-bharaëa—to maintain them; akalpam—unable; tat—his; kalatra—
wife; ädayaù—and so on; tathä—so; na—not; ädriyante—do respect; yathä—as;
pürvam—before; kénäçäù—farmers; iva—like; go-jaram—an old ox.
TRANSLATION
Seeing him unable to support them, his wife and others do not treat him with the same
respect as before, even as miserly farmers do not accord the same treatment to their old
and worn-out oxen.
PURPORT
Not only in the present age but from time immemorial, no one has liked an old man who
is unable to earn in the family. Even in the modern age, in some communities or states,
the old men are given poison so that they will die as soon as possible. In some
cannibalistic communities, the old grandfather is sportingly killed, and a feast is held in
which his body is eaten. The example is given that a farmer does not like an old bull who
has ceased to work. Similarly, when an attached person in family life becomes old and is
unable to earn, he is no longer liked by his wife, sons, daughters and other kinsmen, and
he is consequently neglected, what to speak of not being given respect. It is judicious,
therefore, to give up family attachment before one attains old age and take shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. One should employ himself in the Lord's service so
that the Supreme Lord can take charge of him, and he will not be neglected by his socalled
kinsmen.
SB 3.30.14
TEXT 14
Ta}aaPYaJaaTaiNaveRdae i>a]YaMaa<a" SvYaM>a*TaE" )
JarYaaePaatavEæPYaae Mar<aai>aMau%ae Ga*he )) 14 ))
taträpy ajäta-nirvedo
bhriyamäëaù svayam bhåtaiù
jarayopätta-vairüpyo
657
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
maraëäbhimukho gåhe
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; api—although; ajäta—not arisen; nirvedaù—aversion; bhriyamäëaù—
being maintained; svayam—by himself; bhåtaiù—by those who were maintained;
jarayä—by old age; upätta—obtained; vairüpyaù—deformation; maraëa—death;
abhimukhaù—approaching; gåhe—at home.
TRANSLATION
The foolish family man does not become averse to family life although he is maintained by
those whom he once maintained. Deformed by the influence of old age, he prepares
himself to meet ultimate death.
PURPORT
Family attraction is so strong that even if one is neglected by family members in his old
age, he cannot give up family affection, and he remains at home just like a dog. In the
Vedic way of life one has to give up family life when he is strong enough. It is advised
that before getting too weak and being baffled in material activities, and before
becoming diseased, one should give up family life and engage oneself completely in the
service of the Lord for the remaining days of his life. It is enjoined, therefore, in the
Vedic scriptures, that as soon as one passes fifty years of age, he must give up family life
and live alone in the forest. After preparing himself fully, he should become a sannyäsé
to distribute the knowledge of spiritual life to each and every home.
SB 3.30.15
TEXT 15
AaSTae_vMaTYaaePaNYaSTa& Ga*hPaal/ wvahrNa( )
AaMaYaaVYaPa[dqáaiGanrLPaaharae_LPaceiíTa" )) 15 ))
äste 'vamatyopanyastaà
gåha-päla iväharan
ämayävy apradéptägnir
alpähäro 'lpa-ceñöitaù
658
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
äste—he remains; avamatyä—negligently; upanyastam—what is placed; gåha-pälaù—a
dog; iva—like; äharan—eating; ämayävé—diseased; apradépta-agniù—having dyspepsia;
alpa—little; ähäraù—eating; alpa—little; ceñöitaù—his activity.
TRANSLATION
Thus he remains at home just like a pet dog and eats whatever is so negligently given to
him. Afflicted with many illnesses, such as dyspepsia and loss of appetite, he eats only
very small morsels of food, and he becomes an invalid, who cannot work any more.
PURPORT
Before meeting death one is sure to become a diseased invalid, and when he is neglected
by his family members, his life becomes less than a dog's because he is put into so many
miserable conditions. Vedic literatures enjoin, therefore, that before the arrival of such
miserable conditions, one should leave home and die without the knowledge of his
family members. If a man leaves home and dies without his family's knowing, that is
considered to be a glorious death. But an attached family man wants his family members
to carry him in a great procession even after his death, and although he will not be able
to see how the procession goes, he still desires that his body be taken gorgeously in
procession. Thus he is happy without even knowing where he has to go when he leaves
his body for the next life.
SB 3.30.16
TEXT 16
vaYauNaaeT§-MaTaaetaar" k-f-Sa&åÖNaai@k-" )
k-aSaìaSak*-TaaYaaSa" k-<#e= gaurgauraYaTae )) 16 ))
väyunotkramatottäraù
kapha-saàruddha-näòikaù
käsa-çväsa-kåtäyäsaù
kaëöhe ghura-ghuräyate
SYNONYMS
659
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
väyunä—by air; utkramatä—bulging out; uttäraù—his eyes; kapha—with mucus;
saàruddha—congested; näòikaù—his windpipe; käsa—coughing; çväsa—breathing;
kåta—done; äyäsaù—difficulty; kaëöhe—in the throat; ghura-ghuräyate—he produces a
sound like ghura-ghura.
TRANSLATION
In that diseased condition, one's eyes bulge due to the pressure of air from within, and his
glands become congested with mucus. He has difficulty breathing, and upon exhaling and
inhaling he produces a sound like ghura-ghura, a rattling within the throat.
SB 3.30.17
TEXT 17
XaYaaNa" PairXaaeciÙ" PairvqTa" SvbNDaui>a" )
vaCYaMaaNaae_iPa Na b]UTae k-al/PaaXavXa& GaTa" )) 17 ))
çayänaù pariçocadbhiù
parivétaù sva-bandhubhiù
väcyamäno 'pi na brüte
käla-päça-vaçaà gataù
SYNONYMS
çayänaù—lying down; pariçocadbhiù—lamenting; parivétaù—surrounded; svabandhubhiù—
by his relatives and friends; väcyamänaù—being urged to speak; api—
although; na—not; brüte—he speaks; käla—of time; päça—the noose; vaçam—under
the control of; gataù—gone.
TRANSLATION
In this way he comes under the clutches of death and lies down, surrounded by lamenting
friends and relatives, and although he wants to speak with them, he no longer can because
he is under the control of time.
PURPORT
For formality's sake, when a man is lying on his deathbed, his relatives come to him, and
660
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sometimes they cry very loudly, addressing the dying man: "Oh, my father!" "Oh, my
friend!" or "Oh, my husband!" In that pitiable condition the dying man wants to speak
with them and instruct them of his desires, but because he is fully under the control of
the time factor, death, he cannot express himself, and that causes him inconceivable
pain. He is already in a painful condition because of disease, and his glands and throat
are choked up with mucus. He is already in a very difficult position, and when he is
addressed by his relatives in that way, his grief increases.
SB 3.30.18
TEXT 18
Wv& ku-$u=Mb>ar<ae VYaaPa*TaaTMaaiJaTaeiNd]Ya" )
iMa]YaTae ådTaa& SvaNaaMauåvedNaYaaSTaDaq" )) 18 ))
evaà kuöumba-bharaëe
vyäpåtätmäjitendriyaù
mriyate rudatäà svänäm
uru-vedanayästa-dhéù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; kuöumba-bharaëe—in maintaining a family; vyäpåta—engrossed; ätmä—his
mind; ajita—uncontrolled; indriyaù—his senses; mriyate—he dies; rudatäm—while
crying; svänäm—his relatives; uru—great; vedanayä—with pain; asta—bereft of; dhéù—
consciousness.
TRANSLATION
Thus the man, who engaged with uncontrolled senses in maintaining a family, dies in
great grief, seeing his relatives crying. He dies most pathetically, in great pain and
without consciousness.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä it is said that at the time of death one will be absorbed in the thoughts
which he cultivated during his lifetime. A person who had no other idea than to
properly maintain his family members must have family affairs in his last thoughts. That
is the natural sequence for a common man. The common man does not know the destiny
661
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of his life; he is simply busy in his flash of life, maintaining his family. At the last stage,
no one is satisfied with how he has improved the family economic condition; everyone
thinks that he could not provide sufficiently. Because of his deep family affection, he
forgets his main duty of controlling the senses and improving his spiritual consciousness.
Sometimes a dying man entrusts the family affairs to either his son or some relative,
saying, "I am going. Please look after the family." He does not know where he is going,
but even at the time of death he is anxious about how his family will be maintained.
Sometimes it is seen that a dying man requests the physician to increase his life at least
for a few years so that the family maintenance plan which he has begun can be
completed. These are the material diseases of the conditioned soul. He completely
forgets his real engagement—to become Kåñëa conscious—and is always serious about
planning to maintain his family, although he changes families one after another.
SB 3.30.19
TEXT 19
YaMadUTaaE Tada Pa[aáaE >aqMaaE Sar>aSae+a<aaE )
Sa d*îa }aSTaôdYa" Xak*-NMaU}a& ivMauÄiTa )) 19 ))
yama-dütau tadä präptau
bhémau sarabhasekñaëau
sa dåñövä trasta-hådayaù
çakån-mütraà vimuïcati
SYNONYMS
yama-dütau—two messengers of Yamaräja; tadä—at that time; präptau—arrived;
bhémau—terrible; sa-rabhasa—full of wrath; ékñaëau—their eyes; saù—he; dåñövä—
seeing; trasta—frightened; hådayaù—his heart; çakåt—stool; mütram—urine;
vimuïcati—he passes.
TRANSLATION
At death, he sees the messengers of the lord of death come before him, their eyes full of
wrath, and in great fear he passes stool and urine.
PURPORT
662
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
There are two kinds of transmigration of a living entity after passing away from the
present body. One kind of transmigration is to go to the controller of sinful activities,
who is known as Yamaräja, and the other is to go to the higher planets, up to Vaikuëöha.
Here Lord Kapila describes how persons engaged in activities of sense gratification to
maintain a family are treated by the messengers of Yamaräja, called Yamadütas. At the
time of death the Yamadütas become the custodians of those persons who have strongly
gratified their senses. They take charge of the dying man and take him to the planet
where Yamaräja resides. The conditions there are described in the following verses.
SB 3.30.20
TEXT 20
YaaTaNaadeh Aav*TYa PaaXaEbRd(ßa Gale/ bl/aTa( )
NaYaTaae dqgaRMaßaNa& d<@y& raJa>a$=a YaQaa )) 20 ))
yätanä-deha ävåtya
päçair baddhvä gale balät
nayato dérgham adhvänaà
daëòyaà räja-bhaöä yathä
SYNONYMS
yätanä—for punishment; dehe—his body; ävåtya—covering; päçaiù—with ropes;
baddhvä—binding; gale—by the neck; balät—by force; nayataù—they lead; dérgham—
long; adhvänam—distance; daëòyam—a criminal; räja-bhaöäù—the king's soldiers;
yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
As a criminal is arrested for punishment by the constables of the state, a person engaged
in criminal sense gratification is similarly arrested by the Yamadütas, who bind him by
the neck with strong rope and cover his subtle body so that he may undergo severe
punishment.
PURPORT
Every living entity is covered by a subtle and gross body. The subtle body is the covering
of mind, ego, intelligence and consciousness. It is said in the scriptures that the
663
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
constables of Yamaräja cover the subtle body of the culprit and take him to the abode of
Yamaräja to be punished in a way that he is able to tolerate. He does not die from this
punishment because if he died, then who would suffer the punishment? It is not the
business of the constables of Yamaräja to put one to death. In fact, it is not possible to
kill a living entity because factually he is eternal; he simply has to suffer the
consequences of his activities of sense gratification.
The process of punishment is explained in the Caitanya-caritämåta. Formerly the king's
men would take a criminal in a boat in the middle of the river. They would dunk him by
grasping a bunch of his hair and thrusting him completely underwater, and when he was
almost suffocated, the king's constables would take him out of the water and allow him
to breathe for some time, and then they would again dunk him in the water to suffocate.
This sort of punishment is inflicted upon the forgotten soul by Yamaräja, as will be
described in the following verses.
SB 3.30.21
TEXT 21
TaYaaeiNaRi>aRàôdYaSTaJaRNaEJaaRTavePaQau" )
PaiQa ìi>a>aR+YaMaa<a AaTaaeR_ga& SvMaNauSMarNa( )) 21 ))
tayor nirbhinna-hådayas
tarjanair jäta-vepathuù
pathi çvabhir bhakñyamäëa
ärto 'ghaà svam anusmaran
SYNONYMS
tayoù—of the Yamadütas; nirbhinna—broken; hådayaù—his heart; tarjanaiù—by the
threatening; jäta—arisen; vepathuù—trembling; pathi—on the road; çvabhiù—by dogs;
bhakñyamäëaù—being bitten; ärtaù—distressed; agham—sins; svam—his; anusmaran—
remembering.
TRANSLATION
While carried by the constables of Yamaräja, he is overwhelmed and trembles in their
hands. While passing on the road he is bitten by dogs, and he can remember the sinful
activities of his life. He is thus terribly distressed.
664
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
It appears from this verse that while passing from this planet to the planet of Yamaräja,
the culprit arrested by Yamaräja's constables meets many dogs, which bark and bite just
to remind him of his criminal activities of sense gratification. It is said in Bhagavad-gétä
that one becomes almost blind and is bereft of all sense when he is infuriated by the
desire for sense gratification. He forgets everything. Kämais tais tair håta jïänäù [Bg.
7.20]. One is bereft of all intelligence when he is too attracted by sense gratification, and
he forgets that he has to suffer the consequences also. Here the chance for recounting
his activities of sense gratification is given by the dogs engaged by Yamaräja. While we
live in the gross body, such activities of sense gratification are encouraged even by
modern government regulations. In every state all over the world, such activities are
encouraged by the government in the form of birth control. Women are supplied pills,
and they are allowed to go to a clinical laboratory to get assistance for abortions. This is
going on as a result of sense gratification. Actually sex life is meant for begetting a good
child, but because people have no control over the senses and there is no institution to
train them to control the senses, the poor fellows fall victim to the criminal offenses of
sense gratification, and they are punished after death as described in these pages of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
SB 3.30.22
TEXT 22
+auta*$(=ParqTaae_kR-dvaNal/aiNalE/"
SaNTaPYaMaaNa" PaiQa Taávalu/ke- )
k*-C^\e<a Pa*ïe k-XaYaa c Taai@Ta‚
êl/TYaXa¢-ae_iPa iNaraé[Maaedke- )) 22 ))
kñut-tåö-paréto 'rka-davänalänilaiù
santapyamänaù pathi tapta-väluke
kåcchreëa påñöhe kaçayä ca täòitaç
calaty açakto 'pi niräçramodake
SYNONYMS
kñut-tåö—by hunger and thirst; parétaù—afflicted; arka—sun; dava-anala—forest fires;
anilaiù—by winds; santapyamänaù—being scorched; pathi—on a road; tapta-väluke—of
665
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
hot sand; kåcchreëa—painfully; påñöhe—on the back; kaçayä—with a whip; ca—and;
täòitaù—beaten; calati—he moves; açaktaù—unable; api—although; niräçrama-udake—
without shelter or water.
TRANSLATION
Under the scorching sun, the criminal has to pass through roads of hot sand with forest
fires on both sides. He is whipped on the back by the constables because of his inability to
walk, and he is afflicted by hunger and thirst, but unfortunately there is no drinking
water, no shelter and no place for rest on the road.
SB 3.30.23
TEXT 23
Ta}a Ta}a PaTaH^\aNTaae MaUiC^RTa" PauNaåiTQaTa" )
PaQaa PaaPaqYaSaa NaqTaSTarSaa YaMaSaadNaMa( )) 23 ))
tatra tatra pataï chränto
mürcchitaù punar utthitaù
pathä päpéyasä nétas
tarasä yama-sädanam
SYNONYMS
tatra tatra—here and there; patan—falling; çräntaù—fatigued; mürcchitaù—
unconscious; punaù—again; utthitaù—risen; pathä—by the road; päpéyasä—very
inauspicious; nétaù—brought; tarasä—quickly; yama-sädanam—to the presence of
Yamaräja.
TRANSLATION
While passing on that road to the abode of Yamaräja, he falls down in fatigue, and
sometimes he becomes unconscious, but he is forced to rise again. In this way he is very
quickly brought to the presence of Yamaräja.
SB 3.30.24
TEXT 24
666
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
YaaeJaNaaNaa& Sahóai<a NaviTa& Nav caßNa" )
i}ai>aMauRhUTaOEÜaR>Yaa& va NaqTa" Pa[aPanaeiTa YaaTaNaa" )) 24 ))
yojanänäà sahasräëi
navatià nava cädhvanaù
tribhir muhürtair dväbhyäà vä
nétaù präpnoti yätanäù
SYNONYMS
yojanänäm—of yojanas; sahasräëi—thousands; navatim—ninety; nava—nine; ca—and;
adhvanaù—from a distance; tribhiù—three; muhürtaiù—within moments; dväbhyäm—
two; vä—or; nétaù—brought; präpnoti—he receives; yätanäù—punishments.
TRANSLATION
Thus he has to pass ninety-nine thousand yojanas within two or three moments, and then
he is at once engaged in the torturous punishment which he is destined to suffer.
PURPORT
One yojana is calculated to be eight miles, and he has to pass along a road which is
therefore as much as 792,000 miles. Such a long distance is passed over within a few
moments only. The subtle body is covered by the constables so that the living entity can
pass such a long distance quickly and at the same time tolerate the suffering. This
covering, although material, is of such fine elements that material scientists cannot
discover what the coverings are made of. To pass 792,000 miles within a few moments
seems wonderful to the modern space travelers. They have so far traveled at a speed of
18,000 miles per hour, but here we see that a criminal passes 792,000 miles within a few
seconds only, although the process is not spiritual but material.
SB 3.30.25
TEXT 25
AadqPaNa& SvGaa}aa<aa& veíiYaTvaeLMauk-aidi>a" )
AaTMaMaa&SaadNa& KvaiPa Svk*-ta& ParTaae_iPa va )) 25 ))
667
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ädépanaà sva-gäträëäà
veñöayitvolmukädibhiù
ätma-mäàsädanaà kväpi
sva-kåttaà parato 'pi vä
SYNONYMS
ädépanam—setting on fire; sva-gäträëäm—of his own limbs; veñöayitvä—having been
surrounded; ulmuka-ädibhiù—by pieces of burning wood and so on; ätma-mäàsa—of his
own flesh; adanam—eating; kva api—sometimes; sva-kåttam—done by himself;
parataù—by others; api—else; vä—or.
TRANSLATION
He is placed in the midst of burning pieces of wood, and his limbs are set on fire. In some
cases he is made to eat his own flesh or have it eaten by others.
PURPORT
From this verse through the next three verses the description of punishment will be
narrated. The first description is that the criminal has to eat his own flesh, burning with
fire, or allow others like himself who are present there to eat. In the last great war,
people in concentration camps sometimes ate their own stool, so there is no wonder that
in the Yamasädana, the abode of Yamaräja, one who had a very enjoyable life eating
others' flesh has to eat his own flesh.
SB 3.30.26
TEXT 26
JaqvTaêaN}aa>YauÖar" ìGa*Da]EYaRMaSaadNae )
SaPaRv*iêk-d&XaaÛEdRXaiÙêaTMavEXaSaMa( )) 26 ))
jévataç cänträbhyuddhäraù
çva-gådhrair yama-sädane
sarpa-våçcika-daàçädyair
daçadbhiç cätma-vaiçasam
SYNONYMS
668
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
jévataù—alive; ca—and; antra—of his entrails; abhyuddhäraù—pulling out; çvagådhraiù—
by dogs and vultures; yama-sädane—in the abode of Yamaräja; sarpa—by
serpents; våçcika—scorpions; daàça—gnats; ädyaiù—and so on; daçadbhiù—biting; ca—
and; ätma-vaiçasam—torment of himself.
TRANSLATION
His entrails are pulled out by the hounds and vultures of hell, even though he is still alive
to see it, and he is subjected to torment by serpents, scorpions, gnats and other creatures
that bite him.
SB 3.30.27
TEXT 27
k*-NTaNa& cavYavXaae GaJaaid>Yaae i>adaPaNaMa( )
PaaTaNa& iGairé*(r)e>Yaae raeDaNa& caMbuGaTaRYaae" )) 27 ))
kåntanaà cävayavaço
gajädibhyo bhidäpanam
pätanaà giri-çåìgebhyo
rodhanaà cämbu-gartayoù
SYNONYMS
kåntanam—cutting off; ca—and; avayavaçaù—limb by limb; gaja-ädibhyaù—by
elephants and so on; bhidäpanam—tearing; pätanam—hurling down; giri—of hills;
çåìgebhyaù—from the tops; rodhanam—enclosing; ca—and; ambu-gartayoù—in water
or in a cave.
TRANSLATION
Next his limbs are lopped off and torn asunder by elephants. He is hurled down from
hilltops, and he is also held captive either in water or in a cave.
SB 3.30.28
TEXT 28
YaaSTaaiMaóaNDaTaaiMaóa raErvaÛaê YaaTaNaa" )
669
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
>au»e Narae va Naarq va iMaQa" Sa(r)eNa iNaiMaRTaa" )) 28 ))
yäs tämisrändha-tämisrä
rauravädyäç ca yätanäù
bhuìkte naro vä näré vä
mithaù saìgena nirmitäù
SYNONYMS
yäù—which; tämisra—the name of a hell; andha-tämisräù—the name of a hell;
raurava—the name of a hell; ädyäù—and so on; ca—and; yätanäù—punishments;
bhuìkte—undergoes; naraù—man; vä—or; näré—woman; vä—or; mithaù—mutual;
saìgena—by association; nirmitäù—caused.
TRANSLATION
Men and women whose lives were built upon indulgence in illicit sex life are put into
many kinds of miserable conditions in the hells known as Tämisra, Andha-tämisra and
Raurava.
PURPORT
Materialistic life is based on sex life. The existence of all the materialistic people, who
are undergoing severe tribulation in the struggle for existence, is based on sex.
Therefore, in the Vedic civilization sex life is allowed only in a restricted way; it is for
the married couple and only for begetting children. But when sex life is indulged in for
sense gratification illegally and illicitly, both the man and the woman await severe
punishment in this world or after death. In this world also they are punished by virulent
diseases like syphilis and gonorrhea, and in the next life, as we see in this passage of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, they are put into different kinds of hellish conditions to suffer. In
Bhagavad-gétä, First Chapter, illicit sex life is also very much condemned, and it is said
that one who produces children by illicit sex life is sent to hell. It is confirmed here in
the Bhägavatam that such offenders are put into hellish conditions of life in Tämisra,
Andha-tämisra and Raurava.
SB 3.30.29
TEXT 29
670
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
A}aEv Nark-" SvGaR wiTa MaaTa" Pa[c+aTae )
Yaa YaaTaNaa vE NaarKYaSTaa whaPYauPal/i+aTaa" )) 29 ))
atraiva narakaù svarga
iti mätaù pracakñate
yä yätanä vai närakyas
tä ihäpy upalakñitäù
SYNONYMS
atra—in this world; eva—even; narakaù—hell; svargaù—heaven; iti—thus; mätaù—O
mother; pracakñate—they say; yäù—which; yätanäù—punishments; vai—certainly;
närakyaù—hellish; täù—they; iha—here; api—also; upalakñitäù—visible.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kapila continued: My dear mother, it is sometimes said that we experience hell or
heaven on this planet, for hellish punishments are sometimes visible on this planet also.
PURPORT
Sometimes unbelievers do not accept these statements of scripture regarding hell. They
disregard such authorized descriptions. Lord Kapila therefore confirms them by saying
that these hellish conditions are also visible on this planet. It is not that they are only
on the planet where Yamaräja lives. On the planet of Yamaräja, the sinful man is given
the chance to practice living in the hellish conditions which he will have to endure in
the next life, and then he is given a chance to take birth on another planet to continue
his hellish life. For example, if a man is to be punished to remain in hell and eat stool
and urine, then first of all he practices such habits on the planet of Yamaräja, and then
he is given a particular type of body, that of a hog, so that he can eat stool and think
that he is enjoying life. It is stated previously that in any hellish condition, the
conditioned soul thinks he is happy. Otherwise, it would not be possible for him to suffer
hellish life.
SB 3.30.30
TEXT 30
Wv& ku-$u=Mb& ib>a]a<a odrM>ar Wv va )
671
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ivSa*JYaehae>aYa& Pa[eTYa >au»e TaTf-l/Maqd*XaMa( )) 30 ))
evaà kuöumbaà bibhräëa
udaram bhara eva vä
visåjyehobhayaà pretya
bhuìkte tat-phalam édåçam
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; kuöumbam—family; bibhräëaù—he who maintained; udaram—
stomach; bharaù—he who maintained; eva—only; vä—or; visåjya—after giving up;
iha—here; ubhayam—both of them; pretya—after death; bhuìkte—he undergoes; tat—
of that; phalam—result; édåçam—such.
TRANSLATION
After leaving this body, the man who maintained himself and his family members by
sinful activities suffers a hellish life, and his relatives suffer also.
PURPORT
The mistake of modern civilization is that man does not believe in the next life. But
whether he believes or not, the next life is there, and one has to suffer if one does not
lead a responsible life in terms of the injunctions of authoritative scriptures like the
Vedas and puräëas. Species lower than human beings are not responsible for their
actions because they are made to act in a certain way, but in the developed life of
human consciousness, if one is not responsible for his activities, then he is sure to get a
hellish life, as described herein.
SB 3.30.31
TEXT 31
Wk-" Pa[PaÛTae ßaNTa& ihTved& Svk-le/vrMa( )
ku-Xale/TarPaaQaeYaae >aUTad]aehe<a Yad( >a*TaMa( )) 31 ))
ekaù prapadyate dhväntaà
hitvedaà sva-kalevaram
kuçaletara-pätheyo
672
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bhüta-droheëa yad bhåtam
SYNONYMS
ekaù—alone; prapadyate—he enters; dhväntam—darkness; hitvä—after quitting; idam—
this; sva—his; kalevaram—body; kuçala-itara—sin; pätheyaù—his passage money;
bhüta—to other living entities; droheëa—by injury; yat—which body; bhåtam—was
maintained.
TRANSLATION
He goes alone to the darkest regions of hell after quitting the present body, and the
money he acquired by envying other living entities is the passage money with which he
leaves this world.
PURPORT
When a man earns money by unfair means and maintains his family and himself with
that money, the money is enjoyed by many members of the family, but he alone goes to
hell. A person who enjoys life by earning money or by envying another's life, and who
enjoys with family and friends, will have to enjoy alone the resultant sinful reactions
accrued from such violent and illicit life. For example, if a man secures some money by
killing someone and with that money maintains his family, those who enjoy the black
money earned by him are also partially responsible and are also sent to hell, but he who
is the leader is especially punished. The result of material enjoyment is that one takes
with him the sinful reaction only, and not the money. The money he earned is left in
this world, and he takes only the reaction.
In this world also, if a person acquires some money by murdering someone, the family is
not hanged, although its members are sinfully contaminated. But the man who commits
the murder and maintains his family is himself hanged as a murderer. The direct
offender is more responsible for sinful activities than the indirect enjoyer. The great
learned scholar Cäëakya Paëòita says, therefore, that whatever one has in his possession
had better be spent for the cause of sat, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, because
one cannot take his possessions with him. They remain here, and they will be lost.
Either we leave the money or the money leaves us, but we will be separated. The best use
of money as long as it is within our possession is to spend it to acquire Kåñëa
consciousness.
673
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.30.32
TEXT 32
dEveNaaSaaidTa& TaSYa XaMal&/ iNarYae PauMaaNa( )
>au»e ku-$u=MbPaaezSYa ôTaivta wvaTaur" )) 32 ))
daivenäsäditaà tasya
çamalaà niraye pumän
bhuìkte kuöumba-poñasya
håta-vitta iväturaù
SYNONYMS
daivena—by the arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; äsäditam—
obtained; tasya—his; çamalam—sinful reaction; niraye—in a hellish condition;
pumän—the man; bhuìkte—undergoes; kuöumba-poñasya—of maintaining a family;
håta-vittaù—one whose wealth is lost; iva—like; äturaù—suffering.
TRANSLATION
Thus, by the arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the maintainer of
kinsmen is put into a hellish condition to suffer for his sinful activities, like a man who
has lost his wealth.
PURPORT
The example set herein is that the sinful person suffers just like a man who has lost his
wealth. The human form of body is achieved by the conditioned soul after many, many
births and is a very valuable asset. Instead of utilizing this life to get liberation, if one
uses it simply for the purpose of maintaining his so-called family and therefore performs
foolish and unauthorized action, he is compared to a man who has lost his wealth and
who, upon losing it, laments. When wealth is lost, there is no use lamenting, but as long
as there is wealth, one has to utilize it properly and thereby gain eternal profit. It may be
argued that when a man leaves his money earned by sinful activities, he also leaves his
sinful activities here with his money. But it is especially mentioned herein that by
superior arrangement (daivenäsäditam), although the man leaves behind him his sinfully
earned money, he carries the effect of it. When a man steals some money, if he is caught
674
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
and agrees to return it, he is not freed from the criminal punishment. By the law of the
state, even though he returns the money, he has to undergo the punishment. Similarly,
the money earned by a criminal process may be left by the man when dying, but by
superior arrangement he carries with him the effect, and therefore he has to suffer
hellish life.
SB 3.30.33
TEXT 33
ke-vle/Na ùDaMaeR<a ku-$u=Mb>ar<aaeTSauk-" )
YaaiTa Jaqvae_NDaTaaiMaó& crMa& TaMaSa" PadMa( )) 33 ))
kevalena hy adharmeëa
kuöumba-bharaëotsukaù
yäti jévo 'ndha-tämisraà
caramaà tamasaù padam
SYNONYMS
kevalena—simply; hi—certainly; adharmeëa—by irreligious activities; kuöumba—family;
bharaëa—to maintain; utsukaù—eager; yäti—goes; jévaù—a person; andha-tämisram—
to Andha-tämisra; caramam—ultimate; tamasaù—of darkness; padam—region.
TRANSLATION
Therefore a person who is very eager to maintain his family and kinsmen simply by black
methods certainly goes to the darkest region of hell, which is known as Andha-tämisra.
PURPORT
Three words in this verse are very significant. Kevalena means "only by black methods,"
adharmeëa means "unrighteous" or "irreligious," and kuöumba-bharaëa means "family
maintenance." Maintaining one's family is certainly the duty of a householder, but one
should be eager to earn his livelihood by the prescribed method, as stated in the
scriptures. In Bhagavad-gétä it is described that the Lord has divided the social system
into four classifications of castes, or varëas, according to quality and work. Apart from
Bhagavad-gétä, in every society a man is known according to his quality and work. For
example, when a man is constructing wooden furniture, he is called a carpenter, and a
675
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
man who works with an anvil and iron is called a blacksmith. Similarly, a man who is
engaged in the medical or engineering fields has a particular duty and designation. All
these human activities have been divided by the Supreme Lord into four varëas, namely
brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra. In Bhagavad-gétä and in other Vedic literatures,
the specific duties of the brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra are mentioned.
One should work honestly according to his qualification. He should not earn his
livelihood unfairly, by means for which he is not qualified. If a brähmaëa who works as a
priest so that he may enlighten his followers with the spiritual way of life is not qualified
as a priest, then he is cheating the public. One should not earn by such unfair means.
The same is applicable to a kñatriya or to a vaiçya. It is especially mentioned that the
means of livelihood of those who are trying to advance in Kåñëa consciousness must be
very fair and uncomplicated. Here it is mentioned that he who earns his livelihood by
unfair means (kevalena) is sent to the darkest hellish region. Otherwise, if one maintains
his family by prescribed methods and honest means, there is no objection to one's being
a family man.
SB 3.30.34
TEXT 34
ADaSTaaàrl/aek-SYa YaavTaqYaaRTaNaadYa" )
§-MaXa" SaMaNau§-MYa PauNar}aav]JaeC^uic" )) 34 ))
adhastän nara-lokasya
yävatér yätanädayaù
kramaçaù samanukramya
punar aträvrajec chuciù
SYNONYMS
adhastät—from below; nara-lokasya—human birth; yävatéù—as many; yätanä—
punishments; ädayaù—and so on; kramaçaù—in a regular order; samanukramya—
having gone through; punaù—again; atra—here, on this earth; ävrajet—he may return;
çuciù—pure.
TRANSLATION
Having gone through all the miserable, hellish conditions and having passed in a regular
676
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
order through the lowest forms of animal life prior to human birth, and having thus been
purged of his sins, one is reborn again as a human being on this earth.
PURPORT
Just as a prisoner, who has undergone troublesome prison life, is set free again, the
person who has always engaged in impious and mischievous activities is put into hellish
conditions, and when he has undergone different hellish lives, namely those of lower
animals like cats, dogs and hogs, by the gradual process of evolution he again comes back
as a human being. In Bhagavad-gétä it is stated that even though a person engaged in the
practice of the yoga system may not finish perfectly and may fall down for some reason
or other, his next life as a human being is guaranteed. It is stated that such a person,
who has fallen from the path of yoga practice, is given a chance in his next life to take
birth in a very rich family or in a very pious family. It is interpreted that "rich family"
refers to a big mercantile family because generally people who engage in trades and
mercantile business are very rich. One who engaged in the process of self-realization, or
connecting with the Supreme Absolute Truth, but fell short is allowed to take birth in
such a rich family, or he is allowed to take birth in the family of pious brähmaëas; either
way, he is guaranteed to appear in human society in his next life. It can be concluded
that if someone is not willing to enter into hellish life, as in Tämisra or Andha-tämisra,
then he must take to the process of Kåñëa consciousness, which is the first-class yoga
system, because even if one is unable to attain complete Kåñëa consciousness in this life,
he is guaranteed at least to take his next birth in a human family. He cannot be sent
into a hellish condition. Kåñëa consciousness is the purest life, and it protects all human
beings from gliding down to hell to take birth in a family of dogs or hogs.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Thirtieth Chapter, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, entitled "Description by Lord Kapila of Adverse Fruitive Activities."
31. Lord Kapila's Instructions on the Movements of the Living
Entities
SB 3.31.1
677
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 1
é[q>aGavaNauvac
k-MaR<aa dEvNae}ae<a JaNTaudeRhaePaPataYae )
iñYaa" Pa[iví odr& Pau&Saae reTa"k-<aaé[Ya" )) 1 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
karmaëä daiva-netreëa
jantur dehopapattaye
striyäù praviñöa udaraà
puàso retaù-kaëäçrayaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; karmaëä—by the result
of work; daiva-netreëa—under the supervision of the Lord; jantuù—the living entity;
deha—a body; upapattaye—for obtaining; striyäù—of a woman; praviñöaù—enters;
udaram—the womb; puàsaù—of a man; retaù—of semen; kaëa—a particle; äçrayaù—
dwelling in.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead said: Under the supervision of the Supreme Lord and
according to the result of his work, the living entity, the soul, is made to enter into the
womb of a woman through the particle of male semen to assume a particular type of body.
PURPORT
As stated in the last chapter, after suffering different kinds of hellish conditions, a man
comes again to the human form of body. The same topic is continued in this chapter. In
order to give a particular type of human form to a person who has already suffered
hellish life, the soul is transferred to the semen of a man who is just suitable to become
his father. During sexual intercourse, the soul is transferred through the semen of the
father into the mother's womb in order to produce a particular type of body. This
process is applicable to all embodied living entities, but it is especially mentioned for the
man who was transferred to the Andha-tämisra hell. After suffering there, when he who
has had many types of hellish bodies, like those of dogs and hogs, is to come again to the
678
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
human form, he is given the chance to take his birth in the same type of body from
which he degraded himself to hell.
Everything is done by the supervision of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Material
nature supplies the body, but it does so under the direction of the Supersoul. It is said in
Bhagavad-gétä that a living entity is wandering in this material world on a chariot made
by material nature. The Supreme Lord, as Supersoul, is always present with the
individual soul. He directs material nature to supply a particular type of body to the
individual soul according to the result of his work, and the material nature supplies it.
Here one word, retaù-kaëäçrayaù, is very significant because it indicates that it is not
the semen of the man that creates life within the womb of a woman; rather, the living
entity, the soul, takes shelter in a particle of semen and is then pushed into the womb of
a woman. Then the body develops. There is no possibility of creating a living entity
without the presence of the soul simply by sexual intercourse. The materialistic theory
that there is no soul and that a child is born simply by material combination of the
sperm and ovum is not very feasible. It is unacceptable.
SB 3.31.2
TEXT 2
k-l/l&/ Tvek-ra}ae<a PaÄra}ae<a bud(budMa( )
dXaaheNa Tau k-kR-NDaU" PaeXYa<@& va TaTa" ParMa( )) 2 ))
kalalaà tv eka-rätreëa
païca-rätreëa budbudam
daçähena tu karkandhüù
peçy aëòaà vä tataù param
SYNONYMS
kalalam—mixing of the sperm and ovum; tu—then; eka-rätreëa—on the first night;
païca-rätreëa—by the fifth night; budbudam—a bubble; daça-ahena—in ten days; tu—
then; karkandhüù—like a plum; peçé—a lump of flesh; aëòam—an egg; vä—or; tataù—
thence; param—afterwards.
TRANSLATION
On the first night, the sperm and ovum mix, and on the fifth night the mixture ferments
679
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
into a bubble. On the tenth night it develops into a form like a plum, and after that, it
gradually turns into a lump of flesh or an egg, as the case may be.
PURPORT
The body of the soul develops in four different ways according to its different sources.
One kind of body, that of the trees and plants, sprouts from the earth; the second kind
of body grows from perspiration, as with flies, germs and bugs; the third kind of body
develops from eggs; and the fourth develops from an embryo. This verse indicates that
after emulsification of the ovum and sperm, the body gradually develops either into a
lump of flesh or into an egg, as the case may be. In the case of birds it develops into an
egg, and in the case of animals and human beings it develops into a lump of flesh.
SB 3.31.3
TEXT 3
MaaSaeNa Tau iXarae Üa>Yaa& baûx(gY[aaÛ(r)ivGa]h" )
Na%l/aeMaaiSQacMaaRi<a il/(r)iC^d]aeÙviñi>a" )) 3 ))
mäsena tu çiro dväbhyäà
bähv-aìghry-ädy-aìga-vigrahaù
nakha-lomästhi-carmäëi
liìga-cchidrodbhavas tribhiù
SYNONYMS
mäsena—within a month; tu—then; çiraù—a head; dväbhyäm—in two months; bähu—
arms; aìghri—feet; ädi—and so on; aìga—limbs; vigrahaù—form; nakha—nails; loma—
body hair; asthi—bones; carmäëi—and skin; liìga—organ of generation; chidra—
apertures; udbhavaù—appearance; tribhiù—within three months.
TRANSLATION
In the course of a month, a head is formed, and at the end of two months the hands, feet
and other limbs take shape. By the end of three months, the nails, fingers, toes, body hair,
bones and skin appear, as do the organ of generation and the other apertures in the body,
namely the eyes, nostrils, ears, mouth and anus.
SB 3.31.4
680
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 4
cTaui>aRDaaRTav" Saá PaÄi>a" +auta*@uÙv" )
ziÌJaRraYau<aa vqTa" ku-+aaE >a]aMYaiTa di+a<ae )) 4 ))
caturbhir dhätavaù sapta
païcabhiù kñut-tåò-udbhavaù
ñaòbhir jaräyuëä vétaù
kukñau bhrämyati dakñiëe
SYNONYMS
caturbhiù—within four months; dhätavaù—ingredients; sapta—seven; païcabhiù—
within five months; kñut-tåö—of hunger and thirst; udbhavaù—appearance; ñaòbhiù—
within six months; jaräyuëä—by the amnion; vétaù—enclosed; kukñau—in the
abdomen; bhrämyati—moves; dakñiëe—on the right side.
TRANSLATION
Within four months from the date of conception, the seven essential ingredients of the
body, namely chyle, blood, flesh, fat, bone, marrow and semen, come into existence. At
the end of five months, hunger and thirst make themselves felt, and at the end of six
months, the fetus, enclosed by the amnion, begins to move on the right side of the
abdomen.
PURPORT
When the body of the child is completely formed at the end of six months, the child, if
he is male, begins to move on the right side, and if female, she tries to move on the left
side.
SB 3.31.5
TEXT 5
MaaTauJaRGDaaàPaaNaaÛEreDaÖaTaurSaMMaTae )
XaeTae iv<MaU}aYaaeGaRTaeR Sa JaNTauJaRNTauSaM>ave )) 5 ))
681
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
mätur jagdhänna-pänädyair
edhad-dhätur asammate
çete vië-mütrayor garte
sa jantur jantu-sambhave
SYNONYMS
mätuù—of the mother; jagdha—taken; anna-päna—by the food and drink; ädyaiù—and
so on; edhat—increasing; dhätuù—the ingredients of his body; asammate—abominable;
çete—remains; viö-mütrayoù—of stools and urine; garte—in a hollow; saù—that;
jantuù—fetus; jantu—of worms; sambhave—the breeding place.
TRANSLATION
Deriving its nutrition from the food and drink taken by the mother, the fetus grows and
remains in that abominable residence of stools and urine, which is the breeding place of
all kinds of worms.
PURPORT
In the Märkaëòeya Puräëa it is said that in the intestine of the mother the umbilical
cord, which is known as äpyäyané, joins the mother to the abdomen of the child, and
through this passage the child within the womb accepts the mother's assimilated
foodstuff. In this way the child is fed by the mother's intestine within the womb and
grows from day to day. The statement of the Märkaëòeya Puräëa about the child's
situation within the womb is exactly corroborated by modern medical science, and thus
the authority of the puräëas cannot be disproved, as is sometimes attempted by the
Mäyävädé philosophers.
Since the child depends completely on the assimilated foodstuff of the mother, during
pregnancy there are restrictions on the food taken by the mother. Too much salt, chili,
onion and similar food is forbidden for the pregnant mother because the child's body is
too delicate and new for him to tolerate such pungent food. Restrictions and
precautions to be taken by the pregnant mother, as enunciated in the småti scriptures of
Vedic literature, are very useful. We can understand from the Vedic literature how
much care is taken to beget a nice child in society. The garbhädhäna ceremony before
sexual intercourse was compulsory for persons in the higher grades of society, and it is
very scientific. Other processes recommended in the Vedic literature during pregnancy
682
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
are also very important. To take care of the child is the primary duty of the parents
because if such care is taken, society will be filled with good population to maintain the
peace and prosperity of the society, country and human race.
SB 3.31.6
TEXT 6
k*-iMai>a" +aTaSavaR(r)" SaaEku-MaaYaaRTPa[iTa+a<aMa( )
MaUC^aRMaaPanaeTYauå(c)e-XaSTa}aTYaE" +auiDaTaEMauRhu" )) 6 ))
kåmibhiù kñata-sarväìgaù
saukumäryät pratikñaëam
mürcchäm äpnoty uru-kleças
tatratyaiù kñudhitair muhuù
SYNONYMS
kåmibhiù—by worms; kñata—bitten; sarva-aìgaù—all over the body; saukumäryät—
because of tenderness; prati-kñaëam—moment after moment; mürcchäm—
unconsciousness; äpnoti—he obtains; uru-kleçaù—whose suffering is great; tatratyaiù—
being there (in the abdomen); kñudhitaiù—hungry; muhuù—again and again.
TRANSLATION
Bitten again and again all over the body by the hungry worms in the abdomen itself, the
child suffers terrible agony because of his tenderness. He thus becomes unconscious
moment after moment because of the terrible condition.
PURPORT
The miserable condition of material existence is not only felt when we come out of the
womb of the mother, but is also present within the womb. Miserable life begins from the
moment the living entity begins to contact his material body. Unfortunately, we forget
this experience and do not take the miseries of birth very seriously. In Bhagavad-gétä,
therefore, it is specifically mentioned that one should be very alert to understand the
specific difficulties of birth and death. Just as during the formation of this body we have
to pass through so many difficulties within the womb of the mother, at the time of death
there are also many difficulties. As described in the previous chapter, one has to
683
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
transmigrate from one body to another, and the transmigration into the bodies of dogs
and hogs is especially miserable. But despite such miserable conditions, due to the spell
of mäyä we forget everything and become enamored by the present so-called happiness,
which is described as actually no more than a counteraction to distress.
SB 3.31.7
TEXT 7
k-$u=Taq+<aaeZ<al/v<aæ+aaãaidi>aåLb<aE" )
MaaTa*>au¢E-åPaSPa*í" SavaR(r)aeiTQaTavedNa" )) 7 ))
kaöu-tékñëoñëa-lavaëarükñämlädibhir
ulbaëaiù
mätå-bhuktair upaspåñöaù
sarväìgotthita-vedanaù
SYNONYMS
kaöu—bitter; tékñëa—pungent; uñëa—hot; lavaëa—salty; rükña—dry; amla—sour;
ädibhiù—and so on; ulbaëaiù—excessive; mätå-bhuktaiù—by foods eaten by the mother;
upaspåñöaù—affected; sarva-aìga—all over the body; utthita—arisen; vedanaù—pain.
TRANSLATION
Owing to the mother's eating bitter, pungent foodstuffs, or food which is too salty or too
sour, the body of the child incessantly suffers pains which are almost intolerable.
PURPORT
All descriptions of the child's bodily situation in the womb of the mother are beyond our
conception. It is very difficult to remain in such a position, but still the child has to
remain. Because his consciousness is not very developed, the child can tolerate it,
otherwise he would die. That is the benediction of mäyä, who endows the suffering body
with the qualifications for tolerating such terrible tortures.
SB 3.31.8
TEXT 8
oLbeNa Sa&v*TaSTaiSMaàN}aEê bihrav*Ta" )
684
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
AaSTae k*-Tva iXar" ku-+aaE >auGanPa*ïiXaraeDar" )) 8 ))
ulbena saàvåtas tasminn
antraiç ca bahir ävåtaù
äste kåtvä çiraù kukñau
bhugna-påñöha-çirodharaù
SYNONYMS
ulbena—by the amnion; saàvåtaù—enclosed; tasmin—in that place; antraiù—by the
intestines; ca—and; bahiù—outside; ävåtaù—covered; äste—he lies; kåtvä—having put;
çiraù—the head; kukñau—towards the belly; bhugna—bent; påñöha—back; çiraùdharaù—
neck.
TRANSLATION
Placed within the amnion and covered outside by the intestines, the child remains lying
on one side of the abdomen, his head turned towards his belly and his back and neck
arched like a bow.
PURPORT
If a grown man were put into such a condition as the child within the abdomen,
completely entangled in all respects, it would be impossible for him to live even for a few
seconds. Unfortunately, we forget all these sufferings and try to be happy in this life, not
caring for the liberation of the soul from the entanglement of birth and death. It is an
unfortunate civilization in which these matters are not plainly discussed to make people
understand the precarious condition of material existence.
SB 3.31.9
TEXT 9
Ak-LPa" Sva(r)ceíaYaa& Xaku-NTa wv PaÅre )
Ta}a l/BDaSMa*iTadOEvaTk-MaR JaNMaXaTaaeÙvMa( )
SMarNdqgaRMaNauC^(vaSa& XaMaR ik&- NaaMa ivNdTae )) 9 ))
akalpaù sväìga-ceñöäyäà
685
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
çakunta iva païjare
tatra labdha-småtir daivät
karma janma-çatodbhavam
smaran dérgham anucchväsaà
çarma kià näma vindate
SYNONYMS
akalpaù—unable; sva-aìga—his limbs; ceñöäyäm—to move; çakuntaù—a bird; iva—like;
païjare—in a cage; tatra—there; labdha-småtiù—having gained his memory; daivät—by
fortune; karma—activities; janma-çata-udbhavam—occurring during the last hundred
births; smaran—remembering; dérgham—for a long time; anucchväsam—sighing;
çarma—peace of mind; kim—what; näma—then; vindate—can he achieve.
TRANSLATION
The child thus remains just like a bird in a cage, without freedom of movement. At that
time, if the child is fortunate, he can remember all the troubles of his past one hundred
births, and he grieves wretchedly. What is the possibility of peace of mind in that
condition?
PURPORT
After birth the child may forget about the difficulties of his past lives, but when we are
grown-up we can at least understand the grievous tortures undergone at birth and death
by reading the authorized scriptures like Çrémad-Bhägavatam. If we do not believe in the
scriptures, that is a different question, but if we have faith in the authority of such
descriptions, then we must prepare for our freedom in the next life; that is possible in
this human form of life. One who does not take heed of these indications of suffering in
human existence is said to be undoubtedly committing suicide. It is said that this human
form of life is the only means for crossing over the nescience of mäyä, or material
existence. We have a very efficient boat in this human form of body, and there is a very
expert captain, the spiritual master; the scriptural injunctions are like favorable winds.
If we do not cross over the ocean of the nescience of material existence in spite of all
these facilities, then certainly we are all intentionally committing suicide.
SB 3.31.10
TEXT 10
686
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Aar>Ya SaáMaaNMaaSaaçBDabaeDaae_iPa veiPaTa" )
NaEk-}aaSTae SaUiTavaTaEivRïa>aUirv Saaedr" )) 10 ))
ärabhya saptamän mäsäl
labdha-bodho 'pi vepitaù
naikaträste süti-vätair
viñöhä-bhür iva sodaraù
SYNONYMS
ärabhya—beginning; saptamät mäsät—from the seventh month; labdha-bodhaù—
endowed with consciousness; api—although; vepitaù—tossed; na—not; ekatra—in one
place; äste—he remains; süti-vätaiù—by the winds for childbirth; viñöhä-bhüù—the
worm; iva—like; sa-udaraù—born of the same womb.
TRANSLATION
Thus endowed with the development of consciousness from the seventh month after his
conception, the child is tossed downward by the airs that press the embryo during the
weeks preceding delivery. Like the worms born of the same filthy abdominal cavity, he
cannot remain in one place.
PURPORT
At the end of the seventh month the child is moved by the bodily air and does not
remain in the same place, for the entire uterine system becomes slackened before
delivery. The worms have been described here as sodara. Sodara means "born of the same
mother." Since the child is born from the womb of the mother and the worms are also
born of fermentation within the womb of the same mother, under the circumstances the
child and the worms are actually brothers. We are very anxious to establish universal
brotherhood among human beings, but we should take into consideration that even the
worms are our brothers, what to speak of other living entities. Therefore, we should be
concerned about all living entities.
SB 3.31.11
TEXT 11
687
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
NaaQaMaaNa ‰iz>asTa" SaáviDa]" k*-TaaÅil/" )
STauvqTa Ta& iv(c)-vYaa vaca YaeNaaedre_iPaRTa" )) 11 ))
näthamäna åñir bhétaù
sapta-vadhriù kåtäïjaliù
stuvéta taà viklavayä
väcä yenodare 'rpitaù
SYNONYMS
näthamänaù—appealing; åñiù—the living entity; bhétaù—frightened; sapta-vadhriù—
bound by the seven layers; kåta-aïjaliù—with folded hands; stuvéta—prays; tam—to the
Lord; viklavayä—faltering; väcä—with words; yena—by whom; udare—in the womb;
arpitaù—he was placed.
TRANSLATION
The living entity in this frightful condition of life, bound by seven layers of material
ingredients, prays with folded hands, appealing to the Lord, who has put him in that
condition.
PURPORT
It is said that when a woman is having labor pains she promises that she will never again
become pregnant and suffer from such a severely painful condition. Similarly, when one
is undergoing some surgical operation he promises that he will never again act in such a
way as to become diseased and have to undergo medical surgery, or when one falls into
danger, he promises that he will never again make the same mistake. Similarly, the
living entity, when put into a hellish condition of life, prays to the Lord that he will
never again commit sinful activities and have to be put into the womb for repeated birth
and death. In the hellish condition within the womb, the living entity is very much
afraid of being born again, but when he is out of the womb, when he is in full life and
good health, he forgets everything and commits again and again the same sins for which
he was put into that horrible condition of existence.
SB 3.31.12
TEXT 12
688
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
JaNTauåvac
TaSYaaePaSaàMaivTau& JaGaidC^Yaata‚
NaaNaaTaNaae>auRiv cl/Àr<aarivNdMa( )
Saae_h& v]JaaiMa Xar<a& ùku-Taae>aYa& Mae
YaeNaed*Xaq GaiTardXYaRSaTaae_NauæPaa )) 12 ))
jantur uväca
tasyopasannam avituà jagad icchayättanänä-
tanor bhuvi calac-caraëäravindam
so 'haà vrajämi çaraëaà hy akuto-bhayaà me
yenedåçé gatir adarçy asato'nurüpä
SYNONYMS
jantuù uväca—the human soul says; tasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
upasannam—having approached for protection; avitum—to protect; jagat—the
universe; icchayä—by His own will; ätta-nänä-tanoù—who accepts various forms;
bhuvi—on the earth; calat—walking; caraëa-aravindam—the lotus feet; saù aham—I
myself; vrajämi—go; çaraëam—unto the shelter; hi—indeed; akutaù-bhayam—giving
relief from all fear; me—for me; yena—by whom; édåçé—such; gatiù—condition of life;
adarçi—was considered; asataù—impious; anurüpä—befitting.
TRANSLATION
The human soul says: I take shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who appears in His various eternal forms and walks on the surface of the world.
I take shelter of Him only, because He can give me relief from all fear and from Him I
have received this condition of life, which is just befitting my impious activities.
PURPORT
The word calac-caraëäravindam refers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
actually walks or travels upon the surface of the world. For example, Lord Rämacandra
actually walked on the surface of the world, and Lord Kåñëa also walked just like an
ordinary man. The prayer is therefore offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who descends to the surface of this earth, or any part of this universe, for the protection
689
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of the pious and the destruction of the impious. It is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä that
when there is an increase of irreligion and discrepancies arise in the real religious
activities, the Supreme Lord comes to protect the pious and kill the impious. This verse
indicates Lord Kåñëa.
Another significant point in this verse is that the Lord comes, icchayä, by His own will.
As Kåñëa confirms in Bhagavad-gétä, sambhavämy ätma-mäyayä: [Bg. 4.6] "I appear at My
will, by My internal potential power." He is not forced to come by the laws of material
nature. It is stated here, icchayä: He does not assume any form, as the impersonalists
think, because He comes at His own will, and the form in which He descends is His
eternal form. As the Supreme Lord puts the living entity into the condition of horrible
existence, He can also deliver him, and therefore one should seek shelter at the lotus
feet of Kåñëa. Kåñëa demands, "Give up everything and surrender unto Me." And it is
also said in Bhagavad-gétä that anyone who approaches Him does not come back again to
accept a form in material existence, but goes back to Godhead, back home, never to
return.
SB 3.31.13
TEXT 13
YaSTv}a bÖ wv k-MaRi>arav*TaaTMaa
>aUTaeiNd]YaaXaYaMaYaqMavl/MBYa MaaYaaMa( )
AaSTae ivéuÖMaivk-arMa%<@baeDa‚
MaaTaPYaMaaNaôdYae_viSaTa& NaMaaiMa )) 13 ))
yas tv atra baddha iva karmabhir ävåtätmä
bhütendriyäçayamayém avalambya mäyäm
äste viçuddham avikäram akhaëòa-bodham
ätapyamäna-hådaye 'vasitaà namämi
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; tu—also; atra—here; baddhaù—bound; iva—as if; karmabhiù—by activities;
ävåta—covered; ätmä—the pure soul; bhüta—the gross elements; indriya—the senses;
äçaya—the mind; mayém—consisting of; avalambya—having fallen; mäyäm—into
mäyä; äste—remains; viçuddham—completely pure; avikäram—without change;
akhaëòa-bodham—possessed of unlimited knowledge; ätapyamäna—repentant; hådaye—
690
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
in the heart; avasitam—residing; namämi—I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
I, the pure soul, appearing now bound by my activities, am lying in the womb of my
mother by the arrangement of mäyä. I offer my respectful obeisances unto Him who is
also here with me but who is unaffected and changeless. He is unlimited, but He is
perceived in the repentant heart. To Him I offer my respectful obeisances.
PURPORT
As stated in the previous verse, the jéva soul says, "I take shelter of the Supreme Lord."
Therefore, constitutionally, the jéva soul is the subordinate servitor of the Supreme Soul,
the Personality of Godhead. Both the Supreme Soul and the jéva soul are sitting in the
same body, as confirmed in the Upaniñads. They are sitting as friends, but one is
suffering, and the other is aloof from suffering.
In this verse it is said, viçuddham avikäram akhaëòa-bodham: the Supersoul is always
sitting apart from all contamination. The living entity is contaminated and suffering
because he has a material body, but that does not mean that because the Lord is also
with him, He also has a I material body. He is avikäram, changeless. He is always the
same Supreme, but unfortunately the Mäyävädé philosophers, because of their impure
hearts, cannot understand that the Supreme Soul, the Supersoul, is different from the
individual soul. It is said here, ätapyamäna-hådaye 'vasitam: He is in the heart of every
living entity, but He can be realized only by a soul who is repentant. The individual soul
becomes repentant that he forgot his constitutional position, wanted to become one
with the Supreme Soul and tried his best to lord it over material nature. He has been
baffled, and therefore he is repentant. At that time, Supersoul, or the relationship
between the Supersoul and the individual soul, is realized. As it is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä, after many, many births the knowledge comes to the conditioned soul
that Väsudeva is great, He is master, and He is Lord. The individual soul is the servant,
and therefore he surrenders unto Him. At that time he becomes a mahätmä, a great soul.
Therefore, a fortunate living being who comes to this understanding, even within the
womb of his mother, has his liberation assured.
SB 3.31.14
TEXT 14
Ya" PaÄ>aUTaricTae rihTa" Xarqre
691
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
C^àae_YaQaeiNd]YaGau<aaQaRicdaTMak-ae_hMa( )
TaeNaaivku-<#=MaihMaaNaMa*iz& TaMaeNa&
vNde Par& Pa[k*-iTaPaUåzYaae" PauMaa&SaMa( )) 14 ))
yaù païca-bhüta-racite rahitaù çarére
cchanno 'yathendriya-guëärtha-cid-ätmako 'ham
tenävikuëöha-mahimänam åñià tam enaà
vande paraà prakåti-püruñayoù pumäàsam
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; païca-bhüta—five gross elements; racite—made of; rahitaù—separated;
çarére—in the material body; channaù—covered; ayathä—unfitly; indriya—senses;
guëa—qualities; artha—objects of senses; cit—ego; ätmakaù—consisting of; aham—I;
tena—by a material body; avikuëöha-mahimänam—whose glories are unobscured; åñim—
all-knowing; tam—that; enam—unto Him; vande—I offer obeisances; param—
transcendental; prakåti—to material nature; püruñayoù—to the living entities;
pumäàsam—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
I am separated from the Supreme Lord because of my being in this material body, which
is made of five elements, and therefore my qualities and senses are being misused,
although I am essentially spiritual. Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
transcendental to material nature and the living entities, because He is devoid of such a
material body, and because He is always glorious in His spiritual qualities, I offer my
obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
The difference between the living entity and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
that the living entity is prone to be subjected to material nature, whereas the Supreme
Godhead is always transcendental to material nature as well as to the living entities.
When the living entity is put into material nature, then his senses and qualities are
polluted, or designated. There is no possibility for the Supreme Lord to become
embodied by material qualities or material senses, for He is above the influence of
692
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
material nature and cannot possibly be put in the darkness of ignorance like the living
entities. Because of His full knowledge, He is never subjected to the influence of
material nature. Material nature is always under His control, and it is therefore not
possible that material nature can control the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Since the identity of the living entity is very minute, he is prone to be subjected to
material nature, but when he is freed from this material body, which is false, he attains
the same, spiritual nature as the Supreme Lord. At that time there is no qualitative
difference between him and the Supreme Lord, but because he is not so quantitatively
powerful as to never be put under the influence of material nature, he is quantitatively
different from the Lord.
The entire process of devotional service is to purify oneself of this contamination of
material nature and put oneself on the spiritual platform, where he is qualitatively one
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Vedas it is said that the living entity is
always free. Asaìgo hy ayaà puruñaù. The living entity is liberated. His material
contamination is temporary, and his actual position is that he is liberated. This
liberation is achieved by Kåñëa consciousness, which begins from the point of surrender.
Therefore it is said here, "I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Person."
SB 3.31.15
TEXT 15
YaNMaaYaYaaeåGau<ak-MaRiNabNDaNae_iSMaNa(
Saa&Saairke- PaiQa cr&STadi>aé[Mae<a )
NaíSMa*iTa" PauNarYa& Pa[v*<aqTa l/aek&-
Yau¢-ya k-Yaa MahdNauGa]hMaNTare<a )) 15 ))
yan-mäyayoru-guëa-karma-nibandhane 'smin
säàsärike pathi caraàs tad-abhiçrameëa
nañöa-småtiù punar ayaà pravåëéta lokaà
yuktyä kayä mahad-anugraham antareëa
SYNONYMS
yat—of the Lord; mäyayä—by the mäyä; uru-guëa—arising from the great modes;
karma—activities; nibandhane—with bonds; asmin—this; säàsärike—of repeated birth
and death; pathi—on the path; caran—wandering; tat—of him; abhiçrameëa—with
693
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
great pains; nañöa—lost; småtiù—memory; punaù—again; ayam—this living entity;
pravåëéta—may realize; lokam—his true nature; yuktyä kayä—by what means; mahatanugraham—
the mercy of the Lord; antareëa—without.
TRANSLATION
The human soul further prays: The living entity is put under the influence of material
nature and continues a hard struggle for existence on the path of repeated birth and
death. This conditional life is due to his forgetfulness of his relationship with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, without the Lord's mercy, how can he again
engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord?
PURPORT
The Mäyävädé philosophers say that simply by cultivation of knowledge by mental
speculation, one can be liberated from the condition of material bondage. But here it is
said one is liberated not by knowledge but by the mercy of the Supreme Lord. The
knowledge the conditioned soul gains by mental speculation, however powerful it may
be, is always too imperfect to approach the Absolute Truth. It is said that without the
mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead one cannot understand Him or His actual
form, quality and name. Those who are not in devotional service go on speculating for
many, many thousands of years, but they are still unable to understand the nature of the
Absolute Truth.
One can be liberated in the knowledge of the Absolute Truth simply by the mercy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is clearly said herein that our memory is lost
because we are now covered by His material energy. Arguments may be put forward as to
why we have been put under the influence of this material energy by the supreme will of
the Lord. This is explained in Bhagavad-gétä, where the Lord says, "I am sitting in
everyone's heart, and due to Me one is forgetful or one is alive in knowledge." The
forgetfulness of the conditioned soul is also due to the direction of the Supreme Lord. A
living entity misuses his little independence when he wants to lord it over material
nature. This misuse of independence, which is called mäyä, is always available, otherwise
there would be no independence. Independence implies that one can use it properly or
improperly. It is not static; it is dynamic. Therefore, misuse of independence is the cause
of being influenced by mäyä.
Mäyä is so strong that the Lord says that it is very difficult to surmount her influence.
But one can do so very easily "if he surrenders unto Me." Mäm eva ye prapadyante:
694
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
anyone who surrenders unto Him can overcome the influence of the stringent laws of
material nature. It is clearly said here that a living entity is put under the influence of
mäyä by His will, and if anyone wants to get out of this entanglement, this can be made
possible simply by His mercy.
The activities of the conditioned souls under the influence of material nature are
explained here. Every conditioned soul is engaged in different types of work under the
influence of material nature. We can see in the material world that the conditioned soul
acts so powerfully that he is playing wonderfully in creating the so-called advancements
of material civilization for sense gratification. But actually his position is to know that
he is an eternal servant of the Supreme Lord. When he is actually in perfect knowledge,
he knows that the Lord is the supreme worshipful object and that the living entity is His
eternal servant. Without this knowledge, he engages in material activities; that is called
ignorance.
SB 3.31.16
TEXT 16
jaNa& YadeTaddDaaTk-TaMa" Sa dev‚
S}aEk-ail/k&- iSQarcreZvNauviTaRTaa&Xa" )
Ta& Jaqvk-MaRPadvqMaNauvTaRMaaNaa‚
STaaPa}aYaaePaXaMaNaaYa vYa& >aJaeMa )) 16 ))
jïänaà yad etad adadhät katamaù sa devas
trai-kälikaà sthira-careñv anuvartitäàçaù
taà jéva-karma-padavém anuvartamänäs
täpa-trayopaçamanäya vayaà bhajema
SYNONYMS
jïänam—knowledge; yat—which; etat—this; adadhät—gave; katamaù—who other
than; saù—that; devaù—the Personality of Godhead; trai-kälikam—of the three phases
of time; sthira-careñu—in the inanimate and animate objects; anuvartita—dwelling;
aàçaù—His partial representation; tam—unto Him; jéva—of the jéva souls; karmapadavém—
the path of fruitive activities; anuvartamänäù—who are pursuing; täpatraya—
from the threefold miseries; upaçamanäya—for getting free; vayam—we;
bhajema—must surrender.
695
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
No one other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as the localized Paramätmä, the
partial representation of the Lord, is directing all inanimate and animate objects. He is
present in the three phases of time-past, present and future. Therefore, the conditioned
soul is engaged in different activities by His direction, and in order to get free from the
threefold miseries of this conditional life, we have to surrender unto Him only.
PURPORT
When a conditioned soul is seriously anxious to get out of the influence of the material
clutches, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated within him as
Paramätmä, gives him this knowledge: "Surrender unto Me." As the Lord says in
Bhagavad-gétä, "Give up all other engagements. Just surrender unto Me." It is to be
accepted that the source of knowledge is the Supreme Person. This is also confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä. Mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca [Bg. 15.15]. The Lord says, "Through
Me one gets real knowledge and memory, and one also forgets through Me." To one who
wants to be materially satisfied or who wants to lord it over material nature, the Lord
gives the opportunity to forget His service and engage in the so-called happiness of
material activities. Similarly, when one is frustrated in lording it over material nature
and is very serious about getting out of this material entanglement, the Lord, from
within, gives him the knowledge that he has to surrender unto Him; then there is
liberation.
This knowledge cannot be imparted by anyone other than the Supreme Lord or His
representative. In the Caitanya-caritämåta Lord Caitanya instructs Rüpa Gosvämé that
the living entities wander in life after life, undergoing the miserable conditions of
material existence. But when one is very anxious to get free from the material
entanglement, he gets enlightenment through a spiritual master and Kåñëa. This means
that Kåñëa as the Supersoul is seated within the heart of the living entity, and when the
living entity is serious, the Lord directs him to take shelter of His representative, a bona
fide spiritual master. Directed from within and guided externally by the spiritual master,
one attains the path of Kåñëa consciousness, which is the way out of the material
clutches.
Therefore there is no possibility of one's being situated in his own position unless he is
blessed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unless he is enlightened with the
supreme knowledge, one has to undergo the severe penalties of the hard struggle for
existence in the material nature. The spiritual master is therefore the mercy
696
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
manifestation of the Supreme Person. The conditioned soul has to take direct
instruction from the spiritual master, and thus he gradually becomes enlightened to the
path of Kåñëa consciousness. The seed of Kåñëa consciousness is sown within the heart
of the conditioned soul, and when one hears instruction from the spiritual master, the
seed fructifies, and one's life is blessed.
SB 3.31.17
TEXT 17
deùNYadehivvre Ja#=raiGanNaaSa*Ga(‚
iv<MaU}akU-PaPaiTaTaae >a*XaTaádeh" )
wC^iàTaae ivviSaTau& Ga<aYaNa( SvMaaSaaNa(
iNavaRSYaTae k*-Pa<aDaq>aRGavNa( k-da Nau )) 17 ))
dehy anya-deha-vivare jaöharägninäsågvië-
mütra-küpa-patito bhåça-tapta-dehaù
icchann ito vivasituà gaëayan sva-mäsän
nirväsyate kåpaëa-dhér bhagavan kadä nu
SYNONYMS
dehé—the embodied soul; anya-deha—of another body; vivare—in the abdomen;
jaöhara—of the stomach; agninä—by the fire; asåk—of blood; viö—stool; mütra—and
urine; küpa—in a pool; patitaù—fallen; bhåça—strongly; tapta—scorched; dehaù—his
body; icchan—desiring; itaù—from that place; vivasitum—to get out; gaëayan—
counting; svamäsän—his months; nirväsyate—will be released; kåpaëa-dhéù—person of
miserly intelligence; bhagavan—O Lord; kadä—when; nu—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Fallen into a pool of blood, stool and urine within the abdomen of his mother, his own
body scorched by the mother's gastric fire, the embodied soul, anxious to get out, counts
his months and prays, "O my Lord, when shall I, a wretched soul, be released from this
confinement?"
PURPORT
697
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The precarious condition of the living entity within the womb of his mother is described
here. On one side of where the child is floating is the heat of gastric fire, and on the
other side are urine, stool, blood and discharges. After seven months the child, who has
regained his consciousness, feels the horrible condition of his existence and prays to the
Lord. Counting the months until his release, he becomes greatly anxious to get out of
the confinement. The so-called civilized man does not take account of this horrible
condition of life, and sometimes, for the purpose of sense gratification, he tries to kill
the child by methods of contraception or abortion. Unserious about the horrible
condition in the womb, such persons continue in materialism, grossly misusing the
chance of the human form of life.
The word kåpaëa-dhéù is significant in this verse. Dhé means "intelligence," and kåpaëa
means "miserly." Conditional life is for persons who are of miserly intelligence or who do
not properly utilize their intelligence. In the human form of life the intelligence is
developed, and one has to utilize that developed intelligence to get out of the cycle of
birth and death. One who does not do so is a miser, just like a person who has immense
wealth but does not utilize it, keeping it simply to see. A person who does not actually
utilize his human intelligence to get out of the clutches of mäyä, the cycle of birth and
death, is accepted as miserly. The exact opposite of miserly is udära, "very
magnanimous." A brähmaëa is called udära because he utilizes his human intelligence
for spiritual realization. He uses that intelligence to preach Kåñëa consciousness for the
benefit of the public, and therefore he is magnanimous.
SB 3.31.18
TEXT 18
YaeNaed*Xaq& GaiTaMaSaaE dXaMaaSYa wRXa
Sa°aihTa" PauådYaeNa >avad*XaeNa )
SveNaEv TauZYaTau k*-TaeNa Sa dqNaNaaQa"
k-ae NaaMa TaTPa[iTa ivNaaÅil/MaSYa ku-YaaRTa( )) 18 ))
yenedåçéà gatim asau daça-mäsya éça
saìgrähitaù puru-dayena bhavädåçena
svenaiva tuñyatu kåtena sa déna-näthaù
ko näma tat-prati vinäïjalim asya kuryät
SYNONYMS
698
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yena—by whom (the Lord); édåçém—such; gatim—a condition; asau—that person
(myself); daça-mäsyaù—ten months old; éça—O Lord; saìgrähitaù—was made to accept;
puru-dayena—very merciful; bhavädåçena—incomparable; svena—own; eva—alone;
tuñyatu—may He be pleased; kåtena—with His act; saù—that; déna-näthaù—refuge of
the fallen souls; kaù—who; näma—indeed; tat—that mercy; prati—in return; vinä—
except with; aïjalim—folded hands; asya—of the Lord; kuryät—can repay.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, by Your causeless mercy I am awakened to consciousness, although I am
only ten months old. For this causeless mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
friend of all fallen souls, there is no way to express my gratitude but to pray with folded
hands.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, intelligence and forgetfulness are both supplied by the
Supersoul sitting with the individual soul within the body. When He sees that a
conditioned soul is very serious about getting out of the clutches of the material
influence, the Supreme Lord gives intelligence internally as Supersoul and externally as
the spiritual master, or, as an incarnation of the Personality of Godhead Himself, He
helps by speaking instructions such as Bhagavad-gétä. The Lord is always seeking the
opportunity to reclaim the fallen souls to His abode, the kingdom of God. We should
always feel very much obliged to the Personality of Godhead, for He is always anxious to
bring us into the happy condition of eternal life. There is no sufficient means to repay
the Personality of Godhead for His act of benediction; therefore, we can simply feel
gratitude and pray to the Lord with folded hands. This prayer of the child in the womb
may be questioned by some atheistic people. How can a child pray in such a nice way in
the womb of his mother? Everything is possible by the grace of the Lord. The child is put
into such a precarious condition externally, but internally he is the same, and the Lord
is there. By the transcendental energy of the Lord, everything is possible.
SB 3.31.19
TEXT 19
PaXYaTYaYa& iDaz<aYaa NaNau SaáviDa]"
Xaarqrke- dMaXarqYaRPar" Svdehe )
699
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
YaTSa*íYaaSa& TaMah& Pauåz& Paura<a&
PaXYae bihôRid c cETYaiMav Pa[TaqTaMa( )) 19 ))
paçyaty ayaà dhiñaëayä nanu sapta-vadhriù
çärérake dama-çaréry aparaù sva-dehe
yat-såñöayäsaà tam ahaà puruñaà puräëaà
paçye bahir hådi ca caityam iva pratétam
SYNONYMS
paçyati—sees; ayam—this living entity; dhiñaëayä—with intelligence; nanu—only;
sapta-vadhriù—bound by the seven layers of material coverings; çärérake—agreeable and
disagreeable sense perceptions; dama-çaréré—having a body for self-control; aparaù—
another; sva-dehe—in his body; yat—by the Supreme Lord; såñöayä—endowed; äsam—
was; tam—Him; aham—I; puruñam—person; puräëam—oldest; paçye—see; bahiù—
outside; hådi—in the heart; ca—and; caityam—the source of the ego; iva—indeed;
pratétam—recognized.
TRANSLATION
The living entity in another type of body sees only by instinct; he knows only the
agreeable and disagreeable sense perceptions of that particular body. But I have a body in
which I can control my senses and can understand my destination; therefore, I offer my
respectful obeisances to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by whom I have been
blessed with this body and by whose grace I can see Him within and without.
PURPORT
The evolutionary process of different types of bodies is something like that of a
fructifying flower. Just as there are different stages in the growth of a flower—the bud
stage, the blooming stage and the full—fledged, grown-up stage of aroma and beauty—
similarly, there are 8,400,000 species of bodies in gradual evolution, and there is
systematic progress from the lower species of life to the higher. The human form of life
is supposed to be the highest, for it offers consciousness for getting out of the clutches of
birth and death. The fortunate child in the womb of his mother realizes his superior
position and is thereby distinguished from other bodies. Animals in bodies lower than
that of the human being are conscious only as far as their bodily distress and happiness
700
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
are concerned; they cannot think of more than their bodily necessities of life-eating,
sleeping, mating and defending. But in the human form of life, by the grace of God, the
consciousness is so developed that a man can evaluate his exceptional position and thus
realize the self and the Supreme Lord.
The word dama-çaréré means that we have a body in which we can control the senses
and the mind. The complication of materialistic life is due to an uncontrolled mind and
uncontrolled senses. One should feel grateful to the Supreme Personality of Godhead for
having obtained such a nice human form of body, and one should properly utilize it. The
distinction between an animal and a man is that the animal cannot control himself and
has no sense of decency, whereas the human being has the sense of decency and can
control himself. If this controlling power is not exhibited by the human being, then he is
no better than an animal. By controlling the senses, or by the process of yoga regulation,
one can understand the position of his self, the Supersoul, the world and their
interrelation; everything is possible by controlling the senses. Otherwise, we are no
better than animals.
Real self-realization by means of controlling the senses is explained herein. One should
try to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead and one's own self also. To think oneself
the same as the Supreme is not self-realization. Here it is clearly explained that the
Supreme Lord is anädi, or puräëa, and He has no other cause. The living entity is born
of the Supreme Godhead as part and parcel. It is confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä,
anädir ädir govindaù: [Bs. 5.1] Govinda, the Supreme person, has no cause. He is unborn.
But the living entity is born of Him. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, mamaiväàçaù: both
the living entity and the Supreme Lord are unborn, but it has to be understood that the
supreme cause of the part and parcel is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Brahmasaàhitä
therefore says that everything has come from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1]). The Vedänta-sütra confirms this also.
Janmädy asya yataù: [SB 1.1.1] the Absolute Truth is the original source of everyone's
birth. Kåñëa also says in Bhagavad-gétä, ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù: [Bg. 10.8] "I am the
source of birth of everything, including Brahmä and Lord Çiva and the living entities."
This is self-realization. One should know that he is under the control of the Supreme
Lord and not think that he is fully independent. Otherwise, why should he be put into
conditional life?
SB 3.31.20
TEXT 20
Saae_h& vSaàiPa iv>aae bhudu"%vaSa&
701
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Ga>aaRà iNaiJaRGaiMaze bihrNDakU-Pae )
Ya}aaePaYaaTaMauPaSaPaRiTa devMaaYaa
iMaQYaaMaiTaYaRdNau Sa&Sa*iTac§-MaeTaTa( )) 20 ))
so 'haà vasann api vibho bahu-duùkha-väsaà
garbhän na nirjigamiñe bahir andha-küpe
yatropayätam upasarpati deva-mäyä
mithyä matir yad-anu saàsåti-cakram etat
SYNONYMS
saù aham—I myself; vasan—living; api—although; vibho—O Lord; bahu-duùkha—with
many miseries; väsam—in a condition; garbhät—from the abdomen; na—not;
nirjigamiñe—I wish to depart; bahiù—outside; andha-küpe—in the blind well; yatra—
where; upayätam—one who goes there; upasarpati—she captures; deva-mäyä—the
external energy of the Lord; mithyä—false; matiù—identification; yat—which mäyä;
anu—according to; saàsåti—of continual birth and death; cakram—cycle; etat—this.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, my Lord, although I am living in a terrible condition, I do not wish to depart
from my mother's abdomen to fall again into the blind well of materialistic life. Your
external energy, called deva-mäyä, at once captures the newly born child, and
immediately false identification, which is the beginning of the cycle of continual birth and
death, begins.
PURPORT
As long as the child is within the womb of his mother, he is in a very precarious and
horrible condition of life, but the benefit is that he revives pure consciousness of his
relationship with the Supreme Lord and prays for deliverance. But once he is outside the
abdomen, when a child is born, mäyä, or the illusory energy, is so strong that he is
immediately overpowered into considering his body to be his self. Mäyä means "illusion,"
or that which is actually not. In the material world, everyone is identifying with his
body. This false egoistic consciousness of "I am this body" at once develops after the
child comes out of the womb. The mother and other relatives are awaiting the child, and
702
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
as soon as he is born, the mother feeds him, and everyone takes care of him. The living
entity soon forgets his position and becomes entangled in bodily relationships. The
entire material existence is entanglement in this bodily conception of life. Real
knowledge means to develop the consciousness of "I am not this body. I am spirit soul, an
eternal part and parcel of the Supreme Lord." Real knowledge entails renunciation, or
nonacceptance of this body as the self.
By the influence of mäyä, the external energy, one forgets everything just after birth.
Therefore the child is praying that he prefers to remain within the womb rather than
come out. It is said that Çukadeva Gosvämé, on this consideration, remained for sixteen
years within the womb of his mother; he did not want to be entangled in false bodily
identification. After cultivating such knowledge within the womb of his mother, he
came out at the end of sixteen years and immediately left home so that he might not be
captured by the influence of mäyä. The influence of mäyä is also explained in Bhagavadgétä
as insurmountable. But insurmountable mäyä can be overcome simply by Kåñëa
consciousness. That is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14): mäm eva ye prapadyante
mäyäm etäà taranti te. Whoever surrenders unto the lotus feet of Kåñëa can get out of
this false conception of life. By the influence of mäyä only, one forgets his eternal
relationship with Kåñëa and identifies himself with his body and the by-products of the
body—namely wife, children, society, friendship and love. Thus he becomes a victim of
the influence of mäyä, and his materialistic life of continued birth and death becomes
still more stringent.
SB 3.31.21
TEXT 21
TaSMaadh& ivGaTaiv(c)-v oÖirZYa
AaTMaaNaMaaéu TaMaSa" SauôdaTMaNaEv )
>aUYaae YaQaa VYaSaNaMaeTadNaek-rNDa]&
Maa Mae >aivZYaduPaSaaidTaivZ<auPaad" )) 21 ))
tasmäd ahaà vigata-viklava uddhariñya
ätmänam äçu tamasaù suhådätmanaiva
bhüyo yathä vyasanam etad aneka-randhraà
mä me bhaviñyad upasädita-viñëu-pädaù
SYNONYMS
703
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
tasmät—therefore; aham—I; vigata—ceased; viklavaù—agitation; uddhariñye—shall
deliver; ätmänam—myself; äçu—quickly; tamasaù—from the darkness; suhådä ätmanä—
with friendly intelligence; eva—indeed; bhüyaù—again; yathä—so that; vyasanam—
plight; etat—this; aneka-randhram—entering many wombs; mä—not; me—my;
bhaviñyat—may occur; upasädita—placed (in my mind); viñëu-pädaù—the lotus feet of
Lord Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, without being agitated any more, I shall deliver myself from the darkness of
nescience with the help of my friend, clear consciousness. Simply by keeping the lotus
feet of Lord Viñëu in my mind, I shall be saved from entering into the wombs of many
mothers for repeated birth and death.
PURPORT
The miseries of material existence begin from the very day when the spirit soul takes
shelter in the ovum and sperm of the mother and father, they continue after he is born
from the womb, and then they are further prolonged. We do not know where the
suffering ends. It does not end, however, by one's changing his body. The change of body
is taking place at every moment, but that does not mean that we are improving from the
fetal condition of life to a more comfortable condition. The best thing is, therefore, to
develop Kåñëa consciousness. Here it is stated, upasädita-viñëu-pädaù. This means
realization of Kåñëa consciousness. One who is intelligent, by the grace of the Lord, and
develops Kåñëa consciousness, is successful in his life because simply by keeping himself
in Kåñëa consciousness, he will be saved from the repetition of birth and death.
The child prays that it is better to remain within the womb of darkness and be
constantly absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness than to get out and again fall a victim to the
illusory energy. The illusory energy acts within the abdomen as well as outside the
abdomen, but the trick is that one should remain Kåñëa conscious, and then the effect of
such a horrible condition cannot act unfavorably upon him. In Bhagavad-gétä it is said
that one's intelligence is his friend, and the same intelligence can also be his enemy.
Here also the same idea is repeated: suhådätmanaiva, friendly intelligence. Absorption of
intelligence in the personal service of Kåñëa and full consciousness of Kåñëa always are
the path of self-realization and liberation. Without being unnecessarily agitated, if we
take to the process of Kåñëa consciousness by constantly chanting Hare Kåñëa, Hare
Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare, the
704
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
cycle of birth and death can be stopped for good.
It may be questioned herein how the child can be fully Kåñëa conscious within the
womb of the mother without any paraphernalia with which to execute Kåñëa
consciousness. It is not necessary to arrange for paraphernalia to worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Viñëu. The child wants to remain within the abdomen of its
mother and at the same time wants to become free from the clutches of mäyä. One does
not need any material arrangement to cultivate Kåñëa consciousness. One can cultivate
Kåñëa consciousness anywhere and everywhere, provided he can always think of Kåñëa.
The mahä-mantra, Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare
Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare, can be chanted even within the abdomen of one's
mother. One can chant while sleeping, while working, while imprisoned in the womb or
while outside. This Kåñëa consciousness cannot be checked in any circumstance. The
conclusion of the child's prayer is: "Let me remain in this condition; although it is very
miserable, it is better not to fall a victim to mäyä again by going outside."
SB 3.31.22
TEXT 22
k-iPal/ ovac
Wv& k*-TaMaiTaGaR>aeR dXaMaaSYa" STauvà*iz" )
SaÛ" i+aPaTYavacqNa& Pa[SaUTYaE SaUiTaMaaåTa" )) 22 ))
kapila uväca
evaà kåta-matir garbhe
daça-mäsyaù stuvann åñiù
sadyaù kñipaty aväcénaà
prasütyai süti-märutaù
SYNONYMS
kapilaù uväca—Lord Kapila said; evam—thus; kåta-matiù—desiring; garbhe—in the
womb; daça-mäsyaù—ten-month-old; stuvan—extolling; åñiù—the living entity;
sadyaù—at that very time; kñipati—propels; aväcénam—turned downward; prasütyai—
for birth; süti-märutaù—the wind for childbirth.
TRANSLATION
705
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Lord Kapila continued: The ten-month-old living entity has these desires even while in
the womb. But while he thus extols the Lord, the wind that helps parturition propels him
forth with his face turned downward so that he may be born.
SB 3.31.23
TEXT 23
TaeNaavSa*í" SahSaa k*-Tvavak(- iXar AaTaur" )
iviNaZ§-aMaiTa k*-C^\e<a iNaåC^(vaSaae hTaSMa*iTa" )) 23 ))
tenävasåñöaù sahasä
kåtväväk çira äturaù
viniñkrämati kåcchreëa
nirucchväso hata-småtiù
SYNONYMS
tena—by that wind; avasåñöaù—pushed downward; sahasä—suddenly; kåtvä—turned;
aväk—downward; çiraù—his head; äturaù—suffering; viniñkrämati—he comes out;
kåcchreëa—with great trouble; nirucchväsaù—breathless; hata—deprived of; småtiù—
memory.
TRANSLATION
Pushed downward all of a sudden by the wind, the child comes out with great trouble,
head downward, breathless and deprived of memory due to severe agony.
PURPORT
The word kåcchreëa means "with great difficulty." When the child comes out of the
abdomen through the narrow passage, due to pressure there the breathing system
completely stops, and due to agony the child loses his memory. Sometimes the trouble is
so severe that the child comes Out dead or almost dead. One can imagine what the
pangs of birth are like. The child remains for ten months in that horrible condition
within the abdomen, and at the end of ten months he is forcibly pushed out. In
Bhagavad-gétä the Lord points out that a person who is serious about advancement in
spiritual consciousness should always consider the four pangs of birth, death, disease and
old age. The materialist advances in many ways, but he is unable to stop these four
706
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
principles of suffering inherent in material existence.
SB 3.31.24
TEXT 24
PaiTaTaae >auVYaSa*x(iMaé[" ivïa>aUirv ceíTae )
raeæYaiTa GaTae jaNae ivParqTaa& GaiTa& GaTa" )) 24 ))
patito bhuvy asåì-miçraù
viñöhä-bhür iva ceñöate
rorüyati gate jïäne
viparétäà gatià gataù
SYNONYMS
patitaù—fallen; bhuvi—on the earth; asåk—with blood; miçraù—smeared; viñöhä-bhüù—
a worm; iva—like; ceñöate—he moves his limbs; rorüyati—cries loudly; gate—being lost;
jïäne—his wisdom; viparétäm—the opposite; gatim—state; gataù—gone to.
TRANSLATION
The child thus falls on the ground, smeared with stool and blood, and plays just like a
worm germinated from the stool. He loses his superior knowledge and cries under the
spell of mäyä.
SB 3.31.25
TEXT 25
ParC^Nd& Na ivduza PauZYaMaa<aae JaNaeNa Sa" )
ANai>aPa[eTaMaaPaà" Pa[TYaa:YaaTauMaNaqìr" )) 25 ))
para-cchandaà na viduñä
puñyamäëo janena saù
anabhipretam äpannaù
pratyäkhyätum anéçvaraù
SYNONYMS
707
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
para-chandam—the desire of another; na—not; viduñä—understanding; puñyamäëaù—
being maintained; janena—by persons; saù—he; anabhipretam—into undesirable
circumstances; äpannaù—fallen; pratyäkhyätum—to refuse; anéçvaraù—unable.
TRANSLATION
After coming out of the abdomen, the child is given to the care of persons who are unable
to understand what he wants, and thus he is nursed by such persons. Unable to refuse
whatever is given to him, he falls into undesirable circumstances.
PURPORT
Within the abdomen of the mother, the nourishment of the child was being carried on
by nature's own arrangement. The atmosphere within the abdomen was not at all
pleasing, but as far as the child's feeding was concerned, it was being properly done by
the laws of nature. But upon coming out of the abdomen the child falls into a different
atmosphere. He wants to eat one thing, but something else is given to him because no
one knows his actual demand, and he cannot refuse the undesirables given to him.
Sometimes the child cries for the mother's breast, but because the nurse thinks that it is
due to pain within his stomach that he is crying, she supplies him some bitter medicine.
The child does not want it, but he cannot refuse it. He is put in very awkward
circumstances, and the suffering continues.
SB 3.31.26
TEXT 26
XaaiYaTaae_éuicPaYaRªe JaNTau" SvedJadUizTae )
NaeXa" k-<@UYaNae_(r)aNaaMaaSaNaaeTQaaNaceíNae )) 26 ))
çäyito 'çuci-paryaìke
jantuù svedaja-düñite
neçaù kaëòüyane 'ìgänäm
äsanotthäna-ceñöane
SYNONYMS
çäyitaù—laid down; açuci-paryaìke—on a foul bed; jantuù—the child; sveda-ja—with
creatures born from sweat; düñite—infested; na éçaù—incapable of; kaëòüyane—
708
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
scratching; aìgänäm—his limbs; äsana—sitting; utthäna—standing; ceñöane—or
moving.
TRANSLATION
Laid down on a foul bed infested with sweat and germs, the poor child is incapable of
scratching his body to get relief from his itching sensation to say nothing of sitting up,
standing or even moving.
PURPORT
It should be noted that the child is born crying and suffering. After birth the same
suffering continues, and he cries. Because he is disturbed by the germs in his foul bed,
which is contaminated by his urine and stool, the poor child continues to cry. He is
unable to take any remedial measure for his relief.
SB 3.31.27
TEXT 27
TaudNTYaaMaTvc& d&Xaa MaXak-a MaTku-<aadYa" )
ådNTa& ivGaTajaNa& k*-MaYa" k*-iMak&- YaQaa )) 27 ))
tudanty äma-tvacaà daàçä
maçakä matkuëädayaù
rudantaà vigata-jïänaà
kåmayaù kåmikaà yathä
SYNONYMS
tudanti—they bite; äma-tvacam—the baby, whose skin is soft; daàçäù—gnats;
maçakäù—mosquitoes; matkuëa—bugs; ädayaù—and other creatures; rudantam—
crying; vigata—deprived of; jïänam—wisdom; kåmayaù—worms; kåmikam—a worm;
yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
In his helpless condition, gnats, mosquitoes, bugs and other germs bite the baby, whose
skin is tender, just as smaller worms bite a big worm. The child, deprived of his wisdom,
709
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
cries bitterly.
PURPORT
The word vigata jïänam means that the spiritual knowledge which the child developed
in the abdomen is already lost to the spell of mäyä. Owing to various kinds of
disturbances and to being out of the abdomen, the child cannot remember what he was
thinking of for his salvation. It is assumed that even if a person acquires some spiritually
uplifting knowledge, circumstantially he is prone to forget it. Not only children but also
elderly persons should be very careful to protect their sense of Kåñëa consciousness and
avoid unfavorable circumstances so that they may not forget their prime duty.
SB 3.31.28
TEXT 28
wTYaev& XaEXav& >au¤-a du"%& PaaEGa<@Maev c )
Al/BDaa>aqiPSaTaae_jaNaaidÖMaNYau" éucaiPaRTa" )) 28 ))
ity evaà çaiçavaà bhuktvä
duùkhaà paugaëòam eva ca
alabdhäbhépsito 'jïänäd
iddha-manyuù çucärpitaù
SYNONYMS
iti evam—in this way; çaiçavam—childhood; bhuktvä—having undergone; duùkham—
distress; paugaëòam—boyhood; eva—even; ca—and; alabdha—not achieved;
abhépsitaù—he whose desires; ajïänät—due to ignorance; iddha—kindled; manyuù—his
anger; çucä—by sorrow; arpitaù—overcome.
TRANSLATION
In this way, the child passes through his childhood, suffering different kinds of distress,
and attains boyhood. In boyhood also he suffers pain over desires to get things he can
never achieve. And thus, due to ignorance, he becomes angry and sorry.
PURPORT
710
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
From birth to the end of five years of age is called childhood. After five years up to the
end of the fifteenth year is called paugaëòa. At sixteen years of age, youth begins. The
distresses of childhood are already explained, but when the child attains boyhood he is
enrolled in a school which he does not like. He wants to play, but he is forced to go to
school and study and take responsibility for passing examinations. Another kind of
distress is that he wants to get some things with which to play, but circumstances may be
such that he is not able to attain them, and he thus becomes aggrieved and feels pain. In
one word, he is unhappy, even in his boyhood, just as he was unhappy in his childhood,
what to speak of youth. Boys are apt to create so many artificial demands for playing,
and when they do not attain satisfaction they become furious with anger, and the result
is suffering.
SB 3.31.29
TEXT 29
Sah deheNa MaaNaeNa vDaRMaaNaeNa MaNYauNaa )
k-raeiTa ivGa]h& k-aMaq k-aiMaZvNTaaYa caTMaNa" )) 29 ))
saha dehena mänena
vardhamänena manyunä
karoti vigrahaà kämé
kämiñv antäya cätmanaù
SYNONYMS
saha—with; dehena—the body; mänena—with false prestige; vardhamänena—
increasing; manyunä—on account of anger; karoti—he creates; vigraham—enmity;
kämé—the lusty person; kämiñu—towards other lusty people; antäya—for destruction;
ca—and; ätmanaù—of his soul.
TRANSLATION
With the growth of the body, the living entity, in order to vanquish his soul, increases his
false prestige and anger and thereby creates enmity towards similarly lusty people.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä, Third Chapter, verse 36, Arjuna inquired from Kåñëa about the cause
711
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
of a living being's lust. It is said that a living entity is eternal and, as such, qualitatively
one with the Supreme Lord. Then what is the reason he falls prey to the material and
commits so many sinful activities by the influence of the material energy? In reply to
this question, Lord Kåñëa said that it is lust which causes a living entity to glide down
from his exalted position to the abominable condition of material existence. This lust
circumstantially changes into anger. Both lust and anger stand on the platform of the
mode of passion. Lust is actually the product of the mode of passion, and in the absence
of satisfaction of lust, the same desire transforms into anger on the platform of
ignorance. When ignorance covers the soul, it is the source of his degradation to the
most abominable condition of hellish life.
To raise oneself from hellish life to the highest position of spiritual understanding is to
transform this lust into love of Kåñëa. Çré Narottama däsa Öhäkura, a great äcärya of the
Vaiñëava sampradäya, said, käma kåñëa-karmärpaëe: due to our lust, we want many
things for our sense gratification, but the same lust can be transformed in a purified way
so that we want everything for the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Anger also can be utilized towards a person who is atheistic or who is envious of the
Personality of Godhead. As we have fallen into this material existence because of our
lust and anger, the same two qualities can be utilized for the purpose of advancing in
Kåñëa consciousness, and one can elevate himself again to his former pure, spiritual
position. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has therefore recommended that because in material
existence we have so many objects of sense gratification, which we need for the
maintenance of the body, we should use all of them without attachment, for the purpose
of satisfying the senses of Kåñëa; that is actual renunciation.
SB 3.31.30
TEXT 30
>aUTaE" PaÄi>ararBDae dehe deùbuDaae_Sak*-Ta( )
Ah&MaMaeTYaSad(Ga]ah" k-raeiTa ku-MaiTaMaRiTaMa( )) 30 ))
bhütaiù païcabhir ärabdhe
dehe dehy abudho 'sakåt
ahaà mamety asad-grähaù
karoti kumatir matim
SYNONYMS
712
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
bhütaiù—by material elements; païcabhiù—five; ärabdhe—made; dehe—in the body;
dehé—the living entity; abudhaù—ignorant; asakåt—constantly; aham—I; mama—
mine; iti—thus; asat—nonpermanent things; grähaù—accepting; karoti—he does; kumatiù—
being foolish; matim—thought.
TRANSLATION
By such ignorance the living entity accepts the material body, which is made of five
elements, as himself. With this misunderstanding, he accepts nonpermanent things as his
own and increases his ignorance in the darkest region.
PURPORT
The expansion of ignorance is explained in this verse. The first ignorance is to identify
one's material body, which is made of five elements, as the self, and the second is to
accept something as one's own due to a bodily connection. In this way, ignorance
expands. The living entity is eternal, but because of his accepting nonpermanent things,
misidentifying his interest, he is put into ignorance, and therefore he suffers material
pangs.
SB 3.31.31
TEXT 31
TadQa| ku-åTae k-MaR YaØÖae YaaiTa Sa&Sa*iTaMa( )
Yaae_NauYaaiTa ddT(c)e-XaMaivÛak-MaRbNDaNa" )) 31 ))
tad-arthaà kurute karma
yad-baddho yäti saàsåtim
yo 'nuyäti dadat kleçam
avidyä-karma-bandhanaù
SYNONYMS
tat-artham—for the sake of the body; kurute—he performs; karma—actions; yatbaddhaù—
bound by which; yäti—he goes; saàsåtim—to repeated birth and death; yaù—
which body; anuyäti—follows; dadat—giving; kleçam—misery; avidyä—by ignorance;
karma—by fruitive activities; bandhanaù—the cause of bondage.
713
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
For the sake of the body, which is a source of constant trouble to him and which follows
him because he is bound by ties of ignorance and fruitive activities, he performs various
actions which cause him to be subjected to repeated birth and death.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä it is said that one has to work to satisfy Yajïa, or Viñëu, for any work
done without the purpose of satisfying the Supreme Personality of Godhead is a cause of
bondage. In the conditioned state a living entity, accepting his body as himself, forgets
his eternal relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead and acts on the
interest of his body. He takes the body as himself, his bodily expansions as his kinsmen,
and the land from which his body is born as worshipable. In this way he performs all
sorts of misconceived activities, which lead to his perpetual bondage in repetition of
birth and death in various species.
In modern civilization, the so-called social, national and government leaders mislead
people more and more, under the bodily conception of life, with the result that all the
leaders, with their followers, are gliding down to hellish conditions birth after birth. An
example is given in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Andhä yathändhair upanéyamänäù: [SB 7.5.31]
when a blind man leads several other blind men, the result is that all of them fall down
in a ditch. This is actually happening. There are many leaders to lead the ignorant
public, but because every one of them is bewildered by the bodily conception of life,
there is no peace and prosperity in human society. So-called yogés who perform various
bodily feats are also in the same category as such ignorant people because the haöha-yoga
system is especially recommended for persons who are grossly implicated in the bodily
conception. The conclusion is that as long as one is fixed in the bodily conception, he
has to suffer birth and death.
SB 3.31.32
TEXT 32
YaÛSaiÙ" PaiQa PauNa" iXaénaedrk*-TaaeÛMaE" )
AaiSQaTaae rMaTae JaNTauSTaMaae ivXaiTa PaUvRvTa( )) 32 ))
yady asadbhiù pathi punaù
çiçnodara-kåtodyamaiù
714
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ästhito ramate jantus
tamo viçati pürvavat
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; asadbhiù—with the unrighteous; pathi—on the path; punaù—again; çiçna—for
the genitals; udara—for the stomach; kåta—done; udyamaiù—whose endeavors;
ästhitaù—associating; ramate—enjoys; jantuù—the living entity; tamaù—darkness;
viçati—enters; pürva-vat—as before.
TRANSLATION
If, therefore, the living entity again associates with the path of unrighteousness,
influenced by sensually minded people engaged in the pursuit of sexual enjoyment and the
gratification of the palate, he again goes to hell as before.
PURPORT
It has been explained that the conditioned soul is put into the Andha-tämisra and
Tämisra hellish conditions, and after suffering there he gets a hellish body like the dog's
or hog's. After several such births, he again comes into the form of a human being. How
the human being is born is also described by Kapiladeva. The human being develops in
the mother's abdomen and suffers there and comes out again. After all these sufferings,
if he gets another chance in a human body and wastes his valuable time in the
association of persons who are concerned with sexual life and palatable dishes, then
naturally he again glides down to the same Andha-tämisra and Tämisra hells.
Generally, people are concerned with the satisfaction of the tongue and the satisfaction
of the genitals. That is material life. Material life means eat, drink, be merry and enjoy,
with no concern for understanding one's spiritual identity and the process of spiritual
advancement. Since materialistic people are concerned with the tongue, belly and
genitals, if anyone wants to advance in spiritual life he must be very careful about
associating with such people. To associate with such materialistic men is to commit
purposeful suicide in the human form of life. It is said, therefore, that an intelligent man
should give up such undesirable association and should always mix with saintly persons.
When he is in association with saintly persons, all his doubts about the spiritual
expansion of life are eradicated, and he makes tangible progress on the path of spiritual
understanding. It is also sometimes found that people are very much addicted to a
715
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
particular type of religious faith. Hindus, Muslims and Christians are faithful in their
particular type of religion, and they go to the church, temple or mosque, but
unfortunately they cannot give up the association of persons who are too much addicted
to sex life and satisfaction of the palate. Here it is clearly said that one may officially be
a very religious man, but if he associates with such persons, then he is sure to slide down
to the darkest region of hell.
SB 3.31.33
TEXT 33
SaTYa& XaaEc& dYaa MaaENa& buiÖ" é[qh+aMaa )
XaMaae dMaae >aGaêeiTa YaTSa(r)aÛaiTa Sa¿YaMa( )) 33 ))
satyaà çaucaà dayä maunaà
buddhiù çrér hrér yaçaù kñamä
çamo damo bhagaç ceti
yat-saìgäd yäti saìkñayam
SYNONYMS
satyam—truthfulness; çaucam—cleanliness; dayä—mercy; maunam—gravity; buddhiù—
intelligence; çréù—prosperity; hréù—shyness; yaçaù—fame; kñamä—forgiveness;
çamaù—control of the mind; damaù—control of the senses; bhagaù—fortune; ca—and;
iti—thus; yat-saìgät—from association with whom; yäti saìkñayam—are destroyed.
TRANSLATION
He becomes devoid of truthfulness, cleanliness, mercy, gravity, spiritual intelligence,
shyness, austerity, fame, forgiveness, control of the mind, control of the senses, fortune
and all such opportunities.
PURPORT
Those who are too addicted to sex life cannot understand the purpose of the Absolute
Truth, nor can they be clean in their habits, not to mention showing mercy to others.
They cannot remain grave, and they have no interest in the ultimate goal of life. The
ultimate goal of life is Kåñëa, or Viñëu, but those who are addicted to sex life cannot
understand that their ultimate interest is Kåñëa consciousness. Such people have no
716
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sense of decency, and even in public streets or public parks they embrace each other just
like cats and dogs and pass it off in the name of love-making. Such unfortunate
creatures can never become materially prosperous. Behavior like that of cats and dogs
keeps them in the position of cats and dogs. They cannot improve any material
condition, not to speak of becoming famous. Such foolish persons may even make a show
of so-called yoga, but they are unable to control the senses and mind, which is the real
purpose of yoga practice. Such people can have no opulence in their lives. In a word,
they are very unfortunate.
SB 3.31.34
TEXT 34
TaeZvXaaNTaezu MaU!ezu %i<@TaaTMaSvSaaDauzu )
Sa(r)& Na ku-YaaRC^aeCYaezu YaaeizT§-I@aMa*Gaezu c )) 34 ))
teñv açänteñu müòheñu
khaëòitätmasv asädhuñu
saìgaà na kuryäc chocyeñu
yoñit-kréòä-mågeñu ca
SYNONYMS
teñu—with those; açänteñu—coarse; müòheñu—fools; khaëòita-ätmasu—bereft of selfrealization;
asädhuñu—wicked; saìgam—association; na—not; kuryät—one should
make; çocyeñu—pitiable; yoñit—of women; kréòä-mågeñu—dancing dogs; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
One should not associate with a coarse fool who is bereft of the knowledge of selfrealization
and who is no more than a dancing dog in the hands of a woman.
PURPORT
The restriction of association with such foolish persons is especially meant for those who
are in the line of advancement in Kåñëa consciousness. Advancement in Kåñëa
consciousness involves developing the qualities of truthfulness, cleanliness, mercy,
gravity, intelligence in spiritual knowledge, simplicity, material opulence, fame,
forgiveness, and control of the mind and the senses. All these qualities are to be
717
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
manifested with the progress of Kåñëa consciousness, but if one associates with a çüdra, a
foolish person who is like a dancing dog in the hands of a woman, then he cannot make
any progress. Lord Caitanya has advised that any person who is engaged in Kåñëa
consciousness and who desires to pass beyond material nescience must not associate
himself with women or with persons interested in material enjoyment. For a person
seeking advancement in Kåñëa consciousness, such association is more dangerous than
suicide.
SB 3.31.35
TEXT 35
Na TaQaaSYa >aveNMaaehae bNDaêaNYaPa[Sa(r)Ta" )
YaaeizTSa(r)aÛQaa Pau&Saae YaQaa TaTSai(r)Sa(r)Ta" )) 35 ))
na tathäsya bhaven moho
bandhaç cänya-prasaìgataù
yoñit-saìgäd yathä puàso
yathä tat-saìgi-saìgataù
SYNONYMS
na—not; tathä—in that manner; asya—of this man; bhavet—may arise; mohaù—
infatuation; bandhaù—bondage; ca—and; anya-prasaìgataù—from attachment to any
other object; yoñit-saìgät—from attachment to women; yathä—as; puàsaù—of a man;
yathä—as; tat-saìgi—of men who are fond of women; saìgataù—from the fellowship.
TRANSLATION
The infatuation and bondage which accrue to a man from attachment to any other object
is not as complete as that resulting from attachment to a woman or to the fellowship of
men who are fond of women.
PURPORT
Attachment to women is so contaminating that one becomes attached to the condition
of material life not only by the association of women but by the contaminated
association of persons who are too attached to them. There are many reasons for our
conditional life in the material world, but the topmost of all such causes is the
718
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
association of women, as will be confirmed in the following stanzas.
In Kali-yuga, association with women is very strong. In every step of life, there is
association with women. If a person goes to purchase something, the advertisements are
full of pictures of women. The physiological attraction for women is very great, and
therefore people are very slack in spiritual understanding. The Vedic civilization, being
based on spiritual understanding, arranges association with women very cautiously. Out
of the four social divisions, the members of the first order (namely brahmacarya), the
third order (vänaprastha) and the fourth order (sannyäsa) are strictly prohibited from
female association. Only in one order, the householder, is there license to mix with
women under restricted conditions. In other words, attraction for woman's association is
the cause of the material conditional life, and anyone interested in being freed from this
conditional life must detach himself from the association of women.
SB 3.31.36
TEXT 36
Pa[JaaPaiTa" Sva& duihTar& d*îa Tad]UPaDaizRTa" )
raeihd(>aUTaa& Saae_NvDaavd*+aæPaq hTa}aPa" )) 36 ))
prajäpatiù sväà duhitaraà
dåñövä tad-rüpa-dharñitaù
rohid-bhütäà so 'nvadhävad
åkña-rüpé hata-trapaù
SYNONYMS
prajä-patiù—Lord Brahmä; sväm—his own; duhitaram—daughter; dåñövä—having seen;
tat-rüpa—by her charms; dharñitaù—bewildered; rohit-bhütäm—to her in the form of a
deer; saù—he; anvadhävat—ran; åkña-rüpé—in the form of a stag; hata—bereft of;
trapaù—shame.
TRANSLATION
At the sight of his own daughter, Brahmä was bewildered by her charms and shamelessly
ran up to her in the form of a stag when she took the form of a hind.
PURPORT
719
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Lord Brahmä's being captivated by the charms of his daughter and Lord Çiva's being
captivated by the Mohiné form of the Lord are specific instances which instruct us that
even great demigods like Brahmä and Lord Çiva, what to speak of the ordinary
conditioned soul, are captivated by the beauty of woman. Therefore, everyone is advised
that one should not freely mix even with one's daughter or with one's mother or with
one's sister, because the senses are so strong that when one becomes infatuated, the
senses do not consider the relationship of daughter, mother or sister. It is best, therefore,
to practice controlling the senses by performing bhakti-yoga, engaging in the service of
Madana-mohana. Lord Kåñëa's name is Madana-mohana, for He can subdue the god
Cupid, or lust. Only by engaging in the service of Madana-mohana can one curb the
dictates of Madana, Cupid. Otherwise, attempts to control the senses will fail.
SB 3.31.37
TEXT 37
TaTSa*íSa*íSa*íezu k-ae Nv%i<@TaDaq" PauMaaNa( )
‰iz& NaaraYa<aMa*Tae YaaeizNMaYYaeh MaaYaYaa )) 37 ))
tat-såñöa-såñöa-såñöeñu
ko nv akhaëòita-dhéù pumän
åñià näräyaëam åte
yoñin-mayyeha mäyayä
SYNONYMS
tat—by Brahmä; såñöa-såñöa-såñöeñu—amongst all living entities begotten; kaù—who;
nu—indeed; akhaëòita—not distracted; dhéù—his intelligence; pumän—male; åñim—
the sage; näräyaëam—Näräyaëa; åte—except; yoñit-mayyä—in the form of a woman;
iha—here; mäyayä—by mäyä.
TRANSLATION
Amongst all kinds of living entities begotten by Brahmä, namely men, demigods and
animals, none but the sage Näräyaëa is immune to the attraction of mäyä in the form of
woman.
PURPORT
720
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The first living creature is Brahmä himself, and from him were created sages like Maréci,
who in their turn created Kaçyapa Muni and others, and Kaçyapa Muni and the Manus
created different demigods and human beings, etc. But there is none among them who is
not attracted by the spell of mäyä in the form of woman. Throughout the entire material
world, beginning from Brahmä down to the small, insignificant creatures like the ant,
everyone is attracted by sex life. That is the basic principle of this material world. Lord
Brahmä's being attracted by his daughter is the vivid example that no one is exempt
from sexual attraction to woman. Woman, therefore, is the wonderful creation of mäyä
to keep the conditioned soul in shackles.
SB 3.31.38
TEXT 38
bl&/ Mae PaXYa MaaYaaYaa" ñqMaYYaa JaiYaNaae idXaaMa( )
Yaa k-raeiTa Pada§-aNTaaNa( >a]UivJa*M>ae<a ke-vl/Ma( )) 38 ))
balaà me paçya mäyäyäù
stré-mayyä jayino diçäm
yä karoti padäkräntän
bhrüvi-jåmbheëa kevalam
SYNONYMS
balam—the strength; me—My; paçya—behold; mäyäyäù—of mäyä; stré-mayyäù—in the
shape of a woman; jayinaù—conquerors; diçäm—of all directions; yä—who; karoti—
makes; pada-äkräntän—following at her heels; bhrüvi—of her eyebrows; jåmbheëa—by
the movement; kevalam—merely.
TRANSLATION
Just try to understand the mighty strength of My mäyä in the shape of woman, who by
the mere movement of her eyebrows can keep even the greatest conquerors of the world
under her grip.
PURPORT
There are many instances in the history of the world of a great conqueror's being
captivated by the charms of a Cleopatra. One has to study the captivating potency of
721
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
woman, and man's attraction for that potency. From what source was this generated?
According to Vedänta-sütra, we can understand that everything is generated from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is enunciated there, janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1].
This means that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, or the Supreme Person,
Brahman, the Absolute Truth, is the source from whom everything emanates. The
captivating power of woman, and man's susceptibility to such attraction, must also exist
in the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the spiritual world and must be represented
in the transcendental pastimes of the Lord.
The Lord is the Supreme Person, the supreme male. As a common male wants to be
attracted by a female, that propensity similarly exists in the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He also wants to be attracted by the beautiful features of a woman. Now the
question is, if He wants to be captivated by such womanly attraction, would He be
attracted by any material woman? It is not possible. Even persons who are in this
material existence can give up womanly attraction if they are attracted by the Supreme
Brahman. Such was the case with Haridäsa Öhäkura. A beautiful prostitute tried to
attract him in the dead of night, but since he was situated in devotional service, in
transcendental love of Godhead, Haridäsa Öhäkura was not captivated. Rather, he
turned the prostitute into a great devotee by his transcendental association. This
material attraction, therefore, certainly cannot attract the Supreme Lord. When He
wants to be attracted by a woman, He has to create such a woman from His own energy.
That woman is Rädhäräëé. It is explained by the Gosvämés that Rädhäräëé is the
manifestation of the pleasure potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When
the Supreme Lord wants to derive transcendental pleasure, He has to create a woman
from His internal potency. Thus the tendency to be attracted by womanly beauty is
natural because it exists in the spiritual world. In the material world it is reflected
pervertedly, and therefore there are so many inebrieties.
Instead of being attracted by material beauty, if one is accustomed to be attracted by the
beauty of Rädhäräëé and Kåñëa, then the statement of Bhagavad-gétä, paraà dåñövä
nivartate [Bg. 9.59], holds true. When one is attracted by the transcendental beauty of
Rädhä and Kåñëa, he is no longer attracted by material feminine beauty. That is the
special significance of Rädhä-Kåñëa worship. That is testified to by Yämunäcärya. He
says, "Since I have become attracted by the beauty of Rädhä and Kåñëa, when there is
attraction for a woman or a memory of sex life with a woman, I at once spit on it, and
my face turns in disgust." When we are attracted by Madana-mohana and the beauty of
Kåñëa and His consorts, then the shackles of conditioned life, namely the beauty of a
material woman, cannot attract us.
722
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.31.39
TEXT 39
Sa(r)& Na ku-YaaRTPa[MadaSau JaaTau
YaaeGaSYa Paar& ParMaaåå+au" )
MaTSaevYaa Pa[iTal/BDaaTMal/a>aae
vdiNTa Yaa iNarYaÜarMaSYa )) 39 ))
saìgaà na kuryät pramadäsu jätu
yogasya päraà param ärurukñuù
mat-sevayä pratilabdhätma-läbho
vadanti yä niraya-dväram asya
SYNONYMS
saìgam—association; na—not; kuryät—one should make; pramadäsu—with women;
jätu—ever; yogasya—of yoga; päram—culmination; param—topmost; ärurukñuù—one
who aspires to reach; mat-sevayä—by rendering service unto Me; pratilabdha—obtained;
ätma-läbhaù—self-realization; vadanti—they say; yäù—which women; niraya—to hell;
dväram—the gateway; asya—of the advancing devotee.
TRANSLATION
One who aspires to reach the culmination of yoga and has realized his self by rendering
service unto Me should never associate with an attractive woman, for such a woman is
declared in the scripture to be the gateway to hell for the advancing devotee.
PURPORT
The culmination of yoga is full Kåñëa consciousness. This is affirmed in Bhagavad-gétä: a
person who is always thinking of Kåñëa in devotion is the topmost of all yogés. And in
the Second Chapter of the First Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, it is also stated that when
one becomes freed from material contamination by rendering devotional service unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he can at that time understand the science of
God.
Here the word pratilabdhätma-läbhaù occurs. Ätmä means "self," and läbha means "gain."
Generally, conditioned souls have lost their ätmä, or self, but those who are
723
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
transcendentalists have realized the self. It is directed that such a self-realized soul who
aspires to the topmost platform of yogic perfection should not associate with young
women. In the modern age, however, there are so many rascals who recommend that
while one has genitals he should enjoy women as much as he likes, and at the same time
he can become a yogé. In no standard yoga system is the association of women accepted.
It is clearly stated here that the association of women is the gateway to hellish life. The
association of woman is very much restricted in the Vedic civilization. Out of the four
social divisions, the brahmacäré, vänaprastha and the sannyäsé—three orders—are
strictly prohibited from the association of women; only the gåhasthas, or householders,
are given license to have an intimate relationship with a woman, and that relationship is
also restricted for begetting nice children. If, however, one wants to stick to continued
existence in the material world, he may indulge in female association unrestrictedly.
SB 3.31.40
TEXT 40
YaaePaYaaiTa XaNaEMaaRYaa YaaeizÕeviviNaiMaRTaa )
TaaMaq+aeTaaTMaNaae Ma*TYau& Ta*<aE" kU-PaiMavav*TaMa( )) 40 ))
yopayäti çanair mäyä
yoñid deva-vinirmitä
täm ékñetätmano måtyuà
tåëaiù küpam ivävåtam
SYNONYMS
yä—she who; upayäti—approaches; çanaiù—slowly; mäyä—representation of mäyä;
yoñit—woman; deva—by the Lord; vinirmitä—created; täm—her; ékñeta—one must
regard; ätmanaù—of the soul; måtyum—death; tåëaiù—with grass; küpam—a well; iva—
like; ävåtam—covered.
TRANSLATION
The woman, created by the Lord, is the representation of mäyä, and one who associates
with such mäyä by accepting services must certainly know that this is the way of death,
just like a blind well covered with grass.
724
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Sometimes it happens that a rejected well is covered by grass, and an unwary traveler
who does not know of the existence of the well falls down, and his death is assured.
Similarly, association with a woman begins when one accepts service from her, because
woman is especially created by the Lord to give service to man. By accepting her service,
a man is entrapped. If he is not intelligent enough to know that she is the gateway to
hellish life, he may indulge in her association very liberally. This is restricted for those
who aspire to ascend to the transcendental platform. Even fifty years ago in Hindu
society, such association was restricted. A wife could not see her husband during the
daytime. Householders even had different residential quarters. The internal quarters of
a residential house were for the woman, and the external quarters were for the man.
Acceptance of service rendered by a woman may appear very pleasing, but one should be
very cautious in accepting such service because it is clearly said that woman is the
gateway to death, or forgetfulness of one's self. She blocks the path of spiritual
realization.
SB 3.31.41
TEXT 41
Yaa& MaNYaTae PaiTa& MaaehaNMaNMaaYaaMa*z>aaYaTaqMa( )
ñqTv& ñqSa(r)Ta" Pa[aáae ivtaaPaTYaGa*hPa[dMa( )) 41 ))
yäà manyate patià mohän
man-mäyäm åñabhäyatém
strétvaà stré-saìgataù präpto
vittäpatya-gåha-pradam
SYNONYMS
yäm—which; manyate—she thinks; patim—her husband; mohät—due to illusion; matmäyäm—
My mäyä; åñabha—in the form of a man; äyatém—coming; strétvam—the state
of being a woman; stré-saìgataù—from attachment to a woman; präptaù—obtained;
vitta—wealth; apatya—progeny; gåha—house; pradam—bestowing.
TRANSLATION
A living entity who, as a result of attachment to a woman in his previous life, has been
725
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
endowed with the form of a woman, foolishly looks upon mäyä in the form of a man, her
husband, as the bestower of wealth, progeny, house and other material assets.
PURPORT
From this verse it appears that a woman is also supposed to have been a man in his (her)
previous life, and due to his attachment to his wife, he now has the body of a woman.
Bhagavad-gétä confirms this; a man gets his next life's birth according to what he thinks
of at the time of death. If someone is too attached to his wife, naturally he thinks of his
wife at the time of death, and in his next life he takes the body of a woman. Similarly, if
a woman thinks of her husband at the time of death, naturally she gets the body of a
man in the next life. In the Hindu scriptures, therefore, woman's chastity and devotion
to man is greatly emphasized. A woman's attachment to her husband may elevate her to
the body of a man in her next life, but a man's attachment to a woman will degrade him,
and in his next life he will get the body of a woman. We should always remember, as it is
stated in Bhagavad-gétä, that both the gross and subtle material bodies are dresses; they
are the shirt and coat of the living entity. To be either a woman or a man only involves
one's bodily dress. The soul in nature is actually the marginal energy of the Supreme
Lord. Every living entity, being classified as energy, is supposed to be originally a
woman, or one who is enjoyed. In the body of a man there is a greater opportunity to get
out of the material clutches; there is less opportunity in the body of a woman. In this
verse it is indicated that the body of a man should not be misused through forming an
attachment to women and thus becoming too entangled in material enjoyment, which
will result in getting the body of a woman in the next life. A woman is generally fond of
household prosperity, ornaments, furniture and dresses. She is satisfied when the
husband supplies all these things sufficiently. The relationship between man and woman
is very complicated, but the substance is that one who aspires to ascend to the
transcendental stage of spiritual realization should be very careful in accepting the
association of a woman. In the stage of Kåñëa consciousness, however, such restriction of
association may be slackened because if a man's and woman's attachment is not to each
other but to Kåñëa, then both of them are equally eligible to get out of the material
entanglement and reach the abode of Kåñëa. As it is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, anyone
who seriously takes to Kåñëa consciousness—whether in the lowest species of life or a
woman or of the less intelligent classes, such as the mercantile or laborer class—will go
back home, back to Godhead, and reach the abode of Kåñëa. A man should not be
attached to a woman, nor should a woman be attached to a man. Both man and woman
726
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
should be attached to the service of the Lord. Then there is the possibility of liberation
from material entanglement for both of them.
SB 3.31.42
TEXT 42
TaaMaaTMaNaae ivJaaNaqYaaTPaTYaPaTYaGa*haTMak-Ma( )
dEvaePaSaaidTa& Ma*TYau& Ma*GaYaaeGaaRYaNa& YaQaa )) 42 ))
täm ätmano vijänéyät
paty-apatya-gåhätmakam
daivopasäditaà måtyuà
mågayor gäyanaà yathä
SYNONYMS
täm—the Lord's mäyä; ätmanaù—of herself; vijänéyät—she should know; pati—
husband; apatya—children; gåha—house; ätmakam—consisting of; daiva—by the
authority of the Lord; upasäditam—brought about; måtyum—death; mågayoù—of the
hunter; gäyanam—the singing; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
A woman, therefore, should consider her husband, her house and her children to be the
arrangement of the external energy of the Lord for her death, just as the sweet singing of
the hunter is death for the deer.
PURPORT
In these instructions of Lord Kapiladeva it is explained that not only is woman the
gateway to hell for man, but man is also the gateway to hell for woman. It is a question of
attachment. A man becomes attached to a woman because of her service, her beauty and
many other assets, and similarly a woman becomes attached to a man for his giving her a
nice place to live, ornaments, dress and children. It is a question of attachment for one
another. As long as either is attached to the other for such material enjoyment, the
woman is dangerous for the man, and the man is also dangerous for the woman. But if
the attachment is transferred to Kåñëa, both of them become Kåñëa conscious, and then
marriage is very nice. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé therefore recommends:
727
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
anäsaktasya viñayän
yathärham upayuïjataù
nirbandhaù kåñëa-sambandhe
yuktaà vairägyam ucyate
(Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.255)
Man and woman should live together as householders in relationship with Kåñëa, only
for the purpose of discharging duties in the service of Kåñëa. Engage the children,
engage the wife and engage the husband, all in Kåñëa conscious duties, and then all
these bodily or material attachments will disappear. Since the via medium is Kåñëa, the
consciousness is pure, and there is no possibility of degradation at any time.
SB 3.31.43
TEXT 43
deheNa Jaqv>aUTaeNa l/aek-açaek-MaNauv]JaNa( )
>auÅaNa Wv k-MaaRi<a k-raeTYaivrTa& PauMaaNa( )) 43 ))
dehena jéva-bhütena
lokäl lokam anuvrajan
bhuïjäna eva karmäëi
karoty avirataà pumän
SYNONYMS
dehena—on account of the body; jéva-bhütena—possessed by the living entity; lokät—
from one planet; lokam—to another planet; anuvrajan—wandering; bhuïjänaù—
enjoying; eva—so; karmäëi—fruitive activities; karoti—he does; aviratam—incessantly;
pumän—the living entity.
TRANSLATION
Due to his particular type of body, the materialistic living entity wanders from one planet
to another, following fruitive activities. In this way, he involves himself in fruitive
activities and enjoys the result incessantly.
PURPORT
728
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
When the living entity is encaged in the material body, he is called jéva-bhüta, and when
he is free from the material body he is called brahma-bhüta [SB 4.30.20]. By changing his
material body birth after birth, he travels not only in the different species of life, but
also from one planet to another. Lord Caitanya says that the living entities, bound up by
fruitive activities, are wandering in this way throughout the whole universe, and if by
some chance or by pious activities they get in touch with a bona fide spiritual master, by
the grace of Kåñëa, then they get the seed of devotional service. After getting this seed,
if one sows it within his heart and pours water on it by hearing and chanting, the seed
grows into a big plant, and there are fruits and flowers which the living entity can enjoy,
even in this material world. That is called the brahma-bhüta stage. In his designated
condition, a living entity is called materialistic, and upon being freed from all
designations, when he is fully Kåñëa conscious, engaged in devotional service, he is
called liberated. Unless one gets the opportunity to associate with a bona fide spiritual
master by the grace of the Lord, there is no possibility of one's liberation from the cycle
of birth and death in the different species of life and through the different grades of
planets.
SB 3.31.44
TEXT 44
Jaqvae ùSYaaNauGaae dehae >aUTaeiNd]YaMaNaaeMaYa" )
TaiàraeDaae_SYa Mar<aMaaiv>aaRvSTau SaM>av" )) 44 ))
jévo hy asyänugo deho
bhütendriya-mano-mayaù
tan-nirodho 'sya maraëam
ävirbhävas tu sambhavaù
SYNONYMS
jévaù—the living entity; hi—indeed; asya—of him; anugaù—suitable; dehaù—body;
bhüta—gross material elements; indriya—senses; manaù—mind; mayaù—made of; tat—
of the body; nirodhaù—destruction; asya—of the living entity; maraëam—death;
ävirbhävaù—manifestation; tu—but; sambhavaù—birth.
TRANSLATION
729
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
In this way the living entity gets a suitable body with a material mind and senses,
according to his fruitive activities. When the reaction of his particular activity comes to
an end, that end is called death, and when a particular type of reaction begins, that
beginning is called birth.
PURPORT
From time immemorial, the living entity travels in the different species of life and the
different planets, almost perpetually. This process is explained in Bhagavad-gétä.
Bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni yanträrüòhäni mäyayä: [Bg. 18.61] under the spell of mäyä,
everyone is wandering throughout the universe on the carriage of the body offered by
the material energy. Materialistic life involves a series of actions and reactions. It is a
long film spool of actions and reactions, and one life-span is just a flash in such a
reactionary show. When a child is born, it is to be understood that his particular type of
body is the beginning of another set of activities, and when an old man dies, it is to be
understood that one set of reactionary activities is finished.
We can see that because of different reactionary activities, one man is born in a rich
family, and another is born in a poor family, although both of them are born in the same
place, at the same moment and in the same atmosphere. One who is carrying pious
activity with him is given a chance to take his birth in a rich or pious family, and one
who is carrying impious activity is given a chance to take birth in a lower, poor family.
The change of body means a change to a different field of activities. Similarly, when the
body of the boy changes into that of a youth, the boyish activities change into youthful
activities.
It is clear that a particular body is given to the living entity for a particular type of
activity. This process is going on perpetually, from a time which is impossible to trace
out. Vaiñëava poets say, therefore, anädi karama-phale, which means that these actions
and reactions of one's activity cannot be traced, for they may even continue from the
last millennium of Brahmä's birth to the next millennium. We have seen the example in
the life of Närada Muni. In one millennium he was the son of a maidservant, and in the
next millennium he became a great sage.
SB 3.31.45, SB 3.31.46, SB 3.31.45-46
TEXTS 45-46
d]VYaaePal/iBDaSQaaNaSYa d]VYae+aaYaaeGYaTaa Yada )
TaTPaÄTvMah&MaaNaaduTPaitad]RVYadXaRNaMa( )) 45 ))
730
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
YaQaa+<aaed]RVYaavYavdXaRNaaYaaeGYaTaa Yada )
TadEv c+auzae d]íud]Rí*TvaYaaeGYaTaaNaYaae" )) 46 ))
dravyopalabdhi-sthänasya
dravyekñäyogyatä yadä
tat païcatvam ahaà-mänäd
utpattir dravya-darçanam
yathäkñëor dravyävayavadarçanäyogyatä
yadä
tadaiva cakñuño drañöur
drañöåtväyogyatänayoù
SYNONYMS
dravya—of objects; upalabdhi—of perception; sthänasya—of the place; dravya—of
objects; ékñä—of perception; ayogyatä—incapability; yadä—when; tat—that;
païcatvam—death; aham-mänät—from the misconception of "I"; utpattiù—birth;
dravya—the physical body; darçanam—viewing; yathä—just as; akñëoù—of the eyes;
dravya—of objects; avayava—parts; darçana—of seeing; ayogyatä—incapability; yadä—
when; tadä—then; eva—indeed; cakñuñaù—of the sense of sight; drañöuù—of the seer;
drañöåtva—of the faculty of seeing; ayogyatä—incapability; anayoù—of both of these.
TRANSLATION
When the eyes lose their power to see color or form due to morbid affliction of the optic
nerve, the sense of sight becomes deadened. The living entity, who is the seer of both the
eyes and the sight, loses his power of vision. In the same way, when the physical body,
the place where perception of objects occurs, is rendered incapable of perceiving, that is
known as death. When one begins to view the physical body as one's very self, that is
called birth.
PURPORT
When one says, "I see," this means that he sees with his eyes or with his spectacles; he
sees with the instrument of sight. If the instrument of sight is broken or becomes
diseased or incapable of acting, then he, as the seer, also ceases to act. Similarly, in this
731
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
material body, at the present moment the living soul is acting, and when the material
body, due to its incapability to function, ceases, he also ceases to perform his reactionary
activities. When one's instrument of action is broken and cannot function, that is called
death. Again, when one gets a new instrument for action, that is called birth. This
process of birth and death is going on at every moment, by constant bodily change. The
final change is called death, and acceptance of a new body is called birth. That is the
solution to the question of birth and death. Actually, the living entity has neither birth
nor death, but is eternal. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, na hanyate hanyamäne çarére:
[Bg. 2.20] the living entity never dies, even after the death or annihilation of this
material body.
SB 3.31.47
TEXT 47
TaSMaaà k-aYaR" SaN}aaSaae Na k-aPaR<Ya& Na SaM>a]Ma" )
bud(ßa JaqvGaiTa& Daqrae Mau¢-Sa(r)êreidh )) 47 ))
tasmän na käryaù santräso
na kärpaëyaà na sambhramaù
buddhvä jéva-gatià dhéro
mukta-saìgaç cared iha
SYNONYMS
tasmät—on account of death; na—not; käryaù—should be done; santräsaù—horror;
na—not; kärpaëyam—miserliness; na—not; sambhramaù—eagerness for material gain;
buddhvä—realizing; jéva-gatim—the true nature of the living entity; dhéraù—steadfast;
mukta-saìgaù—free from attachment; caret—one should move about; iha—in this
world.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, one should not view death with horror, nor have recourse to defining the body
as soul, nor give way to exaggeration in enjoying the bodily necessities of life. Realizing
the true nature of the living entity, one should move about in the world free from
attachment and steadfast in purpose.
732
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
A sane person who has understood the philosophy of life and death is very upset upon
hearing of the horrible, hellish condition of life in the womb of the mother or outside of
the mother. But one has to make a solution to the problems of life. A sane man should
understand the miserable condition of this material body. Without being unnecessarily
upset, he should try to find out if there is a remedy. The remedial measures can be
understood when one associates with persons who are liberated. It must be understood
who is actually liberated. The liberated person is described in Bhagavad-gétä: one who
engages in uninterrupted devotional service to the Lord, having surpassed the stringent
laws of material nature, is understood to be situated in Brahman.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is beyond the material creation. It is admitted
even by impersonalists like Çaìkaräcärya that Näräyaëa is transcendental to this
material creation. As such, when one actually engages in the service of the Lord in
various forms, either Näräyaëa or Rädhä-Kåñëa or Sétä-Räma, he is understood to be on
the platform of liberation. The Bhägavatam also confirms that liberation means to be
situated in one's constitutional position. Since a living entity is eternally the servitor of
the Supreme Lord, when one seriously and sincerely engages in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord, he is situated in the position of liberation. One should try to
associate with a liberated person, and then the problems of life, namely birth and death,
can be solved.
While discharging devotional service in full Kåñëa consciousness, one should not be
miserly. He should not unnecessarily show that he has renounced this world. Actually,
renunciation is not possible. If one renounces his palatial building and goes to a forest,
there is actually no renunciation, for the palatial building is the property of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and the forest is also the property of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. If he changes from one property to another, that does not mean that he
renounces; he was never the proprietor of either the palace or the forest. Renunciation
necessitates renouncing the false understanding that one can lord it over material
nature. When one renounces this false attitude and renounces the puffed-up position
that he is also God, that is real renunciation. Otherwise, there is no meaning of
renunciation. Rüpa Gosvämé advises that if one renounces anything which could be
applied in the service of the Lord and does not use it for that purpose, that is called
phalgu-vairägya, insufficient or false renunciation. Everything belongs to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; therefore everything can be engaged in the service of the Lord;
nothing should be used for one's sense gratification. That is real renunciation. Nor
733
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
should one unnecessarily increase the necessities of the body. We should be satisfied
with whatever is offered and supplied by Kåñëa without much personal endeavor. We
should spend our time executing devotional service in Kåñëa consciousness. That is the
solution to the problem of life and death.
SB 3.31.48
TEXT 48
SaMYaGdXaRNaYaa buÖya YaaeGavEraGYaYau¢-Yaa )
MaaYaaivricTae l/aeke- creNNYaSYa k-le/vrMa( )) 48 ))
samyag-darçanayä buddhyä
yoga-vairägya-yuktayä
mäyä-viracite loke
caren nyasya kalevaram
SYNONYMS
samyak-darçanayä—endowed with right vision; buddhyä—through reason; yoga—by
devotional service; vairägya—by detachment; yuktayä—strengthened; mäyä-viracite—
arranged by mäyä; loke—to this world; caret—one should move about; nyasya—
relegating; kalevaram—the body.
TRANSLATION
Endowed with right vision and strengthened by devotional service and a pessimistic
attitude towards material identity, one should relegate his body to this illusory world
through his reason. Thus one can be unconcerned with this material world.
PURPORT
It is sometimes misunderstood that if one has to associate with persons engaged in
devotional service, he will not be able to solve the economic problem. To answer this
argument, it is described here that one has to associate with liberated persons not
directly, physically, but by understanding, through philosophy and logic, the problems of
life. It is stated here, samyag-darçanayä buddhyä: one has to see perfectly, and by
intelligence and yogic practice one has to renounce this world. That renunciation can
be achieved by the process recommended in the Second Chapter of the First Canto of
734
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
The devotee's intelligence is always in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
His attitude towards the material existence is one of detachment, for he knows perfectly
well that this material world is a creation of illusory energy. Realizing himself to be part
and parcel of the Supreme Soul, the devotee discharges his devotional service and is
completely aloof from material action and reaction. Thus at the end he gives up his
material body, or the material energy, and as pure soul he enters the kingdom of God.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Thirty-first Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Kapila's Instructions on the Movements of the Living
Entities."
SB 3.32: Entanglement in Fruitive Activities
32. Entanglement in Fruitive Activities
SB 3.32.1
TEXT 1
k-iPal/ ovac
AQa Yaae Ga*hMaeDaqYaaNDaMaaRNaevavSaNa( Ga*he )
k-aMaMaQa| c DaMaaRNa( SvaNa( daeiGDa >aUYa" iPaPaiTaR TaaNa( )) 1 ))
kapila uväca
atha yo gåha-medhéyän
dharmän evävasan gåhe
kämam arthaà ca dharmän svän
dogdhi bhüyaù piparti tän
SYNONYMS
kapilaù uväca—Lord Kapila said; atha—now; yaù—the person who; gåha-medhéyän—of
the householders; dharmän—duties; eva—certainly; ävasan—living; gåhe—at home;
kämam—sense gratification; artham—economic development; ca—and; dharmän—
religious rituals; svän—his; dogdhi—enjoys; bhüyaù—again and again; piparti—
735
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
performs; tän—them.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead said: The person who lives in the center of household life
derives material benefits by performing religious rituals, and thereby he fulfills his desire
for economic development and sense gratification. Again and again he acts the same way.
PURPORT
There are two kinds of householders. One is called the gåhamedhé, and the other is called
the gåhastha. The objective of the gåhamedhé is sense gratification, and the objective of
the gåhastha is self-realization. Here the Lord is speaking about the gåhamedhé, or the
person who wants to remain in this material world. His activity is to enjoy material
benefits by performing religious rituals for economic development and thereby
ultimately satisfy the senses. He does not want anything more. Such a person works very
hard throughout his life to become very rich and eat very nicely and drink. By giving
some charity for pious activity he can go to a higher planetary atmosphere in the
heavenly planets in his next life, but he does not want to stop the repetition of birth and
death and finish with the concomitant miserable factors of material existence. Such a
person is called a gåhamedhé.
A gåhastha is a person who lives with family, wife, children and relatives but has no
attachment for them. He prefers to live in family life rather than as a mendicant or
sannyäsé, but his chief aim is to achieve self-realization, or to come to the standard of
Kåñëa consciousness. Here, however, Lord Kapiladeva is speaking about the gåhamedhés,
who have made their aim the materialistically prosperous life, which they achieve by
sacrificial ceremonies, by charities and by good work. They are posted in good positions,
and since they know that they are using up their assets of pious activities, they again and
again perform activities of sense gratification. It is said by Prahläda Mahäräja, punaù
punaç carvita-carvaëänäm: [SB 7.5.30] they prefer to chew the already chewed. Again
and again they experience the material pangs, even if they are rich and prosperous, but
they do not want to give up this kind of life.
SB 3.32.2
TEXT 2
Sa caiPa >aGavÖMaaRTk-aMaMaU!" Parax(Mau%" )
736
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
YaJaTae §-Taui>adeRvaNa( iPaTa›&ê é[ÖYaaiNvTa" )) 2 ))
sa cäpi bhagavad-dharmät
käma-müòhaù paräì-mukhaù
yajate kratubhir devän
pitèàç ca çraddhayänvitaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he; ca api—moreover; bhagavat-dharmät—from devotional service; kämamüòhaù—
infatuated by lust; paräk-mukhaù—having the face turned away; yajate—
worships; kratubhiù—with sacrificial ceremonies; devän—the demigods; pitèn—the
forefathers; ca—and; çraddhayä—with faith; anvitaù—endowed.
TRANSLATION
Such persons are ever bereft of devotional service due to being too attached to sense
gratification, and therefore, although they perform various kinds of sacrifices and take
great vows to satisfy the demigods and forefathers, they are not interested in Kåñëa
consciousness, devotional service.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (7.20) it is said that persons who worship demigods have lost their
intelligence: kämais tais tair håta jïänäù. They are much attracted to sense gratification,
and therefore they worship the demigods. It is, of course, recommended in the Vedic
scriptures that if one wants money, health or education, then he should worship the
various demigods. A materialistic person has manifold demands, and thus there are
manifold demigods to satisfy his senses. The gåhamedhés, who want to continue a
prosperous materialistic way of life, generally worship the demigods or the forefathers by
offering piëòa, or respectful oblations. Such persons are bereft of Kåñëa consciousness
and are not interested in devotional service to the Lord. This kind of so-called pious and
religious man is the result of impersonalism. The impersonalists maintain that the
Supreme Absolute Truth has no form and that one can imagine any form he likes for his
benefit and worship in that way. Therefore the gåhamedhés or materialistic men say that
they can worship any form of a demigod as worship of the Supreme Lord. Especially
amongst the Hindus, those who are meat-eaters prefer to worship goddess Kälé because it
737
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
is prescribed that one can sacrifice a goat before that goddess. They maintain that
whether one worships the goddess Kälé or the Supreme Personality of Godhead Viñëu or
any demigod, the destination is the same. This is first-class rascaldom, and such people
are misled. But they prefer this philosophy. Bhagavad-gétä does not accept such
rascaldom, and it is clearly stated that such methods are meant for persons who have lost
their intelligence. The same judgment is confirmed here, and the word käma-müòha,
meaning one who has lost his sense or is infatuated by the lust of attraction for sense
gratification, is used. Käma-müòhas are bereft of Kåñëa consciousness and devotional
service and are infatuated by a strong desire for sense gratification. The worshipers of
demigods are condemned both in Bhagavad-gétä and in Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
SB 3.32.3
TEXT 3
TaC^\ÖYaa§-aNTaMaiTa" iPaTa*devv]Ta" PauMaaNa( )
GaTva caNd]MaSa& l/aek&- SaaeMaPaa" PauNareZYaiTa )) 3 ))
tac-chraddhayäkränta-matiù
pitå-deva-vrataù pumän
gatvä cändramasaà lokaà
soma-päù punar eñyati
SYNONYMS
tat—to the demigods and forefathers; çraddhayä—with reverence; äkränta—overcome;
matiù—his mind; pitå—to the forefathers; deva—to the demigods; vrataù—his vow;
pumän—the person; gatvä—having gone; cändramasam—to the moon; lokam—planet;
soma-päù—drinking soma juice; punaù—again; eñyati—will return.
TRANSLATION
Such materialistic persons, attracted by sense gratification and devoted to the forefathers
and demigods, can be elevated to the moon, where they drink an extract of the soma
plant. They again return to this planet.
PURPORT
The moon is considered one of the planets of the heavenly kingdom. One can be
738
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
promoted to this planet by executing different sacrifices recommended in the Vedic
literature, such as pious activities in worshiping the demigods and forefathers with
rigidity and vows. But one cannot remain there for a very long time. Life on the moon is
said to last ten thousand years according to the calculation of the demigods. The
demigods' time is calculated in such a way that one day (twelve hours) is equal to six
months on this planet. It is not possible to reach the moon by any material vehicle like a
sputnik, but persons who are attracted by material enjoyment can go to the moon by
pious activities. In spite of being promoted to the moon, however, one has to come back
to this earth again when the merits of his works in sacrifice are finished. This is also
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.21): te taà bhuktvä svarga-lokaà viçälaà kñéëe puëye
martya-lokaà viçanti.
SB 3.32.4
TEXT 4
Yada cahqNd]XaYYaaYaa& XaeTae_NaNTaaSaNaae hir" )
Tada l/aek-a l/Ya& YaaiNTa Ta WTae Ga*hMaeiDaNaaMa( )) 4 ))
yadä cähéndra-çayyäyäà
çete 'nantäsano hariù
tadä lokä layaà yänti
ta ete gåha-medhinäm
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; ca—and; ahi-indra—of the king of snakes; çayyäyäm—on the bed; çete—
lies; ananta-äsanaù—He whose seat is Ananta Çeña; hariù—Lord Hari; tadä—then;
lokäù—the planets; layam—unto dissolution; yänti—go; te ete—those very; gåhamedhinäm—
of the materialistic householders.
TRANSLATION
All the planets of the materialistic persons, including all the heavenly planets, such as the
moon, are vanquished when the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, goes to His bed
of serpents, which is known as Ananta Çeña.
PURPORT
739
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The materially attached are very eager to promote themselves to the heavenly planets
such as the moon. There are many heavenly planets to which they aspire just to achieve
more and more material happiness by getting a long duration of life and the
paraphernalia for sense enjoyment. But the attached persons do not know that even if
one goes to the highest planet, Brahmaloka, destruction exists there also. In Bhagavadgétä
the Lord says that one can even go to the Brahmaloka, but still he will find the
pangs of birth, death, disease and old age. Only by approaching the Lord's abode, the
Vaikuëöhaloka, does one not take birth again in this material world. The gåhamedhés, or
materialistic persons, however, do not like to use this advantage. They would prefer to
transmigrate perpetually from one body to another, or from one planet to another. They
do not want the eternal, blissful life in knowledge in the kingdom of God.
There are two kinds of dissolutions. One dissolution takes place at the end of the life of
Brahmä. At that time all the planetary systems, including the heavenly systems, are
dissolved in water and enter into the body of Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, who lies on the
Garbhodaka Ocean on the bed of serpents, called Çeña. In the other dissolution, which
occurs at the end of Brahmä's day, all the lower planetary systems are destroyed. When
Lord Brahmä rises after his night, these lower planetary systems are again created. The
statement in Bhagavad-gétä that persons who worship the demigods have lost their
intelligence is confirmed in this verse. These less intelligent persons do not know that
even if they are promoted to the heavenly planets, at the time of dissolution they
themselves, the demigods and all their planets will be annihilated. They have no
information that eternal, blissful life can be attained.
SB 3.32.5
TEXT 5
Yae SvDaMaaRà duùiNTa Daqra" k-aMaaQaRheTave )
iNa"Sa(r)a NYaSTak-MaaR<a" Pa[XaaNTaa" éuÖceTaSa" )) 5 ))
ye sva-dharmän na duhyanti
dhéräù kämärtha-hetave
niùsaìgä nyasta-karmäëaù
praçäntäù çuddha-cetasaù
SYNONYMS
ye—those who; sva-dharmän—their own occupational duties; na—do not; duhyanti—
740
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
take advantage of; dhéräù—intelligent; käma—sense gratification; artha—economic
development; hetave—for the sake of; niùsaìgäù—free from material attachment;
nyasta—given up; karmäëaù—fruitive activities; praçäntäù—satisfied; çuddha-cetasaù—
of purified consciousness.
TRANSLATION
Those who are intelligent and are of purified consciousness are completely satisfied in
Kåñëa consciousness. Freed from the modes of material nature, they do not act for sense
gratification; rather, since they are situated in their own occupational duties, they act as
one is expected to act.
PURPORT
The first-class example of this type of man is Arjuna. Arjuna was a kñatriya, and his
occupational duty was to fight. Generally, kings fight to extend their kingdoms, which
they rule for sense gratification. But as far as Arjuna is concerned, he declined to fight
for his own sense gratification. He said that although he could get a kingdom by fighting
with his relatives, he did not want to fight with them. But when he was ordered by
Kåñëa and convinced by the teachings of Bhagavad-gétä that his duty was to satisfy
Kåñëa, then he fought. Thus he fought not for his sense gratification but for the
satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Persons who work at their prescribed duties, not for sense gratification but for
gratification of the Supreme Lord, are called niùsaìga, freed from the influence of the
modes of material nature. Nyasta-karmäëaù indicates that the results of their activities
are given to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such persons appear to be acting on
the platform of their respective duties, but such activities are not performed for personal
sense gratification; rather, they are performed for the Supreme Person. Such devotees
are called praçäntäù, which means "completely satisfied." Çuddha-cetasaù means Kåñëa
conscious; their consciousness has become purified. In unpurified consciousness one
thinks of himself as the Lord of the universe, but in purified consciousness one thinks
himself the eternal servant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Putting oneself in
that position of eternal servitorship to the Supreme Lord and working for Him
perpetually, one actually becomes completely satisfied. As long as one works for his
personal sense gratification, he will always be full of anxiety. That is the difference
between ordinary consciousness and Kåñëa consciousness.
SB 3.32.6
741
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 6
iNav*itaDaMaRiNarTaa iNaMaRMaa iNarhx(k*-Taa" )
SvDaMaaRáeNa SatveNa PairéuÖeNa ceTaSaa )) 6 ))
nivåtti-dharma-niratä
nirmamä nirahaìkåtäù
sva-dharmäptena sattvena
pariçuddhena cetasä
SYNONYMS
nivåtti-dharma—in religious activities for detachment; niratäù—constantly engaged;
nirmamäù—without a sense of proprietorship; nirahaìkåtäù—without false egoism; svadharma—
by one's own occupational duties; äptena—executed; sattvena—by goodness;
pariçuddhena—completely purified; cetasä—by consciousness.
TRANSLATION
By executing one's occupational duties, acting with detachment and without a sense of
proprietorship or false egoism, one is posted in one's constitutional position by dint of
complete purification of consciousness, and by thus executing so-called material duties he
can easily enter into the kingdom of God.
PURPORT
Here the word nivåtti-dharma-niratäù means "constantly engaging in executing religious
activities for detachment." There are two kinds of religious performances. One is called
pravåtti-dharma, which means the religious activities performed by the gåhamedhés for
elevation to higher planets or for economic prosperity, the final aim of which is sense
gratification. Every one of us who has come to this material world has the sense of
overlordship. This is called pravåtti. But the opposite type of religious performance,
which is called nivåtti, is to act for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Engaged in
devotional service in Kåñëa consciousness, one has no proprietorship claim, nor is one
situated in the false egoism of thinking that he is God or the master. He always thinks
himself the servant. That is the process of purifying consciousness. With pure
consciousness only can one enter into the kingdom of God. Materialistic persons, in
742
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
their elevated condition, can enter any one of the planets within this material world,
but all are subjected to dissolution over and over again.
SB 3.32.7
TEXT 7
SaUYaRÜare<a Tae YaaiNTa Pauåz& ivìTaaeMau%Ma( )
ParavreXa& Pa[k*-iTaMaSYaaeTPatYaNTa>aavNaMa( )) 7 ))
sürya-dväreëa te yänti
puruñaà viçvato-mukham
parävareçaà prakåtim
asyotpatty-anta-bhävanam
SYNONYMS
sürya-dväreëa—through the path of illumination; te—they; yänti—approach;
puruñam—the Personality of Godhead; viçvataù-mukham—whose face is turned
everywhere; para-avara-éçam—the proprietor of the spiritual and material worlds;
prakåtim—the material cause; asya—of the world; utpatti—of manifestation; anta—of
dissolution; bhävanam—the cause.
TRANSLATION
Through the path of illumination, such liberated persons approach the complete
Personality of Godhead, who is the proprietor of the material and spiritual worlds and is
the supreme cause of their manifestation and dissolution.
PURPORT
The word sürya-dväreëa means "by the illuminated path," or through the sun planet.
The illuminated path is devotional service. It is advised in the Vedas not to pass through
the darkness, but to pass through the sun planet. It is also recommended here that by
traversing the illuminated path one can be freed from the contamination of the material
modes of nature; by that path one can enter into the kingdom where the completely
perfect Personality of Godhead resides. The words puruñaà viçvato-mukham mean the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is all-perfect. All living entities other than the
Supreme Personality of Godhead are very small, although they may be big by our
743
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
calculation. Everyone is infinitesimal, and therefore in the Vedas the Supreme Lord is
called the supreme eternal amongst all eternals. He is the proprietor of the material and
spiritual worlds and the supreme cause of manifestation. Material nature is only the
ingredient because actually the manifestation is caused by His energy. The material
energy is also His energy; just as the combination of father and mother is the cause of
childbirth, so the combination of the material energy and the glance of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the cause of the manifestation of the material world. The
efficient cause, therefore, is not matter, but the Lord Himself.
SB 3.32.8
TEXT 8
iÜParaDaaRvSaaNae Ya" Pa[l/Yaae b]ø<aSTau Tae )
TaavdDYaaSaTae l/aek&- ParSYa ParicNTak-a" )) 8 ))
dvi-parärdhävasäne yaù
pralayo brahmaëas tu te
tävad adhyäsate lokaà
parasya para-cintakäù
SYNONYMS
dvi-parärdha—two parärdhas; avasäne—at the end of; yaù—which; pralayaù—death;
brahmaëaù—of Lord Brahmä; tu—indeed; te—they; tävat—so long; adhyäsate—dwell;
lokam—on the planet; parasya—of the Supreme; para-cintakäù—thinking of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Worshipers of the Hiraëyagarbha expansion of the Personality of Godhead remain within
this material world until the end of two parärdhas, when Lord Brahmä also dies.
PURPORT
One dissolution is at the end of Brahmä's day, and one is at the end of Brahmä's life.
Brahmä dies at the end of two parärdhas, at which time the entire material universe is
dissolved. Persons who are worshipers of Hiraëyagarbha, the plenary expansion of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, do not directly approach the
744
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Supreme Personality of Godhead in Vaikuëöha. They remain within this universe on
Satyaloka or other higher planets until the end of the life of Brahmä. Then, with
Brahmä, they are elevated to the spiritual kingdom.
The words parasya para-cintakäù mean "always thinking of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead," or being always Kåñëa conscious. When we speak of Kåñëa, this refers to the
complete category of viñëu-tattva. Kåñëa includes the three puruña incarnations, namely
Mahä-Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, as well as all the
incarnations taken together. This is confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä. Rämädi-mürtiñu
kalä-niyamena tiñöhan: [Bs. 5.39] Lord Kåñëa is perpetually situated with His many
expansions, such as Räma, Nåsiàha, Vämana, Madhusüdana, Viñëu and Näräyaëa. He
exists with all His plenary portions and the portions of His plenary portions, and each of
them is as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The words parasya paracintakäù
mean those who are fully Kåñëa conscious. Such persons enter directly into the
kingdom of God, the Vaikuëöha planets, or, if they are worshipers of the plenary portion
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, they remain within this universe until its dissolution, and after
that they enter.
SB 3.32.9
TEXT 9
+MaaM>aae_Nal/aiNal/ivYaNMaNawiNd]YaaQaR‚
>aUTaaidi>a" Pairv*Ta& Pa[iTaSaiÅhqzuR" )
AVYaak*-Ta& ivXaiTa YaihR Gau<a}aYaaTMaa
k-al&/ Para:YaMaNau>aUYa Par" SvYaM>aU" )) 9 ))
kñmämbho-'nalänila-viyan-mana-indriyärthabhütädibhiù
parivåtaà pratisaïjihérñuù
avyäkåtaà viçati yarhi guëa-trayätmä
kälaà paräkhyam anubhüya paraù svayambhüù
SYNONYMS
kñmä—earth; ambhaù—water; anala—fire; anila—air; viyat—ether; manaù—mind;
indriya—the senses; artha—the objects of the senses; bhüta—ego; ädibhiù—and so on;
parivåtam—covered by; pratisaïjihérñuù—desiring to dissolve; avyäkåtam—the
changeless spiritual sky; viçati—he enters; yarhi—at which time; guëa-traya-ätmä—
745
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
consisting of the three modes; kälam—the time; para-äkhyam—two parärdhas;
anubhüya—after experiencing; paraù—the chief; svayambhüù—Lord Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
After experiencing the inhabitable time of the three modes of material nature, known as
two parärdhas, Lord Brahmä closes the material universe, which is covered by layers of
earth, water, air, fire, ether, mind, ego, etc., and goes back to Godhead.
PURPORT
The word avyäkåtam is very significant in this verse. The same meaning is stated in
Bhagavad-gétä, in the word sanätana. This material world is vyäkåta, or subject to
changes, and it finally dissolves. But after the dissolution of this material world, the
manifestation of the spiritual world, the sanätana-dhäma, remains. That spiritual sky is
called avyäkåta, that which does not change, and there the Supreme Personality of
Godhead resides. When, after ruling over the material universe under the influence of
the time element, Lord Brahmä desires to dissolve it and enter into the kingdom of God,
others then enter with him.
SB 3.32.10
TEXT 10
Wv& PareTYa >aGavNTaMaNauPa[ivía
Yae YaaeiGaNaae iJaTaMaåNMaNaSaae ivraGaa" )
TaeNaEv Saak-MaMa*Ta& Pauåz& Paura<a&
b]ø Pa[DaaNaMauPaYaaNTYaGaTaai>aMaaNaa" )) 10 ))
evaà paretya bhagavantam anupraviñöä
ye yogino jita-marun-manaso virägäù
tenaiva säkam amåtaà puruñaà puräëaà
brahma pradhänam upayänty agatäbhimänäù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; paretya—having gone a long distance; bhagavantam—Lord Brahmä;
anupraviñöäù—entered; ye—those who; yoginaù—yogés; jita—controlled; marut—the
746
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
breathing; manasaù—the mind; virägäù—detached; tena—with Lord Brahmä; eva—
indeed; säkam—together; amåtam—the embodiment of bliss; puruñam—unto the
Personality of Godhead; puräëam—the oldest; brahma pradhänam—the Supreme
Brahman; upayänti—they go; agata—not gone; abhimänäù—whose false ego.
TRANSLATION
The yogés who become detached from the material world by practice of breathing
exercises and control of the mind reach the planet of Brahmä, which is far, far away.
After giving up their bodies, they enter into the body of Lord Brahmä, and therefore
when Brahmä is liberated and goes to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the
Supreme Brahman, such yogés can also enter into the kingdom of God.
PURPORT
By perfecting their yogic practice, yogés can reach the highest planet, Brahmaloka, or
Satyaloka, and after giving up their material bodies, they can enter into the body of
Lord Brahmä. Because they are not directly devotees of the Lord, they cannot get
liberation directly. They have to wait until Brahmä is liberated, and only then, along
with Brahmä, are they also liberated. It is clear that as long as a living entity is a
worshiper of a particular demigod, his consciousness is absorbed in thoughts of that
demigod, and therefore he cannot get direct liberation, or entrance into the kingdom of
God, nor can he merge into the impersonal effulgence of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Such yogés or demigod worshipers are subjected to the chance of taking birth
again when there is again creation.
SB 3.32.11
TEXT 11
AQa Ta& SavR>aUTaaNaa& ôTPaÚezu k*-Taal/YaMa( )
é[uTaaNau>aav& Xar<a& v]Ja >aaveNa >aaiMaiNa )) 11 ))
atha taà sarva-bhütänäà
håt-padmeñu kåtälayam
çrutänubhävaà çaraëaà
vraja bhävena bhämini
747
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; tam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-bhütänäm—of all
living entities; håt-padmeñu—in the lotus hearts; kåta-älayam—residing; çrutaanubhävam—
whose glories you have heard; çaraëam—unto the shelter; vraja—go;
bhävena—by devotional service; bhämini—My dear mother.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, My dear mother, by devotional service take direct shelter of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is seated in everyone's heart.
PURPORT
One can attain direct contact with the Supreme Personality of Godhead in full Kåñëa
consciousness and revive one's eternal relationship with Him as lover, as Supreme Soul,
as son, as friend or as master. One can reestablish the transcendental loving relationship
with the Supreme Lord in so many ways, and that feeling is true oneness. The oneness of
the Mäyävädé philosophers and the oneness of Vaiñëava philosophers are different. The
Mäyävädé and Vaiñëava philosophers both want to merge into the Supreme, but the
Vaiñëavas do not lose their identities. They want to keep the identity of lover, parent,
friend or servant.
In the transcendental world, the servant and master are one. That is the absolute
platform. Although the relationship is servant and master, both the servant and the
served stand on the same platform. That is oneness. Lord Kapila advised His mother that
she did not need any indirect process. She was already situated in that direct process
because the Supreme Lord had taken birth as her son. Actually, she did not need any
further instruction because she was already in the perfectional stage. Kapiladeva advised
her to continue in the same way. He therefore addressed His mother as bhämini to
indicate that she was already thinking of the Lord as her son. Devahüti is advised by
Lord Kapila to take directly to devotional service, Kåñëa consciousness, because without
that consciousness one cannot become liberated from the clutches of mäyä.
SB 3.32.12, SB 3.32.13, SB 3.32.14, SB 3.32.15, SB 3.32.12-15
TEXTS 12-15
AaÛ" iSQarcra<aa& Yaae vedGa>aR" SahizRi>a" )
YaaeGaeìrE" ku-MaaraÛE" iSaÖEYaaeRGaPa[vTaRkE-" )) 12 ))
748
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
>aedd*íyai>aMaaNaeNa iNa"Sa(r)eNaaiPa k-MaR<aa )
k-Ta*RTvaTSaGau<a& b]ø Pauåz& PauåzzR>aMa( )) 13 ))
Sa Sa&Sa*TYa PauNa" k-ale/ k-ale/NaeìrMaUiTaRNaa )
JaaTae Gau<aVYaiTak-re YaQaaPaUv| Pa[JaaYaTae )) 14 ))
WeìYa| PaarMaeïy& c Tae_iPa DaMaRiviNaiMaRTaMa( )
iNazeVYa PauNaraYaaiNTa Gau<aVYaiTak-re SaiTa )) 15 ))
ädyaù sthira-caräëäà yo
veda-garbhaù saharñibhiù
yogeçvaraiù kumärädyaiù
siddhair yoga-pravartakaiù
bheda-dåñöyäbhimänena
niùsaìgenäpi karmaëä
kartåtvät saguëaà brahma
puruñaà puruñarñabham
sa saàsåtya punaù käle
käleneçvara-mürtinä
jäte guëa-vyatikare
yathä-pürvaà prajäyate
aiçvaryaà pärameñöhyaà ca
te 'pi dharma-vinirmitam
niñevya punar äyänti
guëa-vyatikare sati
SYNONYMS
ädyaù—the creator, Lord Brahmä; sthira-caräëäm—of the immobile and mobile
manifestations; yaù—he who; veda-garbhaù—the repository of the Vedas; saha—along
with; åñibhiù—the sages; yoga-éçvaraiù—with great mystic yogés; kumära-ädyaiù—the
Kumäras and others; siddhaiù—with the perfected living beings; yoga-pravartakaiù—the
authors of the yoga system; bheda-dåñöyä—because of independent vision; abhimänena—
by misconception; niùsaìgena—nonfruitive; api—although; karmaëä—by their
activities; kartåtvät—from the sense of being a doer; sa-guëam—possessing spiritual
749
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
qualities; brahma—Brahman; puruñam—the Personality of Godhead; puruña-åñabham—
the first puruña incarnation; saù—he; saàsåtya—having attained; punaù—again; käle—
at the time; kälena—by time; éçvara-mürtinä—the manifestation of the Lord; jäte guëavyatikare—
when the interaction of the modes arises; yathä—as; pürvam—previously;
prajäyate—is born; aiçvaryam—opulence; pärameñöhyam—royal; ca—and; te—the sages;
api—also; dharma—by their pious activities; vinirmitam—produced; niñevya—having
enjoyed; punaù—again; äyänti—they return; guëa-vyatikare sati—when the interaction
of the modes takes place.
TRANSLATION
My dear mother, someone may worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead with a
special self-interest, but even demigods such as Lord Brahmä, great sages such as Sanatkumära
and great munis such as Maréci have to come back to the material world again at
the time of creation. When the interaction of the three modes of material nature begins,
Brahmä, who is the creator of this cosmic manifestation and who is full of Vedic
knowledge, and the great sages, who are the authors of the spiritual path and the yoga
system, come back under the influence of the time factor. They are liberated by their
nonfruitive activities and they attain the first incarnation of the puruña, but at the time
of creation they come back in exactly the same forms and positions as they had
previously.
PURPORT
That Brahmä becomes liberated is known to everyone, but he cannot liberate his
devotees. Demigods like Brahmä and Lord Çiva cannot give liberation to any living
entity. As it is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, only one who surrenders unto Kåñëa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, can be liberated from the clutches of mäyä. Brahmä is
called here ädyaù sthira-caräëäm. He is the original, first-created living entity, and after
his own birth he creates the entire cosmic manifestation. He was fully instructed in the
matter of creation by the Supreme Lord. Here he is called veda-garbha, which means
that he knows the complete purpose of the Vedas. He is always accompanied by such
great personalities as Maréci, Kaçyapa and the seven sages, as well as by great mystic
yogés, the Kumäras and many other spiritually advanced living entities, but he has his
own interest, separate from the Lord's. Bheda-dåñöyä means that Brahmä sometimes
thinks that he is independent of the Supreme Lord, or he thinks of himself as one of the
three equally independent incarnations. Brahmä is entrusted with creation, Viñëu
750
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
maintains and Rudra, Lord Çiva, destroys. The three of them are understood to be
incarnations of the Supreme Lord in charge of the three different material modes of
nature, but none of them is independent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Here
the word bheda-dåñöyä occurs because Brahmä has a slight inclination to think that he is
as independent as Rudra. Sometimes Brahmä thinks that he is independent of the
Supreme Lord, and the worshiper also thinks that Brahmä is independent. For this
reason, after the destruction of this material world, when there is again creation by the
interaction of the material modes of nature, Brahmä comes back. Although Brahmä
reaches the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the first puruña incarnation, Mahä-
Viñëu, who is full with transcendental qualities, he cannot stay in the spiritual world.
The specific significance of his coming back may be noted. Brahmä and the great åñis
and the great master of yoga (Çiva) are not ordinary living entities; they are very
powerful and have all the perfections of mystic yoga. But still they have an inclination
to try to become one with the Supreme, and therefore they have to come back. In the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is accepted that as long as one thinks that he is equal with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is not completely purified or knowledgeable. In
spite of going up to the first puruña-avatära, Mahä-Viñëu, after the dissolution of this
material creation, such personalities again fall down or come back to the material
creation.
It is a great falldown on the part of the impersonalists to think that the Supreme Lord
appears within a material body and that one should therefore not meditate upon the
form of the Supreme but should meditate instead on the formless. For this particular
mistake, even the great mystic yogés or great stalwart transcendentalists also come back
again when there is creation. All living entities other than the impersonalists and
monists can directly take to devotional service in full Kåñëa consciousness and become
liberated by developing transcendental loving service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Such devotional service develops in the degrees of thinking of the Supreme
Lord as master, as friend, as son and, at last, as lover. These distinctions in
transcendental variegatedness must always be present.
SB 3.32.16
TEXT 16
Yae iTvhaSa¢-MaNaSa" k-MaRSau é[ÖYaaiNvTaa" )
ku-vRNTYaPa[iTaizÖaiNa iNaTYaaNYaiPa c k*-TòXa" )) 16 ))
751
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ye tv ihäsakta-manasaù
karmasu çraddhayänvitäù
kurvanty apratiñiddhäni
nityäny api ca kåtsnaçaù
SYNONYMS
ye—those who; tu—but; iha—in this world; äsakta—addicted; manasaù—whose minds;
karmasu—to fruitive activities; çraddhayä—with faith; anvitäù—endowed; kurvanti—
perform; apratiñiddhäni—with attachment to the result; nityäni—prescribed duties;
api—certainly; ca—and; kåtsnaçaù—repeatedly.
TRANSLATION
Persons who are too addicted to this material world execute their prescribed duties very
nicely and with great faith. They daily perform all such prescribed duties with attachment
to the fruitive result.
PURPORT
In this and the following six verses, the Çrémad-Bhägavatam criticizes persons who are
too materially attached. It is enjoined in the Vedic scriptures that those who are
attached to the enjoyment of material facilities have to sacrifice and undergo certain
ritualistic performances. They have to observe certain rules and regulations in their
daily lives to be elevated to the heavenly planets. It is stated in this verse that such
persons cannot be liberated at any time. Those who worship demigods with the
consciousness that each and every demigod is a separate God cannot be elevated to the
spiritual world, what to speak of persons who are simply attached to duties for the
upliftment of their material condition.
SB 3.32.17
TEXT 17
rJaSaa ku-<#=MaNaSa" k-aMaaTMaaNaae_iJaTaeiNd]Yaa" )
iPaTa›Na( YaJaNTYaNauidNa& Ga*heZvi>arTaaXaYaa" )) 17 ))
rajasä kuëöha-manasaù
kämätmäno 'jitendriyäù
752
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
pitèn yajanty anudinaà
gåheñv abhiratäçayäù
SYNONYMS
rajasä—by the mode of passion; kuëöha—full of anxieties; manasaù—their minds; kämaätmänaù—
aspiring for sense gratification; ajita—uncontrolled; indriyäù—their senses;
pitèn—the forefathers; yajanti—they worship; anudinam—every day; gåheñu—in home
life; abhirata—engaged; äçayäù—their minds.
TRANSLATION
Such persons, impelled by the mode of passion, are full of anxieties and always aspire for
sense gratification due to uncontrolled senses. They worship the forefathers and are busy
day and night improving the economic condition of their family, social or national life.
SB 3.32.18
TEXT 18
}aEviGaRk-aSTae Pauåza ivMau%a hirMaeDaSa" )
k-QaaYaa& k-QaNaqYaaeåiv§-MaSYa MaDauiÜz" )) 18 ))
trai-vargikäs te puruñä
vimukhä hari-medhasaù
kathäyäà kathanéyoruvikramasya
madhudviñaù
SYNONYMS
trai-vargikäù—interested in the three elevating processes; te—those; puruñäù—persons;
vimukhäù—not interested; hari-medhasaù—of Lord Hari; kathäyäm—in the pastimes;
kathanéya—worth chanting of; uru-vikramasya—whose excellent prowess; madhudviñaù—
the killer of the Madhu demon.
TRANSLATION
Such persons are called trai-vargika because they are interested in the three elevating
processes. They are averse to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can give relief to
753
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
the conditioned soul. They are not interested in the Supreme Personality's pastimes,
which are worth hearing because of His transcendental prowess.
PURPORT
According to Vedic thought, there are four elevating principles, namely religiosity,
economic development, sense gratification and liberation. Persons who are simply
interested in material enjoyment make plans to execute prescribed duties. They are
interested in the three elevating processes of religious rituals, economic elevation and
sense enjoyment. By developing their economic condition, they can enjoy material life.
Materialistic persons, therefore, are interested in those elevating processes, which are
called trai-vargika. Trai means "three"; vargika means "elevating processes." Such
materialistic persons are never attracted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Rather, they are antagonistic towards Him.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is here described as hari-medhaù, or "He who can
deliver one from the cycle of birth and death." Materialistic persons are never interested
in hearing about the marvelous pastimes of the Lord. They think that they are fictions
and stories and that the Supreme Godhead is also a man of material nature. They are
not fit for advancing in devotional service, or Kåñëa consciousness. Such materialistic
persons are interested in newspaper stories, novels and imaginary dramas. The factual
activities of the Lord, such as Lord Kåñëa's acting in the Battle of Kurukñetra, or the
activities of the Päëòavas, or the Lord's activities in Våndävana or Dvärakä, are related
in the Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which are full of the activities of the
Lord. But materialistic persons who engage in elevating their position in the material
world are not interested in such activities of the Lord. They may be interested in the
activities of a great politician or a great rich man of this world, but they are not
interested in the transcendental activities of the Supreme Lord.
SB 3.32.19
TEXT 19
NaUNa& dEveNa ivhTaa Yae caCYauTak-QaaSauDaaMa( )
ihTva é*<vNTYaSaÓaQaa" PaurqziMav iv@(>auJa" )) 19 ))
nünaà daivena vihatä
ye cäcyuta-kathä-sudhäm
hitvä çåëvanty asad-gäthäù
754
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
puréñam iva viò-bhujaù
SYNONYMS
nünam—certainly; daivena—by the order of the Lord; vihatäù—condemned; ye—those
who; ca—also; acyuta—of the infallible Lord; kathä—stories; sudhäm—nectar; hitvä—
having given up; çåëvanti—they hear; asat-gäthäù—stories about materialistic persons;
puréñam—stool; iva—like; viö-bhujaù—stool-eaters (hogs).
TRANSLATION
Such persons are condemned by the supreme order of the Lord. Because they are averse
to the nectar of the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they are compared
to stool-eating hogs. They give up hearing the transcendental activities of the Lord and
indulge in hearing of the abominable activities of materialistic persons.
PURPORT
Everyone is addicted to hearing of the activities of another person, whether a politician
or a rich man or an imaginary character whose activities are created in a novel. There
are so many nonsensical literatures, stories and books of speculative philosophy.
Materialistic persons are very interested in reading such literature, but when they are
presented with genuine books of knowledge like Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Bhagavad-gétä,
Viñëu Puräëa or other scriptures of the world, such as the Bible and Koran, they are not
interested. These persons are condemned by the supreme order as much as a hog is
condemned. The hog is interested in eating stool. If the hog is offered some nice
preparation made of condensed milk or ghee, he won't like it; he would prefer
obnoxious, bad-smelling stool, which he finds very relishable. Materialistic persons are
considered condemned because they are interested in hellish activities and not in
transcendental activities. The message of the Lord's activities is nectar, and besides that
message, any information in which we may be interested is actually hellish.
SB 3.32.20
TEXT 20
di+a<aeNa PaQaaYaRM<a" iPaTa*l/aek&- v]JaiNTa Tae )
Pa[JaaMaNau Pa[JaaYaNTae XMaXaaNaaNTai§-Yaak*-Ta" )) 20 ))
755
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
dakñiëena pathäryamëaù
pitå-lokaà vrajanti te
prajäm anu prajäyante
çmaçänänta-kriyä-kåtaù
SYNONYMS
dakñiëena—southern; pathä—by the path; aryamëaù—of the sun; pitå-lokam—to
Pitåloka; vrajanti—go; te—they; prajäm—their families; anu—along with; prajäyante—
they take birth; çmaçäna—the crematorium; anta—to the end; kriyä—fruitive activities;
kåtaù—performing.
TRANSLATION
Such materialistic persons are allowed to go to the planet called Pitåloka by the southern
course of the sun, but they again come back to this planet and take birth in their own
families, beginning again the same fruitive activities from birth to the end of life.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä, Ninth Chapter, verse 21, it is stated that such persons are elevated to
the higher planetary systems. As soon as their lifetimes of fruitive activity are finished,
they return to this planet, and thus they go up and come down. Those who are elevated
to the higher planets again come back into the same family for which they had too much
attachment; they are born, and the fruitive activities continue again until the end of
life. There are different prescribed rituals from birth until the end of life, and they are
very much attached to such activities.
SB 3.32.21
TEXT 21
TaTaSTae +aq<aSauk*-Taa" PauNal/aeRk-iMaMa& SaiTa )
PaTaiNTa ivvXaa devE" SaÛae iv>a]&iXaTaaedYaa" )) 21 ))
tatas te kñéëa-sukåtäù
punar lokam imaà sati
patanti vivaçä devaiù
sadyo vibhraàçitodayäù
756
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; te—they; kñéëa—exhausted; su-kåtäù—results of their pious activities;
punaù—again; lokam imam—to this planet; sati—O virtuous mother; patanti—fall;
vivaçäù—helpless; devaiù—by higher arrangement; sadyaù—suddenly; vibhraàçita—
caused to fall; udayäù—their prosperity.
TRANSLATION
When the results of their pious activities are exhausted, they fall down by higher
arrangement and again come back to this planet, just as any person raised to a high
position sometimes all of a sudden falls.
PURPORT
It is sometimes found that a person elevated to a very high position in government
service falls down all of a sudden, and no one can check him. Similarly, after finishing
their period of enjoyment, foolish persons who are very much interested in being
elevated to the position of president in higher planets also fall down to this planet. The
distinction between the elevated position of a devotee and that of an ordinary person
attracted to fruitive activities is that when a devotee is elevated to the spiritual kingdom
he never falls down, whereas an ordinary person falls, even if he is elevated to the
highest planetary system, Brahmaloka. It is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (äbrahmabhuvanäl
lokäù) that even if one is elevated to a higher planet, he has to come down
again. But Kåñëa confirms in Bhagavad-gétä (8.16), mäm upetya tu kaunteya punar janma
na vidyate: "Anyone who attains My abode never comes back to this conditioned life of
material existence."
SB 3.32.22
TEXT 22
TaSMaatv& SavR>aaveNa >aJaSv ParMaeiïNaMa( )
Tad(Gau<aaé[YaYaa >a¢-ya >aJaNaqYaPadaMbuJaMa( )) 22 ))
tasmät tvaà sarva-bhävena
bhajasva parameñöhinam
tad-guëäçrayayä bhaktyä
bhajanéya-padämbujam
757
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; tvam—you (Devahüti); sarva-bhävena—with loving ecstasy;
bhajasva—worship; parameñöhinam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat-guëa—
the qualities of the Lord; äçrayayä—connected with; bhaktyä—by devotional service;
bhajanéya—worshipable; pada-ambujam—whose lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
My dear mother, I therefore advise that you take shelter of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, for His lotus feet are worth worshiping. Accept this with all devotion and love,
for thus you can be situated in transcendental devotional service.
PURPORT
The word parameñöhinam is sometimes used in connection with Brahmä. parameñöhé
means "the supreme person." As Brahmä is the supreme person within this universe,
Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality in the spiritual world. Lord Kapiladeva advises His
mother that she should take shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa, because it is worthwhile. Taking shelter of demigods, even those in the
highest positions, like Brahmä and Çiva, is not advised herein. One should take shelter
of the Supreme Godhead.
Sarva-bhävena means "in all-loving ecstasy." Bhäva is the preliminary stage of elevation
before the attainment of pure love of Godhead. It is stated in Bhagavad-gétä, budhä
bhäva-samanvitäù: [Bg. 10.8] one who has attained the stage of bhäva can accept the
lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa as worshipable. This is also advised here by Lord Kapila to His
mother. Also significant in this verse is the phrase tad-guëäçrayayä bhaktyä. This means
that discharging devotional service unto Kåñëa is transcendental; it is not material
activity. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä: those who engage in devotional service are
accepted to be situated in the spiritual kingdom. Brahma-bhüyäya kalpate: [Bg. 14.26]
they at once become situated in the transcendental kingdom.
Devotional service in full Kåñëa consciousness is the only means for attaining the
highest perfection of life for the human being. This is recommended herein by Lord
Kapila to His mother. Bhakti is therefore nirguëa, free from all tinges of material
qualities. Although the discharge of devotional service appears to be like material
activities, it is never saguëa, or contaminated by material qualities. Tad-guëäçrayayä
means that Lord Kåñëa's transcendental qualities are so sublime that there is no need to
758
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
divert one's attention to any other activities. His behavior with the devotees is so
exalted that a devotee need not try to divert his attention to any other worship. It is said
that the demoniac Pütanä came to kill Kåñëa by poisoning Him, but because Kåñëa was
pleased to suck her breast, she was given the same position as His mother. Devotees pray,
therefore, that if a demon who wanted to kill Kåñëa gets such an exalted position, why
should they go to anyone other than Kåñëa for their worshipful attachment? There are
two kinds of religious activities: one for material advancement and the other for
spiritual advancement. By taking shelter under the lotus feet of Kåñëa, one is endowed
with both kinds of prosperity, material and spiritual. Why then should one go to any
demigod?
SB 3.32.23
TEXT 23
vaSaudeve >aGaviTa >ai¢-YaaeGa" Pa[YaaeiJaTa" )
JaNaYaTYaaéu vEraGYa& jaNa& Yad(b]ødXaRNaMa( )) 23 ))
väsudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogaù prayojitaù
janayaty äçu vairägyaà
jïänaà yad brahma-darçanam
SYNONYMS
väsudeve—unto Kåñëa; bhagavati—the Personality of Godhead; bhakti-yogaù—
devotional service; prayojitaù—discharged; janayati—produces; äçu—very soon;
vairägyam—detachment; jïänam—knowledge; yat—which; brahma-darçanam—selfrealization.
TRANSLATION
Engagement in Kåñëa consciousness and application of devotional service unto Kåñëa
make it possible to advance in knowledge and detachment, as well as in self-realization.
PURPORT
It is said by less intelligent men that bhakti-yoga, or devotional service, is meant for
persons who are not advanced in transcendental knowledge and renunciation. But the
759
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
fact is that if one engages in the devotional service of the Lord in full Kåñëa
consciousness, he does not have to attempt separately to practice detachment or to wait
for an awakening of transcendental knowledge. It is said that one who engages
unflinchingly in the devotional service of the Lord actually has all the good qualities of
the demigods develop in him automatically. One cannot discover how such good
qualities develop in the body of a devotee, but actually it happens. There is one instance
where a hunter was taking pleasure in killing animals, but after becoming a devotee he
was not prepared to kill even an ant. Such is the quality of a devotee.
Those who are very eager to advance in transcendental knowledge can engage
themselves in pure devotional service, without wasting time in mental speculation. For
arriving at the positive conclusions of knowledge in the Absolute Truth, the word
brahma-darçanam is significant in this verse. Brahma-darçanam means to realize or to
understand the Transcendence. One who engages in the service of Väsudeva can
actually realize what Brahman is. If Brahman is impersonal, then there is no question of
darçanam, which means "seeing face to face." Darçanam refers to seeing the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva. Unless the seer and the seen are persons, there is no
darçanam. Brahma-darçanam means that as soon as one sees the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, he can at once realize what impersonal Brahman is. A devotee does not need
to make separate investigations to understand the nature of Brahman. Bhagavad-gétä
also confirms this. Brahma-bhüyäya kalpate: [Bg. 14.26] a devotee at once becomes a selfrealized
soul in the Absolute Truth.
SB 3.32.24
TEXT 24
YadaSYa ictaMaQaeRzu SaMaeiZviNd]Yav*itai>a" )
Na ivGa*õaiTa vEzMYa& iPa[YaMaiPa[YaiMaTYauTa )) 24 ))
yadäsya cittam artheñu
sameñv indriya-våttibhiù
na vigåhëäti vaiñamyaà
priyam apriyam ity uta
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; asya—of the devotee; cittam—the mind; artheñu—in the sense objects;
sameñu—same; indriya-våttibhiù—by the activities of the senses; na—not; vigåhëäti—
760
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
does perceive; vaiñamyam—difference; priyam—agreeable; apriyam—not agreeable;
iti—thus; uta—certainly.
TRANSLATION
The exalted devotee's mind becomes equipoised in sensory activities, and he is
transcendental to that which is agreeable and not agreeable.
PURPORT
The significance of advancement in transcendental knowledge and detachment from
material attraction is exhibited in the personality of a highly advanced devotee. For him
there is nothing agreeable or disagreeable because he does not act in any way for his
personal sense gratification. Whatever he does, whatever he thinks, is for the
satisfaction of the Personality of Godhead. Either in the material world or in the
spiritual world, his equipoised mind is completely manifested. He can understand that in
the material world there is nothing good; everything is bad due to its being
contaminated by material nature. The materialists conclusions of good and bad, moral
and immoral, etc., are simply mental concoction or sentiment. Actually there is nothing
good in the material world. In the spiritual field everything is absolutely good. There is
no inebriety in the spiritual varieties. Because a devotee accepts everything in spiritual
vision, he is equipoised; that is the symptom of his being elevated to the transcendental
position. He automatically attains detachment, vairägya, then jïäna, knowledge, and
then actual transcendental knowledge. The conclusion is that an advanced devotee
dovetails himself in the transcendental qualities of the Lord, and in that sense he
becomes qualitatively one with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
SB 3.32.25
TEXT 25
Sa TadEvaTMaNaaTMaaNa& iNa"Sa(r)& SaMadXaRNaMa( )
heYaaePaadeYarihTaMaaæ!& PadMaq+aTae )) 25 ))
sa tadaivätmanätmänaà
niùsaìgaà sama-darçanam
heyopädeya-rahitam
ärüòhaà padam ékñate
761
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
saù—the pure devotee; tadä—then; eva—certainly; ätmanä—by his transcendental
intelligence; ätmänam—himself; niùsaìgam—without material attachment; samadarçanam—
equipoised in vision; heya—to be rejected; upädeya—acceptable; rahitam—
devoid of; ärüòham—elevated; padam—to the transcendental position; ékñate—he sees.
TRANSLATION
Because of his transcendental intelligence, the pure devotee is equipoised in his vision and
sees himself to be uncontaminated by matter. He does not see anything as superior or
inferior, and he feels himself elevated to the transcendental platform of being equal in
qualities with the Supreme Person.
PURPORT
Perception of the disagreeable arises from attachment. A devotee has no personal
attachment to anything; therefore for him there is no question of agreeable or
disagreeable. For the service of the Lord he can accept anything, even though it may be
disagreeable to his personal interest. In fact, he is completely free from personal interest,
and thus anything agreeable to the Lord is agreeable to him. For example, for Arjuna at
first fighting was not agreeable, but when he understood that the fighting was agreeable
to the Lord, he accepted the fighting as agreeable. That is the position of a pure devotee.
For his personal interest there is nothing which is agreeable or disagreeable; everything
is done for the Lord, and therefore he is free from attachment and detachment. That is
the transcendental stage of neutrality. A pure devotee enjoys life in the pleasure of the
Supreme Lord.
SB 3.32.26
TEXT 26
jaNaMaa}a& Par& b]ø ParMaaTMaeìr" PauMaaNa( )
d*XYaaidi>a" Pa*QaG>aavE>aRGavaNaek- wRYaTae )) 26 ))
jïäna-mätraà paraà brahma
paramätmeçvaraù pumän
dåçy-ädibhiù påthag bhävair
bhagavän eka éyate
762
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
jïäna—knowledge; mätram—only; param—transcendental; brahma—Brahman;
parama-ätmä—Paramätmä; éçvaraù—the controller; pumän—Supersoul; dåçi-ädibhiù—
by philosophical research and other processes; påthak bhävaiù—according to different
processes of understanding; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ekaù—
alone; éyate—is perceived.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead alone is complete transcendental knowledge, but
according to the different processes of understanding He appears differently, either as
impersonal Brahman, as Paramätmä, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead or as the
puruña-avatära.
PURPORT
The word dåçy-ädibhiù is significant. According to Jéva Gosvämé, dåçi means jïäna,
philosophical research. By different processes of philosophical research under different
concepts, such as the process of jïäna-yoga, the same Bhagavän, or Supreme Personality
of Godhead, is understood as impersonal Brahman. Similarly, by the eightfold yoga
system He appears as the Paramätmä. But in pure Kåñëa consciousness, or knowledge in
purity, when one tries to understand the Absolute Truth, one realizes Him as the
Supreme Person. The Transcendence is realized simply on the basis of knowledge. The
words used here, paramätmeçvaraù pumän, are all transcendental, and they refer to
Supersoul. Supersoul is also described as puruña, but the word Bhagavän directly refers to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is full of six opulences: wealth, fame,
strength, beauty, knowledge and renunciation. He is the Personality of Godhead in
different spiritual skies. The various descriptions of paramätmä, éçvara and pumän
indicate that the expansions of the Supreme Godhead are unlimited.
Ultimately, to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead one has to accept
bhakti-yoga. By executing jïäna-yoga or dhyäna-yoga one has to eventually approach the
bhakti-yoga platform, and then Paramätmä, éçvara, pumän, etc., are all clearly
understood. It is recommended in the Second Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam that
whether one is a devotee or fruitive actor or liberationist, if he is intelligent enough he
should engage himself with all seriousness in the process of devotional service. It is also
explained that whatever one desires which is obtainable by fruitive activities, even if
763
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
one wants to be elevated to higher planets, can be achieved simply by execution of
devotional service. Since the Supreme Lord is full in six opulences, He can bestow any
one of them upon the worshiper.
The one Supreme Personality of Godhead reveals Himself to different thinkers as the
Supreme person or impersonal Brahman or Paramätmä. Impersonalists merge into the
impersonal Brahman, but that is not achieved by worshiping the impersonal Brahman. If
one takes to devotional service and at the same time desires to merge into the existence
of the Supreme Lord, he can achieve that. If someone desires at all to merge into the
existence of the Supreme, he has to execute devotional service.
The devotee can see the Supreme Lord face to face, but the jïäné, the empiric
philosopher or yogé cannot. They cannot be elevated to the positions of associates of the
Lord. There is no evidence in the scriptures stating that by cultivating knowledge or
worshiping the impersonal Brahman one can become a personal associate of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Nor by executing the yogic principles can one become
an associate of the Supreme Godhead. Impersonal Brahman, being formless, is described
as adåçya because the impersonal effulgence of brahmajyoti covers the face of the
Supreme Lord. Some yogés see the four-handed Viñëu sitting within the heart, and
therefore in their case also the Supreme Lord is invisible. Only for the devotees is the
Lord visible. Here the statement dåçy-ädibhiù is significant. Since the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is both invisible and visible, there are different features of the
Lord. The Paramätmä feature and Brahman feature are invisible, but the Bhagavän
feature is visible. In the Viñëu Puräëa this fact is very nicely explained. The universal
form of the Lord and the formless Brahman effulgence of the Lord, being invisible, are
inferior features. The concept of the universal form is material, and the concept of
impersonal Brahman is spiritual, but the highest spiritual understanding is the
Personality of Godhead. The Viñëu Puräëa states, viñëur brahma-svarüpeëa svayam eva
vyavasthitaù: Brahman's real feature is Viñëu, or the Supreme Brahman is Viñëu. Svayam
eva: that is His personal feature. The supreme spiritual conception is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. It is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä: yad gatvä na nivartante
tad dhäma paramaà mama [Bg. 15.6]. That specific abode called paramaà mama is the
place from which, once one attains it, one does not return to this miserable, conditional
life. Every place, every space and everything belongs to Viñëu, but where He personally
lives is tad dhäma paramam, His supreme abode. One has to make one's destination the
supreme abode of the Lord.
SB 3.32.27
TEXT 27
764
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
WTaavaNaev YaaeGaeNa SaMaGa]e<aeh YaaeiGaNa" )
YauJYaTae_i>aMaTaae ùQaaeR YadSa(r)STau k*-TòXa" )) 27 ))
etävän eva yogena
samagreëeha yoginaù
yujyate 'bhimato hy artho
yad asaìgas tu kåtsnaçaù
SYNONYMS
etävän—of such a measure; eva—just; yogena—by yoga practice; samagreëa—all; iha—
in this world; yoginaù—of the yogé; yujyate—is achieved; abhimataù—desired; hi—
certainly; arthaù—purpose; yat—which; asaìgaù—detachment; tu—indeed;
kåtsnaçaù—completely.
TRANSLATION
The greatest common understanding for all yogés is complete detachment from matter,
which can be achieved by different kinds of yoga.
PURPORT
There are three kinds of yoga, namely bhakti-yoga, jïäna-yoga and añöäìga-yoga.
Devotees, jïänés and yogés all try to get out of the material entanglement. The jïänés try
to detach their sensual activities from material engagement. The jïäna-yogé thinks that
matter is false and that Brahman is truth; he tries, therefore, by cultivation of
knowledge, to detach the senses from material enjoyment. The añöäìga-yogés also try to
control the senses. The devotees, however, try to engage the senses in the service of the
Lord. Therefore it appears that the activities of the bhaktas, devotees, are better than
those of the jïänés and yogés. The mystic yogés simply try to control the senses by
practicing the eight divisions of yoga-yama, niyama, äsana, präëäyäma, pratyähära,
etc.—and the jïänés try by mental reasoning to understand that sense enjoyment is
false. But the easiest and most direct process is to engage the senses in the service of the
Lord.
The purpose of all yoga is to detach one's sense activities from this material world. The
final aims, however, are different. Jïänés want to become one with the Brahman
765
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
effulgence, yogés want to realize Paramätmä, and devotees want to develop Kåñëa
consciousness and transcendental loving service to the Lord. That loving service is the
perfect stage of sense control. The senses are actually active symptoms of life, and they
cannot be stopped. They can be detached only if there is superior engagement. As it is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, paraà dåñövä nivartate: [Bg. 9.59] the activities of the senses
can be stopped if they are given superior engagements. The supreme engagement is
engagement of the senses in the service of the Lord. That is the purpose of all yoga.
SB 3.32.28
TEXT 28
jaNaMaek&- ParacqNaEiriNd]YaEb]Rø iNaGauR<aMa( )
Av>aaTYaQaRæPae<a >a]aNTYaa XaBdaidDaiMaR<aa )) 28 ))
jïänam ekaà paräcénair
indriyair brahma nirguëam
avabhäty artha-rüpeëa
bhräntyä çabdädi-dharmiëä
SYNONYMS
jïänam—knowledge; ekam—one; paräcénaiù—averse; indriyaiù—by the senses;
brahma—the Supreme Absolute Truth; nirguëam—beyond the material modes;
avabhäti—appears; artha-rüpeëa—in the form of various objects; bhräntyä—mistakenly;
çabda-ädi—sound and so on; dharmiëä—endowed with.
TRANSLATION
Those who are averse to the Transcendence realize the Supreme Absolute Truth
differently through speculative sense perception, and therefore, because of mistaken
speculation, everything appears to them to be relative.
PURPORT
The Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, is one, and He is spread
everywhere by His impersonal feature. This is clearly expressed in Bhagavad-gétä. Lord
Kåñëa says, "Everything that is experienced is but an expansion of My energy."
Everything is sustained by Him, but that does not mean that He is in everything. Sense
766
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
perceptions, such as aural perception of the sound of a drum, visual perception of a
beautiful woman, or perception of the delicious taste of a milk preparation by the
tongue, all come through different senses and are therefore differently understood.
Therefore sensory knowledge is divided in different categories, although actually
everything is one as a manifestation of the energy of the Supreme Lord. Similarly, the
energies of fire are heat and illumination, and by these two energies fire can display
itself in many varieties, or in diversified sense perception. Mäyävädé philosophers
declare this diversity to be false. But Vaiñëava philosophers do not accept the different
manifestations as false; they accept them as nondifferent from the Supreme Personality
of Godhead because they are a display of His diverse energies.
The philosophy that the Absolute is true and this creation is false (brahma satyaà jagan
mithyä) is not accepted by Vaiñëava philosophers. The example is given that although all
that glitters is not gold, this does not mean that a glittering object is false. For example,
an oyster shell appears to be golden. This appearance of golden hue is due only to the
perception of the eyes, but that does not mean that the oyster shell is false. Similarly, by
seeing the form of Lord Kåñëa one cannot understand what He actually is, but this does
not mean that He is false. The form of Kåñëa has to be understood as it is described in
the books of knowledge such as Brahma-saàhitä. Éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù sac-cidänanda-
vigrahaù [Bs. 5.1]: Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has an eternal,
blissful spiritual body. By our imperfect sense perception we cannot understand the form
of the Lord. We have to acquire knowledge about Him. Therefore it is said here, jïänam
ekam. Bhagavad-gétä confirms that they are fools who, simply upon seeing Kåñëa,
consider Him a common man. They do not know the unlimited knowledge, power and
opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Material sense speculation leads to
the conclusion that the Supreme is formless. It is because of such mental speculation
that the conditioned soul remains in ignorance under the spell of illusory energy. The
Supreme Person has to be understood by the transcendental sound vibrated by Him in
Bhagavad-gétä, wherein He says that there is nothing superior to Himself; the impersonal
Brahman effulgence is resting on His personality. The purified, absolute vision of
Bhagavad-gétä is compared to the River Ganges. Ganges water is so pure that it can
purify even the asses and cows. But anyone who, disregarding the pure Ganges, wishes to
be purified instead by the filthy water flowing in a drain, cannot be successful. Similarly,
one can successfully attain pure knowledge of the Absolute only by hearing from the
pure Absolute Himself.
In this verse it is clearly said that those who are averse to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead speculate with their imperfect senses about the nature of the Absolute Truth.
767
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The formless Brahman conception, however, can be received only by aural reception
and not by personal experience. Knowledge is therefore acquired by aural reception. It is
confirmed in the Vedänta-sütra, çästra-yonitvät: one has to acquire pure knowledge from
the authorized scriptures. So-called speculative arguments about the Absolute Truth are
therefore useless. The actual identity of the living entity is his consciousness, which is
always present while the living entity is awake, dreaming or in deep sleep. Even in deep
sleep, he can perceive by consciousness whether he is happy or distressed. Thus when
consciousness is displayed through the medium of the subtle and gross material bodies, it
is covered, but when the consciousness is purified, in Kåñëa consciousness, one becomes
free from the entanglement of repeated birth and death.
When uncontaminated pure knowledge is uncovered from the modes of material nature,
the actual identity of the living entity is discovered: he is eternally a servitor of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The process of uncovering is like this: the rays of
sunshine are luminous, and the sun itself is also luminous. In the presence of the sun,
the rays illuminate just like the sun, but when the sunshine is covered by the spell of a
cloud, or by mäyä, then darkness, the imperfection of perception, begins. Therefore, to
get out of the entanglement of the spell of nescience, one has to awaken his spiritual
consciousness, or Kåñëa consciousness, in terms of the authorized scriptures.
SB 3.32.29
TEXT 29
YaQaa MahaNah&æPaiñv*TPaÄivDa" Svra$( )
Wk-adXaivDaSTaSYa vPaur<@& JaGaÛTa" )) 29 ))
yathä mahän ahaà-rüpas
tri-våt païca-vidhaù svaräö
ekädaça-vidhas tasya
vapur aëòaà jagad yataù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; mahän—the mahat-tattva; aham-rüpaù—the false ego; tri-våt—the three
modes of material nature; païca-vidhaù—the five material elements; sva-räö—the
individual consciousness; ekädaça-vidhaù—the eleven senses; tasya—of the living entity;
vapuù—the material body; aëòam—the brahmäëòa; jagat—the universe; yataù—from
which or from whom.
768
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
From the total energy, the mahat-tattva, I have manifested the false ego, the three modes
of material nature, the five material elements, the individual consciousness, the eleven
senses and the material body. Similarly, the entire universe has come from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is described as mahat-pada, which means that the total material
energy, known as the mahat-tattva, is lying at His lotus feet. The origin or the total
energy of the cosmic manifestation is the mahat-tattva. From the mahat-tattva all the
other twenty-four divisions have sprung, namely the eleven senses (including the mind),
the five sense objects, the five material elements, and then consciousness, intelligence
and false ego. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of the mahat-tattva, and
therefore, in one sense, because everything is an emanation from the Supreme Lord,
there is no difference between the Lord and the cosmic manifestation. But at the same
time the cosmic manifestation is different from the Lord. The word svaräö is very
significant here. Svaräö means "independent." The Supreme Lord is independent, and
the individual soul is also independent. Although there is no comparison between the
two qualities of independence, the living entity is minutely independent, and the
Supreme Lord is fully independent. As the individual soul has a material body made of
five elements and the senses, the supreme independent Lord similarly has the gigantic
body of the universe. The individual body is temporary; similarly, the entire universe,
which is considered to be the body of the Supreme Lord, is also temporary, and both the
individual and universal bodies are products of the mahat-tattva. One has to understand
the differences with intelligence. Everyone knows that his material body has developed
from a spiritual spark, and similarly the universal body has developed from the supreme
spark, Supersoul. As the individual body develops from the individual soul, the gigantic
body of the universe develops from the Supreme Soul. Just as the individual soul has
consciousness, the Supreme Soul is also conscious. But although there is a similarity
between the consciousness of the Supreme Soul and the consciousness of the individual
soul, the individual soul's consciousness is limited, whereas the consciousness of the
Supreme Soul is unlimited. This is described in Bhagavad-gétä (13.3). Kñetra-jïaà cäpi
mäà viddhi: the Supersoul is present in every field of activity, just as the individual soul
is present in the individual body. Both of them are conscious. The difference is that the
individual soul is conscious of the individual body only, whereas the Supersoul is
769
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
conscious of the total number of individual bodies.
SB 3.32.30
TEXT 30
WTaÜE é[ÖYaa >a¢-ya YaaeGaa>YaaSaeNa iNaTYaXa" )
SaMaaihTaaTMaa iNa"Sa(r)ae ivr¢-ya PairPaXYaiTa )) 30 ))
etad vai çraddhayä bhaktyä
yogäbhyäsena nityaçaù
samähitätmä niùsaìgo
viraktyä paripaçyati
SYNONYMS
etat—this; vai—certainly; çraddhayä—with faith; bhaktyä—by devotional service; yogaabhyäsena—
by practice of yoga; nityaçaù—always; samähita-ätmä—he whose mind is
fixed; niùsaìgaù—aloof from material association; viraktyä—by detachment;
paripaçyati—understands.
TRANSLATION
This perfect knowledge can be achieved by a person who is already engaged in devotional
service with faith, steadiness and full detachment, and who is always absorbed in thought
of the Supreme. He is aloof from material association.
PURPORT
The atheistic mystic practitioner of yoga cannot understand this perfect knowledge.
Only persons who engage in the practical activities of devotional service in full Kåñëa
consciousness can become absorbed in full samädhi. It is possible for them to see and
understand the actual fact of the entire cosmic manifestation and its cause. It is clearly
stated here that this is not possible to understand for one who has not developed
devotional service in full faith. The words samähitätmä and samädhi are synonymous.
SB 3.32.31
TEXT 31
wTYaeTaTk-iQaTa& GauivR jaNa& Tad(b]ødXaRNaMa( )
770
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
YaeNaaNaubuÖyTae Tatv& Pa[k*-Tae" PauåzSYa c )) 31 ))
ity etat kathitaà gurvi
jïänaà tad brahma-darçanam
yenänubuddhyate tattvaà
prakåteù puruñasya ca
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; etat—this; kathitam—described; gurvi—O respectful mother; jïänam—
knowledge; tat—that; brahma—the Absolute Truth; darçanam—revealing; yena—by
which; anubuddhyate—is understood; tattvam—the truth; prakåteù—of matter;
puruñasya—of spirit; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
My dear respectful mother, I have already described the path of understanding the
Absolute Truth, by which one can come to understand the real truth of matter and spirit
and their relationship.
SB 3.32.32
TEXT 32
jaNaYaaeGaê Maiàïae NaEGauR<Yaae >ai¢-l/+a<a" )
ÜYaaerPYaek- WvaQaaeR >aGavC^Bdl/+a<a" )) 32 ))
jïäna-yogaç ca man-niñöho
nairguëyo bhakti-lakñaëaù
dvayor apy eka evärtho
bhagavac-chabda-lakñaëaù
SYNONYMS
jïäna-yogaù—philosophical research; ca—and; mat-niñöhaù—directed towards Me;
nairguëyaù—free from the material modes of nature; bhakti—devotional service;
lakñaëaù—named; dvayoù—of both; api—moreover; ekaù—one; eva—certainly;
arthaù—purpose; bhagavat—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; çabda—by the word;
771
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
lakñaëaù—signified.
TRANSLATION
Philosophical research culminates in understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
After achieving this understanding, when one becomes free from the material modes of
nature, he attains the stage of devotional service. Either by devotional service directly or
by philosophical research, one has to find the same destination, which is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
It is said in Bhagavad-gétä that after many, many lives of philosophical research the wise
man ultimately comes to the point of knowing that Väsudeva, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, is everything, and therefore he surrenders unto Him. Such serious students
in philosophical research are rare because they are very great souls. If by philosophical
research one cannot come to the point of understanding the Supreme Person, then his
task is not finished. His search in knowledge is still to be continued until he comes to
the point of understanding the Supreme Lord in devotional service.
The opportunity for direct touch with the Personality of Godhead is given in Bhagavadgétä,
where it is also said that those who take to other processes, namely the processes of
philosophical speculation and mystic yoga practice, have much trouble. After many,
many years of much trouble, a yogé or wise philosopher may come to Him, but his path is
very troublesome, whereas the path of devotional service is easy for everyone. One can
achieve the result of wise philosophical speculation simply by discharging devotional
service, and unless one reaches the point of understanding the Personality of Godhead
by his mental speculation, all his research work is said to be simply a labor of love. The
ultimate destination of the wise philosopher is to merge in the impersonal Brahman, but
that Brahman is the effulgence of the Supreme Person. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä
(14.27), brahmaëo hi pratiñöhäham amåtasyävyayasya ca: "I am the basis of the impersonal
Brahman, which is indestructible and is the supreme bliss." The Lord is the supreme
reservoir of all pleasure, including Brahman pleasure; therefore, one who has
unflinching faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead is said to be already realized in
impersonal Brahman and Paramätmä.
SB 3.32.33
TEXT 33
772
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
YaQaeiNd]YaE" Pa*QaGÜarErQaaeR bhuGau<aaé[Ya" )
Wk-ae NaaNaeYaTae TaÜÙGavaNa( XaañvTMaRi>a" )) 33 ))
yathendriyaiù påthag-dvärair
artho bahu-guëäçrayaù
eko näneyate tadvad
bhagavän çästra-vartmabhiù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; indriyaiù—by the senses; påthak-dväraiù—in different ways; arthaù—an
object; bahu-guëa—many qualities; äçrayaù—endowed with; ekaù—one; nänä—
differently; éyate—is perceived; tadvat—similarly; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; çästra-vartmabhiù—according to different scriptural injunctions.
TRANSLATION
A single object is appreciated differently by different senses due to its having different
qualities. Similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is one, but according to different
scriptural injunctions He appears to be different.
PURPORT
It appears that by following the path of jïäna-yoga, or empiric philosophical speculation,
one reaches the impersonal Brahman, whereas by executing devotional service in Kåñëa
consciousness one enriches his faith in and devotion to the Personality of Godhead. But
it is stated here that both bhakti-yoga and jïäna-yoga are meant for reaching the same
destination—the Personality of Godhead. By the process of jïäna-yoga the same
Personality of Godhead appears to be impersonal. As the same object appears to be
different when perceived by different senses, the same Supreme Lord appears to be
impersonal by mental speculation. A hill appears cloudy from a distance, and one who
does not know may speculate that the hill is a cloud. Actually, it is not a cloud; it is a big
hill. One has to learn from authority that the sight of a cloud is not actually a cloud but
a hill. If one makes a little more progress, then instead of a cloud he sees the hill and
something green. When one actually approaches the hill, he will see many varieties.
Another example is in perceiving milk. When we see milk, we see that it is white; when
we taste it, it appears that milk is very palatable. When we touch milk, it appears very
773
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
cold; when we smell milk, it appears to have a very good flavor; and when we hear, we
understand that it is called milk. Perceiving milk with different senses, we say that it is
something white, something very delicious, something very aromatic, and so on.
Actually, it is milk. Similarly, those who are trying to find the Supreme Godhead by
mental speculation may approach the bodily effulgence, or the impersonal Brahman,
and those who are trying to find the Supreme Godhead by yoga practice may find Him
as the localized Supersoul, but those who are directly trying to approach the Supreme
Truth by practice of bhakti-yoga can see Him face to face as the Supreme Person.
Ultimately, the Supreme Person is the destination of all different processes. The
fortunate person who, by following the principles of scriptures, becomes completely
purified of all material contamination, surrenders unto the Supreme Lord as everything.
Just as one can appreciate the real taste of milk with the tongue and not with the eyes,
nostrils or ears, one can similarly appreciate the Absolute Truth perfectly and with all
relishable pleasure only through one path, devotional service. This is also confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä. Bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti: [Bg. 18.55] if one wants to understand the
Absolute Truth in perfection, he must take to devotional service. Of course, no one can
understand the Absolute Truth in all perfection. That is not possible for the
infinitesimal living entities. But the highest point of understanding by the living entity
is reached by discharge of devotional service, not otherwise.
By following various scriptural paths, one may come to the impersonal effulgence of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The transcendental pleasure derived from merging
with or understanding the impersonal Brahman is very extensive because Brahman is
ananta. Tad brahma niñkalaà anantam: brahmänanda is unlimited. But that unlimited
pleasure can also be surpassed. That is the nature of the Transcendence. The unlimited
can be surpassed also, and that higher platform is Kåñëa. When one deals directly with
Kåñëa, the mellow and the humor relished by reciprocation of devotional service is
incomparable, even with the pleasure derived from transcendental Brahman.
Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté therefore says that kaivalya, the Brahman pleasure, is
undoubtedly very great and is appreciated by many philosophers, but to a devotee, who
has understood how to derive pleasure from exchanging devotional service with the
Lord, this unlimited Brahman appears to be hellish. One should try, therefore, to
transcend even the Brahman pleasure in order to approach the position of dealing with
Kåñëa face to face. As the mind is the center of all the activities of the senses, Kåñëa is
called the master of the senses, Håñékeça. The process is to fix the mind on Håñékeça, or
Kåñëa, as Mahäräja Ambaréña did (sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]).
Bhakti is the basic principle of all processes. Without bhakti, neither jïäna-yoga nor
774
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
añöäìga-yoga can be successful, and unless one approaches Kåñëa, the principles of selfrealization
have no ultimate destination.
SB 3.32.34, SB 3.32.35, SB 3.32.36, SB 3.32.34-36
TEXTS 34-36
i§-YaYaa §-Taui>adaRNaESTaPa"SvaDYaaYaMaXaRNaE" )
AaTMaeiNd]YaJaYaeNaaiPa Sa&NYaaSaeNa c k-MaR<aaMa( )) 34 ))
YaaeGaeNa ivivDaa(r)eNa >ai¢-YaaeGaeNa cEv ih )
DaMaeR<aae>aYaicöeNa Ya" Pa[v*itaiNav*itaMaaNa( )) 35 ))
AaTMaTatvavbaeDaeNa vEraGYae<a d*!eNa c )
wRYaTae >aGavaNaei>a" SaGau<aae iNaGauR<a" Svd*k(- )) 36 ))
kriyayä kratubhir dänais
tapaù-svädhyäya-marçanaiù
ätmendriya-jayenäpi
sannyäsena ca karmaëäm
yogena vividhäìgena
bhakti-yogena caiva hi
dharmeëobhaya-cihnena
yaù pravåtti-nivåttimän
ätma-tattvävabodhena
vairägyeëa dåòhena ca
éyate bhagavän ebhiù
saguëo nirguëaù sva-dåk
SYNONYMS
kriyayä—by fruitive activities; kratubhiù—by sacrificial performances; dänaiù—by
charity; tapaù—austerities; svädhyäya—study of Vedic literature; marçanaiù—and by
philosophical research; ätma-indriya-jayena—by controlling the mind and senses; api—
also; sannyäsena—by renunciation; ca—and; karmaëäm—of fruitive activities;
yogena—by yoga practice; vividha-aìgena—of different divisions; bhakti-yogena—by
devotional service; ca—and; eva—certainly; hi—indeed; dharmeëa—by prescribed
duties; ubhaya-cihnena—having both symptoms; yaù—which; pravåtti—attachment;
775
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nivåtti-män—containing detachment; ätma-tattva—the science of self-realization;
avabodhena—by understanding; vairägyeëa—by detachment; dåòhena—strong; ca—
and; éyate—is perceived; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ebhiù—by
these; sa-guëaù—in the material world; nirguëaù—beyond the material modes; svadåk—
one who sees his constitutional position.
TRANSLATION
By performing fruitive activities and sacrifices, by distributing charity, by performing
austerities, by studying various literatures, by conducting philosophical research, by
controlling the mind, by subduing the senses, by accepting the renounced order of life and
by performing the prescribed duties of one's social order; by performing the different
divisions of yoga practice, by performing devotional service and by exhibiting the process
of devotional service containing the symptoms of both attachment and detachment; by
understanding the science of self-realization and by developing a strong sense of
detachment, one who is expert in understanding the different processes of self-realization
realizes the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is represented in the material world as
well as in transcendence.
PURPORT
As it is stated in the previous verse, one has to follow the principles of the scriptures.
There are different prescribed duties for persons in the different social and spiritual
orders. Here it is stated that performance of fruitive activities and sacrifices and
distribution of charity are activities meant for persons who are in the householder order
of society. There are four orders of the social system: brahmacarya, gåhastha, vänaprastha
and sannyäsa. For the gåhasthas, or householders, performance of sacrifices, distribution
of charity, and action according to prescribed duties are especially recommended.
Similarly, austerity, study of Vedic literature, and philosophical research are meant for
the vänaprasthas, or retired persons. Study of the Vedic literature from the bona fide
spiritual master is meant for the brahmacäré, or student. Ätmendriya-jaya, control of the
mind and taming of the senses, is meant for persons in the renounced order of life. All
these different activities are prescribed for different persons so that they may be
elevated to the platform of self-realization and from there to Kåñëa consciousness,
devotional service.
The words bhakti-yogena caiva hi mean that whatever is to be performed, as described in
verse 34, whether yoga or sacrifice or fruitive activity or study of Vedic literature or
776
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
philosophical research or acceptance of the renounced order of life, is to be executed in
bhakti-yoga. The words caiva hi, according to Sanskrit grammar, indicate that one must
perform all these activities mixed with devotional service, otherwise such activities will
not produce any fruit. Any prescribed activity must be performed for the sake of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.27), yat karoñi yad
açnäsi: "Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you sacrifice, whatever austerities
you undergo and whatever charities you give, the result should be given to the Supreme
Lord." The word eva is added, indicating that one must execute activities in such a way.
Unless one adds devotional service to all activities, he cannot achieve the desired result,
but when bhakti-yoga is prominent in every activity, then the ultimate goal is sure.
One has to approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, as it is stated in
Bhagavad-gétä: "After many, many births, one approaches the Supreme Person, Kåñëa,
and surrenders unto Him, knowing that He is everything." Also in Bhagavad-gétä, the
Lord says, bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäm: [Bg. 5.29] "For anyone who is undergoing rigid
austerity or for anyone performing different kinds of sacrifices, the beneficiary is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead." He is the proprietor of all planets, and He is the
friend of every living soul.
The words dharmeëobhaya-cihnena mean that the bhakti-yoga process contains two
symptoms, namely attachment for the Supreme Lord and detachment from all material
affinities. There are two symptoms of advancement in the process of devotional service,
just as there are two processes taking place while eating. A hungry man feels strength
and satisfaction from eating, and at the same time he gradually becomes detached from
eating any more. Similarly, with the execution of devotional service, real knowledge
develops, and one becomes detached from all material activities. In no other activity but
devotional service is there such detachment from matter and attachment for the
Supreme. There are nine different processes to increase this attachment to the Supreme
Lord: hearing, chanting, remembering, worshiping, serving the Lord, making friendship,
praying, offering everything and serving the lotus feet of the Lord. The processes for
increasing detachment from material affinities are explained in verse 36.
One can achieve elevation to the higher planetary systems like the heavenly kingdom by
executing one's prescribed duties and by performing sacrifices. When one is
transcendental to such desires because of accepting the renounced order of life, he can
understand the Brahman feature of the Supreme, and when one is able to see his real
constitutional position, he sees all other processes and becomes situated in the stage of
pure devotional service. At that time he can understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Bhagavän.
777
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Understanding of the Supreme person is called ätma-tattva-avabodhena, which means
"understanding of one's real constitutional position." If one actually understands one's
constitutional position as an eternal servitor of the Supreme Lord, he becomes detached
from the service of the material world. Everyone engages in some sort of service. If one
does not know one's constitutional position, one engages in the service of his personal
gross body or his family, society or country. But as soon as one is able to see his
constitutional position (the word sva-dåk means "one who is able to see"), he becomes
detached from such material service and engages himself in devotional service.
As long as one is in the modes of material nature and is performing the duties prescribed
in the scriptures, he can be elevated to higher planetary systems, where the
predominating deities are material representations of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, like the sun-god, the moon-god, the air-god, Brahmä and Lord Çiva. All the
different demigods are material representations of the Supreme Lord. By material
activities one can approach only such demigods, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (9.25). Yänti
deva-vratä devän: those who are attached to the demigods and who perform the
prescribed duties can approach the abodes of the demigods. In this way, one can go to
the planet of the Pitäs, or forefathers. Similarly, one who fully understands the real
position of his life adopts devotional service and realizes the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
SB 3.32.37
TEXT 37
Pa[avaec& >ai¢-YaaeGaSYa SvæPa& Tae cTauivRDaMa( )
k-al/SYa caVYa¢-GaTaeYaaeR_NTaDaaRviTa JaNTauzu )) 37 ))
prävocaà bhakti-yogasya
svarüpaà te catur-vidham
kälasya cävyakta-gater
yo 'ntardhävati jantuñu
SYNONYMS
prävocam—explained; bhakti-yogasya—of devotional service; svarüpam—the identity;
te—to you; catuù-vidham—in four divisions; kälasya—of time; ca—also; avyakta-gateù—
the movement of which is imperceptible; yaù—which; antardhävati—chases; jantuñu—
the living entities.
778
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
My dear mother, I have explained to you the process of devotional service and its identity
in four different social divisions. I have explained to you as well how eternal time is
chasing the living entities, although it is imperceptible to them.
PURPORT
The process of bhakti-yoga, devotional service, is the main river flowing down towards
the sea of the Absolute Truth, and all other processes mentioned are just like tributaries.
Lord Kapila is summarizing the importance of the process of devotional service. Bhaktiyoga,
as described before, is divided into four divisions, three in the material modes of
nature and one in transcendence, which is untinged by the modes of material nature.
Devotional service mixed with the modes of material nature is a means for material
existence, whereas devotional service without desires for fruitive result and without
attempts for empirical philosophical research is pure, transcendental devotional service.
SB 3.32.38
TEXT 38
JaqvSYa Sa&Sa*TaqbRûqrivÛak-MaRiNaiMaRTaa" )
YaaSv(r) Pa[ivXaàaTMaa Na ved GaiTaMaaTMaNa" )) 38 ))
jévasya saàsåtér bahvér
avidyä-karma-nirmitäù
yäsv aìga praviçann ätmä
na veda gatim ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
jévasya—of the living entity; saàsåtéù—courses of material existence; bahvéù—many;
avidyä—in ignorance; karma—by work; nirmitäù—produced; yäsu—into which; aìga—
My dear mother; praviçan—entering; ätmä—the living entity; na—not; veda—
understands; gatim—the movement; ätmanaù—of himself.
TRANSLATION
There are varieties of material existence for the living entity according to the work he
779
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
performs in ignorance or forgetfulness of his real identity. My dear mother, if anyone
enters into that forgetfulness, he is unable to understand where his movements will end.
PURPORT
Once one enters into the continuation of material existence, it is very difficult to get
out. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead comes Himself or sends His bona
fide representative, and He leaves behind scriptures like Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, so that the living entities hovering in the darkness of nescience may take
advantage of the instructions, the saintly persons and the spiritual masters and thus be
freed. Unless the living entity receives the mercy of the saintly persons, the spiritual
master or Kåñëa, it is not possible for him to get out of the darkness of material
existence; by his own endeavor it is not possible.
SB 3.32.39
TEXT 39
NaETaT%l/aYaaePaidXaeàaivNaqTaaYa k-ihRicTa( )
Na STaBDaaYa Na i>aàaYa NaEv DaMaRßJaaYa c )) 39 ))
naitat khaläyopadiçen
nävinétäya karhicit
na stabdhäya na bhinnäya
naiva dharma-dhvajäya ca
SYNONYMS
na—not; etat—this instruction; khaläya—to the envious; upadiçet—one should teach;
na—not; avinétäya—to the agnostic; karhicit—ever; na—not; stabdhäya—to the proud;
na—not; bhinnäya—to the misbehaved; na—not; eva—certainly; dharma-dhvajäya—to
the hypocrites; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kapila continued: This instruction is not meant for the envious, for the agnostics or
for persons who are unclean in their behavior. Nor is it for hypocrites or for persons who
are proud of material possessions.
SB 3.32.40
780
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 40
Na l/aelu/PaaYaaePaidXaeà Ga*haæ!ceTaSae )
Naa>a¢-aYa c Mae JaaTau Na MaÙ¢-iÜzaMaiPa )) 40 ))
na lolupäyopadiçen
na gåhärüòha-cetase
näbhaktäya ca me jätu
na mad-bhakta-dviñäm api
SYNONYMS
na—not; lolupäya—to the greedy; upadiçet—one should instruct; na—not; gåha-ärüòhacetase—
to one who is too attached to family life; na—not; abhaktäya—to the
nondevotee; ca—and; me—of Me; jätu—ever; na—not; mat—My; bhakta—devotees;
dviñäm—to those who are envious of; api—also.
TRANSLATION
It is not to be instructed to persons who are too greedy and too attached to family life, nor
to persons who are nondevotees and who are envious of the devotees and of the
Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Persons who are always planning to do harm to other living entities are not eligible to
understand Kåñëa consciousness and cannot enter into the realm of transcendental
loving service to the Lord. Also, there are so-called disciples who become submissive to a
spiritual master most artificially, with an ulterior motive. They also cannot understand
what Kåñëa consciousness or devotional service is. Persons who, due to being initiated
by another sect of religious faith, do not find devotional service as the common platform
for approaching the Supreme Personality of Godhead, also cannot understand Kåñëa
consciousness. We have experience that some students come to join us, but because of
being biased in some particular type of faith, they leave our camp and become lost in the
wilderness. Actually, Kåñëa consciousness is not a sectarian religious faith; it is a
teaching process for understanding the Supreme Lord and our relationship with Him.
Anyone can join this movement without prejudice, but unfortunately there are persons
781
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
who feel differently. It is better, therefore, not to instruct the science of Kåñëa
consciousness to such persons.
Generally, materialistic persons are after some name, fame and material gain, so if
someone takes to Kåñëa consciousness for these reasons, he will never be able to
understand this philosophy. Such persons take to religious principles as a social
decoration. They admit themselves into some cultural institution for the sake of name
only, especially in this age. Such persons also cannot understand the philosophy of
Kåñëa consciousness. Even if one is not greedy for material possessions but is too
attached to family life, he also cannot understand Kåñëa consciousness. Superficially,
such persons are not very greedy for material possessions, but they are too attached to
wife, children and family improvement. When a person is not contaminated by the
above-mentioned faults yet at the ultimate issue is not interested in the service of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, or if he is a nondevotee, he also cannot understand
the philosophy of Kåñëa consciousness.
SB 3.32.41
TEXT 41
é[ÕDaaNaaYa >a¢-aYa ivNaqTaaYaaNaSaUYave )
>aUTaezu k*-TaMaE}aaYa éué[Uzai>arTaaYa c )) 41 ))
çraddadhänäya bhaktäya
vinétäyänasüyave
bhüteñu kåta-maiträya
çuçrüñäbhiratäya ca
SYNONYMS
çraddadhänäya—faithful; bhaktäya—to the devotee; vinétäya—respectful; anasüyave—
nonenvious; bhüteñu—to all living entities; kåta-maiträya—friendly; çuçrüñä—faithful
service; abhiratäya—eager to render; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Instruction should be given to the faithful devotee who is respectful to the spiritual
master, nonenvious, friendly to all kinds of living entities and eager to render service with
faith and sincerity.
782
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SB 3.32.42
TEXT 42
bihJaaRTaivraGaaYa XaaNTaictaaYa dqYaTaaMa( )
iNaMaRTSaraYa éucYae YaSYaah& Pa[eYaSaa& iPa[Ya" )) 42 ))
bahir-jäta-virägäya
çänta-cittäya déyatäm
nirmatsaräya çucaye
yasyähaà preyasäà priyaù
SYNONYMS
bahiù—for what is outside; jäta-virägäya—to him who has developed detachment; çäntacittäya—
whose mind is peaceful; déyatäm—let this be instructed; nirmatsaräya—
nonenvious; çucaye—perfectly cleansed; yasya—of whom; aham—I; preyasäm—of all
that is very dear; priyaù—the most dear.
TRANSLATION
This instruction should be imparted by the spiritual master to persons who have taken
the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be more dear than anything, who are not envious
of anyone, who are perfectly cleansed and who have developed detachment for that which
is outside the purview of Kåñëa consciousness.
PURPORT
In the beginning, no one can be elevated to the highest stage of devotional service. Here
bhakta means one who does not hesitate to accept the reformatory processes for
becoming a bhakta. In order to become a devotee of the Lord, one has to accept a
spiritual master and inquire from him about how to progress in devotional service. To
serve a devotee, to chant the holy name according to a certain counting method, to
worship the Deity, to hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam or Bhagavad-gétä from a realized person
and to live in a sacred place where devotional service is not disturbed are the first out of
sixty-four devotional activities for making progress in devotional service. One who has
accepted these five chief activities is called a devotee.
One must be prepared to offer the necessary respect and honor to the spiritual master.
783
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
He should not be unnecessarily envious of his Godbrothers. Rather, if a Godbrother is
more enlightened and advanced in Kåñëa consciousness, one should accept him as
almost equal to the spiritual master, and one should be happy to see such Godbrothers
advance in Kåñëa consciousness. A devotee should always be very kind to the general
public in instructing Kåñëa consciousness because that is the only solution for getting
out of the clutches of mäyä. That is really humanitarian work, for it is the way to show
mercy to other people who need it very badly. The word çuçrüñäbhiratäya indicates a
person who faithfully engages in serving the spiritual master. One should give personal
service and all kinds of comforts to the spiritual master. A devotee who does so is also a
bona fide candidate for taking this instruction. The word bahir jäta-virägäya means a
person who has developed detachment from external and internal material propensities.
Not only is he detached from activities which are not connected to Kåñëa consciousness,
but he should be internally averse to the material way of life. Such a person must be
nonenvious and should think of the welfare of all living entities, not only of the human
beings, but living entities other than human beings. The word çucaye means one who is
cleansed both externally and internally. To become actually cleansed externally and
internally, one should chant the holy name of the Lord, Hare Kåñëa, or Viñëu,
constantly.
The word déyatäm means that knowledge of Kåñëa consciousness should be offered by
the spiritual master. The spiritual master must not accept a disciple who is not qualified;
he should not be professional and should not accept disciples for monetary gains. The
bona fide spiritual master must see the bona fide qualities of a person whom he is going
to initiate. An unworthy person should not be initiated. The spiritual master should
train his disciple in such a way so that in the future only the Supreme Personality of
Godhead will be the dearmost goal of his life.
In these two verses the qualities of a devotee are fully explained. One who has actually
developed all the qualities listed in these verses is already elevated to the post of a
devotee. If one has not developed all these qualities, he still has to fulfill these
conditions in order to become a perfect devotee.
SB 3.32.43
TEXT 43
Ya wd& é*<auYaadMb é[ÖYaa Pauåz" Sak*-Ta( )
Yaae vai>aDatae MaiÀta" Sa ùeiTa Padvq& c Mae )) 43 ))
784
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
ya idaà çåëuyäd amba
çraddhayä puruñaù sakåt
yo väbhidhatte mac-cittaù
sa hy eti padavéà ca me
SYNONYMS
yaù—he who; idam—this; çåëuyät—may hear; amba—O mother; çraddhayä—with
faith; puruñaù—a person; sakåt—once; yaù—he who; vä—or; abhidhatte—repeats; matcittaù—
his mind fixed on Me; saù—he; hi—certainly; eti—attains; padavém—abode;
ca—and; me—My.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who once meditates upon Me with faith and affection, who hears and chants
about Me, surely goes back home, back to Godhead.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Thirty-second Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Entanglement in Fruitive Activities."
33. Activities of Kapila
SB 3.33.1
TEXT 1
MaE}aeYa ovac
Wv& iNaXaMYa k-iPal/SYa vcae JaiNa}aq
Saa k-dRMaSYa diYaTaa ik-l/ devhUiTa" )
ivóSTaMaaehPa$=l/a TaMai>aPa[<aMYa
Tauíav TatvivzYaaiªTaiSaiÖ>aUiMaMa( )) 1 ))
maitreya uväca
evaà niçamya kapilasya vaco janitré
785
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sä kardamasya dayitä kila devahütiù
visrasta-moha-paöalä tam abhipraëamya
tuñöäva tattva-viñayäìkita-siddhi-bhümim
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; evam—thus; niçamya—having heard; kapilasya—of
Lord Kapila; vacaù—the words; janitré—the mother; sä—she; kardamasya—of Kardama
Muni; dayitä—the dear wife; kila—namely; devahütiù—Devahüti; visrasta—freed from;
moha-paöalä—the covering of illusion; tam—unto Him; abhipraëamya—having offered
obeisances; tuñöäva—recited prayers; tattva—basic principles; viñaya—in the matter of;
aìkita—the author; siddhi—of liberation; bhümim—the background.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: Thus Devahüti, the mother of Lord Kapila and wife of Kardama Muni,
became freed from all ignorance concerning devotional service and transcendental
knowledge. She offered her obeisances unto the Lord, the author of the basic principles of
the Säìkhya system of philosophy, which is the background of liberation, and she
satisfied Him with the following verses of prayer.
PURPORT
The system of philosophy enunciated by Lord Kapila before His mother is the
background for situation on the spiritual platform. The specific significance of this
system of philosophy is stated herein as siddhi-bhümim—it is the background of
salvation. People who are suffering in this material world because they are conditioned
by the material energy can easily get freedom from the clutches of matter by
understanding the Säìkhya philosophy enunciated by Lord Kapila. By this system of
philosophy, one can immediately become free, even though one is situated in this
material world. That stage is called jévan-mukti. This means that one is liberated even
though one stays with his material body. That happened for Devahüti, the mother of
Lord Kapila, and she therefore satisfied the Lord by offering her prayers. Anyone who
understands the basic principle of Säìkhya philosophy is elevated in devotional service
and becomes fully Kåñëa conscious, or liberated, even within this material world.
SB 3.33.2
TEXT 2
786
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
devhUiTaåvac
AQaaPYaJaae_NTa"Sail/le/ XaYaaNa&
>aUTaeiNd]YaaQaaRTMaMaYa& vPauSTae )
Gau<aPa[vah& SadXaezbqJa&
dDYaaE SvYa& YaÂ#=raBJaJaaTa" )) 2 ))
devahütir uväca
athäpy ajo 'ntaù-salile çayänaà
bhütendriyärthätma-mayaà vapus te
guëa-pravähaà sad-açeña-béjaà
dadhyau svayaà yaj-jaöharäbja-jätaù
SYNONYMS
devahütiù uväca—Devahüti said; atha api—moreover; ajaù—Lord Brahmä; antaùsalile—
in the water; çayänam—lying; bhüta—the material elements; indriya—the
senses; artha—the sense objects; ätma—the mind; mayam—pervaded by; vapuù—body;
te—Your; guëa-praväham—the source of the stream of the three modes of material
nature; sat—manifest; açeña—of all; béjam—the seed; dadhyau—meditated upon;
svayam—himself; yat—of whom; jaöhara—from the abdomen; abja—from the lotus
flower; jätaù—born.
TRANSLATION
Devahüti said: Brahmä is said to be unborn because he takes birth from the lotus flower
which grows from Your abdomen while You lie in the ocean at the bottom of the
universe. But even Brahmä simply meditated upon You, whose body is the source of
unlimited universes.
PURPORT
Brahmä is also named Aja, "he who is unborn." Whenever we think of someone's birth,
there must be a material father and mother, for thus one is born. But Brahmä, being the
first living creature within this universe, was born directly from the body of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who is known as Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, the Viñëu
787
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
form lying down in the ocean at the bottom of the universe. Devahüti wanted to impress
upon the Lord that when Brahmä wants to see Him, he has to meditate upon Him. "You
are the seed of all creation," she said. "Although Brahmä was directly born from You, he
still has to perform many years of meditation, and even then he cannot see You directly,
face to face. Your body is lying within the vast water at the bottom of the universe, and
thus You are known as Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu."
The nature of the Lord's gigantic body is also explained in this verse. That body is
transcendental, untouched by matter. Since the material manifestation has come from
His body, His body therefore existed before the material creation. The conclusion is that
the transcendental body of Viñëu is not made of material elements. The body of Viñëu is
the source of all other living entities, as well as the material nature, which is also
supposed to be the energy of that Supreme Personality of Godhead. Devahüti said, "You
are the background of the material manifestation and all created energy; therefore Your
delivering me from the clutches of mäyä by explaining the system of Säìkhya
philosophy is not so astonishing. But Your being born from my abdomen is certainly
wonderful because although You are the source of all creation, You have so kindly taken
birth as my child. That is most wonderful. Your body is the source of all the universe,
and still You put Your body within the abdomen of a common woman like me. To me,
that is most astonishing."
SB 3.33.3
TEXT 3
Sa Wv ivìSYa >avaNa( ivDatae
Gau<aPa[vahe<a iv>a¢-vqYaR" )
SaGaaRÛNaqhae_ivTaQaai>aSaiNDa‚
raTMaeìrae_TaKYaRSahóXai¢-" )) 3 ))
sa eva viçvasya bhavän vidhatte
guëa-praväheëa vibhakta-véryaù
sargädy aného 'vitathäbhisandhir
ätmeçvaro 'tarkya-sahasra-çaktiù
SYNONYMS
saù—that very person; eva—certainly; viçvasya—of the universe; bhavän—You;
788
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
vidhatte—carry on; guëa-praväheëa—by the interaction of the modes; vibhakta—
divided; véryaù—Your energies; sarga-ädi—the creation and so on; anéhaù—the
nondoer; avitatha—not futile; abhisandhiù—Your determination; ätma-éçvaraù—the
Lord of all living entities; atarkya—inconceivable; sahasra—thousands; çaktiù—
possessing energies.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, although personally You have nothing to do, You have distributed Your
energies in the interactions of the material modes of nature, and for that reason the
creation, maintenance and dissolution of the cosmic manifestation take place. My dear
Lord, You are self-determined and are the Supreme Personality of Godhead for all living
entities. For them You created this material manifestation, and although You are one,
Your diverse energies can act multifariously. This is inconceivable to us.
PURPORT
The statement made in this verse by Devahüti that the Absolute Truth has many
diverse energies although He personally has nothing to do is confirmed in the
Upaniñads. There is no one greater than Him or on an equal level with Him, and
everything is completely done by His energy, as if by nature. It is understood herein,
therefore, that although the modes of material nature are entrusted to different
manifestations like Brahmä, Viñëu and Çiva, each of whom is particularly invested with
different kinds of power, the Supreme Lord is completely aloof from such activities.
Devahüti is saying, "Although You personally are not doing anything, Your
determination is absolute. There is no question of Your fulfilling Your will with the help
of anyone else besides Yourself. You are, in the end, the Supreme Soul and the supreme
controller. Your will, therefore, cannot be checked by anyone else." The Supreme Lord
can check others' plans. As it is said, "Man proposes and God disposes." But when the
Supreme Personality of Godhead proposes, that desire is under no one else's control. He
is absolute. We are ultimately dependent on Him to fulfill our desires, but we cannot say
that God's desires are also dependent. That is His inconceivable power. That which may
be inconceivable for ordinary living entities is easily done by Him. And in spite of His
being unlimited, He has subjected Himself to being known from the authoritative
scriptures like the Vedic literatures. As it is said, çabda-mülatvät: He can be known
through the çabda-brahma, or Vedic literature.
Why is the creation made? Since the Lord is the Supreme Personality of Godhead for all
789
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
living entities, He created this material manifestation for those living entities who want
to enjoy or lord it over material nature. As the Supreme Godhead, He arranges to fulfill
their various desires. It is confirmed also in the Vedas, eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän:
the supreme one supplies the necessities of the many living entities. There is no limit to
the demands of the different kinds of living entities, and the supreme one, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, alone maintains them and supplies them by His inconceivable
energy.
SB 3.33.4
TEXT 4
Sa Tv& >a*Taae Mae Ja#=re<a NaaQa
k-Qa& Nau YaSYaaedr WTadaSaqTa( )
ivì& YauGaaNTae v$=Pa}a Wk-"
XaeTae SMa MaaYaaiXaéurx(iga]PaaNa" )) 4 ))
sa tvaà bhåto me jaöhareëa nätha
kathaà nu yasyodara etad äsét
viçvaà yugänte vaöa-patra ekaù
çete sma mäyä-çiçur aìghri-pänaù
SYNONYMS
saù—that very person; tvam—You; bhåtaù—took birth; me jaöhareëa—by my abdomen;
nätha—O my Lord; katham—how; nu—then; yasya—of whom; udare—in the belly;
etat—this; äsét—did rest; viçvam—universe; yuga-ante—at the end of the millennium;
vaöa-patre—on the leaf of a banyan tree; ekaù—alone; çete sma—You lay down; mäyä—
possessing inconceivable powers; çiçuù—a baby; aìghri—Your toe; pänaù—licking.
TRANSLATION
As the Supreme Personality of Godhead, You have taken birth from my abdomen. O my
Lord, how is that possible for the supreme one, who has in His belly all the cosmic
manifestation? The answer is that it is possible, for at the end of the millennium You lie
down on a leaf of a banyan tree, and just like a small baby, You lick the toe of Your lotus
foot.
790
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
At the time of dissolution the Lord sometimes appears as a small baby lying on a leaf of a
banyan tree, floating on the devastating water. Therefore Devahüti suggests, "Your lying
down within the abdomen of a common woman like me is not so astonishing. You can
lie down on the leaf of a banyan tree and float on the water of devastation as a small
baby. It is not very wonderful, therefore, that You can lie down in the abdomen of my
body. You teach us that those who are very fond of children within this material world
and who therefore enter into marriage to enjoy family life with children can also have
the Supreme Personality of Godhead as their child, and the most wonderful thing is that
the Lord Himself licks His toe."
Since all the great sages and devotees apply all energy and all activities in the service of
the lotus feet of the Lord, there must be some transcendental pleasure in the toes of His
lotus feet. The Lord licks His toe to taste the nectar for which the devotees always
aspire. Sometimes the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself wonders how much
transcendental pleasure is within Himself, and in order to taste His own potency, He
sometimes takes the position of tasting Himself. Lord Caitanya is Kåñëa Himself, but He
appears as a devotee to taste the sweetness of the transcendental mellow in Himself
which is tasted by Çrématé Rädhäräëé, the greatest of all devotees.
SB 3.33.5
TEXT 5
Tv& dehTaN}a" Pa[XaMaaYa PaaPMaNaa&
iNadeXa>aaJaa& c iv>aae iv>aUTaYae )
YaQaavTaaraSTav SaUk-radYa‚
STaQaaYaMaPYaaTMaPaQaaePal/BDaYae )) 5 ))
tvaà deha-tantraù praçamäya päpmanäà
nideça-bhäjäà ca vibho vibhütaye
yathävatäräs tava sükarädayas
tathäyam apy ätma-pathopalabdhaye
SYNONYMS
tvam—You; deha—this body; tantraù—have assumed; praçamäya—for the diminution;
päpmanäm—of sinful activities; nideça-bhäjäm—of instructions in devotion; ca—and;
791
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
vibho—O my Lord; vibhütaye—for the expansion; yathä—as; avatäräù—incarnations;
tava—Your; sükara-ädayaù—the boar and other forms; tathä—so; ayam—this
incarnation of Kapila; api—surely; ätma-patha—the path of self-realization;
upalabdhaye—in order to reveal.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You have assumed this body in order to diminish the sinful activities of
the fallen and to enrich their knowledge in devotion and liberation. Since these sinful
people are dependent on Your direction, by Your own will You assume incarnations as a
boar and as other forms. Similarly, You have appeared in order to distribute
transcendental knowledge to Your dependents.
PURPORT
In the previous verses, the general transcendental qualifications of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead were described. Now the specific purpose of the Lord's
appearance is also described. By His different energies He bestows different kinds of
bodies upon the living entities, who are conditioned by their propensity to lord it over
material nature, but in course of time these living entities become so degraded that they
need enlightenment. It is stated in Bhagavad-gétä that whenever there are discrepancies
in the discharge of the real purpose of this material existence, the Lord appears as an
incarnation. The Lord's form as Kapila directs the fallen souls and enriches them with
knowledge and devotion so that they may go back to Godhead. There are many
incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, like those of the boar, the fish, the
tortoise and the half-man half-lion. Lord Kapiladeva is also one of the incarnations of
Godhead. It is accepted herein that Lord Kapiladeva appeared on the surface of the
earth to give transcendental knowledge to the misguided conditioned souls.
SB 3.33.6
TEXT 6
YaàaMaDaeYaé[v<aaNauk-ITaRNaad(
YaTPa[û<aaÛTSMar<aadiPa KvicTa( )
ìadae_iPa SaÛ" SavNaaYa k-LPaTae
ku-Ta" PauNaSTae >aGavàu dXaRNaaTa( )) 6 ))
792
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
yan-nämadheya-çravaëänukértanäd
yat-prahvaëäd yat-smaraëäd api kvacit
çvädo 'pi sadyaù savanäya kalpate
kutaù punas te bhagavan nu darçanät
SYNONYMS
yat—of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); nämadheya—the name;
çravaëa—hearing; anukértanät—by chanting; yat—to whom; prahvaëät—by offering
obeisances; yat—whom; smaraëät—by remembering; api—even; kvacit—at any time;
çva-adaù—a dog-eater; api—even; sadyaù—immediately; savanäya—for performing
Vedic sacrifices; kalpate—becomes eligible; kutaù—what to speak of; punaù—again; te—
You; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; nu—then; darçanät—by seeing
face to face.
TRANSLATION
To say nothing of the spiritual advancement of persons who see the Supreme Person face
to face, even a person born in a family of dog-eaters immediately becomes eligible to
perform Vedic sacrifices if he once utters the holy name of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead or chants about Him, hears about His pastimes, offers Him obeisances or even
remembers Him.
PURPORT
Herein the spiritual potency of chanting, hearing or remembering the holy name of the
Supreme Lord is greatly stressed. Rüpa Gosvämé has discussed the sequence of sinful
activities of the conditioned soul, and he has established, in Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu,
that those who engage in devotional service become freed from the reactions of all sinful
activities. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä. The Lord says that He takes charge of
one who surrenders unto Him, and He makes him immune to all reactions to sinful
activities. If by chanting the holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead one
becomes so swiftly cleared of all reactions to sinful activities, then what is to be said of
those persons who see Him face to face?
Another consideration here is that persons who are purified by the process of chanting
and hearing become immediately eligible to perform Vedic sacrifices. Generally, only a
person who is born in a family of brähmaëas, who has been reformed by the ten kinds of
793
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
purificatory processes and who is learned in Vedic literature is allowed to perform the
Vedic sacrifices. But here the word sadyaù, "immediately," is used, and Çrédhara Svämé
also remarks that one can immediately become eligible to perform Vedic sacrifices. A
person born in a family of the low caste which is accustomed to eat dogs is so positioned
due to his past sinful activities, but by chanting or hearing once in pureness, or in an
offenseless manner, he is immediately relieved of the sinful reaction. Not only is he
relieved of the sinful reaction, but he immediately achieves the result of all purificatory
processes. Taking birth in the family of a brähmaëa is certainly due to pious activities in
one's past life. But still a child who is born in a family of a brähmaëa depends for his
further reformation upon initiation into acceptance of a sacred thread and many other
reformatory processes. But a person who chants the holy name of the Lord, even if born
in a family of caëòälas, dog-eaters, does not need reformation. Simply by chanting Hare
Kåñëa, he immediately becomes purified and becomes as good as the most learned
brähmaëa.
Çrédhara Svämé especially remarks in this connection, anena püjyatvaà lakñyate. Some
caste brähmaëas remark that by chanting Hare Kåñëa, purification begins. Of course,
that depends on the individual process of chanting, but this remark of Çrédhara Svämé's
is completely applicable if one chants the holy name of the Lord without offense, for he
immediately becomes more than a brähmaëa. As Çrédhara Svämé says, püjyatvam: he
immediately becomes as respectable as a most learned brähmaëa and can be allowed to
perform Vedic sacrifices. If simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord one becomes
sanctified instantly, then what can be said of those persons who see the Supreme Lord
face to face and who understand the descent of the Lord, as Devahüti understands
Kapiladeva.
Usually, initiation depends on the bona fide spiritual master, who directs the disciple. If
he sees that a disciple has become competent and purified by the process of chanting, he
offers the sacred thread to the disciple just so that he will be recognized as one-hundredpercent
equal with a brähmaëa. This is also confirmed in the Hari-bhakti-viläsa by Çré
Sanätana Gosvämé: "As a base metal like bell metal can be changed into gold by a
chemical process, any person can similarly be changed into a brähmaëa by dékñä-vidhäna,
the initiation process".
It is sometimes remarked that by the chanting process one begins to purify himself and
can take birth in his next life in a brähmaëa family and then be reformed. But at this
present moment, even those who are born in the best brähmaëa families are not
reformed, nor is there any certainty that they are actually born of brähmaëa fathers.
Formerly the garbhädhäna reformatory system was prevalent, but at the present moment
794
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
there is no such garbhädhäna, or seed-giving ceremony. Under these circumstances, no
one knows if a man is factually born of a brähmaëa father. Whether one has acquired
the qualification of a brähmaëa depends on the judgment of the bona fide spiritual
master. He bestows upon the disciple the position of a brähmaëa by his own judgment.
When one is accepted as a brähmaëa in the sacred thread ceremony under the
päïcarätrika system, then he is dvija, twice-born. That is confirmed by Sanätana
Gosvämé: dvijatvaà jäyate. By the process of initiation by the spiritual master, a person is
accepted as a brähmaëa in his purified state of chanting the holy name of the Lord. He
then makes further progress to become a qualified Vaiñëava, which means that the
brahminical qualification is already acquired.
SB 3.33.7
TEXT 7
Ahae bTa ìPacae_Taae GarqYaaNa(
YaiÂûaGa]e vTaRTae NaaMa Tau>YaMa( )
TaePauSTaPaSTae Jauhuvu" SaòuraYaaR
b]øaNaUcuNaaRMa Ga*<aiNTa Yae Tae )) 7 ))
aho bata çva-paco 'to garéyän
yaj-jihvägre vartate näma tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuù sasnur äryä
brahmänücur näma gåëanti ye te
SYNONYMS
aho bata—oh, how glorious; çva-pacaù—a dog-eater; ataù—hence; garéyän—
worshipable; yat—of whom; jihvä-agre—on the tip of the tongue; vartate—is; näma—
the holy name; tubhyam—unto You; tepuù tapaù—practiced austerities; te—they;
juhuvuù—executed fire sacrifices; sasnuù—took bath in the sacred rivers; äryäù—
Äryans; brahma anücuù—studied the Vedas; näma—the holy name; gåëanti—accept;
ye—they who; te—Your.
TRANSLATION
Oh, how glorious are they whose tongues are chanting Your holy name! Even if born in
the families of dog-eaters, such persons are worshipable. Persons who chant the holy
795
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
name of Your Lordship must have executed all kinds of austerities and fire sacrifices and
achieved all the good manners of the Äryans. To be chanting the holy name of Your
Lordship, they must have bathed at holy places of pilgrimage, studied the Vedas and
fulfilled everything required.
PURPORT
As it is stated in the previous verse, a person who has once offenselessly chanted the
holy name of God becomes immediately eligible to perform Vedic sacrifices. One should
not be astonished by this statement of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. One should not disbelieve or
think, "How by chanting the holy name of the Lord can one become a holy man to be
compared to the most elevated brähmaëa?" To eradicate such doubts in the minds of
unbelievers, this verse affirms that the stage of chanting of the holy name of the Lord is
not sudden, but that the chanters have already performed all kinds of Vedic rituals and
sacrifices. It is not very astounding, for no one in this life can chant the holy name of
the Lord unless he has passed all lower stages, such as performing the Vedic ritualistic
sacrifices, studying the Vedas and practicing good behavior like that of the Äryans. All
this must first have been done. Just as a student in a law class is to be understood to have
already graduated from general education, anyone who is engaged in the chanting of the
holy name of the Lord—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma,
Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare—must have already passed all lower stages. It is
said that those who simply chant the holy name with the tip of the tongue are glorious.
One does not even have to chant the holy name and understand the whole procedure,
namely the offensive stage, offenseless stage and pure stage; if the holy name is sounded
on the tip of the tongue, that is also sufficient. It is said herein that näma, a singular
number, one name, Kåñëa or Räma, is sufficient. It is not that one has to chant all the
holy names of the Lord. The holy names of the Lord are innumerable, and one does not
have to chant all the names to prove that he has already undergone all the processes of
Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. If one chants once only, it is to be understood that he has
already passed all the examinations, not to speak of those who are chanting always,
twenty-four hours a day. It is specifically said here, tubhyam: "unto You only." One must
chant God's name, not, as the Mäyävädé philosophers say, any name, such as a demigod's
name or the names of God's energies. Only the holy name of the Supreme Lord will be
effective. Anyone who compares the holy name of the Supreme Lord to the names of
the demigods is called päñaëòé, or an offender.
The holy name has to be chanted to please the Supreme Lord, and not for any sense
796
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
gratification or professional purpose. If this pure mentality is there, then even though a
person is born of a low family, such as a dog-eater's, he is so glorious that not only has he
purified himself, but he is quite competent to deliver others. He is competent to speak
on the importance of the transcendental name, just as Öhäkura Haridäsa did. He was
apparently born in a family of Muhammadans, but because he was chanting the holy
name of the Supreme Lord offenselessly, Lord Caitanya empowered him to become the
authority, or äcärya, of spreading the name. It did not matter that he was born in a
family which was not following the Vedic rules and regulations. Caitanya Mahäprabhu
and Advaita Prabhu accepted him as an authority because he was offenselessly chanting
the name of the Lord. Authorities like Advaita Prabhu and Lord Caitanya immediately
accepted that he had already performed all kinds of austerities, studied the Vedas and
performed all sacrifices. That is automatically understood. There is a hereditary class of
brähmaëas called the smärta-brähmaëas, however, who are of the opinion that even if
such persons who are chanting the holy name of the Lord are accepted as purified, they
still have to perform the Vedic rites or await their next birth in a family of brähmaëas so
that they can perform the Vedic rituals. But actually that is not the case. Such a man
does not need to wait for the next birth to become purified. He is at once purified. It is
understood that he has already performed all sorts of rites. It is the so-called brähmaëas
who actually have to undergo different kinds of austerities before reaching that point of
purification. There are many other Vedic performances which are not described here.
All such Vedic rituals have been already performed by the chanters of the holy name.
The word juhuvuù means that the chanters of the holy name have already performed all
kinds of sacrifices. Sasnuù means that they have already traveled to all the holy places of
pilgrimage and taken part in purificatory activities at those places. They are called äryäù
because they have already finished all these requirements, and therefore they must be
among the Äryans or those who have qualified themselves to become Äryans. "Äryan"
refers to those who are civilized, whose manners are regulated according to the Vedic
rituals. Any devotee who is chanting the holy name of the Lord is the best kind of
Äryan. Unless one studies the Vedas, one cannot become an Äryan, but it is
automatically understood that the chanters have already studied all the Vedic literature.
The specific word used here is anücuù, which means that because they have already
completed all those recommended acts, they have become qualified to be spiritual
masters.
The very word gåëanti, which is used in this verse, means to be already established in the
perfectional stage of ritualistic performances. If one is seated on the bench of a highcourt
and is giving judgment on cases, it means that he has already passed all legal exams
797
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
and is better than those who are engaged in the study of law or those expecting to study
law in the future. In a similar way, persons who are chanting the holy name are
transcendental to those who are factually performing the Vedic rituals and those who
expect to be qualified (or, in other words, those who are born in families of brähmaëas
but have not yet undergone the reformatory processes and who therefore expect to study
the Vedic rituals and perform the sacrifices in the future).
There are many Vedic statements in different places saying that anyone who chants the
holy name of the Lord becomes immediately freed from conditional life and that anyone
who hears the holy name of the Lord, even though born of a family of dog-eaters, also
becomes liberated from the clutches of material entanglement.
SB 3.33.8
TEXT 8
Ta& TvaMah& b]ø Par& PauMaa&Sa&
Pa[TYaKóaeTaSYaaTMaiNa Sa&iv>aaVYaMa( )
SvTaeJaSaa ßSTaGau<aPa[vah&
vNde ivZ<au& k-iPal&/ vedGa>aRMa( )) 8 ))
taà tväm ahaà brahma paraà pumäàsaà
pratyak-srotasy ätmani saàvibhävyam
sva-tejasä dhvasta-guëa-pravähaà
vande viñëuà kapilaà veda-garbham
SYNONYMS
tam—unto Him; tväm—You; aham—I; brahma—Brahman; param—supreme;
pumäàsam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pratyak-srotasi—turned inwards;
ätmani—in the mind; saàvibhävyam—meditated upon, perceived; sva-tejasä—by Your
own potency; dhvasta—vanished; guëa-praväham—the influence of the modes of
material nature; vande—I offer obeisances; viñëum—unto Lord Viñëu; kapilam—named
Kapila; veda-garbham—the repository of the Vedas.
TRANSLATION
I believe, my Lord, that You are Lord Viñëu Himself under the name of Kapila, and You
are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supreme Brahman! The saints and sages,
798
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
being freed from all the disturbances of the senses and mind, meditate upon You, for by
Your mercy only can one become free from the clutches of the three modes of material
nature. At the time of dissolution, all the Vedas are sustained in You only.
PURPORT
Devahüti, the mother of Kapila, instead of prolonging her prayers, summarized that Lord
Kapila was none other than Viñëu and that since she was a woman it was not possible
for her to worship Him properly simply by prayer. It was her intention that the Lord be
satisfied. The word pratyak is significant. In yogic practice, the eight divisions are yama,
niyama, äsana, präëäyäma, pratyähära, dhäraëä, dhyäna and samädhi. Pratyähära means
to wind up the activities of the senses. The level of realization of the Supreme Lord
evidenced by Devahüti is possible when one is able to withdraw the senses from material
activities. When one is engaged in devotional service, there is no scope for his senses to
be engaged otherwise. In such full Kåñëa consciousness, one can understand the
Supreme Lord as He is.
SB 3.33.9
TEXT 9
MaE}aeYa ovac
wRi@Taae >aGavaNaev& k-iPal/a:Ya" Par" PauMaaNa( )
vacaiv(c)-vYaeTYaah MaaTar& MaaTa*vTSal/" )) 9 ))
maitreya uväca
éòito bhagavän evaà
kapiläkhyaù paraù pumän
väcäviklavayety äha
mätaraà mätå-vatsalaù
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; éòitaù—praised; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; evam—thus; kapila-äkhyaù—named Kapila; paraù—supreme; pumän—
person; väcä—with words; aviklavayä—grave; iti—thus; äha—replied; mätaram—to His
mother; mätå-vatsalaù—very affectionate to His mother.
799
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kapila, satisfied by the words of His mother,
towards whom He was very affectionate, replied with gravity.
PURPORT
Since the Lord is all-perfect, His exhibition of affection for His mother was also
complete. After hearing the words of His mother, He most respectfully, with due gravity
and good manners, replied.
SB 3.33.10
TEXT 10
k-iPal/ ovac
MaaGaeR<aaNaeNa MaaTaSTae SauSaeVYaeNaaeidTaeNa Mae )
AaiSQaTaeNa Para& k-aïaMaicradvraeTSYaiSa )) 10 ))
kapila uväca
märgeëänena mätas te
susevyenoditena me
ästhitena paräà käñöhäm
aciräd avarotsyasi
SYNONYMS
kapilaù uväca—Lord Kapila said; märgeëa—by the path; anena—this; mätaù—My dear
mother; te—for you; su-sevyena—very easy to execute; uditena—instructed; me—by Me;
ästhitena—being performed; paräm—supreme; käñöhäm—goal; acirät—very soon;
avarotsyasi—you will attain.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead said: My dear mother, the path of self-realization which I
have already instructed to you is very easy. You can execute this system without
difficulty, and by following it you shall very soon be liberated, even within your present
body.
800
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Devotional service is so perfect that simply by following the rules and regulations and
executing them under the direction of the spiritual master, one is liberated, as it is said
herein, from the clutches of mäyä, even in this body. In other yogic processes, or in
empiric philosophical speculation, one is never certain whether or not he is at the
perfectional stage. But in the discharge of devotional service, if one has unflinching
faith in the instruction of the bona fide spiritual master and follows the rules and
regulations, he is sure to be liberated, even within this present body. Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé, in the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, has also confirmed this. Éhä yasya harer däsye:
regardless of where he is situated, anyone whose only aim is to serve the Supreme Lord
under the direction of the spiritual master is called jévan-mukta, or one who is liberated
even with his material body. Sometimes doubts arise in the minds of neophytes about
whether or not the spiritual master is liberated, and sometimes neophytes are doubtful
about the bodily affairs of the spiritual master. The point of liberation, however, is not
to see the bodily symptoms of the spiritual master. One has to see the spiritual symptoms
of the spiritual master. Jévan-mukta means that even though one is in the material body
(there are still some material necessities, since the body is material), because one is fully
situated in the service of the Lord, he should be understood to be liberated.
Liberation entails being situated in one's own position. That is the definition in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam: muktir. .. svarüpeëa vyavasthitiù [SB 2.10.6]. The svarüpa, or actual
identity of the living entity, is described by Lord Caitanya. Jévera 'svarüpa' haya-kåñëera
'nitya-däsa': [Cc. Madhya 20.108] the real identity of the living entity is that he is
eternally a servitor of the Supreme Lord. If someone is one-hundred-percent engaged in
the service of the Lord, he is to be understood as liberated. One must understand
whether or not he is liberated by his activities in devotional service, not by other
symptoms.
SB 3.33.11
TEXT 11
é[ÖTSvETaNMaTa& Maù& Jauí& Yad(b]øvaidi>a" )
YaeNa MaaMa>aYa& YaaYaa Ma*TYauMa*C^NTYaTaiÜd" )) 11 ))
çraddhatsvaitan mataà mahyaà
juñöaà yad brahma-vädibhiù
yena mäm abhayaà yäyä
801
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
måtyum åcchanty atad-vidaù
SYNONYMS
çraddhatsva—you may rest assured; etat—about this; matam—instruction; mahyam—
My; juñöam—followed; yat—which; brahma-vädibhiù—by transcendentalists; yena—by
which; mäm—unto Me; abhayam—without fear; yäyäù—you shall reach; måtyum—
death; åcchanti—attain; a-tat-vidaù—persons who are not conversant with this.
TRANSLATION
My dear mother, those who are actually transcendentalists certainly follow My
instructions, as I have given them to you. You may rest assured that if you traverse this
path of self-realization perfectly, surely you shall be freed from fearful material
contamination and shall ultimately reach Me. Mother, persons who are not conversant
with this method of devotional service certainly cannot get out of the cycle of birth and
death.
PURPORT
Material existence is full of anxiety, and therefore it is fearful. One who gets out of this
material existence automatically becomes free from all anxieties and fear. One who
follows the path of devotional service enunciated by Lord Kapila is very easily liberated.
SB 3.33.12
TEXT 12
MaE}aeYa ovac
wiTa Pa[dXYaR >aGavaNa( SaTaq& TaaMaaTMaNaae GaiTaMa( )
SvMaa}aa b]øvaidNYaa k-iPal/ae_NauMaTaae YaYaaE )) 12 ))
maitreya uväca
iti pradarçya bhagavän
satéà täm ätmano gatim
sva-mäträ brahma-vädinyä
kapilo 'numato yayau
802
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
maitreyaù uväca—Maitreya said; iti—thus; pradarçya—after instructing; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; satém—venerable; täm—that; ätmanaù—of selfrealization;
gatim—path; sva-mäträ—from His mother; brahma-vädinyä—self-realized;
kapilaù—Lord Kapila; anumataù—took permission; yayau—left.
TRANSLATION
Çré Maitreya said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead Kapila, after instructing His
beloved mother, took permission from her and left His home, His mission having been
fulfilled.
PURPORT
The mission of the appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of
Kapila was to distribute the transcendental knowledge of Säìkhya philosophy, which is
full of devotional service. Having imparted that knowledge to His mother—and,
through His mother, to the world—Kapiladeva had no more need to stay at home, so He
took permission from His mother and left. Apparently He left home for spiritual
realization, although He had nothing to realize spiritually because He Himself is the
person to be spiritually realized. Therefore this is an example set by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead while acting like an ordinary human being so that others might
learn from Him. He could, of course, have stayed with His mother, but He indicated that
there was no need to stay with the family. It is best to remain alone as a brahmacäré,
sannyäsé or vänaprastha and cultivate Kåñëa consciousness throughout one's whole life.
Those who are unable to remain alone are given license to live in household life with
wife and children, not for sense gratification but for cultivation of Kåñëa consciousness.
SB 3.33.13
TEXT 13
Saa caiPa TaNaYaae¢e-Na YaaeGaadeXaeNa YaaeGaYauk(- )
TaiSMaàaé[Ma AaPaq@e SarSvTYaa" SaMaaihTaa )) 13 ))
sä cäpi tanayoktena
yogädeçena yoga-yuk
tasminn äçrama äpéòe
803
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
sarasvatyäù samähitä
SYNONYMS
sä—she; ca—and; api—also; tanaya—by her son; uktena—spoken; yoga-ädeçena—by
the instruction on yoga; yoga-yuk—engaged in bhakti-yoga; tasmin—in that; äçrame—
hermitage; äpéòe—the flower crown; sarasvatyäù—of the Sarasvaté; samähitä—fixed in
samädhi.
TRANSLATION
As instructed by her son, Devahüti also began to practice bhakti-yoga in that very
äçrama. She practiced samädhi in the house of Kardama Muni, which was so beautifully
decorated with flowers that it was considered the flower crown of the River Sarasvaté.
PURPORT
Devahüti did not leave her house, because it is never recommended for a woman to
leave her home. She is dependent. The very example of Devahüti was that when she was
not married, she was under the care of her father, Sväyambhuva Manu, and then
Sväyambhuva Manu gave her to Kardama Muni in charity. She was under the care of
her husband in her youth, and then her son, Kapila Muni, was born. As soon as her son
grew up, her husband left home, and similarly the son, after discharging His duty
towards His mother, also left. She could also have left home, but she did not. Rather, she
remained at home and began to practice bhakti-yoga as it was instructed by her great
son, Kapila Muni, and because of her practice of bhakti-yoga, the entire home became
just like a flower crown on the River Sarasvaté.
SB 3.33.14
TEXT 14
A>aq+<aavGaahk-iPaXaaNa( Jai$=l/aNa( ku-i$=l/al/k-aNa( )
AaTMaaNa& caeGa]TaPaSaa ib>a]Taq cqir<a& k*-XaMa( )) 14 ))
abhékñëävagäha-kapiçän
jaöilän kuöilälakän
ätmänaà cogra-tapasä
bibhraté cériëaà kåçam
804
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
SYNONYMS
abhékñëa—again and again; avagäha—by bathing; kapiçän—gray; jaöilän—matted;
kuöila—curled; alakän—hair; ätmänam—her body; ca—and; ugra-tapasä—by severe
austerities; bibhraté—became; cériëam—clothed in rags; kåçam—thin.
TRANSLATION
She began to bathe three times daily, and thus her curling black hair gradually became
gray. Due to austerity, her body gradually became thin, and she wore old garments.
PURPORT
It is the practice of the yogé, brahmacäré, vänaprastha and sannyäsé to bathe at least three
times daily—early in the morning, during noontime and in the evening. These
principles are strictly followed even by some gåhasthas, especially brähmaëas, who are
elevated in spiritual consciousness. Devahüti was a king's daughter and almost a king's
wife also. Although Kardama Muni was not a king, by his yogic mystic power he
accommodated Devahüti very comfortably in a nice palace with maidservants and all
opulence. But since she had learned austerity even in the presence of her husband, there
was no difficulty for her to be austere. Still, because her body underwent severe austerity
after the departure of her husband and son, she became thin. To be too fat is not very
good for spiritually advanced life. Rather, one should reduce because if one becomes fat
it is an impediment to progress in spiritual understanding. One should be careful not to
eat too much, sleep too much or remain in a comfortable position. Voluntarily accepting
some penances and difficulties, one should take less food and less sleep. These are the
procedures for practicing any kind of yoga, whether bhakti-yoga, jïäna-yoga or haöhayoga.
SB 3.33.15
TEXT 15
Pa[JaaPaTae" k-dRMaSYa TaPaaeYaaeGaivJa*iM>aTaMa( )
SvGaahRSQYaMaNaaEPaMYa& Pa[aQYa| vEMaaiNakE-riPa )) 15 ))
prajäpateù kardamasya
tapo-yoga-vijåmbhitam
sva-gärhasthyam anaupamyaà
805
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
prärthyaà vaimänikair api
SYNONYMS
prajä-pateù—of the progenitor of mankind; kardamasya—Kardama Muni; tapaù—by
austerity; yoga—by yoga; vijåmbhitam—developed; sva-gärhasthyam—his home and
household paraphernalia; anaupamyam—unequaled; prärthyam—enviable;
vaimänikaiù—by the denizens of heaven; api—even.
TRANSLATION
The home and household paraphernalia of Kardama, who was one of the Prajäpatis, was
developed in such a way, by dint of his mystic powers of austerity and yoga, that his
opulence was sometimes envied by those who travel in outer space in airplanes.
PURPORT
The statement in this verse that Kardama Muni's household affairs were envied even by
persons who travel in outer space refers to the denizens of heaven. Their airships are not
like those we have invented in the modern age, which fly only from one country to
another; their airplanes were capable of going from one planet to another. There are
many such statements in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam from which we can understand that
there were facilities to travel from one planet to another, especially in the higher
planetary system, and who can say that they are not still traveling? The speed of our
airplanes and space vehicles is very limited, but, as we have already studied, Kardama
Muni traveled in outer space in an airplane which was like a city, and he journeyed to
see all the different heavenly planets. That was not an ordinary airplane, nor was it
ordinary space travel. Because Kardama Muni was such a powerful mystic yogé, his
opulence was envied by the denizens of heaven.
SB 3.33.16
TEXT 16
PaYa"fe-NaiNa>aa" XaYYaa daNTaa åKMaPairC^da" )
AaSaNaaiNa c hEMaaiNa SauSPaXaaRSTar<aaiNa c )) 16 ))
payaù-phena-nibhäù çayyä
däntä rukma-paricchadäù
806
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
äsanäni ca haimäni
susparçästaraëäni ca
SYNONYMS
payaù—of milk; phena—the foam; nibhäù—resembling; çayyäù—beds; däntäù—made of
ivory; rukma—golden; paricchadäù—with covers; äsanäni—chairs and benches; ca—
and; haimäni—made of gold; su-sparça—soft to the touch; ästaraëäni—cushions; ca—
and.
TRANSLATION
The opulence of the household of Kardama Muni is described herein. The bedsheets and
mattresses were all as white as the foam of milk, the chairs and benches were made of
ivory and were covered by cloths of lace with golden filigree, and the couches were made
of gold and had very soft pillows.
SB 3.33.17
TEXT 17
SvC^Sf-i$=k-ku-@yezu MahaMaark-Taezu c )
rÒPa[dqPaa Aa>aaiNTa l/l/NaarÒSa&YauTaa" )) 17 ))
svaccha-sphaöika-kuòyeñu
mahä-märakateñu ca
ratna-pradépä äbhänti
lalanä ratna-saàyutäù
SYNONYMS
svaccha—pure; sphaöika—marble; kuòyeñu—on the walls; mahä-märakateñu—decorated
with valuable emeralds; ca—and; ratna-pradépäù—jewel lamps; äbhänti—shine;
lalanäù—women; ratna—with jewelry; saàyutäù—decorated.
TRANSLATION
The walls of the house were made of first-class marble, decorated with valuable jewels.
There was no need of light, for the household was illuminated by the rays of these jewels.
807
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The female members of the household were all amply decorated with jewelry.
PURPORT
It is understood from this statement that the opulences of household life were exhibited
in valuable jewels, ivory, first-class marble, and furniture made of gold and jewels. The
clothes are also mentioned as being decorated with golden filigree. Everything actually
had some value. It was not like the furniture of the present day, which is cast in
valueless plastic or base metal. The way of Vedic civilization is that whatever was used in
household affairs had to be valuable. In case of need, such items of value could be
exchanged immediately. Thus one's broken and unwanted furniture and paraphernalia
would never be without value. This system is still followed by Indians in household
affairs. They keep metal utensils and golden ornaments or silver plates and valuable silk
garments with gold embroidery, and in case of need, they can have some money in
exchange immediately. There are exchanges for the moneylenders and the householders.
SB 3.33.18
TEXT 18
Ga*haeÛaNa& ku-SauiMaTaE rMYa& bûMard]uMaE" )
kU-JaiÜh(r)iMaQauNa& GaaYaNMataMaDauv]TaMa( )) 18 ))
gåhodyänaà kusumitai
ramyaà bahv-amara-drumaiù
küjad-vihaìga-mithunaà
gäyan-matta-madhuvratam
SYNONYMS
gåha-udyänam—the household garden; kusumitaiù—with flowers and fruits; ramyam—
beautiful; bahu-amara-drumaiù—with many celestial trees; küjat—singing; vihaìga—of
birds; mithunam—with pairs; gäyat—humming; matta—intoxicated; madhu-vratam—
with bees.
TRANSLATION
The compound of the main household was surrounded by beautiful gardens, with sweet,
fragrant flowers and many trees which produced fresh fruit and were tall and beautiful.
808
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The attraction of such gardens was that singing birds would sit on the trees, and their
chanting voices, as well as the humming sound of the bees, made the whole atmosphere as
pleasing as possible.
SB 3.33.19
TEXT 19
Ya}a Pa[ivíMaaTMaaNa& ivbuDaaNaucra JaGau" )
vaPYaaMauTPal/GaiNDaNYaa& k-dRMaeNaaePal/ail/TaMa( )) 19 ))
yatra praviñöam ätmänaà
vibudhänucarä jaguù
väpyäm utpala-gandhinyäà
kardamenopalälitam
SYNONYMS
yatra—where; praviñöam—entered; ätmänam—unto her; vibudha-anucaräù—the
associates of the denizens of heaven; jaguù—sang; väpyäm—in the pond; utpala—of
lotuses; gandhinyäm—with the fragrance; kardamena—by Kardama; upalälitam—
treated with great care.
TRANSLATION
When Devahüti would enter that lovely garden to take her bath in the pond filled with
lotus flowers, the associates of the denizens of heaven, the Gandharvas, would sing about
Kardama's glorious household life. Her great husband, Kardama, gave her all protection at
all times.
PURPORT
The ideal husband-and-wife relationship is very nicely described in this statement.
Kardama Muni gave Devahüti all sorts of comforts in his duty as a husband, but he was
not at all attached to his wife. As soon as his son, Kapiladeva, was grown up, Kardama at
once left all family connection. Similarly, Devahüti was the daughter of a great king,
Sväyambhuva Manu, and was qualified and beautiful, but she was completely dependent
on the protection of her husband. According to Manu, women, the fair sex, should not
have independence at any stage of life. In childhood a woman must be under the
809
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
protection of the parents, in youth she must be under the protection of the husband,
and in old age she must be under the protection of the grown children. Devahüti
demonstrated all these statements of the Manu-saàhitä in her life: as a child she was
dependent on her father, later she was dependent on her husband, in spite of her
opulence, and she was later on dependent on her son, Kapiladeva.
SB 3.33.20
TEXT 20
ihTva TadqiPSaTaTaMaMaPYaa%<@l/YaaeizTaaMa( )
ik-iÄÀk-ar vdNa& Pau}aivëez<aaTaura )) 20 ))
hitvä tad épsitatamam
apy äkhaëòala-yoñitäm
kiïcic cakära vadanaà
putra-viçleñaëäturä
SYNONYMS
hitvä—having given up; tat—that household; épsita-tamam—most desirable; api—even;
äkhaëòala-yoñitäm—by the wives of Lord Indra; kiïcit cakära vadanam—she wore a
sorry look on her face; putra-viçleñaëa—by separation from her son; äturä—afflicted.
TRANSLATION
Although her position was unique from all points of view, saintly Devahüti, in spite of all
her possessions, which were envied even by the ladies of the heavenly planets, gave up all
such comforts. She was only sorry that her great son was separated from her.
PURPORT
Devahüti was not at all sorry at giving up her material comforts, but she was very much
aggrieved at the separation of her son. It may be questioned here that if Devahüti was
not at all sorry to give up the material comforts of life, then why was she sorry about
losing her son? Why was she so attached to her son? The answer is explained in the next
verse. He was not an ordinary son. Her son was the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
One can give up material attachment, therefore, only when one has attachment for the
Supreme Person. This is explained in Bhagavad-gétä. Paraà dåñövä nivartate [Bg. 9.59].
810
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Only when one actually has some taste for spiritual existence can he be reluctant to
follow the materialistic way of life.
SB 3.33.21
TEXT 21
vNa& Pa[v]iJaTae PaTYaavPaTYaivrhaTaura )
jaTaTatvaPYa>aUàíe vTSae GaaEirv vTSal/a )) 21 ))
vanaà pravrajite patyäv
apatya-virahäturä
jïäta-tattväpy abhün nañöe
vatse gaur iva vatsalä
SYNONYMS
vanam—to the forest; pravrajite patyau—when her husband left home; apatya-viraha—
by separation from her son; äturä—very sorry; jïäta-tattvä—knowing the truth; api—
although; abhüt—she became; nañöe vatse—when her calf is lost; gauù—a cow; iva—like;
vatsalä—affectionate.
TRANSLATION
Devahüti's husband had already left home and accepted the renounced order of life, and
then her only son, Kapila, left home. Although she knew all the truths of life and death,
and although her heart was cleansed of all dirt, she was very aggrieved at the loss of her
son, just as a cow is affected when her calf dies.
PURPORT
A woman whose husband is away from home or has taken the renounced order of life
should not be very sorry, because she still has the presence of her husband's
representative, her son. It is said in the Vedic scriptures, ätmaiva putro jäyate: the
husband's body is represented by the son. Strictly speaking, a woman is never widowed if
she has a grown son. Devahüti was not very much affected while Kapila Muni was there,
but upon His departure she was very afflicted. She grieved not because of her worldly
relationship with Kardama Muni but because of her sincere love for the Personality of
Godhead.
811
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
The example given here is that Devahüti became just like a cow who has lost her calf. A
cow bereft of her calf cries day and night. Similarly, Devahüti was aggrieved, and she
always cried and requested her friends and relatives, "Please bring my son home so that I
may live. Otherwise, I shall die." This intense affection for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, although manifested as affection for one's son, is spiritually beneficial.
Attachment for a material son obliges one to remain in material existence, but the same
attachment, when transferred to the Supreme Lord, brings one elevation to the spiritual
world in the association of the Lord.
Every woman can qualify herself as much as Devahüti and then can also have the
Supreme Godhead as her son. If the Supreme Personality of Godhead can appear as the
son of Devahüti, He can also appear as the son of any other woman, provided that
woman is qualified. If one gets the Supreme Lord as a son, one can have the benefit of
bringing up a nice son in this world and at the same time get promotion to the spiritual
world to become the face-to-face associate of the Personality of Godhead.
SB 3.33.22
TEXT 22
TaMaev DYaaYaTaq devMaPaTYa& k-iPal&/ hirMa( )
b>aUvaicrTaae vTSa iNa"SPa*ha Taad*Xae Ga*he )) 22 ))
tam eva dhyäyaté devam
apatyaà kapilaà harim
babhüväcirato vatsa
niùspåhä tädåçe gåhe
SYNONYMS
tam—upon Him; eva—certainly; dhyäyaté—meditating; devam—divine; apatyam—son;
kapilam—Lord Kapila; harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; babhüva—became;
acirataù—very soon; vatsa—O dear Vidura; niùspåhä—unattached; tädåçe gåhe—to such
a home.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, thus always meditating upon her son, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Kapiladeva, she very soon became unattached to her nicely decorated home.
812
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Here is a practical example of how one can elevate oneself in spiritual advancement by
Kåñëa consciousness. Kapiladeva is Kåñëa, and He appeared as the son of Devahüti.
After Kapiladeva left home, Devahüti was absorbed in thought of Him, and thus she was
always Kåñëa conscious. Her constant situation in Kåñëa consciousness enabled her to be
detached from hearth and home.
Unless we are able to transfer our attachment to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
there is no possibility of becoming freed from material attachment. The Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, therefore, confirms that it is not possible for one to become liberated by
cultivation of empiric philosophical speculation. Simply knowing that one is not matter
but spirit soul, or Brahman, does not purify one's intelligence. Even if the impersonalist
reaches the highest platform of spiritual realization, he falls down again to material
attachment because of not being situated in the transcendental loving service of the
Supreme Lord.
The devotees adopt the devotional process, hearing about the Supreme Lord's pastimes
and glorifying His activities and thereby always remembering His beautiful eternal form.
By rendering service, becoming His friend or His servant and offering Him everything
that one possesses, one is able to enter into the kingdom of God. As it is said in
Bhagavad-gétä, tato mäà tattvato jïätvä: after discharging pure devotional service, one
can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead in fact, and thus one becomes
eligible to enter into His association in one of the spiritual planets.
SB 3.33.23
TEXT 23
DYaaYaTaq >aGavd]UPa& Yadah DYaaNaGaaecrMa( )
SauTa" Pa[SaàvdNa& SaMaSTaVYaSTaicNTaYaa )) 23 ))
dhyäyaté bhagavad-rüpaà
yad äha dhyäna-gocaram
sutaù prasanna-vadanaà
samasta-vyasta-cintayä
SYNONYMS
dhyäyaté—meditating; bhagavat-rüpam—upon the form of the Supreme Personality of
813
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Godhead; yat—which; äha—He instructed; dhyäna-gocaram—the object of meditation;
sutaù—her son; prasanna-vadanam—with a smiling face; samasta—on the whole;
vyasta—on the parts; cintayä—with her mind.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, having heard with great eagerness and in all detail from her son, Kapiladeva,
the eternally smiling Personality of Godhead, Devahüti began to meditate constantly upon
the Viñëu form of the Supreme Lord.
SB 3.33.24, SB 3.33.25, SB 3.33.24-25
TEXTS 24-25
>ai¢-Pa[vahYaaeGaeNa vEraGYae<a bl/IYaSaa )
Yau¢-aNauïaNaJaaTaeNa jaNaeNa b]øheTauNaa )) 24 ))
ivéuÖeNa TadaTMaaNaMaaTMaNaa ivìTaaeMau%Ma( )
SvaNau>aUTYaa iTarae>aUTaMaaYaaGau<aivXaez<aMa( )) 25 ))
bhakti-praväha-yogena
vairägyeëa baléyasä
yuktänuñöhäna-jätena
jïänena brahma-hetunä
viçuddhena tadätmänam
ätmanä viçvato-mukham
svänubhütyä tirobhütamäyä-
guëa-viçeñaëam
SYNONYMS
bhakti-praväha-yogena—by continuous engagement in devotional service; vairägyeëa—
by renunciation; baléyasä—very strong; yukta-anuñöhäna—by proper performance of
duties; jätena—produced; jïänena—by knowledge; brahma-hetunä—due to realization of
the Absolute Truth; viçuddhena—by purification; tadä—then; ätmänam—Supreme
Personality of Godhead; ätmanä—with the mind; viçvataù-mukham—whose face is
turned everywhere; sva-anubhütyä—by self-realization; tiraù-bhüta—disappeared; mäyäguëa—
of the modes of material nature; viçeñaëam—distinctions.
814
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TRANSLATION
She did so with serious engagement in devotional service. Because she was strong in
renunciation, she accepted only the necessities of the body. She became situated in
knowledge due to realization of the Absolute Truth, her heart became purified, she
became fully absorbed in meditation upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and all
misgivings due to the modes of material nature disappeared.
SB 3.33.26
TEXT 26
b]ø<YaviSQaTaMaiTa>aRGavTYaaTMaSa&é[Yae )
iNav*taJaqvaPaitaTvaT+aq<a(c)e-XaaáiNav*RiTa" )) 26 ))
brahmaëy avasthita-matir
bhagavaty ätma-saàçraye
nivåtta-jéväpattitvät
kñéëa-kleçäpta-nirvåtiù
SYNONYMS
brahmaëi—in Brahman; avasthita—situated; matiù—her mind; bhagavati—in the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; ätma-saàçraye—residing in all living entities;
nivåtta—freed; jéva—of the jéva soul; äpattitvät—from the unfortunate condition;
kñéëa—disappeared; kleça—material pangs; äpta—attained; nirvåtiù—transcendental
bliss.
TRANSLATION
Her mind became completely engaged in the Supreme Lord, and she automatically
realized the knowledge of the impersonal Brahman. As a Brahman-realized soul, she was
freed from the designations of the materialistic concept of life. Thus all material pangs
disappeared, and she attained transcendental bliss.
PURPORT
The previous verse states that Devahüti was already conversant with the Absolute
Truth. It may be questioned why she was meditating. The explanation is that when one
815
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
theoretically discusses the Absolute Truth, he becomes situated in the impersonal
concept of the Absolute Truth. Similarly, when one seriously discusses the subject
matter of the form, qualities, pastimes and entourage of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, he becomes situated in meditation on Him. If one has complete knowledge of
the Supreme Lord, then knowledge of the impersonal Brahman is automatically realized.
The Absolute Truth is realized by the knower according to three different angles of
vision, namely impersonal Brahman, localized Supersoul and ultimately the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. If one is situated, therefore, in knowledge of the Supreme
Person, this implies that one is already situated in the concept of the Supersoul and
impersonal Brahman.
In Bhagavad-gétä it is said, brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä [Bg. 18.54]. This means that
unless one is freed from the material entanglement and situated in Brahman, there is no
question of entering into the understanding of devotional service or engaging in Kåñëa
consciousness. One who is engaged in devotional service to Kåñëa is understood to be
already realized in the Brahman concept of life because transcendental knowledge of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead includes knowledge of Brahman. This is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä. Brahmaëo hi pratiñöhäham [Bg. 14.27]: the concept of the Personality of
Godhead does not depend on Brahman. The Viñëu Puräëa also confirms that one who
has taken shelter of the all-auspicious Supreme Lord is already situated in the
understanding of Brahman. In other words, one who is a Vaiñëava is already a
brähmaëa.
Another significant point of this verse is that one has to observe the prescribed rules
and regulations. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, yuktähära-vihärasya. When one engages
in devotional service in Kåñëa consciousness, he still has to eat, sleep, defend and mate
because these are necessities of the body. But he performs such activities in a regulated
way. He has to eat kåñëa-prasäda. He has to sleep according to regulated principles. The
principle is to reduce the duration of sleep and to reduce eating, taking only what is
needed to keep the body fit. In short, the goal is spiritual advancement, not sense
gratification. Similarly, sex life must be reduced. Sex life is meant only for begetting
Kåñëa conscious children. Otherwise, there is no necessity for sex life. Nothing is
prohibited, but everything is made yukta, regulated, with the higher purpose always in
mind. By following all these rules and regulations of living, one becomes purified, and all
misconceptions due to ignorance become nil. It is specifically mentioned here that the
causes of material entanglement are completely vanquished.
The Sanskrit statement anartha-nivåtti indicates that this body is unwanted. We are
spirit soul, and there was never any need of this material body. But because we wanted
816
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
to enjoy the material body, we have this body, through the material energy, under the
direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As soon as we are reestablished in our
original position of servitorship to the Supreme Lord, we begin to forget the necessities
of the body, and at last we forget the body.
Sometimes in a dream we get a particular type of body with which to work in the dream.
I may dream that I am flying in the sky or that I have gone into the forest or some
unknown place. But as soon as I am awake I forget all these bodies. Similarly, when one
is Kåñëa conscious, fully devoted, he forgets all his changes of body. We are always
changing bodies, beginning at birth from the womb of our mother. But when we are
awakened to Kåñëa consciousness, we forget all these bodies. The bodily necessities
become secondary, for the primary necessity is the engagement of the soul in real,
spiritual life. The activities of devotional service in full Kåñëa consciousness are the
cause of our being situated in transcendence. The words bhagavaty ätma-saàçraye
denote the Personality of Godhead as the Supreme Soul, or the soul of everyone. In
Bhagavad-gétä Kåñëa says, béjaà mäà sarva-bhütänäm: [Bg. 7.10] "I am the seed of all
entities." By taking shelter of the Supreme Being by the process of devotional service,
one becomes fully situated in the concept of the Personality of Godhead. As described
by Kapila, mad-guëa-çruti-mätreëa: one who is fully Kåñëa conscious, situated in the
Personality of Godhead, is immediately saturated with love of God as soon as he hears
about the transcendental qualities of the Lord.
Devahüti was fully instructed by her son, Kapiladeva, on how to concentrate her mind
on the Viñëu form in full detail. Following the instructions of her son in the matter of
devotional service, she contemplated the form of the Lord within herself with great
devotional love. That is the perfection of Brahman realization or the mystic yoga system
or devotional service. At the ultimate issue, when one is fully absorbed in thought of the
Supreme Lord and meditates on Him constantly, that is the highest perfection.
Bhagavad-gétä confirms that one who is always absorbed in such a way is to be
considered the topmost yogé.
The real purpose of all processes of transcendental realization—jïäna-yoga, dhyäna-yoga
or bhakti-yoga—is to arrive at the point of devotional service. If one endeavors simply to
achieve knowledge of the Absolute Truth or the Supersoul but has no devotional
service, he labors without gaining the real result. This is compared to beating the husks
of wheat after the grains have already been removed. Unless one understands the
Supreme Personality of Godhead to be the ultimate goal, it is valueless simply to
speculate or perform mystic yoga practice. In the añöäìga-yoga system, the seventh stage
of perfection is dhyäna. This dhyäna is the third stage in devotional service. There are
817
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
nine stages of devotional service. The first is hearing, and then comes chanting and
then contemplating. By executing devotional service, therefore, one automatically
becomes an expert jïäné and an expert yogé. In other words, jïäna and yoga are different
preliminary stages of devotional service.
Devahüti was expert in accepting the real substance; she contemplated the form of
Viñëu in detail as advised by her smiling son, Kapiladeva. At the same time, she was
thinking of Kapiladeva, who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore she
completely perfected her austerities, penances and transcendental realization.
SB 3.33.27
TEXT 27
iNaTYaaæ!SaMaaiDaTvaTParav*taGau<a>a]Maa )
Na SaSMaar TadaTMaaNa& SvPane d*íiMavaeiTQaTa" )) 27 ))
nityärüòha-samädhitvät
parävåtta-guëa-bhramä
na sasmära tadätmänaà
svapne dåñöam ivotthitaù
SYNONYMS
nitya—eternal; ärüòha—situated in; samädhitvät—from trance; parävåtta—freed from;
guëa—of the modes of material nature; bhramä—illusion; na sasmära—she did not
remember; tadä—then; ätmänam—her material body; svapne—in a dream; dåñöam—
seen; iva—just as; utthitaù—one who has arisen.
TRANSLATION
Situated in eternal trance and freed from illusion impelled by the modes of material
nature, she forgot her material body, just as one forgets his different bodies in a dream.
PURPORT
A great Vaiñëava said that he who has no remembrance of his body is not bound to
material existence. As long as we are conscious of our bodily existence, it is to be
understood that we are living conditionally, under the three modes of material nature.
When one forgets his bodily existence, his conditional, material life is over. This
818
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
forgetfulness is actually possible when we engage our senses in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord. In the conditional state, one engages his senses as a member of a
family or as a member of a society or country. But when one forgets all such membership
in material circumstances and realizes that he is an eternal servant of the Supreme Lord,
that is actual forgetfulness of material existence.
This forgetfulness actually occurs when one renders service unto the Lord. A devotee no
longer works with the body for sense gratification with family, society, country,
humanity and so on. He simply works for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa.
That is perfect Kåñëa consciousness.
A devotee always merges in transcendental happiness, and therefore he has no
experience of material distresses. This transcendental happiness is called eternal bliss.
According to the opinion of devotees, constant remembrance of the Supreme Lord is
called samädhi, or trance. If one is constantly in trance, there is no possibility of his
being attacked or even touched by the modes of material nature. As soon as one is freed
from the contamination of the three material modes, he no longer has to take birth to
transmigrate from one form to another in this material world.
SB 3.33.28
TEXT 28
TaÕeh" ParTa"Paaezae_PYak*-XaêaDYaSaM>avaTa( )
b>aaE MalE/rvC^à" SaDaUMa wv Paavk-" )) 28 ))
tad-dehaù parataù poño
'py akåçaç cädhy-asambhavät
babhau malair avacchannaù
sadhüma iva pävakaù
SYNONYMS
tat-dehaù—her body; parataù—by others (the damsels created by Kardama); poñaù—
maintained; api—although; akåçaù—not thin; ca—and; ädhi—anxiety; asambhavät—
from not occurring; babhau—shone; malaiù—by dust; avacchannaù—covered; sadhümaù—
surrounded with smoke; iva—like; pävakaù—a fire.
TRANSLATION
819
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Her body was being taken care of by the spiritual damsels created by her husband,
Kardama, and since she had no mental anxiety at that time, her body did not become thin.
She appeared just like a fire surrounded by smoke.
PURPORT
Because she was always in trance in transcendental bliss, the thought of the Personality
of Godhead was always carefully fixed in her mind. She did not become thin, for she was
taken care of by the celestial maidservants created by her husband. It is said, according
to the Äyur-vedic medical science, that if one is free from anxieties he generally
becomes fat. Devahüti, being situated in Kåñëa consciousness, had no mental anxieties,
and therefore her body did not become thin. It is customary in the renounced order of
life that one should not take any service from a servant or maid, but Devahüti was being
served by the celestial maidservants. This may appear to be against the spiritual concept
of life, but just as fire is still beautiful even when surrounded by smoke, she looked
completely pure although it seemed that she was living in a luxurious way.
SB 3.33.29
TEXT 29
Sva(r)& TaPaaeYaaeGaMaYa& Mau¢-ke-Xa& GaTaaMbrMa( )
dEvGauá& Na bubuDae vaSaudevPa[ivíDaq" )) 29 ))
sväìgaà tapo-yogamayaà
mukta-keçaà gatämbaram
daiva-guptaà na bubudhe
väsudeva-praviñöa-dhéù
SYNONYMS
sva-aìgam—her body; tapaù—austerity; yoga—yoga practice; mayam—fully engaged in;
mukta—loosened; keçam—her hair; gata—disarrayed; ambaram—her garments; daiva—
by the Lord; guptam—protected; na—not; bubudhe—she was aware of; väsudeva—in the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; praviñöa—absorbed; dhéù—her thoughts.
TRANSLATION
Because she was always absorbed in the thought of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
820
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
she was not aware that her hair was sometimes loosened or her garments were disarrayed.
PURPORT
In this verse the word daiva-guptam, "protected by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead," is very significant. Once one surrenders unto the service of the Supreme
Lord, the Lord takes charge of the maintenance of the devotee's body, and there is no
need of anxiety for its protection. It is said in the Second Chapter, Second Canto, of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam that a fully surrendered soul has no anxiety about the maintenance
of his body. The Supreme Lord takes care of the maintenance of innumerable species of
bodies; therefore, one who fully engages in His service will not go unprotected by the
Supreme Lord. Devahüti was naturally unmindful of the protection of her body, which
was being taken care of by the Supreme Person.
SB 3.33.30
TEXT 30
Wv& Saa k-iPal/ae¢e-Na MaaGaeR<aaicrTa" ParMa( )
AaTMaaNa& b]øiNavaR<a& >aGavNTaMavaPa h )) 30 ))
evaà sä kapiloktena
märgeëäcirataù param
ätmänaà brahma-nirväëaà
bhagavantam aväpa ha
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; sä—she (Devahüti); kapila—by Kapila; uktena—instructed; märgeëa—by
the path; acirataù—soon; param—supreme; ätmänam—Supersoul; brahma—Brahman;
nirväëam—cessation of materialistic existence; bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; aväpa—she achieved; ha—certainly.
TRANSLATION
My dear Vidura, by following the principles instructed by Kapila, Devahüti soon became
liberated from material bondage, and she achieved the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
as Supersoul, without difficulty.
821
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
PURPORT
Three words have been used in this connection to describe the achievement of
Devahüti: ätmänam, brahma-nirväëam and bhagavantam. These refer to the gradual
process of discovery of the Absolute Truth, mentioned herein as the bhagavantam. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead resides in various Vaikuëöha planets. Nirväëa means
to extinguish the pangs of material existence. When one is able to enter into the
spiritual kingdom or into spiritual realization, one is automatically freed from material
pangs. That is called brahma-nirväëa. According to Vedic scripture, nirväëa means
cessation of the materialistic way of life. Ätmänam means realization of the Supersoul
within the heart. Ultimately, the highest perfection is realization of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. It is to be understood that Devahüti entered the planet which is
called Kapila Vaikuëöha. There are innumerable Vaikuëöha planets predominated by
the expansions of Viñëu. All the Vaikuëöha planets are known by a particular name of
Viñëu. As we understand from Brahma-saàhitä, advaitam acyutam anädim anantarüpam
[Bs. 5.33]. Ananta means "innumerable." The Lord has innumerable expansions of
His transcendental form, and according to the different positions of the symbolical
representations in His four hands, He is known as Näräyaëa, Pradyumna, Aniruddha,
Väsudeva, etc. There is also a Vaikuëöha planet known as Kapila Vaikuëöha, to which
Devahüti was promoted to meet Kapila and reside there eternally, enjoying the company
of her transcendental son.
SB 3.33.31
TEXT 31
TaÜqraSaqTPau<YaTaMa& +ae}a& }aEl/aeKYaivé[uTaMa( )
NaaMana iSaÖPad& Ya}a Saa Sa&iSaiÖMauPaeYauzq )) 31 ))
tad véräsét puëyatamaà
kñetraà trailokya-viçrutam
nämnä siddha-padaà yatra
sä saàsiddhim upeyuñé
SYNONYMS
tat—that; véra—O brave Vidura; äsét—was; puëya-tamam—most sacred; kñetram—
place; trai-lokya—in the three worlds; viçrutam—known; nämnä—by the name; siddha822
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
padam—Siddhapada; yatra—where; sä—she (Devahüti); saàsiddhim—perfection;
upeyuñé—achieved.
TRANSLATION
The place where Devahüti achieved her perfection, my dear Vidura, is understood to be a
most sacred spot. It is known all over the three worlds as Siddhapada.
SB 3.33.32
TEXT 32
TaSYaaSTaÛaeGaivDauTaMaaTYa| MaTYaRMa>aUTSairTa( )
óaeTaSaa& Pa[vra SaaEMYa iSaiÖda iSaÖSaeivTaa )) 32 ))
tasyäs tad yoga-vidhutamärtyaà
martyam abhüt sarit
srotasäà pravarä saumya
siddhidä siddha-sevitä
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—of Devahüti; tat—that; yoga—by yoga practice; vidhuta—relinquished;
märtyam—material elements; martyam—her mortal body; abhüt—became; sarit—a
river; srotasäm—of all rivers; pravarä—the foremost; saumya—O gentle Vidura; siddhidä—
conferring perfection; siddha—by persons desiring perfection; sevitä—resorted to.
TRANSLATION
Dear Vidura, the material elements of her body have melted into water and are now a
flowing river, which is the most sacred of all rivers. Anyone who bathes in that river also
attains perfection, and therefore all persons who desire perfection go bathe there.
SB 3.33.33
TEXT 33
k-iPal/ae_iPa MahaYaaeGaq >aGavaNa( iPaTauraé[MaaTa( )
MaaTar& SaMaNaujaPYa Pa[aGaudqcq& idXa& YaYaaE )) 33 ))
823
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
kapilo 'pi mahä-yogé
bhagavän pitur äçramät
mätaraà samanujïäpya
präg-udécéà diçaà yayau
SYNONYMS
kapilaù—Lord Kapila; api—surely; mahä-yogé—the great sage; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; pituù—of His father; äçramät—from the hermitage; mätaram—
from His mother; samanujïäpya—having asked permission; präk-udécém—northeast;
diçam—direction; yayau—He went.
TRANSLATION
My dear Vidura, the great sage Kapila, the Personality of Godhead, left His father's
hermitage with the permission of His mother and went towards the northeast.
SB 3.33.34
TEXT 34
iSaÖcar<aGaNDavOEMauRiNai>aêaPSaraeGa<aE" )
STaUYaMaaNa" SaMaud]e<a dtaahR<aiNake-TaNa" )) 34 ))
siddha-cäraëa-gandharvair
munibhiç cäpsaro-gaëaiù
stüyamänaù samudreëa
dattärhaëa-niketanaù
SYNONYMS
siddha—by the Siddhas; cäraëa—by the Cäraëas; gandharvaiù—by the Gandharvas;
munibhiù—by the munis; ca—and; apsaraù-gaëaiù—by the Apsaräs (damsels of the
heavenly planets); stüyamänaù—being extolled; samudreëa—by the ocean; datta—
given; arhaëa—oblations; niketanaù—place of residence.
TRANSLATION
While He was passing in the northern direction, all the celestial denizens known as
824
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Cäraëas and Gandharvas, as well as the munis and the damsels of the heavenly planets,
prayed and offered Him all respects. The ocean offered Him oblations and a place of
residence.
PURPORT
It is understood that Kapila Muni first went towards the Himalayas and traced the
course of the River Ganges, and He again came to the delta of the Ganges at the sea
now known as the Bay of Bengal. The ocean gave Him residence at a place still known
as Gaìgä-sägara, where the River Ganges meets the sea. That place is called Gaìgäsägara-
tértha, and even today people gather there to offer respects to Kapiladeva, the
original author of the Säìkhya system of philosophy. Unfortunately, this Säìkhya
system has been misrepresented by an imposter who is also named Kapila, but that other
system of philosophy does not tally with anything described in the Säìkhya of Kapila in
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
SB 3.33.35
TEXT 35
AaSTae YaaeGa& SaMaaSQaaYa Saa&:YaacaYaOEri>aíuTa" )
}aYaa<aaMaiPa l/aek-aNaaMauPaXaaNTYaE SaMaaihTa" )) 35 ))
äste yogaà samästhäya
säìkhyäcäryair abhiñöutaù
trayäëäm api lokänäm
upaçäntyai samähitaù
SYNONYMS
äste—He remains; yogam—yoga; samästhäya—having practiced; säìkhya—of the
Säìkhya philosophy; äcäryaiù—by the great teachers; abhiñöutaù—worshiped;
trayäëäm—three; api—certainly; lokänäm—of the worlds; upaçäntyai—for the
deliverance; samähitaù—fixed in trance.
TRANSLATION
Even now Kapila Muni is staying there in trance for the deliverance of the conditioned
souls in the three worlds, and all the äcäryas, or great teachers, of the system of Säìkhya
825
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
philosophy are worshiping Him.
SB 3.33.36
TEXT 36
WTaiàGaidTa& TaaTa YaTPa*íae_h& TavaNaga )
k-iPal/SYa c Sa&vadae devhUTYaaê PaavNa" )) 36 ))
etan nigaditaà täta
yat påñöo 'haà tavänagha
kapilasya ca saàvädo
devahütyäç ca pävanaù
SYNONYMS
etat—this; nigaditam—spoken; täta—O dear Vidura; yat—which; påñöaù—was asked;
aham—I; tava—by you; anagha—O sinless Vidura; kapilasya—of Kapila; ca—and;
saàvädaù—conversation; devahütyäù—of Devahüti; ca—and; pävanaù—pure.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, since you have inquired from me, I have answered. O sinless one, the
descriptions of Kapiladeva and His mother and their activities are the purest of all pure
discourses.
SB 3.33.37
826
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
TEXT 37
Ya wdMaNaué*<aaeiTa Yaae_i>aDatae
k-iPal/MauNaeMaRTaMaaTMaYaaeGaGauùMa( )
>aGaviTa k*-TaDaq" SauPa<aRke-Taa‚
vuPal/>aTae >aGavTPadarivNdMa( )) 37 ))
ya idam anuçåëoti yo 'bhidhatte
kapila-muner matam ätma-yoga-guhyam
bhagavati kåta-dhéù suparëa-ketäv
upalabhate bhagavat-padäravindam
SYNONYMS
yaù—whoever; idam—this; anuçåëoti—hears; yaù—whoever; abhidhatte—expounds;
kapila-muneù—of the sage Kapila; matam—instructions; ätma-yoga—based on
meditation on the Lord; guhyam—confidential; bhagavati—on the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; kåta-dhéù—having fixed his mind; suparëa-ketau—who has a banner of
Garuòa; upalabhate—achieves; bhagavat—of the Supreme Lord; pada-aravindam—the
lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
The description of the dealings of Kapiladeva and His mother is very confidential, and
anyone who hears or reads this narration becomes a devotee of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who is carried by Garuòa, and he thereafter enters into the abode of the
Supreme Lord to engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
PURPORT
The narration of Kapiladeva and His mother, Devahüti, is so perfect and transcendental
that even if one only hears or reads this description, he achieves the highest
perfectional goal of life, for he engages in the loving service of the lotus feet of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. There is no doubt that Devahüti, who had the
Supreme Lord as her son and who followed the instructions of Kapiladeva so nicely,
attained the highest perfection of human life.
827
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Distributed by www.e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Thirty-third Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Activities of Kapila."
END OF THE THIRD CANTO
Srimad Bhagavatam
Third Canto
Part II
“The Status Quo”
e-book
This e-book and others are available for download at:
www.e-vedas.com
Hard bound books may be purchased at:
www.thekrishnastore.com
Email comments or questions to:
comments@evedas.com
This e-book was completed on December 19, 2004
e-books copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved
www.krishna.com
Distributed by e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
