"Srimad Bhagavatam Eigth Canto"
by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE:
This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of this book, and is NOT FOR
RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only,
under the "fair use" guidelines established by international copyright laws. You
may use this electronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your
own private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, student
papers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluation copy to
others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyright information intact and
do not add or subtract anything to this file and its contents. You may not reproduce
more than ten percent (10%) of this book in any medium without the express
written permission from the copyright holders.
Reference any excerpts in the following way: “Excerpted from “Srimad
Bhagavatam Eight Canto” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of
the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.krishna.com.”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2004 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90034, USA. All
rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluate
dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,
www.krishna.com.

About the Author
His Divine Grace AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most
distinguished teacher of Vedic religion and thought, is the author of
Bhagavad-gita As It Is, Srimad-Bhagavatam, The Sri Isopanisad and many
other English versions of Vedic literature. He is the Founder-Arcarya of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness, which has hundreds of
centers throughout the world.
For more information about His Divine Grace visit:
http://www.krishna.com/newsite/main.php?id=7
3
1. The Manus, Administrators of the Universe
First of all, let me offer my humble, respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet
of my spiritual master, His Divine Grace Çré Çrémad Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté
Gosvämé Prabhupäda. Sometime in the year 1935 when His Divine Grace was
staying at Rädhä-kuëòa, I went to see him from Bombay. At that time, he gave
me many important instructions in regard to constructing temples and
publishing books. He personally told me that publishing books is more
important than constructing temples. Of course, those same instructions
remained within my mind for many years. In 1944 I began publishing my Back
to Godhead, and when I retired from family life in 1958 I began publishing
Çrémad-Bhägavatam in Delhi. When three parts of Çrémad-Bhägavatam had
been published in India, I then started for the United States of America on
the thirteenth of August, 1965.
I am continuously trying to publish books, as suggested by my spiritual
master. Now, in this year, 1976, I have completed the Seventh Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and a summary of the Tenth Canto has already been
published as Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Still, the Eighth
Canto, Ninth Canto, Tenth Canto, Eleventh Canto and Twelfth Canto are
yet to be published. On this occasion, therefore, I am praying to my spiritual
master to give me strength to finish this work. I am neither a great scholar nor
a great devotee; I am simply a humble servant of my spiritual master, and to
the best of my ability I am trying to please him by publishing these books, with
the cooperation of my disciples in America. Fortunately, scholars all over the
world are appreciating these publications. Let us cooperatively publish more
and more volumes of Çrémad-Bhägavatam just to please His Divine Grace
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
4
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
This First Chapter of the Eighth Canto may be summarized as a description
of four Manus, namely Sväyambhuva, Svärociña, Uttama and Tämasa. After
hearing descriptions of the dynasty of Sväyambhuva Manu until the end of the
Seventh Canto, Mahäräja Parékñit desired to know about other Manus. He
desired to understand how the Supreme Personality of Godhead descends-not
only in the past but at the present and in the future-and how He acts in
various pastimes as Manu. Since Parékñit Mahäräja was eager to know all this,
Çukadeva Gosvämé gradually described all the Manus, beginning with the six
Manus who had appeared in the past.
The first Manu was Sväyambhuva Manu. His two daughters, namely Äküti
and Devahüti, gave birth to two sons, named Yajïa and Kapila respectively.
Because Çukadeva Gosvämé had already described the activities of Kapila in
the Third Canto, he now described the activities of Yajïa. The original Manu,
along with his wife, Çatarüpä, went into the forest to practice austerities on
the bank of the River Sunandä. They practiced austerities for a hundred years,
and then Manu, in a trance, formed prayers to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Räkñasas and asuras then attempted to devour him, but Yajïa,
accompanied by his sons the Yämas and the demigods, killed them. Then
Yajïa personally took the post of Indra, the King of the heavenly planets.
The second Manu, whose name was Svärociña, was the son of Agni, and His
sons were headed by Dyumat, Suñeëa and Rociñmat. In the age of this Manu,
Rocana became Indra, the ruler of the heavenly planets, and there were many
demigods, headed by Tuñita. There were also many saintly persons, such as
Ürja and Stambha. Among them was Vedaçirä, whose wife, Tuñitä, gave birth
to Vibhu. Vibhu instructed eighty-eight thousand dåòha-vratas, or saintly
persons, on self-control and austerity.
Uttama, the son of Priyavrata, was the third Manu. Among his sons were
Pavana, Såïjaya and Yajïahotra. During the reign of this Manu, the sons of
Vasiñöha, headed by Pramada, became the seven saintly persons. The Satyas,
Devaçrutas and Bhadras became the demigods, and Satyajit became Indra.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
5
From the womb of Sunåtä, the wife of Dharma, the Lord appeared as
Satyasena, and He killed all the Yakñas and Räkñasas who were fighting with
Satyajit.
Tämasa, the brother of the third Manu, was the fourth Manu, and he had
ten sons, including Påthu, Khyäti, Nara and Ketu. During his reign, the
Satyakas, Haris, Véras and others were demigods, the seven great saints were
headed by Jyotirdhäma, and Triçikha became Indra. Harimedhä begot a son
named Hari in the womb of his wife Hariëé. This Hari, an incarnation of God,
saved the devotee Gajendra. This incident is described as gajendra-mokñaëa.
At the end of this chapter, Parékñit Mahäräja particularly asks about this
incident.
TEXT 1
é[qraJaaevac
SvaYaM>auvSYaeh Gaurae v&Xaae_Ya& ivSTaraC^]uTa" )
Ya}a ivìSa*Jaa& SaGaaeR MaNaUNaNYaaNvdSv Na" )) 1 ))
çré-räjoväca
sväyambhuvasyeha guro
vaàço 'yaà vistaräc chrutaù
yatra viçva-såjäà sargo
manün anyän vadasva naù
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King (Mahäräja Parékñit) said; sväyambhuvasya—of the
great personality Sväyambhuva Manu; iha—in this connection; guro—O my
spiritual master; vaàçaù—dynasty; ayam—this; vistarät—extensively;
çrutaù—I have heard (from you); yatra—wherein; viçva-såjäm—of the great
personalities known as the prajäpatis, such as Maréci; sargaù—creation,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
6
involving the birth of many sons and grandsons from the daughters of Manu;
manün—Manus; anyän—other; vadasva—kindly describe; naù—to us.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit said: O my lord, my spiritual master, now I have fully heard
from Your Grace about the dynasty of Sväyambhuva Manu. But there are also
other Manus, and I want to hear about their dynasties. Kindly describe them to
us.
TEXT 2
MaNvNTare hreJaRNMa k-MaaRi<a c MahqYaSa" )
Ga*<aiNTa k-vYaae b]ø&STaaiNa Naae vd é*<vTaaMa( )) 2 ))
manvantare harer janma
karmäëi ca mahéyasaù
gåëanti kavayo brahmaàs
täni no vada çåëvatäm
SYNONYMS
manvantare—during the change of manvantaras (one Manu following
another); hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
janma—appearance; karmäëi—and activities; ca—also; mahéyasaù—of the
supremely glorified; gåëanti—describe; kavayaù—the great learned persons
who have perfect intelligence; brahman—O learned brähmaëa (Çukadeva
Gosvämé); täni—all of them; naù—to us; vada—please describe;
çåëvatäm—who are very eager to hear.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
7
TRANSLATION
O learned brähmaëa, Çukadeva Gosvämé, the great learned persons who are
completely intelligent describe the activities and appearance of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead during the various manvantaras. We are very eager to
hear about these narrations. Kindly describe them.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has different varieties of
incarnations, including the guëa-avatäras, manvantara-avatäras, lélä-avatäras
and yuga-avatäras, all of which are described in the çästras. Without reference
to the çästras there can be no question of accepting anyone as an incarnation
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, as especially mentioned
here, gåëanti kavayaù: the descriptions of various incarnations are accepted by
great learned scholars with perfect intelligence. At the present time, especially
in India, so many rascals are claiming to be incarnations, and people are being
misled. Therefore, the identity of an incarnation should be confirmed by the
descriptions of the çästras and by wonderful activities. As described in this
verse by the word mahéyasaù, the activities of an incarnation are not ordinary
magic or jugglery, but are wonderful activities. Thus any incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead must be supported by the statements of the
çästra and must actually perform wonderful activities. Parékñit Mahäräja was
eager to hear about the Manus of different ages. There are fourteen Manus
during a day of Brahmä, and the age of each Manu lasts for seventy-one yugas.
Thus there are thousands of Manus during the life of Brahmä.
TEXT 3
YaÛiSMaàNTare b]øN>aGavaiNvì>aavNa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
8
k*-TavaNku-åTae k-TaaR ùTaqTae_NaaGaTae_Û va )) 3 ))
yad yasminn antare brahman
bhagavän viçva-bhävanaù
kåtavän kurute kartä
hy atéte 'nägate 'dya vä
SYNONYMS
yat—whatever activities; yasmin—in a particular age; antare—manvantara;
brahman—O great brähmaëa; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; viçva-bhävanaù—who has created this cosmic manifestation;
kåtavän—has done; kurute—is doing; kartä—and will do; hi—indeed; atéte—in
the past; anägate—in the future; adya—at the present; vä—either.
TRANSLATION
O learned brähmaëa, kindly describe to us whatever activities the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who created this cosmic manifestation, has performed
in the past manvantaras, is performing at present, and will perform in the
future manvantaras.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä the Supreme Personality of Godhead said that both He
and the other living entities present on the battlefield had existed in the past,
they existed at present, and they would continue to exist in the future. Past,
present and future always exist, both for the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and for ordinary living entities. Nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm (Kaöha
Upaniñad 2.2.13). Both the Lord and the living entities are eternal and
sentient, but the difference is that the Lord is unlimited whereas the living
entities are limited. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the creator of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
9
everything, and although the living entities are not created but exist with the
Lord eternally, their bodies are created, whereas the Supreme Lord's body is
never created. There is no difference between the Supreme Lord and His body,
but the conditioned soul, although eternal, is different from his body.
TEXT 4
é[q‰izåvac
MaNavae_iSMaNVYaTaqTaa" z$( k-LPae SvaYaM>auvadYa" )
AaÛSTae k-iQaTaae Ya}a devadqNaa& c SaM>av" )) 4 ))
çré-åñir uväca
manavo 'smin vyatétäù ñaö
kalpe sväyambhuvädayaù
ädyas te kathito yatra
devädénäà ca sambhavaù
SYNONYMS
çré-åñiù uväca—the great saint Çukadeva Gosvämé said; manavaù—Manus;
asmin—during this period (one day of Brahmä); vyatétäù—already past;
ñaö—six; kalpe—in this duration of Brahmä's day;
sväyambhuva—Sväyambhuva Manu; ädayaù—and others; ädyaù—the first one
(Sväyambhuva); te—unto you; kathitaù—I have already described;
yatra—wherein; deva-ädénäm—of all the demigods; ca—also; sambhavaù—the
appearance.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: In the present kalpa there have already been six
Manus. I have described to you Sväyambhuva Manu and the appearance of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
10
many demigods. In this kalpa of Brahmä, Sväyambhuva is the first Manu.
TEXT 5
AakU-TYaa& devhUTYaa& c duih}aaeSTaSYa vE MaNaae" )
DaMaRjaNaaePadeXaaQa| >aGavaNPau}aTaa& GaTa" )) 5 ))
äkütyäà devahütyäà ca
duhitros tasya vai manoù
dharma-jïänopadeçärthaà
bhagavän putratäà gataù
SYNONYMS
äkütyäm—from the womb of Äküti; devahütyäm ca—and from the womb of
Devahüti; duhitroù—of the two daughters; tasya—of him; vai—indeed;
manoù—of Sväyambhuva Manu; dharma—religion; jïäna—and knowledge;
upadeça-artham—for instructing; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; putratäm—sonhood under Äküti and Devahüti; gataù—accepted.
TRANSLATION
Sväyambhuva Manu had two daughters, named Äküti and Devahüti. From
their wombs, the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared as two sons named
Yajïamürti and Kapila respectively. These sons were entrusted with preaching
about religion and knowledge.
PURPORT
Devahüti's son was known as Kapila, and Äküti's son was known as
Yajïamürti. Both of Them taught about religion and philosophical knowledge.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
11
TEXT 6
k*-Ta& Paura >aGavTa" k-iPal/SYaaNauvi<aRTaMa( )
Aa:YaaSYae >aGavaNYajae YaÀk-ar ku-æÜh )) 6 ))
kåtaà purä bhagavataù
kapilasyänuvarëitam
äkhyäsye bhagavän yajïo
yac cakära kurüdvaha
SYNONYMS
kåtam—already done; purä—before; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; kapilasya—Kapila, the son of Devahüti; anuvarëitam—fully
described; äkhyäsye—I shall describe now; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; yajïaù—of the name Yajïapati or Yajïamürti; yat—whatever;
cakära—executed; kuru-udvaha—O best of the Kurus.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Kurus, I have already described [in the Third Canto] the
activities of Kapila, the son of Devahüti. Now I shall describe the activities of
Yajïapati, the son of Äküti.
TEXT 7
ivr¢-" k-aMa>aaeGaezu XaTaæPaaPaiTa" Pa[>au" )
ivSa*JYa raJYa& TaPaSae Sa>aaYaaeR vNaMaaivXaTa( )) 7 ))
viraktaù käma-bhogeñu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
12
çatarüpä-patiù prabhuù
visåjya räjyaà tapase
sabhäryo vanam äviçat
SYNONYMS
viraktaù—without attachment; käma-bhogeñu—in sense gratification (in
gåhastha life); çatarüpä-patiù—the husband of Çatarüpä, namely Sväyambhuva
Manu; prabhuù—who was the master or king of the world; visåjya—after
renouncing totally; räjyam—his kingdom; tapase—for practicing austerities;
sa-bhäryaù—with his wife; vanam—the forest; äviçat—entered.
TRANSLATION
Sväyambhuva Manu, the husband of Çatarüpä, was by nature not at all
attached to enjoyment of the senses. Thus he gave up his kingdom of sense
enjoyment and entered the forest with his wife to practice austerities.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.2), evaà paramparä-präptam imaà räjarñayo
viduù: "The supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way." All the Manus
were perfect kings. They were räjarñis. In other words, although they held posts
as kings of the world, they were as good as great saints. Sväyambhuva Manu,
for example, was the emperor of the world, yet he had no desire for sense
gratification. This is the meaning of monarchy. The king of the country or the
emperor of the empire must be so trained that by nature he renounces sense
gratification. It is not that because one becomes king he should unnecessarily
spend money for sense gratification. As soon as kings became degraded,
spending money for sense gratification, they were lost. Similarly, at the present
moment, monarchy having been lost, the people have created democracy,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
13
which is also failing. Now, by the laws of nature, the time is coming when
dictatorship will put the citizens into more and more difficulty. If the king or
dictator individually, or the members of the government collectively, cannot
maintain the state or kingdom according to the rules of Manu-saàhitä,
certainly their government will not endure.
TEXT 8
SauNaNdaYaa& vzRXaTa& PadEke-Na >auv& SPa*XaNa( )
TaPYaMaaNaSTaPaae gaaeriMadMaNvah >aarTa )) 8 ))
sunandäyäà varña-çataà
padaikena bhuvaà spåçan
tapyamänas tapo ghoram
idam anväha bhärata
SYNONYMS
sunandäyäm—on the bank of the River Sunandä; varña-çatam—for one
hundred years; pada-ekena—on one leg; bhuvam—the earth;
spåçan—touching; tapyamänaù—he performed austerities; tapaù—austerities;
ghoram—very severe; idam—the following; anväha—and spoke; bhärata—O
scion of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O scion of Bharata, after Sväyambhuva Manu had thus entered the forest
with his wife, he stood on one leg on the bank of the River Sunandä, and in this
way, with only one leg touching the earth, he performed great austerities for
one hundred years. While performing these austerities, he spoke as follows.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
14
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments that the word anväha
means that he chanted or murmured to himself, not that he lectured to
anyone.
TEXT 9
.é[qMaNauåvac
YaeNa ceTaYaTae ivì& ivì& ceTaYaTae Na YaMa( )
Yaae JaaGaiTaR XaYaaNae_iSMaàaYa& Ta& ved ved Sa" )) 9 ))
çré-manur uväca
yena cetayate viçvaà
viçvaà cetayate na yam
yo jägarti çayäne 'smin
näyaà taà veda veda saù
SYNONYMS
çré-manuù uväca—Sväyambhuva Manu chanted; yena—by whom (the
Personality of Godhead); cetayate—is brought into animation; viçvam—the
whole universe; viçvam—the whole universe (the material world);
cetayate—animates; na—not; yam—He whom; yaù—He who; jägarti—is
always awake (watching all activities); çayäne—while sleeping; asmin—in this
body; na—not; ayam—this living entity; tam—Him; veda—knows;
veda—knows; saù—He.
TRANSLATION
Lord Manu said: The supreme living being has created this material world of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
15
animation; it is not that He was created by this material world. When
everything is silent, the Supreme Being stays awake as a witness. The living
entity does not know Him, but He knows everything.
PURPORT
Here is a distinction between the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the
living entities. Nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm (Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13).
According to the Vedic version, the Lord is the supreme eternal, the supreme
living being. The difference between the Supreme Being and the ordinary
living being is that when this material world is annihilated, all the living
entities remain silent in oblivion, in a dreaming or unconscious condition,
whereas the Supreme Being stays awake as the witness of everything. This
material world is created, it stays for some time, and then it is annihilated.
Throughout these changes, however, the Supreme Being remains awake. In the
material condition of all living entities, there are three stages of dreaming.
When the material world is awake and put in working order, this is a kind of
dream, a waking dream. When the living entities go to sleep, they dream again.
And when unconscious at the time of annihilation, when this material world is
unmanifested, they enter another stage of dreaming. At any stage in the
material world, therefore, they are all dreaming. In the spiritual world,
however, everything is awake.
TEXT 10
AaTMaavaSYaiMad& ivì& YaTa( ik-iÄÂGaTYaa& JaGaTa( )
TaeNa TYa¢e-Na >auÅqQaa Maa Ga*Da" k-SYaiSvÖNaMa( )) 10 ))
ätmäväsyam idaà viçvaà
yat kiïcij jagatyäà jagat
tena tyaktena bhuïjéthä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
16
mä gådhaù kasya svid dhanam
SYNONYMS
ätma—the Supersoul; äväsyam—living everywhere; idam—this universe;
viçvam—all universes, all places; yat—whatever; kiïcit—everything that
exists; jagatyäm—in this world, everywhere; jagat—everything, animate and
inanimate; tena—by Him; tyaktena—allotted; bhuïjéthäù—you may enjoy;
mä—do not; gådhaù—accept; kasya svit—of anyone else; dhanam—the
property.
TRANSLATION
Within this universe, the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His Supersoul
feature is present everywhere, wherever there are animate or inanimate beings.
Therefore, one should accept only that which is allotted to him; one should not
desire to infringe upon the property of others.
PURPORT
Having described the situation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as
transcendental, Sväyambhuva Manu, for the instruction of the sons and
grandsons in his dynasty, is now describing all the property of the universe as
belonging to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Manu's instructions are not
only for his own sons and grandsons, but for all of human society. The word
"man"—or, in Sanskrit, manuñya—has been derived from the name Manu, for
all the members of human society are descendants of the original Manu. Manu
is also mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä (4.1), where the Lord says:
imaà vivasvate yogaà
proktavän aham avyayam
vivasvän manave präha
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
17
manur ikñväkave 'bravét
"I instructed this imperishable science of yoga to the sun-god, Vivasvän, and
Vivasvän instructed it to Manu, the father of mankind, and Manu in turn
instructed it to Ikñväku." Sväyambhuva Manu and Vaivasvata Manu have
similar duties. Vaivasvata Manu was born of the sun-god, Vivasvän, and his
son was Ikñväku, the King of the earth. Since Manu is understood to be the
original father of humanity, human society should follow his instructions.
Sväyambhuva Manu instructs that whatever exists, not only in the spiritual
world but even within this material world, is the property of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is present everywhere as the Superconsciousness.
As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (13.3), kñetra-jïam cäpi mäà viddhi
sarva-kñetreñu bhärata: in every field—in other words, in every body—the
Supreme Lord is existing as the Supersoul. The individual soul is given a body
in which to live and act according to the instructions of the Supreme Person,
and therefore the Supreme Person also exists within every body. We should
not think that we are independent; rather, we should understand that we are
allotted a certain portion of the total property of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
This understanding will lead to perfect communism. Communists think in
terms of their own nations, but the spiritual communism instructed here is not
only nationwide but universal. Nothing belongs to any nation or any
individual person; everything belongs to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
That is the meaning of this verse. Ätmäväsyam idaà viçvam: whatever exists
within this universe is the property of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The modern communistic theory, and also the idea of the United Nations, can
be reformed—indeed, rectified—by the understanding that everything
belongs to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is not a creation of
our intelligence; rather, He has created us. Ätmäväsyam idaà viçvam.
Éçäväsyam idaà sarvam [Éço mantra 1]. This universal communism can solve all
the problems of the world.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
18
One should learn from the Vedic literature that one's body is also not the
property of the individual soul, but is given to the individual soul according to
his karma. Karmaëä daiva-netreëa jantur dehopapattaye [SB 3.31.1]. The
8,400,000 different bodily forms are machines given to the individual soul.
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (18.61):
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of
the material energy." The Lord, as the Supersoul, sits in everyone's heart and
observes the various desires of the individual soul. The Lord is so merciful that
He gives the living entity the opportunity to enjoy varieties of desires in
suitable bodies, which are nothing but machines (yanträrüòhäni mäyayä [Bg.
18.61]). These machines are manufactured by the material ingredients of the
external energy, and thus the living entity enjoys or suffers according to his
desires. This opportunity is given by the Supersoul.
Everything belongs to the Supreme, and therefore one should not usurp
another's property. We have a tendency to manufacture many things.
Especially nowadays, we are building skyscrapers and developing other
material facilities. We should know, however, that the ingredients of the
skyscrapers and machines cannot be manufactured by anyone but the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The whole world is nothing but a combination of the
five material elements (tejo-väri-mådäà yathä vinimayaù). A skyscraper is a
transformation of earth, water and fire. Earth and water are combined and
burnt into bricks by fire, and a skyscraper is essentially a tall construction of
bricks. Although the bricks may be manufactured by man, the ingredients of
the bricks are not. Of course, man, as a manufacturer, may accept a salary from
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is stated here: tena tyaktena
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
19
bhuïjéthäù [Éço mantra 1]. One may construct a big skyscraper, but neither the
constructor, the merchant nor the worker can claim proprietorship.
Proprietorship belongs to the person who has spent for the building. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead has manufactured water, earth, air, fire and
the sky, and one can use these and take a salary (tena tyaktena bhuïjéthäù).
However, one cannot claim proprietorship. This is perfect communism. Our
tendency to construct great buildings should be used only for constructing
large and valuable temples in which to install the Deity of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Then our desire for construction will be fulfilled.
Since all property belongs to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
everything should be offered to the Lord, and we should take only prasäda
(tena tyaktena bhuïjéthäù). We should not fight among ourselves to take more
than we need. As Närada said to Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira:
yävad bhriyeta jaöharaà
tävat svatvaà hi dehinäm
adhikaà yo 'bhimanyeta
sa steno daëòam arhati
"One may claim proprietorship to as much wealth as required to maintain body
and soul together, but one who desires proprietorship over more than that
must be considered a thief, and he deserves to be punished by the laws of
nature." (SB 7.14.8) Of course, we need to be maintained in eating, sleeping,
mating and defending (ähära-nidra-bhaya-maithuna), but since the Supreme
Lord, the Personality of Godhead, has provided these necessities of life for the
birds and bees, why not for mankind? There is no need for economic
development; everything is provided. Therefore one should understand that
everything belongs to Kåñëa, and with this idea, one may take prasäda.
However, if one interferes with the allotments of others, he is a thief. We
should not accept more than what we actually need. Therefore, if by chance
we get an abundance of money, we should always consider that it belongs to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Kåñëa consciousness we are getting
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
20
sufficient money, but we should never think that the money belongs to us; it
belongs to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and should be equally
distributed to the workers, the devotees. No devotee should claim that any
money or property belongs to him. If one thinks that any portion of property
of this huge universe belongs to anyone, he is to be considered a thief and is
punishable by the laws of nature. Daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé mama mäyä
duratyayä: [Bg. 7.14] no one can surpass the vigilance of material nature or hide
his intentions from material nature. If human society unlawfully claims that
the property of the universe, either partially or wholly, belongs to mankind, all
of human society will be cursed as a society of thieves and will be punished by
the laws of nature.
TEXT 11
Ya& PaXYaiTa Na PaXYaNTa& c+auYaRSYa Na irZYaiTa )
Ta& >aUTaiNal/Ya& dev& SauPa<aRMauPaDaavTa )) 11 ))
yaà paçyati na paçyantaà
cakñur yasya na riñyati
taà bhüta-nilayaà devaà
suparëam upadhävata
SYNONYMS
yam—He who; paçyati—the living entity sees; na—not; paçyantam—although
always seeing; cakñuù—eye; yasya—whose; na—never; riñyati—diminishes;
tam—Him; bhüta-nilayam—the original source of all living entities;
devam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; suparëam—who accompanies
the living entity as a friend; upadhävata—everyone should worship.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
21
TRANSLATION
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead constantly watches the
activities of the world, no one sees Him. However, one should not think that
because no one sees Him, He does not see, for His power to see is never
diminished. Therefore, everyone should worship the Supersoul, who always
stays with the individual soul as a friend.
PURPORT
Offering prayers to Kåñëa, Çrématé Kuntédevé, the mother of the Päëòavas,
said, alakñyaà sarva-bhütänäm antar bahir avasthitam: [SB 1.8.18] "Kåñëa, You
reside both inside and outside of everything, yet the unintelligent conditioned
souls cannot see You." In Bhagavad-gétä it is said that one can see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead through jïäna-cakñuñaù, eyes of knowledge. He who
opens these eyes of knowledge is called a spiritual master. Thus we offer our
prayers to the spiritual master with the following çloka:
om ajïäna-timirändhasya
jïänäïjana-çaläkayä
cakñur unmélitaà yena
tasmai çré-gurave namaù
"I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who with the
torchlight of knowledge has opened my eyes, which were blinded by the
darkness of ignorance." (Gautaméya Tantra) The guru's task is to open the
disciple's eyes of knowledge. When the disciple is awakened from ignorance to
knowledge, he can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead everywhere
because the Lord actually is everywhere.
Aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. The Lord resides within
this universe, He resides within the hearts of all living entities, and He resides
even within the atom. Because we lack perfect knowledge, we cannot see God,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
22
but a little deliberation can help us to see God everywhere. This requires
training. With a little deliberation, even the most degraded person can
perceive the presence of God. If we take into account whose property is the
vast ocean, whose property is the vast land, how the sky exists, how the
numberless millions of stars and planets are set in the sky, who has made this
universe and whose property it is, we should certainly come to the conclusion
that there is a proprietor of everything. When we claim proprietorship over a
certain piece of land, whether individually or for our families or nations, we
should also consider how we became the proprietors. The land was there before
our birth, before we came to the land. How did it become our property? Such
deliberation will help us understand that there is a supreme proprietor of
everything—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The Supreme Godhead is always awake. In the conditioned stage we forget
things because we change our bodies, but because the Supreme Personality of
Godhead does not change His body, He remembers past, present and future.
Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.1), imaà vivasvate yogaà proktavän aham
avyayam: "I spoke this science of God—Bhagavad-gétä—to the sun-god at least
forty million years ago." When Arjuna inquired from Kåñëa how He could
remember incidents that had taken place so long ago, the Lord answered that
Arjuna was also present at that time. Because Arjuna is Kåñëa's friend,
wherever Kåñëa goes, Arjuna goes. But the difference is that Kåñëa remembers
everything, whereas the living entity like Arjuna, being a minute particle of
the Supreme Lord, forgets. Therefore it is said, the Lord's vigilance is never
diminished. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15). Sarvasya cähaà
hådi sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in His Paramätmä feature is always present within the hearts of all
living entities, and from Him come memory, knowledge and forgetfulness. This
is also indicated in this verse by the word suparëam, which means "friend." In
the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (4.6) it is therefore said, dvä suparëa-sayujä sakhäyä
samänaà våkñaà pariñasvajäte: two birds are sitting on the same tree as friends.
One bird is eating the fruit of the tree, and the other is simply observing. This
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
23
observing bird is always present as a friend to the eating bird and giving him
remembrance of things he wanted to do. Thus if we take into account the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in our daily affairs, we can see Him or at least
perceive His presence everywhere.
The words cakñur yasya na riñyati mean that although we cannot see Him,
this does not mean that He cannot see us. Nor does He die when the cosmic
manifestation is annihilated. The example is given in this connection that the
sunshine is present when the sun is present, but when the sun is not present,
or when we cannot see the sun, this does not mean that the sun is lost. The sun
is there, but we cannot see it. Similarly, although we cannot see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in our present darkness, our lack of knowledge, He is
always present, seeing our activities. As the Paramätmä, He is the witness and
adviser (upadrañöä and anumantä). Therefore, by following the instructions of
the spiritual master and studying authorized literatures, one can understand
that God is present before us, seeing everything, although we have no eyes
with which to see Him.
TEXT 12
Na YaSYaaÛNTaaE MaDYa& c Sv" Parae NaaNTar& bih" )
ivìSYaaMaUiNa Yad( YaSMaad( ivì& c Tad*Ta& MahTa( )) 12 ))
na yasyädy-antau madhyaà ca
svaù paro näntaraà bahiù
viçvasyämüni yad yasmäd
viçvaà ca tad åtaà mahat
SYNONYMS
na—neither; yasya—of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); ädi—a
beginning; antau—end; madhyam—middle; ca—also; svaù—own;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
24
paraù—others; na—nor; antaram—inside; bahiù—outside; viçvasya—of the
whole cosmic manifestation; amüni—all such considerations; yat—whose
form; yasmät—from He who is the cause of everything; viçvam—the whole
universe; ca—and; tat—all of them; åtam—truth; mahat—very, very great.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no beginning, no end and no
middle. Nor does He belong to a particular person or nation. He has no inside
or outside. The dualities found within this material world, such as beginning
and end, mine and theirs, are all absent from the personality of the Supreme
Lord. The universe, which emanates from Him, is another feature of the Lord.
Therefore the Supreme Lord is the ultimate truth, and He is complete in
greatness.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is described in the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.1):
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
"Kåñëa, known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal,
blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is
the prime cause of all causes." For the Lord's existence there is no cause, for He
is the cause of everything. He is in everything (mayä tatam idaà sarvam [Bg.
9.4]), He is expanded in everything, but He is not everything. He is
acintya-bhedäbheda, simultaneously one and different. That is explained in this
verse. In the material condition we have a conception of beginning, end and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
25
middle, but for the Supreme Personality of Godhead there are no such things.
The universal cosmic manifestation is also the viräö-rüpa that was shown to
Arjuna in Bhagavad-gétä. Therefore, since the Lord is present everywhere and
all the time, He is the Absolute Truth and the greatest. He is complete in
greatness. God is great, and how He is great is explained here.
TEXT 13
Sa ivìk-aYa" PauåhUTa wRXa"
SaTYa" SvYa&JYaaeiTarJa" Paura<a" )
Datae_SYa JaNMaaÛJaYaaTMaXa¢-ya
Taa& ivÛYaaedSYa iNarqh AaSTae )) 13 ))
sa viçva-käyaù puru-hüta-éçaù
satyaù svayaà-jyotir ajaù puräëaù
dhatte 'sya janmädy-ajayätma-çaktyä
täà vidyayodasya niréha äste
SYNONYMS
saù—that Supreme Personality of Godhead; viçva-käyaù—the total form of the
universe (the whole universe is the external body of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead); puru-hütaù—known by so many names; éçaù—the supreme
controller (with full power); satyaù—the ultimate truth; svayam—personally;
jyotiù—self-effulgent; ajaù—unborn, beginningless; puräëaù—the oldest;
dhatte—He performs; asya—of this universe; janma-ädi—the creation,
maintenance and annihilation; ajayä—by His external energy;
ätma-çaktyä—by His personal potency; täm—that external material energy;
vidyayä—by His spiritual potency; udasya—giving up; niréhaù—without any
desire or activity; äste—He is existing (untouched by the material energy).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
26
TRANSLATION
The entire cosmic manifestation is the body of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the Absolute Truth, who has millions of names and unlimited
potencies. He is self-effulgent, unborn and changeless. He is the beginning of
everything, but He has no beginning. Because He has created this cosmic
manifestation by His external energy, the universe appears to be created,
maintained and annihilated by Him. Nonetheless, He remains inactive in His
spiritual energy and is untouched by the activities of the material energy.
PURPORT
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu says in His Çikñäñöaka, nämnäm akäri bahudhä
nija-sarva-çaktiù: the Supreme Personality of Godhead has many names, which
are all nondifferent from the Supreme Person. This is spiritual existence. By
chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra, consisting of names of the Supreme
Lord, we find that the name has all the potencies of the person. The Lord's
activities are many, and according to His activities He has many names. He
appeared as the son of mother Yaçodä, and also as the son of mother Devaké,
and therefore He is named Devaké-nandana and Yaçodä-nandana. Paräsya
çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate: [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport] the Lord has a multitude
of energies, and therefore He acts in multifarious ways. Yet He has a particular
name. The çästras recommend which names we should chant, such as Hare
Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare. It is not that we have to search
for some name or manufacture one. Rather, we must follow the saintly persons
and the çästras in chanting His holy name.
Although the material and spiritual energies both belong to the Lord, He is
impossible to understand as long as we are in the material energy. And when
we come to the spiritual energy, He is very easy to know. As stated in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.7.23): mäyäà vyudasya cic-chaktyä kaivalye sthita
ätmani. Although the external energy belongs to the Lord, when one is in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
27
external energy (mama mäyä duratyayä [Bg. 7.14]) He is very difficult to
understand. However, when one comes to the spiritual energy, one can
understand Him. Therefore in Bhagavad-gétä (18.55) it is said, bhaktyä mäm
abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù: one who wants to understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in reality must take to the platform of bhakti,
or Kåñëa consciousness. This bhakti consists of various activities (çravaëaà
kértanaà viñëoù smaraëaà päda-sevanam/ arcanaà vandanaà däsyaà sakhyam
ätma-nivedanam [SB 7.5.23]), and to understand the Lord one must take to this
path of devotional service. Even though the people of the world have forgotten
God and may say that God is dead, this is not a fact. One can understand God
when one takes to the Kåñëa consciousness movement, and thus one can be
happy.
TEXT 14
AQaaGa]e ‰zYa" k-MaaR<aqhNTae_k-MaRheTave )
wRhMaaNaae ih Pauåz" Pa[aYaae_Naqha& Pa[PaÛTae )) 14 ))
athägre åñayaù karmäëéhante
'karma-hetave
éhamäno hi puruñaù
präyo 'néhäà prapadyate
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; agre—in the beginning; åñayaù—all learned åñis, saintly
persons; karmäëi—fruitive activities; éhante—execute; akarma—freedom from
fruitive results; hetave—for the purpose of; éhamänaù—engaging in such
activities; hi—indeed; puruñaù—a person; präyaù—almost always;
anéhäm—liberation from karma; prapadyate—attains.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
28
TRANSLATION
Therefore, to enable people to reach the stage of activities that are not tinged
by fruitive results, great saints first engage people in fruitive activities, for
unless one begins by performing activities as recommended in the çästras, one
cannot reach the stage of liberation, or activities that produce no reactions.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (3.9) Lord Kåñëa advises, yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra loko
'yaà karma-bandhanaù: "Work done as a sacrifice for Viñëu has to be
performed, otherwise work binds one to this material world." Generally,
everyone is attracted to hard labor for becoming happy in this material world,
but although various activities are going on all over the world simply for the
sake of happiness, unfortunately only problems are being created from such
fruitive activities. Therefore it is advised that active persons engage in
activities of Kåñëa consciousness, which are called yajïa, because then they
will gradually come to the platform of devotional service. Yajïa means Lord
Viñëu, the yajïa-puruña, the enjoyer of all sacrifices (bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram [Bg. 5.29]). The Supreme Personality of Godhead is
actually the enjoyer, and therefore if we begin our activities for His
satisfaction, we will gradually lose our taste for material activities.
Süta Gosvämé declared to the great assembly of sages at Naimiñäraëya:
ataù pumbhir dvija-çreñöhä
varëäçrama-vibhägaçaù
svanuñöhitasya dharmasya
saàsiddhir hari-toñaëam
"O best among the twice-born, it is concluded that the highest perfection one
can achieve, by discharging his prescribed duties [dharma] according to caste
divisions and order of life, is to please the Lord Hari." (SB 1.2.13) According to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
29
Vedic principles, everyone must act according to his classification as
brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya, çüdra, brahmacäré, gåhastha, vänaprastha or sannyäsé.
Everyone should progress toward perfection by acting in such a way that Kåñëa
will be pleased (saàsiddhir hari-toñaëam). One cannot please Kåñëa by sitting
idly; one must act according to the directions of the spiritual master for the
sake of pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and then one will
gradually come to the stage of pure devotional service. As confirmed in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.12):
naiñkarmyam apy acyuta-bhäva-varjitaà
na çobhate jïänam alaà niraïjanam
"Knowledge of self-realization, even though freed from all material affinity,
does not look well if devoid of a conception of the infallible [God]." Jïänés
recommend that one adopt naiñkarmya by not doing anything but simply
meditating and thinking of Brahman, but this is impossible unless one realizes
Parabrahman, Kåñëa. If there is no Kåñëa consciousness, any kind of activity,
be it philanthropic, political or social, simply causes karma-bandhana, bondage
to material work.
As long as one is entangled in karma-bandhana, one must accept different
types of bodies that spoil the human form of facility. Therefore, in
Bhagavad-gétä (6.3) karma-yoga is recommended:
ärurukñor muner yogaà
karma käraëam ucyate
yogärüòhasya tasyaiva
çamaù käraëam ucyate
"For one who is a neophyte in the yoga system, work is said to be the means;
and for one who has already attained to yoga, cessation of all material activities
is said to be the means." Nonetheless:
karmendriyäëi saàyamya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
30
ya äste manasä smaran
indriyärthän vimüòhätmä
mithyäcäraù sa ucyate
"One who restrains the senses and organs of action, but whose mind dwells on
sense objects, certainly deludes himself and is called a pretender." (Bg. 3.6)
One should act for Kåñëa very seriously in order to become fully Kåñëa
conscious and should not sit down to imitate such great personalities as
Haridäsa Öhäkura. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura condemned such
imitation. Me said:
duñöa mana! tumi kisera vaiñëava?
pratiñöhära tare, nirjanera ghare,
tava hari-näma kevala kaitava
"My dear mind, what kind of devotee are you? Simply for cheap adoration, you
sit in a solitary place and pretend to chant the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra, but
this is all cheating." Recently at Mäyäpur an African devotee wanted to
imitate Haridäsa Öhäkura, but after fifteen days he became restless and went
away. Do not suddenly try to imitate Haridäsa Öhäkura. Engage yourself in
Kåñëa conscious activities, and gradually you will come to the stage of
liberation (muktir hitvänyathä rüpaà svarüpeëa vyavasthitiù [SB 2.10.6]).
TEXT 15
wRhTae >aGavaNaqXaae Na ih Ta}a ivSaÂTae )
AaTMal/a>aeNa PaU<aaRQaaeR NaavSaqdiNTa Yae_Nau TaMa( )) 15 ))
éhate bhagavän éço
na hi tatra visajjate
ätma-läbhena pürëärtho
nävasédanti ye 'nu tam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
31
SYNONYMS
éhate—engages in activities of creation, maintenance and annihilation;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa; éçaù—the supreme
controller; na—not; hi—indeed; tatra—in such activities; visajjate—He
becomes entangled; ätma-läbhena—because of His own gain;
pürëa-arthaù—who is self-satisfied; na—not; avasédanti—are disheartened;
ye—persons who; anu—follow; tam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is full in opulence by His own gain,
yet He acts as the creator, maintainer and annihilator of this material world. In
spite of acting in that way, He is never entangled. Hence devotees who follow
in His footsteps are also never entangled.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (3.9), yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra loko 'yaà
karma-bandhanaù: "Work done as a sacrifice for Viñëu has to be performed,
otherwise work binds one to this material world." If we do not act in Kåñëa
consciousness we shall be entangled, like silkworms in cocoons. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, appears in order to teach us how to work so
that we will not be entangled in this material world. Our real problem is that
we are entangled in materialistic activities, and because we are conditioned,
our struggle continues through punishment in material existence in one body
after another in different forms of life. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä
(15.7):
mamaiväàço jéva-loke
jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù
manaù ñañöhänéndriyäëi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
32
prakåti-sthäni karñati
"The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental parts.
Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses,
which include the mind." The living entities are actually minute forms who are
part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord is full in everything,
and the small particles of the Lord are also originally qualified like Him, but
because of their minute existence, they are infected by material attraction and
thus entangled. We must therefore follow the instructions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and then, like Kåñëa, who is never entangled by His
material activities of creation, maintenance and annihilation, we will have
nothing for which to lament (nävasédanti ye 'nu tam). Kåñëa personally gives
instructions in Bhagavad-gétä, and anyone who follows these instructions is
liberated.
Following Kåñëa's instructions is possible when one is a devotee, for Kåñëa
instructs that one should become a devotee. Man-manä bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru: "Always think of Me and become My devotee.
Worship Me and offer your homage unto Me." (Bg. 18.65) Always thinking of
Kåñëa means chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra, but unless one is an initiated
devotee he cannot do this. As soon as one becomes a devotee, he engages in
Deity worship (mad-yäjé). A devotee's business is to offer obeisances to the
Lord and the spiritual master constantly. This principle is the recognized way
to come to the platform of bhakti. As soon as one comes to this platform, he
gradually understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and simply by
understanding Kåñëa one is liberated from material bondage.
TEXT 16
TaMaqhMaaNa& iNarhx(k*-Ta& buDa&
iNaraiXaz& PaU<aRMaNaNYacaeidTaMa( )
Na›Ha( iXa+aYaNTa& iNaJavTMaRSa&iSQaTa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
33
Pa[>au& Pa[PaÛe_i%l/DaMaR>aavNaMa( )) 16 ))
tam éhamänaà nirahaìkåtaà budhaà
niräçiñaà pürëam ananya-coditam
nèï çikñayantaà nija-vartma-saàsthitaà
prabhuà prapadye 'khila-dharma-bhävanam
SYNONYMS
tam—unto the same Supreme Personality of Godhead; éhamänam—who is
acting for our benefit; nirahaìkåtam—who is without entanglement or desire
for gain; budham—who is completely in knowledge; niräçiñam—without
desires to enjoy the fruits of His activities; pürëam—who is full and therefore
has no need to fulfill desires; ananya—by others; coditam—induced or
inspired; nèn—all of human society; çikñayantam—to teach (the real path of
life); nija-vartma—His own personal way of life; saàsthitam—to establish
(without deviation); prabhum—unto the Supreme Lord; prapadye—I request
everyone to surrender; akhila-dharma-bhävanam—who is the master of all
religious principles or the occupational duties for a human being.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, works just like an ordinary
human being, yet He does not desire to enjoy the fruits of work. He is full in
knowledge, free from material desires and diversions, and completely
independent. As the supreme teacher of human society, He teaches His own
way of activities, and thus He inaugurates the real path of religion. I request
everyone to follow Him.
PURPORT
This is the sum and substance of our Kåñëa consciousness movement. We
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
34
are simply requesting human society to follow in the footsteps of the teacher of
Bhagavad-gétä. Follow the instructions of Bhagavad-gétä As It Is, and your life
will be successful. That is the summary of the Kåñëa consciousness movement.
The organizer of the Kåñëa consciousness movement is teaching everyone how
to follow Lord Rämacandra, how to follow Lord Kåñëa, and how to follow Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu. In this material world, we need a leader for a monarchy
or good government. Lord Çré Rämacandra, by His practical example, showed
how to live for the benefit of all human society. He fought with demons like
Rävaëa, He carried out the orders of His father, and He remained the faithful
husband of mother Sétä. Thus there is no comparison to Lord Rämacandra's
acting as an ideal king. Indeed, people still hanker for räma-räjya, a
government conducted like that of Lord Rämacandra. Similarly, although Lord
Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He taught His disciple and
devotee Arjuna how to lead a life ending in going back home, back to
Godhead (tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]). All
teachings—political, economic, social, religious, cultural and
philosophical—are to be found in Bhagavad-gétä. One only has to follow them
strictly. The Supreme Personality of Godhead also comes as Lord Caitanya just
to play the part of a pure devotee. Thus the Lord teaches us in different ways
just to make our lives successful, and Sväyambhuva Manu requests us to follow
Him.
Sväyambhuva Manu is the leader of mankind, and he has given a book
called Manu-saàhitä to guide human society. Herein he directs us to follow the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in His different incarnations. These
incarnations are described in Vedic literature, and Jayadeva Gosvämé has
described ten important incarnations in summary (keçava dhåta-ména-çaréra
jaya jagad-éça hare, keçava dhåta-nara-hari-rüpa jaya jagad-éça hare, keçava
dhåta-buddha-çaréra jaya jagad-éça hare, etc.). Sväyambhuva Manu instructs us
to follow the instructions of God's incarnations, especially Kåñëa's instructions
of Bhagavad-gétä As It Is.
Appreciating bhakti-märga as instructed by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
35
Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya thus depicted the activities of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu:
vairägya-vidyä-nija-bhakti-yogaçikñärtham
ekaù puruñaù puräëaù
çré-kåñëa-caitanya-çaréra-dhäré
kåpämbudhir yas tam ahaà prapadye
[Cc. Madhya 6.254]
"Let me take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, who
has descended in the form of Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu to teach us real
knowledge, His devotional service, and detachment from whatever does not
foster Kåñëa consciousness. He has descended because He is an ocean of
transcendental mercy. Let me surrender unto His lotus feet."
(Caitanya-candrodaya-näöaka 6.74) In this age of Kali, people cannot follow
the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore the
Lord Himself takes the part of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya to teach personally how to
become Kåñëa conscious. He asks everyone to follow Him and to become a guru
to deliver the fallen souls of Kali-yuga.
yäre dekha, täre kaha 'kåñëa'-upadeça
ämära äjïäya guru haïä tära' ei deça
"Instruct everyone to follow the orders of Lord Çré Kåñëa as they are given in
Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam. In this way become a spiritual master
and try to liberate everyone in this land." (Cc. Madhya 7.128) The coherent
purpose of Lord Rämacandra, Lord Kåñëa and Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu is to
teach human society how to be happy by following the instructions of the
Supreme Lord.
TEXT 17
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
36
é[qéuk- ovac
wiTa MaN}aaePaiNazd& VYaahrNTa& SaMaaihTaMa( )
d*îaSaura YaaTauDaaNaa JaGDauMa>Yad]vNa( +auDaa )) 17 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti mantropaniñadaà
vyäharantaà samähitam
dåñöväsurä yätudhänä
jagdhum abhyadravan kñudhä
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus;
mantra-upaniñadam—the Vedic mantra (uttered by Sväyambhuva Manu);
vyäharantam—taught or chanted; samähitam—concentrated the mind
(without being agitated by material conditions); dåñövä—upon seeing (him);
asuräù—the demons; yätudhänäù—the Räkñasas; jagdhum—desired to devour;
abhyadravan—running very fast; kñudhä—to satisfy their appetite.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Sväyambhuva Manu was thus in a trance,
chanting the mantras of Vedic instruction known as the Upaniñads. Upon
seeing him, the Räkñasas and asuras, being very hungry, wanted to devour him.
Therefore they ran after him with great speed.
TEXT 18
Taa&STaQaaviSaTaaNa( vq+Ya Yaj" SavRGaTaae hir" )
YaaMaE" Pairv*Taae devEhRTvaXaaSaTa( i}aivíPaMa( )) 18 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
37
täàs tathävasitän vékñya
yajïaù sarva-gato hariù
yämaiù parivåto devair
hatväçäsat tri-viñöapam
SYNONYMS
tän—the demons and Räkñasas; tathä—in that way; avasitän—who were
determined to devour Sväyambhuva Manu; vékñya—upon observing;
yajïaù—Lord Viñëu, known as Yajïa; sarva-gataù—who is seated in
everyone's heart; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yämaiù—with
His sons named the Yämas; parivåtaù—surrounded; devaiù—by the demigods;
hatvä—after killing (the demons); açäsat—ruled (taking the post of Indra);
tri-viñöapam—the heavenly planets.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord, Viñëu, who sits in everyone's heart, appearing as
Yajïapati, observed that the Räkñasas and demons were going to devour
Sväyambhuva Manu. Thus the Lord, accompanied by His sons named the
Yämas and by all the other demigods, killed the demons and Räkñasas. He then
took the post of Indra and began to rule the heavenly kingdom.
PURPORT
The various names of the demigods—Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, Lord Indra
and so on—are not personal names; they are names of different posts. In this
regard, we understand that Lord Viñëu sometimes becomes Brahmä or Indra
when there is no suitable person to occupy these posts.
TEXT 19
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
38
Svaraeiczae iÜTaqYaSTau MaNaurGane" SauTaae_>avTa( )
ÛuMaTSauze<araeicZMaTPa[Mau%aSTaSYa caTMaJaa" )) 19 ))
svärociño dvitéyas tu
manur agneù suto 'bhavat
dyumat-suñeëa-rociñmat
pramukhäs tasya cätmajäù
SYNONYMS
svärociñaù—Svärociña; dvitéyaù—the second; tu—indeed; manuù—Manu;
agneù—of Agni; sutaù—the son; abhavat—became; dyumat—Dyumat;
suñeëa—Suñeëa; rociñmat—Rociñmat; pramukhäù—beginning with them;
tasya—of him (Svärociña); ca—also; ätma-jäù—sons.
TRANSLATION
The son of Agni named Svärociña became the second Manu. His several sons
were headed by Dyumat, Suñeëa and Rociñmat.
PURPORT
manvantaraà manur devä
manu-puträù sureçvaraù
åñayo 'àçävatäraç ca
hareù ñaò vidham ucyate
There are many incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Manu,
the manu-puträù (the sons of Manu), the king of the heavenly planets, and the
seven great sages are all partial incarnations of the Supreme Lord. Manu
himself, his sons Priyavrata and Uttänapäda, the demigods created by Dakña,
and the åñis like Maréci were all partial incarnations of the Lord during the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
39
reign of Sväyambhuva Manu. During that time, the incarnation of the Lord as
Yajïa took charge of ruling the heavenly planets. The next Manu was
Svärociña. The Manus and the sages and demigods are further described in the
following eleven verses.
TEXT 20
Ta}aeNd]ae raecNaSTvaSaqd( devaê TauizTaadYa" )
OJaRSTaM>aadYa" Saá ‰zYaae b]øvaidNa" )) 20 ))
tatrendro rocanas tv äséd
deväç ca tuñitädayaù
ürja-stambhädayaù sapta
åñayo brahma-vädinaù
SYNONYMS
tatra—in this manvantara; indraù—Indra; rocanaù—Rocana, the son of
Yajïa; tu—but; äsét—became; deväù—demigods; ca—also;
tuñita-ädayaù—Tuñita and others; ürja—Ürja; stambha—Stambha;
ädayaù—and others; sapta—seven; åñayaù—great saints; brahma-vädinaù—all
faithful devotees.
TRANSLATION
During the reign of Svärociña, the post of Indra was assumed by Rocana, the
son of Yajïa. Tuñita and others became the principal demigods, and Ürja,
Stambha and others became the seven saints. All of them were faithful devotees
of the Lord.
TEXT 21
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
40
‰zeSTau vediXarSaSTauizTaa NaaMa PaTNYa>aUTa( )
TaSYaa& Jaje TaTaae devae iv>auirTYai>aivé[uTa" )) 21 ))
åñes tu vedaçirasas
tuñitä näma patny abhüt
tasyäà jajïe tato devo
vibhur ity abhiviçrutaù
SYNONYMS
åñeù—of the saintly person; tu—indeed; vedaçirasaù—Vedaçirä;
tuñitä—Tuñitä; näma—named; patné—the wife; abhüt—begat; tasyäm—in her
(womb); jajïe—took birth; tataù—thereafter; devaù—the Lord;
vibhuù—Vibhu; iti—thus; abhiviçrutaù—celebrated as.
TRANSLATION
Vedaçirä was a very celebrated åñi. From the womb of his wife, whose name
was Tuñitä, came the avatära named Vibhu.
TEXT 22
AíaXaqiTaSahóai<a MauNaYaae Yae Da*Tav]Taa" )
ANviXa+aNv]Ta& TaSYa k-aEMaarb]øcair<a" )) 22 ))
añöäçéti-sahasräëi
munayo ye dhåta-vratäù
anvaçikñan vrataà tasya
kaumära-brahmacäriëaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
41
SYNONYMS
añöäçéti—eighty-eight; sahasräëi—thousand; munayaù—great saintly persons;
ye—those who; dhåta-vratäù—fixed in vows; anvaçikñan—took instructions;
vratam—vows; tasya—from him (Vibhu); kaumära—who was unmarried;
brahmacäriëaù—and fixed in the brahmacäré stage of life.
TRANSLATION
Vibhu remained a brahmacäri and never married throughout his life. From
him, eighty-eight thousand other saintly persons took lessons on self-control,
austerity and similar behavior.
TEXT 23
Ta*TaqYa otaMaae NaaMa iPa[Yav]TaSauTaae MaNau" )
PavNa" Sa*ÅYaae Yajhae}aaÛaSTaTSauTaa Na*Pa )) 23 ))
tåtéya uttamo näma
priyavrata-suto manuù
pavanaù såïjayo yajïahoträdyäs
tat-sutä nåpa
SYNONYMS
tåtéyaù—the third; uttamaù—Uttama; näma—named; priyavrata—of King
Priyavrata; sutaù—the son; manuù—he became the Manu; pavanaù—Pavana;
såïjayaù—Såïjaya; yajïahotra-ädyäù—Yajïahotra and others; tat-sutäù—the
sons of Uttama; nåpa—O King.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
42
TRANSLATION
O King, the third Manu, Uttama, was the son of King Priyavrata. Among
the sons of this Manu were Pavana, Såïjaya and Yajïahotra.
TEXT 24
viSaïTaNaYaa" Saá ‰zYa" Pa[MadadYa" )
SaTYaa vedé[uTaa >ad]a deva wNd]STau SaTYaiJaTa( )) 24 ))
vasiñöha-tanayäù sapta
åñayaù pramadädayaù
satyä vedaçrutä bhadrä
devä indras tu satyajit
SYNONYMS
vasiñöha-tanayäù—the sons of Vasiñöha; sapta—seven; åñayaù—the sages;
pramada-ädayaù—headed by Pramada; satyäù—the Satyas;
vedaçrutäù—Vedaçrutas; bhadräù—Bhadras; deväù—demigods; indraù—the
King of heaven; tu—but; satyajit—Satyajit.
TRANSLATION
During the reign of the third Manu, Pramada and other sons of Vasiñöha
became the seven sages. The Satyas, Vedaçrutas and Bhadras became demigods,
and Satyajit was selected to be Indra, the King of heaven.
TEXT 25
DaMaRSYa SaUNa*TaaYaa& Tau >aGavaNPauåzaetaMa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
43
SaTYaSaeNa wiTa :YaaTaae JaaTa" SaTYav]TaE" Sah )) 25 ))
dharmasya sünåtäyäà tu
bhagavän puruñottamaù
satyasena iti khyäto
jätaù satyavrataiù saha
SYNONYMS
dharmasya—of the demigod in charge of religion; sünåtäyäm—in the womb of
his wife named Sünåtä; tu—indeed; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; puruña-uttamaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
satyasenaù—Satyasena; iti—thus; khyätaù—celebrated; jätaù—took birth;
satyavrataiù—the Satyavratas; saha—with.
TRANSLATION
In this manvantara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared from the
womb of Sünåtä, who was the wife of Dharma, the demigod in charge of
religion. The Lord was celebrated as Satyasena, and He appeared with other
demigods, known as the Satyavratas.
TEXT 26
Saae_Na*Tav]Tadu"Xaql/aNaSaTaae Ya+ara+aSaaNa( )
>aUTad]uhae >aUTaGa<aa&êavDaqTa( SaTYaiJaTSa%" )) 26 ))
so 'nåta-vrata-duùçélän
asato yakña-räkñasän
bhüta-druho bhüta-gaëäàç
cävadhét satyajit-sakhaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
44
SYNONYMS
saù—He (Satyasena); anåta-vrata—who are fond of speaking lies;
duùçélän—misbehaved; asataù—miscreant; yakña-räkñasän—Yakñas and
Räkñasas; bhüta-druhaù—who are always against the progress of other living
beings; bhüta-gaëän—the ghostly living entities; ca—also; avadhét—killed;
satyajit-sakhaù—with His friend Satyajit.
TRANSLATION
Satyasena, along with His friend Satyajit, who was the King of heaven,
Indra, killed all the untruthful, impious and misbehaved Yakñas, Räkñasas and
ghostly living entities, who gave pains to other living beings.
TEXT 27
cTauQaR otaMa>a]aTaa MaNauNaaRMana c TaaMaSa" )
Pa*Qau" :YaaiTaNaRr" ke-TauirTYaaÛa dXa TaTSauTaa" )) 27 ))
caturtha uttama-bhrätä
manur nämnä ca tämasaù
påthuù khyätir naraù ketur
ity ädyä daça tat-sutäù
SYNONYMS
caturtha—the fourth Manu; uttama-bhrätä—the brother of Uttama;
manuù—became the Manu; nämnä—celebrated by the name; ca—also;
tämasaù—Tämasa; påthuù—Påthu; khyätiù—Khyäti; naraù—Nara;
ketuù—Ketu; iti—thus; ädyäù—headed by; daça—ten; tat-sutäù—sons of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
45
Tämasa Manu.
TRANSLATION
The brother of the third Manu, Uttama, was celebrated by the name
Tämasa, and he became the fourth Manu. Tämasa had ten sons, headed by
Påthu, Khyäti, Nara and Ketu.
TEXT 28
SaTYak-a hrYaae vqra devaiñiXa% wRìr" )
JYaaeiTaDaaRMaadYa" Saá ‰zYaSTaaMaSae_NTare )) 28 ))
satyakä harayo vérä
deväs triçikha éçvaraù
jyotirdhämädayaù sapta
åñayas tämase 'ntare
SYNONYMS
satyakäù—the Satyakas; harayaù—the Haris; véräù—the Véras; deväù—the
demigods; triçikhaù—Triçikha; éçvaraù—the King of heaven;
jyotirdhäma-ädayaù—headed by the celebrated Jyotirdhäma; sapta—seven;
åñayaù—sages; tämase—the reign of Tämasa Manu; antare—within.
TRANSLATION
During the reign of Tämasa Manu, among the demigods were the Satyakas,
Haris and Véras. The heavenly King, Indra, was Triçikha. The sages in
saptarñi-dhäma were headed by Jyotirdhäma.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
46
TEXT 29
deva vEDa*TaYaae NaaMa ivDa*TaeSTaNaYaa Na*Pa )
Naía" k-ale/Na YaEveRda ivDa*Taa" SveNa TaeJaSaa )) 29 ))
devä vaidhåtayo näma
vidhåtes tanayä nåpa
nañöäù kälena yair vedä
vidhåtäù svena tejasä
SYNONYMS
deväù—the demigods; vaidhåtayaù—the Vaidhåtis; näma—by the name;
vidhåteù—of Vidhåti; tanayäù—who were the sons; nåpa—O King;
nañöäù—were lost; kälena—by the influence of time; yaiù—by whom;
vedäù—the Vedas; vidhåtäù—were protected; svena—by their own;
tejasä—power.
TRANSLATION
O King, in the Tämasa manvantara the sons of Vidhåti, who were known as
the Vaidhåtis, also became demigods. Since in course of time the Vedic
authority was lost, these demigods, by their own powers, protected the Vedic
authority.
PURPORT
In the Tämasa manvantara there were two kinds of demigods, and one of
them was known as the Vaidhåtis. The duty of the demigods is to protect the
authority of the Vedas. The word devatä refers to one who carries the authority
of the Vedas, whereas Räkñasas are those who defy the Vedic authority. If the
authority of the Vedas is lost, the entire universe becomes chaotic. Therefore,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
47
it is the duty of the demigods, as well as kings and aides of governments, to give
full protection to the Vedic authority; otherwise human society will be in a
chaotic condition in which there cannot be peace or prosperity.
TEXT 30
Ta}aaiPa Jaje >aGavaNhir<Yaa& hirMaeDaSa" )
hirirTYaaôTaae YaeNa GaJaeNd]ae MaaeicTaae Ga]haTa( )) 30 ))
taträpi jajïe bhagavän
hariëyäà harimedhasaù
harir ity ähåto yena
gajendro mocito grahät
SYNONYMS
taträpi—in that period; jajïe—appeared; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; hariëyäm—in the womb of Hariëé; harimedhasaù—begotten by
Harimedhä; hariù—Hari; iti—thus; ähåtaù—called; yena—by whom;
gaja-indraù—the King of the elephants; mocitaù—was freed; grahät—from the
mouth of a crocodile.
TRANSLATION
Also in this manvantara, the Supreme Lord, Viñëu, took birth from the
womb of Hariëé, the wife of Harimedhä, and He was known as Hari. Hari
saved His devotee Gajendra, the King of the elephants, from the mouth of a
crocodile.
TEXT 31
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
48
é[qraJaaevac
badraYa<a WTaTa( Tae é[aeTauiMaC^aMahe vYaMa( )
hirYaRQaa GaJaPaiTa& Ga]ahGa]STaMaMaUMaucTa( )) 31 ))
çré-räjoväca
bädaräyaëa etat te
çrotum icchämahe vayam
harir yathä gaja-patià
gräha-grastam amümucat
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—King Parékñit said; bädaräyaëe—O son of Bädaräyaëa
(Vyäsadeva); etat—this; te—from you; çrotum icchämahe—desire to hear;
vayam—we; hariù—the Lord Hari; yathä—the manner in which;
gaja-patim—the King of the elephants; gräha-grastam—when attacked by the
crocodile; amümucat—delivered.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit said: My lord, Bädaräyaëi, we wish to hear from you in detail
how the King of the elephants, when attacked by a crocodile, was delivered by
Hari.
TEXT 32
TaTk-QaaSau MahTa( Pau<Ya& DaNYa& SvSTYaYaNa& éu>aMa( )
Ya}a Ya}aaetaMaëaek-ae >aGavaNGaqYaTae hir" )) 32 ))
tat-kathäsu mahat puëyaà
dhanyaà svastyayanaà çubham
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
49
yatra yatrottamaçloko
bhagavän géyate hariù
SYNONYMS
tat-kathäsu—in those narrations; mahat—great; puëyam—pious;
dhanyam—glorious; svastyayanam—auspicious; çubham—all good;
yatra—whenever; yatra—wherever; uttamaçlokaù—the Lord, who is known as
Uttamaçloka (He who is described by transcendental literature);
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; géyate—is glorified;
hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Any literature or narration in which the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Uttamaçloka, is described and glorified is certainly great, pure, glorious,
auspicious and all good.
PURPORT
The Kåñëa consciousness movement is spreading all over the world simply
by describing Kåñëa. We have published many books, including Çré
Caitanya-caritämåta in seventeen volumes, four hundred pages each, as well as
Bhagavad-gétä and The Nectar of Devotion. We are also publishing
Çrémad-Bhägavatam in sixty volumes. Wherever a speaker holds discourses
from these books and an audience hears him, this will create a good and
auspicious situation. Therefore the preaching of Kåñëa consciousness must be
done very carefully by the members of the Kåñëa consciousness movement,
especially the sannyäsés. This will create an auspicious atmosphere.
TEXT 33
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
50
é[qSaUTa ovac
Parqi+aTaEv& Sa Tau badraYai<a"
Pa[aYaaePaivíeNa k-QaaSau caeidTa" )
ovac ivPa[a" Pa[iTaNaNÛ PaaiQaRv&
Mauda MauNaqNaa& SadiSa SMa é*<vTaaMa( )) 33 ))
çré-süta uväca
parékñitaivaà sa tu bädaräyaëiù
präyopaviñöena kathäsu coditaù
uväca vipräù pratinandya pärthivaà
mudä munénäà sadasi sma çåëvatäm
SYNONYMS
çré-sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; parékñitä—by Mahäräja Parékñit;
evam—thus; saù—he; tu—indeed; bädaräyaëiù—Çukadeva Gosvämé;
präya-upaviñöena—Parékñit Mahäräja, who was awaiting impending death;
kathäsu—by the words; coditaù—being encouraged; uväca—spoke; vipräù—O
brähmaëas; pratinandya—after congratulating; pärthivam—Mahäräja Parékñit;
mudä—with great pleasure; munénäm—of great sages; sadasi—in the assembly;
sma—indeed; çåëvatäm—who desired to hear.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: O brähmaëas, when Parékñit Mahäräja, who was
awaiting impending death, thus requested Çukadeva Gosvämé to speak,
Çukadeva Gosvämé, encouraged by the King's words, offered respect to the King
and spoke with great pleasure in the assembly of sages, who desired to hear him.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, First Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Manus, Administrators of the Universe."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
51
2. The Elephant Gajendra's Crisis
The Second, Third and Fourth Chapters of this canto describe how the
Lord, during the reign of the fourth Manu, gave protection to the king of the
elephants. As described in this Second Chapter, when the King of the
elephants, along with his female elephants, was enjoying in the water, a
crocodile suddenly attacked him, and the elephant surrendered to the lotus
feet of the Personality of Godhead for protection.
In the midst of the ocean of milk, there is a very high and beautiful
mountain that has an altitude of ten thousand yojanas, or eighty thousand
miles. This mountain is known as Triküöa. In a valley of Triküöa there is a nice
garden named Åtumat, which was constructed by Varuëa, and in that area
there is a very nice lake. Once the chief of the elephants, along with female
elephants, went to enjoy bathing in that lake, and they disturbed the
inhabitants of the water. Because of this, the chief crocodile in that water, who
was very powerful, immediately attacked the elephant's leg. Thus there ensued
a great fight between the elephant and the crocodile. This fight continued for
one thousand years. Neither the elephant nor the crocodile died, but since
they were in the water, the elephant gradually became weak whereas the
power of the crocodile increased more and more. Thus the crocodile became
more and more encouraged. Then the elephant, being helpless and seeing that
there was no other way for his protection, sought shelter at the lotus feet of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 1
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
52
é[qéuk- ovac
AaSaqd( iGairvrae raJa&iñkU-$= wiTa ivé[uTa" )
+aqraedeNaav*Ta" é[qMaaNYaaeJaNaaYauTaMauiC^\Ta" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
äséd girivaro räjaàs
triküöa iti viçrutaù
kñérodenävåtaù çrémän
yojanäyutam ucchritaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; äsét—there was; girivaraù—a
very big mountain; räjan—O King; tri-küöaù—Triküöa; iti—thus;
viçrutaù—celebrated; kñéra-udena—by the ocean of milk; ävåtaù—surrounded;
çrémän—very beautiful; yojana—a measurement of eight miles; ayutam—ten
thousand; ucchritaù—very high.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, there is a very large mountain called
Triküöa. It is ten thousand yojanas [eighty thousand miles] high. Being
surrounded by the ocean of milk, it is very beautifully situated.
TEXTS 2-3
TaavTaa ivSTa*Ta" PaYaRk(- i}ai>a" é*(r)E" PaYaaeiNaiDaMa( )
idXa" %& raecYaàaSTae raEPYaaYaSaihr<MaYaE" )) 2 ))
ANYaEê k-ku->a" SavaR rÒDaaTauivici}aTaE" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
53
NaaNaad]uMal/TaaGauLMaEiNaRgaaeRzEiNaR‡RraM>aSaaMa( )) 3 ))
tävatä viståtaù paryak
tribhiù çåìgaiù payo-nidhim
diçaù khaà rocayann äste
raupyäyasa-hiraëmayaiù
anyaiç ca kakubhaù sarvä
ratna-dhätu-vicitritaiù
nänä-druma-latä-gulmair
nirghoñair nirjharämbhasäm
SYNONYMS
tävatä—in that way; viståtaù—length and breadth (eighty thousand miles);
paryak—all around; tribhiù—with three; çåìgaiù—peaks;
payaù-nidhim—situated on an island in the ocean of milk; diçaù—all
directions; kham—the sky; rocayan—pleasing; äste—standing; raupya—made
of silver; ayasa—iron; hiraëmayaiù—and gold; anyaiù—with other peaks;
ca—also; kakubhaù—directions; sarväù—all; ratna—with jewels; dhätu—and
minerals; vicitritaiù—decorated very nicely; nänä—with various;
druma-latä—trees and creepers; gulmaiù—and shrubs; nirghoñaiù—with the
sounds of; nirjhara—waterfalls; ambhasäm—of water.
TRANSLATION
The length and breadth of the mountain are of the same measurement
[eighty thousand miles]. Its three principal peaks, which are made of iron, silver
and gold, beautify all directions and the sky. The mountain also has other
peaks, which are full of jewels and minerals and are decorated with nice trees,
creepers and shrubs. The sounds of the waterfalls on the mountain create a
pleasing vibration. In this way the mountain stands, increasing the beauty of all
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
54
directions.
TEXT 4
Sa caviNaJYaMaaNaax(iga]" SaMaNTaaTa( PaYaOiMaRi>a" )
k-raeiTa XYaaMal/a& >aUiMa& hirNMark-TaaXMai>a" )) 4 ))
sa cävanijyamänäìghriù
samantät paya-ürmibhiù
karoti çyämaläà bhümià
harin-marakatäçmabhiù
SYNONYMS
saù—that mountain; ca—also; avanijyamäna-aìghriù—whose foot is always
washed; samantät—all around; payaù-ürmibhiù—by waves of milk;
karoti—makes; çyämaläm—dark green; bhümim—ground; harit—green;
marakata—with emerald; açmabhiù—stones.
TRANSLATION
The ground at the foot of the mountain is always washed by waves of milk
that produce emeralds all around in the eight directions [north, south, east,
west and the directions midway between them].
PURPORT
From Çrémad-Bhägavatam we understand that there are various oceans.
Somewhere there is an ocean filled with milk, somewhere an ocean of liquor,
an ocean of ghee, an ocean of oil, and an ocean of sweet water. Thus there are
different varieties of oceans within this universe. The modern scientists, who
have only limited experience, cannot defy these statements; they cannot give
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
55
us full information about any planet, even the planet on which we live. From
this verse, however, we can understand that if the valleys of some mountains
are washed with milk, this produces emeralds. No one has the ability to imitate
the activities of material nature as conducted by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 5
iSaÖcar<aGaNDavOE„ivRÛaDarMahaerGaE" )
ik-àrErPSaraei>aê §-I@iÙJauRík-Ndr" )) 5 ))
siddha-cäraëa-gandharvair
vidyädhara-mahoragaiù
kinnarair apsarobhiç ca
kréòadbhir juñöa-kandaraù
SYNONYMS
siddha—by the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; cäraëa—the inhabitants of
Cäraëaloka; gandharvaiù—the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka;
vidyädhara—the inhabitants of Vidyädhara-loka; mahä-uragaiù—the
inhabitants of the serpent loka; kinnaraiù—the Kinnaras; apsarobhiù—the
Apsaräs; ca—and; kréòadbhiù—who were engaged in sporting; juñöa—enjoyed;
kandaraù—the caves.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of the higher planets—the Siddhas, Cäraëas, Gandharvas,
Vidyädharas, serpents, Kinnaras and Apsaräs—go to that mountain to sport.
Thus all the caves of the mountain are full of these denizens of the heavenly
planets.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
56
PURPORT
As ordinary men may play in the salty ocean, the inhabitants of the higher
planetary systems go to the ocean of milk. They float in the ocean of milk and
also enjoy various sports within the caves of Triküöa Mountain.
TEXT 6
Ya}a Sa(r)qTaSaàadENaRdd(GauhMaMazRYaa )
Ai>aGaJaRiNTa hrYa" ëaigaNa" ParXaªYaa )) 6 ))
yatra saìgéta-sannädair
nadad-guham amarñayä
abhigarjanti harayaù
çläghinaù para-çaìkayä
SYNONYMS
yatra—in that mountain (Triküöa); saìgéta—of singing; sannädaiù—with the
vibrations; nadat—resounding; guham—the caves; amarñayä—because of
unbearable anger or envy; abhigarjanti—roar; harayaù—the lions;
çläghinaù—being very proud of their strength; para-çaìkayä—because of
suspecting another lion.
TRANSLATION
Because of the resounding vibrations of the denizens of heaven singing in the
caves, the lions there, being very proud of their strength, roar with unbearable
envy, thinking that another lion is roaring in that way.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
57
PURPORT
In the higher planetary systems, there are not only different types of human
beings, but also animals like lions and elephants. There are trees, and the land
is made of emeralds. Such is the creation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has sung in this regard, keçava! tuyä
jagata vicitra: "My Lord Keçava, Your creation is colorful and full of varieties."
Geologists, botanists and other so-called scientists speculate about other
planetary systems, but being unable to estimate the varieties on other planets,
they falsely imagine that all planets but this one are vacant, uninhabited, and
full of dust. Although they cannot even estimate the varieties existing
throughout the universe, they are very proud of their knowledge, and they are
accepted as learned by persons of a similar caliber. As described in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.3.19), çva-vid-varähoñöra-kharaiù saàstutaù puruñaù
paçuù: materialistic leaders are praised by dogs, hogs, camels and asses, and
they themselves are also big animals. One should not be satisfied with the
knowledge imparted by a big animal. Rather, one must take knowledge from a
perfect person like Çukadeva Gosvämé. Mahäjano yena gataù sa panthäù: [Cc.
Madhya 17.186] our duty is to follow the instructions of the mahäjanas. There
are twelve mahäjanas, and Çukadeva Gosvämé is one of them.
svayambhür näradaù çambhuù
kumäraù kapilo manuù
prahlädo janako bhéñmo
balir vaiyäsakir vayam
(SB 6.3.20)
Vaiyäsaki is Çukadeva Gosvämé. Whatever he says we consider to be factual.
That is perfect knowledge.
TEXT 7
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
58
NaaNaar<YaPaéuv]aTaSax(ku-l/d]ae<Yal/x(k*-Ta" )
ic}ad]uMaSauraeÛaNak-l/k-<#=ivh(r)Ma" )) 7 ))
nänäraëya-paçu-vrätasaìkula-
droëy-alaìkåtaù
citra-druma-surodyänakalakaëöha-
vihaìgamaù
SYNONYMS
nänä—with varieties of; araëya-paçu—jungle animals; vräta—with a
multitude; saìkula—filled; droëi—with valleys; alaìkåtaù—very beautifully
decorated; citra—with varieties of; druma—trees; sura-udyäna—in gardens
maintained by the demigods; kalakaëöha—sweetly chirping;
vihaìgamaù—birds.
TRANSLATION
The valleys beneath Triküöa Mountain are beautifully decorated by many
varieties of jungle animals, and in the trees, which are maintained in gardens by
the demigods, varieties of birds chirp with sweet voices.
TEXT 8
SairTSaraei>arC^aedE" Pauil/NaEMaRi<avalu/kE-" )
devñqMaÂNaaMaaedSaaEr>aaMBviNalE/YauRTa" )) 8 ))
sarit-sarobhir acchodaiù
pulinair maëi-välukaiù
deva-stré-majjanämodacopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
59
saurabhämbv-anilair yutaù
SYNONYMS
sarit—with rivers; sarobhiù—and lakes; acchodaiù—filled with crystal-clear
water; pulinaiù—beaches; maëi—with small gems; välukaiù—resembling
grains of sand; deva-stré—of the damsels of the demigods; majjana—by bathing
(in that water); ämoda—bodily fragrance; saurabha—very fragrant;
ambu—with the water; anilaiù—and the air; yutaù—enriched (the atmosphere
of Triküöa Mountain).
TRANSLATION
Triküöa Mountain has many lakes and rivers, with beaches covered by small
gems resembling grains of sand. The water is as clear as crystal, and when the
demigod damsels bathe in it, their bodies lend fragrance to the water and the
breeze, thus enriching the atmosphere.
PURPORT
Even in the material world, there are many grades of living entities. The
human beings on earth generally cover themselves with external fragrances to
stop their bad bodily odors, but here we find that because of the bodily
fragrance of the demigod damsels, the rivers, the lakes, the breeze and the
entire atmosphere of Triküöa Mountain also become fragrant. Since the bodies
of the damsels in the upper planetary systems are so beautiful, we can just
imagine how beautifully formed are the bodies of the Vaikuëöha damsels or the
damsels in Våndävana, the gopés.
TEXTS 9-13
TaSYa d]ae<Yaa& >aGavTaae vå<aSYa MahaTMaNa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
60
oÛaNaMa*TauMaàaMa Aa§-I@& SaurYaaeizTaaMa( )) 9 ))
SavRTaae_l/x(k*-Ta& idVYaEiNaRTYaPauZPaf-l/d]uMaE" )
MaNdarE" PaairJaaTaEê Paa$=l/aXaaek-cMPakE-" )) 10 ))
cUTaE" iPaYaalE/" PaNaSaEraMa]EraMa]aTakE-riPa )
§-MaukE-NaaRirke-lE/ê %JaUR„rEbsJaPaUrkE-" )) 11 ))
MaDaukE-" Xaal/TaalE/ê TaMaalE/rSaNaaJauRNaE" )
Airíae@uMbrâ+aEvR$E=" ik&-éuk-cNdNaE" )) 12 ))
iPacuMadOE" k-aeivdarE" SarlE/" Saurdaåi>a" )
d]a+ae+aurM>aaJaMbui>abRdYaR+aa>aYaaMalE/" )) 13 ))
tasya droëyäà bhagavato
varuëasya mahätmanaù
udyänam åtuman näma
äkréòaà sura-yoñitäm
sarvato 'laìkåtaà divyair
nitya-puñpa-phala-drumaiù
mandäraiù pärijätaiç ca
päöaläçoka-campakaiù
cütaiù piyälaiù panasair
ämrair ämrätakair api
kramukair närikelaiç ca
kharjürair béjapürakaiù
madhukaiù çäla-tälaiç ca
tamälair asanärjunaiù
ariñöoòumbara-plakñair
vaöaiù kiàçuka-candanaiù
picumardaiù kovidäraiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
61
saralaiù sura-därubhiù
dräkñekñu-rambhä-jambubhir
badary-akñäbhayämalaiù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of that mountain (Triküöa); droëyäm—in a valley; bhagavataù—of the
great personality; varuëasya—the demigod Varuëa; mahä-ätmanaù—who is a
great devotee of the Lord; udyänam—a garden; åtumat—Åtumat; näma—of
the name; äkréòam—a place of sporting pastimes; sura-yoñitäm—of the damsels
of the demigods; sarvataù—everywhere; alaìkåtam—beautifully decorated;
divyaiù—pertaining to the demigods; nitya—always; puñpa—of flowers;
phala—and fruits; drumaiù—by trees; mandäraiù—mandära;
pärijätaiù-pärijäta; ca—also; päöala—päöala; açoka-açoka; campakaiù-campaka;
cütaiù-cüta fruits; piyälaiù—piyäla fruits; panasaiù—panasa fruits;
ämraiù—mangoes; ämrätakaiù—sour fruits called ämrätaka; api—also;
kramukaiù—kramuka fruits; närikelaiù—coconut trees; ca—and;
kharjüraiù—date trees; béjapürakaiù—pomegranates; madhukaiù—madhuka
fruits; çäla-tälaiù—palm fruits; ca—and; tamälaiù—tamäla trees;
asana—asana trees; arjunaiù—arjuna trees; ariñöa—ariñöa fruits;
uòumbara—big udumbara trees; plakñaiù—plakña trees; vaöaiù—banyan trees;
kiàçuka—red flowers with no scent; candanaiù—sandalwood trees;
picumardaiù—picumarda flowers; kovidäraiù—kovidära fruits; saralaiù—sarala
trees; sura-därubhiù—sura-däru trees; dräkñä—grapes; ikñuù—sugarcane;
rambhä—bananas; jambubhiù—jambu fruits; badaré—badaré fruits; akña—akña
fruits; abhaya—abhaya fruits; ämalaiù—ämalaké, a sour fruit.
TRANSLATION
In a valley of Triküöa Mountain there was a garden called Åtumat. This
garden belonged to the great devotee Varuëa and was a sporting place for the
damsels of the demigods. Flowers and fruits grew there in all seasons. Among
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
62
them were mandäras, pärijätas, päöalas, açokas, campakas, cütas, piyälas,
panasas, mangoes, ämrätakas, kramukas, coconut trees, date trees and
pomegranates. There were madhukas, palm trees, tamälas, asanas, arjunas,
ariñöas, uòumbaras, plakñas, banyan trees, kiàçukas and sandalwood trees.
There were also picumardas, kovidäras, saralas, sura-därus, grapes, sugarcane,
bananas, jambu, badarés, akñas, abhayas and ämalakés.
TEXTS 14-19
ibLvE" k-iPaTQaEJaRMbqrEv*RTaae >açaTak-aidi>a" )
TaiSMaNSar" SauivPaul&/ l/SaTk-aÄNaPaªJaMa( )) 14 ))
ku-MaudaeTPal/k-úarXaTaPa}aié[YaaeiJaRTaMa( )
Mataz$(PadiNagauRí& Xaku-NTaEê k-l/SvNaE" )) 15 ))
h&Sak-ar<@vak-I<a| c§-aûE" SaarSaEriPa )
Jal/ku-Kku-$=k-aeYaiídaTYaUhku-l/kU-iJaTaMa( )) 16 ))
MaTSYak-C^PaSaÄarcl/TPaÚrJa"PaYa" )
k-dMbveTaSaNal/NaqPavÅul/kE-v*RTaMa( )) 17 ))
ku-NdE" ku-åbk-aXaaekE-" iXarqzE" kU-$=Jaex(GaudE" )
ku-BJakE-" Sv<aRYaUQaqi>aNaaRGaPauàaGaJaaiTai>a" )) 18 ))
Maiçk-aXaTaPa}aEê MaaDavqJaal/k-aidi>a" )
Xaaei>aTa& TaqrJaEêaNYaEiNaRTYaTauRi>arl&/ d]uMaE" )) 19 ))
bilvaiù kapitthair jambérair
våto bhallätakädibhiù
tasmin saraù suvipulaà
lasat-käïcana-paìkajam
kumudotpala-kahläraçatapatra-
çriyorjitam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
63
matta-ñaö-pada-nirghuñöaà
çakuntaiç ca kala-svanaiù
haàsa-käraëòaväkérëaà
cakrähvaiù särasair api
jalakukkuöa-koyañöidätyüha-
kula-küjitam
matsya-kacchapa-saïcäracalat-
padma-rajaù-payaù
kadamba-vetasa-nalanépa-
vaïjulakair våtam
kundaiù kurubakäçokaiù
çiréñaiù küöajeìgudaiù
kubjakaiù svarëa-yüthébhir
näga-punnäga-jätibhiù
mallikä-çatapatraiç ca
mädhavé-jälakädibhiù
çobhitaà téra-jaiç cänyair
nityartubhir alaà drumaiù
SYNONYMS
bilvaiù—bilva trees; kapitthaiù—kapittha trees; jambéraiù—jambéra trees;
våtaù—surrounded by; bhallätaka-ädibhiù—bhallätaka and other trees;
tasmin—in that garden; saraù—a lake; su-vipulam—which was very large;
lasat—shining; käïcana—golden; paìka-jam—filled with lotus flowers;
kumuda—of kumuda flowers; utpala—utpala flowers; kahlära—kahlära
flowers; çatapatra—and çatapatra flowers; çriyä—with the beauty;
ürjitam—excellent; matta—intoxicated; ñaö-pada—bees;
nirghuñöam—hummed; çakuntaiù—with the chirping of birds; ca—and;
kala-svanaiù—whose songs were very melodious; haàsa—swans;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
64
käraëòava—käraëòavas; äkérëam—crowded with; cakrähvaiù—cakrävakas;
särasaiù—cranes; api—as well as; jalakukkuöa—water chickens;
koyañöi—koyañöis; dätyüha-dätyühas; kula—flocks of; küjitam—murmured;
matsya—of the fish; kacchapa—and tortoises; saïcära—because of the
movements; calat—agitating; padma—of the lotuses; rajaù—by the pollen;
payaù—the water (was decorated); kadamba—kadambas; vetasa-vetasas;
nala-nalas; népa-népas; vaïjulakaiù-vaïjulakas; våtam—surrounded by;
kundaiù—kundas; kurubaka-kurubakas; açokaiù-açokas; çiréñaiù-çiréñas;
küöaja-küöajas; iìgudaiù-iìgudas; kubjakaiù-kubjakas;
svarëa-yüthébhiù-svarëa-yüthés; näga-nägas; punnäga-punnägas; jätibhiù-jätés;
mallikä-mallikäs; çatapatraiù-çatapatras; ca—also; mädhavé—mädhavés;
jälakädibhiù-jälakäs; çobhitam—adorned; térajaiù—growing on the banks;
ca—and; anyaiù—others; nitya-åtubhiù—in all seasons; alam—abundantly;
drumaiù—with trees (bearing flowers and fruits).
TRANSLATION
In that garden there was a very large lake filled with shining golden lotus
flowers and the flowers known as kumuda, kahlära, utpala and çatapatra, which
added excellent beauty to the mountain. There were also bilva, kapittha,
jambéra and bhallätaka trees. Intoxicated bumblebees drank honey and hummed
with the chirping of the birds, whose songs were very melodious. The lake was
crowded with swans, käraëòavas, cakrävakas, cranes, and flocks of water
chickens, dätyühas, koyañöis and other murmuring birds. Because of the
agitating movements of the fish and tortoises, the water was decorated with
pollen that had fallen from the lotus flowers. The lake was surrounded by
kadamba flowers, vetasa flowers, nalas, népas, vaïjulakas, kundas, kurubakas,
açokas, çiréñas, küöajas, iìgudas, kubjakas, svarëa-yüthés, nägas, punnägas, jätés,
mallikäs, çatapatras, jälakäs and mädhavé-latäs. The banks were also abundantly
adorned with varieties of trees that yielded flowers and fruits in all seasons.
Thus the entire mountain stood gloriously decorated.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
65
PURPORT
Judging from the exhaustive description of the lakes and rivers on Triküöa
Mountain, on earth there is no comparison to their super-excellence. On other
planets, however, there are many such wonders. For instance, we understand
that there are two million different types of trees, and not all of them are
exhibited on earth. Çrémad-Bhägavatam presents the total knowledge of the
affairs of the universe. It not only describes this universe, but also takes into
account the spiritual world beyond the universe. No one can challenge the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam's descriptions of the material and spiritual worlds. The
attempts to go from the earth to the moon have failed, but the people of earth
can understand what exists on other planets. There is no need of imagination;
one may take actual knowledge from Çrémad-Bhägavatam and be satisfied.
TEXT 20
Ta}aEk-da TaiÓirk-aNaNaaé[Ya"
k-re<aui>avaRr<aYaUQaPaêrNa( )
Sak-<$=k&- k-Ick-ve<auve}avd(
ivXaal/GauLMa& Pa[åJaNvNaSPaTaqNa( )) 20 ))
tatraikadä tad-giri-känanäçrayaù
kareëubhir väraëa-yütha-paç caran
sakaëöakaà kécaka-veëu-vetravad
viçäla-gulmaà prarujan vanaspatén
SYNONYMS
tatra—therein; ekadä—once upon a time; tat-giri—of that mountain
(Triküöa); känana-äçrayaù—who lives in the forest; kareëubhiù—accompanied
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
66
by female elephants; väraëa-yütha-paù—the leader of the elephants;
caran—while wandering (toward the lake); sa-kaëöakam—a place full of
thorns; kécaka-veëu-vetra-vat—with plants and creepers of different names;
viçäla-gulmam—many thickets; prarujan—breaking; vanaù-patén—trees and
plants.
TRANSLATION
The leader of the elephants who lived in the forest of the mountain Triküöa
once wandered toward the lake with his female elephants. He broke many
plants, creepers, thickets and trees, not caring for their piercing thorns.
TEXT 21
YaÓNDaMaa}aaÖrYaae GaJaeNd]a
VYaaga]adYaae VYaal/Ma*Gaa" Sa%Éa" )
MahaerGaaêaiPa >aYaad( d]viNTa
SaGaaErk*-Z<aa" Xar>aaêMaYaR" )) 21 ))
yad-gandha-mäträd dharayo gajendrä
vyäghrädayo vyäla-mågäù sakhaògäù
mahoragäç cäpi bhayäd dravanti
sagaura-kåñëäù sarabhäç camaryaù
SYNONYMS
yat-gandha-mäträt—simply by the scent of that elephant; harayaù—lions;
gaja-indräù—other elephants; vyäghra-ädayaù—ferocious animals like tigers;
vyäla-mågäù—other ferocious animals; sakhaògäù—rhinoceroses;
mahä-uragäù—big, big serpents; ca—also; api—indeed; bhayät—because of
fear; dravanti—running away; sa—with; gaura-kåñëäù—some of them white,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
67
some of them black; sarabhäù—sarabhas; camaryaù—also camarés.
TRANSLATION
Simply by catching scent of that elephant, all the other elephants, the tigers
and the other ferocious animals, such as lions, rhinoceroses, great serpents and
black and white sarabhas, fled in fear. The camaré deer also fled.
TEXT 22
v*k-a vraha Maihz+aRXaLYaa
GaaePauC^Xaal/av*k-MakR-$=aê )
ANYa}a +aud]a hir<aa" XaXaadYa‚
êrNTYa>aqTaa YadNauGa]he<a )) 22 ))
våkä varähä mahiñarkña-çalyä
gopuccha-çälävåka-markaöäç ca
anyatra kñudrä hariëäù çaçädayaç
caranty abhétä yad-anugraheëa
SYNONYMS
våkäù—foxes; varähäù—boars; mahiña—buffalos; åkña—bears;
çalyäù—porcupines; gopuccha—a type of deer; çälävåka—wolves;
markaöäù—monkeys; ca—and; anyatra—elsewhere; kñudräù—small animals;
hariëäù—deer; çaça-ädayaù—rabbits and others; caranti—roaming (in the
forest); abhétäù—without fear; yat-anugraheëa—by the mercy of that
elephant.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
68
By the mercy of this elephant, animals like the foxes, wolves, buffalos, bears,
boars, gopucchas, porcupines, monkeys, rabbits, the other deer and many other
small animals loitered elsewhere in the forest. They were not afraid of him.
PURPORT
All the animals were practically controlled by this elephant, yet although
they could move without fear, because of respect they did not stand before
him.
TEXTS 23-24
Sa gaMaRTaá" k-iri>a" k-re<aui>a‚
v*RTaae MadCYauTk-r>aErNaud]uTa" )
iGair& GairM<aa PairTa" Pa[k-MPaYaNa(
iNazeVYaMaa<aae_il/ku-lE/MaRdaXaNaE" )) 23 ))
Sarae_iNal&/ PaªJare<auæizTa&
iJaga]iNvdUraNMadivûle/+a<a" )
v*Ta" SvYaUQaeNa Ta*zaidRTaeNa TaTa(
Saraevra>YaaSaMaQaaGaMad( d]uTaMa( )) 24 ))
sa gharma-taptaù karibhiù kareëubhir
våto madacyut-karabhair anudrutaù
girià garimëä paritaù prakampayan
niñevyamäëo 'likulair madäçanaiù
saro 'nilaà paìkaja-reëu-rüñitaà
jighran vidürän mada-vihvalekñaëaù
våtaù sva-yüthena tåñärditena tat
sarovaräbhyäsam athägamad drutam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
69
SYNONYMS
saù—he (the leader of the elephants); gharma-taptaù—perspiring;
karibhiù—by other elephants; kareëubhiù—as well as female elephants;
våtaù—surrounded; mada-cyut—liquor dripping from his mouth;
karabhaiù—by small elephants; anudrutaù—was followed; girim—that
mountain; garimëä—by the weight of the body; paritaù—all around;
prakampayan—causing to tremble; niñevyamäëaù—being served; alikulaiù—by
the bumblebees; mada-açanaiù—who drank honey; saraù—from the lake;
anilam—the breeze; paìkaja-reëu-rüñitam—carrying the dust from the lotus
flowers; jighran—smelling; vidürät—from a distance; mada-vihvala—being
intoxicated; ékñaëaù—whose vision; våtaù—surrounded; sva-yüthena—by his
own associates; tåñärditena—who were afflicted by thirst; tat—that;
sarovara-abhyäsam—to the bank of the lake; atha—thus; agamat—went;
drutam—very soon.
TRANSLATION
Surrounded by the herd's other elephants, including females, and followed
by the young ones, Gajapati, the leader of the elephants, made Triküöa
Mountain tremble all around because of the weight of his body. He was
perspiring, liquor dripped from his mouth, and his vision was overwhelmed by
intoxication. He was being served by bumblebees who drank honey, and from a
distance he could smell the dust of the lotus flowers, which was carried from
the lake by the breeze. Thus surrounded by his associates, who were afflicted by
thirst, he soon arrived at the bank of the lake.
TEXT 25
ivGaaù TaiSMaàMa*TaaMbu iNaMaRl&/
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
70
heMaarivNdaeTPal/re<auæizTaMa( )
PaPaaE iNak-aMa& iNaJaPauZk-raed(Da*Ta‚
MaaTMaaNaMaiÙ" òPaYaNGaTa(c)-Ma" )) 25 ))
vigähya tasminn amåtämbu nirmalaà
hemäravindotpala-reëu-rüñitam
papau nikämaà nija-puñkaroddhåtam
ätmänam adbhiù snapayan gata-klamaù
SYNONYMS
vigähya—entering; tasmin—into the lake; amåta-ambu—water as pure as
nectar; nirmalam—crystal clear; hema—very cold; aravinda-utpala—from the
lilies and lotuses; reëu—with the dust; rüñitam—which was mixed; papau—he
drank; nikämam—until fully satisfied; nija—own; puñkara-uddhåtam—drawing
with his trunk; ätmänam—himself; adbhiù—with water; snapayan—bathing
thoroughly; gata-klamaù—was relieved of all fatigue.
TRANSLATION
The King of the elephants entered the lake, bathed thoroughly and was
relieved of his fatigue. Then, with the aid of his trunk, he drank the cold, clear,
nectarean water, which was mixed with the dust of lotus flowers and water
lilies, until he was fully satisfied.
TEXT 26
Sa PauZk-re<aaed(Da*TaXaqk-raMbui>a‚
iNaRPaaYaYaNSa&òPaYaNYaQaa Ga*hq )
ga*<aq k-re<au" k-r>aa&ê duMaRdae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
71
Naací k*-C^\& k*-Pa<aae_JaMaaYaYaa )) 26 ))
sa puñkareëoddhåta-çékarämbubhir
nipäyayan saàsnapayan yathä gåhé
ghåëé kareëuù karabhäàç ca durmado
näcañöa kåcchraà kåpaëo 'ja-mäyayä
SYNONYMS
saù—he (the leader of the elephants); puñkareëa—with his trunk; uddhåta—by
drawing out; çékara-ambubhiù—and sprinkling the water; nipäyayan—causing
them to drink; saàsnapayan—and bathing them; yathä—as; gåhé—a
householder; ghåëé—always kind (to the members of his family); kareëuù—to
his wives, the female elephants; karabhän—to the children; ca—as well as;
durmadaù—who is too attached to the members of his family; na—not;
äcañöa—considered; kåcchram—hardship; kåpaëaù—being without spiritual
knowledge; aja-mäyayä—because of the influence of the external, illusory
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Like a human being who lacks spiritual knowledge and is too attached to the
members of his family, the elephant, being illusioned by the external energy of
Kåñëa, had his wives and children bathe and drink the water. Indeed, he raised
water from the lake with his trunk and sprayed it over them. He did not mind
the hard labor involved in this endeavor.
TEXT 27
Ta& Ta}a k-iêà*Pa dEvcaeidTaae
Ga]ahae bl/IYaa&êr<ae åzaGa]hqTa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
72
Yad*C^YaEv& VYaSaNa& GaTaae GaJaae
YaQaabl&/ Saae_iTabl/ae ivc§-Mae )) 27 ))
taà tatra kaçcin nåpa daiva-codito
gräho baléyäàç caraëe ruñägrahét
yadåcchayaivaà vyasanaà gato gajo
yathä-balaà so 'tibalo vicakrame
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Gajendra); tatra—there (in the water); kaçcit—someone; nåpa—O
King; daiva-coditaù—inspired by providence; grähaù—crocodile;
baléyän—very powerful; caraëe—his foot; ruñä—angrily; agrahét—captured;
yadåcchayä—occurring due to providence; evam—such; vyasanam—a
dangerous position; gataù—having obtained; gajaù—the elephant;
yathä-balam—according to his strength; saù—he; ati-balaù—with great
endeavor; vicakrame—tried to get out.
TRANSLATION
By the arrangement of providence, O King, a strong crocodile was angry at
the elephant and attacked the elephant's leg in the water. The elephant was
certainly strong, and he tried his best to get free from this danger sent by
providence.
TEXT 28
TaQaaTaur& YaUQaPaiTa& k-re<avae
ivk*-ZYaMaa<a& TarSaa bl/IYaSaa )
ivcu§u-éudsNaiDaYaae_Pare GaJaa"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
73
PaaiZ<aRGa]haSTaariYaTau& Na caXak-Na( )) 28 ))
tathäturaà yütha-patià kareëavo
vikåñyamäëaà tarasä baléyasä
vicukruçur déna-dhiyo 'pare gajäù
pärñëi-grahäs tärayituà na cäçakan
SYNONYMS
tathä—then; äturam—that grave condition; yütha-patim—the leader of the
elephants; kareëavaù—his wives; vikåñyamäëam—being attacked; tarasä—by
the strength; baléyasä—by the strength (of the crocodile); vicukruçuù—began
to cry; déna-dhiyaù—who were less intelligent; apare—the other;
gajäù—elephants; pärñëi-grahäù—grasping him from behind; tärayitum—to
free; na—not; ca—also; açakan—were able.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, seeing Gajendra in that grave condition, his wives felt very, very
sorry and began to cry. The other elephants wanted to help Gajendra, but
because of the crocodile's great strength, they could not rescue him by grasping
him from behind.
TEXT 29
iNaYauDYaTaaereviMa>aeNd]Na§-Yaae‚
ivRk-zRTaaerNTarTaae bihiMaRQa" )
SaMaa" Sahó& VYaGaMaNa( MahqPaTae
SaPa[a<aYaaeiê}aMaMa&SaTaaMara" )) 29 ))
niyudhyator evam ibhendra-nakrayor
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
74
vikarñator antarato bahir mithaù
samäù sahasraà vyagaman mahé-pate
sapräëayoç citram amaàsatämaräù
SYNONYMS
niyudhyatoù—fighting; evam—in this way; ibha-indra—of the elephant;
nakrayoù—and the crocodile; vikarñatoù—pulling; antarataù—in the water;
bahiù—outside the water; mithaù—one another; samäù—years;
sahasram—one thousand; vyagaman—passed; mahé-pate—O King;
sa-präëayoù—both alive; citram—wonderful; amaàsata—considered;
amaräù—the demigods.
TRANSLATION
O King, the elephant and the crocodile fought in this way, pulling one
another in and out of the water, for one thousand years. Upon seeing the fight,
the demigods were very surprised.
TEXT 30
TaTaae GaJaeNd]SYa MaNaaebl/aEJaSaa&
k-ale/Na dqgaeR<a MahaNa>aUd( VYaYa" )
ivk*-ZYaMaa<aSYa Jale/_vSaqdTaae
ivPaYaRYaae_>aUTa( Sak-l&/ Jal/aEk-Sa" )) 30 ))
tato gajendrasya mano-balaujasäà
kälena dérgheëa mahän abhüd vyayaù
vikåñyamäëasya jale 'vasédato
viparyayo 'bhüt sakalaà jalaukasaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
75
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; gaja-indrasya—of the King of the elephants; manaù—of the
strength of enthusiasm; bala—the physical strength; ojasäm—and the strength
of the senses; kälena—because of years of fighting; dérgheëa—prolonged;
mahän—great; abhüt—became; vyayaù—the expenditure;
vikåñyamäëasya—who was being pulled (by the crocodile); jale—into the water
(a foreign place); avasédataù—reduced (mental, physical and sensory
strength); viparyayaù—the opposite; abhüt—became; sakalam—all of them;
jala-okasaù—the crocodile, whose home is the water.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, because of being pulled into the water and fighting for many long
years, the elephant became diminished in his mental, physical and sensual
strength. The crocodile, on the contrary, being an animal of the water,
increased in enthusiasm, physical strength and sensual power.
PURPORT
In the fighting between the elephant and the crocodile, the difference was
that although the elephant was extremely powerful, he was in a foreign place,
in the water. During one thousand years of fighting, he could not get any food,
and under the circumstances his bodily strength diminished, and because his
bodily strength diminished, his mind also became weak and his senses less
powerful. The crocodile, however, being an animal of the water, had no
difficulties. He was getting food and was therefore getting mental strength and
sensual encouragement. Thus while the elephant became reduced in strength,
the crocodile became more and more powerful. Now, from this we may take
the lesson that in our fight with mäyä we should not be in a position in which
our strength, enthusiasm and senses will be unable to fight vigorously. Our
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
76
Kåñëa consciousness movement has actually declared war against the illusory
energy, in which all the living entities are rotting in a false understanding of
civilization. The soldiers in this Kåñëa consciousness movement must always
possess physical strength, enthusiasm and sensual power. To keep themselves
fit, they must therefore place themselves in a normal condition of life. What
constitutes a normal condition will not be the same for everyone, and
therefore there are divisions of varëäçrama-brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya, çüdra,
brahmacarya, gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa. Especially in this age,
Kali-yuga, it is advised that no one take sannyäsa.
açvamedhaà gavälambhaà
sannyäsaà pala-paitåkam
devareëa sutotpattià
kalau païca vivarjayet
[Cc. Ädi 17.164]
(Brahma-vaivarta Puräëa)
From this we can understand that in this age the sannyäsa-äçrama is forbidden
because people are not strong. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu showed us an
example in taking sannyäsa at the age of twenty-four years, but even
Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya advised Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu to be extremely
careful because He had taken sannyäsa at an early age. For preaching we give
young boys sannyäsa, but actually it is being experienced that they are not fit
for sannyäsa. There is no harm, however, if one thinks that he is unfit for
sannyäsa; if he is very much agitated sexually, he should go to the äçrama
where sex is allowed, namely the gåhastha-äçrama. That one has been found to
be very weak in one place does not mean that he should stop fighting the
crocodile of mäyä. One should take shelter of the lotus feet of Kåñëa, as we
shall see Gajendra do, and at the same time one can be a gåhastha if he is
satisfied with sexual indulgence. There is no need to give up the fight. Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore recommended, sthäne sthitäù çruti-gatäà
tanu-vän-manobhiù. One may stay in whichever äçrama is suitable for him; it is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
77
not essential that one take sannyäsa. If one is sexually agitated, he can enter
the gåhastha-äçrama. But one must continue fighting. For one who is not in a
transcendental position, to take sannyäsa artificially is not a very great credit.
If sannyäsa is not suitable, one may enter the gåhastha-äçrama and fight mäyä
with great strength. But one should not give up the fighting and go away.
TEXT 31
wTQa& GaJaeNd]" Sa YadaPa Saª$&=
Pa[a<aSYa dehq ivvXaae Yad*C^Yaa )
APaarYaàaTMaivMaae+a<ae icr&
dDYaaivMaa& buiÖMaQaa>YaPaÛTa )) 31 ))
itthaà gajendraù sa yadäpa saìkaöaà
präëasya dehé vivaço yadåcchayä
apärayann ätma-vimokñaëe ciraà
dadhyäv imäà buddhim athäbhyapadyata
SYNONYMS
ittham—in this way; gaja-indraù—the King of the elephants; saù—he;
yadä—when; äpa—obtained; saìkaöam—such a dangerous position;
präëasya—of life; dehé—who is embodied; vivaçaù—circumstantially helpless;
yadåcchayä—by the will of providence; apärayan—being unable;
ätma-vimokñaëe—to save himself; ciram—for a long time; dadhyau—began to
think seriously; imäm—this; buddhim—decision; atha—thereupon;
abhyapadyata—reached.
TRANSLATION
When the King of the elephants saw that he was under the clutches of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
78
crocodile by the will of providence and, being embodied and circumstantially
helpless, could not save himself from danger, he was extremely afraid of being
killed. He consequently thought for a long time and finally reached the
following decision.
PURPORT
Everyone in the material world is engaged in a struggle for existence.
Everyone tries to save himself from danger, but when one is unable to save
himself, if he is pious, he then takes shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (7.16):
catur-vidhä bhajante mäà
janäù sukåtino 'rjuna
ärto jijïäsur arthärthé
jïäné ca bharatarñabha
Four kinds of pious men—namely, one who is in danger, one who is in need of
money, one who is searching for knowledge and one who is inquisitive—begin
to take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in order to be saved or
to advance. The King of the elephants, in his condition of danger, decided to
seek shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. After considerable thought, he
intelligently arrived at this correct decision. Such a decision is not reached by
a sinful man. Therefore in Bhagavad-gétä it is said that those who are pious
(sukåté) can decide that in a dangerous or awkward condition one should seek
shelter of the lotus feet of Kåñëa.
TEXT 32
Na MaaiMaMae jaTaYa AaTaur& GaJaa"
ku-Ta" k-ir<Ya" Pa[>aviNTa MaaeicTauMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
79
Ga]ahe<a PaaXaeNa ivDaaTaurav*Taae‚
_PYah& c Ta& YaaiMa Par& ParaYa<aMa( )) 32 ))
na mäm ime jïätaya äturaà gajäù
kutaù kariëyaù prabhavanti mocitum
gräheëa päçena vidhätur ävåto
'py ahaà ca taà yämi paraà paräyaëam
SYNONYMS
na—not; mäm—me; ime—all these; jïätayaù—friends and relatives (the other
elephants); äturam—in my distress; gajäù—the elephant; kutaù—how;
kariëyaù—my wives; prabhavanti—are able; mocitum—to deliver (from this
dangerous position); gräheëa—by the crocodile; päçena—by the network of
ropes; vidhätuù—of providence; ävåtaù—captured; api—although (I am in
such a position); aham—I; ca—also; tam—that (Supreme Personality of
Godhead); yämi—take shelter of; param—who is transcendental;
paräyaëam—and who is the shelter of even the exalted demigods like Brahmä
and Çiva.
TRANSLATION
The other elephants, who are my friends and relatives, could not rescue me
from this danger. What then to speak of my wives? They cannot do anything. It
is by the will of providence that I have been attacked by this crocodile, and
therefore I shall seek shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
always the shelter of everyone, even of great personalities.
PURPORT
This material world is described as padaà padaà yad vipadäm [SB 10.14.58],
which means that at every step there is danger. A fool wrongly thinks that he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
80
is happy in this material world, but in fact he is not, for one who thinks that
way is only illusioned. At every step, at every moment, there is danger. In
modern civilization one thinks that if he has a nice home and a nice car his life
is perfect. In the Western countries, especially in America, it is very nice to
possess a good car, but as soon as one is on the road, there is danger because at
any moment an accident may take place and one will be killed. The record
actually shows that so many people die in such accidents. Therefore if we
actually think that this material world is a very happy place, this is our
ignorance. Real knowledge is that this material world is full of danger. We may
struggle for existence as far as our intelligence allows and may try to take care
of ourselves, but unless the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, ultimately
saves us from danger, our attempts will be useless. Therefore Prahläda
Mahäräja says:
bälasya neha çaraëaà pitarau nåsiàha
närtasya cägadam udanvati majjato nauù
taptasya tat-pratividhir ya ihäïjaseñöas
tävad vibho tanu-bhåtäà tvad-upekñitänäm
(SB 7.9.19)
We may invent so many ways to be happy or to counteract the dangers of this
material world, but unless our attempts are sanctioned by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, they will never make us happy. Those who try to be
happy without taking shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are
müòhas, rascals. Na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù prapadyante narädhamäù [Bg. 7.15].
Those who are the lowest of men refuse to take to Kåñëa consciousness because
they think that they will be able to protect themselves without Kåñëa's care.
This is their mistake. The decision of the King of the elephants, Gajendra, was
correct. In such a dangerous position, he sought shelter of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
81
TEXT 33
Ya" k-êNaeXaae bil/Naae_NTak-aerGaaTa(
Pa[c<@veGaadi>aDaavTaae >a*XaMa( )
>aqTa& Pa[Paà& PairPaaiTa YaÙYaa‚
NMa*TYau" Pa[DaavTYar<a& TaMaqMaih )) 33 ))
yaù kaçcaneço balino 'ntakoragät
pracaëòa-vegäd abhidhävato bhåçam
bhétaà prapannaà paripäti yad-bhayän
måtyuù pradhävaty araëaà tam émahi
SYNONYMS
yaù—He who (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); kaçcana—someone;
éçaù—the supreme controller; balinaù—very powerful; antaka-uragät—from
the great serpent of time, which brings death; pracaëòa-vegät—whose force is
fearful; abhidhävataù—who is chasing; bhåçam—endlessly (every hour and
every minute); bhétam—one who is afraid of death; prapannam—who is
surrendered (to the Supreme Personality of Godhead); paripäti—He protects;
yat-bhayät—from fear of the Lord; måtyuù—death itself; pradhävati—runs
away; araëam—the actual shelter of everyone; tam—unto Him; émahi—I
surrender or take shelter.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is certainly not known to everyone,
but He is very powerful and influential. Therefore, although the serpent of
eternal time, which is fearful in force, endlessly chases everyone, ready to
swallow him, if one who fears this serpent seeks shelter of the Lord, the Lord
gives him protection, for even death runs away in fear of the Lord. I therefore
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
82
surrender unto Him, the great and powerful supreme authority who is the
actual shelter of everyone.
PURPORT
One who is intelligent understands that there is a great and supreme
authority above everything. That great authority appears in different
incarnations to save the innocent from disturbances. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä, pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm: [Bg. 4.8] the Lord
appears in His various incarnations for two purposes—to annihilate the
duñkåté, the sinful, and to protect His devotees. The King of the elephants
decided to surrender unto Him. This is intelligent. One must know that great
Supreme Personality of Godhead and surrender unto Him. The Lord comes
personally to instruct us how to be happy, and only fools and rascals do not see
by intelligence this supreme authority, the Supreme Person. In the
çruti-mantra it is said:
bhéñäsmäd vätaù pavate
bhéñodeti süryaù
bhéñäsmäd agniç candraç ca
måtyur dhävati païcamaù
(Taittiréya Upaniñad 2.8)
It is out of fear of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that the wind is
blowing, that the sun is distributing heat and light, and that death is chasing
everyone. Thus there is a supreme controller, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä
(9.10): mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sacaräcaram. This material
manifestation is working so well because of the supreme controller. Any
intelligent person, therefore, can understand that there is a supreme
controller. Furthermore, the supreme controller Himself appears as Lord
Kåñëa, as Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu and as Lord Rämacandra to give us
instructions and to show us by example how to surrender unto the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
83
Personality of Godhead. Yet those who are duñkåté, the lowest of men, do not
surrender (na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù prapadyante narädhamäù [Bg. 7.15]).
In Bhagavad-gétä the Lord clearly says, måtyuù sarva-haraç cäham: [Bg. 10.34]
"I am all-devouring death." Thus måtyu, or death, is the representative who
takes everything away from the living entity who has accepted a material body.
No one can say, "I do not fear death." This is a false proposition. Everyone fears
death. However, one who seeks shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
can be saved from death. One may argue, "Does the devotee not die?" The
answer is that a devotee certainly must give up his body, for the body is
material. The difference is, however, that for one who surrenders to Kåñëa
fully and who is protected by Kåñëa, the present body is his last; he will not
again receive a material body to be subjected to death. This is assured in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.9). Tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm eti so'rjuna: a
devotee, after giving up his body, does not accept a material body, but returns
home, back to Godhead. We are always in danger because at any moment
death can take place. It is not that only Gajendra, the King of the elephants,
was afraid of death. Everyone should fear death because everyone is caught by
the crocodile of eternal time and may die at any moment. The best course,
therefore, is to seek shelter of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
be saved from the struggle for existence in this material world, in which one
repeatedly takes birth and dies. To reach this understanding is the ultimate
goal of life.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Second Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Elephant Gajendra's Crisis."
3. Gajendra's Prayers of Surrender
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
84
In this chapter, the prayers by Gajendra, the King of the elephants, are
described. It appears that the King of the elephants was formerly a human
being known as Indradyumna and that he learned a prayer to the Supreme
Lord. Fortunately he remembered that prayer and began to chant it to himself.
First he offered his respectful obeisances to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and because of his awkward position in having been attacked by the
crocodile, he expressed his inability to recite prayers nicely. Nonetheless, he
tried to chant the mantra and expressed himself in appropriate words as
follows.
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of all causes, the original
person from whom everything has emanated. He is the root cause of this
cosmic manifestation, and the entire cosmos rests in Him, yet He is
transcendental, for He does everything in relation to the material world
through His external energy. He is eternally situated in the spiritual world-in
Vaikuëöha or Goloka Våndävana-where He engages in His eternal pastimes.
The material world is a product of His external energy, or material nature,
which works under His direction. It is thus that creation, maintenance and
annihilation take place. The Lord exists at all times. This is extremely difficult
for a nondevotee to understand. Although the transcendental Supreme
Personality of Godhead is perceivable by everyone, only the pure devotees
perceive His presence and activities. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is
completely free from material birth, death, old age and disease. Indeed, if
anyone in this material world takes shelter of Him, he also becomes situated in
that transcendental position. For the satisfaction of the devotee (pariträëäya
sädhünäm [Bg. 4.8]), the Lord appears and exhibits His activities. His
appearance, disappearance and other pastimes are not at all material. One who
knows this secret can enter the kingdom of God. In the Lord, all opposing
elements are adjusted. The Lord is situated in everyone's heart. He is the
controller of everything, He is the witness of all activities, and He is the
original source of all living entities. Indeed, all living entities are parts of Him,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
85
for He is the origin of Mahä-Viñëu, who is the source of the living entities
within this material world. The Lord can observe the activities of our senses,
which can work and achieve material results because of His mercy. Although
He is the original source of everything, He is untouched by any of His
by-products. In this way He is like a gold mine, which is the source of gold in
ornaments and yet is different from the ornaments themselves. The Lord is
worshiped by the method prescribed in the Païcarätras. He is the source of our
knowledge, and He can give us liberation. Therefore it is our duty to
understand Him according to the instructions of devotees, in particular the
spiritual master. Although for us the mode of goodness is covered, by following
the instructions of saintly persons and the spiritual master we can be freed
from material clutches.
"The self-effulgent material form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
adored by nondevotees, His impersonal form is adored by those advanced in
spiritual knowledge, and His feature as the localized Supersoul is appreciated
by yogés. But His original form as a person is understood only by devotees. That
Supreme Personality of Godhead is competent to dissipate the darkness of the
conditioned soul through His instructions in Bhagavad-gétä. He is the ocean of
transcendental qualities and can be understood only by liberated persons freed
from the bodily concept of life. By His causeless mercy, the Lord can rescue the
conditioned soul from the material clutches and enable him to return home,
back to Godhead, to become His personal associate. Nonetheless, a pure
devotee does not aspire to go back to Godhead; he is simply satisfied with
executing his service in this material world. A pure devotee does not ask
anything from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His only prayer is to be
freed from the material conception of life and to be engaged in the Lord's
transcendental loving service."
In this way the King of the elephants, Gajendra, offered prayers directly to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without mistaking Him for one of the
demigods. None of the demigods came to see him, not even Brahmä or Çiva.
Rather, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, seated on Garuòa,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
86
personally appeared before him. Gajendra, by lifting his trunk, offered
obeisances to the Lord, and the Lord immediately pulled him from the water
along with the crocodile who had captured his leg. Then the Lord killed the
crocodile and thus rescued Gajendra.
TEXT 1
é[qbadraYai<aåvac
Wv& VYaviSaTaae buÖya SaMaaDaaYa MaNaae ôid )
JaJaaPa ParMa& JaaPYa& Pa[aGJaNMaNYaNauiXai+aTaMa( )) 1 ))
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
evaà vyavasito buddhyä
samädhäya mano hådi
jajäpa paramaà jäpyaà
präg-janmany anuçikñitam
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus;
vyavasitaù—fixed; buddhyä—by intelligence; samädhäya—for concentration;
manaù—the mind; hådi—in consciousness or in the heart; jajäpa—he chanted;
paramam—a supreme; jäpyam—mantra he had learned from great devotees;
präk-janmani—in his previous birth; anuçikñitam—practiced.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Thereafter, the King of the elephants,
Gajendra, fixed his mind in his heart with perfect intelligence and chanted a
mantra which he had learned in his previous birth as Indradyumna and which
he remembered by the grace of Kåñëa.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
87
PURPORT
Such remembrance is described in Bhagavad-gétä (6.43-44):
tatra taà buddhi-saàyogaà
labhate paurva-dehikam
yatate ca tato bhüyaù
saàsiddhau kuru-nandana
pürväbhyäsena tenaiva
hriyate hy avaço 'pi saù
In these verses it is assured that even if a person engaged in devotional service
falls down, he is not degraded, but is placed in a position in which he will in
due course of time remember the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
explained later, Gajendra was formerly King Indradyumna, and somehow or
other in his next life he became King of the elephants. Now Gajendra was in
danger, and although he was in a body other than that of a human being, he
remembered the stotra he had chanted in his previous life. Yatate ca tato
bhüyaù saàsiddhau kuru-nandana. To enable one to achieve perfection, Kåñëa
gives one the chance to remember Him again. This is proved here, for although
the King of the elephants, Gajendra, was put in danger, this was a chance for
him to remember his previous devotional activities so that he could
immediately be rescued by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
It is imperative, therefore, that all devotees in Kåñëa consciousness practice
chanting some mantra. Certainly one should chant the Hare Kåñëa mantra,
which is the mahä-mantra, or great mantra, and also one should practice
chanting cintämaëi-prakara-sadmasu or the Nåsiàha strotra (ito nåsiàhaù
parato nåsiàho yato yato yämi tato nåsiàhaù). Every devotee should practice in
order to chant some mantra perfectly so that even though he may be imperfect
in spiritual consciousness in this life, in his next life he will not forget Kåñëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
88
consciousness, even if he becomes an animal. Of course, a devotee should try
to perfect his Kåñëa consciousness in this life, for simply by understanding
Kåñëa and His instructions, after giving up this body one can return home,
back to Godhead. Even if there is some falldown, practice of Kåñëa
consciousness never goes in vain. For example, Ajämila, in his boyhood,
practiced chanting the name of Näräyaëa under the direction of his father,
but later, in his youth, he fell down and became a drunkard, woman-hunter,
rogue and thief. Nonetheless, because of chanting the name of Näräyaëa for
the purpose of calling his son, whom he had named Näräyaëa, he became
advanced, even though he was involved in sinful activities. Therefore, we
should not forget the chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mantra under any
circumstances. It will help us in the greatest danger, as we find in the life of
Gajendra.
TEXT 2
é[qGaJaeNd] ovac
p NaMaae >aGavTae TaSMaE YaTa WTaiÀdaTMak-Ma( )
PauåzaYaaidbqJaaYa PareXaaYaai>aDaqMaih )) 2 ))
çré-gajendra uväca
oà namo bhagavate tasmai
yata etac cid-ätmakam
puruñäyädi-béjäya
pareçäyäbhidhémahi
SYNONYMS
çré-gajendraù uväca—Gajendra, the King of elephants, said; oà—O my Lord;
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; bhagavate—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; tasmai—unto Him; yataù—from whom;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
89
etat—this body and the material manifestation; cit-ätmakam—is moving due
to consciousness (the spirit soul); puruñäya—unto the Supreme Person;
ädi-béjäya—who is the origin or root cause of everything; para-éçäya—who is
supreme, transcendental and worshipable for such exalted persons as Brahmä
and Çiva; abhidhémahi—let me meditate upon Him.
TRANSLATION
The King of the elephants, Gajendra, said: I offer my respectful obeisances
unto the Supreme Person, Väsudeva [oà namo bhagavate väsudeväya]. Because
of Him this material body acts due to the presence of spirit, and He is therefore
the root cause of everyone. He is worshipable for such exalted persons as
Brahmä and Çiva, and He has entered the heart of every living being. Let me
meditate upon Him.
PURPORT
In this verse the words etac cid-ätmakam are very important. The material
body certainly consists only of material elements, but when one awakens to
Kåñëa conscious understanding, the body is no longer material but spiritual.
The material body is meant for sense enjoyment, whereas the spiritual body
engages in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Therefore, a devotee
who engages in the service of the Supreme Lord and who constantly thinks of
Him should never be considered to have a material body. It is therefore
enjoined, guruñu nara-matiù: one should stop thinking of the spiritual master
as an ordinary human being with a material body. Arcye viñëau çilä-dhéù:
everyone knows that the Deity in the temple is made of stone, but to think
that the Deity is merely stone is an offense. Similarly, to think that the body of
the spiritual master consists of material ingredients is offensive. Atheists think
that devotees foolishly worship a stone statue as God and an ordinary man as
the guru. The fact is, however, that by the grace of Kåñëa's omnipotence, the
so-called stone statue of the Deity is directly the Supreme Personality of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
90
Godhead, and the body of the spiritual master is directly spiritual. A pure
devotee who is engaged in unalloyed devotional service should be understood
to be situated on the transcendental platform (sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate [Bg. 14.26]). Let us therefore offer our obeisances unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by whose mercy so-called material things
also become spiritual when they are engaged in spiritual activity.
Oàkära (praëava) is the symbolic sound representation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Oà tat sad iti nirdeço brahmaëas tri-vidhaù småtaù: the
three words oà tat sat immediately invoke the Supreme Person. Therefore
Kåñëa says that He is oàkära in all the Vedic mantras (praëavaù sarva-vedeñu).
The Vedic mantras are pronounced beginning with oàkära to indicate
immediately the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Çrémad-Bhägavatam, for
example, begins with the words oà namo bhagavate väsudeväya. There is no
difference between the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, and
oàkära (praëava). We should be careful to understand that oàkära does not
indicate anything niräkära, or formless. Indeed, this verse immediately says,
oà namo bhagavate. Bhagavän is a person. Thus oàkära is the representation
of the Supreme Person. Oàkära is not meant to be impersonal, as the
Mäyävädé philosophers consider it to be. This is distinctly expressed here by
the word puruñäya. The supreme truth addressed by oàkära is puruña, the
Supreme Person; He is not impersonal. Unless He is a person, how can He
control the great, stalwart controllers of this universe? Lord Viñëu, Lord
Brahmä and Lord Çiva are the supreme controllers of this universe, but Lord
Viñëu is offered obeisances even by Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä. Therefore
this verse uses the word pareçäya, which indicates that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is worshiped by exalted demigods. Pareçäya means
parameçvara. Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva are éçvaras, great controllers, but
Lord Viñëu is parameçvara, the supreme controller.
TEXT 3
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
91
YaiSMaiàd& YaTaêed& YaeNaed& Ya wd& SvYaMa( )
Yaae_SMaaTa( ParSMaaÀ ParSTa& Pa[PaÛe SvYaM>auvMa( )) 3 ))
yasminn idaà yataç cedaà
yenedaà ya idaà svayam
yo 'smät parasmäc ca paras
taà prapadye svayambhuvam
SYNONYMS
yasmin—the basic platform on which; idam—the universe rests; yataù—the
ingredients from which; ca—and; idam—the cosmic manifestation is
produced; yena—by whom; idam—this cosmic manifestation is created and
maintained; yaù—He who; idam—this material world; svayam—is Himself;
yaù—He who; asmät—from the effect (this material world); parasmät—from
the cause; ca—and; paraù—transcendental or different; tam—unto Him;
prapadye—I surrender; svayambhuvam—unto the supreme self-sufficient.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Godhead is the supreme platform on which everything rests,
the ingredient by which everything has been produced, and the person who has
created and is the only cause of this cosmic manifestation. Nonetheless, He is
different from the cause and the result. I surrender unto Him, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is self-sufficient in everything.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (9.4) the Lord says, mayä tatam idaà sarvaà jagad
avyakta-mürtinä: "I am the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but everything
rests upon My energy, just as an earthen pot rests on the earth." The place
where an earthen pot rests is also earth. Then again, the earthen pot is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
92
manufactured by a potter, whose body is a product of earth. The potter's wheel
with which the pot is made is an expansion of earth, and the ingredients from
which the pot are made are also earth. As confirmed in the çruti-mantra, yato
vä imäni bhütäni jäyante. yena jätäni jévanti yat prayanty abhisaàviçanti. The
original cause of everything is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and after
being annihilated, everything enters into Him (prakåtià yänti mämikäm).
Thus the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead—Lord Rämacandra or
Lord Kåñëa—is the original cause of everything.
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
"Kåñëa, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal,
blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is
the prime cause of all causes." (Bs. 5.1) The Lord is the cause for everything,
but there is no cause for Him. Sarvaà khalv idaà brahma. Mat-sthäni
sarva-bhütäni na cähaà teñv avasthitaù [Bg. 9.4]. Although He is everything,
His personality is different from the cosmic manifestation.
TEXT 4
Ya" SvaTMaNaqd& iNaJaMaaYaYaaiPaRTa&
Kvicd( iv>aaTa& Kv c TaTa( iTaraeihTaMa( )
AivÖd*k(- Saa+Yau>aYa& Tadq+aTae
Sa AaTMaMaUl/ae_vTau Maa& ParaTPar" )) 4 ))
yaù svätmanédaà nija-mäyayärpitaà
kvacid vibhätaà kva ca tat tirohitam
aviddha-dåk säkñy ubhayaà tad ékñate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
93
sa ätma-mülo 'vatu mäà parät-paraù
SYNONYMS
yaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead who; sva-ätmani—in Him;
idam—this cosmic manifestation; nija-mäyayä—by His own potency;
arpitam—invested; kvacit—sometimes, at the beginning of a kalpa;
vibhätam—it is manifested; kva ca—sometimes, during dissolution; tat—that
(manifestation); tirohitam—not visible; aviddha-dåk—He sees everything (in
all these circumstances); säkñé—the witness; ubhayam—both (manifestation
and annihilation); tat ékñate—sees everything, without loss of sight; saù—that
Supreme Personality of Godhead; ätma-mülaù—self-sufficient, having no
other cause; avatu—please give protection; mäm—unto me; parät-paraù—He
is transcendental to transcendental, or above all transcendence.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, by expanding His own energy, keeps
this cosmic manifestation visible and again sometimes renders it invisible. He is
both the supreme cause and the supreme result, the observer and the witness, in
all circumstances. Thus He is transcendental to everything. May that Supreme
Personality of Godhead give me protection.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has multipotencies (paräsya çaktir
vividhaiva çrüyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]). Therefore, as soon as He likes,
He uses one of His potencies, and by that expansion He creates this cosmic
manifestation. Again, when the cosmic manifestation is annihilated, it rests in
Him. Nonetheless, He is infallibly the supreme observer. Under any
circumstances, the Supreme Lord is changeless. He is simply a witness and is
aloof from all creation and annihilation.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
94
TEXT 5
k-ale/Na PaÄTviMaTaezu k*-TòXaae
l/aeke-zu Paale/zu c SavRheTauzu )
TaMaSTadaSaqd( GahNa& Ga>aqr&
YaSTaSYa Paare_i>aivraJaTae iv>au" )) 5 ))
kälena païcatvam iteñu kåtsnaço
lokeñu päleñu ca sarva-hetuñu
tamas tadäséd gahanaà gabhéraà
yas tasya päre 'bhiviräjate vibhuù
SYNONYMS
kälena—in due course of time (after millions and millions of years);
païcatvam—when everything illusory is annihilated; iteñu—all
transformations; kåtsnaçaù—with everything within this cosmic manifestation;
lokeñu—all the planets, or everything that exists; päleñu—maintainers like
Lord Brahmä; ca—also; sarva-hetuñu—all causative existences; tamaù—great
darkness; tadä—then; äsét—was; gahanam—very dense; gabhéram—very deep;
yaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead who; tasya—this dark situation;
päre—over and above; abhiviräjate—exists or shines; vibhuù—the Supreme.
TRANSLATION
In due course of time, when all the causative and effective manifestations of
the universe, including the planets and their directors and maintainers, are
annihilated, there is a situation of dense darkness. Above this darkness,
however, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I take shelter of His lotus
feet.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
95
PURPORT
From the Vedic mantras we understand that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is above everything. He is supreme, above all the demigods, including
Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva. He is the supreme controller. When everything
disappears by the influence of His energy, the cosmic situation is one of dense
darkness. The Supreme Lord, however, is the sunshine, as confirmed in the
Vedic mantras: äditya-varëaà tamasaù parastät. In our daily experience, when
we on earth are in the darkness of night, the sun is always luminous
somewhere in the sky. Similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
supreme sun, always remains luminous, even when the entire cosmic
manifestation is annihilated in due course of time.
TEXT 6
Na YaSYa deva ‰zYa" Pad& ivdu‚
JaRNTau" PauNa" k-ae_hRiTa GaNTauMaqirTauMa( )
YaQaa Na$=SYaak*-iTai>aivRceíTaae
durTYaYaaNau§-Ma<a" Sa MaavTau )) 6 ))
na yasya devä åñayaù padaà vidur
jantuù punaù ko 'rhati gantum éritum
yathä naöasyäkåtibhir viceñöato
duratyayänukramaëaù sa mävatu
SYNONYMS
na—neither; yasya—He of whom; deväù—the demigods; åñayaù—great sages;
padam—position; viduù—can understand; jantuù—unintelligent living beings
like animals; punaù—again; kaù—who; arhati—is able; gantum—to enter into
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
96
the knowledge; éritum—or to express by words; yathä—as; naöasya—of the
artist; äkåtibhiù—by bodily features; viceñöataù—dancing in different ways;
duratyaya—very difficult; anukramaëaù—His movements; saù—that Supreme
Personality of Godhead; mä—unto me; avatu—may give His protection.
TRANSLATION
An artist onstage, being covered by attractive dresses and dancing with
different movements, is not understood by his audience; similarly, the activities
and features of the supreme artist cannot be understood even by the demigods
or great sages, and certainly not by those who are unintelligent like animals.
Neither the demigods and sages nor the unintelligent can understand the
features of the Lord, nor can they express in words His actual position. May
that Supreme Personality of Godhead give me protection.
PURPORT
A similar understanding was expressed by Kuntédevé. The Supreme Lord
exists everywhere, within and without. He even exists within the heart.
Sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo [Bg. 15.15]. Éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe
'rjuna tiñöhati [Bg. 18.61]. Thus it is indicated that one can find the Supreme
Lord within one's heart. There are many, many yogés trying to find Him.
Dhyänävasthita-tad-gatena manasä paçyanti yaà yoginaù [SB 12.13.1].
Nonetheless, even great yogés, demigods, saints and sages have been unable to
understand the bodily features of that great artist, nor could they understand
the meaning of His movements. What then is to be said of ordinary speculators
like the so-called philosophers of this material world? For them He is
impossible to understand. Therefore we must accept the statements given by
the Supreme when He kindly incarnates to instruct us. We must simply accept
the word of Lord Rämacandra, Lord Kåñëa and Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
and follow in Their footsteps. Then it may be possible for us to know the
purpose of Their incarnations.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
97
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
(Bg. 4.9)
If by the Lord's grace one can understand Him, one will immediately be
delivered, even within his material body. The material body will no longer
have any function, and whatever activities take place with the body will be
activities of Kåñëa consciousness. In this way one may give up his body and
return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 7
idd*+avae YaSYa Pad& SauMa(r)l&/
ivMau¢-Sa(r)a MauNaYa" SauSaaDav" )
crNTYal/aek-v]TaMav]<a& vNae
>aUTaaTMa>aUTaa" Sauôd" Sa Mae GaiTa" )) 7 ))
didåkñavo yasya padaà sumaìgalaà
vimukta-saìgä munayaù susädhavaù
caranty aloka-vratam avraëaà vane
bhütätma-bhütäù suhådaù sa me gatiù
SYNONYMS
didåkñavaù—those who desire to see (the Supreme Personality of Godhead);
yasya—of Him; padam—the lotus feet; su-maìgalam—all-auspicious;
vimukta-saìgäù—persons who are completely disinfected of material
conditions; munayaù—great sages; su-sädhavaù—those who are highly
elevated in spiritual consciousness; caranti—practice; aloka-vratam—vows of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
98
brahmacarya, vänaprastha or sannyäsa; avraëam—without any fault; vane—in
the forest; bhüta-ätma-bhütäù—those who are equal to all living entities;
suhådaù—those who are friends to everyone; saù—that same Supreme
Personality of Godhead; me—my; gatiù—destination.
TRANSLATION
Renunciants and great sages who see all living beings equally, who are
friendly to everyone and who flawlessly practice in the forest the vows of
brahmacarya, vänaprastha and sannyäsa desire to see the all-auspicious lotus
feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. May that same Supreme
Personality of Godhead be my destination.
PURPORT
This verse describes the qualifications for devotees or persons highly
elevated in spiritual consciousness. Devotees are always equal to everyone,
seeing no distinction between lower and higher classes. paëòitäù
sama-darçinaù [Bg. 5.18]. They look upon everyone as a spirit soul who is part
and parcel of the Supreme Lord. Thus they are competent to search for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Understanding that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the friend of everyone (suhådaà sarva-bhütänäm
[Bg. 5.29]), they act as friends of everyone on behalf of the Supreme Lord.
Making no distinction between one nation and another or one community and
another, they preach Kåñëa consciousness, the teachings of Bhagavad-gétä,
everywhere. Thus they are competent to see the lotus feet of the Lord. Such
preachers in Kåñëa consciousness are called paramahaàsas. As indicated by
the word vimukta-saìga, they have nothing to do with material conditions.
One must take shelter of such a devotee in order to see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
99
TEXTS 8-9
Na ivÛTae YaSYa c JaNMa k-MaR va
Na NaaMaæPae Gau<adaez Wv va )
TaQaaiPa l/aek-aPYaYaSaM>avaYa Ya"
SvMaaYaYaa TaaNYaNauk-al/Ma*C^iTa )) 8 ))
TaSMaE NaMa" PareXaaYa b]ø<ae_NaNTaXa¢-Yae )
AæPaaYaaeåæPaaYa NaMa AaêYaRk-MaR<ae )) 9 ))
na vidyate yasya ca janma karma vä
na näma-rüpe guëa-doña eva vä
tathäpi lokäpyaya-sambhaväya yaù
sva-mäyayä täny anukälam åcchati
tasmai namaù pareçäya
brahmaëe 'nanta-çaktaye
arüpäyoru-rüpäya
nama äçcarya-karmaëe
SYNONYMS
na—not; vidyate—there is; yasya—of whom (the Supreme Personality of
Godhead); ca—also; janma—birth; karma—activities; vä—or; na—nor;
näma-rüpe—any material name or material form; guëa—qualities;
doñaù—fault; eva—certainly; vä—either; tathäpi—still; loka—of this cosmic
manifestation; apyaya—who is the destruction; sambhaväya—and creation;
yaù—He who; sva-mäyayä—by His own potency; täni—activities;
anukälam—eternally; åcchati—accepts; tasmai—unto Him; namaù—I offer my
obeisances; para—transcendental; éçäya—who is the supreme controller;
brahmaëe—who is the Supreme Brahman (Parabrahman);
ananta-çaktaye—with unlimited potency; arüpäya—possessing no material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
100
form; uru-rüpäya—possessing various forms as incarnations; namaù—I offer
my obeisances; äçcarya-karmaëe—whose activities are wonderful.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no material birth, activities, name,
form, qualities or faults. To fulfill the purpose for which this material world is
created and destroyed, He comes in the form of a human being like Lord Räma
or Lord Kåñëa by His original internal potency. He has immense potency, and
in various forms, all free from material contamination, He acts wonderfully. He
is therefore the Supreme Brahman. I offer my respects to Him.
PURPORT
In the Viñëu Puräëa it is said, guëäàç ca doñäàç ca mune vyatéta
samasta-kalyäëa-guëätmako hi. The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no
material form, qualities or faults. He is spiritual and is the only reservoir of all
spiritual qualities. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.8) by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm. The Lord's activities
of saving the devotees and annihilating the demons are transcendental.
Anyone annihilated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead gets the same
result as a devotee who is protected by the Lord; both of them are
transcendentally promoted. The only difference is that a devotee goes directly
to the spiritual planets and becomes an associate of the Supreme Lord, whereas
demons are promoted to brahmaloka, the impersonal effulgence of the Lord.
Both of them, however, are transcendentally promoted. The Lord's killing or
annihilating of the demons is not exactly like the killing of this material world.
Although He appears to act within the modes of material nature, He is
nirguëa, above the modes of nature. His name is not material; otherwise how
could one get liberation by chanting Hare Kåñëa, Hare Räma? The names of
the Lord like Räma and Kåñëa are nondifferent from the person Räma and
Kåñëa. Thus by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra one constantly associates
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
101
with Räma and Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore
becomes liberated. A practical example is Ajämila, who always remained
transcendental to his activities simply by chanting the name Näräyaëa. If this
was true of Ajämila, what is to be said of the Supreme Lord? When the Lord
comes to this material world, He does not become a product of matter. This is
confirmed throughout Bhagavad-gétä (janma-karma ca me divyam [Bg. 4.9],
avajänanti mäà müòhäù mänuñéà tanum äçritam [Bg. 9.11]). Therefore, when
the Supreme Personality of Godhead—Räma or Kåñëa—descends to act
transcendentally for our benefit, we should not consider Him an ordinary
human being. When the Lord comes, He does so on the basis of His spiritual
potency (sambhavämy ätma-mäyayä [Bg. 4.6]). Because He is not forced to
come by the material energy, He is always transcendental. One should not
consider the Supreme Lord an ordinary human being. Material names and
forms are contaminated, but spiritual name and spiritual form are
transcendental.
TEXT 10
NaMa AaTMaPa[dqPaaYa Saai+a<ae ParMaaTMaNae )
NaMaae iGara& ivdUraYa MaNaSaêeTaSaaMaiPa )) 10 ))
nama ätma-pradépäya
säkñiëe paramätmane
namo giräà vidüräya
manasaç cetasäm api
SYNONYMS
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances; ätma-pradépäya—unto Him who is
self-effulgent or who gives enlightenment to the living entities; säkñiëe—who
is situated in everyone's heart as a witness; parama-ätmane—unto the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
102
Soul, the Supersoul; namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances; giräm—by
words; vidüräya—who is impossible to reach; manasaù—by the mind;
cetasäm—or by consciousness; api—even.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the self-effulgent Supersoul, who is the witness in everyone's heart, who
enlightens the individual soul and who cannot be reached by exercises of the
mind, words or consciousness.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, cannot be understood by the
individual soul through mental, physical or intellectual exercises. It is by the
grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that the individual soul is
enlightened. Therefore, the Lord is described here as ätma-pradépa. The Lord is
like the sun, which illuminates everything and cannot be illuminated by
anyone. Therefore, if one is serious about understanding the Supreme, one
must receive enlightenment from Him, as instructed in Bhagavad-gétä. One
cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by one's mental,
physical or intellectual powers.
TEXT 11
SatveNa Pa[iTal/>YaaYa NaEZk-MYaeR<a ivPaiêTaa )
NaMa" kE-vLYaNaaQaaYa iNavaR<aSau%Sa&ivde )) 11 ))
sattvena pratilabhyäya
naiñkarmyeëa vipaçcitä
namaù kaivalya-näthäya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
103
nirväëa-sukha-saàvide
SYNONYMS
sattvena—by pure devotional service; prati-labhyäya—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is achieved by such devotional activities;
naiñkarmyeëa—by transcendental activities; vipaçcitä—by persons who are
sufficiently learned; namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances;
kaivalya-näthäya—unto the master of the transcendental world; nirväëa—for
one completely freed from material activities; sukha—of happiness;
saàvide—who is the bestower.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is realized by pure devotees who act in
the transcendental existence of bhakti-yoga. He is the bestower of
uncontaminated happiness and is the master of the transcendental world.
Therefore I offer my respect unto Him.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be
understood only by devotional service. Bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi
tattvataù [Bg. 18.55]. If one wants to know the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in truth, one must take to the activities of devotional service. These activities
are called sattva or çuddha-sattva. In the material world, activities of goodness,
which are symptomatic of a pure brähmaëa, are appreciated. But the activities
of devotional service are çuddha-sattva; in other words, they are on the
transcendental platform. Only by devotional service can one understand the
Supreme.
Devotional service is called naiñkarmya. Mere negation of material activity
will not endure. Naiñkarmyam apy acyuta-bhäva-varjitam. Unless one performs
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
104
activities with reference to Kåñëa consciousness, cessation of material
activities will not be helpful. In hopes of achieving naiñkarmya, freedom from
material action, many highly elevated sannyäsés stopped their activities, yet
they failed and returned to the material platform to act as materialistic
persons. But once one is engaged in the spiritual activities of bhakti-yoga, one
does not fall down. Our Kåñëa consciousness movement is therefore an
attempt to engage everyone always in spiritual activity, by which one becomes
transcendental to material actions. The spiritual activities of
bhakti-märga-çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù smaraëaà päda-sevanam [SB
7.5.23]—lead one to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore, as stated here, sattvena pratilabhyäya naiñkarmyeëa vipaçcitä: "The
Supreme Personality of Godhead is realized by pure devotees who act in the
transcendental existence of bhakti-yoga."
The Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad (15) says, bhaktir asya bhajanaà tad
ihämutropädhi-nairäsyenaivämuñmin manasaù kalpanam etad eva ca
naiñkarmyam. This is a definition of naiñkarmya. One acts in naiñkarmya when
he fully engages in Kåñëa conscious activities without material desires to enjoy,
either here or in the upper planetary systems, in the present life or in a future
life (iha-amutra). Anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam [Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(73)].
When one is freed from all contamination and he acts in devotional service
under the direction of the spiritual master, one is on the platform of
naiñkarma. By such transcendental devotional service, the Lord is served. I
offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.
TEXT 12
NaMa" XaaNTaaYa gaaeraYa MaU!aYa Gau<aDaiMaR<ae )
iNaivRXaezaYa SaaMYaaYa NaMaae jaNagaNaaYa c )) 12 ))
namaù çäntäya ghoräya
müòhäya guëa-dharmiëe
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
105
nirviçeñäya sämyäya
namo jïäna-ghanäya ca
SYNONYMS
namaù—all obeisances; çäntäya—unto Him who is above all material qualities
and completely peaceful, or unto Väsudeva, the Supersoul in every living
entity; ghoräya—unto the fierce forms of the Lord like Jämadagnya and
Nåsiàhadeva; müòhäya—the form of the Lord as an animal, such as the boar;
guëa-dharmiëe—who accepts different qualities within the material world;
nirviçeñäya—who is without material qualities, being fully spiritual;
sämyäya—Lord Buddha, the form of nirväëa, wherein the material qualities
stop; namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances; jïäna-ghanäya—who is
knowledge or the impersonal Brahman; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Väsudeva, who is all-pervading, to
the Lord's fierce form as Lord Nåsiàhadeva, to the Lord's form as an animal
[Lord Varähadeva], to Lord Dattätreya, who preached impersonalism, to Lord
Buddha, and to all the other incarnations. I offer my respectful obeisances unto
the Lord, who has no material qualities but who accepts the three qualities
goodness, passion and ignorance within this material world. I also offer my
respectful obeisances unto the impersonal Brahman effulgence.
PURPORT
In the previous verses it has been described that although the Supreme
Personality of Godhead has no material form, He accepts innumerable forms
to favor His devotees and kill the demons. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
there are so many incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that
they are like the waves of a river. The waves of a river flow incessantly, and no
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
106
one can count how many waves there are. Similarly, no one can calculate
when and how the different incarnations of the Lord appear according to the
necessities of time, place and candidates. The Lord appears perpetually. As
Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.7):
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend
Myself." In the material world there is always the possibility of deviation from
Kåñëa consciousness, and therefore Kåñëa and His devotees always act in
various forms to curb such godlessness.
Even impersonalists who stress the knowledge feature of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead want to merge in the effulgence of the Lord.
Therefore, here the word jïäna-ghanäya indicates that for atheists who
disbelieve in the form and existence of the Lord, all these various incarnations
appear. Since the Lord comes to teach in so many forms, no one can say that
there is no God. The word jïäna-ghanäya is especially used here to refer to
those whose knowledge has become solidified by dint of their searching for the
Lord through speculative philosophical understanding. Superficial knowledge
is useless for understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but when
one's knowledge becomes extremely intense and deep, one understands
Väsudeva (väsudevaù sarvam iti sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù [Bg. 7.19]). A jïäné
attains this stage after many, many births. Therefore the word jïäna-ghanäya
is used here. The word çantäya indicates that Lord Väsudeva is situated in
everyone's heart but does not act with the living entity. Impersonalist jïänés
realize Väsudeva when they are fully mature in knowledge (väsudevaù samam
iti sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
107
TEXT 13
+ae}ajaYa NaMaSTau>Ya& SavaRDYa+aaYa Saai+a<ae )
PauåzaYaaTMaMaUl/aYa MaUl/Pa[k*-TaYae NaMa" )) 13 ))
kñetra-jïäya namas tubhyaà
sarvädhyakñäya säkñiëe
puruñäyätma-müläya
müla-prakåtaye namaù
SYNONYMS
kñetra-jïäya—unto the one who knows everything of the external body;
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances; tubhyam—unto You;
sarva—everything; adhyakñäya—who are superintending, managing;
säkñiëe—who are the witness, Paramätmä, or antaryämé; puruñäya—the
Supreme Person; ätma-müläya—who are the original source of everything;
müla-prakåtaye—unto the puruña-avatära, the origin of prakåti and pradhäna;
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
I beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are the Supersoul, the
superintendent of everything, and the witness of all that occurs. You are the
Supreme Person, the origin of material nature and of the total material energy.
You are also the owner of the material body. Therefore, You are the supreme
complete. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (13.3) the Lord says, kñetra-jïaà cäpi mäà viddhi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
108
sarva-kñetreñu bhärata: "O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am
also the knower in all bodies." Every one of us is thinking, "I am this body" or
"This is my body," but actually the truth is different. Our bodies are given to us
by the supreme proprietor. The living entity, who is also kñetra jïa, or the
knower of the body, is not the body's only proprietor; the actual proprietor of
the body is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the supreme kñetra
jïa. For example, we may rent and occupy a house, but actually the owner of
the house is the landlord. Similarly, we may be allotted a certain type of body
as a facility with which to enjoy this material world, but the actual proprietor
of the body is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is called sarvädhyakña
because everything in the material world works under His supervision. This is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10), wherein the Lord says, mayädhyakñeëa
prakåtiù süyate sacaräcaram: "This material nature, working under My
direction, O son of Kunté, is producing all moving and unmoving beings." From
prakåti, or material nature, come so many varieties of living entities, including
aquatics, plants, trees, insects, birds, animals, human beings and demigods.
prakåti is the mother, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the father
(ahaà béja-pradaù pitä [Bg. 14.4]).
Prakåti can give us material bodies, but as spirit souls we are parts and
parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (15.7): mamaiväàço jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù. The living
entity, being part and parcel of God, is not a product of this material world.
Therefore the Lord is described in this verse as ätma-müla, the original source
of everything. He is the seed of all existences (béjaà mäà sarva-bhütänäm [Bg.
7.10]). In Bhagavad-gétä (14.4) the Lord says:
sarva-yoniñu kaunteya
mürtayaù sambhavanti yäù
täsäà brahma mahad yonir
ahaà béja-pradaù pitä
"It should be understood that all living entities, in all species of life, O son of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
109
Kunté, are made possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the
seed-giving father." Plants, trees, insects, aquatics, demigods, beasts, birds and
all other living entities are sons or parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, but
because they are struggling with different mentalities, they have been given
different types of bodies (manaù ñañöhänéndriyäëi prakåti-sthäni karñati [Bg.
15.7]). Thus they have become sons of prakåti, or material nature, which is
impregnated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Every living entity in
this material world is struggling for existence, and the only salvation or relief
from the cycle of birth and death in the evolutionary process is full surrender.
This is indicated by the word namaù, "I offer my respectful obeisances unto
You."
TEXT 14
SaveRiNd]YaGau<ad]í\e SavRPa[TYaYaheTave )
ASaTaaC^aYaYaae¢-aYa Sada>aaSaaYa Tae NaMa" )) 14 ))
sarvendriya-guëa-drañöre
sarva-pratyaya-hetave
asatä cchäyayoktäya
sad-äbhäsäya te namaù
SYNONYMS
sarva-indriya-guëa-drañöre—unto the seer of all objectives pursued by the
senses; sarva-pratyaya-hetave—who is the solution to all doubts (and without
whose help one cannot solve all doubts and inabilities); asatä—with the
manifestation of unreality or illusion; chäyayä—because of the resemblance;
uktäya—called; sat—of reality; äbhäsäya—unto the reflection; te—unto You;
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
110
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the observer of all the objectives of the senses. Without
Your mercy, there is no possibility of solving the problem of doubts. The
material world is just like a shadow resembling You. Indeed, one accepts this
material world as real because it gives a glimpse of Your existence.
PURPORT
To paraphrase this verse: "The objectives of sensual activities are actually
observed by You. Without Your direction, the living entity cannot take even a
step forward. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), sarvasya cähaà hådi
sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca. You are situated in everyone's
heart, and only from You come remembrance and forgetfulness. Chäyeva yasya
bhuvanäni bibharti durgä [Bs. 5.44]. The living entity under the clutches of
mäyä wants to enjoy this material world, but unless You give him directions
and remind him, he cannot make progress in pursuing his shadowy objective in
life. The conditioned soul wrongly progresses toward the wrong objective, life
after life, and he is reminded of that objective by You. In one life the
conditioned soul desires to progress toward a certain objective, but after his
body changes, he forgets everything. Nonetheless, my Lord, because he wanted
to enjoy something of this world, You remind him of this in his next birth.
Mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca [Bg. 15.15]. Because the conditioned soul
wants to forget You, by Your grace You give him opportunities, life after life,
by which he can almost perpetually forget You. Therefore You are eternally
the director of the conditioned souls. It is because You are the original cause of
everything that everything appears real. The ultimate reality is Your Lordship,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I offer my respectful obeisances unto
You."
The word sarva-pratyaya-hetave is explained by Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura, who says that a result gives one a glimpse of its cause. For example,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
111
since an earthen pot is the result of the actions of a potter, by seeing the
earthen pot one can guess at the existence of the potter. Similarly, this
material world resembles the spiritual world, and any intelligent person can
guess how it is acting. As explained in Bhagavad-gétä, mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram [Bg. 9.10]. The activities of the material world suggest that
behind them is the superintendence of the Lord.
TEXT 15
NaMaae NaMaSTae_i%l/k-ar<aaYa
iNaZk-ar<aaYaad(>auTak-ar<aaYa )
SavaRGaMaaManaYaMaha<aRvaYa
NaMaae_PavGaaRYa ParaYa<aaYa )) 15 ))
namo namas te 'khila-käraëäya
niñkäraëäyädbhuta-käraëäya
sarvägamämnäya-mahärëaväya
namo 'pavargäya paräyaëäya
SYNONYMS
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances; namaù—again I offer my respectful
obeisances; te—unto You; akhila-käraëäya—unto the supreme cause of
everything; niñkäraëäya—unto You who are causeless; adbhuta-käraëäya—the
wonderful cause of everything; sarva—all; ägama-ämnäya—unto the source of
the paramparä system of all Vedic knowledge; mahä-arëaväya—the great
ocean of knowledge, or the great ocean wherein all the rivers of knowledge
merge; namaù—I offer my obeisances; apavargäya—unto You who can give
deliverance or liberation; para-ayaëäya—the shelter of all transcendentalists.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
112
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the cause of all causes, but You Yourself have no cause.
Therefore You are the wonderful cause of everything. I offer my respectful
obeisances unto You, who are the shelter of the Vedic knowledge contained in
the çästras like the Païcarätras and Vedänta-sütra, which are Your
representations, and who are the source of the paramparä system. Because it is
You who can give liberation, You are the only shelter for all transcendentalists.
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described herein as the wonderful
cause. He is wonderful in the sense that although there may be unlimited
emanations from the Supreme Personality of Godhead (janmädy asya yataù
[SB 1.1.1]), He always remains complete (pürëasya pürëam ädäya pürëam
evävaçiñyate [Éço Invocation]). In our experience in the material world, if we
have a bank balance of one million dollars, as we withdraw money from the
bank the balance gradually diminishes until it becomes nil. However, the
Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, is so complete that although
innumerable Personalities of Godhead expand from Him, He remains the same
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Pürëasya pürëam ädäya pürëam evävaçiñyate.
Therefore He is the wonderful cause. Govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà
bhajämi **.
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
"Kåñëa, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal,
blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
113
the prime cause of all causes." (Bs. 5.1)
Even in this material world, we can understand that the sun has existed for
millions of years and has given off heat and light since its creation, yet the sun
still retains its power and never changes. What then is to be said of the
supreme cause, paraà brahma, Kåñëa? Everything emanates from Him
perpetually, yet He maintains His original form (sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù).
Kåñëa personally says in Bhagavad-gétä (10.8), mattaù sarvaà pravartate:
"Everything emanates from Me." Everything emanates from Kåñëa eternally,
yet He is the same Kåñëa and does not change. Therefore He is the shelter of
all transcendentalists who are eager to get free from material bondage.
Everyone must take shelter of Kåñëa. It is therefore advised:
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"Whether one desires everything or nothing or desires to merge into the
existence of the Lord, he is intelligent only if he worships Lord Kåñëa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, by rendering transcendental loving service."
(SB 2.3.10) Paraà brahma, the Supreme Lord, and paraà dhäma, the supreme
repose, is Kåñëa. Therefore anyone who desires anything—whether he be a
karmé, a jïäné or a yogé—should try to perceive the Supreme Personality of
Godhead very seriously, and all of his desires will be fulfilled. The Lord says, ye
yathä mäà prapadyante täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham: [Bg. 4.11] "As the living
entities surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly." Even the karmé who
wants everything for his enjoyment can get it from Kåñëa. For Kåñëa,
supplying what he wants is not at all difficult. Actually, however, one should
worship Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for the sake of getting
liberation.
Vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15]. By studying the Vedic
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
114
literature, one should understand Kåñëa. As confirmed here,
sarvägamämnäya-mahärëaväya. He is the ocean, and all Vedic knowledge flows
toward Him. Therefore, intelligent transcendentalists take shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà
çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]). This is the ultimate goal.
TEXT 16
Gau<aari<aC^àicduZMaPaaYa
TaT+aae>aivSfU-iJaRTaMaaNaSaaYa )
NaEZk-MYaR>aaveNa ivviJaRTaaGaMa‚
SvYa&Pa[k-aXaaYa NaMaSk-raeiMa )) 16 ))
guëäraëi-cchanna-cid-uñmapäya
tat-kñobha-visphürjita-mänasäya
naiñkarmya-bhävena vivarjitägamasvayaà-
prakäçäya namas karomi
SYNONYMS
guëa—by the three guëas, the modes of material nature (sattva, rajas and
tamas); araëi—by araëi wood; channa—covered; cit—of knowledge;
uñmapäya—unto Him whose fire; tat-kñobha—of the agitation of the modes of
material nature; visphürjita—outside; mänasäya—unto Him whose mind;
naiñkarmya-bhävena—because of the stage of spiritual understanding;
vivarjita—in those who give up; ägama—Vedic principles;
svayam—personally; prakäçäya—unto Him who is manifest; namaù karomi—I
offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
115
My Lord, as the fire in araëi wood is covered, You and Your unlimited
knowledge are covered by the material modes of nature. Your mind, however, is
not attentive to the activities of the modes of nature. Those who are advanced
in spiritual knowledge are not subject to the regulative principles directed in the
Vedic literatures. Because such advanced souls are transcendental, You
personally appear in their pure minds. Therefore I offer my respectful
obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (10.11) it is said:
teñäm evänukampärtham
aham ajïäna-jaà tamaù
näçayämy ätma-bhäva stho
jïäna-dépena bhäsvatä
For a devotee who has taken the lotus feet of the Lord within his heart, the
Lord gives spiritual enlightenment, known as jïäna-dépa, by special mercy
from within. This jïäna-dépa is compared to the fire hidden within araëi wood.
To perform fire sacrifices, great sages previously did not ignite a fire directly;
the fire would be invoked from araëi wood. Similarly, all living entities are
covered by the modes of material nature, and the fire of knowledge can be
ignited only by the Supreme Personality of Godhead when one takes Him
within one's heart. Sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]. If one takes
seriously the lotus feet of Kåñëa, who is seated within one's heart, the Lord
eradicates all ignorance. By the torch of knowledge, one immediately
understands everything properly by the special mercy of the Supreme Lord and
becomes self-realized. In other words, although a devotee may externally not be
very well educated, because of his devotional service the Supreme Personality
of Godhead gives him enlightenment from within. If the Lord gives
enlightenment from within, how can one be in ignorance? Therefore the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
116
allegation of the Mäyävädés that the devotional path is for the unintelligent or
uneducated is untrue.
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
[SB 5.18.12]
If one becomes an unalloyed devotee of the Supreme Lord, he automatically
manifests all good qualities. Such a devotee is above the instructions of the
Vedas. He is a paramahaàsa. Even without going through the Vedic literature,
a devotee becomes pure and enlightened by the mercy of the Lord. "Therefore,
my Lord," the devotee says, "I offer my respectful obeisances unto You."
TEXT 17
Maad*KPa[PaàPaéuPaaXaivMaae+a<aaYa
Mau¢-aYa >aUirk-å<aaYa NaMaae_l/YaaYa )
Sva&XaeNa SavRTaNau>a*NMaNaiSa Pa[TaqTa‚
Pa[TYaGd*Xae >aGavTae b*hTae NaMaSTae )) 17 ))
mädåk prapanna-paçu-päça-vimokñaëäya
muktäya bhüri-karuëäya namo 'layäya
sväàçena sarva-tanu-bhån-manasi pratétapratyag-
dåçe bhagavate båhate namas te
SYNONYMS
mädåk—like me; prapanna—surrendered; paçu—an animal; päça—from
entanglement; vimokñaëäya—unto Him who releases; muktäya—unto the
Supreme, who is untouched by the contamination of material nature;
bhüri-karuëäya—who are unlimitedly merciful; namaù—I offer my respectful
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
117
obeisances; alayäya—who are never inattentive or idle (for the purpose of my
deliverance); sva-aàçena—by Your partial feature as Paramätmä; sarva—of
all; tanu-bhåt—the living entities embodied in material nature; manasi—in the
mind; pratéta—who are acknowledged; pratyak-dåçe—as the direct observer (of
all activities); bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
båhate—who are unlimited; namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances; te—unto
You.
TRANSLATION
Since an animal such as me has surrendered unto You, who are supremely
liberated, certainly You will release me from this dangerous position. Indeed,
being extremely merciful, You incessantly try to deliver me. By your partial
feature as Paramätmä, You are situated in the hearts of all embodied beings.
You are celebrated as direct transcendental knowledge, and You are unlimited. I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The words båhate namas te have been explained by Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura: båhate çré-kåñëäya. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
is Kåñëa. There are many tattvas, such as viñëu-tattva, jéva-tattva and
çakti-tattva, but above everything is the viñëu-tattva, which is all-pervading.
This all-pervading feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is explained
in Bhagavad-gétä (10.42), wherein the Lord says:
athavä bahunaitena
kià jïätena tavärjuna
viñöabhyäham idaà kåtsnam
ekäàçena sthito jagat
"But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a single
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
118
fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe." Thus Kåñëa
says that the entire material world is maintained by His partial representation
as Paramätmä. The Lord enters every universe as Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and
then expands Himself as Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu to enter the hearts of all living
entities and even enter the atoms. Aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham
[Bs. 5.35]. Every universe is full of atoms, and the Lord is not only within the
universe but also within the atoms. Thus within every atom the Supreme Lord
exists in His Viñëu feature as Paramätmä, but all the viñëu-tattvas emanate
from Kåñëa. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (10.2), aham ädir hi devänäm:
Kåñëa is the ädi, or beginning, of the devas of this material world—Brahmä,
Viñëu and Maheçvara. Therefore He is described here as bhagavate båhate.
Everyone is bhagavän—everyone possesses opulence—but Kåñëa is båhän
bhagavän, the possessor of unlimited opulence. Éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù [Bs. 5.1].
Kåñëa is the origin of everyone. Ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù [Bg. 10.8]. Even
Brahmä, Viñëu and Maheçvara come from Kåñëa. Mattaù parataraà nänyat
kiïcid asti dhanaïjaya: [Bg. 7.7] there is no personality superior to Kåñëa.
Therefore Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that bhagavate båhate means
"unto Çré Kåñëa."
In this material world, everyone is a paçu, an animal, because of the bodily
conception of life.
yasyätma-buddhiù kuëape tri-dhätuke
sva-dhéù kalaträdiñu bhauma ijya-dhéù
yat tértha-buddhiù salile na karhicij
janeñv abhijïeñu sa eva go-kharaù
"A human being who identifies the body made of three elements as the self,
who considers the by-products of the body to be his kinsmen, who considers
the land of his birth to be worshipable, and who goes to a place of pilgrimage
simply to bathe rather than to meet men of transcendental knowledge there is
to be considered like a cow or an ass." (SB 10.84.13) Practically everyone,
therefore, is a paçu, an animal, and everyone is attacked by the crocodile of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
119
material existence. Not only the King of the elephants but every one of us is
being attacked by the crocodile and is suffering the consequences.
Only Kåñëa can deliver us from this material existence. Indeed, He is always
trying to deliver us. Éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati [Bg. 18.61].
He is within our hearts and is not at all inattentive. His only aim is to deliver
us from material life. It is not that He becomes attentive to us only when we
offer prayers to Him. Even before we offer our prayers, He incessantly tries to
deliver us. He is never lazy in regard to our deliverance. Therefore this verse
says, bhüri-karuëäya namo 'layäya. It is the causeless mercy of the Supreme
Lord that He always tries to bring us back home, back to Godhead. God is
liberated, and He tries to make us liberated, but although He is constantly
trying, we refuse to accept His instructions (sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm
ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]). Nonetheless, He has not become angry.
Therefore He is described here as bhüri-karuëäya, unlimitedly merciful in
delivering us from this miserable material condition of life and taking us back
home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 18
AaTMaaTMaJaaáGa*hivtaJaNaezu Sa¢E-‚
dRuZPa[aPa<aaYa Gau<aSa(r)ivviJaRTaaYa )
Mau¢-aTMai>a" SvôdYae Pair>aaivTaaYa
jaNaaTMaNae >aGavTae NaMa wRìraYa )) 18 ))
ätmätma-jäpta-gåha-vitta-janeñu saktair
duñpräpaëäya guëa-saìga-vivarjitäya
muktätmabhiù sva-hådaye paribhävitäya
jïänätmane bhagavate nama éçvaräya
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
120
ätma—the mind and body; ätma-ja—sons and daughters; äpta—friends and
relatives; gåha—home, community, society and nation; vitta—wealth;
janeñu—to various servants and assistants; saktaiù—by those who are too
attached; duñpräpaëäya—unto You, who are very difficult to achieve;
guëa-saìga—by the three modes of material nature; vivarjitäya—who are not
contaminated; mukta-ätmabhiù—by persons who are already liberated;
sva-hådaye—within the core of the heart; paribhävitäya—unto You, who are
always meditated upon; jïäna-ätmane—the reservoir of all enlightenment;
bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaù—I offer my
respectful obeisances; éçvaräya—unto the supreme controller.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, those who are completely freed from material contamination
always meditate upon You within the cores of their hearts. You are extremely
difficult to attain for those like me who are too attached to mental concoction,
home, relatives, friends, money, servants and assistants. You are the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, uncontaminated by the modes of nature. You are the
reservoir of all enlightenment, the supreme controller. I therefore offer my
respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead comes into the material
world, He is unaffected by the modes of material nature. This is confirmed in
Éçopaniñad. Apäpa-viddham: He is not contaminated. This same fact is
described here. Guëa-saìga-vivarjitäya. Although the Supreme Personality of
Godhead appears as an incarnation within this material world, He is
unaffected by the modes of material nature. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (9.11),
avajänanti mäà müòhä mänuñéà tanum äçritam: foolish men with insufficient
knowledge deride the Personality of Godhead because He appears just like a
human being. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
121
understood only by the muktätmä, the liberated soul. Muktätmabhiù sva-hådaye
paribhävitäya: only the liberated person can constantly think of Kåñëa. Such a
person is the greatest of all yogés.
yoginäm api sarveñäà
mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù
"Of all yogés, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is
the highest of all." (Bg. 6.47)
TEXT 19
Ya& DaMaRk-aMaaQaRivMaui¢-k-aMaa
>aJaNTa wía& GaiTaMaaPNauviNTa )
ik&- caiXazae raTYaiPa dehMaVYaYa&
k-raeTau Mae_d>a]dYaae ivMaae+a<aMa( )) 19 ))
yaà dharma-kämärtha-vimukti-kämä
bhajanta iñöäà gatim äpnuvanti
kià cäçiño räty api deham avyayaà
karotu me 'dabhra-dayo vimokñaëam
SYNONYMS
yam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead who;
dharma-käma-artha-vimukti-kämäù—persons who desire the four principles of
religion, economic development, sense gratification and salvation;
bhajantaù—by worshiping; iñöäm—the objective; gatim—destination;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
122
äpnuvanti—can achieve; kim—what to speak of; ca—also; äçiñaù—other
benedictions; räti—He bestows; api—even; deham—a body;
avyayam—spiritual; karotu—may He bestow benediction; me—unto me;
adabhra-dayaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is unlimitedly
merciful; vimokñaëam—liberation from the present danger and from the
material world.
TRANSLATION
After worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, those who are
interested in the four principles of religion, economic development, sense
gratification and liberation obtain from Him what they desire. What then is to
be said of other benedictions? Indeed, sometimes the Lord gives a spiritual body
to such ambitious worshipers. May that Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
is unlimitedly merciful, bestow upon me the benediction of liberation from this
present danger and from the materialistic way of life.
PURPORT
Some men within this material world are akämé, free from material desire,
some are ambitious to get more and more material profit, and some desire
fulfillment in religious life, economic development, sense gratification and
finally liberation.
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
(SB 2.3.10)
It is recommended that whatever one's position—whether one demands no
material profit, all material profit or ultimately liberation—one should offer
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
123
his obedient devotional service to the Lord, and one will get what he desires.
Kåñëa is so kind. Ye yathä mäà prapadyante täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham [Bg.
4.11]. The Lord reciprocates. Whatever even an ordinary living entity wants,
Kåñëa gives. Kåñëa is situated in everyone's heart, and He gives that which is
desired by the living entity.
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of
the material energy." (Bg. 18.61) The Lord gives everyone an opportunity to
fulfill his ambitions. Even such a devotee as Dhruva Mahäräja wanted the
material benediction of a kingdom greater than that of his father, and
although he received a spiritual body, he also got the kingdom, for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead does not disappoint anyone who takes shelter
of His lotus feet. Therefore, since Gajendra, King of the elephants, had
surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead to get free from the
present danger and, indirectly, from the present danger of materialistic life,
why should the Supreme Personality of Godhead not fulfill his desire?
TEXTS 20-21
Wk-aiNTaNaae YaSYa Na k-ÄNaaQa|
vaH^iNTa Yae vE >aGavTPa[Paàa" )
ATYad(>auTa& TaÀirTa& SauMa(r)l&/
GaaYaNTa AaNaNdSaMaud]MaGana" )) 20 ))
TaMa+ar& b]ø Par& PareXa‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
124
MaVYa¢-MaaDYaaiTMak-YaaeGaGaMYaMa( )
ATaqiNd]Ya& SaU+MaiMavaiTadUr‚
MaNaNTaMaaÛ& PairPaU<aRMaq@e )) 21 ))
ekäntino yasya na kaïcanärthaà
väïchanti ye vai bhagavat-prapannäù
aty-adbhutaà tac-caritaà sumaìgalaà
gäyanta änanda-samudra-magnäù
tam akñaraà brahma paraà pareçam
avyaktam ädhyätmika-yoga-gamyam
aténdriyaà sükñmam ivätidüram
anantam ädyaà paripürëam éòe
SYNONYMS
ekäntinaù—unalloyed devotees (who have no desire other than Kåñëa
consciousness); yasya—the Lord, of whom; na—not; kaïcana—some;
artham—benediction; väïchanti—desire; ye—those devotees who;
vai—indeed; bhagavat-prapannäù—fully surrendered unto the lotus feet of the
Lord; ati-adbhutam—which are wonderful; tat-caritam—the activities of the
Lord; su-maìgalam—and very auspicious (to hear); gäyantaù—by chanting
and hearing; änanda—of transcendental bliss; samudra—in the ocean;
magnäù—who are immersed; tam—unto Him; akñaram—eternally existing;
brahma—the Supreme; param—transcendental; para-éçam—the Lord of the
supreme personalities; avyaktam—invisible or not able to be realized by the
mind and senses; ädhyätmika—transcendental; yoga—by bhakti-yoga,
devotional service; gamyam—obtainable (bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti);
ati-indriyam—beyond the perception of material senses; sükñmam—minute;
iva—like; ati-düram—very far away; anantam—unlimited; ädyam—the
original cause of everything; paripürëam—completely full; éòe—I offer my
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
125
obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Unalloyed devotees, who have no desire other than to serve the Lord,
worship Him in full surrender and always hear and chant about His activities,
which are most wonderful and auspicious. Thus they always merge in an ocean
of transcendental bliss. Such devotees never ask the Lord for any benediction. I,
however, am in danger. Thus I pray to that Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is eternally existing, who is invisible, who is the Lord of all great
personalities, such as Brahmä, and who is available only by transcendental
bhakti-yoga. Being extremely subtle, He is beyond the reach of my senses and
transcendental to all external realization. He is unlimited, He is the original
cause, and He is completely full in everything. I offer my obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanaà
bhaktir uttamä
[Cc. Madhya 19.167]
(Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11)
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kåñëa
favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive
activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."
Unalloyed devotees have nothing to ask from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but Gajendra, the King of the elephants, was circumstantially asking
for an immediate benediction because he had no other way to be rescued.
Sometimes, when there is no alternative, a pure devotee, being fully dependent
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
126
on the mercy of the Supreme Lord, prays for some benediction. But in such a
prayer there is also regret. One who always hears and chants about the
transcendental pastimes of the Lord is always situated on a platform on which
he has nothing to ask in terms of material benefits. Unless one is a completely
pure devotee, one cannot enjoy the transcendental bliss derived from chanting
and dancing in the ecstasy of the saìkértana movement. Such ecstasy is not
possible for an ordinary devotee. Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu showed us
how one can enjoy transcendental bliss simply by chanting, hearing and
dancing in ecstasy. This is bhakti-yoga. Therefore the King of the elephants,
Gajendra, said, ädhyätmika-yoga-gamyam, indicating that unless one is situated
on this transcendental platform, one cannot approach the Supreme Lord. The
benediction of being able to approach the Lord can be achieved after many,
many births, yet Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has awarded this benediction to
everyone, even to the fallen souls who have no heritage of anything in
spiritual life. That is actually being seen in the Kåñëa consciousness
movement. Therefore the path of bhakti-yoga is the spotless process by which
to approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhaktyäham ekayä grähyaù:
only through devotional service can one approach the Supreme Lord. The
Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.1):
mayy äsakta-manäù pärtha
yogaà yuïjan mad-äçrayaù
asaàçayaà samagraà mäà
yathä jïäsyasi tac chåëu
"Now hear, O son of Påthä [Arjuna], how by practicing yoga in full
consciousness of Me, with mind attached to Me, you can know Me in full, free
from doubt." Simply by being attached to Kåñëa consciousness and by thinking
of the lotus feet of Kåñëa constantly, one can fully understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, without a doubt.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
127
TEXTS 22-24
YaSYa b]øadYaae deva veda l/aek-aêracra" )
NaaMaæPaiv>aedeNa f-LGVYaa c k-l/Yaa k*-Taa" )) 22 ))
YaQaaicRzae_Gane" SaivTauGaR>aSTaYaae
iNaYaaRiNTa Sa&YaaNTYaSak*-Ta( Svraeicz" )
TaQaa YaTaae_Ya& Gau<aSaMPa[vahae
buiÖMaRNa" %aiNa XarqrSaGaaR" )) 23 ))
Sa vE Na devaSaurMaTYaRiTaYaRx(
Na ñq Na z<!ae Na PauMaaNa( Na JaNTau" )
NaaYa& Gau<a" k-MaR Na Saà caSaNa(
iNazeDaXaezae JaYaTaadXaez" )) 24 ))
yasya brahmädayo devä
vedä lokäç caräcaräù
näma-rüpa-vibhedena
phalgvyä ca kalayä kåtäù
yathärciño 'gneù savitur gabhastayo
niryänti saàyänty asakåt sva-rociñaù
tathä yato 'yaà guëa-sampraväho
buddhir manaù khäni çaréra-sargäù
sa vai na deväsura-martya-tiryaì
na stré na ñaëòho na pumän na jantuù
näyaà guëaù karma na san na cäsan
niñedha-çeño jayatäd açeñaù
SYNONYMS
yasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead who; brahma-ädayaù—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
128
great demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä; deväù—and other demigods;
vedäù—the Vedic knowledge; lokäù—different personalities; cara-acaräù—the
moving and the nonmoving (like trees and plants); näma-rüpa—of different
names and different forms; vibhedena—by such divisions; phalgvyä—who are
less important; ca—also; kalayä—by the parts; kåtäù—created; yathä—as;
arciñaù—the sparks; agneù—of fire; savituù—from the sun; gabhastayaù—the
shining particles; niryänti—emanate from; saàyänti—and enter into;
asakåt—again and again; sva-rociñaù—as parts and parcels; tathä—similarly;
yataù—the Personality of Godhead from whom; ayam—this;
guëa-sampravähaù—continuous manifestation of the different modes of
nature; buddhiù manaù—the intelligence and mind; khäni—the senses;
çaréra—of the body (gross and subtle); sargäù—the divisions; saù—that
Supreme Personality of Godhead; vai—indeed; na—is not; deva—demigod;
asura—demon; martya—human being; tiryak—bird or beast; na—neither;
stré—woman; na—nor; ñaëòhaù—neuter; na—neither; pumän—man;
na—nor; jantuù—living being or animal; na ayam—nor is He;
guëaù—material quality; karma—fruitive activity; na—is not;
sat—manifestation; na—nor; ca—also; asat—nonmanifestation; niñedha—of
the discrimination of neti neti ("not this, not this"); çeñaù—He is the end;
jayatät—all glories unto Him; açeñaù—who is unlimited.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead creates His minor parts and parcels,
the jéva-tattva, beginning with Lord Brahmä, the demigods and the expansions
of Vedic knowledge [Säma, Åg, Yajur and Atharva] and including all other
living entities, moving and nonmoving, with their different names and
characteristics. As the sparks of a fire or the shining rays of the sun emanate
from their source and merge into it again and again, the mind, the intelligence,
the senses, the gross and subtle material bodies, and the continuous
transformations of the different modes of nature all emanate from the Lord and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
129
again merge into Him. He is neither demigod nor demon, neither human nor
bird or beast. He is not woman, man, or neuter, nor is He an animal. He is not
a material quality, a fruitive activity, a manifestation or nonmanifestation. He is
the last word in the discrimination of "not this, not this," and He is unlimited.
All glories to the Supreme Personality of Godhead!
PURPORT
This is a summary description of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's
unlimited potency. That supreme one is acting in different phases by
manifesting His parts and parcels, which are all simultaneously differently
situated by His different potencies (paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate [Cc.
Madhya 13.65, purport]). Each and every potency is acting quite naturally
(sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca). Therefore the Lord is unlimited. Na tat-samaç
cäbhyadhikaç ca dåçyate: nothing is equal to Him, nor is anything greater than
Him. Although He manifests Himself in so many ways, personally He has
nothing to do (na tasya käryaà karaëaà ca vidyate), for everything is done by
expansions of His unlimited energies.
TEXT 25
iJaJaqivze NaahiMahaMauYaa ik-‚
MaNTabRihêav*TaYae>aYaaeNYaa )
wC^aiMa k-ale/Na Na YaSYa ivâv‚
STaSYaaTMal/aek-avr<aSYa Maae+aMa( )) 25 ))
jijéviñe näham ihämuyä kim
antar bahiç cävåtayebha-yonyä
icchämi kälena na yasya viplavas
tasyätma-lokävaraëasya mokñam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
130
SYNONYMS
jijéviñe—wish to live long; na—not; aham—I; iha—in this life; amuyä—or in
the next life (I do not wish to live upon being saved from this dangerous
position); kim—what is the value; antaù—internally; bahiù—externally;
ca—and; ävåtayä—covered by ignorance; ibha-yonyä—in this birth as an
elephant; icchämi—I desire; kälena—because of the influence of time;
na—there is not; yasya—of which; viplavaù—annihilation; tasya—that;
ätma-loka-ävaraëasya—from the covering of self-realization;
mokñam—liberation.
TRANSLATION
I do not wish to live anymore after I am released from the attack of the
crocodile. What is the use of an elephant's body covered externally and
internally by ignorance? I simply desire eternal liberation from the covering of
ignorance. That covering is not destroyed by the influence of time.
PURPORT
In this material world, every living entity is covered by the darkness of
ignorance. Therefore the Vedas enjoin that one should approach the Supreme
Lord through the spiritual master, who is described and offered prayers in the
Gautaméya-tantra as follows:
oà ajïäna-timirändhasya
jïänäïjana-çaläkayä
cakñur unmélitaà yena
tasmai çré-gurave namaù
"I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who with the
torchlight of knowledge has opened my eyes, which were blinded by the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
131
darkness of ignorance." Although one may struggle for existence in this
material world, to live forever is impossible. One must understand, however,
that this struggle for existence is due to ignorance, for otherwise every living
being is an eternal part of the Supreme Lord. There is no need to live as an
elephant or man, American or Indian; one should desire only to achieve
liberation from the cycle of birth and death. Because of ignorance, we consider
every life offered by nature to be happy and pleasing, but in the degraded life
within this material world, from the life of Lord Brahmä down to that of an
ant, no one can actually be happy. We are making so many plans to live
happily, but there cannot be any happiness in this material world, however we
may try to make a permanent settlement in this life or that.
TEXT 26
Saae_h& ivìSa*Ja& ivìMaivì& ivìvedSaMa( )
ivìaTMaaNaMaJa& b]ø Pa[<aTaae_iSMa Par& PadMa( )) 26 ))
so 'haà viçva-såjaà viçvam
aviçvaà viçva-vedasam
viçvätmänam ajaà brahma
praëato 'smi paraà padam
SYNONYMS
saù—that; aham—I (the person desiring release from material life);
viçva-såjam—unto Him who has created this cosmic manifestation;
viçvam—who is Himself the whole cosmic presentation; aviçvam—although He
is transcendental to the cosmic manifestation; viçva-vedasam—who is the
knower or ingredient of this universal manifestation; viçva-ätmänam—the soul
of the universe; ajam—who is never born, eternally existing; brahma—the
Supreme; praëataù asmi—I offer my respectful obeisances; param—who is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
132
transcendental; padam—the shelter.
TRANSLATION
Now, fully desiring release from material life, I offer my respectful
obeisances unto that Supreme Person who is the creator of the universe, who is
Himself the form of the universe and who is nonetheless transcendental to this
cosmic manifestation. He is the supreme knower of everything in this world,
the Supersoul of the universe. He is the unborn, supremely situated Lord. I
offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
Sometimes when bhakti-yoga, Kåñëa consciousness, is preached to the
common man, people argue, "Where is Kåñëa? Where is God? Can you show
Him to us?" In this verse the answer is given that if we are sufficiently
intelligent, we must know that there is someone who has created the entire
cosmic manifestation, who has supplied and has become the ingredients for
this cosmic manifestation, who is eternally existing, but who is not within the
cosmic manifestation. Simply on the basis of this suggestion, one can offer
respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Lord. This is the beginning of
devotional life.
TEXT 27
YaaeGariNDaTak-MaaR<aae ôid YaaeGaiv>aaivTae )
YaaeiGaNaae Ya& Pa[PaXYaiNTa YaaeGaeXa& Ta& NaTaae_SMYahMa( )) 27 ))
yoga-randhita-karmäëo
hådi yoga-vibhävite
yogino yaà prapaçyanti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
133
yogeçaà taà nato 'smy aham
SYNONYMS
yoga-randhita-karmäëaù—persons whose reactions to fruitive activities have
been burnt up by bhakti-yoga; hådi—within the core of the heart;
yoga-vibhävite—completely purified and clean; yoginaù—mystics who are
competent; yam—unto the Personality of Godhead who; prapaçyanti—directly
see; yoga-éçam—unto that Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all
mystic yoga; tam—unto Him; nataù asmi—offering obeisances; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme, the Supersoul, the master
of all mystic yoga, who is seen in the core of the heart by perfect mystics when
they are completely purified and freed from the reactions of fruitive activity by
practicing bhakti-yoga.
PURPORT
The King of the elephants, Gajendra, simply accepted that there must be
someone who has created this cosmic manifestation and has supplied its
ingredients. This should be admitted by everyone, even the most determined
atheists. Why, then, do the nondevotees and atheists not admit this? The
reason is that they are polluted by the reactions of their fruitive activities. One
must be freed from all the dirt accumulated within the heart due to fruitive
activities performed one after another. One must wash off this dirt by
practicing bhakti-yoga. Yoga-randhita-karmäëaù. As long as one is covered by
material nature's modes of ignorance and passion, there is no possibility of
understanding the Supreme Lord. Tadä rajas-tamo-bhäväù käma-lobhädayaç ca
ye [SB 1.2.19]. When one is freed from the modes of ignorance and passion, one
becomes free from the lowest qualities-käma and lobha, lust and greed.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
134
Nowadays there are so many yoga schools to encourage people in
developing their lusty desires and greed through the practice of yoga. People
are therefore very much fond of so-called yoga practice. The actual practice of
yoga, however, is described here. As authoritatively stated in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (12.13.1), dhyänävasthita-tad-gatena manasä paçyanti yaà
yoginaù: a yogé is one who always meditates on the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This is also confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.38):
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
yaà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is Çyämasundara, Kåñëa Himself,
with inconceivable innumerable attributes, whom the pure devotees see in
their heart of hearts with the eye of devotion tinged with the salve of love."
The bhakti-yogé constantly sees Çyämasundara—beautiful Lord Kåñëa with His
blackish bodily hue. Because the King of the elephants, Gajendra, thought
himself an ordinary animal, he thought himself unfit to see the Lord. In his
humility, he thought that he could not practice yoga. In other words, how can
those who are like animals in the bodily concept of life, and who have no
purity of consciousness, practice yoga? In the present day, people who have no
control over their senses, who have no understanding of philosophy and who
do not follow religious principles or rules and regulations are nonetheless
pretending to be yogés. This is the greatest anomaly in the practice of mystic
yoga.
TEXT 28
NaMaae NaMaSTau>YaMaSaùveGa‚
Xai¢-}aYaaYaai%l/DaqGau<aaYa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
135
Pa[PaàPaal/aYa durNTaXa¢-Yae
k-idiNd]Yaa<aaMaNavaPYavTMaRNae )) 28 ))
namo namas tubhyam asahya-vegaçakti-
trayäyäkhila-dhé-guëäya
prapanna-päläya duranta-çaktaye
kad-indriyäëäm anaväpya-vartmane
SYNONYMS
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances; namaù—again I offer my respectful
obeisances; tubhyam—unto You; asahya—formidable; vega—forces;
çakti-trayäya—unto the Supreme Person, who has threefold potencies;
akhila—of the universe; dhé—for the intelligence; guëäya—who appears as the
sense objects; prapanna-päläya—unto the Supreme, who gives shelter to the
surrendered; duranta-çaktaye—who possesses energies very difficult to
overcome; kat-indriyäëäm—by persons unable to control their senses;
anaväpya—who is unattainable; vartmane—on the path.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the controller of formidable strength in three kinds of
energy. You appear as the reservoir of all sense pleasure and the protector of the
surrendered souls. You possess unlimited energy, but You are unapproachable
by those who are unable to control their senses. I offer my respectful obeisances
unto You again and again.
PURPORT
Attachment, greed and lust are three formidable forces that prevent one
from concentrating upon the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. These forces act because the Supreme Lord does not like to be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
136
realized by nondevotees and atheists. However, when one surrenders unto the
lotus feet of the Lord, these impediments are withdrawn, and one can realize
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Lord is the protector of
the surrendered soul. One cannot become a devotee until one surrenders unto
the Lord's lotus feet. Then the Lord gives one the intelligence from within by
which one can return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 29
NaaYa& ved SvMaaTMaaNa& YaC^¢-yah&iDaYaa hTaMa( )
Ta& durTYaYaMaahaTMYa& >aGavNTaiMaTaae_SMYahMa( )) 29 ))
näyaà veda svam ätmänaà
yac-chaktyähaà-dhiyä hatam
taà duratyaya-mähätmyaà
bhagavantam ito 'smy aham
SYNONYMS
na—not; ayam—people in general; veda—know; svam—own;
ätmänam—identity; yat-çaktyä—by whose influence; aham—I am
independent; dhiyä—by this intelligence; hatam—defeated or covered;
tam—unto Him; duratyaya—difficult to understand; mähätmyam—whose
glories; bhagavantam—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; itaù—taking
shelter; asmi aham—I am.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
by whose illusory energy the jéva, who is part and parcel of God, forgets his real
identity because of the bodily concept of life. I take shelter of the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
137
Personality of Godhead, whose glories are difficult to understand.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, every living entity—regardless of whether he be
human, demigod, animal, bird, bee or whatever—is part and parcel of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord and the living entity are
intimately related like father and son. Unfortunately, because of material
contact, the living entity forgets this and wants to enjoy the material world
independently, according to his own plan. This illusion (mäyä) is very difficult
to surmount. Mäyä covers the living entity because of his willingness to forget
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and make his own plan to enjoy this
material world. As long as this contamination continues, the conditioned soul
will be unable to understand his real identity and will perpetually continue
under illusion, life after life. Ato gåha-kñetra-sutäpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam
ahaà mameti (SB 5.5.8). As long as the living entity is not enlightened so that
he may understand his real position, he will be attracted to materialistic life, to
house, country or field, to society, sons, family, community, bank balance and
so on. Covered by all this, he will continue to think, "I am this body, and
everything related to this body is mine." This materialistic conception of life is
extremely difficult to surmount, but one who surrenders to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, as did Gajendra, the King of the elephants, comes to
enlightenment on the Brahman platform.
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
"One who is transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman
and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is
equally disposed toward all living entities. In that state he attains pure
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
138
devotional service unto Me." (Bg. 18.54) Since a devotee is completely on the
Brahman platform, he is not jealous of any other living entity (samaù sarveñu
bhüteñu).
TEXT 30
é[qéuk- ovac
Wv& GaJaeNd]MauPavi<aRTaiNaivRXaez&
b]øadYaae ivivDail/(r)i>adai>aMaaNaa" )
NaETae YadaePaSaSa*PauiNaRi%l/aTMak-TvaTa(
Ta}aai%l/aMarMaYaae hirraivraSaqTa( )) 30 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evaà gajendram upavarëita-nirviçeñaà
brahmädayo vividha-liìga-bhidäbhimänäù
naite yadopasasåpur nikhilätmakatvät
taträkhilämara-mayo harir äviräsét
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—in this way;
gajendram—unto the King of the elephants, Gajendra; upavarëita—whose
description; nirviçeñam—not directed to any particular person (but to the
Supreme, although he did not know who the Supreme is);
brahmä-ädayaù—the demigods, beginning with Brahmä, Çiva, Indra and
Candra; vividha—varieties; liìga-bhidä—with separate forms;
abhimänäù—considering themselves separate authorities; na—not; ete—all of
them; yadä—when; upasasåpuù—approached; nikhila-ätmakatvät—because
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Supersoul of everyone;
tatra—there; akhila—of the universe; amara-mayaù—consisting of the
demigods (who are only external parts of the body); hariù—the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
139
Personality of Godhead, who can take away everything; äviräsét—appeared
(before the elephant).
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: When the King of the elephants was
describing the supreme authority, without mentioning any particular person, he
did not invoke the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, Indra and
Candra. Thus none of them approached him. However, because Lord Hari is
the Supersoul, Puruñottama, the Personality of Godhead, He appeared before
Gajendra.
PURPORT
From the description of Gajendra, he apparently was aiming at the supreme
authority although he did not know who the supreme authority is. He
conjectured, "There is a supreme authority who is above everything." Under
the circumstances, the Lord's various expansions, such as Lord Brahmä, Lord
Çiva, Candra and Indra, all thought, "Gajendra is not asking our help. He is
asking the help of the Supreme, who is above all of us." As Gajendra has
described, the Supreme Lord has various parts and parcels, including the
demigods, human beings and animals, all covered by separate forms. Although
the demigods are in charge of maintaining different aspects of the universe,
Gajendra thought that they were unable to rescue him. Harià vinä naiva
måtià taranti: no one can rescue anyone from the dangers of birth, death, old
age and disease. It is only the Supreme Personality of Godhead who can rescue
one from the dangers of material existence. Therefore an intelligent person, to
get free from this dangerous existence, approaches the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, not any demigod. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (7.20), kämais tais
tair håta jïänäù prapadyante 'nya-devatäù: those who are unintelligent
approach the various demigods for temporary material benefits. Actually,
however, these demigods cannot rescue the living entity from the dangers of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
140
material existence. Like other living entities, the demigods are merely external
parts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's transcendental body. As stated
in the Vedic mantras, sa ätma-aìgäny anyä devatäù. Within the body is the
ätmä, the soul, whereas the various parts of the body like the hands and legs
are external. Similarly, the ätmä of the entire cosmic manifestation is
Näräyaëa, Lord Viñëu, and all the demigods, human beings and other living
entities are parts of His body.
It may also be concluded that since a tree lives on the strength of its root
and when the root is nourished with water all the parts of the tree are
nourished, one should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
the original root of everything. Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is very difficult to approach, He is very near to us because He lives within our
hearts. As soon as the Lord understands that one is seeking His favor by fully
surrendering, naturally He immediately takes action. Therefore although the
demigods did not come to the aid of Gajendra, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead immediately appeared before him because of his fervent prayer. This
does not mean that the demigods were angry with Gajendra, for actually when
Lord Viñëu is worshiped, all the other demigods are also worshiped. Yasmin
tuñöe jagat tuñöam: if the Supreme Personality of Godhead is satisfied, everyone
is satisfied.
yathä taror müla-niñecanena
tåpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaçäkhäù
präëopahäräc ca yathendriyäëäà
tathaiva sarvärhaëam acyutejyä
"As pouring water on the root of a tree energizes the trunk, branches, twigs
and everything else, and as supplying food to the stomach enlivens the senses
and limbs of the body, so simply worshiping the Supreme Personality of
Godhead through devotional service automatically satisfies the demigods, who
are parts of that Supreme Personality." (SB 4.31.14) When the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is worshiped, all the demigods are satisfied.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
141
TEXT 31
Ta& TaÜdaTaRMauPal/>Ya JaGaiàvaSa"
STaae}a& iNaXaMYa idivJaE" Sah Sa&STauviÙ" )
^NdaeMaYaeNa Gaå@eNa SaMauùMaaNa‚
ê§-aYauDaae_>YaGaMadaéu YaTaae GaJaeNd]" )) 31 ))
taà tadvad ärtam upalabhya jagan-niväsaù
stotraà niçamya divijaiù saha saàstuvadbhiù
chandomayena garuòena samuhyamänaç
cakräyudho 'bhyagamad äçu yato gajendraù
SYNONYMS
tam—unto him (Gajendra); tadvat—in that way; ärtam—who was very
depressed (because of being attacked by the crocodile);
upalabhya—understanding; jagat-niväsaù—the Lord, who exists everywhere;
stotram—the prayer; niçamya—hearing; divijaiù—the denizens of the
heavenly planets; saha—with; saàstuvadbhiù—who were offering their prayers
also; chandomayena—with the speed He desired; garuòena—by Garuòa;
samuhyamänaù—being carried; cakra—carrying His disc; äyudhaù—and other
weapons, like the club; abhyagamat—arrived; äçu—immediately;
yataù—where; gajendraù—the King of the elephants, Gajendra, was situated.
TRANSLATION
After understanding the awkward condition of Gajendra, who had offered
his prayers, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, who lives everywhere,
appeared with the demigods, who were offering prayers to Him. Carrying His
disc and other weapons, He appeared there on the back of His carrier, Garuòa,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
142
with great speed, according to His desire. Thus He appeared before Gajendra.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura specifically hints that since Gajendra
was in such a difficult position and was praying for the mercy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the demigods, who could have immediately gone to his
rescue, hesitated to go there. Since they considered Gajendra's prayer to be
directed toward the Lord, they felt offended, and this in itself was offensive.
Consequently, when the Lord went there, they also went and offered prayers
to the Lord so that their offense might be excused.
TEXT 32
Saae_NTa"SarSYauåble/Na Ga*hqTa AaTaaeR
d*îa GaåTMaiTa hir& % oPaatac§-Ma( )
oiT+aPYa SaaMbuJak-r& iGarMaah k*-C^\a‚
àaraYa<aai%l/Gaurae >aGavNa( NaMaSTae )) 32 ))
so 'ntaù-sarasy urubalena gåhéta ärto
dåñövä garutmati harià kha upätta-cakram
utkñipya sämbuja-karaà giram äha kåcchrän
näräyaëäkhila-guro bhagavan namas te
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Gajendra); antaù-sarasi—in the water; uru-balena—with great force;
gåhétaù—who had been captured by the crocodile; ärtaù—and severely
suffering; dåñövä—upon seeing; garutmati—on the back of Garuòa; harim—the
Lord; khe—in the sky; upätta-cakram—wielding His disc; utkñipya—raising;
sa-ambuja-karam—his trunk, along with a lotus flower; giram-äha—uttered
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
143
the words; kåcchrät—with great difficulty (because of his precarious position);
näräyaëa—O my Lord Näräyaëa; akhila-guro—O universal Lord;
bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaù te—I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You.
TRANSLATION
Gajendra had been forcefully captured by the crocodile in the water and was
feeling acute pain, but when he saw that Näräyaëa, wielding His disc, was
coming in the sky on the back of Garuòa, he immediately took a lotus flower in
his trunk, and with great difficulty due to his painful condition, he uttered the
following words: "O my Lord, Näräyaëa, master of the universe, O Supreme
Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You."
PURPORT
The King of the elephants was so very eager to see the Supreme Personality
of Godhead that when he saw the Lord coming in the sky, with great pain and
in a feeble voice he offered respect to the Lord. A devotee does not consider a
dangerous position to be dangerous, for in such a dangerous position he can
fervently pray to the Lord in great ecstasy. Thus a devotee regards danger as a
good opportunity. Tat te'nukampäà susamékñamäëaù. When a devotee is in
great danger, he sees that danger to be the great mercy of the Lord because it is
an opportunity to think of the Lord very sincerely and with undiverted
attention. Tat te 'nukampäà susamékñamäëo bhuïjäna evätma-kåtaà vipäkam
(SB 10.14.8). He does not accuse the Supreme Personality of Godhead for
having let His devotee fall into such a dangerous condition. Rather, he
considers that dangerous condition to be due to his past misdeeds and takes it
as an opportunity to pray to the Lord and offer thanks for having been given
such an opportunity. When a devotee lives in this way, his salvation—his
going back home, back to Godhead—is guaranteed. We can see this to be true
from the example of Gajendra, who anxiously prayed to the Lord and thus
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
144
received an immediate chance to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 33
Ta& vq+Ya Paqi@TaMaJa" SahSaavTaqYaR
SaGa]ahMaaéu SarSa" k*-PaYaaeÂhar )
Ga]ahad( ivPaai$=TaMau%adir<aa GaJaeNd]&
Sa&PaXYaTaa& hirrMaUMaucduiC^\Yaa<aaMa( )) 33 ))
taà vékñya péòitam ajaù sahasävatérya
sa-gräham äçu sarasaù kåpayojjahära
grähäd vipäöita-mukhäd ariëä gajendraà
saàpaçyatäà harir amümucad ucchriyäëäm
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Gajendra); vékñya—after seeing (in that condition); péòitam—who
was very aggrieved; ajaù—the unborn, the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sahasä—all of a sudden; avatérya—getting down (from the back of Garuòa);
sa-gräham—with the crocodile; äçu—immediately; sarasaù—from the water;
kåpayä—out of great mercy; ujjahära—took out; grähät—from the crocodile;
vipäöita—separated; mukhät—from the mouth; ariëä—with the disc;
gajendram—Gajendra; sampaçyatäm—who were looking on; hariù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; amüm—him (Gajendra); ucat—saved;
ucchriyäëäm—in the presence of all the demigods.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, seeing Gajendra in such an aggrieved position, the unborn
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, immediately got down from the back of
Garuòa by His causeless mercy and pulled the King of the elephants, along with
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
145
the crocodile, out of the water. Then, in the presence of all the demigods, who
were looking on, the Lord severed the crocodile's mouth from its body with His
disc. In this way He saved Gajendra, the King of the elephants.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Third Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Gajendra's Prayers of Surrender."
4. Gajendra Returns to the Spiritual World
This Fourth Chapter describes the previous birth of Gajendra and the
crocodile. It tells how the crocodile became a Gandharva and how Gajendra
became an associate of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
There was a king on the Gandharva planet whose name was Hühü. Once
this King Hühü was enjoying with women in the water, and while enjoying he
pulled the leg of Devala Åñi, who was also taking a bath in the water. Upon
this, the sage became very angry and immediately cursed him to become a
crocodile. King Hühü was very sorry when cursed in that way, and he begged
pardon from the sage, who in compassion gave him the benediction that he
would be freed when Gajendra was delivered by the Personality of Godhead.
Thus the crocodile was delivered when killed by Näräyaëa.
When Gajendra, by the mercy of the Lord, became one of the Lord's
associates in Vaikuëöha, he got four hands. This achievement is called
särüpya-mukti, or the liberation of receiving a spiritual body exactly like that
of Näräyaëa. Gajendra, in his previous birth, had been a great devotee of Lord
Viñëu. His name was Indradyumna, and he was the King of the Tämila
country. Following the Vedic principles, this King retired from family life and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
146
constructed a small cottage in the Malayäcala Hills, where he always worshiped
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in silence. Agastya Åñi, along with many
disciples, once approached King Indradyumna's äçrama, but because the King
was meditating on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he could not receive
Agastya Åñi properly. Thus the åñi became very angry and cursed the King to
become a dull elephant. In accordance with this curse, the King was born as an
elephant, and he forgot all about his previous activities in devotional service.
Nonetheless, in his birth as an elephant, when he was dangerously attacked by
the crocodile, he remembered his past life in devotional service and
remembered a prayer he had learned in that life. Because of this prayer, he
again received the mercy of the Lord. Thus he was immediately delivered, and
he became one of the Lord's four-handed associates.
Çukadeva Gosvämé ends this chapter by describing the good fortune of the
elephant. Çukadeva Gosvämé says that by hearing the narration of Gajendra's
deliverance, one can also get the opportunity to be delivered. Çukadeva
Gosvämé vividly describes this, and thus the chapter ends.
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
Tada devizRGaNDavaR b]øeXaaNaPauraeGaMaa" )
MauMaucu" ku-SauMaaSaar& Xa&SaNTa" k-MaR TaÖre" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
tadä devarñi-gandharvä
brahmeçäna-purogamäù
mumucuù kusumäsäraà
çaàsantaù karma tad dhareù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
147
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tadä—at that time (when
Gajendra was delivered); deva-åñi-gandharväù—the demigods, sages and
Gandharvas; brahma-éçäna-purogamäù—headed by Lord Brahmä and Lord
Çiva; mumucuù—showered; kusuma-äsäram—a covering of flowers;
çaàsantaù—while praising; karma—transcendental activity; tat—that
(gajendra-mokñaëa); hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: When the Lord delivered Gajendra, King of the
elephants, all the demigods, sages and Gandharvas, headed by Brahmä and Çiva,
praised this activity of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and showered
flowers upon both the Lord and Gajendra.
PURPORT
It is evident from this chapter that great sages like Devala Åñi, Närada
Muni and Agastya Muni will sometimes curse someone. The curse of such a
personality, however, is in fact a benediction. Both the crocodile, who had
been a Gandharva in his previous life, and Gajendra, who had been a king
named Indradyumna, were cursed, but both of them benefited. Indradyumna,
in his birth as an elephant, attained salvation and became a personal associate
of the Lord in Vaikuëöha, and the crocodile regained his status as a
Gandharva. We find evidence in many places that the curse of a great saint or
devotee is not a curse but a benediction.
TEXT 2
NaeduduRNdu>aYaae idVYaa GaNDavaR NaNa*TauJaRGau" )
‰zYaêar<aa" iSaÖaSTauíuvu" PauåzaetaMaMa( )) 2 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
148
nedur dundubhayo divyä
gandharvä nanåtur jaguù
åñayaç cäraëäù siddhäs
tuñöuvuù puruñottamam
SYNONYMS
neduù—vibrated; dundubhayaù—kettledrums; divyäù—in the sky of the higher
planetary system; gandharväù—residents of Gandharvaloka; nanåtuù—danced;
jaguù—and sang; åñayaù—all the saintly sages; cäraëäù—the inhabitants of
the Cäraëa planet; siddhäù—the inhabitants of the Siddha planet;
tuñöuvuù—offered prayers; puruña-uttamam—to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Puruñottama, the best of males.
TRANSLATION
There was a beating of kettledrums in the heavenly planets, the inhabitants
of Gandharvaloka began to dance and sing, while great sages and the inhabitants
of Cäraëaloka and Siddhaloka offered prayers to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Puruñottama.
TEXTS 3-4
Yaae_SaaE Ga]ah" Sa vE SaÛ" ParMaaêYaRæPaDa*k(- )
Mau¢-ae devl/XaaPaeNa hUhUGaRNDavRSataMa" )) 3 ))
Pa[<aMYa iXarSaaDaqXaMautaMaëaek-MaVYaYaMa( )
AGaaYaTa YaXaaeDaaMa k-ITaRNYaGau<aSaTk-QaMa( )) 4 ))
yo 'sau grähaù sa vai sadyaù
paramäçcarya-rüpa-dhåk
mukto devala-çäpena
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
149
hühür gandharva-sattamaù
praëamya çirasädhéçam
uttama-çlokam avyayam
agäyata yaço-dhäma
kértanya-guëa-sat-katham
SYNONYMS
yaù—he who; asau—that; grähaù—became a crocodile; saù—he; vai—indeed;
sadyaù—immediately; parama—very nice; äçcarya—wonderful;
rüpa-dhåk—possessing the form (of his original Gandharva position);
muktaù—was delivered; devala-çäpena—by the cursing of Devala Åñi;
hühüù—whose name was formerly Hühü; gandharva-sattamaù—the best of
Gandharvaloka; praëamya—offering his obeisances; çirasä—by the head;
adhéçam—unto the supreme master; uttama-çlokam—who is worshiped by the
choicest verses; avyayam—who is the supreme eternal; agäyata—he began to
chant; yaçaù-dhäma—the glories of the Lord;
kértanya-guëa-sat-katham—whose transcendental pastimes and qualities are
glorious.
TRANSLATION
The best of the Gandharvas, King Hühü, having been cursed by Devala
Muni, had become a crocodile. Now, having been delivered by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he assumed a very beautiful form as a Gandharva.
Understanding by whose mercy this had happened, he immediately offered his
respectful obeisances with his head and began chanting prayers just suitable for
the transcendental Lord, the supreme eternal, who is worshiped by the choicest
verses.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
150
The story of how the Gandharva had become a crocodile will be described
later. The curse by which the Gandharva took this position was actually a
blessing, not a curse. One should not be displeased when a saintly person
curses someone, for his curse, indirectly, is a blessing. The Gandharva had the
mentality of an inhabitant of the celestial planetary system, and for him to
become an associate of the Supreme Lord would have taken millions of long
years. However, because he was cursed by Devala Åñi, he became a crocodile
and in only one life was fortunate enough to see the Supreme Personality of
Godhead face to face and be promoted to the spiritual world to become one of
the Lord's associates. Similarly, Gajendra was also delivered by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead when he was freed from the curse of Agastya Muni.
TEXT 5
Saae_Nauk-iMPaTa wRXaeNa Pair§-MYa Pa[<aMYa TaMa( )
l/aek-SYa PaXYaTaae l/aek&- SvMaGaaNMau¢-ik-iLbz" )) 5 ))
so 'nukampita éçena
parikramya praëamya tam
lokasya paçyato lokaà
svam agän mukta-kilbiñaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (King Hühü); anukampitaù—being favored; éçena—by the Supreme
Lord; parikramya—circumambulating; praëamya—offering his obeisances;
tam—unto Him; lokasya—all the demigods and men; paçyataù—while seeing;
lokam—to the planet; svam—his own; agät—went back; mukta—being
delivered; kilbiñaù—from the reactions of his sin.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
151
TRANSLATION
Having been favored by the causeless mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and having regained his original form, King Hühü circumambulated
the Lord and offered his obeisances. Then, in the presence of all the demigods,
headed by Brahmä, he returned to Gandharvaloka. He had been freed of all
sinful reactions.
TEXT 6
GaJaeNd]ae >aGavTSPaXaaRd( ivMau¢-ae_jaNabNDaNaaTa( )
Pa[aáae >aGavTaae æPa& PaqTavaSaaêTau>auRJa" )) 6 ))
gajendro bhagavat-sparçäd
vimukto 'jïäna-bandhanät
präpto bhagavato rüpaà
péta-väsäç catur-bhujaù
SYNONYMS
gajendraù—the King of the elephants, Gajendra; bhagavat-sparçät—because of
being touched by the hand of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vimuktaù—was immediately freed; ajïäna-bandhanät—from all kinds of
ignorance, especially the bodily concept of life; präptaù—achieved;
bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rüpam—the same bodily
features; péta-väsäù—wearing yellow garments; catuù-bhujaù—and
four-handed, with conchshell, disc, club and lotus.
TRANSLATION
Because Gajendra, King of the elephants, had been touched directly by the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
152
hands of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he was immediately freed of all
material ignorance and bondage. Thus he received the salvation of
särüpya-mukti, in which he achieved the same bodily features as the Lord,
being dressed in yellow garments and possessing four hands.
PURPORT
If one is favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead by having his gross
body touched by the Lord, his body turns into a spiritual body, and he can go
back home, back to Godhead. Gajendra assumed a spiritual body when his
body was touched by the Lord. Similarly, Dhruva Mahäräja assumed his
spiritual body in this way. Arcanä-paddhati, daily worship of the Deity,
provides an opportunity to touch the body of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and thus it enables one to be fortunate enough to get a spiritual
body and go back to Godhead. Not only by touching the body of the Supreme
Lord, but simply by hearing about His pastimes, chanting His glories, touching
His feet and offering worship—in other words, by serving the Lord somehow
or other—one is purified of material contamination. This is the result of
touching the Supreme Lord. One who is a pure devotee (anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam
[Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(74)]), who acts according to the çästra and the
words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, certainly becomes purified.
Like Gajendra, he assumes a spiritual body and returns home, back to
Godhead.
TEXT 7
Sa vE PaUvRMa>aUd( raJaa Paa<@yae d]iv@SataMa" )
wNd]ÛuMan wiTa :YaaTaae ivZ<auv]TaParaYa<a" )) 7 ))
sa vai pürvam abhüd räjä
päëòyo draviòa-sattamaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
153
indradyumna iti khyäto
viñëu-vrata-paräyaëaù
SYNONYMS
saù—this elephant (Gajendra); vai—indeed; pürvam—formerly; abhüt—was;
räjä—a king; päëòyaù—of the country known as Päëòya;
draviòa-sat-tamaù—the best of those born in Draviòa-deça, South India;
indradyumnaù—by the name Mahäräja Indradyumna; iti—thus;
khyätaù—celebrated; viñëu-vrata-paräyaëaù—who was a first-class Vaiñëava,
always engaged in the service of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
This Gajendra had formerly been a Vaiñëava and the king of the country
known as Päëòya, which is in the province of Draviòa [South India]. In his
previous life, he was known as Indradyumna Mahäräja.
TEXT 8
Sa Wk-daraDaNak-al/ AaTMavaNa(
Ga*hqTaMaaENav]Ta wRìr& hirMa( )
Ja$=aDarSTaaPaSa AaPlu/Taae_CYauTa&
SaMacRYaaMaaSa ku-l/acl/aé[Ma" )) 8 ))
sa ekadärädhana-käla ätmavän
gåhéta-mauna-vrata éçvaraà harim
jaöä-dharas täpasa äpluto 'cyutaà
samarcayäm äsa kuläcaläçramaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
154
SYNONYMS
saù—that Indradyumna Mahäräja; ekadä—once upon a time;
ärädhana-käle—at the time of worshiping the Deity; ätmavän—engaged in
devotional service in meditation with great attention; gåhéta—taken;
mauna-vrataù—the vow of silence (not talking with anyone); éçvaram—the
supreme controller; harim—the Personality of Godhead; jaöä-dharaù—with
matted locks; täpasaù—always engaged in austerity; äplutaù—always merged in
love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead; acyutam—the infallible Lord;
samarcayäm äsa—was worshiping; kuläcala-äçramaù—he made his äçrama in
Kuläcala (the Malaya Hills).
TRANSLATION
Indradyumna Mahäräja retired from family life and went to the Malaya
Hills, where he had a small cottage for his äçrama. He wore matted locks on his
head and always engaged in austerities. Once, while observing a vow of silence,
he was fully engaged in the worship of the Lord and absorbed in the ecstasy of
love of Godhead.
TEXT 9
Yad*C^Yaa Ta}a MahaYaXaa MauiNa"
SaMaaGaMaiC^ZYaGa<aE" Pairié[Ta" )
Ta& vq+Ya TaUZ<aqMak*-TaahR<aaidk&-
rhSYauPaaSaqNaMa*izêuk-aePa h )) 9 ))
yadåcchayä tatra mahä-yaçä muniù
samägamac chiñya-gaëaiù pariçritaù
taà vékñya tüñëém akåtärhaëädikaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
155
rahasy upäsénam åñiç cukopa ha
SYNONYMS
yadåcchayä—out of his own will (without being invited); tatra—there;
mahä-yaçäù—very celebrated, well-known; muniù—Agastya Muni;
samägamat—arrived; çiñya-gaëaiù—by his disciples; pariçritaù—surrounded;
tam—him; vékñya—seeing; tüñëém—silent; akåta-arhaëa-ädikam—without
offering a respectful reception; rahasi—in a secluded place; upäsénam—sitting
in meditation; åñiù—the great sage; cukopa—became very angry; ha—it so
happened.
TRANSLATION
While Indradyumna Mahäräja was engaged in ecstatic meditation,
worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the great sage Agastya Muni
arrived there, surrounded by his disciples. When the Muni saw that Mahäräja
Indradyumna, who was sitting in a secluded place, remained silent and did not
follow the etiquette of offering him a reception, he was very angry.
TEXT 10
TaSMaa wMa& XaaPaMadadSaaDau‚
rYa& duraTMaak*-TabuiÖrÛ )
ivPa[avMaNTaa ivXaTaa& TaiMaó&
YaQaa GaJa" STaBDaMaiTa" Sa Wv )) 10 ))
tasmä imaà çäpam adäd asädhur
ayaà durätmäkåta-buddhir adya
viprävamantä viçatäà tamisraà
yathä gajaù stabdha-matiù sa eva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
156
SYNONYMS
tasmai—unto Mahäräja Indradyumna; imam—this; çäpam—curse; adät—he
gave; asädhuù—not at all gentle; ayam—this; durätmä—degraded soul;
akåta—without education; buddhiù—his intelligence; adya—now; vipra—of a
brähmaëa; avamantä—insulter; viçatäm—let him enter; tamisram—darkness;
yathä—as; gajaù—an elephant; stabdha-matiù—possessing blunt intelligence;
saù—he; eva—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Agastya Muni then spoke this curse against the King: This King
Indradyumna is not at all gentle. Being low and uneducated, he has insulted a
brähmaëa. May he therefore enter the region of darkness and receive the dull,
dumb body of an elephant.
PURPORT
An elephant is very strong, it has a very big body, and it can work very hard
and eat a large quantity of food, but its intelligence is not at all commensurate
with its size and strength. Thus in spite of so much bodily strength, the
elephant works as a menial servant for a human being. Agastya Muni thought
it wise to curse the King to become an elephant because the powerful King did
not receive Agastya Muni as one is obliged to receive a brähmaëa. Yet
although Agastya Muni cursed Mahäräja Indradyumna to become an elephant,
the curse was indirectly a benediction, for by undergoing one life as an
elephant, Indradyumna Mahäräja ended the reactions for all the sins of his
previous life. Immediately after the expiry of the elephant's life, he was
promoted to Vaikuëöhaloka to become a personal associate of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, in a body exactly like that of the Lord. This
is called särüpya-mukti.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
157
TEXTS 11-12
é[qéuk- ovac
Wv& XaPTva GaTaae_GaSTYaae >aGavaNa( Na*Pa SaaNauGa" )
wNd]ÛuManae_iPa raJaizRidRí& TaduPaDaarYaNa( )) 11 ))
AaPaà" k-aEÅrq& YaaeiNaMaaTMaSMa*iTaivNaaiXaNaqMa( )
hYaRcRNaaNau>aaveNa YaÓJaTve_PYaNauSMa*iTa" )) 12 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evaà çaptvä gato 'gastyo
bhagavän nåpa sänugaù
indradyumno 'pi räjarñir
diñöaà tad upadhärayan
äpannaù kauïjaréà yonim
ätma-småti-vinäçiném
hary-arcanänubhävena
yad-gajatve 'py anusmåtiù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; çaptvä—after
cursing; gataù—left that place; agastyaù—Agastya Muni; bhagavän—so
powerful; nåpa—O King; sa-anugaù—with his associates;
indradyumnaù—King Indradyumna; api—also; räjarñiù—although he was a
räjarñi; diñöam—because of past deeds; tat—that curse;
upadhärayan—considering; äpannaù—got; kauïjarém—of an elephant;
yonim—the species; ätma-småti—remembrance of one's identity;
vinäçiném—which destroys; hari—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
arcana-anubhävena—because of worshiping; yat—that; gajatve—in the body of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
158
an elephant; api—although; anusmåtiù—the opportunity to remember his past
devotional service.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, after Agastya Muni had thus
cursed King Indradyumna, the Muni left that place along with his disciples.
Since the King was a devotee, he accepted Agastya Muni's curse as welcome
because it was the desire of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore,
although in his next life he got the body of an elephant, because of devotional
service he remembered how to worship and offer prayers to the Lord.
PURPORT
This is the unique position of a devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Although the King was cursed, he welcomed the curse because a
devotee is always aware that nothing can happen without the desire of the
Supreme Lord. Although the King was not at fault, Agastya Muni cursed him,
and when this happened the King considered it to be due to his past misdeeds.
Tat te 'nukampäà susamékñamäëaù (SB 10.14.8). This is a practical example of
how a devotee thinks. He regards any reverses in life as blessings of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, instead of being agitated by such
reverses, he continues his activities of devotional service, and Kåñëa takes care
of him and enables him to be promoted to the spiritual world, back to
Godhead. If a devotee has to suffer the reactions of his past misdeeds, the
Supreme Lord arranges for him to be given only a token of these reactions, and
very soon he is freed from all the reactions of material contamination. One
should therefore adhere to devotional service, and the Lord Himself will very
soon see to one's promotion to the spiritual world. A devotee should not be
disturbed by unfortunate circumstances, but must continue his regular
program, depending on the Lord for everything. The word upadhärayan,
"considering," is very significant in this verse. This word indicates that a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
159
devotee knows what is what; he understands what is happening in material,
conditional life.
TEXT 13
Wv& ivMaae+Ya GaJaYaUQaPaMaBJaNaa>a‚
STaeNaaiPa PaazRdGaiTa& GaiMaTaeNa Yau¢-" )
GaNDavRiSaÖivbuDaEåPaGaqYaMaaNa‚
k-MaaRd(>auTa& Sv>avNa& Gaå@aSaNaae_GaaTa( )) 13 ))
evaà vimokñya gaja-yütha-pam abja-näbhas
tenäpi pärñada-gatià gamitena yuktaù
gandharva-siddha-vibudhair upagéyamänakarmädbhutaà
sva-bhavanaà garuòäsano 'gät
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; vimokñya—delivering; gaja-yütha-pam—the King of the
elephants, Gajendra; abja-näbhaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, from
whose navel sprouts a lotus flower; tena—by him (Gajendra); api—also;
pärñada-gatim—the position of the Lord's associate; gamitena—who had
already gotten; yuktaù—accompanied; gandharva—by the denizens of
Gandharvaloka; siddha—the denizens of Siddhaloka; vibudhaiù—and by all
great learned sages; upagéyamäna—were being glorified; karma—whose
transcendental activities; adbhutam—all-wonderful; sva-bhavanam—to His
own abode; garuòa-äsanaù—sitting on the back of Garuòa; agät—returned.
TRANSLATION
Upon delivering the King of the elephants from the clutches of the crocodile,
and from material existence, which resembles a crocodile, the Lord awarded him
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
160
the status of särüpya-mukti. In the presence of the Gandharvas, the Siddhas
and the other demigods, who were praising the Lord for His wonderful
transcendental activities, the Lord, sitting on the back of His carrier, Garuòa,
returned to His all-wonderful abode and took Gajendra with Him.
PURPORT
In this verse the word vimokñya is significant. For a devotee, mokña or
mukti—salvation—means getting the position of the Lord's associate. The
impersonalists are satisfied to get the liberation of merging in the Brahman
effulgence, but for a devotee, mukti (liberation) means not to merge in the
effulgence of the Lord, but to be directly promoted to the Vaikuëöha planets
and to become an associate of the Lord. In this regard, there is a relevant verse
in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.14.8):
tat te 'nukampäà susamékñamäëo
bhuïjäna evätma-kåtaà vipäkam
håd-väg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te
jéveta yo mukti-pade sa däya-bhäk
"One who seeks Your compassion and thus tolerates all kinds of adverse
conditions due to the karma of his past deeds, who engages always in Your
devotional service with his mind, words and body, and who always offers
obeisances unto You, is certainly a bona fide candidate for liberation." A
devotee who tolerates everything in this material world and patiently executes
his devotional service can become mukti-pade sa däya-bhäk, a bona fide
candidate for liberation. The word däya-bhäk refers to a hereditary right to the
Lord's mercy. A devotee must simply engage in devotional service, not caring
about material situations. Then he automatically becomes a rightful candidate
for promotion to Vaikuëöhaloka. The devotee who renders unalloyed service
to the Lord gets the right to be promoted to Vaikuëöhaloka, just as a son
inherits the property of his father.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
161
When a devotee gets liberation, he becomes free from material
contamination and engages as a servant of the Lord. This is explained in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.10.6): muktir hitvänyathä rüpaà svarüpena vyavasthitiù.
The word svarüpa refers to särüpya-mukti—going back home, back to
Godhead, and remaining the Lord's eternal associate, having regained a
spiritual body exactly resembling that of the Lord, with four hands, holding
the çaìkha, cakra, gadä and padma. The difference between the mukti of the
impersonalist and that of the devotee is that the devotee is immediately
appointed an eternal servant of the Lord, whereas the impersonalist, although
merging in the effulgence of the brahmajyoti, is still insecure and therefore
generally falls again to this material world. Äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà
tataù patanty adho 'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù (SB 10.2.32). Although the
impersonalist rises to the Brahman effulgence and enters into that effulgence,
he has no engagement in the service of the Lord, and therefore he is again
attracted to materialistic philanthropic activities. Thus he comes down to open
hospitals and educational institutions, feed poor men and perform similar
materialistic activities, which the impersonalist thinks are more precious than
serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Anädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù. The
impersonalists do not think that the service of the Lord is more valuable than
serving the poor man or starting a school or hospital. Although they say
brahma satyaà jagan mithyä—"Brahman is real, and the material world is
false"—they are nonetheless very eager to serve the false material world and
neglect the service of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 14
WTaNMaharaJa TaveirTaae MaYaa
k*-Z<aaNau>aavae GaJaraJaMaae+a<aMa( )
SvGYa| YaXaSYa& k-il/k-LMazaPah&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
162
du"SvPanNaaXa& ku-åvYaR é*<vTaaMa( )) 14 ))
etan mahä-räja taverito mayä
kåñëänubhävo gaja-räja-mokñaëam
svargyaà yaçasyaà kali-kalmañäpahaà
duùsvapna-näçaà kuru-varya çåëvatäm
SYNONYMS
etat—this; mahä-räja—O King Parékñit; tava—unto you; éritaù—described;
mayä—by me; kåñëa-anubhävaù—the unlimited potency of Lord Kåñëa (by
which He can deliver a devotee); gaja-räja-mokñaëam—delivering the King of
the elephants; svargyam—giving elevation to higher planetary systems;
yaçasyam—increasing one's reputation as a devotee;
kali-kalmaña-apaham—diminishing the contamination of the Kali-yuga;
duùsvapna-näçam—counteracting the causes of bad dreams; kuru-varya—O
best among the Kurus; çåëvatäm—of persons who hear this narration.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, I have now described the wonderful power of Kåñëa,
as displayed when the Lord delivered the King of the elephants. O best of the
Kuru dynasty, those who hear this narration become fit to be promoted to the
higher planetary systems. Simply because of hearing this narration, they gain a
reputation as devotees, they are unaffected by the contamination of Kali-yuga,
and they never see bad dreams.
TEXT 15
YaQaaNauk-ITaRYaNTYaeTaC^\eYaSk-aMaa iÜJaaTaYa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
163
éucYa" Pa[aTaåTQaaYa du"SvPanaÛuPaXaaNTaYae )) 15 ))
yathänukértayanty etac
chreyas-kämä dvijätayaù
çucayaù prätar utthäya
duùsvapnädy-upaçäntaye
SYNONYMS
yathä—without deviation; anukértayanti—they chant; etat—this narration of
the deliverance of Gajendra; çreyaù-kämäù—persons who desire their own
auspiciousness; dvi-jätayaù—the twice-born (brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas);
çucayaù—especially the brähmaëas, who are always clean; prätaù—in the
morning; utthäya—after getting up from sleep; duùsvapna-ädi—beginning
with sleeping badly at night; upaçäntaye—to counteract all troublesome
positions.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, after getting up from bed in the morning, those who desire their
own welfare—especially the brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and in particular the
brähmaëa Vaiñëavas—should chant this narration as it is, without deviation, to
counteract the troubles of bad dreams.
PURPORT
Every verse in the Vedic literature, especially in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam
and Bhagavad-gétä, is a Vedic mantra. Here the words yathänukértayanti are
used to recommend that this literature be presented as it is. Unscrupulous
persons, however, deviate from the actual narration and interpret the text in
their own way with grammatical jugglery. Such deviations are to be avoided.
This is a Vedic injunction supported by Çukadeva Gosvämé, one of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
164
mahäjanas, or authorities. He says, yathänukértayanti: one should recite the
mantra as it is, without deviation, for then one will be eligible to rise to the
platform of all good fortune. Çukadeva Gosvämé especially recommends that
those who are brähmaëas (çucayaù) recite all these mantras after rising from
bed in the morning.
Because of sinful activities, at night we have bad dreams, which are very
troublesome. Indeed, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was obliged to see hell because of a
slight deviation from devotional service to the Lord. Therefore,
duùsvapna—bad dreams—occur because of sinful activities. A devotee
sometimes accepts a sinful person as his disciple, and to counteract the sinful
reactions he accepts from the disciple, he has to see a bad dream. Nonetheless,
the spiritual master is so kind that in spite of having bad dreams due to the
sinful disciple, he accepts this troublesome business for the deliverance of the
victims of Kali-yuga. After initiation, therefore, a disciple should be extremely
careful not to commit again any sinful act that might cause difficulties for
himself and the spiritual master. Before the Deity, before the fire, before the
spiritual master and before the Vaiñëavas, the honest disciple promises to
refrain from all sinful activity. Therefore he must not again commit sinful acts
and thus create a troublesome situation.
TEXT 16
wdMaah hir" Pa[qTaae GaJaeNd]& ku-åSataMa )
é*<vTaa& SavR>aUTaaNaa& SavR>aUTaMaYaae iv>au" )) 16 ))
idam äha hariù préto
gajendraà kuru-sattama
çåëvatäà sarva-bhütänäà
sarva-bhüta-mayo vibhuù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
165
SYNONYMS
idam—this; äha—said; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
prétaù—being pleased; gajendram—unto Gajendra; kuru-sat-tama—O best of
the Kuru dynasty; çåëvatäm—hearing; sarva-bhütänäm—in the presence of
everyone; sarva-bhüta-mayaù—all-pervading Personality of Godhead;
vibhuù—the great.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Kuru dynasty, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Supersoul of everyone, being thus pleased, addressed Gajendra in the presence
of everyone there. He spoke the following blessings.
TEXTS 17-24
é[q>aGavaNauvac
Yae Maa& Tva& c Sarêed& iGairk-Ndrk-aNaNaMa( )
ve}ak-Ick-ve<aUNaa& GauLMaaiNa SaurPaadPaaNa( )) 17 ))
é*(r)a<aqMaaiNa iDaZ<YaaiNa b]ø<aae Mae iXavSYa c )
+aqraed& Mae iPa[Ya& DaaMa ìeTaÜqPa& c >aaSvrMa( )) 18 ))
é[qvTSa& k-aESTau>a& Maal/a& Gada& k-aEMaaedk-I& MaMa )
SaudXaRNa& PaaÄJaNYa& SauPa<a| PaTaGaeìrMa( )) 19 ))
Xaez& c MaTk-l/a& SaU+Maa& ié[Ya& devq& Madaé[YaaMa( )
b]øa<a& NaardMa*iz& >av& Pa[hadMaev c )) 20 ))
MaTSYakU-MaRvrahaÛErvTaarE" k*-TaaiNa Mae )
k-MaaR<YaNaNTaPau<YaaiNa SaUYa| SaaeMa& huTaaXaNaMa( )) 21 ))
Pa[<av& SaTYaMaVYa¢&- GaaeivPa[aNa( DaMaRMaVYaYaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
166
da+aaYa<aqDaRMaRPaÒq" SaaeMak-XYaPaYaaeriPa )) 22 ))
Ga(r)a& SarSvTaq& NaNda& k-ail/Ndq& iSaTavar<aMa( )
Da]uv& b]ø‰zqNSaá Pau<Yaëaek-a&ê MaaNavaNa( )) 23 ))
oTQaaYaaParra}aaNTae Pa[YaTaa" SauSaMaaihTaa" )
SMariNTa MaMa æPaai<a MauCYaNTae Tae_&hSaae_i%l/aTa( )) 24 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
ye mäà tväà ca saraç cedaà
giri-kandara-känanam
vetra-kécaka-veëünäà
gulmäni sura-pädapän
çåìgäëémäni dhiñëyäni
brahmaëo me çivasya ca
kñérodaà me priyaà dhäma
çveta-dvépaà ca bhäsvaram
çrévatsaà kaustubhaà mäläà
gadäà kaumodakéà mama
sudarçanaà päïcajanyaà
suparëaà patageçvaram
çeñaà ca mat-kaläà sükñmäà
çriyaà devéà mad-äçrayäm
brahmäëaà näradam åñià
bhavaà prahrädam eva ca
matsya-kürma-varähädyair
avatäraiù kåtäni me
karmäëy ananta-puëyäni
süryaà somaà hutäçanam
praëavaà satyam avyaktaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
167
go-viprän dharmam avyayam
däkñäyaëér dharma-patnéù
soma-kaçyapayor api
gaìgäà sarasvatéà nandäà
kälindéà sita-väraëam
dhruvaà brahma-åñén sapta
puëya-çlokäàç ca mänavän
utthäyäpara-rätränte
prayatäù susamähitäù
smaranti mama rüpäëi
mucyante te 'àhaso 'khilät
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; ye—those
who; mäm—Me; tväm—you; ca—also; saraù—lake; ca—also; idam—this;
giri—hill (Triküöa Mountain); kandara—caves; känanam—gardens; vetra—of
cane; kécaka—hollow bamboo; veëünäm—and of another kind of bamboo;
gulmäni—clusters; sura-pädapän—celestial trees; çåìgäëi—the peaks;
imäni—these; dhiñëyäni—abodes; brahmaëaù—of Lord Brahmä; me—of Me;
çivasya—of Lord Çiva; ca—also; kñéra-udam—the ocean of milk; me—My;
priyam—very dear; dhäma—place; çveta-dvépam—known as the white island;
ca—also; bhäsvaram—always brilliant with spiritual rays; çrévatsam—the mark
named Çrévatsa; kaustubham—the Kaustubha gem; mäläm—garland;
gadäm—club; kaumodakém—known as Kaumodaké; mama—My;
sudarçanam—Sudarçana disc; päïcajanyam—conchshell named Päïcajanya;
suparëam—Garuòa; pataga-éçvaram—the king of all birds; çeñam—the resting
place Çeña Näga; ca—and; mat-kaläm—My expanded part; sükñmäm—very
subtle; çriyam devém—the goddess of fortune; mat-äçrayäm—all dependent
upon Me; brahmäëam—Lord Brahmä; näradam åñim—the great saint Närada
Muni; bhavam—Lord Çiva; prahrädam eva ca—as well as Prahläda;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
168
matsya—the Matsya incarnation; kürma—the Kürma incarnation;
varäha—the boar incarnation; ädyaiù—and so on; avatäraiù—by different
incarnations; kåtäni—done; me—My; karmäëi—activities; ananta—unlimited;
puëyäni—auspicious, pious; süryam—the sun-god; somam—the moon-god;
hutäçanam—the fire-god; praëavam—the oàkära mantra; satyam—the
Absolute Truth; avyaktam—the total material energy; go-viprän—the cows
and brähmaëas; dharmam—devotional service; avyayam—never ending;
däkñäyaëéù—the daughters of Dakña; dharma-patnéù—bona fide wives;
soma—of the moon-god; kaçyapayoù—and of the great åñi Kaçyapa; api—also;
gaìgäm—the River Ganges; sarasvatém—the River Sarasvaté; nandäm—the
River Nandä; kälindém—the River Yamunä; sita-väraëam—the elephant
Airävata; dhruvam—Dhruva Mahäräja; brahma-åñén—great åñis; sapta—seven;
puëya-çlokän—extremely pious; ca—and; mänavän—human beings;
utthäya—getting up; apara-rätra-ante—at the end of the night;
prayatäù—being very careful; su-samähitäù—with concentrated minds;
smaranti—remember; mama—My; rüpäëi—forms; mucyante—are delivered;
te—such persons; aàhasaù—from sinful reactions; akhilät—of all kinds.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Freed from all sinful reactions
are those who rise from bed at the end of night, early in the morning, and fully
concentrate their minds with great attention upon My form; your form; this
lake; this mountain; the caves; the gardens; the cane plants; the bamboo plants;
the celestial trees; the residential quarters of Me, Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva;
the three peaks of Triküöa Mountain, made of gold, silver and iron; My very
pleasing abode [the ocean of milk]; the white island, Çvetadvépa, which is
always brilliant with spiritual rays; My mark of Çrévatsa; the Kaustubha gem;
My Vaijayanté garland; My club, Kaumodaké; My Sudarçana disc and
Päïcajanya conchshell; My bearer, Garuòa, the king of the birds; My bed, Çeña
Näga; My expansion of energy the goddess of fortune; Lord Brahmä; Närada
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
169
Muni; Lord Çiva; Prahläda; My incarnations like Matsya, Kürma and Varäha;
My unlimited all-auspicious activities, which yield piety to he who hears them;
the sun; the moon; fire; the mantra oàkära; the Absolute Truth; the total
material energy; the cows and brähmaëas; devotional service; the wives of Soma
and Kaçyapa, who are all daughters of King Dakña; the Rivers Ganges,
Sarasvaté, Nandä and Yamunä [Kälindé]; the elephant Airävata; Dhruva
Mahäräja; the seven åñis; and the pious human beings.
TEXT 25
Yae Maa& STauvNTYaNaeNaa(r) Pa[iTabuDYa iNaXaaTYaYae )
Taeza& Pa[a<aaTYaYae cah& ddaiMa ivPaul/a& GaiTaMa( )) 25 ))
ye mäà stuvanty anenäìga
pratibudhya niçätyaye
teñäà präëätyaye cähaà
dadämi vipuläà gatim
SYNONYMS
ye—those who; mäm—unto Me; stuvanti—offer prayers; anena—in this way;
aìga—O King; pratibudhya—getting up; niça-atyaye—at the end of night;
teñäm—for them; präëa-atyaye—at the time of death; ca—also; aham—I;
dadämi—give; vipuläm—the eternal, unlimited; gatim—transferral to the
spiritual world.
TRANSLATION
My dear devotee, unto those who rise from bed at the end of night and offer
Me the prayers offered by you, I give an eternal residence in the spiritual world
at the end of their lives.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
170
TEXT 26
é[qéuk- ovac
wTYaaidXYa ôzqke-Xa" Pa[aDMaaYa Jal/JaaetaMaMa( )
hzRYaiNvbuDaaNaqk-Maaåraeh %GaaiDaPaMa( )) 26 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ity ädiçya håñékeçaù
prädhmäya jalajottamam
harñayan vibudhänékam
äruroha khagädhipam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; ädiçya—advising;
håñékeçaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, known as Håñékeça;
prädhmäya—blowing; jala-ja-uttamam—the conchshell, the best of the
aquatics; harñayan—pleasing; vibudha-anékam—the host of demigods, headed
by Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva; äruroha—got up; khaga-adhipam—on the back
of Garuòa.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After giving this instruction, the Lord,
who is known as Håñékeça, bugled with His Päïcajanya conchshell, in this way
pleasing all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä. Then He mounted the back
of His carrier, Garuòa.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Fourth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Gajendra Returns to the Spiritual World."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
171
5. The Demigods Appeal to the Lord for Protection
This chapter describes the fifth and sixth Manus, and it also describes the
prayers of the demigods and the curse of Durväsä Muni.
The brother of Tämasa, the fourth Manu, who has previously been
described, was the fifth Manu, Raivata. The sons of Raivata included Arjuna,
Bali and Vindhya. During the reign of this Manu, Indra, the King of heaven,
was known as Vibhu. Among the demigods were the Bhütarayas, and among
the seven åñis were Hiraëyaromä, Vedaçirä and Ürdhvabähu. The åñi known as
Çubhra, by his wife, Vikuëöhä, gave birth to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Vaikuëöha. This Supreme Personality of Godhead manifested a
Vaikuëöha planet at the request of Ramädevé. His power and activities are
mentioned in the Third Canto.
The sixth Manu was Cäkñuña, the son of Cakñu Manu. Among the sons of
the sixth Manu were Püru, Püruña and Sudyumna. During the reign of this
Manu, Mantradruma was Indra, the King of the heavenly planets. Among the
demigods were the Äpyas, and among the seven åñis were Haviñmän and
Véraka. The wife of Vairäja, whose name was Devasambhüti, gave birth to
Ajita, an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This Ajita,
taking the shape of a tortoise and holding the mountain known as Mandara on
His back, churned the ocean and produced nectar for the demigods.
Mahäräja Parékñit was very eager to hear about the churning of the ocean,
and therefore Çukadeva Gosvämé began to explain to him how the demigods,
having been cursed by Durväsä Muni, were defeated in battle by the asuras.
When the demigods were deprived of their heavenly kingdom, they went to
the assembly house of Lord Brahmä and informed Lord Brahmä of what had
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
172
happened. Then Brahmä, along with all the demigods, went to the shore of the
ocean of milk and offered prayers to Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu.
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
raJaàuidTaMaeTaTa( Tae hre" k-MaaRgaNaaXaNaMa( )
GaJaeNd]Maae+a<a& Pau<Ya& rEvTa& TvNTar& é*<au )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
räjann uditam etat te
hareù karmägha-näçanam
gajendra-mokñaëaà puëyaà
raivataà tv antaraà çåëu
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; räjan—O King; uditam—already
described; etat—this; te—unto you; hareù—of the Lord; karma—activity;
agha-näçanam—by hearing which one can be freed from all misfortune;
gajendra-mokñaëam—deliverance of Gajendra, the King of the elephants;
puëyam—very pious to hear and describe; raivatam—about Raivata Manu;
tu—but; antaram—in this millennium; çåëu—kindly hear from me.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: O King, I have described to you the pastime
of Gajendra-mokñaëa, which is most pious to hear. By hearing of such activities
of the Lord, one can be freed from all sinful reactions. Now please listen as I
describe Raivata Manu.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
173
TEXT 2
PaÄMaae rEvTaae NaaMa MaNauSTaaMaSaSaaedr" )
bil/ivNDYaadYaSTaSYa SauTaa haJauRNaPaUvRk-a" )) 2 ))
païcamo raivato näma
manus tämasa-sodaraù
bali-vindhyädayas tasya
sutä härjuna-pürvakäù
SYNONYMS
païcamaù—the fifth; raivataù—Raivata; näma—by the name; manuù—Manu;
tämasa-sodaraù—the brother of Tämasa Manu; bali—Bali; vindhya—Vindhya;
ädayaù—and so on; tasya—his; sutäù—sons; ha—certainly; arjuna—Arjuna;
pürvakäù—heading all the sons.
TRANSLATION
The brother of Tämasa Manu was the fifth Manu, named Raivata. His sons
were headed by Arjuna, Bali and Vindhya.
TEXT 3
iv>auirNd]" SaurGa<aa raJaN>aUTarYaadYa" )
ihr<YaraeMaa vediXara OßRbaûadYaae iÜJaa" )) 3 ))
vibhur indraù sura-gaëä
räjan bhütarayädayaù
hiraëyaromä vedaçirä
ürdhvabähv-ädayo dvijäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
174
SYNONYMS
vibhuù—Vibhu; indraù—the King of heaven; sura-gaëäù—the demigods;
räjan—O King; bhütaraya-ädayaù—headed by the Bhütarayas;
hiraëyaromä—Hiraëyaromä; vedaçirä—Vedaçirä; ürdhvabähu—Ürdhvabähu;
ädayaù—and others; dvijäù—the brähmaëas or åñis who occupied the seven
planets.
TRANSLATION
O King, in the millennium of Raivata Manu the King of heaven was known
as Vibhu, among the demigods were the Bhütarayas, and among the seven
brähmaëas who occupied the seven planets were Hiraëyaromä, Vedaçirä and
Ürdhvabähu.
TEXT 4
PaÒq ivku-<#=a éu>a]SYa vEku-<#E=" SaurSataMaE" )
TaYaae" Svk-l/Yaa Jaje vEku-<#=ae >aGavaNSvYaMa( )) 4 ))
patné vikuëöhä çubhrasya
vaikuëöhaiù sura-sattamaiù
tayoù sva-kalayä jajïe
vaikuëöho bhagavän svayam
SYNONYMS
patné—the wife; vikuëöhä—named Vikuëöhä; çubhrasya—of Çubhra;
vaikuëöhaiù—with the Vaikuëöhas; sura-sat-tamaiù—demigods; tayoù—by
Vikuëöhä and Çubhra; sva-kalayä—with plenary expansions; jajïe—appeared;
vaikuëöhaù—the Lord; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
175
svayam—personally.
TRANSLATION
From the combination of Çubhra and his wife, Vikuëöhä, there appeared the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vaikuëöha, along with demigods who were
His personal plenary expansions.
TEXT 5
vEku-<#=" k-iLPaTaae YaeNa l/aek-ae l/aek-NaMaSk*-Ta" )
rMaYaa Pa[aQYaRMaaNaeNa deVYaa TaiTPa[Yak-aMYaYaa )) 5 ))
vaikuëöhaù kalpito yena
loko loka-namaskåtaù
ramayä prärthyamänena
devyä tat-priya-kämyayä
SYNONYMS
vaikuëöhaù—a Vaikuëöha planet; kalpitaù—was constructed; yena—by whom;
lokaù—planet; loka-namaskåtaù—worshiped by all people; ramayä—by Ramä,
the goddess of fortune; prärthyamänena—being so requested; devyä—by the
goddess; tat—her; priya-kämyayä—just to please.
TRANSLATION
Just to please the goddess of fortune, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Vaikuëöha, at her request, created another Vaikuëöha planet, which is
worshiped by everyone.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
176
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks here that this Vaikuëöha
planet, like Çrémad-Bhägavatam, appears and is said to be born or created, but
both Çrémad-Bhägavatam and Vaikuëöha eternally exist beyond the material
universes, which are enveloped by eight kinds of coverings. As described in the
Second Canto, Lord Brahmä saw Vaikuëöha before the creation of the
universe. Véraräghava Äcärya mentions that this Vaikuëöha is within the
universe. It is situated above the mountain known as Lokäloka. This planet is
worshiped by everyone.
TEXT 6
TaSYaaNau>aav" k-iQaTaae Gau<aaê ParMaaedYaa" )
>aaEMaaNre<aUNSa ivMaMae Yaae ivZ<aaevR<aRYaed( Gau<aaNa( )) 6 ))
tasyänubhävaù kathito
guëäç ca paramodayäù
bhaumän reëün sa vimame
yo viñëor varëayed guëän
SYNONYMS
tasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead appearing as Vaikuëöha;
anubhävaù—great activities; kathitaù—were explained;
guëäù—transcendental qualities; ca—also; parama-udayäù—greatly glorious;
bhaumän—earthly; reëün—particles; saù—someone; vimame—can count;
yaù—such a person; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; varëayet—can count; guëän—the
transcendental qualities.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
177
TRANSLATION
Although the great activities and transcendental qualities of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead's various incarnations are wonderfully described,
sometimes we are unable to understand them. Yet everything is possible for
Lord Viñëu. If one could count the atoms of the universe, then he could count
the qualities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But no one can count the
atoms of the universe, nor can anyone count the transcendental qualities of the
Lord.
PURPORT
The Lord's glorious activities referred to in this connection took place after
His personal bodyguards Jaya and Vijaya became Daityas, having been cursed
by the great sages Sanaka, Sanätana, Sanat-kumära and Sanandana. Jaya, as
Hiraëyäkña, had to fight with Varähadeva, and that same Varähadeva is
mentioned in regard to the Raivata millennium. The fighting, however, took
place during the reign of the first Manu, Sväyambhuva. Therefore according to
some authorities there are two Varähas. According to others, however, Varäha
appeared during the regime of Sväyambhuva Manu and stayed in the water
until that of Raivata Manu. Some may doubt that this could be possible, but
the answer is that everything is possible. If one could count the atoms within
the universe, one could count the qualities of Lord Viñëu. But the atoms of the
universe are impossible for anyone to count, and similarly no one can count
the transcendental qualities of the Lord.
TEXT 7
zïê c+auz" Pau}aêa+auzae NaaMa vE MaNau" )
PaUåPaUåzSauÛuManPa[Mau%aêa+auzaTMaJaa" )) 7 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
178
ñañöhaç ca cakñuñaù putraç
cäkñuño näma vai manuù
püru-püruña-sudyumnapramukhäç
cäkñuñätmajäù
SYNONYMS
ñañöhaù—the sixth; ca—and; cakñuñaù—of Cakñu; putraù—the son;
cäkñuñaù—Cäkñuña; näma—named; vai—indeed; manuù—Manu; püru—Püru;
püruña—Püruña; sudyumna—Sudyumna; pramukhäù—headed by;
cäkñuña-ätma-jäù—the sons of Cäkñuña.
TRANSLATION
The son of Cakñu known as Cäkñuña was the sixth Manu. He had many
sons, headed by Püru, Püruña and Sudyumna.
TEXT 8
wNd]ae MaN}ad]uMaSTa}a deva AaPYaadYaae Ga<aa" )
MauNaYaSTa}a vE raJaNhivZMaÜqrk-adYa" )) 8 ))
indro mantradrumas tatra
devä äpyädayo gaëäù
munayas tatra vai räjan
haviñmad-vérakädayaù
SYNONYMS
indraù—the King of heaven; mantradrumaù—known as Mantradruma;
tatra—in that sixth manvantara; deväù—the demigods; äpya-ädayaù—the
Äpyas and others; gaëäù—that assembly; munayaù—the seven sages;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
179
tatra—there; vai—indeed; räjan—O King; haviñmat—of the name Haviñmän;
véraka-ädayaù—Véraka and others.
TRANSLATION
During the reign of Cäkñuña Manu, the King of heaven was known as
Mantradruma. Among the demigods were the Äpyas, and among the great sages
were Haviñmän and Véraka.
TEXT 9
Ta}aaiPa devSaM>aUTYaa& vEraJaSYaa>avTa( SauTa" )
AiJaTaae NaaMa >aGavaNa&XaeNa JaGaTa" PaiTa" )) 9 ))
taträpi devasambhütyäà
vairäjasyäbhavat sutaù
ajito näma bhagavän
aàçena jagataù patiù
SYNONYMS
tatra api—again in that sixth manvantara; devasambhütyäm—by
Devasambhüti; vairäjasya—by her husband, Vairäja; abhavat—there was;
sutaù—a son; ajitaù näma—by the name Ajita; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; aàçena—partially; jagataù patiù—the master of the
universe.
TRANSLATION
In this sixth manvantara millennium, Lord Viñëu, the master of the
universe, appeared in His partial expansion. He was begotten by Vairäja in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
180
womb of his wife, Devasambhüti, and His name was Ajita.
TEXT 10
PaYaaeiDa& YaeNa iNaMaRQYa Saura<aa& SaaiDaTaa SauDaa )
>a]MaMaa<aae_M>aiSa Da*Ta" kU-MaRæPae<a MaNdr" )) 10 ))
payodhià yena nirmathya
suräëäà sädhitä sudhä
bhramamäëo 'mbhasi dhåtaù
kürma-rüpeëa mandaraù
SYNONYMS
payodhim—the ocean of milk; yena—by whom; nirmathya—by churning;
suräëäm—of the demigods; sädhitä—produced; sudhä—nectar;
bhramamäëaù—moving here and there; ambhasi—within the water;
dhåtaù—was staying; kürma-rüpeëa—in the form of a tortoise; mandaraù—the
mountain known as Mandara.
TRANSLATION
By churning the ocean of milk, Ajita produced nectar for the demigods. In
the form of a tortoise, He moved here and there, carrying on His back the great
mountain known as Mandara.
TEXTS 11-12
é[qraJaaevac
YaQaa >aGavTaa b]øNMaiQaTa" +aqrSaaGar" )
YadQa| va YaTaêaid]& dDaaraMbucraTMaNaa )) 11 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
181
YaQaaMa*Ta& SaurE" Pa[aá& ik&- caNYad>avTa( TaTa" )
WTad( >aGavTa" k-MaR vdSv ParMaad(>auTaMa( )) 12 ))
çré-räjoväca
yathä bhagavatä brahman
mathitaù kñéra-sägaraù
yad-arthaà vä yataç cädrià
dadhärämbucarätmanä
yathämåtaà suraiù präptaà
kià cänyad abhavat tataù
etad bhagavataù karma
vadasva paramädbhutam
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—King Parékñit inquired; yathä—as; bhagavatä—by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; brahman—O learned brähmaëa; mathitaù—churned;
kñéra-sägaraù—the ocean of milk; yat-artham—what was the purpose;
vä—either; yataù—wherefrom, for what reason; ca—and; adrim—the
mountain (Mandara); dadhära—was staying; ambucara-ätmanä—in the form
of a tortoise; yathä—as; amåtam—nectar; suraiù—by the demigods;
präptam—was achieved; kim—what; ca—and; anyat—other;
abhavat—became; tataù—thereafter; etat—all these; bhagavataù—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; karma—pastimes, activities;
vadasva—kindly describe; parama-adbhutam—because they are so wonderful.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit inquired: O great brähmaëa, Çukadeva Gosvämé, why and how
did Lord Viñëu churn the ocean of milk? For what reason did He stay in the
water as a tortoise and hold up Mandara Mountain? How did the demigods
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
182
obtain the nectar, and what other things were produced from the churning of
the ocean? Kindly describe all these wonderful activities of the Lord.
TEXT 13
TvYaa SaªQYaMaaNaeNa MaihMana SaaTvTaa& PaTae" )
NaaiTaTa*PYaiTa Mae icta& Sauicr& TaaPaTaaiPaTaMa( )) 13 ))
tvayä saìkathyamänena
mahimnä sätvatäà pateù
nätitåpyati me cittaà
suciraà täpa-täpitam
SYNONYMS
tvayä—by Your Holiness; saìkathyamänena—being described; mahimnä—by
all the glories; sätvatäm pateù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
master of the devotees; na—not; ati-tåpyati—is sufficiently satisfied; me—my;
cittam—heart; suciram—for such a long time; täpa—by miseries;
täpitam—being distressed.
TRANSLATION
My heart, which is disturbed by the three miserable conditions of material
life, is not yet sated with hearing you describe the glorious activities of the
Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the master of the devotees.
TEXT 14
é[qSaUTa ovac
SaMPa*íae >aGavaNaev& ÜEPaaYaNaSauTaae iÜJaa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
183
Ai>aNaNÛ hrevsYaRMa>Yaacíu& Pa[c§-Mae )) 14 ))
çré-süta uväca
sampåñöo bhagavän evaà
dvaipäyana-suto dvijäù
abhinandya harer véryam
abhyäcañöuà pracakrame
SYNONYMS
çré-sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; sampåñöaù—being questioned;
bhagavän—Çukadeva Gosvämé; evam—thus; dvaipäyana-sutaù—the son of
Vyäsadeva; dvi-jäù—O brähmaëas assembled here;
abhinandya—congratulating Mahäräja Parékñit; hareù véryam—the glories of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; abhyäcañöum—to describe;
pracakrame—endeavored.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: O learned brähmaëas assembled here at
Naimiñäraëya, when Çukadeva Gosvämé, the son of Dvaipäyana, was thus
questioned by the King, he congratulated the King and then endeavored to
describe further the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXTS 15-16
é[qéuk- ovac
Yada YauÖe_SaurEdeRva bDYaMaaNaa" iXaTaaYauDaE" )
GaTaaSavae iNaPaiTaTaa NaaeitaïerNSMa >aUirXa" )) 15 ))
Yada duvaRSa" XaaPaeNa SaeNd]a l/aek-añYaae Na*Pa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
184
iNa"é[qk-aêa>av&STa}a NaeéuirJYaadYa" i§-Yaa" )) 16 ))
çré-çuka uväca
yadä yuddhe 'surair devä
badhyamänäù çitäyudhaiù
gatäsavo nipatitä
nottiñöheran sma bhüriçaù
yadä durväsaù çäpena
sendrä lokäs trayo nåpa
niùçrékäç cäbhavaàs tatra
neçur ijyädayaù kriyäù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; yadä—when; yuddhe—in the
fighting; asuraiù—by the demons; deväù—the demigods;
badhyamänäù—besieged; çita-äyudhaiù—by serpent weapons;
gata-äsavaù—almost dead; nipatitäù—some of them having fallen; na—not;
uttiñöheran—got up again; sma—so became; bhüriçaù—the majority of them;
yadä—when; durväsaù—of Durväsä Muni; çäpena—with the curse;
sa-indräù—with Indra; lokäù trayaù—the three worlds; nåpa—O King;
niùçrékäù—without any material opulence; ca—also; abhavan—became;
tatra—at that time; neçuù—could not be performed; ijya-ädayaù—sacrifices;
kriyäù—ritualistic ceremonies.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: When the asuras, with their serpent weapons,
severely attacked the demigods in a fight, many of the demigods fell and lost
their lives. Indeed, they could not be revived. At that time, O King, the
demigods had been cursed by Durväsä Muni, the three worlds were
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
185
poverty-stricken, and therefore ritualistic ceremonies could not be performed.
The effects of this were very serious.
PURPORT
It is described that while Durväsä Muni was passing on the road, he saw
Indra on the back of his elephant and was pleased to offer Indra a garland from
his own neck. Indra, however, being too puffed up, took the garland, and
without respect for Durväsä Muni, he placed it on the trunk of his carrier
elephant. The elephant, being an animal, could not understand the value of
the garland, and thus the elephant threw the garland between its legs and
smashed it. Seeing this insulting behavior, Durväsä Muni immediately cursed
Indra to be poverty-stricken, bereft of all material opulence. Thus the
demigods, afflicted on one side by the fighting demons and on the other by the
curse of Durväsä Muni, lost all the material opulences in the three worlds.
To be extremely opulent in materialistic advancement is sometimes very
risky. The materially opulent person does not care about anyone, and thus he
commits offenses to great personalities, such as devotees and great saints. This
is the way of material opulence. As described by Çukadeva Gosvämé,
dhana-durmadändha: too much wealth makes one blind. This happens even to
Indra in his heavenly kingdom, and what to speak of others in this material
world? When one is materially opulent, he should learn to be sober and
well-behaved toward Vaiñëavas and saintly persons; otherwise he will fall
down.
TEXTS 17-18
iNaXaaMYaETaTa( SaurGa<aa MaheNd]vå<aadYa" )
NaaDYaGaC^NSvYa& MaN}aEMaRN}aYaNTaae iviNaiêTaMa( )) 17 ))
TaTaae b]øSa>aa& JaGMauMaeRraeMaURDaRiNa SavRXa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
186
Sav| ivjaPaYaa& c§u-" Pa[<aTaa" ParMaeiïNae )) 18 ))
niçämyaitat sura-gaëä
mahendra-varuëädayaù
nädhyagacchan svayaà mantrair
mantrayanto viniçcitam
tato brahma-sabhäà jagmur
meror mürdhani sarvaçaù
sarvaà vijïäpayäà cakruù
praëatäù parameñöhine
SYNONYMS
niçämya—hearing; etat—this incident; sura-gaëäù—all the demigods;
mahä-indra—King Indra; varuëa-ädayaù—Varuëa and other demigods;
na—not; adhyagacchan—reached; svayam—personally; mantraiù—by
deliberation; mantrayantaù—discussing; viniçcitam—a real conclusion;
tataù—thereupon; brahma-sabhäm—to the assembly of Lord Brahmä;
jagmuù—they went; meroù—of Sumeru Mountain; mürdhani—on the top;
sarvaçaù—all of them; sarvam—everything; vijïäpayäm cakruù—they
informed; praëatäù—offered obeisances; parameñöhine—unto Lord Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
Lord Indra, Varuëa and the other demigods, seeing their lives in such a
state, consulted among themselves, but they could not find any solution. Then
all the demigods assembled and went together to the peak of Sumeru Mountain.
There, in the assembly of Lord Brahmä, they fell down to offer Lord Brahmä
their obeisances, and then they informed him of all the incidents that had taken
place.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
187
TEXTS 19-20
Sa ivl/aeKYaeNd]vaYvadqNa( iNa"SatvaiNvGaTaPa[>aaNa( )
l/aek-aNaMa(r)l/Pa[aYaaNaSauraNaYaQaa iv>au" )) 19 ))
SaMaaihTaeNa MaNaSaa Sa&SMarNPauåz& ParMa( )
ovacaeTfu-çvdNaae devaNSa >aGavaNPar" )) 20 ))
sa vilokyendra-väyv-ädén
niùsattvän vigata-prabhän
lokän amaìgala-präyän
asurän ayathä vibhuù
samähitena manasä
saàsmaran puruñaà param
uväcotphulla-vadano
devän sa bhagavän paraù
SYNONYMS
saù—Lord Brahmä; vilokya—looking over; indra-väyu-ädén—all the demigods,
headed by Lord Indra and Väyu; niùsattvän—bereft of all spiritual potency;
vigata-prabhän—bereft of all effulgence; lokän—all the three worlds;
amaìgala-präyän—merged into misfortune; asurän—all the demons;
ayathäù—flourishing; vibhuù—Lord Brahmä, the supreme within this material
world; samähitena—by full adjustment; manasä—of the mind;
saàsmaran—remembering again and again; puruñam—the Supreme Person;
param—transcendental; uväca—said; utphulla-vadanaù—bright-faced;
devän—unto the demigods; saù—he; bhagavän—the most powerful; paraù—of
the demigods.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
188
Upon seeing that the demigods were bereft of all influence and strength and
that the three worlds were consequently devoid of auspiciousness, and upon
seeing that the demigods were in an awkward position whereas all the demons
were flourishing, Lord Brahmä, who is above all the demigods and who is most
powerful, concentrated his mind on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus
being encouraged, he became bright-faced and spoke to the demigods as follows.
PURPORT
After hearing from the demigods the real situation, Lord Brahmä was very
much concerned because the demons were unnecessarily so powerful. When
demons become powerful, the entire world is placed in an awkward position
because demons are simply interested in their own sense gratification and not
in the welfare of the world. Demigods or devotees, however, are concerned
with the welfare of all living beings. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, for example, left his
ministership and went to Våndävana for the benefit of the entire world
(lokänäà hita-käriëau). This is the nature of a saintly person or demigod. Even
impersonalists think of the welfare of all people. Thus Brahmä was very much
concerned at seeing the demons in power.
TEXT 21
Ah& >avae YaUYaMaQaae_SauradYaae
MaNauZYaiTaYaRGd]uMagaMaRJaaTaYa" )
YaSYaavTaara&Xak-l/aivSaiJaRTaa
v]JaaMa SaveR Xar<a& TaMaVYaYaMa( )) 21 ))
ahaà bhavo yüyam atho 'surädayo
manuñya-tiryag-druma-gharma-jätayaù
yasyävatäräàça-kalä-visarjitä
vrajäma sarve çaraëaà tam avyayam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
189
SYNONYMS
aham—I; bhavaù—Lord Çiva; yüyam—all of you demigods; atho—as well as;
asura-ädayaù—demons and others; manuñya—the human beings; tiryak—the
animals; druma—the trees and plants; gharma-jätayaù—as well as the insects
and germs born of perspiration; yasya—of whom (the Supreme Personality of
Godhead); avatära—of the puruña incarnation; aàça—of His part and parcel,
the guëa-avatära, Brahmä; kalä—of Brahmä's sons; visarjitäù—produced by
the generation; vrajäma—we shall go; sarve—all of us; çaraëam—unto the
shelter; tam—unto the Supreme; avyayam—the inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: I, Lord Çiva, all of you demigods, the demons, the living
entities born of perspiration, the living beings born of eggs, the trees and plants
sprouting from the earth, and the living entities born from embryos—all come
from the Supreme Lord, from His incarnation of rajo-guëa [Lord Brahmä, the
guëa-avatära] and from the great sages [åñis] who are part of me. Let us
therefore go to the Supreme Lord and take shelter of His lotus feet.
PURPORT
Some creatures are born from embryos, some from perspiration, and some
from seeds. In this way, all living entities emanate from the guëa-avatära of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Ultimately, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the shelter of all living entities.
TEXT 22
Na YaSYa vDYaae Na c r+a<aqYaae
NaaePae+a<aqYaadr<aqYaPa+a" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
190
TaQaaiPa SaGaRiSQaiTaSa&YaMaaQa|
Datae rJa"SatvTaMaa&iSa k-ale/ )) 22 ))
na yasya vadhyo na ca rakñaëéyo
nopekñaëéyädaraëéya-pakñaù
tathäpi sarga-sthiti-saàyamärthaà
dhatte rajaù-sattva-tamäàsi käle
SYNONYMS
na—not; yasya—by whom (the Lord); vadhyaù—anyone is to be killed;
na—nor; ca—also; rakñaëéyaù—anyone is to be protected; na—nor;
upekñaëéya—to be neglected; ädaraëéya—to be worshiped; pakñaù—part;
tathäpi—still; sarga—creation; sthiti—maintenance; saàyama—and
annihilation; artham—for the sake of; dhatte—He accepts; rajaù—passion;
sattva—goodness; tamäàsi—and ignorance; käle—in due course of time.
TRANSLATION
For the Supreme Personality of Godhead there is no one to be killed, no one
to be protected, no one to be neglected and no one to be worshiped.
Nonetheless, for the sake of creation, maintenance and annihilation according
to time, He accepts different forms as incarnations either in the mode of
goodness, the mode of passion or the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
This verse explains that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is equal to
everyone. This is confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (9.29):
samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu
na me dveñyo 'sti na priyaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
191
ye bhajanti tu mäà bhaktyä
mayi te teñu cäpy aham
"I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever
renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend
to him." Although the Lord is impartial, He gives special attention to His
devotees. Therefore the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.8):
pariträëäya sädhünäà
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm
dharma-saàsthäpanärthäya
sambhavämi yuge yuge
"To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish
the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after millennium." The
Lord has nothing to do with anyone's protection or destruction, but for the
creation, maintenance and annihilation of this material world He apparently
has to act either in goodness, in passion or in darkness. Actually, however, He
is unaffected by these modes of material nature. He is the Supreme Lord of
everyone. As a king sometimes punishes or rewards someone to maintain law
and order, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although having nothing to
do with the activities of this material world, sometimes appears as various
incarnations according to the time, place and object.
TEXT 23
AYa& c TaSYa iSQaiTaPaal/Na+a<a"
Satv& Jauza<aSYa >avaYa deihNaaMa( )
TaSMaad( v]JaaMa" Xar<a& JaGad(Gauå&
SvaNaa& Sa Naae DaaSYaiTa Xa& SauriPa[Ya" )) 23 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
192
ayaà ca tasya sthiti-pälana-kñaëaù
sattvaà juñäëasya bhaväya dehinäm
tasmäd vrajämaù çaraëaà jagad-guruà
svänäà sa no dhäsyati çaà sura-priyaù
SYNONYMS
ayam—this period; ca—also; tasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sthiti-pälana-kñaëaù—the time for maintenance, or for establishing His rule;
sattvam—the mode of goodness; juñäëasya—accepting (now, without waiting);
bhaväya—for the increased development or establishment; dehinäm—of all
living entities who accept material bodies; tasmät—therefore; vrajämaù—let us
take; çaraëam—shelter; jagat-gurum—at the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is the universal teacher; svänäm—His own
persons; saù—He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); naù—unto us;
dhäsyati—will give; çam—the good fortune we need; sura-priyaù—because He
is naturally very dear to the devotees.
TRANSLATION
Now is the time to invoke the mode of goodness of the living entities who
have accepted material bodies. The mode of goodness is meant to establish the
Supreme Lord's rule, which will maintain the existence of the creation.
Therefore, this is the opportune moment to take shelter of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Because He is naturally very kind and dear to the
demigods, He will certainly bestow good fortune upon us.
PURPORT
The material world is conducted by the three modes of nature, namely
sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa. By rajo-guëa everything material is
created, by sattva-guëa everything material is maintained properly, and by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
193
tamo-guëa, when the creation is improperly situated, everything is destroyed.
From this verse we can understand the situation of Kali-yuga, through
which we are now passing. Just before the beginning of Kali-yuga—or, in other
words, at the end of Dväpara-yuga—Lord Çré Kåñëa appeared and left His
instructions in the form of Bhagavad-gétä, in which He asked all living entities
to surrender unto Him. Since the beginning of Kali-yuga, however, people
have practically been unable to surrender to the lotus feet of Kåñëa, and
therefore, after some five thousand years, Kåñëa came again as Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu just to teach the entire world how to surrender unto Him, unto
Çré Kåñëa, and thus be purified.
Surrendering unto the lotus feet of Kåñëa means achieving complete
purification. Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.66):
sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù
"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver
you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." Thus as soon as one surrenders unto
the lotus feet of Kåñëa, one certainly becomes free from all contamination.
Kali-yuga is full of contamination. This is described in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (12.3.51):
kaler doña-nidhe räjann
asti hy eko mahän guëaù
kértanäd eva kåñëasya
mukta-saìgaù paraà vrajet
This age of Kali is full of unlimited faults. Indeed, it is just like an ocean of
faults (doña-nidhi). But there is one chance, one opportunity. Kértanäd eva
kåñëasya mukta-saìgaù paraà vrajet: simply by chanting the Hare Kåñëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
194
mantra, one can be freed from the contamination of Kali-yuga and, in his
original spiritual body, can return home, back to Godhead. This is the
opportunity of Kali-yuga.
When Kåñëa appeared, He gave His orders, and when Kåñëa Himself
appeared as a devotee, as Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, He showed us the path by
which to cross the ocean of Kali-yuga. That is the path of the Hare Kåñëa
movement. When Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu appeared, He ushered in the era
for the saìkértana movement. It is also said that for ten thousand years this era
will continue. This means that simply by accepting the saìkértana movement
and chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra, the fallen souls of this Kali-yuga
will be delivered. After the Battle of Kurukñetra, at which Bhagavad-gétä was
spoken, Kali-yuga continues for 432,000 years, of which only 5,000 years have
passed. Thus there is still a balance of 427,000 years to come. Of these 427,000
years, the 10,000 years of the saìkértana movement inaugurated by Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu 500 years ago provide the opportunity for the fallen
souls of Kali-yuga to take to the Kåñëa consciousness movement, chant the
Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra and thus be delivered from the clutches of material
existence and return home, back to Godhead.
Chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra is potent always, but it is
especially potent in this age of Kali. Therefore Çukadeva Gosvämé, while
instructing Mahäräja Parékñit, stressed this chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mantra.
kaler doña-nidhe räjann
asti hy eko mahän guëaù
kértanäd eva kåñëasya
mukta-saìgaù paraà vrajet
"My dear King, although Kali-yuga is full of faults, there is still one good
quality about this age. It is that simply by chanting the Hare Kåñëa
mahä-mantra, one can become free from material bondage and be promoted to
the transcendental kingdom." (SB 12.3.51) Those who have accepted the task
of spreading the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra in full Kåñëa consciousness should
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
195
take this opportunity to deliver people very easily from the clutches of material
existence. Our duty, therefore, is to follow the instructions of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu and preach the Kåñëa consciousness movement all over the world
very sincerely. This is the best welfare activity for the peace and prosperity of
human society.
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu's movement consists of spreading
kåñëa-saìkértana. Paraà vijayate çré-kåñëa-saìkértanam: "All glories to the Çré
Kåñëa saìkértana!" Why is it so glorious? This has also been explained by Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Ceto-darpaëa-märjanam: [Cc. Antya 20.12] by the
chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra, one's heart is cleansed. The whole
difficulty is that in this age of Kali there is no sattva-guëa and no clearance of
the heart, and therefore people are making the mistake of identifying with
their bodies. Even the big philosophers and scientists with whom we deal are
practically all under the impression that they are their bodies. The other day
we were discussing a prominent philosopher, Thomas Huxley, who was proud
of being an Englishman. This means that he was in the bodily conception of
life. Everywhere we find this same misunderstanding. As soon as one is in the
bodily conception of life, one is nothing but an animal like a cat or a dog (sa
eva go-kharaù [SB 10.84.13]). Thus the most dangerous of the dirty things
within our hearts is this misidentification of the body as the self. Under the
influence of this misunderstanding, one thinks, "I am this body. I am an
Englishman. I am an Indian. I am an American. I am Hindu. I am Muslim."
This misconception is the strongest impediment, and it must be removed. That
is the instruction of Bhagavad-gétä and of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Indeed,
Bhagavad-gétä begins with this instruction:
dehino 'smin yathä dehe
kaumäraà yauvanaà jarä
tathä dehäntara-präptir
dhéras tatra na muhyati
"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
196
to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." (Bg. 2.13) Although the
soul is within the body, nevertheless, because of misunderstanding and animal
propensities one accepts the body as the self. Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore
says, ceto-darpaëa-märjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. To cleanse the core of the
heart, which is full of misunderstanding, is possible only through
çré-kåñëa-saìkértana. The leaders of the Kåñëa consciousness movement should
very seriously take this opportunity to be kind to the fallen souls by delivering
them from the misunderstanding of materialistic life.
One cannot be happy in any way within this material world. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (8.16):
äbrahma-bhuvanäl lokäù
punar ävartino 'rjuna
"From the highest planet in this material world down to the lowest, all are
places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place." Therefore, not
to speak of going to the moon, even if one is promoted to the highest planetary
system, Brahmaloka, there cannot be any happiness in this material world. If
one actually wants happiness, one must go to the spiritual world. The material
world is characterized by a struggle for existence, and survival of the fittest is a
well-known principle, but the poor souls of this material world do not know
what is survival and who is fit. Survival does not mean that one should die;
survival means that one should not die, but should enjoy an everlastingly
blissful life of knowledge. This is survival. The Kåñëa consciousness movement
is meant to make every person fit for survival. Indeed, it is meant to stop the
struggle for existence. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam and Bhagavad-gétä give definite
directions on how to stop the struggle for existence and how to survive in
eternal life. The saìkértana movement, therefore, is a great opportunity.
Simply by hearing Bhagavad-gétä and chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra,
one becomes completely purified. Thus the struggle for existence ceases, and
one goes back home, back to Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
197
TEXT 24
é[qéuk- ovac
wTYaa>aaZYa SauraNveDaa" Sah devErirNdMa )
AiJaTaSYa Pad& Saa+aaÂGaaMa TaMaSa" ParMa( )) 24 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ity äbhäñya surän vedhäù
saha devair arindama
ajitasya padaà säkñäj
jagäma tamasaù param
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; äbhäñya—talking;
surän—unto the demigods; vedhäù—Lord Brahmä, who is the head of this
universe and who gives everyone good sense in Vedic knowledge; saha—with;
devaiù—the demigods; arim-dama—O Mahäräja Parékñit, subduer of all kinds
of enemies (such as the senses); ajitasya—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; padam—to the place; säkñät—directly; jagäma—went;
tamasaù—the world of darkness; param—transcendental to, beyond.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, subduer of all enemies, after Lord Brahmä finished
speaking to the demigods, he took them with him to the abode of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, which is beyond this material world. The Lord's abode
is on an island called Çvetadvépa, which is situated in the ocean of milk.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
198
Mahäräja Parékñit is addressed here as arindama, "subduer of all enemies."
Not only do we have enemies outside of our bodies, but within our bodies there
are many enemies, such as lusty desires, anger and greed. Mahäräja Parékñit is
specifically addressed as arindama because in his political life he was able to
subdue all kinds of enemies, and even though he was a young king, as soon as
he heard that he was going to die within seven days, he immediately left his
kingdom. He did not follow the dictates of enemies within his body, such as
lust, greed and anger. He was not at all angry with the muni's son who had
cursed him. Rather, he accepted the curse and prepared for his death in the
association of Çukadeva Gosvämé. Death is inevitable; no one can surpass the
force of death. Therefore Mahäräja Parékñit, while fully alive, wanted to hear
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. He is consequently addressed here as arindama.
Another word, sura-priya, is also significant. Although Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is equal toward everyone, He is especially inclined
toward His devotees (ye bhajanti tu mäà bhaktyä mayi te teñu cäpy aham). The
devotees are all demigods. There are two kinds of men within this world. One
is called the deva, and the other is called the asura. The Padma Puräëa states:
dvau bhüta-sargau loke 'smin
daiva äsura eva ca
viñëu-bhaktaù småto daiva
äsuras tad-viparyayaù
Anyone who is a devotee of Lord Kåñëa is called a deva, and others, even
though they may be devotees of demigods, are called asuras. Rävaëa, for
example, was a great devotee of Lord Çiva, but he is described as an asura.
Similarly, Hiraëyakaçipu is described as a great devotee of Lord Brahmä, yet he
was also an asura. Therefore, only the devotee of Lord Viñëu is called sura, not
asura. Lord Kåñëa is very much pleased with His devotees, even if they are not
on the topmost stage of devotional service. Even on the lower stages of
devotional service one is transcendental, and if one continues with devotional
life, he continues to be a deva or sura. If one continues in this way, Kåñëa will
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
199
always be pleased with him and will give him all instructions so that he may
very easily return home, back to Godhead.
Concerning ajitasya padam, the abode of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in the milk ocean of this material world, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura says: padaà kñérodadhi-stha-çvetadvépaà tamasaù prakåteù param. The
island known as Çvetadvépa, which is in the ocean of milk, is transcendental. It
has nothing to do with this material world. A city government may have a rest
house where the governor and important government officers stay. Such a rest
house is not an ordinary house. Similarly, although Çvetadvépa, which is in the
ocean of milk, is in this material world, it is paraà padam, transcendental.
TEXT 25
Ta}aad*íSvæPaaYa é[uTaPaUvaRYa vE Pa[>au" )
STauiTaMab]UTa dEvqi>aGasi>aRSTvvihTaeiNd]Ya" )) 25 ))
taträdåñöa-svarüpäya
çruta-pürväya vai prabhuù
stutim abrüta daivébhir
gérbhis tv avahitendriyaù
SYNONYMS
tatra—there (at the Lord's abode known as Çvetadvépa);
adåñöa-svarüpäya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was not
seen even by Lord Brahmä; çruta-pürväya—but who was heard about from the
Vedas; vai—indeed; prabhuù—Lord Brahmä; stutim—prayers derived from
Vedic literature; abrüta—performed; daivébhiù—by prayers mentioned in the
Vedic literature or offered by persons strictly following Vedic principles;
gérbhiù—by such sound vibrations or songs; tu—then; avahita-indriyaù—fixed
in mind, without deviation.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
200
TRANSLATION
There [at Çvetadvépa], Lord Brahmä offered prayers to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, even though he had never seen the Supreme Lord.
Simply because Lord Brahmä had heard about the Supreme Personality of
Godhead from Vedic literature, with a fixed mind he offered the Lord prayers
as written or approved by Vedic literature.
PURPORT
It is said that when Brahmä and the other demigods go to see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in Çvetadvépa, they cannot directly see Him, but their
prayers are heard by the Lord, and the needful action is taken. This we have
seen in many instances. The word çruta-pürväya is significant. We get
experience by directly seeing or by hearing. If it is not possible to see someone
directly, we can hear about him from authentic sources. Sometimes people ask
whether we can show them God. This is ludicrous. It is not necessary for one
to see God before he can accept God. Our sensory perception is always
incomplete. Therefore, even if we see God, we may not be able to understand
Him. When Kåñëa was on earth, many, many people saw Him but could not
understand that He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Avajänanti mäà
müòhä mänuñéà tanum äçritam [Bg. 9.11]. Even though the rascals and fools saw
Kåñëa personally, they could not understand that He is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Even upon seeing God personally, one who is
unfortunate cannot understand Him. Therefore we have to hear about God,
Kåñëa, from the authentic Vedic literature and from persons who understand
the Vedic version properly. Even though Brahmä had not seen the Supreme
Personality of Godhead before, he was confident that the Lord was there in
Çvetadvépa. Thus he took the opportunity to go there and offer prayers to the
Lord.
These prayers were not ordinary concocted prayers. Prayers must be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
201
approved by Vedic literature, as indicated in this verse by the words daivébhir
gérbhiù. In our Kåñëa consciousness movement we do not allow any song that
has not been approved or sung by bona fide devotees. We cannot allow cinema
songs to be sung in the temple. We generally sing two songs. One is
çré-kåñëa-caitanya prabhu nityänanda çré-advaita gadädhara
çréväsädi-gaura-bhakta-vånda. This is bona fide. It is always mentioned in the
Caitanya-caritämåta, and it is accepted by the äcäryas. The other, of course, is
the mahä-mantra—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare
Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. We may also sing the songs of
Narottama däsa Öhäkura, Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura and Locana däsa Öhäkura,
but these two songs—"çré-kåñëa-caitanya" and the Hare Kåñëa
mahä-mantra—are sufficient to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
although we cannot see Him. Seeing the Lord is not as important as
appreciating Him from the authentic literature or the authentic statements of
authorized persons.
TEXT 26
é[qb]øaevac
Aivi§-Ya& SaTYaMaNaNTaMaaÛ&
GauhaXaYa& iNaZk-l/MaPa[TaKYaRMa( )
MaNaae_Ga]YaaNa& vcSaaiNaå¢&-
NaMaaMahe devvr& vre<YaMa( )) 26 ))
çré-brahmoväca
avikriyaà satyam anantam ädyaà
guhä-çayaà niñkalam apratarkyam
mano-'grayänaà vacasäniruktaà
namämahe deva-varaà vareëyam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
202
SYNONYMS
çré-brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; avikriyam—unto the Personality of
Godhead, who never changes (as opposed to material existence); satyam—the
eternal supreme truth; anantam—unlimited; ädyam—the original cause of all
causes; guhä-çayam—present in everyone's heart; niñkalam—without any
decrease in potency; apratarkyam—inconceivable, not within the jurisdiction
of material arguments; manaù-agrayänam—more quick than the mind,
inconceivable to mental speculation; vacasä—by jugglery of words;
aniruktam—indescribable; namämahe—all of us demigods offer our respectful
obeisances; deva-varam—unto the Supreme Lord, who is not equaled or
surpassed by anyone; vareëyam—the supreme worshipable, who is worshiped
by the Gäyatré mantra.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: O Supreme Lord, O changeless, unlimited supreme truth.
You are the origin of everything. Being all-pervading, You are in everyone's
heart and also in the atom. You have no material qualities. Indeed, You are
inconceivable. The mind cannot catch You by speculation, and words fail to
describe You. You are the supreme master of everyone, and therefore You are
worshipable for everyone. We offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not anything of material creation.
Everything material must change from one form to another—for example,
from earth to earthen pot and from earthen pot to earth again. All our
creations are temporary, impermanent. The Supreme Personality of Godhead,
however, is eternal, and similarly the living entities, who are parts of Him, are
also eternal (mamaiväàço jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù [Bg. 15.7]). The
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
203
Supreme Personality of Godhead is sanätana, eternal, and the individual living
entities are also eternal. The difference is that Kåñëa, or God, is the supreme
eternal, whereas the individual souls are minute, fragmental eternals. As stated
in Bhagavad-gétä (13.3), kñetra-jïaà cäpi mäà viddhi sarva-kñetreñu bhärata.
Although the Lord is a living being and the individual souls are living beings,
the Supreme Lord, unlike the individual souls, is vibhu, all-pervading, and
ananta, unlimited. The Lord is the cause of everything. The living entities are
innumerable, but the Lord is one. No one is greater than Him, and no one is
equal to Him. Thus the Lord is the supreme worshipable object, as understood
from the Vedic mantras (na tat-samaç cäbhyadhikaç ca dåçyate). The Lord is
supreme because no one can evaluate Him by mental speculation or jugglery of
words. The Lord can travel more quickly than the mind. In the çruti-mantras
of Éçopaniñad it is said:
anejad ekaà manaso javéyo
nainad devä äpnuvan pürvam arñat
tad dhävato 'nyän atyeti tiñöhat
tasminn apo mätariçvä dadhäti
"Although fixed in His abode, the Personality of Godhead is swifter than the
mind and can overcome all others running. The powerful demigods cannot
approach Him. Although in one place, He controls those who supply the air
and rain. He surpasses all in excellence." (Éçopaniñad 4) Thus the Supreme is
never to be equaled by the subordinate living entities.
Because the Lord is situated in everyone's heart and the individual living
entity is not, never should the individual living entity be equated with the
Supreme Lord. In Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) the Lord says, sarvasya cähaà hådi
sanniviñöaù: "I am situated in everyone's heart." This does not mean, however,
that everyone is equal to the Lord. In the çruti-mantras it is also said, hådi hy
ayam ätmä pratiñöhitaù. In the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is said,
satyaà paraà dhémahi [SB 1.1.1]. The Vedic mantras say, satyaà jïänam
anantam and niñkalaà niñkriyaà çäntaà niravadyam. God is supreme.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
204
Although naturally He does not do anything, He is doing everything. As the
Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä:
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings
are in Me, but I am not in them." (Bg. 9.4)
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sacaräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature, working under My direction, O son of Kunté, is
producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is
created and annihilated again and again." (Bg. 9.10) Thus although the Lord is
silent in His abode, He is doing everything through His different energies
(paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]).
All the Vedic mantras, or çruti-mantras, are included in this verse spoken
by Lord Brahmä, for Brahmä and his followers, the Brahma-sampradäya,
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead through the paramparä
system. We have to gain understanding through the words of our predecessors.
There are twelve mahäjanas, or authorities, of whom Brahmä is one.
svayambhür näradaù çambhuù
kumäraù kapilo manuù
prahlädo janako bhéñmo
balir vaiyäsakir vayam
(SB 6.3.20)
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
205
We belong to the disciplic succession of Brahmä, and therefore we are known
as the Brahma-sampradäya. As the demigods follow Lord Brahmä to
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we also have to follow the
authorities of the paramparä system to understand the Lord.
TEXT 27
ivPaiêTa& Pa[a<aMaNaaeiDaYaaTMaNaa‚
MaQaeRiNd]Yaa>aaSaMaiNad]Mav]<aMa( )
^aYaaTaPaaE Ya}a Na Ga*Da]Pa+aaE
TaMa+ar& %& i}aYauGa& v]JaaMahe )) 27 ))
vipaçcitaà präëa-mano-dhiyätmanäm
arthendriyäbhäsam anidram avraëam
chäyätapau yatra na gådhra-pakñau
tam akñaraà khaà tri-yugaà vrajämahe
SYNONYMS
vipaçcitam—unto the omniscient; präëa—how the living force is working;
manaù—how the mind is working; dhiya—how the intelligence is working;
ätmanäm—of all living entities; artha—the objects of the senses; indriya—the
senses; äbhäsam—knowledge; anidram—always awake and free from
ignorance; avraëam—without a material body subject to pains and pleasures;
chäyä-ätapau—the shelter for all who are suffering from ignorance;
yatra—wherein; na—not; gådhra-pakñau—partiality toward any living being;
tam—unto Him; akñaram—infallible; kham—all-pervading like the sky;
tri-yugam—appearing with six opulences in three yugas (Satya, Tretä and
Dväpara); vrajämahe—I take shelter.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
206
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead directly and indirectly knows how
everything, including the living force, mind and intelligence, is working under
His control. He is the illuminator of everything and has no ignorance. He does
not have a material body subject to the reactions of previous activities, and He
is free from the ignorance of partiality and materialistic education. I therefore
take shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, who is eternal, all-pervading
and as great as the sky and who appears with six opulences in three yugas
[Satya, Tretä and Dväpara].
PURPORT
In the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is described in this way: janmädy asya yato'nvayäd itarataç cärtheñv
abhijïaù [SB 1.1.1]. The Lord is the origin of all emanations, and He directly
and indirectly knows everything about all the activities within His creation.
Therefore the Lord is addressed here as vipaçcitam, one who is full of all
knowledge or who knows everything. The Lord is the Supreme Soul, and He
knows everything about the living entities and their senses.
The word anidram, meaning "always awake and free from ignorance," is very
important in this verse. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), mattaù småtir
jïänam apohanaà ca: it is the Lord who gives intelligence to everyone and
who causes everyone to forget. There are millions and millions of living
entities, and the Lord gives them directions. Therefore He has no time to
sleep, and He is never in ignorance of our activities. The Lord is the witness of
everything; He sees what we are doing at every moment. The Lord is not
covered by a body resulting from karma. Our bodies are formed as a result of
our past deeds (karmaëä daiva-netreëa [SB 3.31.1]), but the Supreme
Personality of Godhead does not have a material body, and therefore He has
no avidyä, ignorance. He does not sleep, but is always alert and awake.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
207
The Supreme Lord is described as tri-yuga because although He appeared
variously in Satya-yuga, Tretä-yuga and Dväpara-yuga, when He appeared in
Kali-yuga He never declared Himself the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
kåñëa-varëaà tviñäkåñëaà
säìgopäìgästra-pärñadam
The Lord appears in Kali-yuga as a devotee. Thus although He is Kåñëa, He
chants the Hare Kåñëa mantra like a devotee. Still, Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(11.5.32) recommends:
yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair
yajanti hi sumedhasaù
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, whose complexion is not black like that of Kåñëa
but is golden (tviñäkåñëam), is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is
accompanied by associates like Nityänanda, Advaita, Gadädhara and Çréväsa.
Those who are sufficiently intelligent worship this Supreme Personality of
Godhead by performing saìkértana-yajïa. In this incarnation, the Supreme
Lord declares Himself not to be the Supreme Lord, and therefore He is known
as Tri-yuga.
TEXT 28
AJaSYa c§&- TvJaYaeYaRMaa<a&
MaNaaeMaYa& PaÄdXaarMaaéu )
i}aNaai>a ivÛuÀl/MaíNaeiMa
Yad+aMaahuSTaMa*Ta& Pa[PaÛe )) 28 ))
ajasya cakraà tv ajayeryamäëaà
manomayaà païcadaçäram äçu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
208
tri-näbhi vidyuc-calam añöa-nemi
yad-akñam ähus tam åtaà prapadye
SYNONYMS
ajasya—of the living being; cakram—the wheel (the cycle of birth and death
in this material world); tu—but; ajayä—by the external energy of the Supreme
Lord; éryamäëam—going around with great force; manaù-mayam—which is
nothing but a mental creation depending chiefly on the mind;
païcadaça—fifteen; aram—possessing spokes; äçu—very quick;
tri-näbhi—having three naves (the three modes of material nature);
vidyut—like electricity; calam—moving; añöa-nemi—made of eight fellies (the
eight external energies of the Lord-bhümir äpo 'nalo väyuù, etc.); yat—who;
akñam—the hub; ähuù—they say; tam—unto Him; åtam—the fact;
prapadye—let us offer our respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
In the cycle of material activities, the material body resembles the wheel of a
mental chariot. The ten senses [five for working and five for gathering
knowledge] and the five life airs within the body form the fifteen spokes of the
chariot's wheel. The three modes of nature [goodness, passion and ignorance]
are its center of activities, and the eight ingredients of nature [earth, water,
fire, air, sky, mind, intelligence and false ego] comprise the rim of the wheel.
The external, material energy moves this wheel like electrical energy. Thus the
wheel revolves very quickly around its hub or central support, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is the Supersoul and the ultimate truth. We offer
our respectful obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
The cycle of repeated birth and death is figuratively described herein. As
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
209
stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.5):
apareyam itas tv anyäà
prakåtià viddhi me paräm
jéva-bhütäà mahä-bäho
yayedaà dhäryate jagat
The entire world is going on because the living entity, who is part and parcel
of the Supreme Lord, is utilizing the material energy. Under the clutches of
the material energy, the jévätmä is revolving on the wheel of birth and death
under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The central point
is the Supersoul. As explained in Bhagavad-gétä (18.61):
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of
the material energy." The material body of the living entity is a result of the
conditioned soul's activities, and because the supporter is the Supersoul, the
Supersoul is the true reality. Every one of us, therefore, should offer respectful
obeisances to this central reality. One should not be misguided by the activities
of this material world and forget the central point, the Absolute Truth. That is
the instruction given here by Lord Brahmä.
TEXT 29
Ya Wk-v<a| TaMaSa" Par& Ta‚
dl/aek-MaVYa¢-MaNaNTaPaarMa( )
AaSaa& ck-araePaSauPa<aRMaeNa‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
210
MauPaaSaTae YaaeGarQaeNa Daqra" )) 29 ))
ya eka-varëaà tamasaù paraà tad
alokam avyaktam ananta-päram
äsäà cakäropasuparëam enam
upäsate yoga-rathena dhéräù
SYNONYMS
yaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead who; eka-varëam—absolute,
situated in pure goodness; tamasaù—to the darkness of the material world;
param—transcendental; tat—that; alokam—who cannot be seen;
avyaktam—not manifested; ananta-päram—unlimited, beyond the
measurement of material time and space; äsäm cakära—situated;
upa-suparëam—on the back of Garuòa; enam—Him; upäsate—worship;
yoga-rathena—by the vehicle of mystic yoga; dhéräù—persons who are sober,
undisturbed by material agitation.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated in pure goodness
[çuddha-sattva], and therefore He is eka-varëa—the oàkära [praëava]. Because
the Lord is beyond the cosmic manifestation, which is considered to be
darkness, He is not visible to material eyes. Nonetheless, He is not separated
from us by time or space, but is present everywhere. Seated on His carrier,
Garuòa, He is worshiped by means of mystical yogic power by those who have
achieved freedom from agitation. Let us all offer our respectful obeisances unto
Him.
PURPORT
Sattvaà viçuddhaà vasudeva-çabditam (SB 4.3.23). In this material world,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
211
the three modes of material nature—goodness, passion and
ignorance—prevail. Among these three, goodness is the platform of
knowledge, and passion brings about a mixture of knowledge and ignorance,
but the mode of ignorance is full of darkness. Therefore the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is beyond darkness and passion. He is on the platform
where goodness or knowledge is not disturbed by passion and ignorance. This
is called the vasudeva platform. It is on this platform of vasudeva that
Väsudeva, or Kåñëa, can appear. Thus Kåñëa appeared on this planet as the son
of Vasudeva. Because the Lord is situated beyond the three modes of material
nature, He is unseen by those who are dominated by these three modes. One
must therefore become dhéra, or undisturbed by the modes of material nature.
The process of yoga may be practiced by one who is free from the agitation of
these modes. Therefore yoga is defined in this way: yoga indriya-saàyamaù. As
previously explained, we are disturbed by the indriyas, or senses. Moreover, we
are agitated by the three modes of material nature, which are imposed upon us
by the external energy. In conditional life, the living entity moves turbulently
in the whirlpool of birth and death, but when one is situated on the
transcendental platform of viçuddha-sattva, pure goodness, he can see the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who sits on the back of Garuòa. Lord
Brahmä offers his respectful obeisances unto that Supreme Lord.
TEXT 30
Na YaSYa k-êaiTaiTaTaiTaR MaaYaa&
YaYaa JaNaae MauùiTa ved NaaQaRMa( )
Ta& iNaiJaRTaaTMaaTMaGau<a& PareXa&
NaMaaMa >aUTaezu SaMa& crNTaMa( )) 30 ))
na yasya kaçcätititarti mäyäà
yayä jano muhyati veda närtham
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
212
taà nirjitätmätma-guëaà pareçaà
namäma bhüteñu samaà carantam
SYNONYMS
na—not; yasya—of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead);
kaçca—anyone; atititarti—is able to overcome; mäyäm—the illusory energy;
yayä—by whom (by the illusory energy); janaù—people in general;
muhyati—become bewildered; veda—understand; na—not; artham—the aim
of life; tam—unto Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead);
nirjita—completely controlling; ätmä—the living entities; ätma-guëam—and
His external energy; para-éçam—the Lord, who is transcendentally situated;
namäma—we offer our respectful obeisances; bhüteñu—unto all living beings;
samam—equally situated, or equipoised; carantam—controlling or ruling
them.
TRANSLATION
No one can overcome the Supreme Personality of Godhead's illusory energy
[mäyä], which is so strong that it bewilders everyone, making one lose the sense
to understand the aim of life. That same mäyä, however, is subdued by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who rules everyone and who is equally
disposed toward all living entities. Let us offer our obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
The prowess of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, certainly
controls all living entities, so much so that the living entities have forgotten
the aim of life. Na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum: [SB 7.5.31] the living
entities have forgotten that the aim of life is to go back home, back to
Godhead. The external energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead gives
all conditioned souls what appears to be an opportunity to be happy within
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
213
this material world, but that is mäyä; in other words, it is a dream that is never
to be fulfilled. Thus every living being is illusioned by the external energy of
the Supreme Lord. That illusory energy is undoubtedly very strong, but she is
fully under the control of the transcendental person who is described in this
verse as pareçam, the transcendental Lord. The Lord is not a part of the
material creation, but is beyond the creation. Therefore, not only does He
control the conditioned souls through His external energy, but He also
controls the external energy itself. Bhagavad-gétä clearly says that the strong
material energy controls everyone and that getting out of her control is
extremely difficult. That controlling energy belongs to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and works under His control. The living entities,
however, being subdued by the material energy, have forgotten the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 31
wMae vYa& YaiTPa[YaYaEv TaNva
SatveNa Sa*ía bihrNTaraiv" )
GaiTa& Na SaU+MaaMa*zYaê ivÚhe
ku-Taae_SauraÛa wTarPa[DaaNaa" )) 31 ))
ime vayaà yat-priyayaiva tanvä
sattvena såñöä bahir-antar-äviù
gatià na sükñmäm åñayaç ca vidmahe
kuto 'surädyä itara-pradhänäù
SYNONYMS
ime—these; vayam—we (the demigods); yat—to whom; priyayä—appearing
very near and dear; eva—certainly; tanvä—the material body; sattvena—by
the mode of goodness; såñöäù—created; bahiù-antaù-äviù—although fully
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
214
aware, internally and externally; gatim—destination; na—not;
sükñmäm—very subtle; åñayaù—great saintly persons; ca—also;
vidmahe—understand; kutaù—how; asura-ädyäù—the demons and atheists;
itara—who are insignificant in their identities; pradhänäù—although they are
leaders of their own societies.
TRANSLATION
Since our bodies are made of sattva-guëa, we, the demigods, are internally
and externally situated in goodness. All the great saints are also situated in that
way. Therefore, if even we cannot understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, what is to be said of those who are most insignificant in their bodily
constitutions, being situated in the modes of passion and ignorance? How can
they understand the Lord? Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
Atheists and demons cannot understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, although He is situated within everyone. For them the Lord finally
appears in the form of death, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (måtyuù
sarva-haraç cäham [Bg. 10.34]). Atheists think that they are independent, and
therefore they do not care about the supremacy of the Lord, yet the Lord
asserts His supremacy when He overcomes them as death. At the time of
death, their attempts to use their so-called scientific knowledge and
philosophical speculation to deny the supremacy of the Lord cannot work.
Hiraëyakaçipu, for example, was an exalted representative of the atheistic class
of men. He always challenged the existence of God, and thus he became
inimical even toward his own son. Everyone was afraid of Hiraëyakaçipu's
atheistic principles. Nonetheless, when Lord Nåsiàhadeva appeared in order
to kill him, Hiraëyakaçipu's atheistic principles could not save him. Lord
Nåsiàhadeva killed Hiraëyakaçipu and took away all his power, influence and
pride. Atheistic men, however, never understand how everything they create
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
215
is annihilated. The Supersoul is situated within them, but because of the
predominance of the modes of passion and ignorance, they cannot understand
the supremacy of the Lord. Even the demigods, the devotees, who are
transcendentally situated or situated on the platform of goodness, are not fully
aware of the qualities and position of the Lord. How then can the demons and
atheists understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead? It is not possible.
Therefore, to gain this understanding, the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä,
offered their respectful obeisances to the Lord.
TEXT 32
PaadaE MahqYa& Svk*-TaEv YaSYa
cTauivRDaae Ya}a ih >aUTaSaGaR" )
Sa vE MahaPaUåz AaTMaTaN}a"
Pa[SaqdTaa& b]ø Mahaiv>aUiTa" )) 32 ))
pädau mahéyaà sva-kåtaiva yasya
catur-vidho yatra hi bhüta-sargaù
sa vai mahä-püruña ätma-tantraù
prasédatäà brahma mahä-vibhütiù
SYNONYMS
pädau—His lotus feet; mahé—the earth; iyam—this; sva-kåta—created by
Himself; eva—indeed; yasya—of whom; catuù-vidhaù—of four kinds of living
entities; yatra—wherein; hi—indeed; bhüta-sargaù—material creation;
saù—He; vai—indeed; mahä-püruñaù—the Supreme Person;
ätma-tantraù—self-sufficient; prasédatäm—may He be merciful to us;
brahma—the greatest; mahä-vibhütiù—with unlimited potency.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
216
TRANSLATION
On this earth there are four kinds of living entities, who are all created by
Him. The material creation rests on His lotus feet. He is the great Supreme
Person, full of opulence and power. May He be pleased with us.
PURPORT
The word mahé refers to the five material elements—earth, water, air, fire
and sky—which rest upon the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Mahat-padaà puëya-yaço muräreù. The mahat-tattva, the total
material energy, rests on His lotus feet, for the cosmic manifestation is but
another opulence of the Lord. In this cosmic manifestation there are four
kinds of living entities—jaräyu ja (those born from embryos), aëòa ja (those
born from eggs), sveda ja (those born from perspiration), and udbhijja (those
born from seeds). Everything is generated from the Lord, as confirmed in the
Vedänta-sütra (janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1]). No one is independent, but the
Supreme Soul is completely independent. Janmädy asya yato 'nvayäd itarataç
cärtheñv abhijïaù sva-räö. The word sva-räö means "independent." We are
dependent, whereas the Supreme Lord is completely independent. Therefore
the Supreme Lord is the greatest of all. Even Lord Brahmä, who created the
cosmic manifestation, is but another opulence of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The material creation is activated by the Lord, and therefore the
Lord is not a part of the material creation. The Lord exists in His original,
spiritual position. The universal form of the Lord, vairäja-mürti, is another
feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 33
AM>aSTau Yad]eTa odarvqYa|
iSaDYaiNTa JaqvNTYauTa vDaRMaaNaa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
217
l/aek-a YaTaae_Qaai%l/l/aek-Paal/a"
Pa[SaqdTaa& Na" Sa Mahaiv>aUiTa" )) 33 ))
ambhas tu yad-reta udära-véryaà
sidhyanti jévanty uta vardhamänäù
lokä yato 'thäkhila-loka-päläù
prasédatäà naù sa mahä-vibhütiù
SYNONYMS
ambhaù—the masses of water seen on this planet or on others; tu—but;
yat-retaù—His semen; udära-véryam—so powerful; sidhyanti—are generated;
jévanti—live; uta—indeed; vardhamänäù—flourish; lokäù—all the three
worlds; yataù—from which; atha—also; akhila-loka-päläù—all the demigods
throughout the universe; prasédatäm—may be pleased; naù—upon us;
saù—He; mahä-vibhütiù—a person with unlimited potency.
TRANSLATION
The entire cosmic manifestation has emerged from water, and it is because of
water that all living entities endure, live and develop. This water is nothing but
the semen of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, may the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who has such great potency, be pleased with us.
PURPORT
Despite the theories of so-called scientists, the vast quantities of water on
this planet and on other planets are not created by a mixture of hydrogen and
oxygen. Rather, the water is sometimes explained to be the perspiration and
sometimes the semen of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is from water
that all living entities emerge, and because of water they live and grow. If there
were no water, all life would cease. Water is the source of life for everyone.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
218
Therefore, by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we have so
much water all over the world.
TEXT 34
SaaeMa& MaNaae YaSYa SaMaaMaNaiNTa
idvaEk-Saa& Yaae bl/MaNDa AaYau" )
wRXaae NaGaaNaa& Pa[JaNa" Pa[JaaNaa&
Pa[SaqdTaa& Na" Sa Mahaiv>aUiTa" )) 34 ))
somaà mano yasya samämananti
divaukasäà yo balam andha äyuù
éço nagänäà prajanaù prajänäà
prasédatäà naù sa mahä-vibhütiù
SYNONYMS
somam—the moon; manaù—the mind; yasya—of whom (of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead); samämananti—they say; divaukasäm—of the
denizens of the upper planetary systems; yaù—who; balam—the strength;
andhaù—the food grains; äyuù—the duration of life; éçaù—the Supreme Lord;
nagänäm—of the trees; prajanaù—the source of breeding; prajänäm—of all
living entities; prasédatäm—may He be pleased; naù—upon us; saù—that
Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahä-vibhütiù—the source of all opulences.
TRANSLATION
Soma, the moon, is the source of food grains, strength and longevity for all
the demigods. He is also the master of all vegetation and the source of
generation for all living entities. As stated by learned scholars, the moon is the
mind of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. May that Supreme Personality of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
219
Godhead, the source of all opulences, be pleased with us.
PURPORT
Soma, the predominating deity of the moon, is the source of food grains and
therefore the source of strength even for the celestial beings, the demigods. He
is the vital force for all vegetation. Unfortunately, modern so-called scientists,
who do not fully understand the moon, describe the moon as being full of
deserts. Since the moon is the source for our vegetation, how can the moon be
a desert? The moonshine is the vital force for all vegetation, and therefore we
cannot possibly accept that the moon is a desert.
TEXT 35
AiGanMauR%& YaSYa Tau JaaTaveda
JaaTa" i§-Yaak-a<@iNaiMataJaNMaa )
ANTa"SaMaud]e_NauPacNSvDaaTaUNa(
Pa[SaqdTaa& Na" Sa Mahaiv>aUiTa" )) 35 ))
agnir mukhaà yasya tu jäta-vedä
jätaù kriyä-käëòa-nimitta-janmä
antaù-samudre 'nupacan sva-dhätün
prasédatäà naù sa mahä-vibhütiù
SYNONYMS
agniù—fire; mukham—the mouth through which the Supreme Personality of
Godhead eats; yasya—of whom; tu—but; jäta-vedäù—the producer of wealth
or of all necessities of life; jätaù—produced; kriyä-käëòa—ritualistic
ceremonies; nimitta—for the sake of; janmä—formed for this reason;
antaù-samudre—within the depths of the ocean; anupacan—always digesting;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
220
sva-dhätün—all elements; prasédatäm—may be pleased; naù—upon us;
saù—He; mahä-vibhütiù—the supremely powerful.
TRANSLATION
Fire, which is born for the sake of accepting oblations in ritualistic
ceremonies, is the mouth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Fire exists
within the depths of the ocean to produce wealth, and fire is also present in the
abdomen to digest food and produce various secretions for the maintenance of
the body. May that supremely powerful Personality of Godhead be pleased with
us.
TEXT 36
YaÀ+auraSaqTa( Tari<adeRvYaaNa&
}aYaqMaYaae b]ø<a Wz iDaZ<YaMa( )
Üar& c Mau¢e-rMa*Ta& c Ma*TYau"
Pa[SaqdTaa& Na" Sa Mahaiv>aUiTa" )) 36 ))
yac-cakñur äsét taraëir deva-yänaà
trayémayo brahmaëa eña dhiñëyam
dväraà ca mukter amåtaà ca måtyuù
prasédatäà naù sa mahä-vibhütiù
SYNONYMS
yat—that which; cakñuù—eye; äsét—became; taraëiù—the sun-god;
deva-yänam—the predominating deity for the path of deliverance for the
demigods; trayé-mayaù—for the sake of guidance in karma-käëòa Vedic
knowledge; brahmaëaù—of the supreme truth; eñaù—this; dhiñëyam—the
place for realization; dväram ca—as well as the gateway; mukteù—for
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
221
liberation; amåtam—the path of eternal life; ca—as well as; måtyuù—the cause
of death; prasédatäm—may He be pleased; naù—upon us; saù—that Supreme
Personality of Godhead; mahä-vibhütiù—the all-powerful.
TRANSLATION
The sun-god marks the path of liberation, which is called arcirädi-vartma.
He is the chief source for understanding of the Vedas, he is the abode where
the Absolute Truth can be worshiped, He is the gateway to liberation, and he is
the source of eternal life as well as the cause of death. The sun-god is the eye of
the Lord. May that Supreme Lord, who is supremely opulent, be pleased with
us.
PURPORT
The sun-god is considered to be the chief of the demigods. He is also
considered to be the demigod who watches the northern side of the universe.
He gives help for understanding the Vedas. As confirmed in Brahma-saàhitä
(5.52):
yac-cakñur eña savitä sakala-grahäëäà
räjä samasta-sura-mürtir açeña-tejäù
yasyäjïayä bhramati saàbhåta-käla-cakro
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"The sun, full of infinite effulgence, is the king of all the planets and the image
of the good soul. The sun is like the eye of the Supreme Lord. I adore the
primeval Lord Govinda, in pursuance of whose order the sun performs his
journey, mounting the wheel of time." The sun is actually the eye of the Lord.
In the Vedic mantras it is said that unless the Supreme Personality of Godhead
sees, no one can see. Unless there is sunlight, no living entity on any planet
can see. Therefore the sun is considered to be the eye of the Supreme Lord.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
222
That is confirmed here by the words yac-cakñur äsét and in the Brahma-saàhitä
by the words yac-cakñur eña savitä. The word savitä means the sun-god.
TEXT 37
Pa[a<aad>aUd( YaSYa cracra<aa&
Pa[a<a" Sahae bl/MaaeJaê vaYau" )
ANvaSMa SaMa]aJaiMavaNauGaa vYa&
Pa[SaqdTaa& Na" Sa Mahaiv>aUiTa" )) 37 ))
präëäd abhüd yasya caräcaräëäà
präëaù saho balam ojaç ca väyuù
anväsma samräjam ivänugä vayaà
prasédatäà naù sa mahä-vibhütiù
SYNONYMS
präëät—from the vital force; abhüt—generated; yasya—of whom;
cara-acaräëäm—of all living entities, moving and nonmoving; präëaù—the
vital force; sahaù—the basic principle of life; balam—strength; ojaù—the vital
force; ca—and; väyuù—the air; anväsma—follow; samräjam—an emperor;
iva—like; anugäù—followers; vayam—all of us; prasédatäm—may be pleased;
naù—upon us; saù—He; mahä-vibhütiù—the supremely powerful.
TRANSLATION
All living entities, moving and nonmoving, receive their vital force, their
bodily strength and their very lives from the air. All of us follow the air for our
vital force, exactly as servants follow an emperor. The vital force of air is
generated from the original vital force of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
May that Supreme Lord be pleased with us.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
223
TEXT 38
é[ae}aad( idXaae YaSYa ôdê %aiNa
Pa[Jaijre %& PauåzSYa Naa>Yaa" )
Pa[a<aeiNd]YaaTMaaSauXarqrke-Ta"
Pa[SaqdTaa& Na" Sa Mahaiv>aUiTa" )) 38 ))
çroträd diço yasya hådaç ca khäni
prajajïire khaà puruñasya näbhyäù
präëendriyätmäsu-çaréra-ketaù
prasédatäà naù sa mahä-vibhütiù
SYNONYMS
çroträt—from the ears; diçaù—different directions; yasya—of whom;
hådaù—from the heart; ca—also; khäni—the holes of the body;
prajajïire—generated; kham—the sky; puruñasya—of the Supreme Person;
näbhyäù—from the navel; präëa—of the life force; indriya—senses;
ätmä—mind; asu—vital force; çaréra—and body; ketaù—the shelter;
prasédatäm—may be pleased; naù—upon us; saù—He; mahä-vibhütiù—the
supremely powerful.
TRANSLATION
May the supremely powerful Personality of Godhead be pleased with us. The
different directions are generated from His ears, the holes of the body come
from His heart, and the vital force, the senses, the mind, the air within the
body, and the ether, which is the shelter of the body, come from His navel.
TEXT 39
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
224
bl/aNMaheNd]iñdXaa" Pa[Saada‚
NMaNYaaeiGaRrqXaae iDaz<aad( ivirÄ" )
%e>YaSTau ^Nda&SYa*zYaae Mae!\Ta" k-"
Pa[SaqdTaa& Na" Sa Mahaiv>aUiTa" )) 39 ))
balän mahendras tri-daçäù prasädän
manyor giréço dhiñaëäd viriïcaù
khebhyas tu chandäàsy åñayo meòhrataù kaù
prasédatäà naù sa mahä-vibhütiù
SYNONYMS
balät—by His strength; mahä-indraù—King Indra became possible;
tri-daçäù—as well as the demigods; prasädät—by satisfaction; manyoù—by
anger; giri-éçaù—Lord Çiva; dhiñaëät—from sober intelligence; viriïcaù—Lord
Brahmä; khebhyaù—from the bodily holes; tu—as well as; chandäàsi—Vedic
mantras; åñayaù—great saintly persons; meòhrataù—from the genitals;
kaù—the prajäpatis; prasédatäm—may be pleased; naù—upon us; saù—He;
mahä-vibhütiù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has extraordinary
power.
TRANSLATION
Mahendra, the King of Heaven, was generated from the prowess of the Lord,
the demigods were generated from the mercy of the Lord, Lord Çiva was
generated from the anger of the Lord, and Lord Brahmä from His sober
intelligence. The Vedic mantras were generated from the bodily holes of the
Lord, and the great saints and prajäpatis were generated from His genitals. May
that supremely powerful Lord be pleased with us.
TEXT 40
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
225
é[qvR+aSa" iPaTarX^aYaYaaSaNa(
DaMaR" STaNaaidTar" Pa*ïTaae_>aUTa( )
ÛaEYaRSYa XaqZ<aaeR_PSarSaae ivharaTa(
Pa[SaqdTaa& Na" Sa Mahaiv>aUiTa" )) 40 ))
çrér vakñasaù pitaraç chäyayäsan
dharmaù stanäd itaraù påñöhato 'bhüt
dyaur yasya çérñëo 'psaraso vihärät
prasédatäà naù sa mahä-vibhütiù
SYNONYMS
çréù—the goddess of fortune; vakñasaù—from His chest; pitaraù—the
inhabitants of Pitåloka; chäyayä—from His shadow; äsan—became possible;
dharmaù—the principle of religion; stanät—from His bosom;
itaraù—irreligion (the opposite of dharma); påñöhataù—from the back;
abhüt—became possible; dyauù—the heavenly planets; yasya—of whom;
çérñëaù—from the top of the head; apsarasaù—the inhabitants of Apsaroloka;
vihärät—by His sense enjoyment; prasédatäm—kindly be pleased; naù—upon
us; saù—He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); mahä-vibhütiù—the
greatest in all prowess.
TRANSLATION
The goddess of fortune was generated from His chest, the inhabitants of
Pitåloka from His shadow, religion from His bosom, and irreligion [the opposite
of religion] from His back. The heavenly planets were generated from the top of
His head, and the Apsaräs from His sense enjoyment. May that supremely
powerful Personality of Godhead be pleased with us.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
226
TEXT 41
ivPa[ae Mau%ad( b]ø c YaSYa Gauù&
raJaNYa AaSaqd( >auJaYaaebRl&/ c )
OvaeRivR@aeJaae_x(iga]rvedéUd]aE
Pa[SaqdTaa& Na" Sa Mahaiv>aUiTa" )) 41 ))
vipro mukhäd brahma ca yasya guhyaà
räjanya äséd bhujayor balaà ca
ürvor viò ojo 'ìghrir aveda-çüdrau
prasédatäà naù sa mahä-vibhütiù
SYNONYMS
vipraù—the brähmaëas; mukhät—from His mouth; brahma—the Vedic
literatures; ca—also; yasya—of whom; guhyam—from His confidential
knowledge; räjanyaù—the kñatriyas; äsét—became possible; bhujayoù—from
His arms; balam ca—as well as bodily strength; ürvoù—from the thighs;
viö—vaiçyas; ojaù—and their expert productive knowledge; aìghriù—from His
feet; aveda—those who are beyond the jurisdiction of Vedic knowledge;
çüdrau—the worker class; prasédatäm—may be pleased; naù—upon us;
saù—He; mahä-vibhütiù—the supremely powerful Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëas and Vedic knowledge come from the mouth of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the kñatriyas and bodily strength come from His arms,
the vaiçyas and their expert knowledge in productivity and wealth come from
His thighs, and the çüdras, who are outside of Vedic knowledge, come from His
feet. May that Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is full in prowess, be
pleased with us.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
227
TEXT 42
l/ae>aae_DaraTa( Pa[qiTaåPaYaR>aUd( ÛuiTa‚
NaRSTa" PaXaVYa" SPaXaeRNa k-aMa" )
>a]uvaeYaRMa" Pa+Ma>avSTau k-al/"
Pa[SaqdTaa& Na" Sa Mahaiv>aUiTa" )) 42 ))
lobho 'dharät prétir upary abhüd dyutir
nastaù paçavyaù sparçena kämaù
bhruvor yamaù pakñma-bhavas tu kälaù
prasédatäà naù sa mahä-vibhütiù
SYNONYMS
lobhaù—greed; adharät—from the lower lip; prétiù—affection; upari—from
the upper lip; abhüt—became possible; dyutiù—bodily luster; nastaù—from the
nose; paçavyaù—fit for the animals; sparçena—by the touch; kämaù—lusty
desires; bhruvoù—from the eyebrows; yamaù—Yamaräja became possible;
pakñma-bhavaù—from the eyelashes; tu—but; kälaù—eternal time, which
brings death; prasédatäm—be pleased; naù—upon us; saù—He;
mahä-vibhütiù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has great prowess.
TRANSLATION
Greed is generated from His lower lip, affection from His upper lip, bodily
luster from His nose, animalistic lusty desires from His sense of touch,
Yamaräja from His eyebrows, and eternal time from His eyelashes. May that
Supreme Lord be pleased with us.
TEXT 43
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
228
d]VYa& vYa" k-MaR Gau<aaiNvXaez&
YaÛaeGaMaaYaaivihTaaNvdiNTa )
Yad( duivR>aaVYa& Pa[buDaaPabaDa&
Pa[SaqdTaa& Na" Sa Mahaiv>aUiTa" )) 43 ))
dravyaà vayaù karma guëän viçeñaà
yad-yogamäyä-vihitän vadanti
yad durvibhävyaà prabudhäpabädhaà
prasédatäà naù sa mahä-vibhütiù
SYNONYMS
dravyam—the five elements of the material world; vayaù—time;
karma—fruitive activities; guëän—the three modes of material nature;
viçeñam—the varieties caused by combinations of the twenty-three elements;
yat—that which; yoga-mäyä—by the Lord's creative potency; vihitän—all
done; vadanti—all learned men say; yat durvibhävyam—which is actually
extremely difficult to understand; prabudha-apabädham—rejected by the
learned, by those who are fully aware; prasédatäm—may be pleased; naù—upon
us; saù—He; mahä-vibhütiù—the controller of everything.
TRANSLATION
All learned men say that the five elements, eternal time, fruitive activity,
the three modes of material nature, and the varieties produced by these modes
are all creations of yogamäyä. This material world is therefore extremely
difficult to understand, but those who are highly learned have rejected it. May
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the controller of everything, be
pleased with us.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
229
PURPORT
The word durvibhävyam is very important in this verse. No one can
understand how everything is happening in this material world by the
arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead through His material
energies. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10), mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate
sacaräcaram: everything is actually happening under the direction of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This much we can learn, but how it is
happening is extremely difficult to understand. We cannot even understand
how the affairs within our body are systematically taking place. The body is a
small universe, and since we cannot understand how things are happening in
this small universe, how can we understand the affairs of the bigger universe?
Actually this universe is very difficult to understand, yet learned sages have
advised, as Kåñëa has also advised, that this material world is duùkhälayam
açäçvatam; [Bg. 8.15] in other words, it is a place of misery and temporality.
One must give up this world and go back home, back to the Personality of
Godhead. Materialists may argue, "If this material world and its affairs are
impossible to understand, how can we reject it?" The answer is provided by the
word prabudhäpabädham. We have to reject this material world because it is
rejected by those who are learned in Vedic wisdom. Even though we cannot
understand what this material world is, we should be ready to reject it in
accordance with the advice of learned persons, especially the advice of Kåñëa.
Kåñëa says:
mäm upetya punar janma
duùkhälayam açäçvatam
näpnuvanti mahätmänaù
saàsiddhià paramäà gatäù
"After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogés in devotion, never return to
this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they have attained the
highest perfection." (Bg. 8.15) One has to return home, back to Godhead, for
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
230
this is the highest perfection of life. To go back to Godhead means to reject
this material world. Although we cannot understand the functions of this
material world and whether it is good for us or bad for us, in accordance with
the advice of the supreme authority we must reject it and go back home, back
to Godhead.
TEXT 44
NaMaae_STau TaSMaa oPaXaaNTaXa¢-Yae
SvaraJYal/a>aPa[iTaPaUirTaaTMaNae )
Gau<aezu MaaYaaricTaezu v*itai>a‚
NaR SaÂMaaNaaYa Na>aSvdUTaYae )) 44 ))
namo 'stu tasmä upaçänta-çaktaye
sväräjya-läbha-pratipüritätmane
guëeñu mäyä-raciteñu våttibhir
na sajjamänäya nabhasvad-ütaye
SYNONYMS
namaù—our respectful obeisances; astu—let there be; tasmai—unto Him;
upaçänta-çaktaye—who does not endeavor to achieve anything else, who is
free from restlessness; sväräjya—completely independent; läbha—of all gains;
pratipürita—fully achieved; ätmane—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; guëeñu—of the material world, which is moving because of the three
modes of nature; mäyä-raciteñu—things created by the external energy;
våttibhiù—by such activities of the senses; na sajjamänäya—one who does not
become attached, or one who is above material pains and pleasures;
nabhasvat—the air; ütaye—unto the Lord, who has created this material world
as His pastime.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
231
TRANSLATION
Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is completely silent, free from endeavor, and completely satisfied
by His own achievements. He is not attached to the activities of the material
world through His senses. Indeed, in performing His pastimes in this material
world, He is just like the unattached air.
PURPORT
We can simply understand that behind the activities of material nature is
the Supreme Lord, by whose indications everything takes place, although we
cannot see Him. Even without seeing Him, we should offer Him our respectful
obeisances. We should know that He is complete. Everything is done
systematically by His energies (paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate [Cc. Madhya
13.65, purport]), and therefore He has nothing to do (na tasya käryaà karaëaà
ca vidyate). As indicated here by the word upaçänta-çaktaye, His different
energies act, but although He sets these energies in action, He Himself has
nothing to do. He is not attached to anything, for He is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore, let us offer our respectful obeisances unto
Him.
TEXT 45
Sa Tv& Naae dXaRYaaTMaaNaMaSMaTk-r<aGaaecrMa( )
Pa[PaàaNaa& idd*+aU<aa& SaiSMaTa& Tae Mau%aMbuJaMa( )) 45 ))
sa tvaà no darçayätmänam
asmat-karaëa-gocaram
prapannänäà didåkñüëäà
sasmitaà te mukhämbujam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
232
SYNONYMS
saù—He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); tvam—You are my Lord;
naù—to us; darçaya—be visible; ätmänam—in Your original form;
asmat-karaëa-gocaram—appreciable by our direct senses, especially by our
eyes; prapannänäm—we are all surrendered unto You; didåkñüëäm—yet we
wish to see You; sasmitam—smiling; te—Your; mukha-ambujam—lotuslike
face.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, we are surrendered unto You, yet we
wish to see You. Please make Your original form and smiling lotus face visible
to our eyes and appreciable to our other senses.
PURPORT
The devotees are always eager to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in His original form, with His smiling lotuslike face. They are not interested in
experiencing the impersonal form. The Lord has both impersonal and personal
features. The impersonalists have no idea of the personal feature of the Lord,
but Lord Brahmä and the members of his disciplic succession want to see the
Lord in His personal form. Without a personal form there can be no question
of a smiling face, which is clearly indicated here by the words sasmitam te
mukhämbujam. Those who are in the Vaiñëava sampradäya of Brahmä always
want to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They are eager to realize the
Lord's personal feature, not the impersonal feature. As clearly stated here,
asmat-karaëa-gocaram: the personal feature of the Lord can be directly
perceived by our senses.
TEXT 46
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
233
TaESTaE" SveC^a>aUTaE æPaE" k-ale/ k-ale/ SvYa& iv>aae )
k-MaR duivRzh& Yaàae >aGava&STaTa( k-raeiTa ih )) 46 ))
tais taiù svecchä-bhütai rüpaiù
käle käle svayaà vibho
karma durviñahaà yan no
bhagaväàs tat karoti hi
SYNONYMS
taiù—by such appearances; taiù—by such incarnations; sva-icchä-bhütaiù—all
appearing by Your personal sweet will; rüpaiù—by factual forms; käle käle—in
different millenniums; svayam—personally; vibho—O Supreme;
karma—activities; durviñaham—uncommon (unable to be enacted by anyone
else); yat—that which; naù—unto us; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tat—that; karoti—executes; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, by Your sweet will You appear
in various incarnations, millennium after millennium, and act wonderfully,
performing uncommon activities that would be impossible for us.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.7):
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
234
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend
Myself." Thus it is not imagination but a fact that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, by His sweet will, appears in different incarnations, such as Matsya,
Kürma, Varäha, Nåsiàha, Vämana, Paraçuräma, Rämacandra, Balaräma,
Buddha and many other forms. Devotees are always eager to see one of the
Lord's innumerable forms. It is said that just as no one can count how many
waves there are in the sea, no one can count the forms of the Lord. This does
not mean, however, that anyone can claim to be a form of the Lord and be
acceptable as an incarnation. The incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead must be accepted in terms of the descriptions found in the çästras.
Lord Brahmä is eager to see the incarnation of the Lord, or the original source
of all incarnations; he is not eager to see an imposter. The incarnation's
activities are proof of His identity. All the incarnations described in the
çästras act wonderfully (keçava dhåta-ména-çaréra jaya jagadéça hare). It is only
by the personal sweet will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that He
appears and disappears, and only fortunate devotees can expect to see Him
face to face.
TEXT 47
(c)e-Xa>aUYaRLPaSaarai<a k-MaaRi<a ivf-l/aiNa va )
deihNaa& ivzYaaTaaRNaa& Na TaQaEvaiPaRTa& TviYa )) 47 ))
kleça-bhüry-alpa-säräëi
karmäëi viphaläni vä
dehinäà viñayärtänäà
na tathaivärpitaà tvayi
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
235
kleça—hardship; bhüri—very much; alpa—very little; säräëi—good result;
karmäëi—activities; viphaläni—frustration; vä—either; dehinäm—of persons;
viñaya-artänäm—who are eager to enjoy the material world; na—not;
tathä—like that; eva—indeed; arpitam—dedicated; tvayi—unto Your
Lordship.
TRANSLATION
Karmés are always anxious to accumulate wealth for their sense gratification,
but for that purpose they must work very hard. Yet even though they work
hard, the results are not satisfying. Indeed, sometimes their work results only in
frustration. But devotees who have dedicated their lives to the service of the
Lord can achieve substantial results without working very hard. These results
exceed the devotee's expectations.
PURPORT
We can practically see how the devotees who have dedicated their lives for
the service of the Lord in the Kåñëa consciousness movement are getting
immense opportunities for the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
without working very hard. The Kåñëa consciousness movement actually
started with only forty rupees, but now it has more than forty crores worth of
property, and all this opulence has been achieved within eight or ten years. No
karmé can expect to improve his business so swiftly, and besides that, whatever
a karmé acquires is temporary and sometimes frustrating. In Kåñëa
consciousness, however, everything is encouraging and improving. The Kåñëa
consciousness movement is not very popular with the karmés because this
movement recommends that one refrain from illicit sex, meat-eating, gambling
and intoxication. These are restrictions that karmés very much dislike.
Nonetheless, in the presence of so many enemies, this movement is
progressing, going forward without impediments. If the devotees continue to
spread this movement, dedicating life and soul to the lotus feet of Kåñëa, no
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
236
one will be able to check it. The movement will go forward without limits.
Chant Hare Kåñëa!
TEXT 48
NaavMa" k-MaRk-LPaae_iPa ivf-l/aYaeìraiPaRTa" )
k-LPaTae PauåzSYaEv Sa ùaTMaa diYaTaae ihTa" )) 48 ))
nävamaù karma-kalpo 'pi
viphaläyeçvarärpitaù
kalpate puruñasyaiva
sa hy ätmä dayito hitaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; avamaù—very little, or insignificant; karma—activities;
kalpaù—rightly executed; api—even; viphaläya—go in vain;
éçvara-arpitaù—because of being dedicated to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; kalpate—it is so accepted; puruñasya—of all persons; eva—indeed;
saù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hi—certainly; ätmä—the
Supersoul, the supreme father; dayitaù—extremely dear; hitaù—beneficial.
TRANSLATION
Activities dedicated to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even if
performed in small measure, never go in vain. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, being the supreme father, is naturally very dear and always ready to
act for the good of the living entities.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (2.40), the Lord says svalpam apy asya dharmasya träyate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
237
mahato bhayät: this dharma, devotional service, is so important that even if
performed to a very small, almost negligible extent, it can give one the supreme
result. There are many instances in the history of the world in which even a
slight service rendered to the Lord has saved a living entity from the greatest
danger. Ajämila, for example, was saved by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead from the greatest danger, that of going to hell. He was saved simply
because he chanted the name Näräyaëa at the end of his life. When Ajämila
chanted this holy name of the Lord, Näräyaëa, he did not chant knowingly;
actually he was calling his youngest son, whose name was Näräyaëa.
Nonetheless, Lord Näräyaëa took this chanting seriously, and thus Ajämila
achieved the result of ante näräyaëa-småtiù [SB 2.1.6], remembering Näräyaëa
at the end of life. If one somehow or other remembers the holy name of
Näräyaëa, Kåñëa or Räma at the end of life, he immediately achieves the
transcendental result of going back home, back to Godhead.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is actually the only object of our love.
As long as we are in this material world we have so many desires to fulfill, but
when we come in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we
immediately become perfect and fully satisfied, just as a child is fully satisfied
when he comes to the lap of his mother. Dhruva Mahäräja went to the forest
to achieve some material result by austerity and penance, but when he actually
saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead he said, "I do not want any material
benediction. I am completely satisfied." Even if one wants some material
benefit from serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this can be
achieved extremely easily, without hard labor. Therefore the çästra
recommends:
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"Whether one desires everything or nothing or desires to merge into the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
238
existence of the Lord, he is intelligent only if he worships Lord Kåñëa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, by rendering transcendental loving service."
(SB 2.3.10) Even if one has material desires, one can undoubtedly achieve what
he wants by rendering service to the Lord.
TEXT 49
YaQaa ih Sk-NDaXaa%aNaa& TaraeMaURl/avSaecNaMa( )
WvMaaraDaNa& ivZ<aae" SaveRzaMaaTMaNaê ih )) 49 ))
yathä hi skandha-çäkhänäà
taror mülävasecanam
evam ärädhanaà viñëoù
sarveñäm ätmanaç ca hi
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; hi—indeed; skandha—of the trunk; çäkhänäm—and of the
branches; taroù—of a tree; müla—the root; avasecanam—watering; evam—in
this way; ärädhanam—worship; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; sarveñäm—of
everyone; ätmanaù—of the Supersoul; ca—also; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
When one pours water on the root of a tree, the trunk and branches of the
tree are automatically pleased. Similarly, when one becomes a devotee of Lord
Viñëu, everyone is served, for the Lord is the Supersoul of everyone.
PURPORT
As stated in the Padma Puräëa:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
239
ärädhanänäà sarveñäà
viñëor ärädhanaà param
tasmät parataraà devi
tadéyänäà samarcanam
"Of all types of worship, worship of Lord Viñëu is best, and better than the
worship of Lord Viñëu is the worship of His devotee, the Vaiñëava." There are
many demigods worshiped by people who are attached to material desires
(kämais tais tair håta jïänäù prapadyante'nya-devatäù [Bg. 7.20]). Because
people are embarrassed by so many material desires, they worship Lord Çiva,
Lord Brahmä, the goddess Kälé, Durgä, Gaëeça and Sürya to achieve different
results. However, one can achieve all these results simultaneously just by
worshiping Lord Viñëu. As stated elsewhere in the Bhägavatam (4.31.14):
yathä taror müla-niñecanena
tåpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaçäkhäù
präëopahäräc ca yathendriyäëäà
tathaiva sarvärhaëam acyutejyä
"Just by pouring water on the root of a tree, one nourishes its trunk and all of
its branches, fruits and flowers, and just by supplying food to the stomach, one
satisfies all the limbs of the body. Similarly, by worshiping Lord Viñëu one can
satisfy everyone." Kåñëa consciousness is not a sectarian religious movement.
Rather, it is meant for all-embracing welfare activities for the world. One can
enter this movement without discrimination in terms of caste, creed, religion
or nationality. If one is trained to worship the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa, who is the origin of viñëu-tattva, one can become fully
satisfied and perfect in all respects.
TEXT 50
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
240
NaMaSTau>YaMaNaNTaaYa duivRTaKYaaRTMak-MaR<ae )
iNaGauR<aaYa Gau<aeXaaYa SatvSQaaYa c SaaMPa[TaMa( )) 50 ))
namas tubhyam anantäya
durvitarkyätma-karmaëe
nirguëäya guëeçäya
sattva-sthäya ca sämpratam
SYNONYMS
namaù—all obeisances; tubhyam—unto You, my Lord; anantäya—who are
everlasting, transcending the three phases of time (past, present and future);
durvitarkya-ätma-karmaëe—unto You, who perform inconceivable activities;
nirguëäya—which are all transcendental, free from the inebriety of material
qualities; guëa-éçäya—unto You, who control the three modes of material
nature; sattva-sthäya—who are in favor of the material quality of goodness;
ca—also; sämpratam—at present.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, all obeisances unto You, who are eternal, beyond time's limits of
past, present and future. You are inconceivable in Your activities, You are the
master of the three modes of material nature, and, being transcendental to all
material qualities, You are free from material contamination. You are the
controller of all three of the modes of nature, but at the present You are in
favor of the quality of goodness. Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto
You.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead controls the material activities
manifested by the three modes of material nature. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
241
nirguëaà guëa-bhoktå ca: the Supreme Personality of Godhead is always
transcendental to the material qualities (sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and
tamo-guëa), but nonetheless He is their controller. The Lord manifests
Himself in three features—as Brahmä, Viñëu and Maheçvara—to control
these three qualities. He personally takes charge of sattva-guëa as Lord Viñëu,
and He entrusts the charge of rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa to Lord Brahmä and
Lord Çiva. Ultimately, however, He is the controller of all three guëas. Lord
Brahmä, expressing his appreciation, said that because Lord Viñëu had now
taken charge of the activities of goodness, there was every hope that the
demigods would be successful in fulfilling their desires. The demigods were
harassed by the demons, who were infested with tamo-guëa. However, as Lord
Brahmä has previously described, since the time of sattva-guëa had now
arrived, the demigods could naturally expect to fulfill their desires. The
demigods are supposedly well advanced in knowledge, yet they could not
understand the knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore
the Lord is addressed here as anantäya. Although Lord Brahmä knows past,
present and future, he is unable to understand the unlimited knowledge of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Fifth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Demigods Appeal to the Lord for Protection."
6. The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce
This chapter describes how the Lord appeared before the demigods when
they offered Him their prayers. Following the advice of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the demigods executed a truce with the demons for
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
242
the purpose of churning nectar from the sea.
Because of the prayers offered by the demigods in the previous chapter,
Lord Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu was pleased with the demigods, and thus He
appeared before them. The demigods were almost blinded by His
transcendental bodily effulgence. At first, therefore, they could not even see
any part of His body. After some time, however, when Brahmä could see the
Lord, he, along with Lord Çiva, began to offer the Lord prayers.
Lord Brahmä said: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being beyond
birth and death, is eternal. He has no material qualities. Yet He is the ocean of
unlimited auspicious qualities. He is subtler than the most subtle, He is
invisible, and His form is inconceivable. He is worshipable for all the
demigods. Innumerable universes exist within His form, and therefore He is
never separated from these universes by time, space or circumstances. He is the
chief and the pradhäna. Although He is the beginning, the middle and the end
of the material creation, the idea of pantheism conceived by Mäyävädé
philosophers has no validity. The Supreme Personality of Godhead controls
the entire material manifestation through His subordinate agent, the external
energy. Because of His inconceivable transcendental position, He is always the
master of the material energy. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His
various forms, is always present even within this material world, but the
material qualities cannot touch Him. One can understand His position only by
His instructions, as given in Bhagavad-gétä." As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (10.10),
dadämi buddhi-yogaà tam. Buddhi-yoga means bhakti-yoga. Only through the
process of bhakti-yoga can one understand the Supreme Lord.
When offered prayers by Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead was pleased. Thus He gave appropriate instructions to
all the demigods. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is known as Ajita,
unconquerable, advised the demigods to make a peace proposal to the demons,
so that after formulating a truce, the demigods and demons could churn the
ocean of milk. The rope would be the biggest serpent, known as Väsuki, and
the churning rod would be Mandara Mountain. Poison would also be produced
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
243
from the churning, but it would be taken by Lord Çiva, and so there would be
no need to fear it. Many other attractive things would be generated by the
churning, but the Lord warned the demigods not to be captivated by such
things. Nor should the demigods be angry if there were some disturbances.
After advising the demigods in this way, the Lord disappeared from the scene.
Following the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
demigods established a peace with Mahäräja Bali, the King of the demons.
Then both the demons and the demigods started for the ocean, taking
Mandara Mountain with them. Because of the great heaviness of the
mountain, the demigods and demons became fatigued, and some of them
actually died. Then the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, appeared
there on the back of His carrier, Garuòa, and by His mercy He brought these
demigods and demons back to life. The Lord then lifted the mountain with one
of His hands and placed it on the back of Garuòa. The Lord sat on the
mountain and was carried to the spot of the churning by Garuòa, who placed
the mountain in the middle of the sea. Then the Lord asked Garuòa to leave
that place because as long as Garuòa was present, Väsuki could not come there.
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
Wv& STauTa" SaurGa<aE>aRGavaNa( hirrqìr" )
TaezaMaaivr>aUd( raJaNSahóak-aeRdYaÛuiTa" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evaà stutaù sura-gaëair
bhagavän harir éçvaraù
teñäm ävirabhüd räjan
sahasrärkodaya-dyutiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
244
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—in this way;
stutaù—being worshiped by prayers; sura-gaëaiù—by the demigods;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariù—the vanquisher of all
inauspiciousness; éçvaraù—the supreme controller; teñäm—in front of Lord
Brahmä and all the demigods; ävirabhüt—appeared there; räjan—O King
(Parékñit); sahasra—of thousands; arka—of suns; udaya—like the rising;
dyutiù—His effulgence.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King Parékñit, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Hari, being thus worshiped with prayers by the demigods and Lord
Brahmä, appeared before them. His bodily effulgence resembled the
simultaneous rising of thousands of suns.
TEXT 2
TaeNaEv SahSaa SaveR deva" Pa[iTahTae+a<aa" )
NaaPaXYaN%& idXa" +aaE<aqMaaTMaaNa& c ku-Taae iv>auMa( )) 2 ))
tenaiva sahasä sarve
deväù pratihatekñaëäù
näpaçyan khaà diçaù kñauëém
ätmänaà ca kuto vibhum
SYNONYMS
tena eva—because of this; sahasä—all of a sudden; sarve—all; deväù—the
demigods; pratihata-ékñaëäù—their vision being blocked; na—not;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
245
apaçyan—could see; kham—the sky; diçaù—the directions; kñauëém—land;
ätmänam ca—also themselves; kutaù—and where is the question of seeing;
vibhum—the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
The vision of all the demigods was blocked by the Lord's effulgence. Thus
they could see neither the sky, the directions, the land, nor even themselves,
what to speak of seeing the Lord, who was present before them.
TEXTS 3-7
ivirÄae >aGavaNd*îa Sah XaveR<a Taa& TaNauMa( )
SvC^a& Mark-TaXYaaMaa& k-ÅGa>aaRå<ae+a<aaMa( )) 3 ))
TaáheMaavdaTaeNa l/SaTk-aEXaeYavaSaSaa )
Pa[SaàcaåSavaR(r)q& SauMau%q& SauNdr>a]uvMa( )) 4 ))
MahaMai<aik-rq$e=Na ke-YaUra>Yaa& c >aUizTaaMa( )
k-<aaR>ar<aiNa>aaRTak-Paael/é[qMau%aMbuJaaMa( )) 5 ))
k-aÄqk-l/aPavl/YaharNaUPaurXaaei>aTaaMa( )
k-aESTau>aa>ar<aa& l/+Maq& ib>a]Taq& vNaMaail/NaqMa( )) 6 ))
SaudXaRNaaidi>a" SvañEMaURiTaRMaiÙåPaaiSaTaaMa( )
Tauíav devPa[vr" SaXavR" Pauåz& ParMa( )
SavaRMarGa<aE" Saak&- SavaR(r)ErviNa& GaTaE" )) 7 ))
viriïco bhagavän dåñövä
saha çarveëa täà tanum
svacchäà marakata-çyämäà
kaïja-garbhäruëekñaëäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
246
tapta-hemävadätena
lasat-kauçeya-väsasä
prasanna-cäru-sarväìgéà
sumukhéà sundara-bhruvam
mahä-maëi-kiréöena
keyüräbhyäà ca bhüñitäm
karëäbharaëa-nirbhätakapola-
çré-mukhämbujäm
käïcékaläpa-valayahära-
nüpura-çobhitäm
kaustubhäbharaëäà lakñméà
bibhratéà vana-mäliném
sudarçanädibhiù svästrair
mürtimadbhir upäsitäm
tuñöäva deva-pravaraù
saçarvaù puruñaà param
sarvämara-gaëaiù säkaà
sarväìgair avanià gataiù
SYNONYMS
viriïcaù—Lord Brahmä; bhagavän—who is also addressed as bhagavän because
of his powerful position; dåñövä—by seeing; saha—with; çarveëa—Lord Çiva;
täm—unto the Supreme Lord; tanum—His transcendental form;
svacchäm—without material contamination; marakata-çyämäm—with a bodily
luster like the light of a blue gem; kaïja-garbha-aruëa-ékñaëäm—with pinkish
eyes like the womb of a lotus flower; tapta-hema-avadätena—with a luster like
that of molten gold; lasat—shining; kauçeya-väsasä—dressed in yellow silk
garments; prasanna-cäru-sarva-aìgém—all the parts of whose body were
graceful and very beautiful; su-mukhém—with a smiling face;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
247
sundara-bhruvam—whose eyebrows were very beautifully situated;
mahä-maëi-kiréöena—with a helmet bedecked with valuable jewels;
keyüräbhyäm ca bhüñitäm—decorated with all kinds of ornaments;
karëa-äbharaëa-nirbhäta—illuminated by the rays of the jewels on His ears;
kapola—with cheeks; çré-mukha-ambujäm—whose beautiful lotuslike face;
käïcé-kaläpa-valaya—ornaments like the belt on the waist and bangles on the
hands; hära-nüpura—with a necklace on the chest and ankle bells on the legs;
çobhitäm—all beautifully set; kaustubha-äbharaëäm—whose chest was
decorated with the Kaustubha gem; lakñmém—the goddess of fortune;
bibhratém—moving; vana-mäliném—with flower garlands;
sudarçana-ädibhiù—bearing the Sudarçana cakra and others; sva-astraiù—with
His weapons; mürtimadbhiù—in His original form; upäsitäm—being
worshiped; tuñöäva—satisfied; deva-pravaraù—the chief of the demigods;
sa-çarvaù—with Lord Çiva; puruñam param—the Supreme Personality;
sarva-amara-gaëaiù—accompanied by all the demigods; säkam—with;
sarva-aìgaiù—with all the parts of the body; avanim—on the ground;
gataiù—prostrated.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, along with Lord Çiva, saw the crystal-clear personal beauty of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose blackish body resembles a marakata
gem, whose eyes are reddish like the depths of a lotus, who is dressed with
garments that are yellow like molten gold, and whose entire body is attractively
decorated. They saw His beautiful, smiling, lotuslike face, crowned by a helmet
bedecked with valuable jewels. The Lord has attractive eyebrows, and His
cheeks are adorned with earrings. Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva saw the belt on
the Lord's waist, the bangles on His arms, the necklace on His chest, and the
ankle bells on His legs. The Lord is bedecked with flower garlands, His neck is
decorated with the Kaustubha gem, and He carries with Him the goddess of
fortune and His personal weapons, like His disc and club. When Lord Brahmä,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
248
along with Lord Çiva and the other demigods, thus saw the form of the Lord,
they all immediately fell to the ground, offering their obeisances.
TEXT 8
é[qb]øaevac
AJaaTaJaNMaiSQaiTaSa&YaMaaYaa‚
Gau<aaYa iNavaR<aSau%a<aRvaYa )
A<aaeri<aMane_PairGa<YaDaaMane
MahaNau>aavaYa NaMaae NaMaSTae )) 8 ))
çré-brahmoväca
ajäta-janma-sthiti-saàyamäyäguëäya
nirväëa-sukhärëaväya
aëor aëimne 'parigaëya-dhämne
mahänubhäväya namo namas te
SYNONYMS
çré-brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; ajäta-janma-sthiti-saàyamäya—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is never born but whose appearance in
different incarnations never ceases; aguëäya—never affected by the material
modes of nature (sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa);
nirväëa-sukha-arëaväya—unto the ocean of eternal bliss, beyond material
existence; aëoù aëimne—smaller than the atom; aparigaëya-dhämne—whose
bodily features are never to be conceived by material speculation;
mahä-anubhäväya—whose existence is inconceivable; namaù—offering our
obeisances; namaù—again offering our obeisances; te—unto You.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
249
Lord Brahmä said: Although You are never born, Your appearance and
disappearance as an incarnation never cease. You are always free from the
material qualities, and You are the shelter of transcendental bliss resembling an
ocean. Eternally existing in Your transcendental form, You are the supreme
subtle of the most extremely subtle. We therefore offer our respectful
obeisances unto You, the Supreme, whose existence is inconceivable.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.6):
ajo 'pi sann avyayätmä
bhütänäm éçvaro 'pi san
prakåtià sväm adhiñöhäya
sambhavämy ätma-mäyayä
"Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, and
although I am the Lord of all sentient beings, I still appear in every millennium
in My original transcendental form." In the following verse in Bhagavad-gétä
(4.7), the Lord says:
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time descend Myself."
Thus although the Supreme Lord is unborn, there is no cessation to His
appearance in different forms as incarnations like Lord Kåñëa and Lord Räma.
Since His incarnations are eternal, the various activities performed by these
incarnations are also eternal. The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not
appear because He is forced to do so by karma like ordinary living entities who
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
250
are forced to accept a certain type of body. It is to be understood that the
Lord's body and activities are all transcendental, being free from the
contamination of the material modes of nature. These pastimes are
transcendental bliss to the Lord. The word aparigaëya-dhämne is very
significant. There is no limit to the Lord's appearance in different
incarnations. All of these incarnations are eternal, blissful and full of
knowledge.
TEXT 9
æPa& TavETaTa( PauåzzR>aeJYa&
é[eYaae_iQaRi>avOE„idk-TaaiN}ake-<a )
YaaeGaeNa DaaTa" Sah Naiñl/aek-aNa(
PaXYaaMYaMauiZMaàu h ivìMaUTaaOE )) 9 ))
rüpaà tavaitat puruñarñabhejyaà
çreyo 'rthibhir vaidika-täntrikeëa
yogena dhätaù saha nas tri-lokän
paçyämy amuñminn u ha viçva-mürtau
SYNONYMS
rüpam—form; tava—Your; etat—this; puruña-åñabha—O best of all
personalities; ijyam—worshipable; çreyaù—ultimate auspiciousness;
arthibhiù—by persons who desire; vaidika—under the direction of Vedic
instructions; täntrikeëa—realized by followers of Tantras, like
Närada-païcarätra; yogena—by practice of mystic yoga; dhätaù—O supreme
director; saha—with; naù—us (the demigods); tri-lokän—controlling the three
worlds; paçyämi—we see directly; amuñmin—in You; u—oh; ha—completely
manifested; viçva-mürtau—in You, who have the universal form.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
251
TRANSLATION
O best of persons, O supreme director, those who actually aspire for supreme
good fortune worship this form of Your Lordship according to the Vedic
Tantras. My Lord, we can see all the three worlds in You.
PURPORT
The Vedic mantras say: yasmin vijïäte sarvam evaà vijïätaà bhavati
(Muëòaka Upaniñad 1.3). When the devotee sees the Supreme Personality of
Godhead by his meditation, or when he sees the Lord personally, face to face,
he becomes aware of everything within this universe. Indeed, nothing is
unknown to him. Everything within this material world is fully manifested to a
devotee who has seen the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhagavad-gétä
(4.34) therefore advises:
tad viddhi praëipätena
paripraçnena sevayä
upadekñyanti te jïänaà
jïäninas tattva-darçinaù
"Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him
submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart
knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth." Lord Brahmä is one of
these self-realized authorities (svayambhür näradaù çambhuù kumäraù kapilo
manuù [SB 6.3.20]). One must therefore accept the disciplic succession from
Lord Brahmä, and then one can understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in fullness. Here the word viçva-mürtau indicates that everything
exists in the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who is able to
worship Him can see everything in Him and see Him in everything.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
252
TEXT 10
TvYYaGa] AaSaqTa( TviYa MaDYa AaSaqTa(
TvYYaNTa AaSaqiddMaaTMaTaN}ae )
TvMaaidrNTaae JaGaTaae_SYa MaDYa&
ga$=SYa Ma*Tòev Par" ParSMaaTa( )) 10 ))
tvayy agra äsét tvayi madhya äsét
tvayy anta äséd idam ätma-tantre
tvam ädir anto jagato 'sya madhyaà
ghaöasya måtsneva paraù parasmät
SYNONYMS
tvayi—unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; agre—in the
beginning; äsét—there was; tvayi—unto You; madhye—in the middle;
äsét—there was; tvayi—unto You; ante—in the end; äsét—there was; idam—all
of this cosmic manifestation; ätma-tantre—fully under Your control;
tvam—Your Lordship; ädiù—beginning; antaù—end; jagataù—of the cosmic
manifestation; asya—of this; madhyam—middle; ghaöasya—of an earthen pot;
måtsnä iva—like the earth; paraù—transcendental; parasmät—because of
being the chief.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, who are always fully independent, this entire cosmic
manifestation arises from You, rests upon You and ends in You. Your Lordship
is the beginning, sustenance and end of everything, like the earth, which is the
cause of an earthen pot, which supports the pot, and to which the pot, when
broken, finally returns.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
253
TEXT 11
Tv& MaaYaYaaTMaaé[YaYaa SvYaed&
iNaMaaRYa ivì& TadNauPa[iví" )
PaXYaiNTa Yau¢-a MaNaSaa MaNaqiz<aae
Gau<aVYavaYae_PYaGau<a& ivPaiêTa" )) 11 ))
tvaà mäyayätmäçrayayä svayedaà
nirmäya viçvaà tad-anupraviñöaù
paçyanti yuktä manasä manéñiëo
guëa-vyaväye 'py aguëaà vipaçcitaù
SYNONYMS
tvam—Your Lordship; mäyayä—by Your eternal energy;
ätma-äçrayayä—whose existence is under Your shelter; svayä—emanated from
Yourself; idam—this; nirmäya—for the sake of creating; viçvam—the entire
universe; tat—into it; anupraviñöaù—You enter; paçyanti—they see;
yuktäù—persons in touch with You; manasä—by an elevated mind;
manéñiëaù—people with advanced consciousness; guëa—of material qualities;
vyaväye—in the transformation; api—although; aguëam—still untouched by
the material qualities; vipaçcitaù—those who are fully aware of the truth of
çästra.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme, You are independent in Your self and do not take help from
others. Through Your own potency, You create this cosmic manifestation and
enter into it. Those who are advanced in Kåñëa consciousness, who are fully in
knowledge of the authoritative çästra, and who, through the practice of
bhakti-yoga, are cleansed of all material contamination, can see with clear minds
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
254
that although You exist within the transformations of the material qualities,
Your presence is untouched by these qualities.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10):
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sacaräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature, working under My direction, O son of Kunté, is
producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is
created and annihilated again and again." The material energy creates,
maintains and devastates the entire cosmic manifestation because of directions
given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who enters this universe as
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu but is untouched by the material qualities. In
Bhagavad-gétä the Lord refers to mäyä, the external energy, which creates this
material world, as mama mäyä, "My energy," because this energy works under
the full control of the Lord. These facts can be realized only by those who are
well versed in Vedic knowledge and advanced in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 12
YaQaaiGanMaeDaSYaMa*Ta& c Gaaezu
>auVYaàMaMbUÛMaNae c v*itaMa( )
YaaeGaEMaRNauZYaa AiDaYaiNTa ih Tva&
Gau<aezu buÖya k-vYaae vdiNTa )) 12 ))
yathägnim edhasy amåtaà ca goñu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
255
bhuvy annam ambüdyamane ca våttim
yogair manuñyä adhiyanti hi tväà
guëeñu buddhyä kavayo vadanti
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; agnim—fire; edhasi—in wood; amåtam—milk, which is like nectar;
ca—and; goñu—from cows; bhuvi—on the ground; annam—food grains;
ambu—water; udyamane—in enterprise; ca—also; våttim—livelihood;
yogaiù—by practice of bhakti-yoga; manuñyäù—human beings;
adhiyanti—achieve; hi—indeed; tväm—You; guëeñu—in the material modes of
nature; buddhyä—by intelligence; kavayaù—great personalities; vadanti—say.
TRANSLATION
As one can derive fire from wood, milk from the milk bag of the cow, food
grains and water from the land, and prosperity in one's livelihood from
industrial enterprises, so, by the practice of bhakti-yoga, even within this
material world, one can achieve Your favor or intelligently approach You. Those
who are pious all affirm this.
PURPORT
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead is nirguëa, not to be found
within this material world, the entire material world is pervaded by Him, as
stated in Bhagavad-gétä (mayä tatam idaà sarvam). The material world is
nothing but an expansion of the Lord's material energy, and the entire cosmic
manifestation rests upon Him (mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni [Bg. 9.4]).
Nonetheless, the Supreme Lord cannot be found here (na cähaà teñv
avasthitaù). A devotee, however, can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead
through the practice of bhakti-yoga. One ordinarily does not begin to practice
bhakti-yoga unless he has practiced it in previous births. Moreover, one can
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
256
begin bhakti-yoga only by the mercy of the spiritual master and Kåñëa.
Guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. The seed of
devotional service is obtainable by the mercy of guru, the spiritual master, and
Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Only by the practice of bhakti-yoga can one achieve the favor of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and see Him face to face
(premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti [Bs.
5.38]). One cannot see the Lord by other methods, such as karma, jïäna or
yoga. Under the direction of the spiritual master, one must cultivate
bhakti-yoga (çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù smaraëaà päda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23]).
Then, even within this material world, although the Lord is not visible, a
devotee can see Him. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (bhaktyä mäm
abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù [Bg. 18.55]) and in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(bhaktyäham ekayä grähyaù). Thus by devotional service one can achieve the
favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although He is not visible or
understandable to materialistic persons.
In this verse, the cultivation of bhakti-yoga is compared to many material
activities. By friction one can get fire from wood, by digging the earth one can
get food grains and water, and by agitating the milk bag of the cow one can get
nectarean milk. Milk is compared to nectar, which one can drink to become
immortal. Of course, simply drinking milk will not make one immortal, but it
can increase the duration of one's life. In modern civilization, men do not
think milk to be important, and therefore they do not live very long. Although
in this age men can live up to one hundred years, their duration of life is
reduced because they do not drink large quantities of milk. This is a sign of
Kali-yuga. In Kali-yuga, instead of drinking milk, people prefer to slaughter an
animal and eat its flesh. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His
instructions of Bhagavad-gétä, advises go-rakñya, which means cow protection.
The cow should be protected, milk should be drawn from the cows, and this
milk should be prepared in various ways. One should take ample milk, and thus
one can prolong one's life, develop his brain, execute devotional service, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
257
ultimately attain the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As it is
essential to get food grains and water by digging the earth, it is also essential to
give protection to the cows and take nectarean milk from their milk bags.
The people of this age are inclined toward industrial enterprises for
comfortable living, but they refuse to endeavor to execute devotional service,
by which they can achieve the ultimate goal of life by returning home, back to
Godhead. Unfortunately, as it is said, na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëuà
duräçayä ye bahir-artha-mäninaù [SB 7.5.31]. People without spiritual education
do not know that the ultimate goal of life is to go back home, back to Godhead.
Forgetting this aim of life, they are working very hard in disappointment and
frustration (moghäçä mogha-karmäëo mogha jïänä vicetasaù [Bg. 9.12]). The
so-called vaiçyas—the industrialists or businessmen—are involved in big, big
industrial enterprises, but they are not interested in food grains and milk.
However, as indicated here, by digging for water, even in the desert, we can
produce food grains; when we produce food grains and vegetables, we can give
protection to the cows; while giving protection to the cows, we can draw from
them abundant quantities of milk; and by getting enough milk and combining
it with food grains and vegetables, we can prepare hundreds of nectarean
foods. We can happily eat this food and thus avoid industrial enterprises and
joblessness.
Agriculture and cow protection are the way to become sinless and thus be
attracted to devotional service. Those who are sinful cannot be attracted by
devotional service. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.28):
yeñäà tv anta-gataà päpaà
janänäà puëya-karmaëäm
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktä
bhajante mäà dåòha-vratäù
"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful
actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of
delusion, engage themselves in My service with determination." The majority
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
258
of people in this age of Kali are sinful, short-living, unfortunate and disturbed
(mandäù sumanda-matayo manda-bhägyä hy upadrutäù [SB 1.1.10]). For them,
Caitanya Mahäprabhu has advised:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting
the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way.
There is no other way."
TEXT 13
Ta& Tva& vYa& NaaQa SaMauiÂhaNa&
SaraeJaNaa>aaiTaicreiPSaTaaQaRMa( )
d*îa GaTaa iNav*RTaMaÛ SaveR
GaJaa dvaTaaR wv Gaa(r)MaM>a" )) 13 ))
taà tväà vayaà nätha samujjihänaà
saroja-näbhäticirepsitärtham
dåñövä gatä nirvåtam adya sarve
gajä davärtä iva gäìgam ambhaù
SYNONYMS
tam—O Lord; tväm—Your Lordship; vayam—all of us; nätha—O master;
samujjihänam—now appearing before us with all glories; saroja-näbha—O
Lord, whose navel resembles a lotus flower, or from whose navel grows a lotus
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
259
flower; ati-cira—for an extremely long time; épsita—desiring; artham—for the
ultimate goal of life; dåñövä—seeing; gatäù—in our vision;
nirvåtam—transcendental happiness; adya—today; sarve—all of us;
gajäù—elephants; dava-artäù—being afflicted in a forest fire; iva—like;
gäìgam ambhaù—with water from the Ganges.
TRANSLATION
Elephants afflicted by a forest fire become very happy when they get water
from the Ganges. Similarly, O my Lord, from whose navel grows a lotus flower,
since You have now appeared before us, we have become transcendentally
happy. By seeing Your Lordship, whom we have desired to see for a very long
time, we have achieved our ultimate goal in life.
PURPORT
The devotees of the Lord are always very eager to see the Supreme Lord
face to face, but they do not demand that the Lord come before them, for a
pure devotee considers such a demand to be contrary to devotional service. Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu teaches this lesson in His Çikñäñöaka. Adarçanän
marma-hatäà karotu vä. The devotee is always eager to see the Lord face to
face, but if he is brokenhearted because he cannot see the Lord, even life after
life, he will never command the Lord to appear. This is a sign of pure devotion.
Therefore in this verse we find the word ati-cira-épsita-artham, meaning that
the devotee aspires for a long, long time to see the Lord. If the Lord, by His
own pleasure, appears before the devotee, the devotee feels extremely happy,
as Dhruva Mahäräja felt when he personally saw the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. When Dhruva Mahäräja saw the Lord, he had no desire to ask the
Lord for any benediction. Indeed, simply by seeing the Lord, Dhruva Mahäräja
felt so satisfied that he did not want to ask the Lord for any benediction
(svämin kåtärtho 'smi varaà na yäce [Cc. Madhya 22.42]). A pure devotee,
whether able or unable to see the Lord, always engages in the Lord's devotional
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
260
service, always hoping that at some time the Lord may be pleased to appear
before him so that he can see the Lord face to face.
TEXT 14
Sa Tv& ivDaTSvai%l/l/aek-Paal/a
vYa& YadQaaRSTav PaadMaUl/Ma( )
SaMaaGaTaaSTae bihrNTaraTMaNa(
ik&- vaNYaivjaPYaMaXaezSaai+a<a" )) 14 ))
sa tvaà vidhatsväkhila-loka-pälä
vayaà yad arthäs tava päda-mülam
samägatäs te bahir-antar-ätman
kià vänya-vijïäpyam açeña-säkñiëaù
SYNONYMS
saù—that; tvam—Your Lordship; vidhatsva—kindly do the needful;
akhila-loka-päläù—the demigods, directors of different departments of this
universe; vayam—all of us; yat—that which; arthäù—purpose; tava—at Your
Lordship's; päda-mülam—lotus feet; samägatäù—we have arrived; te—unto
You; bahiù-antaù-ätman—O Supersoul of everyone, O constant internal and
external witness; kim—what; vä—either; anya-vijïäpyam—we have to inform
You; açeña-säkñiëaù—the witness and knower of everything.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, we, the various demigods, the directors of this universe, have come
to Your lotus feet. Please fulfill the purpose for which we have come. You are
the witness of everything, from within and without. Nothing is unknown to
You, and therefore it is unnecessary to inform You again of anything.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
261
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (13.3), kñetra-jïaà cäpi mäà viddhi sarva-kñetreñu
bhärata. The individual souls are proprietors of their individual bodies, but the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the proprietor of all bodies. Since He is the
witness of everyone's body, nothing is unknown to Him. He knows what we
need. Our duty, therefore, is to execute devotional service sincerely, under the
direction of the spiritual master. Kåñëa, by His grace, will supply whatever we
need in executing our devotional service. In the Kåñëa consciousness
movement, we simply have to execute the order of Kåñëa and guru. Then all
necessities will be supplied by Kåñëa, even if we do not ask for them.
TEXT 15
Ah& iGair}aê SauradYaae Yae
d+aadYaae_Ganeirv ke-TavSTae )
ik&- va ivdaMaeXa Pa*QaiGv>aaTaa
ivDaTSv Xa& Naae iÜJadevMaN}aMa( )) 15 ))
ahaà giritraç ca surädayo ye
dakñädayo 'gner iva ketavas te
kià vä vidämeça påthag-vibhätä
vidhatsva çaà no dvija-deva-mantram
SYNONYMS
aham—I (Lord Brahmä); giritraù—Lord Çiva; ca—also; sura-ädayaù—all the
demigods; ye—as we are; dakña-ädayaù—headed by Mahäräja Dakña;
agneù—of fire; iva—like; ketavaù—sparks; te—of You; kim—what; vä—either;
vidäma—can we understand; éça—O my Lord;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
262
påthak-vibhätäù—independently of You; vidhatsva—kindly bestow upon us;
çam—good fortune; naù—our; dvija-deva-mantram—the means of deliverance
suitable for the brähmaëas and demigods.
TRANSLATION
I [Lord Brahmä], Lord Çiva and all the demigods, accompanied by the
prajäpatis like Dakña, are nothing but sparks illuminated by You, who are the
original fire. Since we are particles of You, what can we understand about our
welfare? O Supreme Lord, please give us the means of deliverance that is
suitable for the brähmaëas and demigods.
PURPORT
In this verse, the word dvija-deva-mantram is very important. The word
mantra means "that which delivers one from the material world." Only the
dvijas (the brähmaëas) and the devas (the demigods) can be delivered from
material existence by the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Whatever is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is a mantra and is
suitable for delivering the conditioned souls from mental speculation. The
conditioned souls are engaged in a struggle for existence (manaù
ñañöhänéndriyäëi prakåti-sthäni karñati [Bg. 15.7]). Deliverance from this struggle
constitutes the highest benefit, but unless one gets a mantra from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, deliverance is impossible. The beginning mantra is the
Gäyatré mantra. Therefore, after purification, when one is qualified to become
a brähmaëa (dvija), he is offered the Gäyatré mantra. Simply by chanting the
Gäyatré mantra, one can be delivered. This mantra, however, is suitable only
for the brähmaëas and demigods. In Kali-yuga, we are all in a very difficult
position, in which we need a suitable mantra that can deliver us from the
dangers of this age. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His
incarnation as Lord Caitanya, gives us the Hare Kåñëa mantra.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
263
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting
the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way.
There is no other way." In His Çikñäñöaka, Lord Caitanya says, paraà vijayate
çré-kåñëa-saìkértanam: "All glories to the chanting of çré-kåñëa-saìkértana!"
The mahä-mantra—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare
Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare—is directly chanted by the Lord
Himself, who gives us this mantra for deliverance.
We cannot invent any means to be delivered from the dangers of material
existence. Here, even the demigods, such as Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, and
the prajäpatis, such as Dakña, are said to be like illuminating sparks in the
presence of the Supreme Lord, who is compared to a great fire. Sparks are
beautiful as long as they are in the fire. Similarly, we have to remain in the
association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and always engage in
devotional service, for then we shall always be brilliant and illuminating. As
soon as we fall from the service of the Lord, our brilliance and illumination
will immediately be extinguished, or at least stopped for some time. When we
living entities, who are like sparks of the original fire, the Supreme Lord, fall
into a material condition, we must take the mantra from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead as it is offered by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. By
chanting this Hare Kåñëa mantra, we shall be delivered from all the difficulties
of this material world.
TEXT 16
é[qéuk- ovac
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
264
Wv& ivirÄaidi>arqi@TaSTad(
ivjaYa Taeza& ôdYa& YaQaEv )
JaGaad JaqMaUTaGa>aqrYaa iGara
bÖaÅl/INSa&v*TaSavRk-ark-aNa( )) 16 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evaà viriïcädibhir éòitas tad
vijïäya teñäà hådayaà yathaiva
jagäda jémüta-gabhérayä girä
baddhäïjalén saàvåta-sarva-kärakän
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; viriïca-ädibhiù—by
all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä; éòitaù—being worshiped; tat
vijïäya—understanding the expectation; teñäm—of all of them; hådayam—the
core of the heart; yathä—as; eva—indeed; jagäda—replied;
jémüta-gabhérayä—like the sound of clouds; girä—by words;
baddha-aïjalén—unto the demigods, who stood with folded hands;
saàvåta—restrained; sarva—all; kärakän—senses.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: When the Lord was thus offered prayers by
the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä, He understood the purpose for which
they had approached Him. Therefore, in a deep voice that resembled the
rumbling of clouds, the Lord replied to the demigods, who all stood there
attentively with folded hands.
TEXT 17
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
265
Wk- WveìrSTaiSMaNSaurk-aYaeR Saureìr" )
ivhTauRk-aMaSTaaNaah SaMaud]aeNMaQaNaaidi>a" )) 17 ))
eka eveçvaras tasmin
sura-kärye sureçvaraù
vihartu-kämas tän äha
samudronmathanädibhiù
SYNONYMS
ekaù—alone; eva—indeed; éçvaraù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tasmin—in that; sura-kärye—the activities of the demigods; sura-éçvaraù—the
Lord of the demigods, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vihartu—to enjoy
pastimes; kämaù—desiring; tän—unto the demigods; äha—said;
samudra-unmathana-ädibhiù—by activities of churning the ocean.
TRANSLATION
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of the demigods,
was capable of performing the activities of the demigods by Himself, He wanted
to enjoy pastimes in churning the ocean. Therefore He spoke as follows.
TEXT 18
é[q>aGavaNauvac
hNTa b]øàhae XaM>aae he deva MaMa >aaizTaMa( )
é*<auTaavihTaa" SaveR é[eYaae v" SYaad( YaQaa Saura" )) 18 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
hanta brahmann aho çambho
he devä mama bhäñitam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
266
çåëutävahitäù sarve
çreyo vaù syäd yathä suräù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
hanta—addressing them; brahman aho—O Lord Brahmä; çambho—O Lord
Çiva; he—O; deväù—demigods; mama—My; bhäñitam—statement;
çåëuta—hear; avahitäù—with great attention; sarve—all of you; çreyaù—good
fortune; vaù—for all of you; syät—shall be; yathä—as; suräù—for the
demigods.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva and
other demigods, please hear Me with great attention, for what I say will bring
good fortune for all of you.
TEXT 19
YaaTa daNavdETaeYaESTaavTa( SaiNDaivRDaqYaTaaMa( )
k-ale/NaaNauGa*hqTaESTaEYaaRvd( vae >av AaTMaNa" )) 19 ))
yäta dänava-daiteyais
tävat sandhir vidhéyatäm
kälenänugåhétais tair
yävad vo bhava ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
yäta—just execute; dänava—with the demons; daiteyaiù—and the asuras;
tävat—so long; sandhiù—a truce; vidhéyatäm—execute; kälena—by a favorable
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
267
time (or kävyena—by Çukräcärya); anugåhétaiù—receiving benedictions;
taiù—with them; yävat—as long as; vaù—of you; bhavaù—good fortune;
ätmanaù—of yourselves.
TRANSLATION
As long as you are not flourishing, you should make a truce with the demons
and asuras, who are now being favored by time.
PURPORT
One word in this verse has two readings—kälena and kävyena. Kälena
means "favored by time," and kävyena means "favored by Çukräcärya,"
Çukräcärya being the spiritual master of the Daityas. The demons and Daityas
were favored in both ways, and therefore the demigods were advised by the
Supreme Lord to execute a truce for the time being, until time favored them.
TEXT 20
ArYaae_iPa ih SaNDaeYaa" SaiTa k-aYaaRQaRGaaErve )
AihMaUizk-vd( deva ùQaRSYa Padvq& GaTaE" )) 20 ))
arayo 'pi hi sandheyäù
sati käryärtha-gaurave
ahi-müñikavad devä
hy arthasya padavéà gataiù
SYNONYMS
arayaù—enemies; api—although; hi—indeed; sandheyäù—eligible for a truce;
sati—being so; kärya-artha-gaurave—in the matter of an important duty;
ahi—snake; müñika—mouse; vat—like; deväù—O demigods; hi—indeed;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
268
arthasya—of interest; padavém—position; gataiù—so being.
TRANSLATION
O demigods, fulfilling one's own interests is so important that one may even
have to make a truce with one's enemies. For the sake of one's self-interest, one
has to act according to the logic of the snake and the mouse.
PURPORT
A snake and a mouse were once caught in a basket. Now, since the mouse is
food for the snake, this was a good opportunity for the snake. However, since
both of them were caught in the basket, even if the snake ate the mouse, the
snake would not be able to get out. Therefore, the snake thought it wise to
make a truce with the mouse and ask the mouse to make a hole in the basket so
that both of them could get out. The snake's intention was that after the
mouse made the hole, the snake would eat the mouse and escape from the
basket through the hole. This is called the logic of the snake and the mouse.
TEXT 21
AMa*TaaeTPaadNae YaÒ" i§-YaTaaMaivl/iMbTaMa( )
YaSYa PaqTaSYa vE JaNTauMa*RTYauGa]STaae_Marae >aveTa( )) 21 ))
amåtotpädane yatnaù
kriyatäm avilambitam
yasya pétasya vai jantur
måtyu-grasto 'maro bhavet
SYNONYMS
amåta-utpädane—in generating nectar; yatnaù—endeavor; kriyatäm—do;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
269
avilambitam—without delay; yasya—of which nectar; pétasya—anyone who
drinks; vai—indeed; jantuù—living entity; måtyu-grastaù—although in
imminent danger of death; amaraù—immortal; bhavet—can become.
TRANSLATION
Immediately endeavor to produce nectar, which a person who is about to die
may drink to become immortal.
TEXTS 22-23
i+aPTva +aqraedDaaE SavaR vqåta*<al/TaaEzDaq" )
MaNQaaNa& MaNdr& k*-Tva Nae}a& k*-Tva Tau vaSauik-Ma( )) 22 ))
SahaYaeNa MaYaa deva iNaMaRNQaßMaTaiNd]Taa" )
(c)e-Xa>aaJaae >aivZYaiNTa dETYaa YaUYa& f-l/Ga]ha" )) 23 ))
kñiptvä kñérodadhau sarvä
vérut-tåëa-latauñadhéù
manthänaà mandaraà kåtvä
netraà kåtvä tu väsukim
sahäyena mayä devä
nirmanthadhvam atandritäù
kleça-bhäjo bhaviñyanti
daityä yüyaà phala-grahäù
SYNONYMS
kñiptvä—putting; kñéra-udadhau—in the ocean of milk; sarväù—all kinds of;
vérut—creepers; tåëa—grass; latä—vegetables; auñadhéù—and drugs;
manthänam—the churning rod; mandaram—Mandara Mountain;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
270
kåtvä—making; netram—the churning rope; kåtvä—making; tu—but;
väsukim—the snake Väsuki; sahäyena—with a helper; mayä—by Me;
deväù—all the demigods; nirmanthadhvam—go on churning; atandritäù—very
carefully, without diversion; kleça-bhäjaù—sharetakers of sufferings;
bhaviñyanti—will be; daityäù—the demons; yüyam—but all of you;
phala-grahäù—gainers of the actual result.
TRANSLATION
O demigods, cast into the ocean of milk all kinds of vegetables, grass,
creepers and drugs. Then, with My help, making Mandara Mountain the
churning rod and Väsuki the rope for churning, churn the ocean of milk with
undiverted attention. Thus the demons will be engaged in labor, but you, the
demigods, will gain the actual result, the nectar produced from the ocean.
PURPORT
It appears that when different kinds of drugs, creepers, grass and vegetables
are put into this milk and the milk is churned, as milk is churned for butter,
the active principles of the vegetables and drugs mix with the milk, and the
result is nectar.
TEXT 24
YaUYa& TadNauMaaedß& YaidC^NTYaSaura" Saura" )
Na Sa&rM>ae<a iSaDYaiNTa SavaRQaaR" SaaNTvYaa YaQaa )) 24 ))
yüyaà tad anumodadhvaà
yad icchanty asuräù suräù
na saàrambheëa sidhyanti
sarvärthäù säntvayä yathä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
271
SYNONYMS
yüyam—all of you; tat—that; anumodadhvam—should accept; yat—whatever;
icchanti—they desire; asuräù—the demons; suräù—O demigods; na—not;
saàrambheëa—by being agitated in anger; sidhyanti—are very successful;
sarva-arthäù—all desired ends; säntvayä—by peaceful execution; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
My dear demigods, with patience and peace everything can be done, but if
one is agitated by anger, the goal is not achieved. Therefore, whatever the
demons ask, agree to their proposal.
TEXT 25
Na >aeTaVYa& k-al/kU-$=ad( ivzaÂl/iDaSaM>avaTa( )
l/ae>a" k-aYaaeR Na vae JaaTau raez" k-aMaSTau vSTauzu )) 25 ))
na bhetavyaà kälaküöäd
viñäj jaladhi-sambhavät
lobhaù käryo na vo jätu
roñaù kämas tu vastuñu
SYNONYMS
na—not; bhetavyam—should be afraid; kälaküöät—of kälaküöa; viñät—from
the poison; jaladhi—from the ocean of milk; sambhavät—which will appear;
lobhaù—greed; käryaù—execution; na—not; vaù—unto you; jätu—at any
time; roñaù—anger; kämaù—lust; tu—and; vastuñu—in the products.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
272
TRANSLATION
A poison known as kälaküöa will be generated from the ocean of milk, but
you should not fear it. And when various products are churned from the ocean,
you should not be greedy for them or anxious to obtain them, nor should you be
angry.
PURPORT
It appears that by the churning process many things would be generated
from the ocean of milk, including poison, valuable gems, nectar and many
beautiful women. The demigods were advised, however, not to be greedy for
the gems or beautiful women, but to wait patiently for the nectar. The real
purpose was to get the nectar.
TEXT 26
é[qéuk- ovac
wiTa devaNSaMaaidXYa >aGavaNa( PauåzaetaMa" )
TaezaMaNTadRDae raJaNSvC^NdGaiTarqìr" )) 26 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti devän samädiçya
bhagavän puruñottamaù
teñäm antardadhe räjan
svacchanda-gatir éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; devän—all the
demigods; samädiçya—advising; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
273
Godhead; puruña-uttamaù—the best of all persons; teñäm—from them;
antardadhe—disappeared; räjan—O King; svacchanda—free; gatiù—whose
movements; éçvaraù—the Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: O King Parékñit, after advising the demigods
in this way, the independent Supreme Personality of Godhead, the best of all
living entities, disappeared from their presence.
TEXT 27
AQa TaSMaE >aGavTae NaMaSk*-TYa iPaTaaMah" )
>avê JaGMaTau" Sv& Sv& DaaMaaePaeYaubRil&/ Saura" )) 27 ))
atha tasmai bhagavate
namaskåtya pitämahaù
bhavaç ca jagmatuù svaà svaà
dhämopeyur balià suräù
SYNONYMS
atha—after this; tasmai—unto Him; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; namaskåtya—offering obeisances; pitä-mahaù—Lord Brahmä;
bhavaù ca—as well as Lord Çiva; jagmatuù—returned; svam svam—to their
own; dhäma—abodes; upeyuù—approached; balim—King Bali; suräù—all the
other demigods.
TRANSLATION
Then Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, after offering their respectful obeisances
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
274
to the Lord, returned to their abodes. All the demigods then approached
Mahäräja Bali.
TEXT 28
d*îarqNaPYaSa&YataaÅaTa+aae>aaNSvNaaYak-aNa( )
NYazeDad( dETYara$( ëaeKYa" SaiNDaivGa]hk-al/ivTa( )) 28 ))
dåñövärén apy asaàyattäï
jäta-kñobhän sva-näyakän
nyañedhad daitya-räö çlokyaù
sandhi-vigraha-kälavit
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—observing; arén—the enemies; api—although; asaàyattän—without
any endeavor to fight; jäta-kñobhän—who became agitated; sva-näyakän—his
own captains and commanders; nyañedhat—prevented; daitya-räö—the
Emperor of the Daityas, Mahäräja Bali; çlokyaù—very respectable and
prominent; sandhi—for making negotiations; vigraha—as well as for fighting;
käla—the time; vit—completely aware of.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Bali, a most celebrated king of the demons, knew very well when
to make peace and when to fight. Thus although his commanders and captains
were agitated and were about to kill the demigods, Mahäräja Bali, seeing that
the demigods were coming to him without a militant attitude, forbade his
commanders to kill them.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
275
Vedic etiquette enjoins: gåhe çatrum api präptaà viçvastam akutobhayam.
When enemies come to their opponent's place, they should be received in such
a way that they will forget that there is animosity between the two parties. Bali
Mahäräja was well conversant with the arts of peacemaking and fighting. Thus
he received the demigods very well, although his commanders and captains
were agitated. This kind of treatment was prevalent even during the fight
between the Päëòavas and the Kurus. During the day, the Päëòavas and Kurus
would fight with the utmost strength, and when the day was over they would
go to each other's camps as friends and be received as such. During such
friendly meetings, one enemy would offer anything the other enemy wanted.
That was the system.
TEXT 29
Tae vEraeciNaMaaSaqNa& Gauá& caSaurYaUQaPaE" )
ié[Yaa ParMaYaa Jauí& iJaTaaXaezMauPaaGaMaNa( )) 29 ))
te vairocanim äsénaà
guptaà cäsura-yütha-paiù
çriyä paramayä juñöaà
jitäçeñam upägaman
SYNONYMS
te—all the demigods; vairocanim—unto Baliräja, the son of Virocana;
äsénam—sitting down; guptam—well protected; ca—and;
asura-yütha-paiù—by the commanders of the asuras; çriyä—by opulence;
paramayä—supreme; juñöam—blessed; jita-açeñam—who became the
proprietor of all the worlds; upägaman—approached.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
276
TRANSLATION
The demigods approached Bali Mahäräja, the son of Virocana, and sat down
near him. Bali Mahäräja was protected by the commanders of the demons and
was most opulent, having conquered all the universes.
TEXT 30
MaheNd]" ë+<aYaa vaca SaaNTviYaTva MahaMaiTa" )
A>Ya>aazTa TaTa( Sav| iXai+aTa& PauåzaetaMaaTa( )) 30 ))
mahendraù çlakñëayä väcä
säntvayitvä mahä-matiù
abhyabhäñata tat sarvaà
çikñitaà puruñottamät
SYNONYMS
mahä-indraù—the King of heaven, Indra; çlakñëayä—very mild; väcä—by
words; säntvayitvä—pleasing Bali Mahäräja very much; mahä-matiù—the most
intelligent person; abhyabhäñata—addressed; tat—that; sarvam—everything;
çikñitam—that was learned; puruña-uttamät—from Lord Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
After pleasing Bali Mahäräja with mild words, Lord Indra, the King of the
demigods, who was most intelligent, very politely submitted all the proposals he
had learned from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu.
TEXT 31
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
277
TatvraecTa dETYaSYa Ta}aaNYae Yae_SauraiDaPaa" )
XaMbrae_iríNaeiMaê Yae c i}aPaurvaiSaNa" )) 31 ))
tat tv arocata daityasya
tatränye ye 'surädhipäù
çambaro 'riñöanemiç ca
ye ca tripura-väsinaù
SYNONYMS
tat—all those words; tu—but; arocata—were very pleasing; daityasya—to Bali
Mahäräja; tatra—as well as; anye—others; ye—who were; asura-adhipäù—the
chiefs of the asuras; çambaraù—Çambara; ariñöanemiù—Ariñöanemi; ca—also;
ye—others who; ca—and; tripura-väsinaù—all the residents of Tripura.
TRANSLATION
The proposals submitted by King Indra were immediately accepted by Bali
Mahäräja and his assistants, headed by Çambara and Ariñöanemi, and by all the
other residents of Tripura.
PURPORT
It appears from this verse that politics, diplomacy, the propensity to cheat,
and everything that we find in this world in individual and social negotiations
between two parties are also present in the upper planetary systems. The
demigods went to Bali Mahäräja with the proposal to manufacture nectar, and
the Daityas, the demons, immediately accepted it, thinking that since the
demigods were already weak, when the nectar was produced the demons would
take it from them and use it for their own purposes. The demigods, of course,
had similar intentions. The only difference is that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Viñëu, was on the side of the demigods because the demigods
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
278
were His devotees, whereas the demons did not care about Lord Viñëu. All
over the universe there are two parties—the Viñëu party, or God-conscious
party, and the godless party. The godless party is never happy or victorious, but
the God-conscious party is always happy and victorious.
TEXT 32
TaTaae devaSaura" k*-Tva Sa&ivd& k*-TaSaaEôda" )
oÛMa& ParMa& c§u-rMa*TaaQaeR ParNTaPa )) 32 ))
tato deväsuräù kåtvä
saàvidaà kåta-sauhådäù
udyamaà paramaà cakrur
amåtärthe parantapa
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; deva-asuräù—both the demons and the demigods;
kåtvä—executing; saàvidam—indicating; kåta-sauhådäù—an armistice
between them; udyamam—enterprise; paramam—supreme; cakruù—they did;
amåta-arthe—for the sake of nectar; parantapa—O Mahäräja Parékñit,
chastiser of enemies.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, chastiser of enemies, the demigods and the demons
thereafter made an armistice between them. Then, with great enterprise, they
arranged to produce nectar, as proposed by Lord Indra.
PURPORT
The word saàvidam is significant in this verse. The demigods and demons
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
279
both agreed to stop fighting, at least for the time being, and endeavored to
produce nectar. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura notes in this
connection:
saàvid yuddhe pratijïäyäm
äcäre nämni toñaëe
sambhäñaëe kriyäkäre
saìketa-jïänayor api
The word saàvit is variously used to mean "in fighting," "in promising," "for
satisfying," "in addressing," "by practical action," "indication," and "knowledge."
TEXT 33
TaTaSTae MaNdriGairMaaeJaSaaeTPaa$y duMaRda" )
NadNTa odiDa& iNaNYau" Xa¢-a" Pairgabahv" )) 33 ))
tatas te mandara-girim
ojasotpäöya durmadäù
nadanta udadhià ninyuù
çaktäù parigha-bähavaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; te—all the demigods and demons;
mandara-girim—Mandara Mountain; ojasä—with great strength;
utpäöya—extracting; durmadäù—very powerful and competent;
nadanta—cried very loudly; udadhim—toward the ocean; ninyuù—brought;
çaktäù—very strong; parigha-bähavaù—having long, strong arms.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
280
Thereafter, with great strength, the demons and demigods, who were all very
powerful and who had long, stout arms, uprooted Mandara Mountain. Crying
very loudly, they brought it toward the ocean of milk.
TEXT 34
dUr>aaraeÜhé[aNTaa" Xa§-vEraecNaadYa" )
APaarYaNTaSTa& vae!u& ivvXaa ivJahu" PaiQa )) 34 ))
düra-bhärodvaha-çräntäù
çakra-vairocanädayaù
apärayantas taà voòhuà
vivaçä vijahuù pathi
SYNONYMS
düra—for a great distance; bhära-udvaha—by carrying the great load;
çräntäù—being fatigued; çakra—King Indra; vairocana-ädayaù—and Mahäräja
Bali (the son of Virocana) and others; apärayantaù—being unable; tam—the
mountain; voòhum—to bear; vivaçäù—being unable; vijahuù—gave up;
pathi—on the way.
TRANSLATION
Because of conveying the great mountain for a long distance, King Indra,
Mahäräja Bali and the other demigods and demons became fatigued. Being
unable to carry the mountain, they left it on the way.
TEXT 35
iNaPaTaNSa iGairSTa}a bhUNaMardaNavaNa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
281
cU<aRYaaMaaSa MahTaa >aare<a k-Nak-acl/" )) 35 ))
nipatan sa giris tatra
bahün amara-dänavän
cürëayäm äsa mahatä
bhäreëa kanakäcalaù
SYNONYMS
nipatan—falling down; saù—that; giriù—mountain; tatra—there;
bahün—many; amara-dänavän—demigods and demons; cürëayäm äsa—were
smashed; mahatä—by great; bhäreëa—weight; kanaka-acalaù—the golden
mountain known as Mandara.
TRANSLATION
The mountain known as Mandara, which was extremely heavy, being made
of gold, fell and smashed many demigods and demons.
PURPORT
By constitution, gold is heavier than stone. Since Mandara Mountain was
made of gold and was therefore heavier than stone, the demigods and demons
could not properly carry it to the ocean of milk.
TEXT 36
Taa&STaQaa >aGanMaNaSaae >aGanbahUåk-NDaraNa( )
ivjaYa >aGava&STa}a b>aUv Gaå@ßJa" )) 36 ))
täàs tathä bhagna-manaso
bhagna-bähüru-kandharän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
282
vijïäya bhagaväàs tatra
babhüva garuòa-dhvajaù
SYNONYMS
tän—all the demigods and demons; tathä—thereafter;
bhagna-manasaù—being brokenhearted; bhagna-bähu—with broken arms;
üru—thighs; kandharän—and shoulders; vijïäya—knowing; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu; tatra—there; babhüva—appeared;
garuòa-dhvajaù—being carried on Garuòa.
TRANSLATION
The demigods and demons were frustrated and disheartened, and their arms,
thighs and shoulders were broken. Therefore the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who knows everything, appeared there on the back of His carrier,
Garuòa.
TEXT 37
iGairPaaTaiviNaiZPaíaiNvl/aeKYaaMardaNavaNa( )
wR+aYaa JaqvYaaMaaSa iNaJaRraNa( iNav]R<aaNYaQaa )) 37 ))
giri-päta-viniñpiñöän
vilokyämara-dänavän
ékñayä jévayäm äsa
nirjarän nirvraëän yathä
SYNONYMS
giri-päta—because of the falling of Mandara Mountain; viniñpiñöän—crushed;
vilokya—observing; amara—the demigods; dänavän—and the demons;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
283
ékñayä—simply by His glance; jévayäm äsa—brought back to life;
nirjarän—without aggrievement; nirvraëän—without bruises; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
Observing that most of the demons and the demigods had been crushed by
the falling of the mountain, the Lord glanced over them and brought them back
to life. Thus they became free from grief, and they even had no bruises on their
bodies.
TEXT 38
iGair& caraePYa Gaå@e hSTaeNaEke-Na l/Il/Yaa )
Aaåù Pa[YaYaaviBDa& SauraSaurGa<aEv*RTa" )) 38 ))
girià cäropya garuòe
hastenaikena lélayä
äruhya prayayäv abdhià
suräsura-gaëair våtaù
SYNONYMS
girim—the mountain; ca—also; äropya—placing; garuòe—on the back of
Garuòa; hastena—by the hand; ekena—one; lélayä—very easily as His pastime;
äruhya—getting on; prayayau—He went; abdhim—to the ocean of milk;
sura-asura-gaëaiù—by the demigods and asuras; våtaù—surrounded.
TRANSLATION
The Lord very easily lifted the mountain with one hand and placed it on the
back of Garuòa. Then, He too got on the back of Garuòa and went to the ocean
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
284
of milk, surrounded by the demigods and demons.
PURPORT
Here is proof of the omnipotence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is above everyone. There are two classes of living entities—the demons
and the demigods—and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is above them
both. The demons believe in the "chance" theory of creation, whereas the
demigods believe in creation by the hand of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The omnipotence of the Supreme Lord is proved here, for simply
with one hand He lifted Mandara Mountain, the demigods and the demons,
placed them on the back of Garuòa and brought them to the ocean of milk.
Now, the demigods, the devotees, would immediately accept this incident,
knowing that the Lord can lift anything, however heavy it might be. But
although demons were also carried along with the demigods, demons, upon
hearing of this incident, would say that it is mythological. But if God is
all-powerful, why would it be difficult for Him to lift a mountain? Since He is
floating innumerable planets with many hundreds and thousands of Mandara
Mountains, why can't He lift one of them with His hand? This is not
mythology, but the difference between the believers and the faithless is that
the devotees accept the incidents mentioned in the Vedic literatures to be
true, whereas the demons simply argue and label all these historical incidents
mythology. Demons would prefer to explain that everything happening in the
cosmic manifestation takes place by chance, but demigods, or devotees, never
consider anything to be chance. Rather, they know that everything is an
arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the difference
between the demigods and the demons.
TEXT 39
AvraePYa iGair& Sk-NDaaTa( SauPa<aR" PaTaTaa& vr" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
285
YaYaaE Jal/aNTa oTSa*JYa hir<aa Sa ivSaiJaRTa" )) 39 ))
avaropya girià skandhät
suparëaù patatäà varaù
yayau jalänta utsåjya
hariëä sa visarjitaù
SYNONYMS
avaropya—unloading; girim—the mountain; skandhät—from his shoulder;
suparëaù—Garuòa; patatäm—of all the birds; varaù—the biggest or most
powerful; yayau—went; jala-ante—where the water is; utsåjya—placing;
hariëä—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; saù—he (Garuòa);
visarjitaù—discharged from that place.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Garuòa, the chief of birds, unloaded Mandara Mountain from
his shoulder and brought it near the water. Then he was asked by the Lord to
leave that place, and he left.
PURPORT
Garuòa was asked by the Lord to leave that place because the snake Väsuki,
who was to be used as the rope for churning, could not go there in the presence
of Garuòa. Garuòa, the carrier of Lord Viñëu, is not a vegetarian. He eats big
snakes. Väsuki, being a great snake, would be natural food for Garuòa, the
chief of birds. Lord Viñëu therefore asked Garuòa to leave so that Väsuki could
be brought to churn the ocean with Mandara Mountain, which was to be used
as the churning rod. These are the wonderful arrangements of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Nothing takes place by accident. Carrying Mandara
Mountain on the back of a bird and putting it in its right position might be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
286
difficult for anyone, whether demigod or demon, but for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead everything is possible, as shown by this pastime. The
Lord had no difficulty lifting the mountain with one hand, and Garuòa, His
carrier, carried all the demons and demigods together by the grace of the
Supreme Lord. The Lord is known as Yogeçvara, the master of all mystic
power, because of His omnipotence. If He likes, He can make anything lighter
than cotton or heavier than the universe. Those who do not believe in the
activities of the Lord cannot explain how things happen. Using words like
"accident," they take shelter of ideas that are unbelievable. Nothing is
accidental. Everything is done by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as the
Lord Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10). Mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate
sacaräcaram. Whatever actions and reactions occur within the cosmic
manifestation all take place under the superintendence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. However, because the demons do not understand the
potency of the Lord, when wonderful things are done, the demons think that
they are accidental.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce."
7. Lord Çiva Saves the Universe by Drinking Poison
The summary of the Seventh Chapter is as follows. As described in this
chapter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appearing in His incarnation as
a tortoise, dove deep into the ocean to carry Mandara Mountain on His back.
At first the churning of the ocean produced kälaküöa poison. Everyone feared
this poison, but Lord Çiva satisfied them by drinking it.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
287
With the understanding that when the nectar was generated from the
churning they would share it equally, the demigods and the demons brought
Väsuki to be used as the rope for the churning rod. By the expert arrangement
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the demons held the snake near the
mouth, whereas the demigods held the tail of the great snake. Then, with great
endeavor, they began pulling the snake in both directions. Because the
churning rod, Mandara Mountain, was very heavy and was not held by any
support in the water, it sank into the ocean, and in this way the prowess of
both the demons and the demigods was vanquished. The Supreme Personality
of Godhead then appeared in the form of a tortoise and supported Mandara
Mountain on His back. Then the churning resumed with great force. As a
result of the churning, a huge amount of poison was produced. The prajäpatis,
seeing no one else to save them, approached Lord Çiva and offered him prayers
full of truth. Lord Çiva is called Äçutoña because he is very pleased if one is a
devotee. Therefore he easily agreed to drink all the poison generated by the
churning. The goddess Durgä, Bhaväné, the wife of Lord Çiva, was not at all
disturbed when Lord Çiva agreed to drink the poison, for she knew Lord Çiva's
prowess. Indeed, she expressed her pleasure at this agreement. Then Lord Çiva
gathered the devastating poison, which was everywhere. He took it in his hand
and drank it. After he drank the poison, his neck became bluish. A small
quantity of the poison dropped from his hands to the ground, and it is because
of this poison that there are poisonous snakes, scorpions, toxic plants and
other poisonous things in this world.
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
Tae NaaGaraJaMaaMaN}Ya f-l/>aaGaeNa vaSauik-Ma( )
PairvqYa iGaraE TaiSMaNa( Nae}aMaiBDa& MaudaiNvTaa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
288
Aarei>are SauraYataa AMa*TaaQaeR ku-æÜh )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
te näga-räjam ämantrya
phala-bhägena väsukim
parivéya girau tasmin
netram abdhià mudänvitäù
ärebhire surä yattä
amåtärthe kurüdvaha
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; te—all of them (the demigods
and the demons); näga-räjam—the king of the Nägas, snakes;
ämantrya—inviting, or requesting; phala-bhägena—by promising a share of the
nectar; väsukim—the snake Väsuki; parivéya—encircling; girau—Mandara
Mountain; tasmin—unto it; netram—the churning rope; abdhim—the ocean
of milk; mudä anvitäù—all surcharged with great pleasure; ärebhire—began to
act; suräù—the demigods; yattäù—with great endeavor; amåta-arthe—for
gaining nectar; kuru-udvaha—O King Parékñit, best of the Kurus.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O best of the Kurus, Mahäräja Parékñit, the
demigods and demons summoned Väsuki, king of the serpents, requesting him
to come and promising to give him a share of the nectar. They coiled Väsuki
around Mandara Mountain as a churning rope, and with great pleasure they
endeavored to produce nectar by churning the ocean of milk.
TEXT 2
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
289
hir" PaurSTaaÂGa*he PaUv| devaSTaTaae_>avNa( )) 2 ))
hariù purastäj jagåhe
pürvaà deväs tato 'bhavan
SYNONYMS
hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Ajita; purastät—from the front;
jagåhe—took; pürvam—at first; deväù—the demigods; tataù—thereafter;
abhavan—took the front portion of Väsuki.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, Ajita, grasped the front portion of the snake,
and then the demigods followed.
TEXT 3
TaàEC^Na( dETYaPaTaYaae MahaPauåzceiíTaMa( )
Na Ga*õqMaae vYa& PauC^Maher(r)MaMa(r)l/Ma( )
SvaDYaaYaé[uTaSaMPaàa" Pa[:YaaTaa JaNMak-MaRi>a" )) 3 ))
tan naicchan daitya-patayo
mahä-puruña-ceñöitam
na gåhëémo vayaà puccham
aher aìgam amaìgalam
svädhyäya-çruta-sampannäù
prakhyätä janma-karmabhiù
SYNONYMS
tat—that arrangement; na aicchan—not liking; daitya-patayaù—the leaders of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
290
the demons; mahä-puruña—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ceñöitam—attempt; na—not; gåhëémaù—shall take; vayam—all of us (the
Daityas); puccham—the tail; aheù—of the serpent; aìgam—part of the body;
amaìgalam—inauspicious, inferior; svädhyäya—with Vedic study; çruta—and
Vedic knowledge; sampannäù—fully equipped; prakhyätäù—prominent;
janma-karmabhiù—by birth and activities.
TRANSLATION
The leaders of the demons thought it unwise to hold the tail, the
inauspicious portion of the snake. Instead, they wanted to hold the front, which
had been taken by the Personality of Godhead and the demigods, because that
portion was auspicious and glorious. Thus the demons, on the plea that they
were all highly advanced students of Vedic knowledge and were all famous for
their birth and activities, protested that they wanted to hold the front of the
snake.
PURPORT
The demons thought that the front of the snake was auspicious and that
catching hold of that portion would be more chivalrous. Moreover, Daityas
must always do the opposite of the demigods. That is their nature. We have
actually seen this in relation to our Kåñëa consciousness movement. We are
advocating cow protection and encouraging people to drink more milk and eat
palatable preparations made of milk, but the demons, just to protest such
proposals, are claiming that they are advanced in scientific knowledge, as
described here by the words svädhyäya-çruta-sampannäù. They say that
according to their scientific way, they have discovered that milk is dangerous
and that the beef obtained by killing cows is very nutritious. This difference of
opinion will always continue. Indeed, it has existed since days of yore. Millions
of years ago, there was the same competition. The demons, as a result of their
so-called Vedic study, preferred to hold the side of the snake near the mouth.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
291
The Supreme Personality of Godhead thought it wise to catch hold of the
dangerous part of the snake and allow the demons to hold the tail, which was
not dangerous, but because of a competitive desire, the demons thought it wise
to hold the snake near the mouth. If the demigods were going to drink poison,
the demons would resolve, "Why should we not share the poison and die
gloriously by drinking it?"
In regard to the words svädhyäya-çruta-sampannäù prakhyätä
janma-karmabhiù, another question may be raised. If one is actually educated
in Vedic knowledge, is famous for performing prescribed activities and has
been born in a great aristocratic family, why should he be called a demon? The
answer is that one may be highly educated and may have been born in an
aristocratic family, but if he is godless, if he does not listen to the instructions
of God, then he is a demon. There are many examples in history of men like
Hiraëyakaçipu, Rävaëa and Kaàsa who were well educated, who were born in
aristocratic families and who were very powerful and chivalrous in fighting,
but who, because of deriding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, were called
Räkñasas, or demons. One may be very well educated, but if he has no sense of
Kåñëa consciousness, no obedience to the Supreme Lord, he is a demon. That
is described by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (7.15):
na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù
prapadyante narädhamäù
mäyayäpahåta-jïänä
äsuraà bhävam äçritäù
"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose
knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of
demons, do not surrender unto Me." Äsuraà bhävam refers to not accepting
the existence of God or the transcendental instructions of the Personality of
Godhead. Bhagavad-gétä clearly consists of transcendental instructions
imparted directly by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But asuras, instead
of accepting these instructions directly, make commentaries according to their
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
292
own whimsical ways and mislead everyone, without profit even for themselves.
One should therefore be very careful of demoniac, godless persons. According
to the words of Lord Kåñëa, even if a godless demon is very well educated, he
must be considered a müòha, narädhama and mäyayäpahåta jïäna.
TEXT 4
wiTa TaUZ<aq& iSQaTaaNdETYaaNa( ivl/aeKYa PauåzaetaMa" )
SMaYaMaaNaae ivSa*JYaaGa]& PauC^& JaGa]ah SaaMar" )) 4 ))
iti tüñëéà sthitän daityän
vilokya puruñottamaù
smayamäno visåjyägraà
pucchaà jagräha sämaraù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; tüñëém—silently; sthitän—staying; daityän—the demons;
vilokya—seeing; puruña-uttamaù—the Personality of Godhead;
smayamänaù—smiling; visåjya—giving up; agram—the front portion of the
snake; puccham—the rear portion; jagräha—grasped; sa-amaraù—with the
demigods.
TRANSLATION
Thus the demons remained silent, opposing the desire of the demigods.
Seeing the demons and understanding their motive, the Personality of Godhead
smiled. Without discussion, He immediately accepted their proposal by grasping
the tail of the snake, and the demigods followed Him.
TEXT 5
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
293
k*-TaSQaaNaiv>aaGaaSTa Wv& k-XYaPaNaNdNaa" )
MaMaNQau" ParMa& Yataa AMa*TaaQa| PaYaaeiNaiDaMa( )) 5 ))
kåta-sthäna-vibhägäs ta
evaà kaçyapa-nandanäù
mamanthuù paramaà yattä
amåtärthaà payo-nidhim
SYNONYMS
kåta—adjusting; sthäna-vibhägäù—the division of the places they were to hold;
te—they; evam—in this way; kaçyapa-nandanäù—the sons of Kaçyapa (both
the demigods and the demons); mamanthuù—churned; paramam—with great;
yattäù—endeavor; amåta-artham—for getting nectar; payaù-nidhim—the
ocean of milk.
TRANSLATION
After thus adjusting how the snake was to be held, the sons of Kaçyapa, both
demigods and demons, began their activities, desiring to get nectar by churning
the ocean of milk.
TEXT 6
MaQYaMaaNae_<aRve Saae_id]rNaaDaarae ùPaae_ivXaTa( )
iDa]YaMaa<aae_iPa bil/i>aGaaOErvaTa( Paa<@uNaNdNa )) 6 ))
mathyamäne 'rëave so 'drir
anädhäro hy apo 'viçat
dhriyamäëo 'pi balibhir
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
294
gauravät päëòu-nandana
SYNONYMS
mathyamäne—while the churning was going on; arëave—in the ocean of milk;
saù—that; adriù—hill; anädhäraù—without being supported by anything;
hi—indeed; apaù—in the water; aviçat—drowned; dhriyamäëaù—captured;
api—although; balibhiù—by the powerful demigods and demons;
gauravät—from being very heavy; päëòu-nandana—O son of Päëòu
(Mahäräja Parékñit).
TRANSLATION
O son of the Päëòu dynasty, when Mandara Mountain was thus being used
as a churning rod in the ocean of milk, it had no support, and therefore
although held by the strong hands of the demigods and demons, it sank into the
water.
TEXT 7
Tae SauiNaivR<<aMaNaSa" PairãaNaMau%ié[Ya" )
AaSaNa( SvPaaEåze Naíe dEveNaaiTabl/IYaSaa )) 7 ))
te sunirviëëa-manasaù
parimläna-mukha-çriyaù
äsan sva-pauruñe nañöe
daivenätibaléyasä
SYNONYMS
te—all of them (the demigods and demons); sunirviëëa-manasaù—their minds
being very disappointed; parimläna—dried up; mukha-çriyaù—the beauty of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
295
their faces; äsan—became; sva-pauruñe—with their own prowess; nañöe—being
lost; daivena—by a providential arrangement; ati-baléyasä—which is always
stronger than anything else.
TRANSLATION
Because the mountain had been sunk by the strength of providence, the
demigods and demons were disappointed, and their faces seemed to shrivel.
TEXT 8
ivl/aeKYa ivganeXaiviDa& Tadeìrae
durNTavqYaaeR_ivTaQaai>aSaiNDa" )
k*-Tva vPau" k-C^PaMad(>auTa& MahTa(
Pa[ivXYa TaaeYa& iGairMauÂhar )) 8 ))
vilokya vighneça-vidhià tadeçvaro
duranta-véryo 'vitathäbhisandhiù
kåtvä vapuù kacchapam adbhutaà mahat
praviçya toyaà girim ujjahära
SYNONYMS
vilokya—observing; vighna—the obstruction (the sinking of the mountain);
éça-vidhim—by the providential arrangement; tadä—then; éçvaraù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; duranta-véryaù—inconceivably powerful;
avitatha—infallible; abhisandhiù—whose determination; kåtvä—expanding;
vapuù—body; kacchapam—tortoise; adbhutam—wonderful; mahat—very
great; praviçya—entering; toyam—the water; girim—the mountain (Mandara);
ujjahära—lifted.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
296
TRANSLATION
Seeing the situation that had been created by the will of the Supreme, the
unlimitedly powerful Lord, whose determination is infallible, took the
wonderful shape of a tortoise, entered the water, and lifted the great Mandara
Mountain.
PURPORT
Here is evidence that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the supreme
controller of everything. As we have previously described, there are two classes
of men—the demons and the demigods—but neither of them are supremely
powerful. Everyone has experienced that hindrances are imposed upon us by
the supreme power. The demons regard these hindrances as mere accidents or
chance, but devotees accept them to be acts of the supreme ruler. When faced
with hindrances, therefore, devotees pray to the Lord. Tat te 'nukampäà
susamékñamäëo bhuïjäna evätma-kåtaà vipäkam [SB 10.14.8]. Devotees endure
hindrances, accepting them to be caused by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and regarding them as benedictions. Demons, however, being unable
to understand the supreme controller, regard such hindrances as accidental.
Here, of course, the Supreme Personality of Godhead was present personally. It
was by His will that there were hindrances, and by His will those hindrances
were removed. The Lord appeared as a tortoise to support the great mountain.
Kñitir iha vipulatare tava tiñöhati påñöhe. The Lord held the great mountain on
His back. Keçava dhåta-kürma-çaréra jaya jagadéça hare. Dangers can be created
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they can also be removed by Him.
This is known to devotees, but demons cannot understand it.
TEXT 9
TaMauiTQaTa& vq+Ya ku-l/acl&/ PauNa"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
297
SaMauÛTaa iNaMaRiQaTau& SauraSaura" )
dDaar Pa*ïeNa Sa l/+aYaaeJaNa‚
Pa[STaair<aa ÜqPa wvaParae MahaNa( )) 9 ))
tam utthitaà vékñya kuläcalaà punaù
samudyatä nirmathituà suräsuräù
dadhära påñöhena sa lakña-yojanaprastäriëä
dvépa iväparo mahän
SYNONYMS
tam—that mountain; utthitam—lifted; vékñya—observing; kuläcalam—known
as Mandara; punaù—again; samudyatäù—enlivened; nirmathitum—to churn
the ocean of milk; sura-asuräù—the demigods and the demons;
dadhära—carried; påñöhena—by the back; saù—the Supreme Lord;
lakña-yojana—one hundred thousand yojanas (eight hundred thousand miles);
prastäriëä—extending; dvépaù—a big island; iva—like; aparaù—another;
mahän—very big.
TRANSLATION
When the demigods and demons saw that Mandara Mountain had been
lifted, they were enlivened and encouraged to begin churning again. The
mountain rested on the back of the great tortoise, which extended for eight
hundred thousand miles like a large island.
TEXT 10
SauraSaureNd]E>auRJavqYaRveiPaTa&
Pair>a]MaNTa& iGairMa(r) Pa*ïTa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
298
ib>a]Ta( TadavTaRNaMaaidk-C^Paae
MaeNae_(r)k-<@UYaNaMaPa[MaeYa" )) 10 ))
suräsurendrair bhuja-vérya-vepitaà
paribhramantaà girim aìga påñöhataù
bibhrat tad-ävartanam ädi-kacchapo
mene 'ìga-kaëòüyanam aprameyaù
SYNONYMS
sura-asura-indraiù—by the leaders of the demons and the demigods;
bhuja-vérya—by the strength of their arms; vepitam—moving;
paribhramantam—rotating; girim—the mountain; aìga—O Mahäräja Parékñit;
påñöhataù—on His back; bibhrat—bore; tat—of that; ävartanam—the rotating;
ädi-kacchapaù—as the supreme original tortoise; mene—considered;
aìga-kaëòüyanam—as pleasing scratching of the body; aprameyaù—unlimited.
TRANSLATION
O King, when the demigods and demons, by the strength of their arms,
rotated Mandara Mountain on the back of the extraordinary tortoise, the
tortoise accepted the rolling of the mountain as a means of scratching His body,
and thus He felt a pleasing sensation.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is always the unlimited. Although the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His body as a tortoise, held on His back
the largest of mountains, Mandara-parvata, He did not feel any
inconvenience. On the contrary, He apparently felt some itching, and thus the
rotation of the mountain was certainly very pleasing.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
299
TEXT 11
TaQaaSauraNaaivXadaSaure<a
æPae<a Taeza& bl/vqYaRMaqrYaNa( )
oÕqPaYaNa( devGa<aa&ê ivZ<au‚
dOEveNa NaaGaeNd]MabaeDaæPa" )) 11 ))
tathäsurän äviçad äsureëa
rüpeëa teñäà bala-véryam érayan
uddépayan deva-gaëäàç ca viñëur
daivena nägendram abodha-rüpaù
SYNONYMS
tathä—thereafter; asurän—unto the demons; äviçat—entered; äsureëa—by
the quality of passion; rüpeëa—in such a form; teñäm—of them;
bala-véryam—strength and energy; érayan—increasing;
uddépayan—encouraging; deva-gaëän—the demigods; ca—also; viñëuù—Lord
Viñëu; daivena—by the feature of goodness; näga-indram—unto the King of
the serpents, Väsuki; abodha-rüpaù—by the quality of ignorance.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Lord Viñëu entered the demons as the quality of passion, the
demigods as the quality of goodness, and Väsuki as the quality of ignorance to
encourage them and increase their various types of strength and energy.
PURPORT
Everyone in this material world is under the different modes of material
nature. There were three different parties in the churning of Mandara
Mountain—the demigods, who were in the mode of goodness, the demons,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
300
who were in the mode of passion, and the snake Väsuki, who was in the mode
of ignorance. Since they were all becoming tired (Väsuki so much so that he
was almost going to die), Lord Viñëu, to encourage them to continue the work
of churning the ocean, entered into them according to their respective modes
of nature—goodness, passion and ignorance.
TEXT 12
oPaYaRGaeNd]& iGairrai@vaNYa
Aa§-MYa hSTaeNa Sahóbahu" )
TaSQaaE idiv b]ø>aveNd]Mau:YaE‚
ri>aíuviÙ" SauMaNaae_i>av*í" )) 12 ))
upary agendraà giri-räò ivänya
äkramya hastena sahasra-bähuù
tasthau divi brahma-bhavendra-mukhyair
abhiñöuvadbhiù sumano-'bhivåñöaù
SYNONYMS
upari—on the top of; agendram—the big mountain; giri-räö—the king of
mountains; iva—like; anyaù—another; äkramya—catching; hastena—by one
hand; sahasra-bähuù—exhibiting thousands of hands; tasthau—situated;
divi—in the sky; brahma—Lord Brahmä; bhava—Lord Çiva; indra—the King
of heaven; mukhyaiù—headed by; abhiñöuvadbhiù—offered prayers to the Lord;
sumanaù—by flowers; abhivåñöaù—being showered.
TRANSLATION
Manifesting Himself with thousands of hands, the Lord then appeared on
the summit of Mandara Mountain, like another great mountain, and held
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
301
Mandara Mountain with one hand. In the upper planetary systems, Lord
Brahmä and Lord Çiva, along with Indra, King of heaven, and other demigods,
offered prayers to the Lord and showered flowers upon Him.
PURPORT
To balance Mandara Mountain while it was being pulled from both sides,
the Lord Himself appeared on its summit like another great mountain. Lord
Brahmä, Lord Çiva and King Indra then expanded themselves and showered
flowers on the Lord.
TEXT 13
oPaYaRDaêaTMaiNa Gaae}aNae}aYaae"
Pare<a Tae Pa[aivXaTaa SaMaeiDaTaa" )
MaMaNQauriBDa& TarSaa MadaeTk-$=a
Mahaid]<aa +aaei>aTaNa§-c§-Ma( )) 13 ))
upary adhaç cätmani gotra-netrayoù
pareëa te präviçatä samedhitäù
mamanthur abdhià tarasä madotkaöä
mahädriëä kñobhita-nakra-cakram
SYNONYMS
upari—upward; adhaù ca—and downward; ätmani—unto the demons and
demigods; gotra-netrayoù—unto the mountain and Väsuki, who was used as a
rope; pareëa—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; te—they;
präviçatä—entering them; samedhitäù—sufficiently agitated;
mamanthuù—churned; abdhim—the ocean of milk; tarasä—with great
strength; mada-utkaöäù—being mad; mahä-adriëä—with the great Mandara
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
302
Mountain; kñobhita—agitated; nakra-cakram—all the alligators in the water.
TRANSLATION
The demigods and demons worked almost madly for the nectar, encouraged
by the Lord, who was above and below the mountain and who had entered the
demigods, the demons, Väsuki and the mountain itself. Because of the strength
of the demigods and demons, the ocean of milk was so powerfully agitated that
all the alligators in the water were very much perturbed. Nonetheless the
churning of the ocean continued in this way.
TEXT 14
AhqNd]Saahók-#=aerd*x(Mau%‚
ìaSaaiGanDaUMaahTavcRSaae_Saura" )
PaaEl/aeMak-ale/Yabl/ILvl/adYaae
dvaiGandGDaa" Sarl/a wva>avNa( )) 14 ))
ahéndra-sähasra-kaöhora-dåì-mukhaçväsägni-
dhümähata-varcaso 'suräù
pauloma-käleya-balélvalädayo
davägni-dagdhäù saralä iväbhavan
SYNONYMS
ahéndra—of the King of serpents; sähasra—by thousands; kaöhora—very, very
hard; dåk—all directions; mukha—by the mouth; çväsa—breathing; agni—fire
coming out; dhüma—smoke; ähata—being affected; varcasaù—by the rays;
asuräù—the demons; pauloma—Pauloma; käleya—Käleya; bali—Bali;
ilvala—Ilvala; ädayaù—headed by; dava-agni—by a forest fire;
dagdhäù—burned; saraläù—sarala trees; iva—like; abhavan—all of them
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
303
became.
TRANSLATION
Väsuki had thousands of eyes and mouths. From his mouths he breathed
smoke and blazing fire, which affected the demons, headed by Pauloma, Käleya,
Bali and Ilvala. Thus the demons, who appeared like sarala trees burned by a
forest fire, gradually became powerless.
TEXT 15
deva&ê TaC^(vaSaiXa%ahTaPa[>aaNa(
DaUMa]aMbróGvrk-Äuk-aNaNaaNa( )
SaMa>YavzRN>aGavÜXaa gaNaa
vvu" SaMaud]aeMYauRPaGaU!vaYav" )) 15 ))
deväàç ca tac-chväsa-çikhä-hata-prabhän
dhümrämbara-srag-vara-kaïcukänanän
samabhyavarñan bhagavad-vaçä ghanä
vavuù samudrormy-upagüòha-väyavaù
SYNONYMS
devän—all the demigods; ca—also; tat—of Väsuki; çväsa—from the breathing;
çikhä—by the flames; hata—being affected; prabhän—their bodily luster;
dhümra—smoky; ambara—dress; srak-vara—excellent garlands;
kaïcuka—armaments; änanän—and faces; samabhyavarñan—sufficiently
rained; bhagavat-vaçäù—under the control of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; ghanäù—clouds; vavuù—blew; samudra—of the ocean of milk;
ürmi—from the waves; upagüòha—bearing fragments of water;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
304
väyavaù—breezes.
TRANSLATION
Because the demigods were also affected by the blazing breath of Väsuki,
their bodily lusters diminished, and their garments, garlands, weapons and faces
were blackened by smoke. However, by the grace of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, clouds appeared on the sea, pouring torrents of rain, and breezes blew,
carrying particles of water from the sea waves, to give the demigods relief.
TEXT 16
MaQYaMaaNaaTa( TaQaa iSaNDaaedeRvaSaurvæQaPaE" )
Yada SauDaa Na JaaYaeTa iNaMaRMaNQaaiJaTa" SvYaMa( )) 16 ))
mathyamänät tathä sindhor
deväsura-varütha-paiù
yadä sudhä na jäyeta
nirmamanthäjitaù svayam
SYNONYMS
mathyamänät—sufficiently being churned; tathä—in this way; sindhoù—from
the ocean of milk; deva—of the demigods; asura—and the demons;
varütha-paiù—by the best; yadä—when; sudhä—nectar; na jäyeta—did not
come out; nirmamantha—churned; ajitaù—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Ajita; svayam—personally.
TRANSLATION
When nectar did not come from the ocean of milk, despite so much endeavor
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
305
by the best of the demigods and demons, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Ajita, personally began to churn the ocean.
TEXT 17
MaegaXYaaMa" k-Nak-PairiDa" k-<aRivÛaeTaivÛu‚
NMaUiDNaR >a]aJaiÜlu/il/Tak-c" óGDarae r¢-Nae}a" )
JaE}aEdaeRi>aRJaRGad>aYadEdRNdéUk&- Ga*hqTva
MaQNaNa( MaQNaa Pa[iTaiGairirvaXaae>aTaaQaae Da*Taaid]" )) 17 ))
megha-çyämaù kanaka-paridhiù karëa-vidyota-vidyun
mürdhni bhräjad-vilulita-kacaù srag-dharo rakta-netraù
jaitrair dorbhir jagad-abhaya-dair dandaçükaà gåhétvä
mathnan mathnä pratigirir iväçobhatätho dhåtädriù
SYNONYMS
megha-çyämaù—blackish like a cloud; kanaka-paridhiù—wearing yellow
garments; karëa—on the ears; vidyota-vidyut—whose earrings shone like
lightning; mürdhni—on the head; bhräjat—gleaming; vilulita—disheveled;
kacaù—whose hair; srak-dharaù—wearing a flower garland;
rakta-netraù—with red eyes; jaitraiù—with victorious; dorbhiù—with arms;
jagat—to the universe; abhaya-daiù—which give fearlessness;
dandaçükam—the snake (Väsuki); gåhétvä—after taking; mathnan—churning;
mathnä—by the churning rod (Mandara Mountain); pratigiriù—another
mountain; iva—like; açobhata—He appeared; atho—then;
dhåta-adriù—having taken the mountain.
TRANSLATION
The Lord appeared like a blackish cloud. He was dressed with yellow
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
306
garments, His earrings shone on His ears like lightning, and His hair spread
over His shoulders. He wore a garland of flowers, and His eyes were pinkish.
With His strong, glorious arms, which award fearlessness throughout the
universe, He took hold of Väsuki and began churning the ocean, using Mandara
Mountain as a churning rod. When engaged in this way, the Lord appeared like
a beautifully situated mountain named Indranéla.
TEXT 18
iNaMaRQYaMaaNaadudDaer>aUiÜz&
MahaeLb<a& hal/hl/aûMaGa]Ta" )
SaM>a]aNTaMaqNaaeNMak-raihk-C^PaaTa(
iTaiMaiÜPaGa]ahiTaiMai(r)l/aku-l/aTa( )) 18 ))
nirmathyamänäd udadher abhüd viñaà
maholbaëaà hälahalähvam agrataù
sambhränta-ménonmakarähi-kacchapät
timi-dvipa-gräha-timiìgiläkulät
SYNONYMS
nirmathyamänät—while the activities of churning were going on;
udadheù—from the ocean; abhüt—there was; viñam—poison;
mahä-ulbaëam—very fierce; hälahala-ähvam—by the name hälahala;
agrataù—at first; sambhränta—agitated and going here and there;
ména—various kinds of fish; unmakara—sharks; ahi—different kinds of
snakes; kacchapät—and many kinds of tortoises; timi—whales; dvipa—water
elephants; gräha—crocodiles; timiìgila—whales that can swallow whales;
äkulät—being very much agitated.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
307
TRANSLATION
The fish, sharks, tortoises and snakes were most agitated and perturbed. The
entire ocean became turbulent, and even the large aquatic animals like whales,
water elephants, crocodiles and timiìgila fish [large whales that can swallow
small whales] came to the surface. While the ocean was being churned in this
way, it first produced a fiercely dangerous poison called hälahala.
TEXT 19
TaduGa]veGa& idiXa idXYauPaYaRDaae
ivSaPaRduTSaPaRdSaùMaPa[iTa )
>aqTaa" Pa[Jaa dud]uvur(r) Saeìra
Ar+YaMaa<aa" Xar<a& SadaiXavMa( )) 19 ))
tad ugra-vegaà diçi diçy upary adho
visarpad utsarpad asahyam aprati
bhétäù prajä dudruvur aìga seçvarä
arakñyamäëäù çaraëaà sadäçivam
SYNONYMS
tat—that; ugra-vegam—very fierce and potent poison; diçi diçi—in all
directions; upari—upward; adhaù—downward; visarpat—curling;
utsarpat—going upward; asahyam—unbearable; aprati—uncontrollable;
bhétäù—being very much afraid; prajäù—the residents of all the worlds;
dudruvuù—moved here and there; aìga—O Mahäräja Parékñit;
sa-éçvaräù—with the Supreme Lord; arakñyamäëäù—not being protected;
çaraëam—shelter; sadäçivam—unto the lotus feet of Lord Çiva.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
308
TRANSLATION
O King, when that uncontrollable poison was forcefully spreading up and
down in all directions, all the demigods, along with the Lord Himself,
approached Lord Çiva [Sadäçiva]. Feeling unsheltered and very much afraid,
they sought shelter of him.
PURPORT
One may question that since the Supreme Personality of Godhead was
personally present, why did He accompany all the demigods and people in
general to take shelter of Lord Sadäçiva, instead of intervening Himself. In this
connection Çréla Madhväcärya warns:
rudrasya yaçaso 'rthäya
svayaà viñëur viñaà vibhuù
na saïjahre samartho 'pi
väyuà coce praçäntaye
Lord Viñëu was competent to rectify the situation, but in order to give credit
to Lord Çiva, who later drank all the poison and kept it in his neck, Lord Viñëu
did not take action.
TEXT 20
ivl/aeKYa Ta& devvr& i}al/aeKYaa
>avaYa deVYaai>aMaTa& MauNaqNaaMa( )
AaSaqNaMad]avPavGaRheTaae‚
STaPaae Jauza<a& STauiTai>a" Pa[<aeMau" )) 20 ))
vilokya taà deva-varaà tri-lokyä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
309
bhaväya devyäbhimataà munénäm
äsénam adräv apavarga-hetos
tapo juñäëaà stutibhiù praëemuù
SYNONYMS
vilokya—observing; tam—him; deva-varam—the best of the demigods;
tri-lokyäù—of the three worlds; bhaväya—for the flourishing; devyä—with his
wife, Bhaväné; abhimatam—accepted by; munénäm—great saintly persons;
äsénam—sitting together; adrau—from the top of Kailäsa Hill;
apavarga-hetoù—desiring liberation; tapaù—in austerity; juñäëam—being
served by them; stutibhiù—by prayers; praëemuù—offered their respectful
obeisances.
TRANSLATION
The demigods observed Lord Çiva sitting on the summit of Kailäsa Hill with
his wife, Bhaväné, for the auspicious development of the three worlds. He was
being worshiped by great saintly persons desiring liberation. The demigods
offered him their obeisances and prayers with great respect.
TEXT 21
é[qPa[JaaPaTaYa Ocu"
devdev Mahadev >aUTaaTMaNa( >aUTa>aavNa )
}aaih Na" Xar<aaPaàa&ñEl/aeKYadhNaad( ivzaTa( )) 21 ))
çré-prajäpataya ücuù
deva-deva mahä-deva
bhütätman bhüta-bhävana
trähi naù çaraëäpannäàs
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
310
trailokya-dahanäd viñät
SYNONYMS
çré-prajäpatayaù ücuù—the prajäpatis said; deva-deva—O Lord Mahädeva, best
of the demigods; mahä-deva—O great demigod; bhüta-ätman—O life and soul
of everyone in this world; bhüta-bhävana—O the cause of the happiness and
flourishing of all of them; trähi—deliver; naù—us; çaraëa-äpannän—who have
taken shelter at your lotus feet; trailokya—of the three worlds;
dahanät—which is causing the burning; viñät—from this poison.
TRANSLATION
The prajäpatis said: O greatest of all demigods, Mahädeva, Supersoul of all
living entities and cause of their happiness and prosperity, we have come to the
shelter of your lotus feet. Now please save us from this fiery poison, which is
spreading all over the three worlds.
PURPORT
Since Lord Çiva is in charge of annihilation, why should he be approached
for protection, which is given by Lord Viñëu? Lord Brahmä creates, and Lord
Çiva annihilates, but both Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva are incarnations of
Lord Viñëu and are known as çaktyäveça-avatäras. They are endowed with a
special power like that of Lord Viñëu, who is actually all-pervading in their
activities. Therefore whenever prayers for protection are offered to Lord Çiva,
actually Lord Viñëu is indicated, for otherwise Lord Çiva is meant for
destruction. Lord Çiva is one of the éçvaras, or the controllers known as
çaktyäveça-avatäras. Therefore he can be addressed as having the qualities of
Lord Viñëu.
TEXT 22
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
311
TvMaek-" SavRJaGaTa wRìrae bNDaMaae+aYaae" )
Ta& TvaMacRiNTa ku-Xal/a" Pa[PaàaiTaRhr& GauåMa( )) 22 ))
tvam ekaù sarva-jagata
éçvaro bandha-mokñayoù
taà tväm arcanti kuçaläù
prapannärti-haraà gurum
SYNONYMS
tvam ekaù—Your Lordship is indeed; sarva-jagataù—of the three worlds;
éçvaraù—the controller; bandha-mokñayoù—of both bondage and liberation;
tam—that controller; tväm arcanti—worship you; kuçaläù—persons who want
good fortune; prapanna-ärti-haram—who can mitigate all the distresses of a
sheltered devotee; gurum—you who act as a good advisor to all fallen souls.
TRANSLATION
O lord, you are the cause of bondage and liberation of the entire universe
because you are its ruler. Those who are advanced in spiritual consciousness
surrender unto you, and therefore you are the cause of mitigating their
distresses, and you are also the cause of their liberation. We therefore worship
Your Lordship.
PURPORT
Actually Lord Viñëu maintains and accomplishes all good fortune. If one
has to take shelter of Lord Viñëu, why should the demigods take shelter of
Lord Çiva? They did so because Lord Viñëu acts through Lord Çiva in the
creation of the material world. Lord Çiva acts on behalf of Lord Viñëu. When
the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (14.4) that He is the father of all living entities
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
312
(ahaà béja-pradaù pitä), this refers to actions performed by Lord Viñëu through
Lord Çiva. Lord Viñëu is always unattached to material activities, and when
material activities are to be performed, Lord Viñëu performs them through
Lord Çiva. Lord Çiva is therefore worshiped on the level of Lord Viñëu. When
Lord Viñëu is untouched by the external energy He is Lord Viñëu, but when
He is in touch with the external energy, He appears in His feature as Lord
Çiva.
TEXT 23
Gau<aMaYYaa SvXa¢-yaSYa SaGaRiSQaTYaPYaYaaiNv>aae )
DaTSae Yada Svd*Ga( >aUMaNb]øivZ<auiXavai>aDaaMa( )) 23 ))
guëa-mayyä sva-çaktyäsya
sarga-sthity-apyayän vibho
dhatse yadä sva-dåg bhüman
brahma-viñëu-çiväbhidhäm
SYNONYMS
guëa-mayyä—acting in three modes of activity; sva-çaktyä—by the external
energy of Your Lordship; asya—of this material world;
sarga-sthiti-apyayän—creation, maintenance and annihilation; vibho—O lord;
dhatse—you execute; yadä—when; sva-dåk—you manifest yourself;
bhüman—O great one; brahma-viñëu-çiva-abhidhäm—as Lord Brahmä, Lord
Viñëu or Lord Çiva.
TRANSLATION
O lord, you are self-effulgent and supreme. You create this material world by
your personal energy, and you assume the names Brahmä, Viñëu and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
313
Maheçvara when you act in creation, maintenance and annihilation.
PURPORT
This prayer is actually offered to Lord Viñëu, the puruña, who in His
incarnations as the guëa-avatäras assumes the names Brahmä, Viñëu and
Maheçvara.
TEXT 24
Tv& b]ø ParMa& Gauù& SadSaÙav>aavNaMa( )
NaaNaaXai¢-i>ara>aaTaSTvMaaTMaa JaGadqìr" )) 24 ))
tvaà brahma paramaà guhyaà
sad-asad-bhäva-bhävanam
nänä-çaktibhir äbhätas
tvam ätmä jagad-éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
tvam—Your Lordship; brahma—impersonal Brahman; paramam—supreme;
guhyam—confidential; sat-asat-bhäva-bhävanam—the cause of varieties of
creation, its cause and effect; nänä-çaktibhiù—with varieties of potencies;
äbhätaù—manifest; tvam—you are; ätmä—the Supersoul; jagat-éçvaraù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
You are the cause of all causes, the self-effulgent, inconceivable, impersonal
Brahman, which is originally Parabrahman. You manifest various potencies in
this cosmic manifestation.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
314
PURPORT
This prayer is offered to the impersonal Brahman, which consists of the
effulgent rays of Parabrahman. Parabrahman is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (paraà brahma paraà dhäma pavitraà paramaà bhavän [Bg. 10.12]).
When Lord Çiva is worshiped as Parabrahman, the worship is meant for Lord
Viñëu.
TEXT 25
Tv& XaBdYaaeiNaJaRGadaidraTMaa
Pa[a<aeiNd]Yad]VYaGau<a" Sv>aav" )
k-al/" §-Tau" SaTYaMa*Ta& c DaMaR‚
STvYYa+ar& YaTa( i}av*daMaNaiNTa )) 25 ))
tvaà çabda-yonir jagad-ädir ätmä
präëendriya-dravya-guëaù svabhävaù
kälaù kratuù satyam åtaà ca dharmas
tvayy akñaraà yat tri-våd-ämananti
SYNONYMS
tvam—Your Lordship; çabda-yoniù—the origin and source of Vedic literature;
jagat-ädiù—the original cause of material creation; ätmä—the soul;
präëa—the living force; indriya—the senses; dravya—the material elements;
guëaù—the three qualities; sva-bhävaù—material nature; kälaù—eternal time;
kratuù—sacrifice; satyam—truth; åtam—truthfulness; ca—and;
dharmaù—two different types of religion; tvayi—unto you; akñaram—the
original syllable, oàkära; yat—that which; tri-våt—consisting of the letters a,
u and m; ämananti—they say.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
315
TRANSLATION
O lord, you are the original source of Vedic literature. You are the original
cause of material creation, the life force, the senses, the five elements, the three
modes and the mahat-tattva. You are eternal time, determination and the two
religious systems called truth [satya] and truthfulness [åta]. You are the shelter
of the syllable oà, which consists of three letters a-u-m.
TEXT 26
AiGanMauR%& Tae_i%l/devTaaTMaa
i+aiTa& ivdul/aeRk->avax(iga]PaªJaMa( )
k-al&/ GaiTa& Tae_i%l/devTaaTMaNaae
idXaê k-<aaOE rSaNa& Jale/XaMa( )) 26 ))
agnir mukhaà te 'khila-devatätmä
kñitià vidur loka-bhaväìghri-paìkajam
kälaà gatià te 'khila-devatätmano
diçaç ca karëau rasanaà jaleçam
SYNONYMS
agniù—fire; mukham—mouth; te—of Your Lordship; akhila-devatä-ätmä—the
origin of all demigods; kñitim—the surface of the globe; viduù—they know;
loka-bhava—O origin of all planets; aìghri-paìkajam—your lotus feet;
kälam—eternal time; gatim—progress; te—of Your Lordship;
akhila-devatä-ätmanaù—the total aggregate of all the demigods; diçaù—all
directions; ca—and; karëau—your ears; rasanam—taste; jala-éçam—the
demigod controller of the water.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
316
TRANSLATION
O father of all planets, learned scholars know that fire is your mouth, the
surface of the globe is your lotus feet, eternal time is your movement, all the
directions are your ears, and Varuëa, master of the waters, is your tongue.
PURPORT
In the çruti-mantras it is said, agniù sarva-devatäù: "Fire is the aggregate of
all demigods." Agni is the mouth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is
through Agni, or fire, that the Lord accepts all sacrificial oblations.
TEXT 27
Naai>aNaR>aSTae ìSaNa& Na>aSvaNa(
SaUYaRê c+aU&iz Jal&/ SMa reTa" )
ParavraTMaaé[Ya<a& TavaTMaa
SaaeMaae MaNaae ÛaE>aRGavNa( iXarSTae )) 27 ))
näbhir nabhas te çvasanaà nabhasvän
süryaç ca cakñüàñi jalaà sma retaù
parävarätmäçrayaëaà tavätmä
somo mano dyaur bhagavan çiras te
SYNONYMS
näbhiù—navel; nabhaù—the sky; te—of Your Lordship; çvasanam—breathing;
nabhasvän—the air; süryaù ca—and the sun globe; cakñüàñi—your eyes;
jalam—the water; sma—indeed; retaù—semen;
para-avara-ätma-äçrayaëam—the shelter of all living entities, low and high;
tava—your; ätmä—self; somaù—the moon; manaù—mind; dyauù—the higher
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
317
planetary systems; bhagavan—O Your Lordship; çiraù—head; te—of you.
TRANSLATION
O lord, the sky is your navel, the air is your breathing, the sun is your eyes,
and the water is your semen. You are the shelter of all kinds of living entities,
high and low. The god of the moon is your mind, and the upper planetary
system is your head.
TEXT 28
ku-i+a" SaMaud]a iGarYaae_iSQaSaºa
raeMaai<a SavaOEziDavqåDaSTae )
^Nda&iSa Saa+aaTa( Tav Saá DaaTav‚
S}aYaqMaYaaTMaNa( ôdYa& SavRDaMaR" )) 28 ))
kukñiù samudrä girayo 'sthi-saìghä
romäëi sarvauñadhi-vérudhas te
chandäàsi säkñät tava sapta dhätavas
trayé-mayätman hådayaà sarva-dharmaù
SYNONYMS
kukñiù—abdomen; samudräù—the oceans; girayaù—the mountains;
asthi—bones; saìghäù—combination; romäëi—the hairs of the body;
sarva—all; auñadhi—drugs; vérudhaù—plants and creepers; te—your;
chandäàsi—Vedic mantras; säkñät—directly; tava—your; sapta—seven;
dhätavaù—layers of the body; trayé-maya-ätman—O three Vedas personified;
hådayam—core of the heart; sarva-dharmaù—all kinds of religion.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
318
TRANSLATION
O lord, you are the three Vedas personified. The seven seas are your
abdomen, and the mountains are your bones. All drugs, creepers and vegetables
are the hairs on your body, the Vedic mantras like Gäyatré are the seven layers
of your body, and the Vedic religious system is the core of your heart.
TEXT 29
Mau%aiNa PaÄaePaiNazdSTaveXa
YaEiñ&XadíaetarMaN}avGaR" )
YaTa( TaiC^va:Ya& ParMaaTMaTatv&
dev SvYa&JYaaeiTarviSQaiTaSTae )) 29 ))
mukhäni païcopaniñadas taveça
yais triàçad-añöottara-mantra-vargaù
yat tac chiväkhyaà paramätma-tattvaà
deva svayaà-jyotir avasthitis te
SYNONYMS
mukhäni—faces; païca—five; upaniñadaù—Vedic literatures; tava—your;
éça—O lord; yaiù—by which; triàçat-añöa-uttara-mantra-vargaù—in the
category of thirty-eight important Vedic mantras; yat—that; tat—as it is;
çiva-äkhyam—celebrated by the name Çiva; paramätma-tattvam—which
ascertain the truth about Paramätmä; deva—O lord;
svayam-jyotiù—self-illuminated; avasthitiù—situation; te—of Your Lordship.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
319
O lord, the five important Vedic mantras are represented by your five faces,
from which the thirty-eight most celebrated Vedic mantras have been
generated. Your Lordship, being celebrated as Lord Çiva, is self-illuminated.
You are directly situated as the supreme truth, known as Paramätmä.
PURPORT
The five mantras mentioned in this connection are as follows: (1) Puruña,
(2) Aghora, (3) Sadyojäta, (4) Vämadeva, and (5) Éçäna. These five mantras are
within the category of thirty-eight special Vedic mantras chanted by Lord
Çiva, who is therefore celebrated as Çiva or Mahädeva. Another reason why
Lord Çiva is called Çiva, which means "all-auspicious," is that he is
self-illuminated, exactly like Lord Viñëu, who is the Paramätmä. Because Lord
Çiva is directly an incarnation of Lord Viñëu, he is situated as Lord Viñëu's
direct representative. This fact is corroborated by a Vedic mantra: patià
viçvasyätmeçvaraà çäçvatam. çivam acyutam. The Supersoul is called by many
names, of which Maheçvara, Çiva and Acyuta are especially mentioned.
TEXT 30
^aYaa TvDaMaaeRiMaRzu YaEivRSaGaaeR
Nae}a}aYa& SatvrJaSTaMaa&iSa )
Saa&:YaaTMaNa" Xaañk*-TaSTave+aa
^NdaeMaYaae dev ‰iz" Paura<a" )) 30 ))
chäyä tv adharmormiñu yair visargo
netra-trayaà sattva-rajas-tamäàsi
säìkhyätmanaù çästra-kåtas tavekñä
chandomayo deva åñiù puräëaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
320
SYNONYMS
chäyä—shadow; tu—but; adharma-ürmiñu—in the waves of irreligion, like
käma, krodha, lobha and moha; yaiù—by which; visargaù—so many varieties of
creation; netra-trayam—three eyes; sattva—goodness; rajaù—passion;
tamäàsi—and darkness; säìkhya-ätmanaù—the origin of all Vedic literatures;
çästra—scriptures; kåtaù—made; tava—by you; ékñä—simply by glancing;
chandaù-mayaù—full of Vedic verses; deva—O lord; åñiù—all Vedic
literatures; puräëaù—and the puräëas, the supplementary Vedas.
TRANSLATION
O lord, your shadow is seen in irreligion, which brings about varieties of
irreligious creations. The three modes of nature—goodness, passion and
ignorance—are your three eyes. All the Vedic literatures, which are full of
verses, are emanations from you because their compilers wrote the various
scriptures after receiving your glance.
TEXT 31
Na Tae iGair}aai%l/l/aek-Paal/‚
ivirÄvEku-<#=SaureNd]GaMYaMa( )
JYaaeiTa" Par& Ya}a rJaSTaMaê
Satv& Na Yad( b]ø iNarSTa>aedMa( )) 31 ))
na te giri-träkhila-loka-pälaviriïca-
vaikuëöha-surendra-gamyam
jyotiù paraà yatra rajas tamaç ca
sattvaà na yad brahma nirasta-bhedam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
321
SYNONYMS
na—not; te—of Your Lordship; giri-tra—O King of the mountains;
akhila-loka-päla—all the directors of departments of material activities;
viriïca—Lord Brahmä; vaikuëöha—Lord Viñëu; sura-indra—the King of
heaven; gamyam—they can understand; jyotiù—effulgence;
param—transcendental; yatra—wherein; rajaù—the mode of passion; tamaù
ca—and the mode of ignorance; sattvam—the mode of goodness; na—not; yat
brahma—which is impersonal Brahman; nirasta-bhedam—without distinction
between demigods and human beings.
TRANSLATION
O Lord Giréça, since the impersonal Brahman effulgence is transcendental to
the material modes of goodness, passion and ignorance, the various directors of
this material world certainly cannot appreciate it or even know where it is. It is
not understandable even to Lord Brahmä, Lord Viñëu or the King of heaven,
Mahendra.
PURPORT
The brahmajyoti is actually the effulgence of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. As stated in Brahma-saàhitä (5.40):
yasya prabhä prabhavato jagad-aëòa-koöikoöiñv
açeña-vasudhädi-vibhüti-bhinnam
tad brahma niñkalam anantam açeña-bhütaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is endowed with great power. The
glowing effulgence of His transcendental form is the impersonal Brahman,
which is absolute, complete and unlimited and which displays the varieties of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
322
countless planets, with their different opulences, in millions and millions of
universes." Although the impersonal feature of the Absolute is an expansion of
the rays of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He does not need to take care
of the impersonalists who enter the brahmajyoti. Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä
(9.4), mayä tatam idaà sarvaà jagad avyakta-mürtinä: "In My impersonal
feature I pervade this entire universe." Thus the avyakta-mürti, the impersonal
feature, is certainly an expansion of Kåñëa's energy. Mäyävädés, who prefer to
merge into this Brahman effulgence, worship Lord Çiva. The mantras referred
to in text 29 are called mukhäni païcopaniñadas taveça. Mäyävädés take all
these mantras seriously in worshiping Lord Çiva. These mantras are as follows:
(1) tat puruñäya vidmahe çäntyai, (2) mahä-deväya dhémahi vidyäyai, (3) tan no
rudraù pratiñöhäyai, (4) pracodayät dhåtyai, (5) aghorebhyas tamä. .., (6) atha
ghorebhyo mohä. .., (7) aghorebhyo rakñä. .., (8) aghoratarebhyo nidrä. .., (9)
sarvebhyaù sarva-vyädhyai, (10) sarva-sarvebhyo måtyave, (11) namas te 'stu
kñudhä. .., (12) rudra-rüpebhyas tåñëä. .., (13) vämadeväya rajä. .., (14) jyeñöhäya
svähä. .., (15) çreñöhäya ratyai, (16) rudräya kalyäëyai, (17) käläya kämä. .., (18)
kala-vikaraëäya sandhinyai, (19) bala-vikaraëäya kriyä. .., (20) baläya våddhyai,
(21) balacchäyä. .., (22) pramathanäya dhätryai, (23) sarva-bhüta-damanäya
bhrämaëyai, (24) manaù-çoñiëyai, (25) unmanäya jvarä. .., (26) sadyojätaà
prapadyämi siddhyai, (27) sadyojätäya vai namaù åddhyai, (28) bhave dityai, (29)
abhave lakñmyai, (30) nätibhave medhä. .., (31) bhajasva mäà käntyai, (32)
bhava svadhä. .., (33) udbhaväya prabhä. .., (34) éçänaù sarva-vidyänäà çaçinyai,
(35) éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäm abhaya-dä. .., (36) brahmädhipatir
brahmaëodhipatir brahman brahmeñöa-dä. .., (37) çivo me astu marécyai, (38)
sadäçivaù jvälinyai.
The impersonal Brahman is unknown even to the other directors of the
material creation, including Lord Brahmä, Lord Indra and even Lord Viñëu.
This does not mean, however, that Lord Viñëu is not omniscient. Lord Viñëu is
omniscient, but He does not need to understand what is going on in His
all-pervading expansion. Therefore in Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says that
although everything is an expansion of Him (mayä tatam idaà sarvam [Bg.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
323
9.4]), He does not need to take care of everything (na cähaà teñv avasthitaù),
since there are various directors like Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva and Indra.
TEXT 32
k-aMaaßri}aPaurk-al/GaraÛNaek-‚
>aUTad]uh" +aPaYaTa" STauTaYae Na TaTa( Tae )
YaSTvNTak-al/ wdMaaTMak*-Ta& SvNae}a‚
viöSfu-il/(r)iXa%Yaa >aiSaTa& Na ved )) 32 ))
kämädhvara-tripura-kälagarädy-anekabhüta-
druhaù kñapayataù stutaye na tat te
yas tv anta-käla idam ätma-kåtaà sva-netravahni-
sphuliìga-çikhayä bhasitaà na veda
SYNONYMS
käma-adhvara—sacrifices for sense gratification (like Dakña-yajïa, the
sacrifices performed by Dakña); tripura—the demon named Tripuräsura;
kälagara—Kälagara; ädi—and others; aneka—many; bhüta-druhaù—who are
meant for giving trouble to the living entities; kñapayataù—being engaged in
their destruction; stutaye—your prayer; na—not; tat—that; te—speaking to
you; yaù tu—because; anta-käle—at the time of annihilation; idam—in this
material world; ätma-kåtam—done by yourself; sva-netra—by your eyes;
vahni-sphuliìga-çikhayä—by the sparks of fire; bhasitam—burned to ashes; na
veda—I do not know how it is happening.
TRANSLATION
When annihilation is performed by the flames and sparks emanating from
your eyes, the entire creation is burned to ashes. Nonetheless, you do not know
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
324
how this happens. What then is to be said of your destroying the Dakña-yajïa,
Tripuräsura and the kälaküöa poison? Such activities cannot be subject matters
for prayers offered to you.
PURPORT
Since Lord Çiva considers the great acts he performs to be very
unimportant, what was to be said of counteracting the strong poison produced
by the churning? The demigods indirectly prayed that Lord Çiva counteract
the kälaküöa poison, which was spreading throughout the universe.
TEXT 33
Yae TvaTMaraMaGauåi>aôRid iciNTaTaaxiga]‚
ÜNÜ& crNTaMauMaYaa TaPaSaai>aTaáMa( )
k-TQaNTa oGa]Paåz& iNarTa& XMaXaaNae
Tae NaUNaMaUiTaMaivd&STav haTal/Âa" )) 33 ))
ye tv ätma-räma-gurubhir hådi cintitäìghridvandvaà
carantam umayä tapasäbhitaptam
katthanta ugra-paruñaà nirataà çmaçäne
te nünam ütim avidaàs tava häta-lajjäù
SYNONYMS
ye—persons who; tu—indeed; ätma-räma-gurubhiù—by those who are
self-satisfied and who are considered to be spiritual masters of the world;
hådi—within the heart; cintita-aìghri-dvandvam—thinking of your two lotus
feet; carantam—moving; umayä—with your consort, Umä; tapasä
abhitaptam—highly advanced through practice of austerity and penance;
katthante—criticize your acts; ugra-paruñam—not a gentle person;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
325
niratam—always; çmaçäne—in the crematorium; te—such persons;
nünam—indeed; ütim—such activities; avidan—not knowing; tava—your
activities; häta-lajjäù—shameless.
TRANSLATION
Exalted, self-satisfied persons who preach to the entire world think of your
lotus feet constantly within their hearts. However, when persons who do not
know your austerity see you moving with Umä, they misunderstand you to be
lusty, or when they see you wandering in the crematorium they mistakenly
think that you are ferocious and envious. Certainly they are shameless. They
cannot understand your activities.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva is the topmost Vaiñëava (vaiñëavänäà yathä çambhuù). It is
therefore said, vaiñëavera kriyä-mudrä vijïe nä bujhaya. Even the most
intelligent person cannot understand what a Vaiñëava like Lord Çiva is doing
or how he is acting. Those who are conquered by lusty desires and anger
cannot estimate the glories of Lord Çiva, whose position is always
transcendental. In all the activities associated with lusty desires, Lord Çiva is
an implement of ätma-räma. Ordinary persons, therefore, should not try to
understand Lord Çiva and his activities. One who tries to criticize the
activities of Lord Çiva is shameless.
TEXT 34
TaTa( TaSYa Tae SadSaTaae" ParTa" ParSYa
NaaÅ" SvæPaGaMaNae Pa[>aviNTa >aUMan" )
b]øadYa" ik-MauTa Sa&STavNae vYa& Tau
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
326
TaTSaGaRSaGaRivzYaa AiPa Xai¢-Maa}aMa( )) 34 ))
tat tasya te sad-asatoù parataù parasya
näïjaù svarüpa-gamane prabhavanti bhümnaù
brahmädayaù kim uta saàstavane vayaà tu
tat-sarga-sarga-viñayä api çakti-mätram
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; tasya—of that; te—of Your Lordship; sat-asatoù—of the living
entities, moving and not moving; parataù—transcendentally situated;
parasya—very difficult to understand; na—nor; aïjaù—as it is;
svarüpa-gamane—to approach your reality; prabhavanti—it is possible;
bhümnaù—O great one; brahma-ädayaù—even such persons as Lord Brahmä;
kim uta—what to speak of others; saàstavane—in offering prayers; vayam
tu—as far as we are concerned; tat—of you; sarga-sarga-viñayäù—creations of
the creation; api—although; çakti-mätram—to our ability.
TRANSLATION
Even personalities like Lord Brahmä and other demigods cannot understand
your position, for you are beyond the moving and nonmoving creation. Since no
one can understand you in truth, how can one offer you prayers? It is
impossible. As far as we are concerned, we are creatures of Lord Brahmä's
creation. Under the circumstances, therefore, we cannot offer you adequate
prayers, but as far as our ability allows, we have expressed our feelings.
TEXT 35
WTaTa( Par& Pa[PaXYaaMaae Na Par& Tae Maheìr )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
327
Ma*@NaaYa ih l/aek-SYa VYai¢-STae_VYa¢-k-MaR<a" )) 35 ))
etat paraà prapaçyämo
na paraà te maheçvara
måòanäya hi lokasya
vyaktis te 'vyakta-karmaëaù
SYNONYMS
etat—all these things; param—transcendental; prapaçyämaù—we can see;
na—not; param—the actual transcendental position; te—of Your Lordship;
mahä-éçvara—O great ruler; måòanäya—for the happiness; hi—indeed;
lokasya—of all the world; vyaktiù—manifested; te—of Your Lordship;
avyakta-karmaëaù—whose activities are unknown to everyone.
TRANSLATION
O greatest of all rulers, your actual identity is impossible for us to
understand. As far as we can see, your presence brings flourishing happiness to
everyone. Beyond this, no one can appreciate your activities. We can see this
much, and nothing more.
PURPORT
When the demigods offered these prayers to Lord Çiva, their inner purpose
was to please him so that he would rectify the disturbing situation created by
the hälahala poison. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.20), kämais tais tair håta
jïänäù prapadyante 'nya-devatäù: when one worships demigods, this is
certainly because of deep-rooted desires he wants fulfilled by the mercy of
those demigods. People are generally attached to the worship of demigods for
some motive.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
328
TEXT 36
é[qéuk- ovac
TaÜq+Ya VYaSaNa& TaaSaa& k*-PaYaa >a*XaPaqi@Ta" )
SavR>aUTaSauôd( dev wdMaah SaTaq& iPa[YaaMa( )) 36 ))
çré-çuka uväca
tad-vékñya vyasanaà täsäà
kåpayä bhåça-péòitaù
sarva-bhüta-suhåd deva
idam äha satéà priyäm
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tat—this situation;
vékñya—seeing; vyasanam—dangerous; täsäm—of all the demigods;
kåpayä—out of compassion; bhåça-péòitaù—greatly aggrieved;
sarva-bhüta-suhåt—the friend of all living entities; devaù—Mahädeva;
idam—this; äha—said; satém—unto Satédevé; priyäm—his very dear wife.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Lord Çiva is always benevolent toward
all living entities. When he saw that the living entities were very much
disturbed by the poison, which was spreading everywhere, he was very
compassionate. Thus he spoke to his eternal consort, Saté, as follows.
TEXT 37
é[qiXav ovac
Ahae bTa >avaNYaeTaTa( Pa[JaaNaa& PaXYa vEXaSaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
329
+aqraedMaQaNaaed(>aUTaaTa( k-al/kU-$=aduPaiSQaTaMa( )) 37 ))
çré-çiva uväca
aho bata bhaväny etat
prajänäà paçya vaiçasam
kñéroda-mathanodbhütät
kälaküöäd upasthitam
SYNONYMS
çré-çivaù uväca—Çré Çiva said; aho bata—how pitiable; bhaväni—my dear wife,
Bhaväné; etat—this situation; prajänäm—of all living entities; paçya—just see;
vaiçasam—very dangerous; kñéra-uda—of the ocean of milk;
mathana-udbhütät—produced by the churning; kälaküöät—because of the
production of poison; upasthitam—the present situation.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çiva said: My dear Bhaväné, just see how all these living entities have
been placed in danger because of the poison produced from the churning of the
ocean of milk.
TEXT 38
AaSaa& Pa[a<aParqPSaUNaa& ivDaeYaMa>aYa& ih Mae )
WTaavaiNh Pa[>aaerQaaeR Yad( dqNaPairPaal/NaMa( )) 38 ))
äsäà präëa-parépsünäà
vidheyam abhayaà hi me
etävän hi prabhor artho
yad déna-paripälanam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
330
SYNONYMS
äsäm—all of these living entities; präëa-parépsünäm—very strongly desiring to
protect their lives; vidheyam—something must be done; abhayam—safety;
hi—indeed; me—by me; etävän—this much; hi—indeed; prabhoù—of the
master; arthaù—duty; yat—that which; déna-paripälanam—to give protection
to suffering humanity.
TRANSLATION
It is my duty to give protection and safety to all living entities struggling for
existence. Certainly it is the duty of the master to protect his suffering
dependents.
TEXT 39
Pa[a<aE" SvE" Pa[ai<aNa" PaaiNTa SaaDav" +a<a>ax(GaurE" )
bÖvErezu >aUTaezu MaaeihTaeZvaTMaMaaYaYaa )) 39 ))
präëaiù svaiù präëinaù pänti
sädhavaù kñaëa-bhaìguraiù
baddha-vaireñu bhüteñu
mohiteñv ätma-mäyayä
SYNONYMS
präëaiù—by lives; svaiù—their own; präëinaù—other living entities;
pänti—protect; sädhavaù—devotees; kñaëa-bhaìguraiù—temporary;
baddha-vaireñu—unnecessarily engaged in animosity; bhüteñu—unto living
entities; mohiteñu—bewildered; ätma-mäyayä—by the external energy of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
331
Lord.
TRANSLATION
People in general, being bewildered by the illusory energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, are always engaged in animosity toward one another.
But devotees, even at the risk of their own temporary lives, try to save them.
PURPORT
This is the characteristic of a Vaiñëava. Para-duùkha-duùkhé: a Vaiñëava is
always unhappy to see the conditioned souls unhappy. Otherwise, he would
have no business teaching them how to become happy. In materialistic life,
people must certainly engage in activities of animosity. Materialistic life is
therefore compared to saàsära-dävänala **(75), a blazing forest fire that
automatically takes place. Lord Çiva and his followers in the paramparä system
try to save people from this dangerous condition of materialistic life. This is
the duty of devotees following the principles of Lord Çiva and belonging to the
Rudra-sampradäya. There are four Vaiñëava sampradäyas, and the
Rudra-sampradäya is one of them because Lord Çiva (Rudra) is the best of the
Vaiñëavas (vaiñëavänäà yathä çambhuù). Indeed, as we shall see, Lord Çiva
drank all the poison for the benefit of humanity.
TEXT 40
Pau&Sa" k*-PaYaTaae >ad]e SavaRTMaa Pa[qYaTae hir" )
Pa[qTae hraE >aGaviTa Pa[qYae_h& Sacracr" )
TaSMaaidd& Gar& >auÅe Pa[JaaNaa& SviSTarSTau Mae )) 40 ))
puàsaù kåpayato bhadre
sarvätmä préyate hariù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
332
préte harau bhagavati
préye 'haà sacaräcaraù
tasmäd idaà garaà bhuïje
prajänäà svastir astu me
SYNONYMS
puàsaù—with a person; kåpayataù—engaged in benevolent activities;
bhadre—O most gentle Bhaväné; sarva-ätmä—the Supersoul;
préyate—becomes pleased; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
préte—because of His pleasure; harau—the Supreme Lord, Hari;
bhagavati—the Personality of Godhead; préye—also become pleased; aham—I;
sa-cara-acaraù—with all others, moving and nonmoving; tasmät—therefore;
idam—this; garam—poison; bhuïje—let me drink; prajänäm—of the living
entities; svastiù—welfare; astu—let there be; me—by me.
TRANSLATION
My dear gentle wife Bhaväné, when one performs benevolent activities for
others, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is very pleased. And when
the Lord is pleased, I am also pleased, along with all other living creatures.
Therefore, let me drink this poison, for all the living entities may thus become
happy because of me.
TEXT 41
é[qéuk- ovac
WvMaaMaN}Ya >aGavaN>avaNaq& ivì>aavNa" )
Tad( ivz& JaGDauMaare>ae Pa[>aavjaNvMaaedTa )) 41 ))
çré-çuka uväca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
333
evam ämantrya bhagavän
bhavänéà viçva-bhävanaù
tad viñaà jagdhum ärebhe
prabhäva-jïänvamodata
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—in this way;
ämantrya—addressing; bhagavän—Lord Çiva; bhaväném—Bhaväné;
viçva-bhävanaù—the well-wisher of all the universe; tat viñam—that poison;
jagdhum—to drink; ärebhe—began; prabhäva-jïä—mother Bhaväné, who
perfectly knew the capability of Lord Çiva; anvamodata—gave her permission.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After informing Bhaväné in this way,
Lord Çiva began to drink the poison, and Bhaväné, who knew perfectly well the
capabilities of Lord Çiva, gave him her permission to do so.
TEXT 42
TaTa" k-rTal/Ik*-TYa VYaaiPa hal/ahl&/ ivzMa( )
A>a+aYaNMahadev" k*-PaYaa >aUTa>aavNa" )) 42 ))
tataù karatalé-kåtya
vyäpi hälähalaà viñam
abhakñayan mahä-devaù
kåpayä bhüta-bhävanaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; karatalé-kåtya—taking in his hand; vyäpi—widespread;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
334
hälähalam—called hälahala; viñam—poison; abhakñayat—drank;
mahä-devaù—Lord Çiva; kåpayä—out of compassion; bhüta-bhävanaù—for the
welfare of all living entities.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Lord Çiva, who is dedicated to auspicious, benevolent work for
humanity, compassionately took the whole quantity of poison in his palm and
drank it.
PURPORT
Although there was such a great quantity of poison that it spread all over
the universe, Lord Çiva had such great power that he reduced the poison to a
small quantity so that he could hold it in his palm. One should not try to
imitate Lord Çiva. Lord Çiva can do whatever he likes, but those who try to
imitate Lord Çiva by smoking ganja and other poisonous things will certainly
be killed because of such activities.
TEXT 43
TaSYaaiPa dXaRYaaMaaSa SvvqYa| Jal/k-LMaz" )
YaÀk-ar Gale/ Naql&/ TaÀ SaaDaaeivR>aUz<aMa( )) 43 ))
tasyäpi darçayäm äsa
sva-véryaà jala-kalmañaù
yac cakära gale nélaà
tac ca sädhor vibhüñaëam
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Lord Çiva; api—also; darçayäm äsa—exhibited; sva-véryam—its own
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
335
potency; jala-kalmañaù—that poison born of the water; yat—which;
cakära—made; gale—on the neck; nélam—bluish line; tat—that; ca—also;
sädhoù—of the saintly person; vibhüñaëam—ornament.
TRANSLATION
As if in defamation, the poison born from the ocean of milk manifested its
potency by marking Lord Çiva's neck with a bluish line. That line, however, is
now accepted as an ornament of the Lord.
TEXT 44
TaPYaNTae l/aek-TaaPaeNa SaaDav" Pa[aYaXaae JaNaa" )
ParMaaraDaNa& TaiÖ PauåzSYaai%l/aTMaNa" )) 44 ))
tapyante loka-täpena
sädhavaù präyaço janäù
paramärädhanaà tad dhi
puruñasyäkhilätmanaù
SYNONYMS
tapyante—voluntarily suffer; loka-täpena—because of the suffering of people
in general; sädhavaù—saintly persons; präyaçaù—almost always; janäù—such
persons; parama-ärädhanam—the topmost method of worshiping; tat—that
activity; hi—indeed; puruñasya—of the Supreme Person;
akhila-ätmanaù—who is the Supersoul of everyone.
TRANSLATION
It is said that great personalities almost always accept voluntary suffering
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
336
because of the suffering of people in general. This is considered the highest
method of worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is present in
everyone's heart.
PURPORT
Here is an explanation of how those engaged in activities for the welfare of
others are very quickly recognized by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.68-69), ya idaà paramaà guhyaà
mad-bhakteñv abhidhäsyati. .. na ca tasmän manuñyeñu kaçcin me priya-kåttamaù:
"One who preaches the message of Bhagavad-gétä to My devotees is most dear
to Me. No one can excel him in satisfying Me by worship." There are different
kinds of welfare activities in this material world, but the supreme welfare
activity is the spreading of Kåñëa consciousness. Other welfare activities
cannot be effective, for the laws of nature and the results of karma cannot be
checked. It is by destiny, or the laws of karma, that one must suffer or enjoy.
For instance, if one is given a court order, he must accept it, whether it brings
suffering or profit. Similarly, everyone is under obligations to karma and it
reactions. No one can change this. Therefore the çästra says:
tasyaiva hetoù prayateta kovido
na labhyate yad bhramatäm upary adhaù
(SB 1.5.18)
One should endeavor for that which is never obtained by wandering up and
down the universe as a result of the reactions of karma. What is that? One
should endeavor to become Kåñëa conscious. If one tries to spread Kåñëa
consciousness all over the world, he should be understood to be performing the
best welfare activity. The Lord is automatically very pleased with him. If the
Lord is pleased with him, what is left for him to achieve? If one has been
recognized by the Lord, even if he does not ask the Lord for anything, the
Lord, who is within everyone, supplies him whatever he wants. This is also
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
337
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (teñäà nityäbhiyuktänäà yoga-kñemaà vahämy
aham [Bg. 9.22]). Again, as stated here, tapyante loka-täpena sädhavaù präyaço
janäù. The best welfare activity is raising people to the platform of Kåñëa
consciousness, since the conditioned souls are suffering only for want of Kåñëa
consciousness. The Lord Himself also comes to mitigate the suffering of
humanity.
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
pariträëäya sädhünäà
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm
dharma-saàsthäpanärthäya
sambhavämi yuge yuge
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend
Myself. To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to
reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after
millennium." (Bg. 4.7-8) All the çästras conclude, therefore, that spreading the
Kåñëa consciousness movement is the best welfare activity in the world.
Because of the ultimate benefit this bestows upon people in general, the Lord
very quickly recognizes such service performed by a devotee.
TEXT 45
iNaXaMYa k-MaR TaC^M>aaedeRvdevSYa Maq!uz" )
Pa[Jaa da+aaYa<aq b]øa vEku-<#=ê XaXa&iSare )) 45 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
338
niçamya karma tac chambhor
deva-devasya méòhuñaù
prajä däkñäyaëé brahmä
vaikuëöhaç ca çaçaàsire
SYNONYMS
niçamya—after hearing; karma—the act; tat—that; çambhoù—of Lord Çiva;
deva-devasya—who is worshipable even for the demigods; méòhuñaù—he who
bestows great benedictions upon people in general; prajäù—the people in
general; däkñäyaëé—Bhaväné, the daughter of Dakña; brahmä—Lord Brahmä;
vaikuëöhaù ca—Lord Viñëu also; çaçaàsire—praised very much.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing of this act, everyone, including Bhaväné [the daughter of
Mahäräja Dakña], Lord Brahmä, Lord Viñëu, and the people in general, very
highly praised this deed performed by Lord Çiva, who is worshiped by the
demigods and who bestows benedictions upon the people.
TEXT 46
Pa[Sk-à& iPabTa" Paa<aeYaRTa( ik-iÄÂGa*hu" SMa TaTa( )
v*iêk-aihivzaEzDYaae dNdéUk-aê Yae_Pare )) 46 ))
praskannaà pibataù päëer
yat kiïcij jagåhuù sma tat
våçcikähi-viñauñadhyo
dandaçükäç ca ye 'pare
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
339
praskannam—scattered here and there; pibataù—of Lord Çiva while drinking;
päëeù—from the palm; yat—which; kiïcit—very little; jagåhuù—took the
opportunity to drink; sma—indeed; tat—that; våçcika—the scorpions;
ahi—the cobras; viña-auñadhyaù—poisonous drugs; dandaçükäù ca—and
animals whose bites are poisonous; ye—who; apare—other living entities.
TRANSLATION
Scorpions, cobras, poisonous drugs and other animals whose bites are
poisonous took the opportunity to drink whatever little poison had fallen and
scattered from Lord Çiva's hand while he was drinking.
PURPORT
Mosquitoes, jackals, dogs and other varieties of dandaçüka, or animals
whose bites are poisonous, drank the poison of the samudra-manthana, the
churned ocean, since it was available after it fell from the palms of Lord Çiva.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Seventh Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Çiva Saves the Universe by Drinking Poison."
8. The Churning of the Milk Ocean
This chapter describes how the goddess of fortune appeared during the
churning of the ocean of milk and how she accepted Lord Viñëu as her
husband. As described later in the chapter, when Dhanvantari appeared with a
pot of nectar the demons immediately snatched it from him, but Lord Viñëu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
340
appeared as the incarnation Mohiné, the most beautiful woman in the world,
just to captivate the demons and save the nectar for the demigods.
After Lord Çiva drank all the poison, both the demigods and demons took
courage and resumed their activities of churning. Because of this churning,
first a surabhi cow was produced. Great saintly persons accepted this cow to
derive clarified butter from its milk and offer this clarified butter in oblations
for great sacrifices. Thereafter, a horse named Uccaiùçravä was generated.
This horse was taken by Bali Mahäräja. Then there appeared Airävata and
other elephants that could go anywhere in any direction, and she-elephants
also appeared. The gem known as Kaustubha was also generated, and Lord
Viñëu took that gem and placed it on His chest. Thereafter, a pärijäta flower
and the Apsaräs, the most beautiful women in the universe, were generated.
Then the goddess of fortune, Lakñmé, appeared. The demigods, great sages,
Gandharvas and others offered her their respectful worship. The goddess of
fortune could not find anyone to accept as her husband. At last she selected
Lord Viñëu to be her master. Lord Viñëu gave her a place to stay everlastingly
at His chest. Because of this combination of Lakñmé and Näräyaëa, all who
were present, including the demigods and people in general, were very pleased.
The demons, however, being neglected by the goddess of fortune, were very
depressed. Then Väruëé, the goddess of drinking, was generated, and by the
order of Lord Viñëu the demons accepted her. Then the demons and demigods,
with renewed energy, began to churn again. This time a partial incarnation of
Lord Viñëu called Dhanvantari appeared. He was very beautiful, and he
carried a jug containing nectar. The demons immediately snatched the jug
from Dhanvantari's hand and began to run away, and the demigods, being very
morose, took shelter of Viñëu. After the demons snatched the jug from
Dhanvantari, they began to fight among themselves. Lord Viñëu solaced the
demigods, who therefore did not fight, but remained silent. While the fighting
was going on among the demons, the Lord Himself appeared as the incarnation
Mohiné, the most beautiful woman in the universe.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
341
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
PaqTae Gare v*zaªe<a Pa[qTaaSTae_MardaNava" )
MaMaNQauSTarSaa iSaNDau& hivDaaRNaq TaTaae_>avTa( )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
péte gare våñäìkeëa
prétäs te 'mara-dänaväù
mamanthus tarasä sindhuà
havirdhäné tato 'bhavat
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; péte—was drunk; gare—when
the poison; våña-aìkeëa—by Lord Çiva, who sits on a bull; prétäù—being
pleased; te—all of them; amara—the demigods; dänaväù—and the demons;
mamanthuù—again began to churn; tarasä—with great force; sindhum—the
ocean of milk; havirdhäné—the surabhi cow, who is the source of clarified
butter; tataù—from that churning; abhavat—was generated.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Upon Lord Çiva's drinking the poison, both
the demigods and the demons, being very pleased, began to churn the ocean
with renewed vigor. As a result of this, there appeared a cow known as surabhi.
PURPORT
The surabhi cow is described as havirdhäné, the source of butter. Butter,
when clarified by melting, produces ghee, or clarified butter, which is
inevitably necessary for performing great ritualistic sacrifices. As stated in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
342
Bhagavad-gétä (18.5), yajïa-däna-tapaù-karma na tyäjyaà käryam eva tat:
sacrifice, charity and austerity are essential to keep human society perfect in
peace and prosperity. Yajïa, the performance of sacrifice, is essential; to
perform yajïa, clarified butter is absolutely necessary; and to get clarified
butter, milk is necessary. Milk is produced when there are sufficient cows.
Therefore in Bhagavad-gétä (18.44), cow protection is recommended
(kåñi-go-rakñya-väëijyaà vaiçya-karma svabhäva jam).
TEXT 2
TaaMaiGanhae}aqMa*zYaae JaGa*hub]RøvaidNa" )
YajSYa devYaaNaSYa MaeDYaaYa hivze Na*Pa )) 2 ))
täm agni-hotrém åñayo
jagåhur brahma-vädinaù
yajïasya deva-yänasya
medhyäya haviñe nåpa
SYNONYMS
täm—that cow; agni-hotrém—absolutely necessary for the production of
yogurt, milk and ghee to offer as oblations in the fire; åñayaù—sages who
perform such sacrifices; jagåhuù—took in charge; brahma-vädinaù—because
such sages know the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies; yajïasya—of sacrifice;
deva-yänasya—which fulfills the desire to be elevated to the higher planetary
systems and to Brahmaloka; medhyäya—fit for offering oblations; haviñe—for
the sake of pure clarified butter; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, great sages who were completely aware of the Vedic
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
343
ritualistic ceremonies took charge of that surabhi cow, which produced all the
yogurt, milk and ghee absolutely necessary for offering oblations into the fire.
They did this just for the sake of pure ghee, which they wanted for the
performance of sacrifices to elevate themselves to the higher planetary systems,
up to Brahmaloka.
PURPORT
Surabhi cows are generally found on the Vaikuëöha planets. As described in
Brahma-saàhitä, Lord Kåñëa, on His planet, Goloka Våndävana, engages in
tending the surabhi cows (surabhér abhipälayantam [Bs. 5.29]). These cows are
the Lord's pet animals. From the surabhi cows one can take as much milk as
one needs, and one may milk these cows as many times as he desires. In other
words, the surabhi cow can yield milk unlimitedly. Milk is necessary for the
performance of yajïa. Sages know how to use milk to elevate human society to
the perfection of life. Since cow protection is recommended everywhere in the
çästras, the brahmä vädés took charge of the surabhi cow, in which the demons
were not very interested.
TEXT 3
TaTa oÀE"é[va NaaMa hYaae_>aUÀNd]Paa<@ur" )
TaiSMaNbil/" SPa*ha& c§e- NaeNd] wRìriXa+aYaa )) 3 ))
tata uccaiùçravä näma
hayo 'bhüc candra-päëòuraù
tasmin baliù spåhäà cakre
nendra éçvara-çikñayä
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; uccaiùçraväù näma—by the name Uccaiùçravä; hayaù—a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
344
horse; abhüt—was generated; candra-päëòuraù—being as white as the moon;
tasmin—unto it; baliù—Mahäräja Bali; spåhäm cakre—desired to possess;
na—not; indraù—the King of the demigods; éçvara-çikñayä—by the previous
advice of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, a horse named Uccaiùçravä, which was as white as the moon,
was generated. Bali Mahäräja desired to possess this horse, and Indra, the King
of heaven, did not protest, for he had previously been so advised by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 4
TaTa WeravTaae NaaMa var<aeNd]ae iviNaGaRTa" )
dNTaEêTaui>aR" ìeTaad]ehRrN>aGavTaae MaihMa( )) 4 ))
tata airävato näma
väraëendro vinirgataù
dantaiç caturbhiù çvetädrer
haran bhagavato mahim
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; airävataù näma—of the name Airävata;
väraëa-indraù—the king of elephants; vinirgataù—was generated;
dantaiù—with its tusks; caturbhiù—four; çveta—white; adreù—of the
mountain; haran—defying; bhagavataù—of Lord Çiva; mahim—the glories.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
345
As the next result of the churning, the king of elephants, named Airävata,
was generated. This elephant was white, and with its four tusks it defied the
glories of Kailäsa Mountain, the glorious abode of Lord Çiva.
TEXT 5
Werav<aadYaSTvíaE idGGaJaa A>av&STaTa" )
A>a]MauPa[>a*TaYaae_íaE c k-ir<YaSTv>avà*Pa )) 5 ))
airävaëädayas tv añöau
dig-gajä abhavaàs tataù
abhramu-prabhåtayo 'ñöau ca
kariëyas tv abhavan nåpa
SYNONYMS
airävaëa-ädayaù—headed by Airävaëa; tu—but; añöau—eight;
dik-gajäù—elephants that could go in any direction; abhavan—were
generated; tataù—thereafter; abhramu-prabhåtayaù—headed by the
she-elephant named Abhramu; añöau—eight; ca—also; kariëyaù—female
elephants; tu—indeed; abhavan—also generated; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, O King, eight great elephants, which could go in any direction,
were generated. They were headed by Airävaëa. Eight she-elephants, headed by
Abhramu, were also generated.
PURPORT
The names of the eight elephants were Airävaëa, Puëòaréka, Vämana,
Kumuda, Aïjana, Puñpadanta, Särvabhauma and Supratéka.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
346
TEXT 6
k-aESTau>aa:YaMa>aUd( rÒ& PaÚraGaae MahaedDae" )
TaiSMaNa( Ma<aaE SPa*ha& c§e- v+aae_l/ªr<ae hir" )
TaTaae_>avTa( PaairJaaTa" Saurl/aek-iv>aUz<aMa( )
PaUrYaTYaiQaRNaae Yaae_QaOE" Xaìd( >auiv YaQaa >avaNa( )) 6 ))
kaustubhäkhyam abhüd ratnaà
padmarägo mahodadheù
tasmin maëau spåhäà cakre
vakño-'laìkaraëe hariù
tato 'bhavat pärijätaù
sura-loka-vibhüñaëam
pürayaty arthino yo 'rthaiù
çaçvad bhuvi yathä bhavän
SYNONYMS
kaustubha-äkhyam—known as Kaustubha; abhüt—was generated; ratnam—a
valuable gem; padmarägaù—another gem, named Padmaräga;
mahä-udadheù—from that great ocean of milk; tasmin—that; maëau—jewel;
spåhäm cakre—desired to possess; vakñaù-alaìkaraëe—to decorate His chest;
hariù—the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tataù—thereafter;
abhavat—was generated; pärijätaù—the celestial flower named pärijäta;
sura-loka-vibhüñaëam—which decorates the heavenly planets;
pürayati—fulfills; arthinaù—giving persons desiring material wealth;
yaù—that which; arthaiù—by what is desired; çaçvat—always; bhuvi—on this
planet; yathä—as; bhavän—Your Lordship (Mahäräja Parékñit).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
347
TRANSLATION
Generated thereafter from the great ocean were the celebrated gems
Kaustubha-maëi and Padmaräga-maëi. Lord Viñëu, to decorate His chest,
desired to possess them. Generated next was the pärijäta flower, which
decorates the celestial planets. O King, as you fulfill the desires of everyone on
this planet by fulfilling all ambitions, the pärijäta fulfills the desires of everyone.
TEXT 7
TaTaêaPSarSaae JaaTaa iNaZk-k-<#y" SauvaSaSa" )
rMa<Ya" SviGaR<aa& vLGauGaiTal/Il/avl/aek-NaE" )) 7 ))
tataç cäpsaraso jätä
niñka-kaëöhyaù suväsasaù
ramaëyaù svargiëäà valgugati-
lélävalokanaiù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; ca—also; apsarasaù—the residents of Apsaroloka;
jätäù—were generated; niñka-kaëöhyaù—decorated with golden necklaces;
su-väsasaù—dressed with fine clothing; ramaëyaù—extremely beautiful and
attractive; svargiëäm—of the inhabitants of the heavenly planets;
valgu-gati-lélä-avalokanaiù—moving very softly, they attract everyone's heart.
TRANSLATION
Next there appeared the Apsaräs [who are used as prostitutes on the
heavenly planets]. They were fully decorated with golden ornaments and
lockets and were dressed in fine and attractive clothing. The Apsaräs move very
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
348
slowly in an attractive style that bewilders the inhabitants of the heavenly
planets.
TEXT 8
TaTaêaivr>aUTa( Saa+aaC^\q rMaa >aGavTPara )
rÅYaNTaq idXa" k-aNTYaa ivÛuTa( SaaEdaMaNaq YaQaa )) 8 ))
tataç cävirabhüt säkñäc
chré ramä bhagavat-parä
raïjayanté diçaù käntyä
vidyut saudämané yathä
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; ca—and; ävirabhüt—manifested; säkñät—directly; çré—the
goddess of fortune; ramä—known as Ramä; bhagavat-parä—absolutely
inclined to be possessed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
raïjayanté—illuminating; diçaù—all directions; käntyä—by luster;
vidyut—lightning; saudämané—Saudämané; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
Then there appeared the goddess of fortune, Ramä, who is absolutely
dedicated to being enjoyed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. She
appeared like electricity, surpassing the lightning that might illuminate a marble
mountain.
PURPORT
Çré means opulence. Kåñëa is the owner of all opulences.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
349
bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram
suhådaà sarva-bhütänäà
jïätvä mäà çäntim åcchati
This peace formula for the world is given in Bhagavad-gétä (5.29). When
people know that the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, is the supreme enjoyer, the
supreme proprietor and the most intimate well-wishing friend of all living
entities, peace and prosperity will ensue all over the world. Unfortunately, the
conditioned souls, being placed into illusion by the external energy of the
Lord, want to fight with one another, and therefore peace is disturbed. The
first prerequisite for peace is that all the wealth presented by Çré, the goddess
of fortune, be offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everyone
should give up his false proprietorship over worldly possessions and offer
everything to Kåñëa. This is the teaching of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement.
TEXT 9
TaSYaa& c§u-" SPa*ha& SaveR SaSauraSaurMaaNava" )
æPaaEdaYaRvYaaev<aRMaihMaai+aáceTaSa" )) 9 ))
tasyäà cakruù spåhäà sarve
sasuräsura-mänaväù
rüpaudärya-vayo-varëamahimäkñipta-
cetasaù
SYNONYMS
tasyäm—unto her; cakruù—did; spåhäm—desire; sarve—everyone;
sa-sura-asura-mänaväù—the demigods, the demons and the human beings;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
350
rüpa-audärya—by the exquisite beauty and bodily features; vayaù—youth;
varëa—complexion; mahimä—glories; äkñipta—agitated; cetasaù—their
minds.
TRANSLATION
Because of her exquisite beauty, her bodily features, her youth, her
complexion and her glories, everyone, including the demigods, the demons and
the human beings, desired her. They were attracted because she is the source of
all opulences.
PURPORT
Who in this world does not want to possess wealth, beauty and the social
respectability that come from these opulences? People generally desire material
enjoyment, material opulence and the association of aristocratic family
members (bhogaiçvarya-prasaktänäm [Bg. 2.44]). Material enjoyment entails
money, beauty and the reputation they bring, which can all be achieved by the
mercy of the goddess of fortune. The goddess of fortune, however, never
remains alone. As indicated in the previous verse by the word bhagavat-parä,
she is the property of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is enjoyable
only by Him. If one wants the favor of the goddess of fortune, mother Lakñmé,
because she is by nature bhagavat-parä one must keep her with Näräyaëa. The
devotees who always engage in the service of Näräyaëa (näräyaëa-paräyaëa)
can easily achieve the favor of the goddess of fortune without a doubt, but
materialists who try to get the favor of the goddess of fortune only to possess
her for personal enjoyment are frustrated. Theirs is not a good policy. The
celebrated demon Rävaëa, for example, wanted to deprive Rämacandra of
Lakñmé, Sétä, and thus be victorious, but the result was just the opposite. Sétä,
of course, was taken by force by Lord Rämacandra, and Rävaëa and his entire
material empire were vanquished. The goddess of fortune is desirable for
everyone, including human beings, but one should understand that the goddess
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
351
of fortune is the exclusive property of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
One cannot achieve the mercy of the goddess of fortune unless one prays both
to her and to the supreme enjoyer, the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 10
TaSYaa AaSaNaMaaiNaNYae MaheNd]ae Mahdd(>auTaMa( )
MaUiTaRMaTYa" SairC^\eïa heMaku-M>aEJaRl&/ éuic )) 10 ))
tasyä äsanam äninye
mahendro mahad-adbhutam
mürtimatyaù saric-chreñöhä
hema-kumbhair jalaà çuci
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—for her; äsanam—a sitting place; äninye—brought; mahä-indraù—the
King of heaven, Indra; mahat—glorious; adbhutam—wonderful;
mürti-matyaù—accepting forms; sarit-çreñöhäù—the best of various sacred
waters; hema—golden; kumbhaiù—with waterpots; jalam—water; çuci—pure.
TRANSLATION
The King of heaven, Indra, brought a suitable sitting place for the goddess of
fortune. All the rivers of sacred water, such as the Ganges and Yamunä,
personified themselves, and each of them brought pure water in golden
waterpots for mother Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune.
TEXT 11
Aai>azeciNak-a >aUiMarahrTa( Sak-l/aEzDaq" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
352
Gaav" PaÄ Paiv}aai<a vSaNTaae MaDauMaaDavaE )) 11 ))
äbhiñecanikä bhümir
äharat sakalauñadhéù
gävaù païca paviträëi
vasanto madhu-mädhavau
SYNONYMS
äbhiñecanikäù—paraphernalia required for installing the Deity; bhümiù—the
land; äharat—collected; sakala—all kinds of; auñadhéù—drugs and herbs;
gävaù—the cows; païca—five different varieties of products from the cow,
namely milk, yogurt, clarified butter, cow dung and cow urine;
paviträëi—uncontaminated; vasantaù—personified springtime;
madhu-mädhavau—flowers and fruits produced during spring, or in the
months of Caitra and Vaiçäkha.
TRANSLATION
The land became a person and collected all the drugs and herbs needed for
installing the Deity. The cows delivered five products, namely milk, yogurt,
ghee, urine and cow dung, and spring personified collected everything produced
in spring, during the months of Caitra and Vaiçäkha [April and May].
PURPORT
Païca-gavya, the five products received from the cow, namely milk, yogurt,
ghee, cow dung and cow urine, are required in all ritualistic ceremonies
performed according to the Vedic directions. Cow urine and cow dung are
uncontaminated, and since even the urine and dung of a cow are important,
we can just imagine how important this animal is for human civilization.
Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, directly advocates
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
353
go-rakñya, the protection of cows. Civilized men who follow the system of
varëäçrama, especially those of the vaiçya class, who engage in agriculture and
trade, must give protection to the cows. Unfortunately, because people in
Kali-yuga are mandäù, all bad, and sumanda-matayaù, misled by false
conceptions of life, they are killing cows in the thousands. Therefore they are
unfortunate in spiritual consciousness, and nature disturbs them in so many
ways, especially through incurable diseases like cancer and through frequent
wars and among nations. As long as human society continues to allow cows to
be regularly killed in slaughterhouses, there cannot be any question of peace
and prosperity.
TEXT 12
‰zYa" k-LPaYaa& c§u-rai>azek&- YaQaaiviDa )
JaGau>aRd]ai<a GaNDavaR Na$yê NaNa*TauJaRGau" )) 12 ))
åñayaù kalpayäà cakrur
äbhiñekaà yathä-vidhi
jagur bhadräëi gandharvä
naöyaç ca nanåtur jaguù
SYNONYMS
åñayaù—the great sages; kalpayäm cakruù—executed; äbhiñekam—the abhiñeka
ceremony, which is required during the installation of the Deity;
yathä-vidhi—as directed in the authorized scriptures; jaguù—chanted Vedic
mantras; bhadräëi—all good fortune; gandharväù—and the inhabitants of
Gandharvaloka; naöyaù—the women who were professional dancers; ca—also;
nanåtuù—very nicely danced on the occasion; jaguù—and sang authorized
songs prescribed in the Vedas.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
354
TRANSLATION
The great sages performed the bathing ceremony of the goddess of fortune as
directed in the authorized scriptures, the Gandharvas chanted all-auspicious
Vedic mantras, and the professional women dancers very nicely danced and
sang authorized songs prescribed in the Vedas.
TEXT 13
Maegaa Ma*d(r)Pa<avMaurJaaNak-GaaeMau%aNa( )
VYaNaadYaNa( Xa«ve<auvq<aaSTauMaul/iNa"SvNaaNa( )) 13 ))
meghä mådaìga-paëavamurajänaka-
gomukhän
vyanädayan çaìkha-veëuvéëäs
tumula-niùsvanän
SYNONYMS
meghäù—personified clouds; mådaìga—drums; paëava—kettledrums;
muraja—another kind of drum; änaka—another type of drum; gomukhän—a
type of bugle; vyanädayan—vibrated; çaìkha—conchshells; veëu—flutes;
véëäù—stringed instruments; tumula—tumultuous; niùsvanän—vibration.
TRANSLATION
The clouds in personified form beat various types of drums, known as
mådaìgas, paëavas, murajas and änakas. They also blew conchshells and bugles
known as gomukhas and played flutes and stringed instruments. The combined
sound of these instruments was tumultuous.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
355
TEXT 14
TaTaae_i>aizizcudeRvq& ié[Ya& PaÚk-ra& SaTaqMa( )
idiGa>aa" PaU<aRk-l/XaE" SaU¢-vaKYaEiÜRJaeirTaE" )) 14 ))
tato 'bhiñiñicur devéà
çriyaà padma-karäà satém
digibhäù pürëa-kalaçaiù
sükta-väkyair dvijeritaiù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; abhiñiñicuù—poured all-auspicious water on the body;
devém—the goddess of fortune; çriyam—very beautiful; padma-karäm—with a
lotus in her hand; satém—she who is most chaste, not knowing anyone but the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; digibhäù—the great elephants;
pürëa-kalaçaiù—by completely full water jugs; sükta-väkyaiù—with Vedic
mantras; dvi-ja—by brähmaëas; éritaiù—chanted.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the great elephants from all the directions carried big water jugs
full of Ganges water and bathed the goddess of fortune, to the accompaniment
of Vedic mantras chanted by learned brähmaëas. While thus being bathed, the
goddess of fortune maintained her original style, with a lotus flower in her
hand, and she appeared very beautiful. The goddess of fortune is the most
chaste, for she does not know anyone but the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The goddess of fortune, Lakñmé, is described in this verse as çriyam, which
means that she has six opulences—wealth, strength, influence, beauty,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
356
knowledge and renunciation. These opulences are received from the goddess of
fortune. Lakñmé is addressed here as devé, the goddess, because in Vaikuëöha
she supplies all opulences to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His
devotees, who in this way enjoy natural life in the Vaikuëöha planets. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead is pleased with His consort, the goddess of
fortune, who carries a lotus flower in her hand. Mother Lakñmé is described in
this verse as saté, the supremely chaste, because she never diverts her attention
from the Supreme Personality of Godhead to anyone else.
TEXT 15
SaMaud]" PaqTak-aEXaeYavaSaSaq SaMauPaahrTa( )
vå<a" óJa& vEJaYaNTaq& MaDauNaa Mataz$(PadaMa( )) 15 ))
samudraù péta-kauçeyaväsasé
samupäharat
varuëaù srajaà vaijayantéà
madhunä matta-ñaöpadäm
SYNONYMS
samudraù—the ocean; péta-kauçeya—yellow silk; väsasé—both the upper and
lower portions of a garment; samupäharat—presented; varuëaù—the
predominating deity of the water; srajam—garland; vaijayantém—the most
decorated and the biggest; madhunä—with honey; matta—drunken;
ñaö-padäm—bumblebees, which have six legs.
TRANSLATION
The ocean, which is the source of all valuable jewels, supplied the upper and
lower portions of a yellow silken garment. The predominating deity of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
357
water, Varuëa, presented flower garlands surrounded by six-legged bumblebees,
drunken with honey.
PURPORT
When bathing the Deity in the abhiñeka ceremony with various liquids,
such as milk, honey, yogurt, ghee, cow dung and cow urine, it is customary to
supply yellow garments. In this way the abhiñeka ceremony for the goddess of
fortune was performed according to the regular Vedic principles.
TEXT 16
>aUz<aaiNa ivic}aai<a ivìk-MaaR Pa[JaaPaiTa" )
har& SarSvTaq PaÚMaJaae NaaGaaê ku-<@le/ )) 16 ))
bhüñaëäni viciträëi
viçvakarmä prajäpatiù
häraà sarasvaté padmam
ajo nägäç ca kuëòale
SYNONYMS
bhüñaëäni—varieties of ornaments; viciträëi—all very nicely decorated;
viçvakarmä prajäpatiù—Viçvakarmä, one of the prajäpatis, the sons of Lord
Brahmä who generate progeny; häram—garland or necklace; sarasvaté—the
goddess of education; padmam—a lotus flower; ajaù—Lord Brahmä; nägäù
ca—the inhabitants of Nägaloka; kuëòale—two earrings.
TRANSLATION
Viçvakarmä, one of the prajäpatis, supplied varieties of decorated ornaments.
The goddess of learning, Sarasvaté, supplied a necklace, Lord Brahmä supplied a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
358
lotus flower, and the inhabitants of Nägaloka supplied earrings.
TEXT 17
TaTa" k*-TaSvSTYaYaNaaeTPal/óJa&
Nadd(iÜref-a& PairGa*ù Paai<aNaa )
ccal/ v£&- Sauk-Paael/ku-<@l&/
Sav]q@haSa& dDaTaq SauXaae>aNaMa( )) 17 ))
tataù kåta-svastyayanotpala-srajaà
nadad-dvirephäà parigåhya päëinä
cacäla vaktraà sukapola-kuëòalaà
savréòa-häsaà dadhaté suçobhanam
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; kåta-svastyayanä—being worshiped regularly by
all-auspicious ritualistic ceremonies; utpala-srajam—a garland of lotuses;
nadat—humming; dvirephäm—surrounded by bumblebees;
parigåhya—capturing; päëinä—by the hand; cacäla—went on; vaktram—face;
su-kapola-kuëòalam—her cheeks decorated with earrings;
sa-vréòa-häsam—smiling with shyness; dadhaté—expanding;
su-çobhanam—her natural beauty.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, mother Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune, having been properly
celebrated with an auspicious ritualistic ceremony, began moving about, holding
in her hand a garland of lotus flowers, which were surrounded by humming
bumblebees. Smiling with shyness, her cheeks decorated by her earrings, she
looked extremely beautiful.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
359
PURPORT
The goddess of fortune, mother Lakñméjé, accepted the ocean of milk as her
father, but she perpetually rests on the bosom of Näräyaëa. She offers
benedictions even to Lord Brahmä and other living entities in this material
world, yet she is transcendental to all material qualities. Although she
appeared to have been born of the ocean of milk, she immediately resorted to
her eternal place on the bosom of Näräyaëa.
TEXT 18
STaNaÜYa& caiTak*-Xaaedrq SaMa&
iNarNTar& cNdNaku-x(ku-Maaei+aTaMa( )
TaTaSTaTaae NaUPaurvLGauiXaiÅTaE‚
ivRSaPaRTaq heMal/Taev Saa b>aaE )) 18 ))
stana-dvayaà cätikåçodaré samaà
nirantaraà candana-kuìkumokñitam
tatas tato nüpura-valgu çiïjitair
visarpaté hema-lateva sä babhau
SYNONYMS
stana-dvayam—her two breasts; ca—also; ati-kåça-udaré—the middle portion
of her body being very thin; samam—equally; nirantaram—constantly;
candana-kuìkuma—with sandalwood pulp and kuìkuma, a reddish powder;
ukñitam—smeared; tataù tataù—here and there; nüpura—of ankle bells;
valgu—very beautiful; çiïjitaiù—with the light resounding; visarpaté—walking;
hema-latä—a golden creeper; iva—exactly like; sä—the goddess of fortune;
babhau—appeared.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
360
TRANSLATION
Her two breasts, which were symmetrical and nicely situated, were covered
with sandalwood pulp and kuìkuma powder, and her waist was very thin. As
she walked here and there, her ankle bells jingling softly, she appeared like a
creeper of gold.
TEXT 19
ivl/aek-YaNTaq iNarvÛMaaTMaNa"
Pad& Da]uv& caVYai>acairSad(Gau<aMa( )
GaNDavRiSaÖaSaurYa+acar<a‚
}aEiPaíPaeYaaidzu NaaNvivNdTa )) 19 ))
vilokayanté niravadyam ätmanaù
padaà dhruvaà cävyabhicäri-sad-guëam
gandharva-siddhäsura-yakña-cäraëatraipiñöapeyädiñu
nänvavindata
SYNONYMS
vilokayanté—observing, examining; niravadyam—without any fault;
ätmanaù—for herself; padam—position; dhruvam—eternal; ca—also;
avyabhicäri-sat-guëam—without any change of qualities; gandharva—among
the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka; siddha—the inhabitants of Siddhaloka;
asura—the demons; yakña—the Yakñas; cäraëa—the inhabitants of
Cäraëaloka; traipiñöapeya-ädiñu—and among the demigods; na—not;
anvavindata—could accept any one of them.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
361
TRANSLATION
While walking among the Gandharvas, Yakñas, asuras, Siddhas, Cäraëas and
denizens of heaven, Lakñmédevé, the goddess of fortune, was scrutinizingly
examining them, but she could not find anyone naturally endowed with all good
qualities. None of them was devoid of faults, and therefore she could not take
shelter of any of them.
PURPORT
The goddess of fortune, Lakñmédevé, having been generated from the ocean
of milk, was the daughter of the ocean. Thus she was allowed to select her own
husband in a svayaàvara ceremony. She examined every one of the
candidates, but she could not find anyone suitably qualified to be her shelter.
In other words, Näräyaëa, the natural husband of Lakñmé, cannot be
superseded by anyone in this material world.
TEXT 20
NaUNa& TaPaae YaSYa Na MaNYauiNaJaRYaae
jaNa& KvicTa( TaÀ Na Sa(r)viJaRTaMa( )
k-iêNMaha&STaSYa Na k-aMaiNaJaRYa"
Sa wRìr" ik&- ParTaaeVYaPaaé[Ya" )) 20 ))
nünaà tapo yasya na manyu-nirjayo
jïänaà kvacit tac ca na saìga-varjitam
kaçcin mahäàs tasya na käma-nirjayaù
sa éçvaraù kià parato vyapäçrayaù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
362
nünam—certainly; tapaù—austerity; yasya—of someone; na—not;
manyu—anger; nirjayaù—conquered; jïänam—knowledge; kvacit—in some
saintly person; tat—that; ca—also; na—not; saìga-varjitam—without the
contamination of association; kaçcit—someone; mahän—a very great exalted
person; tasya—his; na—not; käma—material desires; nirjayaù—conquered;
saù—such a person; éçvaraù—controller; kim—how can he be; parataù—of
others; vyapäçrayaù—under the control.
TRANSLATION
The goddess of fortune, examining the assembly, thought in this way:
Someone who has undergone great austerity has not yet conquered anger.
Someone possesses knowledge, but he has not conquered material desires.
Someone is a very great personality, but he cannot conquer lusty desires. Even a
great personality depends on something else. How, then, can he be the supreme
controller?
PURPORT
Here is an attempt to find the supreme controller, or éçvara. Everyone may
be accepted as an éçvara, or controller, but still such controllers are controlled
by others. For example, one may have undergone severe austerities but still be
under the control of anger. By a scrutinizing analysis, we find that everyone is
controlled by something else. No one, therefore, can be the true controller but
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. This is supported by the çästras.
Éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù: [Bs. 5.1] the supreme controller is Kåñëa. Kåñëa is
never controlled by anyone, for He is the controller of everyone
(sarva-käraëa-käraëam).
TEXT 21
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
363
DaMaR" KvicTa( Ta}a Na >aUTaSaaEôd&
TYaaGa" KvicTa( Ta}a Na Maui¢-k-ar<aMa( )
vqYa| Na Pau&Saae_STYaJaveGaiNaZk*-Ta&
Na ih iÜTaqYaae Gau<aSa(r)viJaRTa" )) 21 ))
dharmaù kvacit tatra na bhüta-sauhådaà
tyägaù kvacit tatra na mukti-käraëam
véryaà na puàso 'sty aja-vega-niñkåtaà
na hi dvitéyo guëa-saìga-varjitaù
SYNONYMS
dharmaù—religion; kvacit—one may have full knowledge of; tatra—therein;
na—not; bhüta-sauhådam—friendship with other living entities;
tyägaù—renunciation; kvacit—one may possess; tatra—therein; na—not;
mukti-käraëam—the cause of liberation; véryam—power; na—not;
puàsaù—of any person; asti—there may be; aja-vega-niñkåtam—no release
from the power of time; na—nor; hi—indeed; dvitéyaù—the second one;
guëa-saìga-varjitaù—completely freed from the contamination of the modes
of nature.
TRANSLATION
Someone may possess full knowledge of religion but still not be kind to all
living entities. In someone, whether human or demigod, there may be
renunciation, but that is not the cause of liberation. Someone may possess great
power and yet be unable to check the power of eternal time. Someone else may
have renounced attachment to the material world, yet he cannot compare to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, no one is completely freed from
the influence of the material modes of nature.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
364
PURPORT
The statement dharmaù kvacit tatra na bhüta-sauhådam is very important in
this verse. We actually see that there are many Hindus, Muslims, Christians,
Buddhists and religionists of other cults who adhere to their religious
principles very nicely but are not equal to all living entities. Indeed, although
they profess to be very religious, they kill poor animals. Such religion has no
meaning. Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.8) says:
dharmaù svanuñöhitaù puàsäà
viñvaksena-kathäsu yaù
notpädayed yadi ratià
çrama eva hi kevalam
One may be very expert in following the religious principles of his own sect,
but if he has no tendency to love the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his
observance of religious principles is simply a waste of time. One must develop a
sense of loving Väsudeva (väsudevaù sarvam iti sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù [Bg.
7.19]). The sign of a devotee is that he is a friend to everyone (suhådaà
sarva-bhütänäm [Bg. 5.29]). A devotee will never allow a poor animal to be
killed in the name of religion. This is the difference between a superficially
religious person and a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
We find that there have been many great heroes in history, but they could
not escape from the cruel hands of death. Even the greatest hero cannot
escape from the ruling power of the Supreme Personality of Godhead when
Kåñëa comes as death. That is described by Kåñëa Himself: måtyuù sarva-haraç
cäham [Bg. 10.34]. The Lord, appearing as death, takes away a hero's so-called
power. Even Hiraëyakaçipu could not be saved when Nåsiàhadeva appeared
before him as death. One's material strength is nothing before the strength of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
365
TEXT 22
KviciÀraYauNaR ih Xaql/Ma(r)l&/
KvicTa( TadPYaiSTa Na veÛMaaYauz" )
Ya}aae>aYa& ku-}a c Saae_PYaMa(r)l/"
SauMa(r)l/" k-ê Na k-a¿Tae ih MaaMa( )) 22 ))
kvacic ciräyur na hi çéla-maìgalaà
kvacit tad apy asti na vedyam äyuñaù
yatrobhayaà kutra ca so 'py amaìgalaù
sumaìgalaù kaçca na käìkñate hi mäm
SYNONYMS
kvacit—someone; cira-äyuù—has a long duration of life; na—not; hi—indeed;
çéla-maìgalam—good behavior or auspiciousness; kvacit—someone; tat
api—although possessing good behavior; asti—is; na—not; vedyam
äyuñaù—aware of the duration of life; yatra ubhayam—if there are both
(behavior and auspiciousness); kutra—somewhere; ca—also; saù—that person;
api—although; amaìgalaù—a little inauspicious in some other detail;
su-maìgalaù—auspicious in every respect; kaçca—someone; na—not;
käìkñate—desires; hi—indeed; mäm—me.
TRANSLATION
Someone may have longevity but not have auspiciousness or good behavior.
Someone may have both auspiciousness and good behavior, but the duration of
his life is not fixed. Although such demigods as Lord Çiva have eternal life, they
have inauspicious habits like living in crematoriums. And even if others are
well qualified in all respects, they are not devotees of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
366
TEXT 23
Wv& ivMa*XYaaVYai>acairSad(Gau<aE‚
vRr& iNaJaEk-aé[YaTaYaaGau<aaé[YaMa( )
vv]e vr& SavRGau<aErPaei+aTa&
rMaa Mauku-Nd& iNarPae+aMaqiPSaTaMa( )) 23 ))
evaà vimåçyävyabhicäri-sad-guëair
varaà nijaikäçrayatayäguëäçrayam
vavre varaà sarva-guëair apekñitaà
ramä mukundaà nirapekñam épsitam
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; vimåçya—after full deliberation;
avyabhicäri-sat-guëaiù—with extraordinary transcendental qualities;
varam—superior; nija-eka-äçrayatayä—because of possessing all good qualities
without depending on others; aguëa-äçrayam—the reservoir of all
transcendental qualities; vavre—accepted; varam—as a bridegroom;
sarva-guëaiù—with all transcendental qualities; apekñitam—qualified;
ramä—the goddess of fortune; mukundam—unto Mukunda;
nirapekñam—although He did not wait for her; épsitam—the most desirable.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: In this way, after full deliberation, the
goddess of fortune accepted Mukunda as her husband because although He is
independent and not in want of her, He possesses all transcendental qualities
and mystic powers and is therefore the most desirable.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
367
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mukunda, is self-sufficient. Since He
is fully independent, He was not in want of the support or association of
Lakñmédevé. Nonetheless, Lakñmédevé, the goddess of fortune, accepted Him as
her husband.
TEXT 24
TaSYaa&SadeXa oXaTaq& Navk-ÅMaal/a&
MaaÛNMaDauv]TavæQaiGaraePagauíaMa( )
TaSQaaE iNaDaaYa iNak-$e= Tadur" SvDaaMa
Sav]q@haSaivk-SaàYaNaeNa YaaTaa )) 24 ))
tasyäàsa-deça uçatéà nava-kaïja-mäläà
mädyan-madhuvrata-varütha-giropaghuñöäm
tasthau nidhäya nikaöe tad-uraù sva-dhäma
savréòa-häsa-vikasan-nayanena yätä
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); aàsa-deçe—on the
shoulders; uçatém—very beautiful; nava—new; kaïja-mäläm—garland of lotus
flowers; mädyat—maddened; madhuvrata-varütha—of bumblebees; girä—with
the vibrating; upaghuñöäm—surrounded by their humming;
tasthau—remained; nidhäya—after placing the garland; nikaöe—nearby;
tat-uraù—the bosom of the Lord; sva-dhäma—her real resort;
sa-vréòa-häsa—smiling with shyness; vikasat—glittering; nayanena—with the
eyes; yätä—so situated.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
368
TRANSLATION
Approaching the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the goddess of fortune
placed upon His shoulders the garland of newly grown lotus flowers, which was
surrounded by humming bumblebees searching for honey. Then, expecting to
get a place on the bosom of the Lord, she remained standing by His side, her
face smiling in shyness.
TEXT 25
TaSYaa" ié[YaiñJaGaTaae JaNak-ae JaNaNYaa
v+aaeiNavaSaMak-raeTa( ParMa& iv>aUTae" )
é[q" Sva" Pa[Jaa" Sak-å<aeNa iNarq+a<aeNa
Ya}a iSQaTaEDaYaTa SaaiDaPaTaq„&iñl/aek-aNa( )) 25 ))
tasyäù çriyas tri-jagato janako jananyä
vakño niväsam akarot paramaà vibhüteù
çréù sväù prajäù sakaruëena nirékñaëena
yatra sthitaidhayata sädhipatéàs tri-lokän
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—of her; çriyaù—the goddess of fortune; tri-jagataù—of the three
worlds; janakaù—the father; jananyäù—of the mother; vakñaù—bosom;
niväsam—residence; akarot—made; paramam—supreme; vibhüteù—of the
opulent; çréù—the goddess of fortune; sväù—own; prajäù—descendants;
sa-karuëena—with favorable mercy; nirékñaëena—by glancing over;
yatra—wherein; sthitä—staying; aidhayata—increased; sa-adhipatén—with the
great directors and leaders; tri-lokän—the three worlds.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
369
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the father of the three worlds, and
His bosom is the residence of mother Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune, the
proprietor of all opulences. The goddess of fortune, by her favorable and
merciful glance, can increase the opulence of the three worlds, along with their
inhabitants and their directors, the demigods.
PURPORT
According to the desire of Lakñmédevé, the goddess of fortune, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead made His bosom her residence so that by her glance
she could favor everyone, including the demigods and ordinary human beings.
In other words, since the goddess of fortune stays on the bosom of Näräyaëa,
she naturally sees any devotee who worships Näräyaëa. When the goddess of
fortune understands that a devotee is in favor of devotional service to
Näräyaëa, she is naturally inclined to bless the devotee with all opulences. The
karmés try to receive the favor and mercy of Lakñmé, but because they are not
devotees of Näräyaëa, their opulence is flickering. The opulence of devotees
who are attached to the service of Näräyaëa is not like the opulence of karmés.
The opulence of devotees is as permanent as the opulence of Näräyaëa
Himself.
TEXT 26
Xa«TaUYaRMa*d(r)aNaa& vaid}aa<aa& Pa*Qau" SvNa" )
devaNauGaaNaa& Sañq<aa& Na*TYaTaa& GaaYaTaaMa>aUTa( )) 26 ))
çaìkha-türya-mådaìgänäà
väditräëäà påthuù svanaù
devänugänäà sastréëäà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
370
nåtyatäà gäyatäm abhüt
SYNONYMS
çaìkha—conchshells; türya—bugles; mådaìgänäm—and of different types of
drums; väditräëäm—of the musical instruments; påthuù—very great;
svanaù—sound; deva-anugänäm—the inhabitants of the upper planets like the
Gandharvas and Cäraëas, who follow the demigods; sa-stréëäm—as along with
their own wives; nåtyatäm—engaged in dancing; gäyatäm—singing;
abhüt—became.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Gandharvaloka and Cäraëaloka then took the
opportunity to play their musical instruments, such as conchshells, bugles and
drums. They began dancing and singing along with their wives.
TEXT 27
b]øåd]ai(r)raeMau:Yaa" SaveR ivìSa*Jaae iv>auMa( )
wRi@re_ivTaQaEMaRN}aESTaiç(r)E" PauZPavizR<a" )) 27 ))
brahma-rudräìgiro-mukhyäù
sarve viçva-såjo vibhum
éòire 'vitathair mantrais
tal-liìgaiù puñpa-varñiëaù
SYNONYMS
brahma—Lord Brahmä; rudra—Lord Çiva; aìgiraù—the great sage Aìgirä
Muni; mukhyäù—headed by; sarve—all of them; viçva-såjaù—the directors of
universal management; vibhum—the very great personality; éòire—worshiped;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
371
avitathaiù—real; mantraiù—by chanting; tat-liìgaiù—worshiping the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; puñpa-varñiëaù—throwing flowers like showers.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, the great sage Aìgirä, and similar directors of
universal management showered flowers and chanted mantras indicating the
transcendental glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 28
ié[Yaavl/aeik-Taa deva" SaPa[JaaPaTaYa" Pa[Jaa" )
Xaql/aidGau<aSaMPaàa le/i>are iNav*RiTa& ParaMa( )) 28 ))
çriyävalokitä deväù
saprajäpatayaù prajäù
çélädi-guëa-sampannä
lebhire nirvåtià paräm
SYNONYMS
çriyä—by the goddess of fortune, Lakñmé; avalokitäù—being seen favorably
with mercy; deväù—all the demigods; sa-prajäpatayaù—with all the prajäpatis;
prajäù—and their generations; çéla-ädi-guëa-sampannäù—all blessed with
good behavior and good characteristics; lebhire—achieved;
nirvåtim—satisfaction; paräm—the ultimate.
TRANSLATION
All the demigods, along with the prajäpatis and their descendants, being
blessed by Lakñméjé's glance upon them, were immediately enriched with good
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
372
behavior and transcendental qualities. Thus they were very much satisfied.
TEXT 29
iNa"Satva l/aelu/Paa raJaNa( iNaåÛaeGaa GaTa}aPaa" )
Yada caePaei+aTaa l/+MYaa b>aUvudOETYadaNava" )) 29 ))
niùsattvä lolupä räjan
nirudyogä gata-trapäù
yadä copekñitä lakñmyä
babhüvur daitya-dänaväù
SYNONYMS
niùsattväù—without strength; lolupäù—very greedy; räjan—O King;
nirudyogäù—frustrated; gata-trapäù—shameless; yadä—when; ca—also;
upekñitäù—neglected; lakñmyä—by the goddess of fortune; babhüvuù—they
became; daitya-dänaväù—the demons and Räkñasas.
TRANSLATION
O King, because of being neglected by the goddess of fortune, the demons
and Räkñasas were depressed, bewildered and frustrated, and thus they became
shameless.
TEXT 30
AQaaSaqd( vaå<aq devq k-NYaa k-Mal/l/aecNaa )
ASaura JaGa*huSTaa& vE hrerNauMaTaeNa Tae )) 30 ))
athäséd väruëé devé
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
373
kanyä kamala-locanä
asurä jagåhus täà vai
harer anumatena te
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter (after the appearance of the goddess of fortune); äsét—there
was; väruëé—Väruëé; devé—the demigoddess who controls drunkards;
kanyä—a young girl; kamala-locanä—lotus-eyed; asuräù—the demons;
jagåhuù—accepted; täm—her; vai—indeed; hareù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; anumatena—by the order; te—they (the demons).
TRANSLATION
Next appeared Väruëé, the lotus-eyed goddess who controls drunkards. With
the permission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, the demons,
headed by Bali Mahäräja, took possession of this young girl.
TEXT 31
AQaaedDaeMaRQYaMaaNaaTa( k-aXYaPaErMa*TaaiQaRi>a" )
odiTaïNMaharaJa Pauåz" ParMaad(>auTa" )) 31 ))
athodadher mathyamänät
käçyapair amåtärthibhiù
udatiñöhan mahäräja
puruñaù paramädbhutaù
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; udadheù—from the ocean of milk; mathyamänät—while
being churned; käçyapaiù—by the sons of Kaçyapa, namely the demigods and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
374
the demons; amåta-arthibhiù—anxious to get nectar from the churning;
udatiñöhat—there appeared; mahäräja—O King; puruñaù—a male person;
parama—highly; adbhutaù—wonderful.
TRANSLATION
O King, thereafter, while the sons of Kaçyapa, both demons and demigods,
were engaged in churning the ocean of milk, a very wonderful male person
appeared.
TEXT 32
dqgaRPaqvrdaedR<@" k-MbuGa]qvae_å<ae+a<a" )
XYaaMal/STaå<a" óGvq SavaR>ar<a>aUizTa" )) 32 ))
dérgha-pévara-dor-daëòaù
kambu-grévo 'ruëekñaëaù
çyämalas taruëaù sragvé
sarväbharaëa-bhüñitaù
SYNONYMS
dérgha—long; pévara—stout and strong; doù-daëòaù—the arms; kambu—like a
conchshell; grévaù—the neck; aruëa-ékñaëaù—reddish eyes;
çyämalaù—blackish complexion; taruëaù—very young; sragvé—wearing a
flower garland; sarva—all; äbharaëa—with ornaments; bhüñitaù—decorated.
TRANSLATION
He was strongly built; his arms were long, stout and strong; his neck, which
was marked with three lines, resembled a conchshell; his eyes were reddish; and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
375
his complexion was blackish. He was very young, he was garlanded with
flowers, and his entire body was fully decorated with various ornaments.
TEXT 33
PaqTavaSaa MahaerSk-" SauMa*íMai<aku-<@l/" )
iòGDaku-iÄTake-XaaNTaSau>aGa" iSa&hiv§-Ma" )
AMa*TaaPaU<aRk-l/Sa& ib>a]d( vl/Ya>aUizTa" )) 33 ))
péta-väsä mahoraskaù
sumåñöa-maëi-kuëòalaù
snigdha-kuïcita-keçäntasubhagaù
siàha-vikramaù
amåtäpürëa-kalasaà
bibhrad valaya-bhüñitaù
SYNONYMS
péta-väsäù—wearing yellow garments; mahä-uraskaù—his chest very broad;
su-måñöa-maëi-kuëòalaù—whose earrings were well polished and made of
pearls; snigdha—polished; kuïcita-keça—curling hair; anta—at the end;
su-bhagaù—separated and beautiful; siàha-vikramaù—strong like a lion;
amåta—with nectar; äpürëa—filled to the top; kalasam—a jar;
bibhrat—moving; valaya—with bangles; bhüñitaù—decorated.
TRANSLATION
He was dressed in yellow garments and wore brightly polished earrings made
of pearls. The tips of his hair were anointed with oil, and his chest was very
broad. His body had all good features, he was stout and strong like a lion, and
he was decorated with bangles. In his hand he carried a jug filled to the top with
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
376
nectar.
TEXT 34
Sa vE >aGavTa" Saa+aaiÜZ<aaer&Xaa&XaSaM>av" )
DaNvNTaiririTa :YaaTa AaYauveRdd*iGaJYa>aak(- )) 34 ))
sa vai bhagavataù säkñäd
viñëor aàçäàça-sambhavaù
dhanvantarir iti khyäta
äyur-veda-dåg ijya-bhäk
SYNONYMS
saù—he; vai—indeed; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
säkñät—directly; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; aàça-aàça-sambhavaù—incarnation
of the plenary portion of a plenary portion; dhanvantariù—Dhanvantari;
iti—thus; khyätaù—celebrated; äyuù-veda-dåk—fully conversant in the
medical science; ijya-bhäk—one of the demigods eligible to share the benefits
of sacrifices.
TRANSLATION
This person was Dhanvantari, a plenary portion of a plenary portion of Lord
Viñëu. He was very conversant with the science of medicine, and as one of the
demigods he was permitted to take a share in sacrifices.
PURPORT
Çréla Madhväcärya remarks:
teñäà satyäc cälanärthaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
377
harir dhanvantarir vibhuù
samartho 'py asuräëäà tu
sva-hastäd amucat sudhäm
Dhanvantari, who was carrying the jug containing nectar, was a plenary
incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but although he was very
strong, the asuras were able to take the jug of nectar from his hands.
TEXT 35
TaMaal/aeKYaaSaura" SaveR k-l/Sa& caMa*Taa>a*TaMa( )
il/PSaNTa" SavRvSTaUiNa k-l/Sa& TarSaahrNa( )) 35 ))
tam älokyäsuräù sarve
kalasaà cämåtäbhåtam
lipsantaù sarva-vastüni
kalasaà tarasäharan
SYNONYMS
tam—him; älokya—seeing; asuräù—the demons; sarve—all of them;
kalasam—the container of nectar; ca—also; amåta-äbhåtam—filled with
nectar; lipsantaù—desiring strongly; sarva-vastüni—all objects; kalasam—the
jug; tarasä—immediately; aharan—snatched away.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing Dhanvantari carrying the jug of nectar, the demons, desiring
the jug and its contents, immediately snatched it away by force.
TEXT 36
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
378
NaqYaMaaNae_SaurESTaiSMaNk-l/Sae_Ma*Ta>aaJaNae )
ivz<<aMaNaSaae deva hir& Xar<aMaaYaYau" )) 36 ))
néyamäne 'surais tasmin
kalase 'måta-bhäjane
viñaëëa-manaso devä
harià çaraëam äyayuù
SYNONYMS
néyamäne—being carried; asuraiù—by the demons; tasmin—that; kalase—jug;
amåta-bhäjane—containing nectar; viñaëëa-manasaù—aggrieved in mind;
deväù—all the demigods; harim—unto the Supreme Lord; çaraëam—to take
shelter; äyayuù—went.
TRANSLATION
When the jug of nectar was carried off by the demons, the demigods were
morose. Thus they sought shelter at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Hari.
TEXT 37
wiTa TaÕENYaMaal/aeKYa >aGavaN>a*TYak-aMak*-Ta( )
Maa i%ÛTa iMaQaae_Qa| v" SaaDaiYaZYae SvMaaYaYaa )) 37 ))
iti tad-dainyam älokya
bhagavän bhåtya-käma-kåt
mä khidyata mitho 'rthaà vaù
sädhayiñye sva-mäyayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
379
SYNONYMS
iti—in this way; tat—of the demigods; dainyam—moroseness; älokya—seeing;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhåtya-käma-kåt—who is
always ready to fulfill the desires of His servants; mä khidyata—do not be
aggrieved; mithaù—by a quarrel; artham—to get nectar; vaù—for all of you;
sädhayiñye—I shall execute; sva-mäyayä—by My own energy.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who always desires to fulfill the
ambitions of His devotees, saw that the demigods were morose, He said to them,
"Do not be aggrieved. By My own energy I shall bewilder the demons by
creating a quarrel among them. In this way I shall fulfill your desire to have the
nectar."
TEXT 38
iMaQa" k-il/r>aUtaeza& TadQaeR TazRceTaSaaMa( )
Ah& PaUvRMah& PaUv| Na Tv& Na TviMaiTa Pa[>aae )) 38 ))
mithaù kalir abhüt teñäà
tad-arthe tarña-cetasäm
ahaà pürvam ahaà pürvaà
na tvaà na tvam iti prabho
SYNONYMS
mithaù—among themselves; kaliù—disagreement and quarrel; abhüt—there
was; teñäm—of all of them; tat-arthe—for the sake of nectar;
tarña-cetasäm—bewildered in heart and soul by the illusory energy of Viñëu;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
380
aham—I; pürvam—first; aham—I; pürvam—first; na—not; tvam—you;
na—not; tvam—you; iti—thus; prabho—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, a quarrel then arose among the demons over who would get the
nectar first. Each of them said, "You cannot drink it first. I must drink it first.
Me first, not you!"
PURPORT
This is the symptom of demons. The first concern of a nondevotee is how to
enjoy his personal sense gratification at once, whereas the devotee's first
concern is to satisfy the Lord. This is the distinction between the nondevotee
and the devotee. In this material world, since most people are nondevotees,
they regularly compete, fight, disagree and war among themselves, for
everyone wants to enjoy and satisfy his own senses. Therefore, unless such
demons become Kåñëa conscious and are trained to satisfy the senses of the
Lord, there can be no question of peace in human society or any society, even
that of the demigods. The demigods and devotees, however, always surrender
to the lotus feet of the Lord, and thus the Lord is always anxious to satisfy their
ambitions. While the demons fight to satisfy their own senses, devotees engage
in devotional service to satisfy the senses of the Lord. The members of the
Kåñëa consciousness movement must be alert in regard to this point, and then
their preaching of the Kåñëa consciousness movement will be successful.
TEXTS 39-40
deva" Sv& >aaGaMahRiNTa Yae TauLYaaYaaSaheTav" )
Sa}aYaaGa wvETaiSMaàez DaMaR" SaNaaTaNa" )) 39 ))
wiTa SvaNPa[TYazeDaNvE dETaeYaa JaaTaMaTSara" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
381
dubRl/a" Pa[bl/aNa( raJaNa( Ga*hqTak-l/SaaNa( Mauhu" )) 40 ))
deväù svaà bhägam arhanti
ye tulyäyäsa-hetavaù
satra-yäga ivaitasminn
eña dharmaù sanätanaù
iti svän pratyañedhan vai
daiteyä jäta-matsaräù
durbaläù prabalän räjan
gåhéta-kalasän muhuù
SYNONYMS
deväù—the demigods; svam bhägam—their own share; arhanti—deserve to
take; ye—all of them who; tulya-äyäsa-hetavaù—who made an equal endeavor;
satra-yäge—in the performance of sacrifices; iva—similarly; etasmin—in this
matter; eñaù—this; dharmaù—religion; sanätanaù—eternal; iti—thus;
svän—among themselves; pratyañedhan—forbade one another; vai—indeed;
daiteyäù—the sons of Diti; jäta-matsaräù—envious; durbaläù—weak;
prabalän—by force; räjan—O King; gåhéta—possessing; kalasän—the jug
containing nectar; muhuù—constantly.
TRANSLATION
Some of the demons said, "All the demigods have taken part in churning the
ocean of milk. Now, as everyone has an equal right to partake in any public
sacrifice, according to the eternal religious system it is befitting that the
demigods now have a share of the nectar." O King, in this way the weaker
demons forbade the stronger demons to take the nectar.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
382
Desiring to take the nectar, those among the demons who were less strong
spoke in favor of the demigods. The weaker Daityas naturally pleaded on
behalf of the demigods to stop the stronger Daityas from drinking the nectar
without sharing it. In this way, disagreement and trouble arose as they forbade
one another to drink the nectar.
TEXTS 41-46
WTaiSMaàNTare ivZ<au" SavaeRPaaYaivdqìr" )
Yaaeizd]UPaMaiNadeRXYa& dDaar ParMaad(>auTaMa( )) 41 ))
Pa[e+a<aqYaaeTPal/XYaaMa& SavaRvYavSauNdrMa( )
SaMaaNak-<aaR>ar<a& Sauk-Paael/aeàSaaNaNaMa( )) 42 ))
NavYaaEvNaiNav*RtaSTaNa>aark*-XaaedrMa( )
Mau%aMaaedaNaur¢-ail/‡ªaraeiÜGanl/aecNaMa( )) 43 ))
ib>a]Ta( Sauke-Xa>aare<a Maal/aMauTfu-çMaiçk-aMa( )
SauGa]qvk-<#=a>ar<a& Sau>auJaa(r)d>aUizTaMa( )) 44 ))
ivrJaaMbrSa&vqTaiNaTaMbÜqPaXaae>aYaa )
k-aHCYaa Pa[ivl/SaÜLGaucl/Àr<aNaUPaurMa( )) 45 ))
Sav]q@iSMaTaivi+aá>a]Uivl/aSaavl/aek-NaE" )
dETYaYaUQaPaceTa"Sau k-aMaMauÕqPaYaNa( Mauhu" )) 46 ))
etasminn antare viñëuù
sarvopäya-vid éçvaraù
yoñid-rüpam anirdeçyaà
dadhära-paramädbhutam
prekñaëéyotpala-çyämaà
sarvävayava-sundaram
samäna-karëäbharaëaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
383
sukapolonnasänanam
nava-yauvana-nirvåttastana-
bhära-kåçodaram
mukhämodänuraktälijhaìkärodvigna-
locanam
bibhrat sukeça-bhäreëa
mäläm utphulla-mallikäm
sugréva-kaëöhäbharaëaà
su-bhujäìgada-bhüñitam
virajämbara-saàvétanitamba-
dvépa-çobhayä
käïcyä pravilasad-valgucalac-
caraëa-nüpuram
savréòa-smita-vikñiptabhrü-
viläsävalokanaiù
daitya-yütha-pa-cetaùsu
kämam uddépayan muhuù
SYNONYMS
etasmin antare—after this incident; viñëuù—Lord Viñëu; sarva-upäya-vit—one
who knows how to deal with different situations; éçvaraù—the supreme
controller; yoñit-rüpam—the form of a beautiful woman; anirdeçyam—no one
could ascertain who She was; dadhära—assumed; parama—supremely;
adbhutam—wonderful; prekñaëéya—pleasing to look at;
utpala-çyämam—blackish like a newly grown lotus; sarva—all; avayava—parts
of the body; sundaram—very beautiful; samäna—equally adjusted;
karëa-äbharaëam—ornaments on the ears; su-kapola—very beautiful cheeks;
unnasa-änanam—a raised nose on Her face; nava-yauvana—newly youthful;
nirvåtta-stana—breasts not agitated; bhära—weight; kåça—very lean and thin;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
384
udaram—waist; mukha—face; ämoda—creating pleasure;
anurakta—attracted; ali—bumblebees; jhaìkära—making a humming sound;
udvigna—from anxiety; locanam—Her eyes; bibhrat—moving;
su-keça-bhäreëa—by the weight of beautiful hair; mäläm—with a flower
garland; utphulla-mallikäm—made of fully grown mallikä flowers; su-gréva—a
nice neck; kaëöha-äbharaëam—ornamented with beautiful jewelry;
su-bhuja—very beautiful arms; aìgada-bhüñitam—decorated with bangles;
viraja-ambara—very clean cloth; saàvéta—spread; nitamba—breast;
dvépa—appearing like an island; çobhayä—by such beauty; käïcyä—the belt
on the waist; pravilasat—spreading over; valgu—very beautiful;
calat-caraëa-nüpuram—moving ankle bells; sa-vréòa-smita—smiling with
shyness; vikñipta—glancing; bhrü-viläsa—activities of the eyebrows;
avalokanaiù—glancing over; daitya-yütha-pa—the leaders of the demons;
cetaùsu—in the core of the heart; kämam—lusty desire;
uddépayat—awakening; muhuù—constantly.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, who can counteract any
unfavorable situation, then assumed the form of an extremely beautiful woman.
This incarnation as a woman, Mohiné-mürti, was most pleasing to the mind.
Her complexion resembled in color a newly grown blackish lotus, and every part
of Her body was beautifully situated. Her ears were equally decorated with
earrings, Her cheeks were very beautiful, Her nose was raised and Her face full
of youthful luster. Her large breasts made Her waist seem very thin. Attracted
by the aroma of Her face and body, bumblebees hummed around Her, and thus
Her eyes were restless. Her hair, which was extremely beautiful, was garlanded
with mallikä flowers. Her attractively constructed neck was decorated with a
necklace and other ornaments, Her arms were decorated with bangles, Her body
was covered with a clean sari, and Her breasts seemed like islands in an ocean
of beauty. Her legs were decorated with ankle bells. Because of the movements
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
385
of Her eyebrows as She smiled with shyness and glanced over the demons, all
the demons were saturated with lusty desires, and every one of them desired to
possess Her.
PURPORT
Because of the Supreme Lord's assuming the form of a beautiful woman to
arouse the lusty desires of the demons, a description of Her complete beauty is
given here.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Eighth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Churning of the Milk Ocean."
9. The Lord Incarnates as Mohiné-Mürti
This chapter describes how the demons, being enchanted by the beauty of
the Mohiné form, agreed to hand over the container of nectar to Mohinédevé,
who tactfully delivered it to the demigods.
When the demons got possession of the container of nectar, an
extraordinarily beautiful young woman appeared before them. All the demons
became captivated by the young woman's beauty and became attached to Her.
Now, because the demons were fighting among themselves to possess the
nectar, they selected this beautiful woman as a mediator to settle their quarrel.
Taking advantage of their weakness in this regard, Mohiné, the incarnation of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, got the demons to promise that whatever
decision She might give, they would not refuse to accept it. When the demons
made this promise, the beautiful woman, Mohiné-mürti, had the demigods and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
386
demons sit in different lines so that She could distribute the nectar. She knew
that the demons were quite unfit to drink the nectar. Therefore, by cheating
them She distributed all the nectar to the demigods. When the demons saw
this cheating of Mohiné-mürti, they remained silent. But one demon, named
Rähu, dressed himself like a demigod and sat down in the line of the demigods.
He sat beside the sun and the moon. When the Supreme Personality of
Godhead understood how Rähu was cheating, He immediately cut off the
demon's head. Rähu, however, had already tasted the nectar, and therefore
although his head was severed, he remained alive. After the demigods finished
drinking the nectar, the Supreme Personality of Godhead assumed His own
form. Çukadeva Gosvämé ends this chapter by describing how powerful is the
chanting of the holy names, pastimes and paraphernalia of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
Tae_NYaaeNYaTaae_Saura" Paa}a& hrNTaSTYa¢-SaaEôda" )
i+aPaNTaae dSYauDaMaaR<a AaYaaNTaq& dd*éu" iñYaMa( )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
te 'nyonyato 'suräù pätraà
harantas tyakta-sauhådäù
kñipanto dasyu-dharmäëa
äyäntéà dadåçuù striyam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; te—the demons;
anyonyataù—among themselves; asuräù—the demons; pätram—the container
of nectar; harantaù—snatching from one another; tyakta-sauhådäù—became
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
387
inimical toward one another; kñipantaù—sometimes throwing;
dasyu-dharmäëaù—sometimes snatching like robbers; äyäntém—coming
forward; dadåçuù—saw; striyam—a very beautiful and attractive woman.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thereafter, the demons became inimical toward one
another. Throwing and snatching the container of nectar, they gave up their
friendly relationship. Meanwhile, they saw a very beautiful young woman
coming forward toward them.
TEXT 2
Ahae æPaMahae DaaMa Ahae ASYaa Nav& vYa" )
wiTa Tae TaaMai>ad]uTYa PaPa[C^uJaaRTaôC^Yaa" )) 2 ))
aho rüpam aho dhäma
aho asyä navaà vayaù
iti te täm abhidrutya
papracchur jäta-håc-chayäù
SYNONYMS
aho—how wonderful; rüpam—Her beauty; aho—how wonderful; dhäma—Her
bodily luster; aho—how wonderful; asyäù—of Her; navam—new;
vayaù—beautiful age; iti—in this way; te—those demons; täm—unto the
beautiful woman; abhidrutya—going before Her hastily; papracchuù—inquired
from Her; jäta-håt-çayäù—their hearts being filled with lust to enjoy Her.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
388
Upon seeing the beautiful woman, the demons said, "Alas, how wonderful is
Her beauty, how wonderful the luster of Her body, and how wonderful the
beauty of Her youthful age!" Speaking in this way, they quickly approached
Her, full of lusty desires to enjoy Her, and began to inquire from Her in many
ways.
TEXT 3
k-a Tv& k-ÅPal/aXaai+a ku-Taae va ik&- ick-IzRiSa )
k-SYaaiSa vd vaMaaeå MaQNaTaqv MaNaa&iSa Na" )) 3 ))
kä tvaà kaïja-paläçäkñi
kuto vä kià cikérñasi
kasyäsi vada vämoru
mathnatéva manäàsi naù
SYNONYMS
kä—who; tvam—are You; kaïja-paläça-akñi—having eyes like the petals of a
lotus; kutaù—from where; vä—either; kim cikérñasi—what is the purpose for
which You have come here; kasya—of whom; asi—do You belong;
vada—kindly tell us; väma-üru—O You whose thighs are extraordinarily
beautiful; mathnaté—agitating; iva—like; manäàsi—within our minds;
naù—our.
TRANSLATION
O wonderfully beautiful girl, You have such nice eyes, resembling the petals
of a lotus flower. Who are You? Where do You come from? What is Your
purpose in coming here, and to whom do You belong? O You whose thighs are
extraordinarily beautiful, our minds are becoming agitated simply because of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
389
seeing You.
PURPORT
The demons inquired from the wonderfully beautiful girl, "To whom do You
belong?" A woman is supposed to belong to her father before her marriage, to
her husband after her marriage, and to her grown sons in her old age. In regard
to this inquiry, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that the question
"To whom do You belong?" means "Whose daughter are You?" Since the
demons could understand that the beautiful girl was still unmarried, every one
of them desired to marry Her. Thus they inquired, "Whose daughter are You?"
TEXT 4
Na vYa& TvaMarEdOETYaE" iSaÖGaNDavRcar<aE" )
NaaSPa*íPaUva| JaaNaqMaae l/aeke-XaEê ku-Taae Na*i>a" )) 4 ))
na vayaà tvämarair daityaiù
siddha-gandharva-cäraëaiù
näspåñöa-pürväà jänémo
lokeçaiç ca kuto nåbhiù
SYNONYMS
na—it is not; vayam—we; tvä—unto You; amaraiù—by the demigods;
daityaiù—by the demons; siddha—by the Siddhas; gandharva—by the
Gandharvas; cäraëaiù—and by the Cäraëas; na—not; aspåñöa-pürväm—never
enjoyed or touched by anyone; jänémaù—know exactly; loka-éçaiù—by the
various directors of the universe; ca—also; kutaù—what to speak of;
nåbhiù—by human society.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
390
TRANSLATION
What to speak of human beings, even the demigods, demons, Siddhas,
Gandharvas, Cäraëas and the various directors of the universe, the Prajäpatis,
have never touched You before. It is not that we are unable to understand Your
identity.
PURPORT
Even the asuras observed the etiquette that no one should address a
married woman with lust. The great analyst Cäëakya Paëòita says, mätåvat
para-däreñu: one should consider another's wife to be one's mother. The asuras,
the demons, took it for granted that the beautiful young woman,
Mohiné-mürti, who had arrived before them, was certainly not married.
Therefore they assumed that no one in the world, including the demigods, the
Gandharvas, the Cäraëas and the Siddhas, had ever touched Her. The demons
knew that the young girl was unmarried, and therefore they dared to address
Her. They supposed that the young girl, Mohiné-mürti, had come there to find
a husband among all those present (the Daityas, the demigods, the Gandharvas
and so on).
TEXT 5
NaUNa& Tv& iviDaNaa Sau>a]U" Pa[eizTaaiSa Xarqir<aaMa( )
SaveRiNd]YaMaNa"Pa[qiTa& ivDaaTau& Saga*<aeNa ik-Ma( )) 5 ))
nünaà tvaà vidhinä subhrüù
preñitäsi çarériëäm
sarvendriya-manaù-prétià
vidhätuà saghåëena kim
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
391
SYNONYMS
nünam—indeed; tvam—You; vidhinä—by Providence; su-bhrüù—O You with
the beautiful eyebrows; preñitä—sent; asi—certainly You are so; çarériëäm—of
all embodied living entities; sarva—all; indriya—of the senses; manaù—and of
the mind; prétim—what is pleasing; vidhätum—to administer; sa-ghåëena—by
Your causeless mercy; kim—whether.
TRANSLATION
O beautiful girl with beautiful eyebrows, certainly Providence, by His
causeless mercy, has sent You to please the senses and minds of all of us. Is this
not a fact?
TEXT 6
Saa Tv& Na" SPaDaRMaaNaaNaaMaek-vSTauiNa MaaiNaiNa )
jaTaqNaa& bÖvEra<aa& Xa& ivDaTSv SauMaDYaMae )) 6 ))
sä tvaà naù spardhamänänäm
eka-vastuni mänini
jïäténäà baddha-vairäëäà
çaà vidhatsva sumadhyame
SYNONYMS
sä—as such You are; tvam—Your good self; naù—of all of us demons;
spardhamänänäm—of those who are becoming increasingly inimical;
eka-vastuni—in one subject matter (the container of nectar); mänini—O You
who are most beautiful in Your prestigious position; jïäténäm—among our
family members; baddha-vairäëäm—increasingly becoming enemies;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
392
çam—auspiciousness; vidhatsva—must execute; su-madhyame—O beautiful
thin-waisted woman.
TRANSLATION
We are now all engaged in enmity among ourselves because of this one
subject matter—the container of nectar. Although we have been born in the
same family, we are becoming increasingly inimical. O thin-waisted woman,
who are so beautiful in Your prestigious position, we therefore request You to
favor us by settling our dispute.
PURPORT
The demons understood that the beautiful woman had attracted the
attention of them all. Therefore they unanimously requested Her to become
the arbiter to settle their dispute.
TEXT 7
vYa& k-XYaPadaYaada >a]aTar" k*-TaPaaEåza" )
iv>aJaSv YaQaaNYaaYa& NaEv >aedae YaQaa >aveTa( )) 7 ))
vayaà kaçyapa-däyädä
bhrätaraù kåta-pauruñäù
vibhajasva yathä-nyäyaà
naiva bhedo yathä bhavet
SYNONYMS
vayam—all of us; kaçyapa-däyädäù—descendants of Kaçyapa Muni;
bhrätaraù—we are all brothers; kåta-pauruñäù—who are all able and
competent; vibhajasva—just divide; yathä-nyäyam—according to law; na—not;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
393
eva—certainly; bhedaù—partiality; yathä—as; bhavet—should so become.
TRANSLATION
All of us, both demons and demigods, have been born of the same father,
Kaçyapa, and thus we are related as brothers. But now we are exhibiting our
personal prowess in dissension. Therefore we request You to settle our dispute
and divide the nectar equally among us.
TEXT 8
wTYauPaaMaiN}aTaae dETYaEMaaRYaaYaaeizÜPauhRir" )
Pa[hSYa åicraPaa(r)EiNaRrq+aiàdMab]vqTa( )) 8 ))
ity upämantrito daityair
mäyä-yoñid-vapur hariù
prahasya ruciräpäìgair
nirékñann idam abravét
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; upämantritaù—being fervently requested; daityaiù—by the demons;
mäyä-yoñit—the illusory woman; vapuù hariù—the incarnation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; prahasya—smiling; rucira—beautiful; apäìgaiù—by
exhibiting attractive feminine features; nirékñan—looking at them;
idam—these words; abravét—said.
TRANSLATION
Having thus been requested by the demons, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who had assumed the form of a beautiful woman, began to smile.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
394
Looking at them with attractive feminine gestures, She spoke as follows.
TEXT 9
é[q>aGavaNauvac
k-Qa& k-XYaPadaYaada" Pau&êLYaa& MaiYa Sa(r)Taa" )
ivìaSa& Pai<@Taae JaaTau k-aiMaNaqzu Na YaaiTa ih )) 9 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
kathaà kaçyapa-däyädäù
puàçcalyäà mayi saìgatäù
viçväsaà paëòito jätu
käminéñu na yäti hi
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of
Mohiné-mürti said; katham—how is it so; kaçyapa-däyädäù—you are all
descendants of Kaçyapa Muni; puàçcalyäm—unto a prostitute who agitates the
minds of men; mayi—unto Me; saìgatäù—you come in My association;
viçväsam—faith; paëòitaù—those who are learned; jätu—at any time;
käminéñu—unto a woman; na—never; yäti—takes place; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, in the form of Mohiné, told the
demons: O sons of Kaçyapa Muni, I am only a prostitute. How is it that you
have so much faith in Me? A learned person never puts his faith in a woman.
PURPORT
Cäëakya Paëòita, the great politician and moral instructor, said, viçväso
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
395
naiva kartavyaù stréñu räja-kuleñu ca: "Never put your faith in a woman or a
politician." Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was pretending to
be a woman, warned the demons against putting so much faith in Her, for She
had appeared as an attractive woman ultimately to cheat them. Indirectly
disclosing the purpose for which She had appeared before them, She said to
the sons of Kaçyapa, "How is this? You were all born of a great åñi, yet you are
putting your faith in a woman who is loitering here and there like a prostitute,
unprotected by father or husband. Women in general should not be trusted,
and what to speak of a woman loitering like a prostitute?" The word käminé is
significant in this connection. Women, especially beautiful young women,
invoke the dormant lusty desires of a man. Therefore, according to
Manu-saàhitä, every woman should be protected, either by her husband, by
her father or by her grown sons. Without such protection, a woman will be
exploited. Indeed, women like to be exploited by men. As soon as a woman is
exploited by a man, she becomes a common prostitute. This is explained by
Mohiné-mürti, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 10
Saal/av*k-a<aa& ñq<aa& c SvEir<aqNaa& SauriÜz" )
Sa:YaaNYaahuriNaTYaaiNa NaUÒ& NaUÒ& ivicNvTaaMa( )) 10 ))
sälävåkäëäà stréëäà ca
svairiëénäà sura-dviñaù
sakhyäny ähur anityäni
nütnaà nütnaà vicinvatäm
SYNONYMS
sälävåkäëäm—of monkeys, jackals and dogs; stréëäm ca—and of women;
svairiëénäm—especially women who are independent; sura-dviñaù—O demons;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
396
sakhyäni—friendship; ähuù—it is said; anityäni—temporary; nütnam—new
friends; nütnam—new friends; vicinvatäm—all of whom are thinking.
TRANSLATION
O demons, as monkeys, jackals and dogs are unsteady in their sexual
relationships and want newer and newer friends every day, women who live
independently seek new friends daily. Friendship with such a woman is never
permanent. This is the opinion of learned scholars.
TEXT 11
é[qéuk- ovac
wiTa Tae +veil/TaESTaSYaa AaìSTaMaNaSaae_Saura" )
JahSau>aaRvGaM>aqr& dduêaMa*Ta>aaJaNaMa( )) 11 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti te kñvelitais tasyä
äçvasta-manaso 'suräù
jahasur bhäva-gambhéraà
daduç cämåta-bhäjanam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; te—those demons;
kñvelitaiù—by speaking as if jokingly; tasyäù—of Mohiné-mürti;
äçvasta—grateful, with faith; manasaù—their minds; asuräù—all the demons;
jahasuù—laughed; bhäva-gambhéram—although Mohiné-mürti was full of
gravity; daduù—delivered; ca—also; amåta-bhäjanam—the container of
nectar.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
397
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After the demons heard the words of
Mohiné-mürti, who had spoken as if jokingly, they were all very confident.
They laughed with gravity, and ultimately they delivered the container of
nectar into Her hands.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead in His form of Mohiné was certainly not joking
but talking seriously, with gravity. The demons, however, being captivated by
Mohiné-mürti's bodily features, took Her words as a joke and confidently
delivered the container of nectar into Her hands. Thus Mohiné-mürti
resembles Lord Buddha, who appeared sammohäya sura-dviñäm [SB 1.3.24]—to
cheat the asuras. The word sura-dviñäm refers to those who are envious of the
demigods or devotees. Sometimes an incarnation of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead cheats the atheists. Thus we see here that although Mohiné-mürti
was speaking factually to the asuras, the asuras took Her words to be facetious.
Indeed, they were so confident of Mohiné-mürti's honesty that they
immediately delivered the container of nectar into Her hands, as if they would
allow Her to do with the nectar whatever She liked, whether She distributed
it, threw it away or drank it Herself without giving it to them.
TEXT 12
TaTaae Ga*hqTvaMa*Ta>aaJaNa& hir‚
bR>aaz wRziTSMaTaXaae>aYaa iGara )
YaÛ>YauPaeTa& Kv c SaaßSaaDau va
k*-Ta& MaYaa vae iv>aJae SauDaaiMaMaaMa( )) 12 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
398
tato gåhétvämåta-bhäjanaà harir
babhäña éñat-smita-çobhayä girä
yady abhyupetaà kva ca sädhv asädhu vä
kåtaà mayä vo vibhaje sudhäm imäm
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; gåhétvä—taking possession of; amåta-bhäjanam—the pot
containing the nectar; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, in
the form of Mohiné; babhäña—spoke; éñat—slightly; smita-çobhayä girä—with
smiling beauty and by words; yadi—if; abhyupetam—promised to be accepted;
kva ca—whatever it may be; sädhu asädhu vä—whether honest or dishonest;
kåtam mayä—is done by Me; vaù—unto you; vibhaje—I shall give you the
proper share; sudhäm—nectar; imäm—this.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, having taken possession of
the container of nectar, smiled slightly and spoke in attractive words. She said:
My dear demons, if you accept whatever I may do, whether honest or dishonest,
then I can take responsibility for dividing the nectar among you.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot abide by anyone's dictation.
Whatever He does is absolute. The demons, of course, were deluded by the
illusory potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus
Mohiné-mürti got them to promise that whatever She would do they would
accept.
TEXT 13
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
399
wTYai>aVYaaôTa& TaSYaa Aak-<YaaRSaurPau(r)va" )
APa[Maa<aivdSTaSYaaSTaTa( TaQaeTYaNvMa&SaTa )) 13 ))
ity abhivyähåtaà tasyä
äkarëyäsura-puìgaväù
apramäëa-vidas tasyäs
tat tathety anvamaàsata
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; abhivyähåtam—the words that were spoken; tasyäù—Her;
äkarëya—after hearing; asura-puìgaväù—the chiefs of the demons;
apramäëa-vidaù—because they were all foolish; tasyäù—of Her; tat—those
words; tathä—let it be so; iti—thus; anvamaàsata—agreed to accept.
TRANSLATION
The chiefs of the demons were not very expert in deciding things. Upon
hearing the sweet words of Mohiné-mürti, they immediately assented. "Yes,"
they answered. "What You have said is all right." Thus the demons agreed to
accept Her decision.
TEXTS 14-15
AQaaePaaeZYa k*-TaòaNaa huTva c hivzaNal/Ma( )
dtva GaaeivPa[>aUTae>Ya" k*-TaSvSTYaYaNaa iÜJaE" )) 14 ))
YaQaaePaJaaez& vaSaa&iSa PairDaaYaahTaaiNa Tae )
ku-Xaezu Pa[aivXaNSaveR Pa[aGaGa]eZvi>a>aUizTaa" )) 15 ))
athopoñya kåta-snänä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
400
hutvä ca haviñänalam
dattvä go-vipra-bhütebhyaù
kåta-svastyayanä dvijaiù
yathopajoñaà väsäàsi
paridhäyähatäni te
kuçeñu präviçan sarve
präg-agreñv abhibhüñitäù
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; upoñya—observing a fast; kåta-snänäù—performing bathing;
hutvä—offering oblations; ca—also; haviñä—with clarified butter;
analam—into the fire; dattvä—giving in charity; go-vipra-bhütebhyaù—unto
the cows, brähmaëas and living beings in general;
kåta-svastyayanäù—performing ritualistic ceremonies; dvijaiù—as dictated by
the brähmaëas; yathä-upajoñam—according to one's taste; väsäàsi—garments;
paridhäya—putting on; ähatäni—first-class and new; te—all of them;
kuçeñu—on seats made of kuça grass; präviçan—sitting on them; sarve—all of
them; präk-agreñu—facing east; abhibhüñitäù—properly decorated with
ornaments.
TRANSLATION
The demigods and demons then observed a fast. After bathing, they offered
clarified butter and oblations into the fire and gave charity to the cows and to
the brähmaëas and members of the other orders of society, namely the
kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras, who were all rewarded as they deserved.
Thereafter, the demigods and demons performed ritualistic ceremonies under
the directions of the brähmaëas. Then they dressed themselves with new
garments according to their own choice, decorated their bodies with ornaments,
and sat facing east on seats made of kuça grass.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
401
PURPORT
The Vedas enjoin that for every ritualistic ceremony one must first become
clean by bathing either in the water of the Ganges or Yamunä or in the sea.
Then one may perform the ritualistic ceremony and offer clarified butter into
the fire. In this verse the words paridhäya ähatäni are especially significant. A
sannyäsé or a person about to perform a ritualistic ceremony should not dress
himself in clothing sewn with a needle.
TEXTS 16-17
Pa[ax(Mau%ezUPaivíezu Saurezu idiTaJaezu c )
DaUPaaMaaeidTaXaal/aYaa& JauíaYaa& MaaLYadqPakE-" )) 16 ))
TaSYaa& NareNd] k-r>aaeååXaÕukU-l/‚
é[ae<aqTa$=al/SaGaiTaMaRdivûl/a+aq )
Saa kU-JaTaq k-Nak-NaUPauriXaiÅTaeNa
ku-M>aSTaNaq k-l/SaPaai<arQaaivveXa )) 17 ))
präì-mukheñüpaviñöeñu
sureñu ditijeñu ca
dhüpämodita-çäläyäà
juñöäyäà mälya-dépakaiù
tasyäà narendra karabhorur uçad-dukülaçroëé-
taöälasa-gatir mada-vihvaläkñé
sä küjaté kanaka-nüpura-çiïjitena
kumbha-stané kalasa-päëir athäviveça
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
402
präk-mukheñu—facing east; upaviñöeñu—were sitting on their respective seats;
sureñu—all the demigods; diti-jeñu—the demons; ca—also;
dhüpa-ämodita-çäläyäm—in the arena, which was full of the smoke of incense;
juñöäyäm—fully decorated; mälya-dépakaiù—with flower garlands and lamps;
tasyäm—in that arena; nara-indra—O King; karabha-üruù—having thighs
resembling the trunks of elephants; uçat-duküla—dressed with a very beautiful
sari; çroëé-taöa—because of big hips; alasa-gatiù—stepping very slowly;
mada-vihvala-akñé—whose eyes were restless because of youthful pride;
sä—She; küjaté—tinkling; kanaka-nüpura—of golden ankle bells;
çiïjitena—with the sound; kumbha-stané—a woman whose breasts were like
water jugs; kalasa-päëiù—holding a waterpot in Her hand; atha—thus;
äviveça—entered the arena.
TRANSLATION
O King, as the demigods and demons sat facing east in an arena fully
decorated with flower garlands and lamps and fragrant with the smoke of
incense, that woman, dressed in a most beautiful sari, Her ankle bells tinkling,
entered the arena, walking very slowly because of Her big, low hips. Her eyes
were restless due to youthful pride, Her breasts were like water jugs, Her
thighs resembled the trunks of elephants, and She carried a waterpot in Her
hand.
TEXT 18
Taa& é[qSa%q& k-Nak-ku-<@l/caåk-<aR‚
NaaSaak-Paael/vdNaa& PardevTaa:YaaMa( )
Sa&vq+Ya SaMMauMauhuåiTSMaTavq+a<aeNa
devaSaura ivGail/TaSTaNaPaiÆk-aNTaaMa( )) 18 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
403
täà çré-sakhéà kanaka-kuëòala-cäru-karëanäsä-
kapola-vadanäà para-devatäkhyäm
saàvékñya sammumuhur utsmita-vékñaëena
deväsurä vigalita-stana-paööikäntäm
SYNONYMS
täm—unto Her; çré-sakhém—appearing like a personal associate of the goddess
of fortune; kanaka-kuëòala—with golden earrings; cäru—very beautiful;
karëa—ears; näsä—nose; kapola—cheeks; vadanäm—face;
para-devatä-äkhyäm—the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead,
appearing in that form; saàvékñya—looking at Her; sammumuhuù—all of them
became enchanted; utsmita—slightly smiling; vékñaëena—glancing over them;
deva-asuräù—all the demigods and demons; vigalita-stana-paööika-antäm—the
border of the sari on the breasts moved slightly.
TRANSLATION
Her attractive nose and cheeks and Her ears, adorned with golden earrings,
made Her face very beautiful. As She moved, Her sari's border on Her breasts
moved slightly aside. When the demigods and demons saw these beautiful
features of Mohiné-mürti, who was glancing at them and slightly smiling, they
were all completely enchanted.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks here that Mohiné-mürti is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in a feminine form and that the goddess
of fortune is Her associate. This form assumed by the Personality of Godhead
challenged the goddess of fortune. The goddess of fortune is beautiful, but if
the Lord accepts the form of a woman, He surpasses the goddess of fortune in
beauty. It is not that the goddess of fortune, being female, is the most beautiful.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
404
The Lord is so beautiful that He can excel any beautiful goddess of fortune by
assuming a female form.
TEXT 19
ASaura<aa& SauDaadaNa& SaPaaR<aaiMav duNaRYaMa( )
MaTva JaaiTaNa*Xa&SaaNaa& Na Taa& VYa>aJadCYauTa" )) 19 ))
asuräëäà sudhä-dänaà
sarpäëäm iva durnayam
matvä jäti-nåçaàsänäà
na täà vyabhajad acyutaù
SYNONYMS
asuräëäm—of the demons; sudhä-dänam—giving of the nectar; sarpäëäm—of
snakes; iva—like; durnayam—miscalculation; matvä—thinking like that;
jäti-nåçaàsänäm—of those who are by nature very envious; na—not;
täm—the nectar; vyabhajat—delivered the share; acyutaù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who never falls down.
TRANSLATION
Demons are by nature crooked like snakes. Therefore, to distribute a share
of the nectar to them was not at all feasible, since this would be as dangerous as
supplying milk to a snake. Considering this, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who never falls down, did not deliver a share of nectar to the demons.
PURPORT
It is said, sarpaù krüraù khalaù krüraù sarpät krürataraù khalaù: "The snake
is very crooked and envious, and so also is a person like a demon."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
405
Mantrauñadhi-vaçaù sarpaù khalaù kena niväryate: "One can bring a snake
under control with mantras, herbs and drugs, but an envious and crooked
person cannot be brought under control by any means." Considering this logic,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead thought it unwise to distribute nectar to
the demons.
TEXT 20
k-LPaiYaTva Pa*Qak(- Pa»qå>aYaeza& JaGaTPaiTa" )
Taa&êaePaveXaYaaMaaSa Svezu Svezu c Pai»zu )) 20 ))
kalpayitvä påthak paìktér
ubhayeñäà jagat-patiù
täàç copaveçayäm äsa
sveñu sveñu ca paìktiñu
SYNONYMS
kalpayitvä—after arranging; påthak paìktéù—different seats; ubhayeñäm—of
both the demigods and the demons; jagat-patiù—the master of the universe;
tän—all of them; ca—and; upaveçayäm äsa—seated; sveñu sveñu—in their own
places; ca—also; paìktiñu—all in order.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead as Mohiné-mürti, the master of the
universe, arranged separate lines of sitting places and seated the demigods and
demons according to their positions.
TEXT 21
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
406
dETYaaNGa*hqTak-l/Saae vÄYaàuPaSaÄrE" )
dUrSQaaNa( PaaYaYaaMaaSa JaraMa*TYauhra& SauDaaMa( )) 21 ))
daityän gåhéta-kalaso
vaïcayann upasaïcaraiù
düra-sthän päyayäm äsa
jarä-måtyu-haräà sudhäm
SYNONYMS
daityän—the demons; gåhéta-kalasaù—the Lord, who bore the container of
nectar; vaïcayan—by cheating; upasaïcaraiù—with sweet words;
düra-sthän—the demigods, who were sitting at a distant place; päyayäm
äsa—made them drink; jarä-måtyu-haräm—which can counteract invalidity,
old age and death; sudhäm—such nectar.
TRANSLATION
Taking the container of nectar in Her hands, She first approached the
demons, satisfied them with sweet words and thus cheated them of their share
of the nectar. Then She administered the nectar to the demigods, who were
sitting at a distant place, to make them free from invalidity, old age and death.
PURPORT
Mohiné-mürti, the Personality of Godhead, gave the demigods seats at a
distance. Then She approached the demons and spoke with them very
graciously, so that they thought themselves very fortunate to talk with Her.
Since Mohiné-mürti had seated the demigods at a distant place, the demons
thought that the demigods would get only a little of the nectar and that
Mohiné-mürti was so pleased with the demons that She would give the demons
all the nectar. The words vaïcayann upasaïcaraiù indicate that the Lord's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
407
whole policy was to cheat the demons simply by speaking sweet words. The
Lord's intention was to distribute the nectar only to the demigods.
TEXT 22
Tae Paal/YaNTa" SaMaYaMaSaura" Svk*-Ta& Na*Pa )
TaUZ<aqMaaSaNk*-Taòeha" ñqivvadJauGauPSaYaa )) 22 ))
te pälayantaù samayam
asuräù sva-kåtaà nåpa
tüñëém äsan kåta-snehäù
stré-viväda-jugupsayä
SYNONYMS
te—the demons; pälayantaù—keeping in order; samayam—equilibrium;
asuräù—the demons; sva-kåtam—made by them; nåpa—O King; tüñëém
äsan—remained silent; kåta-snehäù—because of having developed attachment
to Mohiné-mürti; stré-viväda—disagreeing with a woman; jugupsayä—because
of thinking such an action as abominable.
TRANSLATION
O King, since the demons had promised to accept whatever the woman did,
whether just or unjust, now, to keep this promise, to show their equilibrium
and to save themselves from fighting with a woman, they remained silent.
TEXT 23
TaSYaa& k*-TaaiTaPa[<aYaa" Pa[<aYaaPaaYak-aTara" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
408
bhuMaaNaeNa cabÖa Naaecu" ik-ÄNa iviPa[YaMa( )) 23 ))
tasyäà kåtätipraëayäù
praëayäpäya-kätaräù
bahu-mänena cäbaddhä
nocuù kiïcana vipriyam
SYNONYMS
tasyäm—of Mohiné-mürti; kåta-ati-praëayäù—because of staunch friendship;
praëaya-apäya-kätaräù—being afraid that their friendship with Her would be
broken; bahu-mänena—by great respect and honor; ca—also;
äbaddhäù—being too attached to Her; na—not; ücuù—they said;
kiïcana—even the slightest thing; vipriyam—by which Mohiné-mürti might be
displeased with them.
TRANSLATION
The demons had developed affection for Mohiné-mürti and a kind of faith in
Her, and they were afraid of disturbing their relationship. Therefore they
showed respect and honor to Her words and did not say anything that might
disturb their friendship with Her.
PURPORT
The demons were so captivated by the tricks and friendly words of
Mohiné-mürti that although the demigods were served first, the demons were
pacified merely by sweet words. The Lord said to the demons, "The demigods
are very miserly and are excessively anxious to take the nectar first. So let
them have it first. Since you are not like them you can wait a little longer. You
are all heroes and are so pleased with Me. It is better for you to wait until after
the demigods drink."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
409
TEXT 24
devil/(r)Pa[iTaC^à" Sv>aaRNaudeRvSa&Said )
Pa[iví" SaaeMaMaiPabÀNd]ak-aR>Yaa& c SaUicTa" )) 24 ))
deva-liìga-praticchannaù
svarbhänur deva-saàsadi
praviñöaù somam apibac
candrärkäbhyäà ca sücitaù
SYNONYMS
deva-liìga-praticchannaù—covering himself with the dress of a demigod;
svarbhänuù—Rähu (who attacks and eclipses the sun and moon);
deva-saàsadi—in the group of the demigods; praviñöaù—having entered;
somam—the nectar; apibat—drank; candra-arkäbhyäm—by both the moon
and the sun; ca—and; sücitaù—was pointed out.
TRANSLATION
Rähu, the demon who causes eclipses of the sun and moon, covered himself
with the dress of a demigod and thus entered the assembly of the demigods and
drank nectar without being detected by anyone, even by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The moon and the sun, however, because of permanent
animosity toward Rähu, understood the situation. Thus Rähu was detected.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mohiné-mürti, was able to bewilder
all the demons, but Rähu was so clever that he was not bewildered. Rähu could
understand that Mohiné-mürti was cheating the demons, and therefore he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
410
changed his dress, disguised himself as a demigod, and sat down in the assembly
of the demigods. Here one may ask why the Supreme Personality of Godhead
could not detect Rähu. The reason is that the Lord wanted to show the effects
of drinking nectar. This will be revealed in the following verses. The moon
and sun, however, were always alert in regard to Rähu. Thus when Rähu
entered the assembly of the demigods, the moon and sun immediately detected
him, and then the Supreme Personality of Godhead also became aware of him.
TEXT 25
c§e-<a +aurDaare<a Jahar iPabTa" iXar" )
hirSTaSYa k-bNDaSTau SauDaYaaâaivTaae_PaTaTa( )) 25 ))
cakreëa kñura-dhäreëa
jahära pibataù çiraù
haris tasya kabandhas tu
sudhayäplävito 'patat
SYNONYMS
cakreëa—by the disc; kñura-dhäreëa—which was sharp like a razor;
jahära—cut off; pibataù—while drinking nectar; çiraù—the head; hariù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; tasya—of that Rähu; kabandhaù tu—but the
headless body; sudhayä—by the nectar; aplävitaù—without being touched;
apatat—immediately fell dead.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, using His disc, which was sharp
like a razor, at once cut off Rähu's head. When Rähu's head was severed from
his body, the body, being untouched by the nectar, could not survive.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
411
PURPORT
When the Personality of Godhead, Mohiné-mürti, severed Rähu's head from
his body, the head remained alive although the body died. Rähu had been
drinking nectar through his mouth, and before the nectar entered his body, his
head was cut off. Thus Rähu's head remained alive whereas the body died. This
wonderful act performed by the Lord was meant to show that nectar is
miraculous ambrosia.
TEXT 26
iXarSTvMarTaa& NaqTaMaJaae Ga]hMacqoePaTa( )
YaSTau PavRi<a cNd]ak-aRvi>aDaaviTa vErDaq" )) 26 ))
çiras tv amaratäà nétam
ajo graham acékÿpat
yas tu parvaëi candrärkäv
abhidhävati vaira-dhéù
SYNONYMS
çiraù—the head; tu—of course; amaratäm—immortality; nétam—having
obtained; ajaù—Lord Brahmä; graham—as one of the planets;
acékÿpat—recognized; yaù—the same Rähu; tu—indeed; parvaëi—during the
periods of the full moon and dark moon; candra-arkau—both the moon and
the sun; abhidhävati—chases; vaira-dhéù—because of animosity.
TRANSLATION
Rähu's head, however, having been touched by the nectar, became immortal.
Thus Lord Brahmä accepted Rähu's head as one of the planets. Since Rähu is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
412
an eternal enemy of the moon and the sun, he always tries to attack them on
the nights of the full moon and the dark moon.
PURPORT
Since Rähu had become immortal, Lord Brahmä accepted him as one of the
grahas, or planets, like the moon and the sun. Rähu, however, being an eternal
enemy of the moon and sun, attacks them periodically during the nights of the
full moon and the dark moon.
TEXT 27
PaqTaPa[aYae_Ma*Tae devE>aRGavaNa( l/aek->aavNa" )
PaXYaTaaMaSaureNd]a<aa& Sv& æPa& JaGa*he hir" )) 27 ))
péta-präye 'måte devair
bhagavän loka-bhävanaù
paçyatäm asurendräëäà
svaà rüpaà jagåhe hariù
SYNONYMS
péta-präye—when almost finished being drunk; amåte—the nectar; devaiù—by
the demigods; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead as
Mohiné-mürti; loka-bhävanaù—the maintainer and well-wisher of the three
worlds; paçyatäm—in the presence of; asura-indräëäm—all the demons, with
their chiefs; svam—own; rüpam—form; jagåhe—manifested; hariù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the best friend and well-wisher of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
413
the three worlds. Thus when the demigods had almost finished drinking the
nectar, the Lord, in the presence of all the demons, disclosed His original form.
TEXT 28
Wv& SauraSaurGa<aa" SaMadeXak-al/‚
heTvQaRk-MaRMaTaYaae_iPa f-le/ ivk-LPaa" )
Ta}aaMa*Ta& SaurGa<aa" f-l/MaÅSaaPau‚
YaRTPaadPaªJarJa"é[Ya<aaà dETYaa" )) 28 ))
evaà suräsura-gaëäù sama-deça-kälahetv-
artha-karma-matayo 'pi phale vikalpäù
taträmåtaà sura-gaëäù phalam aïjasäpur
yat-päda-paìkaja-rajaù-çrayaëän na daityäù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; sura—the demigods; asura-gaëäù—and the demons;
sama—equal; deça—place; käla—time; hetu—cause; artha—objective;
karma—activities; matayaù—ambition; api—although one; phale—in the
result; vikalpäù—not equal; tatra—thereupon; amåtam—nectar;
sura-gaëäù—the demigods; phalam—the result; aïjasä—easily, totally or
directly; äpuù—achieved; yat—because of; päda-paìkaja—of the lotus feet of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rajaù—of the saffron dust;
çrayaëät—because of receiving benedictions or taking shelter; na—not;
daityäù—the demons.
TRANSLATION
The place, the time, the cause, the purpose, the activity and the ambition
were all the same for both the demigods and the demons, but the demigods
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
414
achieved one result and the demons another. Because the demigods are always
under the shelter of the dust of the Lord's lotus feet, they could very easily
drink the nectar and get its result. The demons, however, not having sought
shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord, were unable to achieve the result they
desired.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (4.11) it is said, ye yathä mäà prapadyante täàs tathaiva
bhajämy aham: the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the supreme judge who
rewards or punishes different persons according to their surrender unto His
lotus feet. Therefore it can actually be seen that although karmés and bhaktas
may work in the same place, at the same time, with the same energy and with
the same ambition, they achieve different results. The karmés transmigrate
through different bodies in the cycle of birth and death, sometimes going
upward and sometimes downward, thus suffering the results of their actions in
the karma-cakra, the cycle of birth and death. The devotees, however, because
of fully surrendering at the lotus feet of the Lord, are never baffled in their
attempts. Although externally they work almost like the karmés, the devotees
go back home, back to Godhead, and achieve success in every effort. The
demons or atheists have faith in their own endeavors, but although they work
very hard day and night, they cannot get any more than their destiny. The
devotees, however, can surpass the reactions of karma and achieve wonderful
results, even without effort. It is also said, phalena paricéyate: one's success or
defeat in any activity is understood by its result. There are many karmés in the
dress of devotees, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead can detect their
purpose. The karmés want to use the property of the Lord for their selfish sense
gratification, but a devotee endeavors to use the Lord's property for God's
service. Therefore a devotee is always distinct from the karmés, although the
karmés may dress like devotees. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (3.9), yajïärthät
karmaëo 'nyatra loko 'yaà karma-bandhanaù. One who works for Lord Viñëu is
free from this material world, and after giving up his body he goes back home,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
415
back to Godhead. A karmé, however, although externally working like a
devotee, is entangled in his nondevotional activity, and thus he suffers the
tribulations of material existence. Thus from the results achieved by the
karmés and devotees, one can understand the presence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who acts differently for the karmés and jïänés than for
the devotees. The author of Çré Caitanya-caritämåta therefore says:
kåñëa-bhakta—niñkäma, ataeva 'çänta'
bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kämé—sakali 'açänta'
[Cc. Madhya 19.149]
The karmés who desire sense gratification, the jïänés who aspire for the
liberation of merging into the existence of the Supreme, and the yogés who
seek material success in mystic power are all restless, and ultimately they are
baffled. But the devotee, who does not expect any personal benefit and whose
only ambition is to spread the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
is blessed with all the auspicious results of bhakti-yoga, without hard labor.
TEXT 29
Yad( YauJYaTae_SauvSauk-MaRMaNaaevcaei>a‚
deRhaTMaJaaidzu Na*i>aSTadSaTa( Pa*Qa¤-aTa( )
TaErev Sad( >aviTa YaTa( i§-YaTae_Pa*Qa¤-aTa(
SavRSYa Tad( >aviTa MaUl/iNazecNa& YaTa( )) 29 ))
yad yujyate 'su-vasu-karma-mano-vacobhir
dehätmajädiñu nåbhis tad asat påthaktvät
tair eva sad bhavati yat kriyate 'påthaktvät
sarvasya tad bhavati müla-niñecanaà yat
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
416
SYNONYMS
yat—whatever; yujyate—is performed; asu—for the protection of one's life;
vasu—protection of wealth; karma—activities; manaù—by the acts of the
mind; vacobhiù—by the acts of words; deha-ätma-ja-ädiñu—for the sake of
one's personal body or family, etc., with reference to the body; nåbhiù—by the
human beings; tat—that; asat—impermanent, transient; påthaktvät—because
of separation from the Supreme Personality of Godhead; taiù—by the same
activities; eva—indeed; sat bhavati—becomes factual and permanent;
yat—which; kriyate—is performed; apåthaktvät—because of nonseparation;
sarvasya—for everyone; tat bhavati—becomes beneficial;
müla-niñecanam—exactly like pouring water on the root of a tree; yat—which.
TRANSLATION
In human society there are various activities performed for the protection of
one's wealth and life by one's words, one's mind and one's actions, but they are
all performed for one's personal or extended sense gratification with reference
to the body. All these activities are baffled because of being separate from
devotional service. But when the same activities are performed for the
satisfaction of the Lord, the beneficial results are distributed to everyone, just
as water poured on the root of a tree is distributed throughout the entire tree.
PURPORT
This is the distinction between materialistic activities and activities
performed in Kåñëa consciousness. The entire world is active, and this includes
the karmés, the jïänés, the yogés and the bhaktas. However, all activities except
those of the bhaktas, the devotees, end in bafflement and a waste of time and
energy. Moghäçä mogha-karmäëo mogha jïänä vicetasaù: [Bg. 9.12] if one is not
a devotee, his hopes, his activities and his knowledge are all baffled. A
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
417
nondevotee works for his personal sense gratification or for the sense
gratification of his family, society, community or nation, but because all such
activities are separate from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they are
considered asat. The word asat means bad or temporary, and sat means
permanent and good. Activities performed for the satisfaction of Kåñëa are
permanent and good, but asat activity, although sometimes celebrated as
philanthropy, altruism, nationalism, this "ism" or that "ism," will never produce
any permanent result and is therefore all bad. Even a little work done in Kåñëa
consciousness is a permanent asset and is all-good because it is done for Kåñëa,
the all-good Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is everyone's friend
(suhådaà sarva-bhütänäm). The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the only
enjoyer and proprietor of everything (bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram [Bg. 5.29]). Therefore any activity performed for the
Supreme Lord is permanent. As a result of such activities, the performer is
immediately recognized. Na ca tasmän manuñyeñu kaçcin me priya-kåttamaù [Bg.
18.69]. Such a devotee, because of full knowledge of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is immediately transcendental, although he may superficially appear
to be engaged in materialistic activities. The only distinction between
materialistic activity and spiritual activity is that material activity is performed
only to satisfy one's own senses whereas spiritual activity is meant to satisfy the
transcendental senses of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By spiritual
activity everyone factually benefits, whereas by materialistic activity no one
benefits and instead one becomes entangled in the laws of karma.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Ninth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Lord Incarnates as Mohiné-mürti."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
418
10. The Battle Between the Demigods and the Demons
The summary of Chapter Ten is as follows. Because of envy, the fight
between the demons and the demigods continued. When the demigods were
almost defeated by demoniac maneuvers and became morose, Lord Viñëu
appeared among them.
Both the demigods and the demons are expert in activities involving the
material energy, but the demigods are devotees of the Lord, whereas the
demons are just the opposite. The demigods and demons churned the ocean of
milk to get nectar from it, but the demons, not being devotees of the Lord,
could derive no profit. After feeding nectar to the demigods, Lord Viñëu
returned to His abode on the back of Garuòa, but the demons, being most
aggrieved, again declared war against the demigods. Bali Mahäräja, the son of
Virocana, became the commander in chief of the demons. In the beginning of
the battle, the demigods prepared to defeat the demons. Indra, King of heaven,
fought with Bali, and other demigods, like Väyu, Agni and Varuëa, fought
against other leaders of the demons. In this fight the demons were defeated,
and to save themselves from death they began to manifest many illusions
through material maneuvers, killing many soldiers on the side of the demigods.
The demigods, finding no other recourse, surrendered again to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, who then appeared and counteracted all the
illusions presented by the jugglery of the demons. Heroes among the demons
such as Kälanemi, Mälé, Sumälé and Mälyavän fought the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and were all killed by the Lord. The demigods were thus freed
from all dangers.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
419
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
wiTa daNavdETaeYaa NaaivNdàMa*Ta& Na*Pa )
Yau¢-a" k-MaRi<a Yataaê vaSaudevParax(Mau%a" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti dänava-daiteyä
nävindann amåtaà nåpa
yuktäù karmaëi yattäç ca
väsudeva-paräìmukhäù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; dänava-daiteyäù—the
asuras and the demons; na—not; avindan—achieved (the desired result);
amåtam—nectar; nåpa—O King; yuktäù—all being combined; karmaëi—in
the churning; yattäù—engaged with full attention and effort; ca—and;
väsudeva—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa;
paräìmukhäù—because of being nondevotees.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, the demons and Daityas all engaged with
full attention and effort in churning the ocean, but because they were not
devotees of Väsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, they were
not able to drink the nectar.
TEXT 2
SaaDaiYaTvaMa*Ta& raJaNPaaYaiYaTva Svk-aNSauraNa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
420
PaXYaTaa& SavR>aUTaaNaa& YaYaaE Gaå@vahNa" )) 2 ))
sädhayitvämåtaà räjan
päyayitvä svakän surän
paçyatäà sarva-bhütänäà
yayau garuòa-vähanaù
SYNONYMS
sädhayitvä—after executing; amåtam—generation of the nectar; räjan—O
King; päyayitvä—and feeding; svakän—to His own devotees; surän—to the
demigods; paçyatäm—in the presence of; sarva-bhütänäm—all living entities;
yayau—went away; garuòa-vähanaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
carried by Garuòa.
TRANSLATION
O King, after the Supreme Personality of Godhead had brought to
completion the affairs of churning the ocean and feeding the nectar to the
demigods, who are His dear devotees, He left the presence of them all and was
carried by Garuòa to His own abode.
TEXT 3
SaPaÒaNaa& ParaMa*iÖ& d*îa Tae idiTaNaNdNaa" )
AMa*ZYaMaa<aa oTPaeTaudeRvaNPa[TYauÛTaaYauDaa" )) 3 ))
sapatnänäà paräm åddhià
dåñövä te diti-nandanäù
amåñyamäëä utpetur
devän pratyudyatäyudhäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
421
SYNONYMS
sapatnänäm—of their rivals, the demigods; paräm—the best;
åddhim—opulence; dåñövä—observing; te—all of them; diti-nandanäù—the
sons of Diti, the Daityas; amåñyamäëäù—being intolerant; utpetuù—ran
toward (just to create a disturbance); devän—the demigods;
pratyudyata-äyudhäù—their weapons raised.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the victory of the demigods, the demons became intolerant of their
superior opulence. Thus they began to march toward the demigods with raised
weapons.
TEXT 4
TaTa" SaurGa<aa" SaveR SauDaYaa PaqTaYaEiDaTaa" )
Pa[iTaSa&YauYauDau" XañENaaRraYa<aPadaé[Yaa" )) 4 ))
tataù sura-gaëäù sarve
sudhayä pétayaidhitäù
pratisaàyuyudhuù çastrair
näräyaëa-padäçrayäù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; sura-gaëäù—the demigods; sarve—all of them; sudhayä—by
the nectar; pétayä—which had been drunk; edhitäù—being enlivened by such
drinking; pratisaàyuyudhuù—they counterattacked the demons; çastraiù—by
regular weapons; näräyaëa-pada-äçrayäù—their real weapon being shelter at
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
422
the lotus feet of Näräyaëa.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, being enlivened because of drinking the nectar, the demigods,
who are always at the shelter of the lotus feet of Näräyaëa, used their various
weapons to counterattack the demons in a fighting spirit.
TEXT 5
Ta}a dEvaSaurae NaaMa r<a" ParMadaå<a" )
raeDaSYaudNvTaae raJa&STauMaul/ae raeMahzR<a" )) 5 ))
tatra daiväsuro näma
raëaù parama-däruëaù
rodhasy udanvato räjaàs
tumulo roma-harñaëaù
SYNONYMS
tatra—there (at the beach of the ocean of milk); daiva—the demigods;
asuraù—the demons; näma—as they are celebrated; raëaù—fighting;
parama—very much; däruëaù—fierce; rodhasi—on the beach of the sea;
udanvataù—of the ocean of milk; räjan—O King; tumulaù—tumultuous;
roma-harñaëaù—hair standing on the body.
TRANSLATION
O King, a fierce battle on the beach of the ocean of milk ensued between the
demigods and the demons. The fighting was so terrible that simply hearing
about it would make the hair on one's body stand on end.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
423
TEXT 6
Ta}aaNYaaeNYa& SaPaÒaSTae Sa&rBDaMaNaSaae r<ae )
SaMaaSaaÛaiSai>abaR<aEiNaRJaganuivRivDaaYauDaE" )) 6 ))
tatränyonyaà sapatnäs te
saàrabdha-manaso raëe
samäsädyäsibhir bäëair
nijaghnur vividhäyudhaiù
SYNONYMS
tatra—thereupon; anyonyam—one another; sapatnäù—all of them becoming
fighters; te—they; saàrabdha—very angry; manasaù—within their minds;
raëe—in that battle; samäsädya—getting the opportunity to fight between
themselves; asibhiù—with swords; bäëaiù—with arrows; nijaghnuù—began to
beat one another; vividha-äyudhaiù—with varieties of weapons.
TRANSLATION
Both parties in that fight were extremely angry at heart, and in enmity they
beat one another with swords, arrows and varieties of other weapons.
PURPORT
There are always two kinds of men in this universe, not only on this planet
but also in higher planetary systems. All the kings dominating planets like the
sun and moon also have enemies like Rähu. It is because of occasional attacks
upon the sun and moon by Rähu that eclipses take place. The fighting between
the demons and demigods is perpetual; it cannot be stopped unless intelligent
persons from both sides take to Kåñëa consciousness.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
424
TEXT 7
Xa«TaUYaRMa*d(r)aNaa& >aerq@Mair<aa& MahaNa( )
hSTYaìrQaPataqNaa& NadTaa& iNaSvNaae_>avTa( )) 7 ))
çaìkha-türya-mådaìgänäà
bheré-òamariëäà mahän
hasty-açva-ratha-patténäà
nadatäà nisvano 'bhavat
SYNONYMS
çaìkha—of conchshells; türya—of big bugles; mådaìgänäm—and of drums;
bheré—of bugles; òamariëäm—of kettledrums; mahän—great and tumultuous;
hasti—of elephants; açva—of horses; ratha-patténäm—of fighters on chariots
or on the ground; nadatäm—all of them making sounds together; nisvanaù—a
tumultuous sound; abhavat—so became.
TRANSLATION
The sounds of the conchshells, bugles, drums, bherés and òamarés
[kettledrums], as well as the sounds made by the elephants, horses and soldiers,
who were both on chariots and on foot, were tumultuous.
TEXT 8
riQaNaae riQai>aSTa}a Paitai>a" Sah PataYa" )
hYaa hYaEir>aaêe>aE" SaMaSaÂNTa Sa&YauGae )) 8 ))
rathino rathibhis tatra
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
425
pattibhiù saha pattayaù
hayä hayair ibhäç cebhaiù
samasajjanta saàyuge
SYNONYMS
rathinaù—fighters on chariots; rathibhiù—with the charioteers of the enemy;
tatra—in the battlefield; pattibhiù—with the infantry soldiers; saha—with;
pattayaù—the infantry of the enemy soldiers; hayäù—the horses;
hayaiù—with the enemy's soldiers; ibhäù—the soldiers fighting on the backs of
elephants; ca—and; ibhaiù—with the enemy's soldiers on the backs of
elephants; samasajjanta—began to fight together on an equal level;
saàyuge—on the battlefield.
TRANSLATION
On that battlefield, the charioteers fought with the opposing charioteers, the
infantry soldiers with the opposing infantry, the soldiers on horseback with the
opposing soldiers on horseback, and the soldiers on the backs of elephants with
the enemy soldiers on elephants. In this way, the fighting took place between
equals.
TEXT 9
oí\E" ke-icid>aE" ke-icdPare YauYauDau" %rE" )
ke-icd( GaaErMau%E‰R+aEÜs„iPai>ahRiri>a>aR$=a" )) 9 ))
uñöraiù kecid ibhaiù kecid
apare yuyudhuù kharaiù
kecid gaura-mukhair åkñair
dvépibhir haribhir bhaöäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
426
SYNONYMS
uñöraiù—on the backs of camels; kecit—some persons; ibhaiù—on the backs of
elephants; kecit—some persons; apare—others; yuyudhuù—engaged in
fighting; kharaiù—on the backs of asses; kecit—some persons;
gaura-mukhaiù—on white-faced monkeys; åkñaiù—on red-faced monkeys;
dvépibhiù—on the backs of tigers; haribhiù—on the backs of lions; bhaöäù—all
the soldiers engaged in this way.
TRANSLATION
Some soldiers fought on the backs of camels, some on the backs of elephants,
some on asses, some on white-faced and red-faced monkeys, some on tigers and
some on lions. In this way, they all engaged in fighting.
TEXTS 10-12
Ga*Da]E" k-ªEbRkE-rNYae XYaeNa>aaSaEiSTaiMai(r)lE/" )
Xar>aEMaRihzE" %ÉEGaaeRv*zEGaRvYaaå<aE" )) 10 ))
iXavai>ara%ui>a" ke-icTa( k*-k-l/aSaE" XaXaENaRrE" )
bSTaEreke- k*-Z<aSaarEh|SaErNYae c SaUk-rE" )) 11 ))
ANYae Jal/SQal/%GaE" SatvEivRk*-TaivGa]hE" )
SaeNaYaaeå>aYaae raJaiNvivéuSTae_Ga]Taae_Ga]Ta" )) 12 ))
gådhraiù kaìkair bakair anye
çyena-bhäsais timiìgilaiù
çarabhair mahiñaiù khaògair
go-våñair gavayäruëaiù
çiväbhir äkhubhiù kecit
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
427
kåkaläsaiù çaçair naraiù
bastair eke kåñëa-särair
haàsair anye ca sükaraiù
anye jala-sthala-khagaiù
sattvair vikåta-vigrahaiù
senayor ubhayo räjan
viviçus te 'grato 'grataù
SYNONYMS
gådhraiù—on the backs of vultures; kaìkaiù—on the backs of eagles;
bakaiù—on the backs of ducks; anye—others; çyena—on the backs of hawks;
bhäsaiù—on the backs of bhäsas; timiìgilaiù—on the backs of big fish known
as timiìgilas; çarabhaiù—on the backs of çarabhas; mahiñaiù—on the backs of
buffalo; khaògaiù—on the backs of rhinoceroses; go—on the backs of cows;
våñaiù—on the backs of bulls; gavaya-aruëaiù—on the backs of gavayas and
aruëas; çiväbhiù—on the backs of jackals; äkhubhiù—on the backs of big rats;
kecit—some persons; kåkaläsaiù—on the backs of big lizards; çaçaiù—on the
backs of big rabbits; naraiù—on the backs of human beings; bastaiù—on the
backs of goats; eke—some; kåñëa-säraiù—on the backs of black deer;
haàsaiù—on the backs of swans; anye—others; ca—also; sükaraiù—on the
backs of boars; anye—others; jala-sthala-khagaiù—animals moving on the
water, on land and in the sky; sattvaiù—by creatures being used as vehicles;
vikåta—are deformed; vigrahaiù—by such animals whose bodies; senayoù—of
the two parties of soldiers; ubhayoù—of both; räjan—O King;
viviçuù—entered; te—all of them; agrataù agrataù—going forward face to face.
TRANSLATION
O King, some soldiers fought on the backs of vultures, eagles, ducks, hawks
and bhäsa birds. Some fought on the backs of timiìgilas, which can devour huge
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
428
whales, some on the backs of çarabhas, and some on buffalo, rhinoceroses, cows,
bulls, jungle cows and aruëas. Others fought on the backs of jackals, rats,
lizards, rabbits, human beings, goats, black deer, swans and boars. In this way,
mounted on animals of the water, land and sky, including animals with
deformed bodies, both armies faced each other and went forward.
TEXTS 13-15
ic}aßJaPa$E= raJaàaTaPa}aE" iSaTaaMalE/" )
MahaDaNaEvRJa]d<@EVYaRJaNaEbaRhRcaMarE" )) 13 ))
vaTaaed(DaUTaaetaraeZ<aqzEricRi>aRvRMaR>aUz<aE" )
Sfu-riÙivRXadE" XañE" SauTara& SaUYaRriXMai>a" )) 14 ))
devdaNavvqra<aa& ßiJaNYaaE Paa<@uNaNdNa )
reJaTauvsrMaal/ai>aYaaRdSaaiMav SaaGaraE )) 15 ))
citra-dhvaja-paöai räjann
ätapatraiù sitämalaiù
mahä-dhanair vajra-daëòair
vyajanair bärha-cämaraiù
vätoddhütottaroñëéñair
arcirbhir varma-bhüñaëaiù
sphuradbhir viçadaiù çastraiù
sutaräà sürya-raçmibhiù
deva-dänava-véräëäà
dhvajinyau päëòu-nandana
rejatur véra-mäläbhir
yädasäm iva sägarau
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
429
citra-dhvaja-paöaiù—with very nicely decorated flags and canopies; räjan—O
King; ätapatraiù—with umbrellas for protection from the sunshine;
sita-amalaiù—most of them very clean and white; mahä-dhanaiù—by very
valuable; vajra-daëòaiù—with rods made of valuable jewels and pearls;
vyajanaiù—with fans; bärha-cämaraiù—with other fans made of peacock
feathers; väta-uddhüta—flapping with the breeze; uttara-uñëéñaiù—with upper
and lower garments; arcirbhiù—by the effulgence; varma-bhüñaëaiù—with
ornaments and shields; sphuradbhiù—shining; viçadaiù—sharp and clean;
çastraiù—with weapons; sutaräm—excessively; sürya-raçmibhiù—with the
dazzling illumination of the sunshine; deva-dänava-véräëäm—of all the heroes
of the parties of both the demons and the demigods; dhvajinyau—the two
parties of soldiers, each one bearing his own flag; päëòu-nandana—O
descendant of Mahäräja Päëòu; rejatuù—distinctly recognized;
véra-mäläbhiù—with garlands used by heroes; yädasäm—of aquatics; iva—just
like; sägarau—two oceans.
TRANSLATION
O King, O descendant of Mahäräja Päëòu, the soldiers of both the demigods
and demons were decorated by canopies, colorful flags, and umbrellas with
handles made of valuable jewels and pearls. They were further decorated by fans
made of peacock feathers and by other fans also. The soldiers, their upper and
lower garments waving in the breeze, naturally looked very beautiful, and in the
light of the glittering sunshine their shields, ornaments and sharp, clean
weapons appeared dazzling. Thus the ranks of soldiers seemed like two oceans
with bands of aquatics.
TEXTS 16-18
vEraecNaae bil/" Sa&:Yae Saae_Saura<aa& cMaUPaiTa" )
YaaNa& vEhaYaSa& NaaMa k-aMaGa& MaYaiNaiMaRTaMa( )) 16 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
430
SavRSaa°aiMak-aePaeTa& SavaRêYaRMaYa& Pa[>aae )
APa[TaKYaRMaiNadeRXYa& d*XYaMaaNaMadXaRNaMa( )) 17 ))
AaiSQaTaSTad( ivMaaNaaGY[a& SavaRNaqk-aiDaPaEv*RTa" )
bal/VYaJaNa^}aaGY[aE reJae cNd] wvaedYae )) 18 ))
vairocano baliù saìkhye
so 'suräëäà camü-patiù
yänaà vaihäyasaà näma
käma-gaà maya-nirmitam
sarva-säìgrämikopetaà
sarväçcaryamayaà prabho
apratarkyam anirdeçyaà
dåçyamänam adarçanam
ästhitas tad vimänägryaà
sarvänékädhipair våtaù
bäla-vyajana-chaträgryai
reje candra ivodaye
SYNONYMS
vairocanaù—the son of Virocana; baliù—Mahäräja Bali; saìkhye—in the
battle; saù—he, so celebrated; asuräëäm—of the demons;
camü-patiù—commander in chief; yänam—airplane; vaihäyasam—called
Vaihäyasa; näma—by the name; käma-gam—able to fly anywhere he desired;
maya-nirmitam—made by the demon Maya; sarva—all;
säìgrämika-upetam—equipped with all kinds of weapons required for fighting
with all different types of enemies; sarva-äçcarya-mayam—wonderful in every
respect; prabho—O King; apratarkyam—inexplicable;
anirdeçyam—indescribable; dåçyamänam—sometimes visible;
adarçanam—sometimes not visible; ästhitaù—being seated on such; tat—that;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
431
vimäna-agryam—excellent airplane; sarva—all; anéka-adhipaiù—by the
commanders of soldiers; våtaù—surrounded;
bäla-vyajana-chatra-agryaiù—protected by beautifully decorated umbrellas and
the best of cämaras; reje—brilliantly situated; candraù—the moon; iva—like;
udaye—at the time of rising in the evening.
TRANSLATION
For that battle the most celebrated commander in chief, Mahäräja Bali, son
of Virocana, was seated on a wonderful airplane named Vaihäyasa. O King, this
beautifully decorated airplane had been manufactured by the demon Maya and
was equipped with weapons for all types of combat. It was inconceivable and
indescribable. Indeed, it was sometimes visible and sometimes not. Seated in
this airplane under a beautiful protective umbrella and being fanned by the best
of cämaras, Mahäräja Bali, surrounded by his captains and commanders,
appeared just like the moon rising in the evening, illuminating all directions.
TEXTS 19-24
TaSYaaSaNSavRTaae YaaNaEYaURQaaNaa& PaTaYaae_Saura" )
NaMauic" XaMbrae ba<aae ivPa[icitarYaaeMau%" )) 19 ))
iÜMaUDaaR k-al/Naa>aae_Qa Pa[heiTaheRiTairLvl/" )
Xaku-iNa>aURTaSaNTaaPaae vJa]d&í\ae ivraecNa" )) 20 ))
hYaGa]qv" Xax(ku-iXara" k-iPal/ae MaegaduNdui>a" )
Taark-ê§-d*k(- éuM>aae iNaéuM>aae JaM>a oTk-l/" )) 21 ))
Airíae_iríNaeiMaê MaYaê i}aPauraiDaPa" )
ANYae PaaEl/aeMak-ale/Yaa iNavaTak-vcadYa" )) 22 ))
Al/BDa>aaGaa" SaaeMaSYa ke-vl&/ (c)e-Xa>aaiGaNa" )
SavR WTae r<aMau%e bhuXaae iNaiJaRTaaMara" )) 23 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
432
iSa&hNaadaiNvMauÄNTa" Xa«aNdDMauMaRharvaNa( )
d*îa SaPaÒaNauiTSa¢-aNbl/i>aTa( ku-iPaTaae >a*XaMa( )) 24 ))
tasyäsan sarvato yänair
yüthänäà patayo 'suräù
namuciù çambaro bäëo
vipracittir ayomukhaù
dvimürdhä kälanäbho 'tha
prahetir hetir ilvalaù
çakunir bhütasantäpo
vajradaàñöro virocanaù
hayagrévaù çaìkuçiräù
kapilo meghadundubhiù
tärakaç cakradåk çumbho
niçumbho jambha utkalaù
ariñöo 'riñöanemiç ca
mayaç ca tripurädhipaù
anye pauloma-käleyä
nivätakavacädayaù
alabdha-bhägäù somasya
kevalaà kleça-bhäginaù
sarva ete raëa-mukhe
bahuço nirjitämaräù
siàha-nädän vimuïcantaù
çaìkhän dadhmur mahä-ravän
dåñövä sapatnän utsiktän
balabhit kupito bhåçam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
433
SYNONYMS
tasya—of him (Mahäräja Bali); äsan—situated; sarvataù—all around;
yänaiù—by different vehicles; yüthänäm—of the soldiers; patayaù—the
commanders; asuräù—demons; namuciù—Namuci; çambaraù—Çambara;
bäëaù—Bäëa; vipracittiù—Vipracitti; ayomukhaù—Ayomukha;
dvimürdhä—Dvimürdhä; kälanäbhaù—Kälanäbha; atha—also;
prahetiù—Praheti; hetiù—Heti; ilvalaù—Ilvala; çakuniù—Çakuni;
bhütasantäpaù—Bhütasantäpa; vajra-daàñöraù—Vajradaàñöra;
virocanaù—Virocana; hayagrévaù—Hayagréva; çaìkuçiräù—Çaìkuçirä;
kapilaù—Kapila; megha-dundubhiù—Meghadundubhi; tärakaù—Täraka;
cakradåk—Cakradåk; çumbhaù—Çumbha; niçumbhaù—Niçumbha;
jambhaù—Jambha; utkalaù—Utkala; ariñöaù—Ariñöa;
ariñöanemiù—Ariñöanemi; ca—and; mayaù ca—and Maya;
tripurädhipaù—Tripurädhipa; anye—others; pauloma-käleyäù—the sons of
Puloma and the Käleyas; nivätakavaca-ädayaù—Nivätakavaca and other
demons; alabdha-bhägäù—all unable to take a share; somasya—of the nectar;
kevalam—merely; kleça-bhäginaù—the demons took a share of the labor;
sarve—all of them; ete—the demons; raëa-mukhe—in the front of the battle;
bahuçaù—by excessive strength; nirjita-amaräù—being very troublesome to
the demigods; siàha-nädän—vibrations like those of lions;
vimuïcantaù—uttering; çaìkhän—conchshells; dadhmuù—blew;
mahä-ravän—making a tumultuous sound; dåñövä—after seeing;
sapatnän—their rivals; utsiktän—ferocious; balabhit—(Lord Indra) being
afraid of the strength; kupitaù—having become angry; bhåçam—extremely.
TRANSLATION
Surrounding Mahäräja Bali on all sides were the commanders and captains of
the demons, sitting on their respective chariots. Among them were the
following demons: Namuci, Çambara, Bäëa, Vipracitti, Ayomukha, Dvimürdhä,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
434
Kälanäbha, Praheti, Heti, Ilvala, Çakuni, Bhütasantäpa, Vajradaàñöra,
Virocana, Hayagréva, Çaìkuçirä, Kapila, Meghadundubhi, Täraka, Cakradåk,
Çumbha, Niçumbha, Jambha, Utkala, Ariñöa, Ariñöanemi, Tripurädhipa, Maya,
the sons of Puloma, the Käleyas and Nivätakavaca. All of these demons had
been deprived of their share of the nectar and had shared merely in the labor of
churning the ocean. Now, they fought against the demigods, and to encourage
their armies, they made a tumultuous sound like the roaring of lions and blew
loudly on conchshells. Balabhit, Lord Indra, upon seeing this situation of his
ferocious rivals, became extremely angry.
TEXT 25
WeravTa& id¡-ir<aMaaæ!" éuéu>ae Svra$( )
YaQaa óvTPa[óv<aMaudYaaid]MahPaRiTa" )) 25 ))
airävataà dik-kariëam
ärüòhaù çuçubhe sva-räö
yathä sravat-prasravaëam
udayädrim ahar-patiù
SYNONYMS
airävatam—Airävata; dik-kariëam—the great elephant who could go
everywhere; ärüòhaù—mounted on; çuçubhe—became very beautiful to see;
sva-räö—Indra; yathä—just as; sravat—flowing; prasravaëam—waves of wine;
udaya-adrim—on Udayagiri; ahaù-patiù—the sun.
TRANSLATION
Sitting on Airävata, an elephant who can go anywhere and who holds water
and wine in reserve for showering, Lord Indra looked just like the sun rising
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
435
from Udayagiri, where there are reservoirs of water.
PURPORT
On the top of the mountain called Udayagiri are large lakes from which
water continuously pours in waterfalls. Similarly, Indra's carrier, Airävata,
holds water and wine in reserve and showers it in the direction of Lord Indra.
Thus Indra, King of heaven, sitting on the back of Airävata, appeared like the
brilliant sun rising above Udayagiri.
TEXT 26
TaSYaaSaNSavRTaae deva NaaNaavahßJaaYauDaa" )
l/aek-Paal/a" SahGa<aEvaRYviGanvå<aadYa" )) 26 ))
tasyäsan sarvato devä
nänä-väha-dhvajäyudhäù
lokapäläù saha-gaëair
väyv-agni-varuëädayaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Lord Indra; äsan—situated; sarvataù—all around; deväù—all the
demigods; nänä-väha—with varieties of carriers; dhvaja-äyudhäù—and with
flags and weapons; loka-päläù—all the chiefs of various higher planetary
systems; saha—with; gaëaiù—their associates; väyu—the demigod controlling
air; agni—the demigod controlling fire; varuëa—the demigod controlling
water; ädayaù—all of them surrounding Lord Indra.
TRANSLATION
Surrounding Lord Indra, King of heaven, were the demigods, seated on
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
436
various types of vehicles and decorated with flags and weapons. Present among
them were Väyu, Agni, Varuëa and other rulers of various planets, along with
their associates.
TEXT 27
Tae_NYaaeNYaMai>aSa&Sa*TYa i+aPaNTaae MaMaRi>aiMaRQa" )
AaûYaNTaae ivXaNTaae_Ga]e YauYauDauÜRNÜYaaeiDaNa" )) 27 ))
te 'nyonyam abhisaàsåtya
kñipanto marmabhir mithaù
ähvayanto viçanto 'gre
yuyudhur dvandva-yodhinaù
SYNONYMS
te—all of them (the demigods and the demons); anyonyam—one another;
abhisaàsåtya—having come forward face to face; kñipantaù—chastising one
another; marmabhiù mithaù—with much pain to the cores of the hearts of one
another; ähvayantaù—addressing one another; viçantaù—having entered the
battlefield; agre—in front; yuyudhuù—fought; dvandva-yodhinaù—two
combatants chose each other.
TRANSLATION
The demigods and demons came before each other and reproached one
another with words piercing to the heart. Then they drew near and began
fighting face to face in pairs.
TEXT 28
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
437
YauYaaeDa bil/irNd]e<a Taarke-<a Gauhae_SYaTa )
vå<aae heiTaNaaYauDYaiNMa}aae raJaNPa[heiTaNaa )) 28 ))
yuyodha balir indreëa
tärakeëa guho 'syata
varuëo hetinäyudhyan
mitro räjan prahetinä
SYNONYMS
yuyodha—fought; baliù—Mahäräja Bali; indreëa—with King Indra;
tärakeëa—with Täraka; guhaù—Kärttikeya; asyata—engaged in fighting;
varuëaù—the demigod Varuëa; hetinä—with Heti; ayudhyat—fought one
another; mitraù—the demigod Mitra; räjan—O King; prahetinä—with Praheti.
TRANSLATION
O King, Mahäräja Bali fought with Indra, Kärttikeya with Täraka, Varuëa
with Heti, and Mitra with Praheti.
TEXT 29
YaMaSTau k-al/Naa>aeNa ivìk-MaaR MaYaeNa vE )
XaMbrae YauYauDae Tví\a Saiv}aa Tau ivraecNa" )) 29 ))
yamas tu kälanäbhena
viçvakarmä mayena vai
çambaro yuyudhe tvañörä
saviträ tu virocanaù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
438
yamaù—Yamaräja; tu—indeed; kälanäbhena—with Kälanäbha;
viçvakarmä—Viçvakarmä; mayena—with Maya; vai—indeed;
çambaraù—Çambara; yuyudhe—fought; tvañörä—with Tvañöä; saviträ—with
the sun-god; tu—indeed; virocanaù—the demon Virocana.
TRANSLATION
Yamaräja fought with Kälanäbha, Viçvakarmä with Maya Dänava, Tvañöä
with Çambara, and the sun-god with Virocana.
TEXTS 30-31
AParaiJaTaeNa NaMauicriìNaaE v*zPavR<aa )
SaUYaaeR bil/SauTaEdeRvae ba<aJYaeïE" XaTaeNa c )) 30 ))
rahu<aa c TaQaa SaaeMa" Paul/aeMana YauYauDae_iNal/" )
iNaéuM>aéuM>aYaaedeRvq >ad]k-al/I TariSvNaq )) 31 ))
aparäjitena namucir
açvinau våñaparvaëä
süryo bali-sutair devo
bäëa-jyeñöhaiù çatena ca
rähuëä ca tathä somaù
pulomnä yuyudhe 'nilaù
niçumbha-çumbhayor devé
bhadrakälé tarasviné
SYNONYMS
aparäjitena—with the demigod Aparäjita; namuciù—the demon Namuci;
açvinau—the Açviné brothers; våñaparvaëä—with the demon Våñaparvä;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
439
süryaù—the sun-god; bali-sutaiù—with the sons of Bali; devaù—the god;
bäëa-jyeñöhaiù—the chief of whom is Bäëa; çatena—numbering one hundred;
ca—and; rähuëä—by Rähu; ca—also; tathä—as well as; somaù—the
moon-god; pulomnä—Puloma; yuyudhe—fought; anilaù—the demigod Anila,
who controls air; niçumbha—the demon Niçumbha; çumbhayoù—with
Çumbha; devé—the goddess Durgä; bhadrakälé—Bhadra Kälé;
tarasviné—extremely powerful.
TRANSLATION
The demigod Aparäjita fought with Namuci, and the two Açviné-kumära
brothers fought with Våñaparvä. The sun-god fought with the one hundred sons
of Mahäräja Bali, headed by Bäëa, and the moon-god fought with Rähu. The
demigod controlling air fought with Puloma, and Çumbha and Niçumbha fought
the supremely powerful material energy, Durgädevé, who is called Bhadra Kälé.
TEXTS 32-34
v*zak-iPaSTau JaM>aeNa Maihze<a iv>aavSau" )
wLvl/" Sah vaTaaiPab]RøPau}aErirNdMa )) 32 ))
k-aMadeveNa duMaRzR oTk-l/ae MaaTa*i>a" Sah )
b*hSPaiTaêaeXaNaSaa Narke-<a XaNaEêr" )) 33 ))
MaåTaae iNavaTak-vcE" k-ale/YaEvRSavae_Mara" )
ivìedevaSTau PaaEl/aeMaE åd]a" §-aeDavXaE" Sah )) 34 ))
våñäkapis tu jambhena
mahiñeëa vibhävasuù
ilvalaù saha vätäpir
brahma-putrair arindama
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
440
kämadevena durmarña
utkalo mätåbhiù saha
båhaspatiç coçanasä
narakeëa çanaiçcaraù
maruto nivätakavacaiù
käleyair vasavo 'maräù
viçvedeväs tu paulomai
rudräù krodhavaçaiù saha
SYNONYMS
våñäkapiù—Lord Çiva; tu—indeed; jambhena—with Jambha; mahiñeëa—with
Mahiñäsura; vibhävasuù—the fire-god; ilvalaù—the demon Ilvala; saha
vätäpiù—with his brother, Vätäpi; brahma-putraiù—with the sons of Brahmä,
such as Vasiñöha; arim-dama—O Mahäräja Parékñit, suppressor of enemies;
kämadevena—with Kämadeva; durmarñaù—Durmarña; utkalaù—the demon
Utkala; mätåbhiù saha—with the demigoddesses known as the Mätåkäs;
båhaspatiù—the demigod Båhaspati; ca—and; uçanasä—with Çukräcärya;
narakeëa—with the demon known as Naraka; çanaiçcaraù—the demigod Çani,
or Saturn; marutaù—the demigods of air; nivätakavacaiù—with the demon
Nivätakavaca; käleyaiù—with the Kälakeyas; vasavaù amaräù—the Vasus
fought; viçvedeväù—the Viçvedeva demigods; tu—indeed; paulomaiù—with
the Paulomas; rudräù—the eleven Rudras; krodhavaçaiù saha—with the
Krodhavaça demons.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, suppressor of enemies [Arindama], Lord Çiva fought
with Jambha, and Vibhävasu fought with Mahiñäsura. Ilvala, along with his
brother Vätäpi, fought the sons of Lord Brahmä. Durmarña fought with Cupid,
the demon Utkala with the Mätåkä demigoddesses, Båhaspati with Çukräcärya,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
441
and Çanaiçcara [Saturn] with Narakäsura. The Maruts fought Nivätakavaca,
the Vasus fought the Kälakeya demons, the Viçvedeva demigods fought the
Pauloma demons, and the Rudras fought the Krodhavaça demons, who were
victims of anger.
TEXT 35
Ta WvMaaJaavSaura" SaureNd]a
ÜNÜeNa Sa&hTYa c YauDYaMaaNaa" )
ANYaaeNYaMaaSaaÛ iNaJaganuraeJaSaa
iJaGaqzvSTaq+<aXaraiSaTaaeMarE" )) 35 ))
ta evam äjäv asuräù surendrä
dvandvena saàhatya ca yudhyamänäù
anyonyam äsädya nijaghnur ojasä
jigéñavas tékñëa-çaräsi-tomaraiù
SYNONYMS
te—all of them; evam—in this way; äjau—on the battlefield; asuräù—the
demons; sura-indräù—and the demigods; dvandvena—two by two;
saàhatya—mixing together; ca—and; yudhyamänäù—engaged in fighting;
anyonyam—with one another; äsädya—approaching; nijaghnuù—slashed with
weapons and killed; ojasä—with great strength; jigéñavaù—everyone desiring
victory; tékñëa—sharp; çara—with arrows; asi—with swords; tomaraiù—with
lances.
TRANSLATION
All of these demigods and demons assembled on the battlefield with a
fighting spirit and attacked one another with great strength. All of them
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
442
desiring victory, they fought in pairs, hitting one another severely with
sharpened arrows, swords and lances.
TEXT 36
>auéui<@i>aê§-GadiíRPaiÆXaE"
Xa¢-yuLMaukE-" Pa[aSaParìDaEriPa )
iNaiñ&Xa>açE/" PairgaE" SaMauÓrE"
Sai>aiNdPaalE/ê iXara&iSa iciC^du" )) 36 ))
bhuçuëòibhiç cakra-gadarñöi-paööiçaiù
çakty-ulmukaiù präsa-paraçvadhair api
nistriàça-bhallaiù parighaiù samudgaraiù
sabhindipälaiç ca çiräàsi cicchiduù
SYNONYMS
bhuçuëòibhiù—with weapons called bhuçuëòi; cakra—with discs; gadä—with
clubs; åñöi—with the weapons called åñöi; paööiçaiù—with the weapons called
paööiça; çakti—with the çakti weapons; ulmukaiù—with the weapons called
ulmukas; präsa—with the präsa weapons; paraçvadhaiù—with the weapons
called paraçvadha; api—also; nistriàça—with nistriàças; bhallaiù—with
lances; parighaiù—with the weapons named parighas; sa-mudgaraiù—with the
weapons known as mudgara; sa-bhindipälaiù—with the bhindipäla weapons;
ca—also; çiräàsi—heads; cicchiduù—cut off.
TRANSLATION
They severed one another's heads, using weapons like bhuçuëòis, cakras,
clubs, åñöis, paööiças, çaktis, ulmukas, präsas, paraçvadhas, nistriàças, lances,
parighas, mudgaras and bhindipälas.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
443
TEXT 37
GaJaaSTaur(r)a" SarQaa" PadaTaYa"
Saaraehvaha ivivDaa iv%i<@Taa" )
iNak*-tabahUåiXaraeDarax(ga]Ya‚
iX^àßJaeZvaSaTaNau}a>aUz<aa" )) 37 ))
gajäs turaìgäù sarathäù padätayaù
säroha-vähä vividhä vikhaëòitäù
nikåtta-bähüru-çirodharäìghrayaç
chinna-dhvajeñväsa-tanutra-bhüñaëäù
SYNONYMS
gajäù—elephants; turaìgäù—horses; sa-rathäù—with chariots;
padätayaù—infantry soldiers; säroha-vähäù—carriers with the riders;
vividhäù—varieties; vikhaëòitäù—cut to pieces; nikåtta-bähu—cut off arms;
üru—thighs; çirodhara—necks; aìghrayaù—legs; chinna—cut up;
dhvaja—flags; iñväsa—bows; tanutra—armor; bhüñaëäù—ornaments.
TRANSLATION
The elephants, horses, chariots, charioteers, infantry soldiers and various
kinds of carriers, along with their riders, were slashed to pieces. The arms,
thighs, necks and legs of the soldiers were severed, and their flags, bows, armor
and ornaments were torn apart.
TEXT 38
Taeza& PadagaaTarQaa(r)cUi<aRTaa‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
444
daYaaeDaNaaduLb<a oiTQaTaSTada )
re<auidRXa" %& ÛuMai<a& c ^adYaNa(
NYavTaRTaaSa*KóuiTai>a" PairPlu/TaaTa( )) 38 ))
teñäà padäghäta-rathäìga-cürëitäd
äyodhanäd ulbaëa utthitas tadä
reëur diçaù khaà dyumaëià ca chädayan
nyavartatäsåk-srutibhiù pariplutät
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of all the people engaged on the battlefield; padäghäta—because of
beating on the ground by the legs of the demons and demigods;
ratha-aìga—and by the wheels of the chariots; cürëität—which was made into
pieces of dust; äyodhanät—from the battlefield; ulbaëaù—very forceful;
utthitaù—rising; tadä—at that time; reëuù—the dust particles; diçaù—all
directions; kham—outer space; dyumaëim—up to the sun; ca—also;
chädayan—covering all of space up to that; nyavartata—dropped floating in
the air; asåk—of blood; srutibhiù—by particles; pariplutät—because of being
widely sprinkled.
TRANSLATION
Because of the impact on the ground of the legs of the demons and demigods
and the wheels of the chariots, particles of dust flew violently into the sky and
made a dust cloud that covered all directions of outer space, as far as the sun.
But when the particles of dust were followed by drops of blood being sprinkled
all over space, the dust cloud could no longer float in the sky.
TEXT 39
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
445
iXaraei>aåd(DaUTaik-rq$=ku-<@lE/"
Sa&rM>ad*iG>a" PairdídC^dE" )
Maha>auJaE" Saa>ar<aE" SahaYauDaE"
Saa Pa[aSTa*Taa >aU" k-r>aaeåi>abR>aaE )) 39 ))
çirobhir uddhüta-kiréöa-kuëòalaiù
saàrambha-dågbhiù paridañöa-dacchadaiù
mahä-bhujaiù säbharaëaiù sahäyudhaiù
sä präståtä bhüù karabhorubhir babhau
SYNONYMS
çirobhiù—by the heads; uddhüta—separated, scattered from; kiréöa—having
their helmets; kuëòalaiù—and earrings; saàrambha-dågbhiù—eyes staring in
anger (although the heads were severed from their bodies); paridañöa—having
been bitten by the teeth; dacchadaiù—the lips; mahä-bhujaiù—with big arms;
sa-äbharaëaiù—decorated with ornaments; saha-äyudhaiù—and with weapons
in their hands, although the hands were severed; sä—that battlefield;
präståtä—scattered; bhüù—the warfield; karabha-ürubhiù—and with thighs
and legs resembling the trunks of elephants; babhau—it so became.
TRANSLATION
In the course of the battle, the warfield became strewn with the severed
heads of heroes, their eyes still staring and their teeth still pressed against their
lips in anger. Helmets and earrings were scattered from these severed heads.
Similarly, many arms, decorated with ornaments and clutching various
weapons, were strewn here and there, as were many legs and thighs, which
resembled the trunks of elephants.
TEXT 40
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
446
k-bNDaaSTa}a caeTPaeTau" PaiTaTaSviXarae_i+ai>a" )
oÛTaaYauDadaedR<@EraDaavNTaae >a$=aNa( Ma*Dae )) 40 ))
kabandhäs tatra cotpetuù
patita-sva-çiro-'kñibhiù
udyatäyudha-dordaëòair
ädhävanto bhaöän mådhe
SYNONYMS
kabandhäù—trunks (bodies without heads); tatra—there (on the battlefield);
ca—also; utpetuù—generated; patita—fallen; sva-çiraù-akñibhiù—by the eyes
in one's head; udyata—raised; äyudha—equipped with weapons;
dordaëòaiù—the arms of whom; ädhävantaù—rushing toward; bhaöän—the
soldiers; mådhe—on the battlefield.
TRANSLATION
Many headless trunks were generated on that battlefield. With weapons in
their arms, those ghostly trunks, which could see with the eyes in the fallen
heads, attacked the enemy soldiers.
PURPORT
It appears that the heroes who died on the battlefield immediately became
ghosts, and although their heads had been severed from their bodies, new
trunks were generated, and these new trunks, seeing with the eyes in the
severed heads, began to attack the enemy. In other words, many ghosts were
generated to join the fight, and thus new trunks appeared on the battlefield.
TEXT 41
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
447
bil/MaRheNd]& dXai>aiñi>arEravTa& XarE" )
cTaui>aRêTaurae vahaNaeke-NaaraehMaaC^RYaTa( )) 41 ))
balir mahendraà daçabhis
tribhir airävataà çaraiù
caturbhiç caturo vähän
ekenäroham ärcchayat
SYNONYMS
baliù—Mahäräja Bali; mahä-indram—the King of heaven; daçabhiù—with ten;
tribhiù—with three; airävatam—Airävata, carrying Indra; çaraiù—by arrows;
caturbhiù—by four arrows; caturaù—the four; vähän—mounted soldiers;
ekena—by one; äroham—the driver of the elephants; ärcchayat—attacked.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Bali then attacked Indra with ten arrows and attacked Airävata,
Indra's carrier elephant, with three arrows. With four arrows he attacked the
four horsemen guarding Airävata's legs, and with one arrow he attacked the
driver of the elephant.
PURPORT
The word vähän refers to the soldiers on horseback who protected the legs
of the carrier elephants. According to the system of military arrangement, the
legs of the elephant bearing the commander were also protected.
TEXT 42
Sa TaaNaaPaTaTa" Xa§-STaaviÙ" Xaqga]iv§-Ma" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
448
icC^ed iNaiXaTaE>aRçErSaMPa[aáaNhSaiàv )) 42 ))
sa tän äpatataù çakras
tävadbhiù çéghra-vikramaù
ciccheda niçitair bhallair
asampräptän hasann iva
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Indra); tän—arrows; äpatataù—while moving toward him and falling
down; çakraù—Indra; tävadbhiù—immediately; çéghra-vikramaù—was
practiced to oppress very soon; ciccheda—cut to pieces; niçitaiù—very sharp;
bhallaiù—with another type of arrow; asampräptän—the enemy's arrows not
being received; hasan iva—as if smiling.
TRANSLATION
Before Bali Mahäräja's arrows could reach him, Indra, King of heaven, who
is expert in dealing with arrows, smiled and counteracted the arrows with
arrows of another type, known as bhalla, which were extremely sharp.
TEXT 43
TaSYa k-MaaeRtaMa& vq+Ya duMaRzR" Xai¢-Maadde )
Taa& Jvl/NTaq& MahaeLk-a>aa& hSTaSQaaMaiC^NaÖir" )) 43 ))
tasya karmottamaà vékñya
durmarñaù çaktim ädade
täà jvalantéà maholkäbhäà
hasta-sthäm acchinad dhariù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
449
SYNONYMS
tasya—of King Indra; karma-uttamam—the very expert service in military art;
vékñya—after observing; durmarñaù—being in a very angry mood; çaktim—the
çakti weapon; ädade—took up; täm—that weapon; jvalantém—blazing fire;
mahä-ulkä-äbhäm—appearing like a great firebrand; hasta-sthäm—while still
in the hand of Bali; acchinat—cut to pieces; hariù—Indra.
TRANSLATION
When Bali Mahäräja saw the expert military activities of Indra, he could not
restrain his anger. Thus he took up another weapon, known as çakti, which
blazed like a great firebrand. But Indra cut that weapon to pieces while it was
still in Bali's hand.
TEXT 44
TaTa" éUl&/ TaTa" Pa[aSa& TaTaSTaaeMarMa*íYa" )
Yad( YaC^ñ& SaMaadÛaTSav| TadiC^Nad( iv>au" )) 44 ))
tataù çülaà tataù präsaà
tatas tomaram åñöayaù
yad yac chastraà samädadyät
sarvaà tad acchinad vibhuù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; çülam—lance; tataù—thereafter; präsam—the präsa
weapon; tataù—thereafter; tomaram—the tomara weapon; åñöayaù—the åñöi
weapons; yat yat—whatever and whichever; çastram—weapon;
samädadyät—Bali Mahäräja tried to use; sarvam—all of them; tat—those same
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
450
weapons; acchinat—cut to pieces; vibhuù—the great Indra.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, one by one, Bali Mahäräja used a lance, präsa, tomara, åñöis and
other weapons, but whatever weapons he took up, Indra immediately cut them
to pieces.
TEXT 45
SaSaJaaRQaaSaurq& MaaYaaMaNTaDaaRNaGaTaae_Saur" )
TaTa" Pa[adur>aUC^El/" SauraNaqk-aePair Pa[>aae )) 45 ))
sasarjäthäsuréà mäyäm
antardhäna-gato 'suraù
tataù prädurabhüc chailaù
suränékopari prabho
SYNONYMS
sasarja—released; atha—now; äsurém—demoniac; mäyäm—illusion;
antardhäna—out of vision; gataù—having gone; asuraù—Bali Mahäräja;
tataù—thereafter; prädurabhüt—there appeared; çailaù—a big mountain;
sura-anéka-upari—above the heads of the soldiers of the demigods; prabho—O
my lord.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, Bali Mahäräja then disappeared and resorted to demoniac
illusions. A giant mountain, generated from illusion, then appeared above the
heads of the demigod soldiers.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
451
TEXT 46
TaTaae iNaPaeTauSTarvae dùMaaNaa dvaiGanNaa )
iXal/a" Sa$=ªiXa%raêU<aRYaNTYaae iÜzØl/Ma( )) 46 ))
tato nipetus taravo
dahyamänä davägninä
çiläù saöaìka-çikharäç
cürëayantyo dviñad-balam
SYNONYMS
tataù—from that great mountain; nipetuù—began to fall; taravaù—large trees;
dahyamänäù—blazing in fire; dava-agninä—by the forest fire; çiläù—and
stones; sa-öaìka-çikharäù—having edges with points as sharp as stone picks;
cürëayantyaù—smashing; dviñat-balam—the strength of the enemies.
TRANSLATION
From that mountain fell trees blazing in a forest fire. Chips of stone, with
sharp edges like picks, also fell and smashed the heads of the demigod soldiers.
TEXT 47
MahaerGaa" SaMauTPaeTaudRNdéUk-a" Sav*iêk-a" )
iSa&hVYaaga]vrahaê MadRYaNTaae MahaGaJaa" )) 47 ))
mahoragäù samutpetur
dandaçükäù savåçcikäù
siàha-vyäghra-varähäç ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
452
mardayanto mahä-gajäù
SYNONYMS
mahä-uragäù—big serpents; samutpetuù—fell upon them; dandaçükäù—other
poisonous animals and insects; sa-våçcikäù—with scorpions; siàha—lions;
vyäghra—tigers; varähäù ca—and forest boars; mardayantaù—smashing;
mahä-gajäù—great elephants.
TRANSLATION
Scorpions, large snakes and many other poisonous animals, as well as lions,
tigers, boars and great elephants, all began falling upon the demigod soldiers,
crushing everything.
TEXT 48
YaaTauDaaNYaê XaTaXa" éUl/hSTaa ivvaSaSa" )
i^iNDa i>aNDaqiTa vaidNYaSTaQaa r+aaeGa<aa" Pa[>aae )) 48 ))
yätudhänyaç ca çataçaù
çüla-hastä viväsasaù
chindhi bhindhéti vädinyas
tathä rakño-gaëäù prabho
SYNONYMS
yätudhänyaù—carnivorous female demons; ca—and; çataçaù—hundreds upon
hundreds; çüla-hastäù—every one of them with a trident in hand;
viväsasaù—completely naked; chindhi—cut to pieces; bhindhi—pierce;
iti—thus; vädinyaù—talking; tathä—in that way; rakñaù-gaëäù—a band of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
453
Räkñasas (a type of demon); prabho—O my King.
TRANSLATION
O my King, many hundreds of male and female carnivorous demons,
completely naked and carrying tridents in their hands, then appeared, crying
the slogans "Cut them to pieces! Pierce them!"
TEXT 49
TaTaae MahagaNaa VYaaeiMan GaM>aqrPaåzSvNaa" )
A(r)araNMauMaucuvaRTaErahTaa" STaNaiYaÒv" )) 49 ))
tato mahä-ghanä vyomni
gambhéra-paruña-svanäù
aìgärän mumucur vätair
ähatäù stanayitnavaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; mahä-ghanäù—big clouds; vyomni—in the sky;
gambhéra-paruña-svanäù—making very deep rumbling sounds;
aìgärän—embers; mumucuù—released; vätaiù—by the strong winds;
ähatäù—harassed; stanayitnavaù—with the sound of thunder.
TRANSLATION
Fierce clouds, harassed by strong winds, then appeared in the sky. Rumbling
very gravely with the sound of thunder, they began to shower live coals.
TEXT 50
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
454
Sa*íae dETYaeNa SauMahaNviö" ìSaNaSaariQa" )
Saa&vTaRk- wvaTYauGa]ae ivbuDaßiJaNaqMaDaak(- )) 50 ))
såñöo daityena sumahän
vahniù çvasana-särathiù
säàvartaka ivätyugro
vibudha-dhvajiném adhäk
SYNONYMS
såñöaù—created; daityena—by the demon (Bali Mahäräja); su-mahän—very
great, devastating; vahniù—a fire; çvasana-särathiù—being carried by the
blasting wind; säàvartakaù—the fire named Säàvartaka, which appears
during the time of dissolution; iva—just like; ati—very much; ugraù—terrible;
vibudha—of the demigods; dhvajiném—the soldiers; adhäk—burned to ashes.
TRANSLATION
A great devastating fire created by Bali Mahäräja began burning all the
soldiers of the demigods. This fire, accompanied by blasting winds, seemed as
terrible as the Säàvartaka fire, which appears at the time of dissolution.
TEXT 51
TaTa" SaMaud] oÜel/" SavRTa" Pa[TYad*XYaTa )
Pa[c<@vaTaEåd(DaUTaTar(r)avTaR>aqz<a" )) 51 ))
tataù samudra udvelaù
sarvataù pratyadåçyata
pracaëòa-vätair uddhütacopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
455
taraìgävarta-bhéñaëaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; samudraù—the sea; udvelaù—being agitated;
sarvataù—everywhere; pratyadåçyata—appeared before everyone's vision;
pracaëòa—fierce; vätaiù—by the winds; uddhüta—agitated; taraìga—of the
waves; ävarta—whirling water; bhéñaëaù—ferocious.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, whirlpools and sea waves, agitated by fierce blasts of wind,
appeared everywhere, before everyone's vision, in a furious flood.
TEXT 52
Wv& dETYaEMaRhaMaaYaErl/+YaGaiTa>aqr<ae )
Sa*JYaMaaNaaSau MaaYaaSau ivzedu" SaurSaEiNak-a" )) 52 ))
evaà daityair mahä-mäyair
alakñya-gatibhé raëe
såjyamänäsu mäyäsu
viñeduù sura-sainikäù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; daityaiù—by the demons; mahä-mäyaiù—who were expert in
creating illusions; alakñya-gatibhiù—but invisible; raëe—in the fight;
såjyamänäsu mäyäsu—because of the creation of such an illusory atmosphere;
viñeduù—became morose; sura-sainikäù—the soldiers of the demigods.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
456
TRANSLATION
While this magical atmosphere in the fight was being created by the invisible
demons, who were expert in such illusions, the soldiers of the demigods became
morose.
TEXT 53
Na TaTPa[iTaiviDa& Ya}a ivduirNd]adYaae Na*Pa )
DYaaTa" Pa[adur>aUTa( Ta}a >aGavaiNvì>aavNa" )) 53 ))
na tat-pratividhià yatra
vidur indrädayo nåpa
dhyätaù prädurabhüt tatra
bhagavän viçva-bhävanaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; tat-pratividhim—the counteraction of such an illusory atmosphere;
yatra—wherein; viduù—could understand; indra-ädayaù—the demigods,
headed by Indra; nåpa—O King; dhyätaù—being meditated upon;
prädurabhüt—appeared there; tatra—in that place; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; viçva-bhävanaù—the creator of the universe.
TRANSLATION
O King, when the demigods could find no way to counteract the activities of
the demons, they wholeheartedly meditated upon the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the creator of the universe, who then immediately appeared.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
457
TEXT 54
TaTa" SauPa<aa|Sak*-Taax(iga]Paçv"
iPaXa(r)vaSaa Navk-Ål/aecNa" )
Ad*XYaTaaíaYauDabahuåçSa‚
C^\qk-aESTau>aaNagYaRik-rq$=ku-<@l/" )) 54 ))
tataù suparëäàsa-kåtäìghri-pallavaù
piçaìga-väsä nava-kaïja-locanaù
adåçyatäñöäyudha-bähur ullasacchré-
kaustubhänarghya-kiréöa-kuëòalaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; suparëa-aàsa-kåta-aìghri-pallavaù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whose lotus feet spread over the two shoulders of
Garuòa; piçaìga-väsäù—whose dress is yellow; nava-kaïja-locanaù—and
whose eyes are just like the petals of a newly blossomed lotus;
adåçyata—became visible (in the presence of the demigods);
añöa-äyudha—equipped with eight kinds of weapons; bähuù—arms;
ullasat—brilliantly exhibiting; çré—the goddess of fortune; kaustubha—the
Kaustubha gem; anarghya—of incalculable value; kiréöa—helmet;
kuëòalaù—having earrings.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose eyes resemble the petals of a
newly blossomed lotus, sat on the back of Garuòa, spreading His lotus feet over
Garuòa's shoulders. Dressed in yellow, decorated by the Kaustubha gem and the
goddess of fortune, and wearing an invaluable helmet and earrings, the Supreme
Lord, holding various weapons in His eight hands, became visible to the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
458
demigods.
TEXT 55
TaiSMaNPa[ivíe_SaurkU-$=k-MaRJaa
MaaYaa ivNaeéuMaRihNaa MahqYaSa" )
SvPanae YaQaa ih Pa[iTabaeDa AaGaTae
hirSMa*iTa" SavRivPaiÜMaae+a<aMa( )) 55 ))
tasmin praviñöe 'sura-küöa-karmajä
mäyä vineçur mahinä mahéyasaù
svapno yathä hi pratibodha ägate
hari-småtiù sarva-vipad-vimokñaëam
SYNONYMS
tasmin praviñöe—upon the entrance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
asura—of the demons; küöa-karma-jä—because of the illusory, magical
activities; mäyä—the false manifestations; vineçuù—were immediately curbed;
mahinä—by the superior power; mahéyasaù—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is greater than the greatest; svapnaù—dreams; yathä—as;
hi—indeed; pratibodhe—when awakening; ägate—has arrived;
hari-småtiù—remembrance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sarva-vipat—of all kinds of dangerous situations; vimokñaëam—immediately
vanquishes.
TRANSLATION
As the dangers of a dream cease when the dreamer awakens, the illusions
created by the jugglery of the demons were vanquished by the transcendental
prowess of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as soon as He entered the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
459
battlefield. Indeed, simply by remembrance of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one becomes free from all dangers.
TEXT 56
d*îa Ma*Dae Gaå@vahiMa>aairvah
AaivDYa éUl/MaihNaaedQa k-al/NaeiMa" )
TaçIl/Yaa Gaå@MaUiDNaR PaTad( Ga*hqTva
TaeNaahNaà*Pa SavahMair& }YaDaqXa" )) 56 ))
dåñövä mådhe garuòa-väham ibhäri-väha
ävidhya çülam ahinod atha kälanemiù
tal lélayä garuòa-mürdhni patad gåhétvä
tenähanan nåpa saväham arià tryadhéçaù
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—seeing; mådhe—on the battlefield; garuòa-väham—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, carried by Garuòa; ibhäri-vähaù—the demon, who was
carried by a big lion; ävidhya—whirling around; çülam—trident;
ahinot—discharged at him; atha—thus; kälanemiù—the demon Kälanemi;
tat—such an attack by the demon against the Supreme Lord; lélayä—very
easily; garuòa-mürdhni—on the head of His carrier, Garuòa; patat—while
falling down; gåhétvä—after taking it immediately, without difficulty;
tena—and by the same weapon; ahanat—killed; nåpa—O King;
sa-väham—with his carrier; arim—the enemy; tri-adhéçaù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the proprietor of the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
O King, when the demon Kälanemi, who was carried by a lion, saw that the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
460
Supreme Personality of Godhead, carried by Garuòa, was on the battlefield, the
demon immediately took his trident, whirled it and discharged it at Garuòa's
head. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, the master of the three
worlds, immediately caught the trident, and with the very same weapon he
killed the enemy Kälanemi, along with his carrier, the lion.
PURPORT
In this regard, Çréla Madhväcärya says:
kälanemy-ädayaù sarve
kariëä nihatä api
çukreëojjévitäù santaù
punas tenaiva pätitäù
"Kälanemi and all the other demons were killed by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Hari, and when Çukräcärya, their spiritual master, brought them
back to life, they were again killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead."
TEXT 57
Maal/I SauMaaLYaiTabl/aE YauiDa PaeTaTauYaR‚
À§e-<a k*-taiXarSaavQa MaaLYava&STaMa( )
AahTYa iTaGMaGadYaahNad<@JaeNd]&
TaaviC^rae_iC^NadreNaRdTaae_ir<aaÛ" )) 57 ))
mälé sumäly atibalau yudhi petatur yaccakreëa
kåtta-çirasäv atha mälyaväàs tam
ähatya tigma-gadayähanad aëòajendraà
tävac chiro 'cchinad arer nadato 'riëädyaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
461
SYNONYMS
mälé sumälé—two demons named Mälé and Sumälé; ati-balau—very powerful;
yudhi—on the battlefield; petatuù—fell down; yat-cakreëa—by whose disc;
kåtta-çirasau—their heads having been cut off; atha—thereupon;
mälyavän—Mälyavän; tam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ähatya—attacking; tigma-gadayä—with a very sharp club; ahanat—attempted
to attack, kill; aëòa-ja-indram—Garuòa, the king of all the birds, who are born
from eggs; tävat—at that time; çiraù—the head; acchinat—cut off; areù—of
the enemy; nadataù—roaring like a lion; ariëä—by the disc; ädyaù—the
original Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, two very powerful demons named Mälé and Sumälé were killed
by the Supreme Lord, who severed their heads with His disc. Then Mälyavän,
another demon, attacked the Lord. With his sharp club, the demon, who was
roaring like a lion, attacked Garuòa, the lord of the birds, who are born from
eggs. But the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the original person, used His
disc to cut off the head of that enemy also.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Tenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Battle Between the Demigods and the
Demons."
11. King Indra Annihilates the Demons
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
462
As described in this chapter, the great saint Närada Muni, being very
compassionate to the demons who had been killed by the demigods, forbade
the demigods to continue killing. Then Çukräcärya, by his mystic power,
renewed the lives of all the demons.
Having been graced by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the demigods
began fighting the demons again, with renewed energy. King Indra released his
thunderbolt against Bali, and when Bali fell, his friend Jambhäsura attacked
Indra, who then cut off Jambhäsura's head with his thunderbolt. When Närada
Muni learned that Jambhäsura had been killed, he informed Jambhäsura's
relatives Namuci, Bala and Päka, who then went to the battlefield and
attacked the demigods. Indra, King of heaven, severed the heads of Bala and
Päka and released the weapon known as kuliça, the thunderbolt, against
Namuci's shoulder. The thunderbolt, however, returned unsuccessful, and thus
Indra became morose. At that time, an unseen voice came from the sky. The
voice declared, "A dry or wet weapon cannot kill Namuci." Hearing this voice,
Indra began to think of how Namuci could be killed. He then thought of foam,
which is neither moist nor dry. Using a weapon of foam, he was able to kill
Namuci. Thus Indra and the other demigods killed many demons. Then, at the
request of Lord Brahmä, Närada went to the demigods and forbade them to kill
the demons any longer. All the demigods then returned to their abodes.
Following the instructions of Närada, whatever demons remained alive on the
battlefield took Bali Mahäräja to Asta Mountain. There, by the touch of
Çukräcärya's hand, Bali Mahäräja regained his senses and consciousness, and
those demons whose heads and bodies had not been completely lost were
brought back to life by the mystic power of Çukräcärya.
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
463
AQaae Saura" Pa[TYauPal/BDaceTaSa"
ParSYa Pau&Sa" ParYaaNauk-MPaYaa )
Jaganu>a*RXa& Xa§-SaMaqr<aadYa‚
STaa&STaaNr<ae YaEri>aSa&hTaa" Paura )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
atho suräù pratyupalabdha-cetasaù
parasya puàsaù parayänukampayä
jaghnur bhåçaà çakra-saméraëädayas
täàs tän raëe yair abhisaàhatäù purä
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atho—thereafter; suräù—all the
demigods; pratyupalabdha-cetasaù—being enlivened again by revival of their
consciousness; parasya—of the Supreme; puàsaù—of the Personality of
Godhead; parayä—supreme; anukampayä—by the mercy; jaghnuù—began to
beat; bhåçam—again and again; çakra—Indra; saméraëa—Väyu; ädayaù—and
others; tän tän—to those demons; raëe—in the fight; yaiù—by whom;
abhisaàhatäù—they were beaten; purä—before.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thereafter, by the supreme grace of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Çré Hari, all the demigods, headed by Indra and Väyu,
were brought back to life. Being enlivened, the demigods began severely beating
the very same demons who had defeated them before.
TEXT 2
vEraecNaaYa Sa&rBDaae >aGavaNPaak-XaaSaNa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
464
odYaC^d( Yada vJa]& Pa[Jaa ha heiTa cu§u-éu" )) 2 ))
vairocanäya saàrabdho
bhagavän päka-çäsanaù
udayacchad yadä vajraà
prajä hä heti cukruçuù
SYNONYMS
vairocanäya—unto Bali Mahäräja (just to kill him); saàrabdhaù—being very
angry; bhagavän—the most powerful; päka-çäsanaù—Indra; udayacchat—took
in his hand; yadä—at which time; vajram—the thunderbolt; prajäù—all the
demons; hä hä—alas, alas; iti—thus; cukruçuù—began to resound.
TRANSLATION
When the most powerful Indra became angry and took his thunderbolt in
hand to kill Mahäräja Bali, the demons began lamenting, "Alas, alas!"
TEXT 3
vJa]Paai<aSTaMaahed& iTarSk*-TYa Paur"iSQaTaMa( )
MaNaiSvNa& SauSaMPaà& ivcrNTa& MahaMa*Dae )) 3 ))
vajra-päëis tam ähedaà
tiraskåtya puraù-sthitam
manasvinaà susampannaà
vicarantaà mahä-mådhe
SYNONYMS
vajra-päëiù—Indra, who always carries in his hand the thunderbolt;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
465
tam—unto Bali Mahäräja; äha—addressed; idam—in this way;
tiraskåtya—chastising him; puraù-sthitam—standing before him;
manasvinam—very sober and tolerant; su-sampannam—well equipped with
paraphernalia for fighting; vicarantam—moving; mahä-mådhe—on the great
battlefield.
TRANSLATION
Sober and tolerant and well equipped with paraphernalia for fighting, Bali
Mahäräja moved before Indra on the great battlefield. King Indra, who always
carries the thunderbolt in his hand, rebuked Bali Mahäräja as follows.
TEXT 4
Na$=vNMaU! MaaYaai>aMaaRYaeXaaNa( Naae iJaGaqziSa )
iJaTva bal/aNa( iNabÖa+aaNa( Na$=ae hriTa TaÖNaMa( )) 4 ))
naöavan müòha mäyäbhir
mäyeçän no jigéñasi
jitvä bälän nibaddhäkñän
naöo harati tad-dhanam
SYNONYMS
naöa-vat—like a cheater or rogue; müòha—you rascal; mäyäbhiù—by
exhibiting illusions; mäyä-éçän—unto the demigods, who can control all such
illusory manifestations; naù—unto us; jigéñasi—you are trying to become
victorious; jitvä—conquering; bälän—small children; nibaddha-akñän—by
binding the eyes; naöaù—a cheater; harati—takes away; tat-dhanam—the
property in the possession of a child.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
466
TRANSLATION
Indra said: O rascal, as a cheater sometimes binds the eyes of a child and
takes away his possessions, you are trying to defeat us by displaying some
mystic power, although you know that we are the masters of all such mystic
powers.
TEXT 5
Aaåå+aiNTa MaaYaai>aåiTSaSa*PSaiNTa Yae idvMa( )
TaaNdSYaUiNvDauNaaeMYajaNPaUvRSMaaÀ PadadDa" )) 5 ))
ärurukñanti mäyäbhir
utsisåpsanti ye divam
tän dasyün vidhunomy ajïän
pürvasmäc ca padäd adhaù
SYNONYMS
ärurukñanti—persons who desire to come to the upper planetary systems;
mäyäbhiù—by so-called mystic power or material advancement of science;
utsisåpsanti—or want to be liberated by such false attempts; ye—such persons
who; divam—the higher planetary system known as Svargaloka; tän—such
rogues and ruffians; dasyün—such thieves; vidhunomi—I force to go down;
ajïän—rascals; pürvasmät—previous; ca—also; padät—from the position;
adhaù—downward.
TRANSLATION
Those fools and rascals who want to ascend to the upper planetary system by
mystic power or mechanical means, or who endeavor to cross even the upper
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
467
planets and achieve the spiritual world or liberation, I cause to be sent to the
lowest region of the universe.
PURPORT
There are undoubtedly different planetary systems for different persons. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä (14.18), ürdhvaà gacchanti sattva-sthäù: persons in the
mode of goodness can go to the upper planets. Those in the modes of darkness
and passion, however, are not allowed to enter the higher planets. The word
divam refers to the higher planetary system known as Svargaloka. Indra, King
of the higher planetary system, has the power to push down any conditioned
soul attempting to go from the lower to the higher planets without proper
qualifications. The modern attempt to go to the moon is also an attempt by
inferior men to go to Svargaloka by artificial, mechanical means. This attempt
cannot be successful. From this statement of Indra it appears that anyone
attempting to go to the higher planetary systems by mechanical means, which
are here called mäyä, is condemned to go the hellish planets in the lower
portion of the universe. To go to the higher planetary system, one needs
sufficient good qualities. A sinful person situated in the mode of ignorance and
addicted to drinking, meat-eating and illicit sex will never enter the higher
planets by mechanical means.
TEXT 6
Saae_h& duMaaRiYaNaSTae_Û vJa]e<a XaTaPavR<aa )
iXarae hirZYae MaNdaTMaNga$=Sv jaiTai>a" Sah )) 6 ))
so 'haà durmäyinas te 'dya
vajreëa çata-parvaëä
çiro hariñye mandätman
ghaöasva jïätibhiù saha
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
468
SYNONYMS
saù—I am the same powerful person; aham—I; durmäyinaù—of you, who can
perform so much jugglery with illusions; te—of you; adya—today; vajreëa—by
the thunderbolt; çata-parvaëä—which has hundreds of sharp edges; çiraù—the
head; hariñye—I shall separate; manda-ätman—O you with a poor fund of
knowledge; ghaöasva—just try to exist on this battlefield; jïätibhiù saha—with
your relatives and assistants.
TRANSLATION
Today, with my thunderbolt, which has hundreds of sharp edges, I, the same
powerful person, shall sever your head from your body. Although you can
produce so much jugglery through illusion, you are endowed with a poor fund of
knowledge. Now, try to exist on this battlefield with your relatives and friends.
TEXT 7
é[qbil/åvac
Sa°aMae vTaRMaaNaaNaa& k-al/caeidTak-MaR<aaMa( )
k-IiTaRJaRYaae_JaYaae Ma*TYau" SaveRza& SYaurNau§-MaaTa( )) 7 ))
çré-balir uväca
saìgräme vartamänänäà
käla-codita-karmaëäm
kértir jayo 'jayo måtyuù
sarveñäà syur anukramät
SYNONYMS
çré-baliù uväca—Bali Mahäräja said; saìgräme—in the battlefield;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
469
vartamänänäm—of all persons present here; käla-codita—influenced by the
course of time; karmaëäm—for persons engaged in fighting or any other
activities; kértiù—reputation; jayaù—victory; ajayaù—defeat; måtyuù—death;
sarveñäm—of all of them; syuù—must be done; anukramät—one after another.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja replied: All those present on this battlefield are certainly
under the influence of eternal time, and according to their prescribed activities,
they are destined to receive fame, victory, defeat and death, one after another.
PURPORT
If one is victorious on the battlefield, he becomes famous; and if one is not
victorious but is defeated, he may die. Both victory and defeat are possible,
whether on such a battlefield as this or on the battlefield of the struggle for
existence. Everything takes place according to the laws of nature (prakåteù
kriyamäëäni guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù [Bg. 3.27]). Since everyone, without
exception, is subject to the modes of material nature, whether one is victorious
or defeated he is not independent, but is under the control of material nature.
Bali Mahäräja, therefore, was very sensible. He knew that the fighting was
arranged by eternal time and that under time's influence one must accept the
results of one's own activities. Therefore even though Indra threatened that he
would now kill Bali Mahäräja by releasing the thunderbolt, Bali Mahäräja was
not at all afraid. This is the spirit of a kñatriya: yuddhe cäpy apaläyanam (Bg.
18.43). A kñatriya must be tolerant in all circumstances, especially on the
battlefield. Thus Bali Mahäräja asserted that he was not at all afraid of death,
although he was threatened by such a great personality as the King of heaven.
TEXT 8
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
470
Taidd& k-al/rXaNa& JaGaTa( PaXYaiNTa SaUrYa" )
Na ôZYaiNTa Na XaaeciNTa Ta}a YaUYaMaPai<@Taa" )) 8 ))
tad idaà käla-raçanaà
jagat paçyanti sürayaù
na håñyanti na çocanti
tatra yüyam apaëòitäù
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; idam—this whole material world; käla-raçanam—is moving
because of time eternal; jagat—moving forward (this whole universe);
paçyanti—observe; sürayaù—those who are intelligent by admission of the
truth; na—not; håñyanti—become jubilant; na—nor; çocanti—lament;
tatra—in such; yüyam—all of you demigods; apaëòitäù—not very learned
(having forgotten that you are working under eternal time).
TRANSLATION
Seeing the movements of time, those who are cognizant of the real truth
neither rejoice nor lament for different circumstances. Therefore, because you
are jubilant due to your victory, you should be considered not very learned.
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja knew that Indra, King of heaven, was extremely powerful,
certainly more powerful than he himself. Nonetheless, Bali Mahäräja
challenged Indra by saying that Indra was not a very learned person. In
Bhagavad-gétä (2.11) Kåñëa rebuked Arjuna by saying:
açocyän anvaçocas tvaà
prajïä-vädäàç ca bhäñase
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
471
gatäsün agatäsüàç ca
nänuçocanti paëòitäù
"While speaking learned words, you are mourning for what is not worthy of
grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living nor the dead." Thus as
Kåñëa challenged Arjuna by saying that he was not a paëòita, or a learned
person, Bali Mahäräja also challenged King Indra and his associates. In this
material world, everything happens under the influence of time.
Consequently, for a learned person who sees how things are taking place, there
is no question of being sorry or happy because of the waves of material nature.
After all, since we are being carried away by these waves, what is the meaning
of being jubilant or morose? One who is fully conversant with the laws of
nature is never jubilant or morose because of nature's activities. In
Bhagavad-gétä (2.14), Kåñëa advises that one be tolerant: täàs titikñasva
bhärata. Following this advice of Kåñëa's, one should not be morose or unhappy
because of circumstantial changes. This is the symptom of a devotee. A
devotee carries out his duty in Kåñëa consciousness and is never unhappy in
awkward circumstances. He has full faith that in such circumstances, Kåñëa
protects His devotee. Therefore a devotee never deviates from his prescribed
duty of devotional service. The material qualities of jubilation and moroseness
are present even in the demigods, who are very highly situated in the upper
planetary system. Therefore, when one is undisturbed by the so-called
favorable and unfavorable circumstances of this material world, he should be
understood to be brahma-bhüta [SB 4.30.20], or self-realized. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (18.54), brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä na çocati na käìkñati: "One
who is transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman and
becomes fully joyful." When one is undisturbed by material circumstances, he
should be understood to be on the transcendental stage, above the reactions of
the three modes of material nature.
TEXT 9
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
472
Na vYa& MaNYaMaaNaaNaaMaaTMaaNa& Ta}a SaaDaNaMa( )
iGarae v" SaaDauXaaeCYaaNaa& Ga*õqMaae MaMaRTaa@Naa" )) 9 ))
na vayaà manyamänänäm
ätmänaà tatra sädhanam
giro vaù sädhu-çocyänäà
gåhëémo marma-täòanäù
SYNONYMS
na—not; vayam—we; manyamänänäm—who are considering; ätmänam—the
self; tatra—in victory or defeat; sädhanam—the cause; giraù—the words;
vaù—of you; sädhu-çocyänäm—who are to be pitied by the saintly persons;
gåhëémaù—accept; marma-täòanäù—which afflict the heart.
TRANSLATION
You demigods think that your own selves are the cause of your attaining
fame and victory. Because of your ignorance, saintly persons feel sorry for you.
Therefore, although your words afflict the heart, we do not accept them.
TEXT 10
é[qéuk- ovac
wTYaai+aPYa iv>au& vqrae NaaracEvsrMadRNa" )
Aak-<aRPaU<aOErhNada+aePaErah Ta& PauNa" )) 10 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ity äkñipya vibhuà véro
näräcair véra-mardanaù
äkarëa-pürëairahanad
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
473
äkñepair äha taà punaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; äkñipya—chastising;
vibhum—unto King Indra; véraù—the valiant Bali Mahäräja; näräcaiù—by the
arrows named näräcas; véra-mardanaù—Bali Mahäräja, who could subdue even
great heros; äkarëa-pürëaiù—drawn up to his ear; ahanat—attacked;
äkñepaiù—by words of chastisement; äha—said; tam—unto him;
punaù—again.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After thus rebuking Indra, King of heaven, with
sharp words, Bali Mahäräja, who could subdue any other hero, drew back to his
ear the arrows known as näräcas and attacked Indra with these arrows. Then he
again chastised Indra with strong words.
TEXT 11
Wv& iNarak*-Taae devae vEir<aa TaQYavaidNaa )
NaaMa*ZYaTa( TadiDa+aePa& Taae}aahTa wv iÜPa" )) 11 ))
evaà niräkåto devo
vairiëä tathya-vädinä
nämåñyat tad-adhikñepaà
toträhata iva dvipaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; niräkåtaù—being defeated; devaù—King Indra; vairiëä—by his
enemy; tathya-vädinä—who was competent to speak the truth; na—not;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
474
amåñyat—lamented; tat—of him (Bali); adhikñepam—the chastisement;
totra—by the scepter or rod; ähataù—being beaten; iva—just like; dvipaù—an
elephant.
TRANSLATION
Since Mahäräja Bali's rebukes were truthful, King Indra did not at all
become sorry, just as an elephant beaten by its driver's rod does not become
agitated.
TEXT 12
Pa[ahrTa( ku-il/Xa& TaSMaa AMaaega& ParMadRNa" )
SaYaaNaae NYaPaTad( >aUMaaE i^àPa+a wvacl/" )) 12 ))
präharat kuliçaà tasmä
amoghaà para-mardanaù
sayäno nyapatad bhümau
chinna-pakña iväcalaù
SYNONYMS
präharat—inflicted; kuliçam—thunderbolt scepter; tasmai—unto him (Bali
Mahäräja); amogham—infallible; para-mardanaù—Indra, who is expert in
defeating the enemy; sa-yänaù—with his airplane; nyapatat—fell down;
bhümau—on the ground; chinna-pakñaù—whose wings have been taken away;
iva—like; acalaù—a mountain.
TRANSLATION
When Indra, the defeater of enemies, released his infallible thunderbolt
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
475
scepter at Bali Mahäräja with a desire to kill him, Bali Mahäräja indeed fell to
the ground with his airplane, like a mountain with its wings cut off.
PURPORT
In many descriptions in Vedic literature it is found that mountains also fly
in the sky with wings. When such mountains are dead, they fall to the ground,
where they stay as very large dead bodies.
TEXT 13
Sa%aYa& PaiTaTa& d*îa JaM>aae bil/Sa%" SauôTa( )
A>YaYaaTa( SaaEôd& Sa:YauhRTaSYaaiPa SaMaacrNa( )) 13 ))
sakhäyaà patitaà dåñövä
jambho bali-sakhaù suhåt
abhyayät sauhådaà sakhyur
hatasyäpi samäcaran
SYNONYMS
sakhäyam—his intimate friend; patitam—having fallen; dåñövä—after seeing;
jambhaù—the demon Jambha; bali-sakhaù—a very intimate friend of Bali
Mahäräja; suhåt—and constant well-wisher; abhyayät—appeared on the scene;
sauhådam—very compassionate friendship; sakhyuù—of his friend;
hatasya—who was injured and fallen; api—although; samäcaran—just to
perform friendly duties.
TRANSLATION
When the demon Jambhäsura saw that his friend Bali had fallen, he appeared
before Indra, the enemy, just to serve Bali Mahäräja with friendly behavior.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
476
TEXT 14
Sa iSa&hvah AaSaaÛ GadaMauÛMYa r&hSaa )
Ja}aavTaa@YaC^§&- GaJa& c SauMahabl/" )) 14 ))
sa siàha-väha äsädya
gadäm udyamya raàhasä
jaträv atäòayac chakraà
gajaà ca sumahä-balaù
SYNONYMS
saù—Jambhäsura; siàha-vähaù—being carried by a lion; äsädya—coming
before King Indra; gadäm—his club; udyamya—taking up; raàhasä—with
great force; jatrau—on the base of the neck; atäòayat—hit; çakram—Indra;
gajam ca—as well as his elephant; su-mahä-balaù—the greatly powerful
Jambhäsura.
TRANSLATION
The greatly powerful Jambhäsura, carried by a lion, approached Indra and
forcefully struck him on the shoulder with his club. He also struck Indra's
elephant.
TEXT 15
GadaPa[harVYaiQaTaae >a*Xa& ivûil/Taae GaJa" )
JaaNau>Yaa& Dar<aq& SPa*îa k-XMal&/ ParMa& YaYaaE )) 15 ))
gadä-prahära-vyathito
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
477
bhåçaà vihvalito gajaù
jänubhyäà dharaëéà spåñövä
kaçmalaà paramaà yayau
SYNONYMS
gadä-prahära-vyathitaù—being aggrieved because of the blow from
Jambhäsura's club; bhåçam—very much; vihvalitaù—upset; gajaù—the
elephant; jänubhyäm—with its two knees; dharaëém—the earth;
spåñövä—touching; kaçmalam—unconsciousness; paramam—ultimate;
yayau—entered.
TRANSLATION
Being beaten by Jambhäsura's club, Indra's elephant was confused and
aggrieved. Thus it touched its knees to the ground and fell unconscious.
TEXT 16
TaTaae rQaae MaaTail/Naa hiri>adRXaXaTaEv*RTa" )
AaNaqTaae iÜPaMauTSa*JYa rQaMaaååhe iv>au" )) 16 ))
tato ratho mätalinä
haribhir daça-çatair våtaù
änéto dvipam utsåjya
ratham äruruhe vibhuù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; rathaù—chariot; mätalinä—by his chariot driver named
Mätali; haribhiù—with horses; daça-çataiù—by ten times one hundred (one
thousand); våtaù—yoked; änétaù—being brought in; dvipam—the elephant;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
478
utsåjya—keeping aside; ratham—the chariot; äruruhe—got up; vibhuù—the
great Indra.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Mätali, Indra's chariot driver, brought Indra's chariot, which
was drawn by one thousand horses. Indra then left his elephant and got onto
the chariot.
TEXT 17
TaSYa TaTa( PaUJaYaNa( k-MaR YaNTaudaRNavSataMa" )
éUle/Na Jvl/Taa Ta& Tau SMaYaMaaNaae_hNaNMa*Dae )) 17 ))
tasya tat püjayan karma
yantur dänava-sattamaù
çülena jvalatä taà tu
smayamäno 'hanan mådhe
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Mätali; tat—that service (bringing the chariot before Indra);
püjayan—appreciating; karma—such service to the master; yantuù—of the
chariot driver; dänava-sat-tamaù—the best of the demons, namely Jambhäsura;
çülena—by his trident; jvalatä—which was blazing fire; tam—Mätali;
tu—indeed; smayamänaù—smiling; ahanat—struck; mådhe—in the battle.
TRANSLATION
Appreciating Mätali's service, Jambhäsura, the best of the demons, smiled.
Nonetheless, he struck Mätali in the battle with a trident of blazing fire.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
479
TEXT 18
Saehe åJa& SauduMaRza| SatvMaal/MBYa MaaTail/" )
wNd]ae JaM>aSYa Sax(k]u-Öae vJa]e<aaPaahriC^r" )) 18 ))
sehe rujaà sudurmarñäà
sattvam älambya mätaliù
indro jambhasya saìkruddho
vajreëäpäharac chiraù
SYNONYMS
sehe—tolerated; rujam—the pain; su-durmarñäm—intolerable;
sattvam—patience; älambya—taking shelter of; mätaliù—the charioteer
Mätali; indraù—King Indra; jambhasya—of the great demon Jambha;
saìkruddhaù—being very angry at him; vajreëa—with his thunderbolt;
apäharat—separated; çiraù—the head.
TRANSLATION
Although the pain was extremely severe, Mätali tolerated it with great
patience. Indra, however, became extremely angry at Jambhäsura. He struck
Jambhäsura with his thunderbolt and thus severed his head from his body.
TEXT 19
JaM>a& é[uTva hTa& TaSYa jaTaYaae Naardad*ze" )
NaMauicê bl/" Paak-STa}aaPaeTauSTvraiNvTaa" )) 19 ))
jambhaà çrutvä hataà tasya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
480
jïätayo näradäd åñeù
namuciç ca balaù päkas
taträpetus tvaränvitäù
SYNONYMS
jambham—Jambhäsura; çrutvä—after hearing; hatam—had been killed;
tasya—his; jïätayaù—friends and relatives; näradät—from the source Närada;
åñeù—from the great saint; namuciù—the demon Namuci; ca—also;
balaù—the demon Bala; päkaù—the demon Päka; tatra—there;
äpetuù—immediately arrived; tvarä-anvitäù—with great haste.
TRANSLATION
When Närada Åñi informed Jambhäsura's friends and relatives that
Jambhäsura had been killed, the three demons named Namuci, Bala and Päka
arrived on the battlefield in great haste.
TEXT 20
vcaei>a" PaåzEirNd]MadRYaNTaae_SYa MaMaRSau )
XarErvaik-rNa( Maegaa Daarai>airv PavRTaMa( )) 20 ))
vacobhiù paruñair indram
ardayanto 'sya marmasu
çarair aväkiran meghä
dhäräbhir iva parvatam
SYNONYMS
vacobhiù—with harsh words; paruñaiù—very rough and cruel; indram—King
Indra; ardayantaù—chastising, piercing; asya—of Indra; marmasu—in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
481
heart, etc.; çaraiù—with arrows; aväkiran—covered all around;
meghäù—clouds; dhäräbhiù—with showers of rain; iva—just as; parvatam—a
mountain.
TRANSLATION
Rebuking Indra with harsh, cruel words that were piercing to the heart,
these demons showered him with arrows, just as torrents of rain wash a great
mountain.
TEXT 21
hrqNdXaXaTaaNYaaJaaE hYaRìSYa bl/" XarE" )
TaaviÙrdRYaaMaaSa YauGaPaçgauhSTavaNa( )) 21 ))
harén daça-çatäny äjau
haryaçvasya balaù çaraiù
tävadbhir ardayäm äsa
yugapal laghu-hastavän
SYNONYMS
harén—horses; daça-çatäni—ten times one hundred (one thousand); äjau—on
the battlefield; haryaçvasya—of King Indra; balaù—the demon Bala;
çaraiù—with arrows; tävadbhiù—with so many; ardayäm äsa—put into
tribulation; yugapat—simultaneously; laghu-hastavän—with quick handling.
TRANSLATION
Quickly handling the situation on the battlefield, the demon Bala put all of
Indra's one thousand horses into tribulation by simultaneously piercing them all
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
482
with an equal number of arrows.
TEXT 22
XaTaa>Yaa& MaaTail&/ Paak-ae rQa& SaavYav& Pa*Qak(- )
Sak*-TSaNDaaNaMaae+ae<a Tadd(>auTaMa>aUd( r<ae )) 22 ))
çatäbhyäà mätalià päko
rathaà sävayavaà påthak
sakåt sandhäna-mokñeëa
tad adbhutam abhüd raëe
SYNONYMS
çatäbhyäm—with two hundred arrows; mätalim—unto the chariot driver
Mätali; päkaù—the demon named Päka; ratham—the chariot;
sa-avayavam—with all paraphernalia; påthak—separately; sakåt—once, at one
time; sandhäna—by yoking the arrows to the bow; mokñeëa—and releasing;
tat—such an action; adbhutam—wonderful; abhüt—so became; raëe—on the
battlefield.
TRANSLATION
Päka, another demon, attacked both the chariot, with all its paraphernalia,
and the chariot driver, Mätali, by fitting two hundred arrows to his bow and
releasing them all simultaneously. This was indeed a wonderful act on the
battlefield.
TEXT 23
NaMauic" PaÄdXai>a" Sv<aRPau«EMaRhezui>a" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
483
AahTYa VYaNadTSa&:Yae SaTaaeYa wv TaaeYad" )) 23 ))
namuciù païca-daçabhiù
svarëa-puìkhair maheñubhiù
ähatya vyanadat saìkhye
satoya iva toyadaù
SYNONYMS
namuciù—the demon named Namuci; païca-daçabhiù—with fifteen;
svarëa-puìkhaiù—with golden feathers attached; mahä-iñubhiù—very
powerful arrows; ähatya—piercing; vyanadat—resounded; saìkhye—on the
battlefield; sa-toyaù—bearing water; iva—like; toya-daù—a cloud that delivers
rain.
TRANSLATION
Then Namuci, another demon, attacked Indra and injured him with fifteen
very powerful golden-feathered arrows, which roared like a cloud full of water.
TEXT 24
SavRTa" XarkU-$e=Na Xa§&- SarQaSaariQaMa( )
^adYaaMaaSaurSaura" Pa[av*$(=SaUYaRiMavaMbuda" )) 24 ))
sarvataù çara-küöena
çakraà saratha-särathim
chädayäm äsur asuräù
prävåö-süryam ivämbudäù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
484
sarvataù—all around; çara-küöena—by a dense shower of arrows;
çakram—Indra; sa-ratha—with his chariot; särathim—and with his chariot
driver; chädayäm äsuù—covered; asuräù—all the demons; prävåö—in the rainy
season; süryam—the sun; iva—like; ambu-däù—clouds.
TRANSLATION
Other demons covered Indra, along with his chariot and chariot driver, with
incessant showers of arrows, just as clouds cover the sun in the rainy season.
TEXT 25
Al/+aYaNTaSTaMaTaqv ivûl/a
ivcu§u-éudeRvGa<aa" SahaNauGaa" )
ANaaYak-a" Xa}auble/Na iNaiJaRTaa
vi<aKPaQaa i>aàNavae YaQaa<aRve )) 25 ))
alakñayantas tam atéva vihvalä
vicukruçur deva-gaëäù sahänugäù
anäyakäù çatru-balena nirjitä
vaëik-pathä bhinna-navo yathärëave
SYNONYMS
alakñayantaù—being unable to see; tam—King Indra; atéva—fiercely;
vihvaläù—bewildered; vicukruçuù—began to lament; deva-gaëäù—all the
demigods; saha-anugäù—with their followers; anäyakäù—without any captain
or leader; çatru-balena—by the superior power of their enemies;
nirjitäù—oppressed severely; vaëik-pathäù—traders; bhinna-navaù—whose
ship is wrecked; yathä arëave—as in the middle of the ocean.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
485
TRANSLATION
The demigods, being severely oppressed by their enemies and being unable to
see Indra on the battlefield, were very anxious. Having no captain or leader,
they began lamenting like traders in a wrecked vessel in the midst of the ocean.
PURPORT
From this statement it appears that in the upper planetary system there is
shipping and that traders there engage in navigation as their occupational
duty. Sometimes, as on this planet, these traders are shipwrecked in the middle
of the ocean. It appears that even in the upper planetary system, such
calamities occasionally take place. The upper planetary system in the creation
of the Lord is certainly not vacant or devoid of living entities. From
Çrémad-Bhägavatam we understand that every planet is full of living entities,
just as earth is. There is no reason to accept that on other planetary systems
there are no living beings.
TEXT 26
TaTaSTaurazai@zubÖPaÅrad(
iviNaGaRTa" SaaìrQaßJaaGa]<aq" )
b>aaE idXa" %& Pa*iQavq& c raecYaNa(
SvTaeJaSaa SaUYaR wv +aPaaTYaYae )) 26 ))
tatas turäñäò iñu-baddha-païjaräd
vinirgataù säçva-ratha-dhvajägraëéù
babhau diçaù khaà påthivéà ca rocayan
sva-tejasä sürya iva kñapätyaye
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
486
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; turäñäö—another name of Indra; iñu-baddha-païjarät—from
the cage of the network of arrows; vinirgataù—being released; sa—with;
açva—horses; ratha—chariot; dhvaja—flag; agraëéù—and chariot driver;
babhau—became; diçaù—all directions; kham—the sky; påthivém—the earth;
ca—and; rocayan—pleasing everywhere; sva-tejasä—by his personal
effulgence; süryaù—the sun; iva—like; kñapä-atyaye—at the end of night.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Indra released himself from the cage of the network of arrows.
Appearing with his chariot, flag, horses and chariot driver and thus pleasing the
sky, the earth and all directions, he shone effulgently like the sun at the end of
night. Indra was bright and beautiful in the vision of everyone.
TEXT 27
iNarq+Ya Pa*TaNaa& dev" ParEr>YaidRTaa& r<ae )
odYaC^d( irPau& hNTau& vJa]& vJa]Darae åza )) 27 ))
nirékñya påtanäà devaù
parair abhyarditäà raëe
udayacchad ripuà hantuà
vajraà vajra-dharo ruñä
SYNONYMS
nirékñya—after observing; påtanäm—his own soldiers; devaù—the demigod
Indra; paraiù—by the enemies; abhyarditäm—put into great difficulties or
oppressed; raëe—in the battlefield; udayacchat—took up; ripum—the enemies;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
487
hantum—to kill; vajram—the thunderbolt; vajra-dharaù—the carrier of the
thunderbolt; ruñä—in great anger.
TRANSLATION
When Indra, who is known as Vajra-dhara, the carrier of the thunderbolt,
saw his own soldiers so oppressed by the enemies on the battlefield, he became
very angry. Thus he took up his thunderbolt to kill the enemies.
TEXT 28
Sa TaeNaEvaíDaare<a iXarSaq bl/Paak-Yaae" )
jaTaqNaa& PaXYaTaa& raJaÅhar JaNaYaN>aYaMa( )) 28 ))
sa tenaiväñöa-dhäreëa
çirasé bala-päkayoù
jïäténäà paçyatäà räjaï
jahära janayan bhayam
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Indra); tena—by that; eva—indeed; añöa-dhäreëa—by the
thunderbolt; çirasé—the two heads; bala-päkayoù—of the two demons known
as Bala and Päka; jïäténäm paçyatäm—while their relatives and soldiers were
watching; räjan—O King; jahära—(Indra) cut off; janayan—creating;
bhayam—fear (among them).
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, King Indra used his thunderbolt to cut off the heads of both
Bala and Päka in the presence of all their relatives and followers. In this way he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
488
created a very fearful atmosphere on the battlefield.
TEXT 29
NaMauicSTaÜDa& d*îa Xaaek-aMazRåzaiNvTa" )
iJagaa&SauirNd]& Na*PaTae ck-ar ParMaaeÛMaMa( )) 29 ))
namucis tad-vadhaà dåñövä
çokämarña-ruñänvitaù
jighäàsur indraà nåpate
cakära paramodyamam
SYNONYMS
namuciù—the demon Namuci; tat—of those two demons; vadham—the
massacre; dåñövä—after seeing; çoka-amarña—lamentation and grief;
ruñä-anvitaù—being very angry at this; jighäàsuù—wanted to kill;
indram—King Indra; nå-pate—O Mahäräja Parékñit; cakära—made;
parama—a great; udyamam—endeavor.
TRANSLATION
O King, when Namuci, another demon, saw the killing of both Bala and
Päka, he was full of grief and lamentation. Thus he angrily made a great
attempt to kill Indra.
TEXT 30
AXMaSaarMaYa& éUl&/ ga<$=avÖeMa>aUz<aMa( )
Pa[Ga*ùa>Yad]vTa( §u-Öae hTaae_SaqiTa ivTaJaRYaNa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
489
Pa[aih<aaed( devraJaaYa iNaNadNa( Ma*Garai@v )) 30 ))
açmasäramayaà çülaà
ghaëöävad dhema-bhüñaëam
pragåhyäbhyadravat kruddho
hato 'séti vitarjayan
prähiëod deva-räjäya
ninadan måga-räò iva
SYNONYMS
açmasära-mayam—made of steel; çülam—a spear; ghaëöä-vat—bound with
bells; hema-bhüñaëam—decorated with ornaments of gold; pragåhya—taking in
his hand; abhyadravat—forcefully went; kruddhaù—in an angry mood; hataù
asi iti—now you are killed; vitarjayan—roaring like that; prähiëot—struck;
deva-räjäya—unto King Indra; ninadan—resounding; måga-räö—a lion;
iva—like.
TRANSLATION
Being angry and roaring like a lion, the demon Namuci took up a steel spear,
which was bound with bells and decorated with ornaments of gold. He loudly
cried, "Now you are killed!" Thus coming before Indra to kill him, Namuci
released his weapon.
TEXT 31
TadaPaTad( GaGaNaTale/ MahaJav&
iviciC^de hirirzui>a" SahóDaa )
TaMaahNaà*Pa ku-il/XaeNa k-NDare
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
490
åzaiNvTaiñdXaPaiTa" iXarae hrNa( )) 31 ))
tadäpatad gagana-tale mahä-javaà
vicicchide harir iñubhiù sahasradhä
tam ähanan nåpa kuliçena kandhare
ruñänvitas tridaça-patiù çiro haran
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; apatat—falling like a meteor; gagana-tale—beneath the
sky or on the ground; mahä-javam—extremely powerful; vicicchide—cut to
pieces; hariù—Indra; iñubhiù—by his arrows; sahasradhä—into thousands of
pieces; tam—that Namuci; ähanat—struck; nåpa—O King; kuliçena—with his
thunderbolt; kandhare—on the shoulder; ruñä-anvitaù—being very angry;
tridaça-patiù—Indra, the King of the demigods; çiraù—the head; haran—to
separate.
TRANSLATION
O King, when Indra, King of heaven, saw this very powerful spear falling
toward the ground like a blazing meteor, he immediately cut it to pieces with his
arrows. Then, being very angry, he struck Namuci's shoulder with his
thunderbolt to cut off Namuci's head.
TEXT 32
Na TaSYa ih TvcMaiPa vJa] OiJaRTaae
ib>aed Ya" SaurPaiTaNaaEJaSaeirTa" )
Tadd(>auTa& ParMaiTavqYaRv*}ai>aTa(
iTarSk*-Taae NaMauiciXaraeDarTvca )) 32 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
491
na tasya hi tvacam api vajra ürjito
bibheda yaù sura-patinaujaseritaù
tad adbhutaà param ativérya-våtra-bhit
tiraskåto namuci-çirodhara-tvacä
SYNONYMS
na—not; tasya—of him (Namuci); hi—indeed; tvacam api—even the skin;
vajraù—the thunderbolt; ürjitaù—very powerful; bibheda—could pierce;
yaù—the weapon which; sura-patinä—by the king of the demigods;
ojasä—very forcefully; éritaù—had been released; tat—therefore; adbhutam
param—it was extraordinarily wonderful; ativérya-våtra-bhit—so powerful that
it could pierce the body of the very powerful Våträsura; tiraskåtaù—(now in
the future) which had been repelled; namuci-çirodhara-tvacä—by the skin of
Namuci's neck.
TRANSLATION
Although King Indra hurled his thunderbolt at Namuci with great force, it
could not even pierce his skin. It is very wonderful that the famed thunderbolt
that had pierced the body of Våträsura could not even slightly injure the skin of
Namuci's neck.
TEXT 33
TaSMaaidNd]ae_ib>aeC^}aaevRJa]" Pa[iTahTaae YaTa" )
ik-iMad& dEvYaaeGaeNa >aUTa& l/aek-ivMaaehNaMa( )) 33 ))
tasmäd indro 'bibhec chatror
vajraù pratihato yataù
kim idaà daiva-yogena
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
492
bhütaà loka-vimohanam
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; indraù—the King of heaven; abibhet—became very fearful;
çatroù—from the enemy (Namuci); vajraù—the thunderbolt; pratihataù—was
unable to hit and returned; yataù—because; kim idam—what is this;
daiva-yogena—by some superior force; bhütam—it has happened;
loka-vimohanam—so wonderful to the people in general.
TRANSLATION
When Indra saw the thunderbolt return from the enemy, he was very much
afraid. He began to wonder whether this had happened because of some
miraculous superior power.
PURPORT
Indra's thunderbolt is invincible, and therefore when Indra saw that it had
returned without doing any injury to Namuci, he was certainly very much
afraid.
TEXT 34
YaeNa Mae PaUvRMad]q<aa& Pa+aC^ed" Pa[JaaTYaYae )
k*-Taae iNaivXaTaa& >aarE" PaTaT}aE" PaTaTaa& >auiv )) 34 ))
yena me pürvam adréëäà
pakña-cchedaù prajätyaye
kåto niviçatäà bhäraiù
patattraiù patatäà bhuvi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
493
SYNONYMS
yena—by the same thunderbolt; me—by me; pürvam—formerly; adréëäm—of
the mountains; pakña-cchedaù—the cutting of the wings; prajä-atyaye—when
there was killing of the people in general; kåtaù—was done; niviçatäm—of
those mountains which entered; bhäraiù—by the great weight; patattraiù—by
wings; patatäm—falling; bhuvi—on the ground.
TRANSLATION
Indra thought: Formerly, when many mountains flying in the sky with
wings would fall to the ground and kill people, I cut their wings with this same
thunderbolt.
TEXT 35
TaPa"SaarMaYa& Tvaí\& v*}aae YaeNa ivPaai$=Ta" )
ANYae caiPa bl/aePaeTaa" SavaRñEr+aTaTvc" )) 35 ))
tapaù-säramayaà tväñöraà
våtro yena vipäöitaù
anye cäpi balopetäù
sarvästrair akñata-tvacaù
SYNONYMS
tapaù—austerities; sära-mayam—greatly powerful; tväñöram—performed by
Tvañöä; våtraù—Våträsura; yena—by which; vipäöitaù—was killed;
anye—others; ca—also; api—indeed; bala-upetäù—very powerful persons;
sarva—all kinds; astraiù—by weapons; akñata—without being injured;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
494
tvacaù—their skin.
TRANSLATION
Våträsura was the essence of the austerities undergone by Tvañöä, yet the
thunderbolt killed him. Indeed, not only he but also many other stalwart
heroes, whose very skin could not be injured even by all kinds of weapons, were
killed by the same thunderbolt.
TEXT 36
Saae_Ya& Pa[iTahTaae vJa]ae MaYaa Mau¢-ae_Saure_LPake- )
Naah& Tadadde d<@& b]øTaeJaae_PYak-ar<aMa( )) 36 ))
so 'yaà pratihato vajro
mayä mukto 'sure 'lpake
nähaà tad ädade daëòaà
brahma-tejo 'py akäraëam
SYNONYMS
saù ayam—therefore, this thunderbolt; pratihataù—repelled;
vajraù—thunderbolt; mayä—by me; muktaù—released; asure—unto that
demon; alpake—less important; na—not; aham—I; tat—that; ädade—hold;
daëòam—it is now just like a rod; brahma-tejaù—as powerful as a brahmästra;
api—although; akäraëam—now it is useless.
TRANSLATION
But now, although the same thunderbolt has been released against a less
important demon, it has been ineffectual. Therefore, although it was as good as
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
495
a brahmästra, it has now become useless like an ordinary rod. I shall therefore
hold it no longer.
TEXT 37
wiTa Xa§&- ivzqdNTaMaah vaGaXarqir<aq )
NaaYa& éuZkE-rQaae Naad]OEvRDaMahRiTa daNav" )) 37 ))
iti çakraà viñédantam
äha väg açarériëé
näyaà çuñkair atho närdrair
vadham arhati dänavaù
SYNONYMS
iti—in this way; çakram—unto Indra; viñédantam—lamenting; äha—spoke;
väk—a voice; açarériëé—without any body, or from the sky; na—not;
ayam—this; çuñkaiù—by anything dry; atho—also; na—nor; ärdraiù—by
anything moist; vadham—annihilation; arhati—is befitting; dänavaù—this
demon (Namuci).
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: While the morose Indra was lamenting in this
way, an ominous, unembodied voice said from the sky, "This demon Namuci is
not to be annihilated by anything dry or moist."
TEXT 38
MaYaaSMaE Yad( vrae dtaae Ma*TYauNaOEvad]RéuZk-Yaae" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
496
ATaae_NYaiêNTaNaqYaSTae oPaaYaae MagavNa( irPaae" )) 38 ))
mayäsmai yad varo datto
måtyur naivärdra-çuñkayoù
ato 'nyaç cintanéyas te
upäyo maghavan ripoù
SYNONYMS
mayä—by me; asmai—unto him; yat—because; varaù—a benediction;
dattaù—has been granted; måtyuù—death; na—not; eva—indeed; ärdra—by
either a moist; çuñkayoù—or by a dry medium; ataù—therefore;
anyaù—something else, another; cintanéyaù—has to be thought of; te—by you;
upäyaù—means; maghavan—O Indra; ripoù—of your enemy.
TRANSLATION
The voice also said, "O Indra, because I have given this demon the
benediction that he will never be killed by any weapon that is dry or moist, you
have to think of another way to kill him."
TEXT 39
Taa& dEvq& iGarMaak-<YaR MagavaNSauSaMaaihTa" )
DYaaYaNa( fe-NaMaQaaPaXYaduPaaYaMau>aYaaTMak-Ma( )) 39 ))
täà daivéà giram äkarëya
maghavän susamähitaù
dhyäyan phenam athäpaçyad
upäyam ubhayätmakam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
497
SYNONYMS
täm—that; daivém—ominous; giram—voice; äkarëya—after hearing;
maghavän—Lord Indra; su-samähitaù—becoming very careful;
dhyäyan—meditating; phenam—appearance of foam; atha—thereafter;
apaçyat—he saw; upäyam—the means; ubhaya-ätmakam—simultaneously dry
and moist.
TRANSLATION
After hearing the ominous voice, Indra, with great attention, began to
meditate on how to kill the demon. He then saw that foam would be the means,
for it is neither moist nor dry.
TEXT 40
Na éuZke-<a Na cad]eR<a Jahar NaMauce" iXar" )
Ta& TauíuvuMauRiNaGa<aa MaaLYaEêavaik-riNv>auMa( )) 40 ))
na çuñkeëa na cärdreëa
jahära namuceù çiraù
taà tuñöuvur muni-gaëä
mälyaiç cäväkiran vibhum
SYNONYMS
na—neither; çuñkeëa—by dry means; na—nor; ca—also; ärdreëa—by a moist
weapon; jahära—he separated; namuceù—of Namuci; çiraù—the head;
tam—him (Indra); tuñöuvuù—satisfied; muni-gaëäù—all the sages;
mälyaiù—with flower garlands; ca—also; aväkiran—covered; vibhum—that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
498
great personality.
TRANSLATION
Thus Indra, King of heaven, severed Namuci's head with a weapon of foam,
which was neither dry nor moist. Then all the sages satisfied Indra, the exalted
personality, by showering flowers and garlands upon him, almost covering him.
PURPORT
In this regard, the çruti-mantras say, apäà phenena namuceù çira indro
'därayat: Indra killed Namuci with watery foam, which is neither moist nor
dry.
TEXT 41
GaNDavRMau:YaaE JaGaTauivRìavSauParavSaU )
devduNdu>aYaae NaeduNaRTaRKYaae NaNa*TauMauRda )) 41 ))
gandharva-mukhyau jagatur
viçvävasu-parävasü
deva-dundubhayo nedur
nartakyo nanåtur mudä
SYNONYMS
gandharva-mukhyau—the two chiefs of the Gandharvas; jagatuù—began to
sing nice songs; viçvävasu—named Viçvävasu; parävasü—named Parävasu;
deva-dundubhayaù—the kettledrums beaten by the demigods; neduù—made
their sound; nartakyaù—the dancers known as Apsaräs; nanåtuù—began to
dance; mudä—in great happiness.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
499
TRANSLATION
Viçvävasu and Parävasu, the two chiefs of the Gandharvas, sang in great
happiness. The kettledrums of the demigods sounded, and the Apsaräs danced
in jubilation.
TEXT 42
ANYae_PYaev& Pa[iTaÜNÜaNvaYviGanvå<aadYa" )
SaUdYaaMaaSaurSauraNa( Ma*GaaNke-Sair<aae YaQaa )) 42 ))
anye 'py evaà pratidvandvän
väyv-agni-varuëädayaù
südayäm äsur asurän
mågän kesariëo yathä
SYNONYMS
anye—others; api—also; evam—in this way; pratidvandvän—the opposing
party of belligerants; väyu—the demigod known as Väyu; agni—the demigod
known as Agni; varuëa-ädayaù—the demigod known as Varuëa and others;
südayäm äsuù—began to kill vigorously; asurän—all the demons;
mågän—deer; kesariëaù—lions; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
Väyu, Agni, Varuëa and other demigods began killing the demons who
opposed them, just as lions kill deer in a forest.
TEXT 43
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
500
b]ø<aa Pa[eizTaae devaNdevizRNaaRrdae Na*Pa )
varYaaMaaSa ivbuDaaNd*îa daNavSa¿YaMa( )) 43 ))
brahmaëä preñito devän
devarñir närado nåpa
värayäm äsa vibudhän
dåñövä dänava-saìkñayam
SYNONYMS
brahmaëä—by Lord Brahmä; preñitaù—sent; devän—unto the demigods;
deva-åñiù—the great sage of the heavenly planets; näradaù—Närada Muni;
nåpa—O King; värayäm äsa—forbade; vibudhän—all the demigods;
dåñövä—after seeing; dänava-saìkñayam—the total annihilation of the
demons.
TRANSLATION
O King, when Lord Brahmä saw the imminent total annihilation of the
demons, he sent a message with Närada, who went before the demigods to make
them stop fighting.
TEXT 44
é[qNaard ovac
>aviÙrMa*Ta& Pa[aá& NaaraYa<a>auJaaé[YaE" )
ié[Yaa SaMaeiDaTaa" SavR oPaarMaTa ivGa]haTa( )) 44 ))
çré-närada uväca
bhavadbhir amåtaà präptaà
näräyaëa-bhujäçrayaiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
501
çriyä samedhitäù sarva
upäramata vigrahät
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni prayed to the demigods; bhavadbhiù—by all
of you; amåtam—nectar; präptam—has been obtained; näräyaëa—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhuja-äçrayaiù—being protected by the
arms; çriyä—by all fortune; samedhitäù—have flourished; sarve—all of you;
upäramata—now cease; vigrahät—from this fighting.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Närada said: All of you demigods are protected by the arms of
Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and by His grace you have
gotten the nectar. By the grace of the goddess of fortune, you are glorious in
every way. Therefore, please stop this fighting.
TEXT 45
é[qéuk- ovac
Sa&YaMYa MaNYauSa&rM>a& MaaNaYaNTaae MauNaevRc" )
oPaGaqYaMaaNaaNaucrEYaRYau" SaveR i}aivíPaMa( )) 45 ))
çré-çuka uväca
saàyamya manyu-saàrambhaà
mänayanto muner vacaù
upagéyamänänucarair
yayuù sarve triviñöapam
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
502
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; saàyamya—controlling;
manyu—of anger; saàrambham—the aggravation; mänayantaù—accepting;
muneù vacaù—the words of Närada Muni; upagéyamäna—being praised;
anucaraiù—by their followers; yayuù—returned; sarve—all of the demigods;
triviñöapam—to the heavenly planets.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Accepting the words of Närada, the demigods
gave up their anger and stopped fighting. Being praised by their followers, they
returned to their heavenly planets.
TEXT 46
Yae_viXaía r<ae TaiSMaNa( NaardaNauMaTaeNa Tae )
bil&/ ivPaàMaadaYa ASTa& iGairMauPaaGaMaNa( )) 46 ))
ye 'vaçiñöä raëe tasmin
näradänumatena te
balià vipannam ädäya
astaà girim upägaman
SYNONYMS
ye—some of the demons who; avaçiñöäù—remained; raëe—in the fight;
tasmin—in that; närada-anumatena—by the order of Närada; te—all of them;
balim—Mahäräja Bali; vipannam—in reverses; ädäya—taking; astam—named
Asta; girim—to the mountain; upägaman—went.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
503
Following the order of Närada Muni, whatever demons remained on the
battlefield took Bali Mahäräja, who was in a precarious condition, to the hill
known as Astagiri.
TEXT 47
Ta}aaivNaíavYavaNa( ivÛMaaNaiXaraeDaraNa( )
oXaNaa JaqvYaaMaaSa SaÅqvNYaa SvivÛYaa )) 47 ))
taträvinañöävayavän
vidyamäna-çirodharän
uçanä jévayäm äsa
saàjévanyä sva-vidyayä
SYNONYMS
tatra—on that hill; avinañöa-avayavän—the demons who had been killed but
whose bodily parts had not been lost; vidyamäna-çirodharän—whose heads
were still existing on their bodies; uçanäù—Çukräcärya; jévayäm äsa—brought
to life; saàjévanyä—by the Saàjévané mantra; sva-vidyayä—by his own
achievement.
TRANSLATION
There, on that hill, Çukräcärya brought to life all the dead demoniac soldiers
who had not lost their heads, trunks and limbs. He achieved this by his own
mantra, known as Saàjévané.
TEXT 48
bil/êaeXaNaSaa SPa*í" Pa[TYaaPaàeiNd]YaSMa*iTa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
504
ParaiJaTaae_iPa Naai%Ûçaek-Tatvivc+a<a" )) 48 ))
baliç coçanasä spåñöaù
pratyäpannendriya-småtiù
paräjito 'pi näkhidyal
loka-tattva-vicakñaëaù
SYNONYMS
baliù—Mahäräja Bali; ca—also; uçanasä—by Çukräcärya; spåñöaù—being
touched; pratyäpanna—was brought back; indriya-småtiù—realization of the
actions of the senses and memory; paräjitaù—he was defeated; api—although;
na akhidyat—he did not lament; loka-tattva-vicakñaëaù—because he was very
experienced in universal affairs.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja was very experienced in universal affairs. When he regained
his senses and memory by the grace of Çukräcärya, he could understand
everything that had happened. Therefore, although he had been defeated, he did
not lament.
PURPORT
It is significant that Bali Mahäräja is here said to be very experienced.
Although defeated, he was not at all sorry, for he knew that nothing can take
place without the sanction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Since he
was a devotee, he accepted his defeat without lamentation. As stated by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in Bhagavad-gétä (2.47), karmaëy evädhikäras
te mä phaleñu kadäcana. Everyone in Kåñëa consciousness should execute his
duty, without regard for victory or defeat. One must execute his duty as
ordered by Kåñëa or His representative, the spiritual master. Änukülyena
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
505
kåñëänuçélanaà bhaktir uttamä [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. In first-class devotional
service, one always abides by the orders and will of Kåñëa.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Eleventh Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "King Indra Annihilates the Demons."
12. The Mohiné-mürti Incarnation Bewilders Lord Çiva
This chapter describes how Lord Çiva was bewildered upon seeing the
beautiful Mohiné-mürti incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and how he later came to his senses. When Lord Çiva heard about the pastimes
performed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, in the form of an
attractive woman, he mounted his bull and went to see the Lord. Accompanied
by his wife, Umä, and his servants, the bhüta-gaëa, or ghosts, he approached
the lotus feet of the Lord. Lord Çiva offered obeisances to the Supreme Lord as
the all-pervading Lord, the universal form, the supreme controller of creation,
the Supersoul, the resting place for everyone, and the completely independent
cause of all causes. Thus he offered prayers giving truthful descriptions of the
Lord. Then he expressed his desire. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is
very kind to His devotees. Therefore, to fulfill the desire of His devotee Lord
Çiva, He expanded His energy and manifested Himself in the form of a very
beautiful and attractive woman. Upon seeing this form, even Lord Çiva was
captivated. Later, by the grace of the Lord, he controlled himself. This
demonstrates that by the power of the Lord's external energy, everyone is
captivated by the form of woman in this material world. Again, however, by
the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can overcome the
influence of mäyä. This was evinced by Lord Çiva, the topmost devotee of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
506
Lord. First he was captivated, but later, by the grace of the Lord, he restrained
himself. It is declared in this connection that only a pure devotee can restrain
himself from the attractive feature of mäyä. Otherwise, once a living entity is
trapped by the external feature of mäyä, he cannot overcome it. After Lord
Çiva was graced by the Supreme Lord, he circumambulated the Lord along
with his wife, Bhaväné, and his companions, the ghosts. Then he left for his
own abode. Çukadeva Gosvämé concludes this chapter by describing the
transcendental qualities of Uttamaçloka, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and by declaring that one can glorify the Lord by nine kinds of devotional
service, beginning with çravaëaà kértanaà [SB 7.5.23].
TEXTS 1-2
é[qbadraYai<aåvac
v*zßJaae iNaXaMYaed& Yaaeizd]UPae<a daNavaNa( )
MaaehiYaTva SaurGa<aaNhir" SaaeMaMaPaaYaYaTa( )) 1 ))
v*zMaaåù iGairXa" SavR>aUTaGa<aEv*RTa" )
Sah deVYaa YaYaaE d]íu& Ya}aaSTae MaDauSaUdNa" )) 2 ))
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
våña-dhvajo niçamyedaà
yoñid-rüpeëa dänavän
mohayitvä sura-gaëän
hariù somam apäyayat
våñam äruhya giriçaù
sarva-bhüta-gaëair våtaù
saha devyä yayau drañöuà
yaträste madhusüdanaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
507
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; våña-dhvajaù—Lord Çiva,
who is carried by a bull; niçamya—hearing; idam—this (news);
yoñit-rüpeëa—by assuming the form of a woman; dänavän—the demons;
mohayitvä—enchanting; sura-gaëän—unto the demigods; hariù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; somam—nectar; apäyayat—caused to drink;
våñam—the bull; äruhya—mounting; giriçaù—Lord Çiva; sarva—all;
bhüta-gaëaiù—by the ghosts; våtaù—surrounded; saha devyä—with Umä;
yayau—went; drañöum—to see; yatra—where; äste—stays;
madhusüdanaù—Lord Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, in the
form of a woman, captivated the demons and enabled the demigods to drink the
nectar. After hearing of these pastimes, Lord Çiva, who is carried by a bull,
went to the place where Madhusüdana, the Lord, resides. Accompanied by his
wife, Umä, and surrounded by his companions, the ghosts, Lord Çiva went
there to see the Lord's form as a woman.
TEXT 3
Sa>aaiJaTaae >aGavTaa Saadr& SaaeMaYaa >av" )
SaUPaiví ovaced& Pa[iTaPaUJYa SMaYaNhirMa( )) 3 ))
sabhäjito bhagavatä
sädaraà somayä bhavaù
süpaviñöa uväcedaà
pratipüjya smayan harim
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
508
SYNONYMS
sabhäjitaù—well received; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Viñëu; sa-ädaram—with great respect (as befitting Lord Çiva);
sa-umayä—with Umä; bhavaù—Lord Çambhu (Lord Çiva);
su-upaviñöaù—being comfortably situated; uväca—said; idam—this;
pratipüjya—offering respect; smayan—smiling; harim—unto the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead welcomed Lord Çiva and Umä with
great respect, and after being seated comfortably, Lord Çiva duly worshiped the
Lord and smilingly spoke as follows.
TEXT 4
é[qMahadev ovac
devdev JaGaÜyaiPaÅGadqXa JaGaNMaYa )
SaveRzaMaiPa >aavaNaa& TvMaaTMaa heTaurqìr" )) 4 ))
çré-mahädeva uväca
deva-deva jagad-vyäpiï
jagad-éça jagan-maya
sarveñäm api bhävänäà
tvam ätmä hetur éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
çré-mahädevaù uväca—Lord Çiva (Mahädeva) said; deva-deva—O best demigod
among the demigods; jagat-vyäpin—O all-pervading Lord; jagat-éça—O master
of the universe; jagat-maya—O my Lord, who are transformed by Your energy
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
509
into this creation; sarveñäm api—all kinds of; bhävänäm—situations;
tvam—You; ätmä—the moving force; hetuù—because of this; éçvaraù—the
Supreme Lord, Parameçvara.
TRANSLATION
Lord Mahädeva said: O chief demigod among the demigods, O all-pervading
Lord, master of the universe, by Your energy You are transformed into the
creation. You are the root and efficient cause of everything. You are not
material. Indeed, You are the Supersoul or supreme living force of everything.
Therefore, You are Parameçvara, the supreme controller of all controllers.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, resides within the material
world as the sattva-guëa-avatära. Lord Çiva is the tamo-guëa-avatära, and Lord
Brahmä is the rajo-guëa-avatära, but although Lord Viñëu is among them, He
is not in the same category. Lord Viñëu is deva-deva, the chief of all the
demigods. Since Lord Çiva is in this material world, the energy of the Supreme
Lord, Viñëu, includes Lord Çiva. Lord Viñëu is therefore called jagad-vyäpé,
"the all-pervading Lord." Lord Çiva is sometimes called Maheçvara, and so
people think that Lord Çiva is everything. But here Lord Çiva addresses Lord
Viñëu as Jagad-éça, "the master of the universe." Lord Çiva is sometimes called
Viçveçvara, but here he addresses Lord Viñëu as Jagan-maya, indicating that
even Viçveçvara is under Lord Viñëu's control. Lord Viñëu is the master of the
spiritual world, yet He controls the material world also, as stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sacaräcaram [Bg. 9.10]). Lord
Brahmä and Lord Çiva are also sometimes called éçvara, but the supreme éçvara
is Lord Viñëu, Lord Kåñëa. As stated in Brahma-saàhitä, éçvaraù paramaù
kåñëaù: [Bs. 5.1] the Supreme Lord is Kåñëa, Lord Viñëu. Everything in
existence works in proper order because of Lord Viñëu.
Aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. Even paramäëu, the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
510
small atoms, work because of Lord Viñëu's presence within them.
TEXT 5
AaÛNTaavSYa YaNMaDYaiMadMaNYadh& bih" )
YaTaae_VYaYaSYa NaETaaiNa TaTa( SaTYa& b]ø icd( >avaNa( )) 5 ))
ädy-antäv asya yan madhyam
idam anyad ahaà bahiù
yato 'vyayasya naitäni
tat satyaà brahma cid bhavän
SYNONYMS
ädi—the beginning; antau—and the end; asya—of this manifested cosmos or
of anything material or visible; yat—that which; madhyam—between the
beginning and the end, the sustenance; idam—this cosmic manifestation;
anyat—anything other than You; aham—the wrong mental conception;
bahiù—outside of You; yataù—because of; avyayasya—the inexhaustible;
na—not; etäni—all these differences; tat—that; satyam—the Absolute Truth;
brahma—the Supreme; cit—spiritual; bhavän—Your Lordship.
TRANSLATION
The manifest, the unmanifest, false ego and the beginning, maintenance and
annihilation of this cosmic manifestation all come from You, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. But because You are the Absolute Truth, the supreme
absolute spirit soul, the Supreme Brahman, such changes as birth, death and
sustenance do not exist in You.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
511
According to the Vedic mantras, yato vä imäni bhütäni jäyante: everything
is an emanation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated by the Lord
Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (7.4):
bhümir äpo 'nalo väyuù
khaà mano buddhir eva ca
ahaìkära itéyaà me
bhinnä prakåtir añöadhä
"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all together
these eight comprise My separated material energies." In other words, the
ingredients of the cosmic manifestation also consist of the energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This does not mean, however, that because
the ingredients come from Him, He is no longer complete. pürëasya pürëam
ädäya pürëam evävaçiñyate: [Éço Invocation] "Because He is the complete whole,
even though so many complete units emanate from Him, He remains the
complete balance." Thus the Lord is called avyaya, inexhaustible. Unless we
accept the Absolute Truth as acintya-bhedäbheda, simultaneously one and
different, we cannot have a clear conception of the Absolute Truth. The Lord
is the root of everything. Aham ädir hi devänäm: [Bg 10.2] He is the original
cause of all the devas, or demigods. Ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù: [Bg. 10.8]
everything emanates from Him. In all cases—nominative, objective, positive,
negative and so on—whatever we may conceive of in this entire cosmic
manifestation is in fact the Supreme Lord. For Him there are no such
distinctions as "this is mine, and this belongs to someone else," because He is
everything. He is therefore called avyaya—changeless and inexhaustible.
Because the Supreme Lord is avyaya, He is the Absolute Truth, the fully
spiritual Supreme Brahman.
TEXT 6
TavEv cr<aaM>aaeJa& é[eYaSk-aMaa iNaraiXaz" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
512
ivSa*JYaae>aYaTa" Sa(r)& MauNaYa" SaMauPaaSaTae )) 6 ))
tavaiva caraëämbhojaà
çreyas-kämä niräçiñaù
visåjyobhayataù saìgaà
munayaù samupäsate
SYNONYMS
tava—Your; eva—indeed; caraëa-ambhojam—lotus feet;
çreyaù-kämäù—persons desiring the ultimate auspiciousness, the ultimate goal
of life; niräçiñaù—without material desire; visåjya—giving up; ubhayataù—in
this life and the next; saìgam—attachment; munayaù—great sages;
samupäsate—worship.
TRANSLATION
Pure devotees or great saintly persons who desire to achieve the highest goal
in life and who are completely free from all material desires for sense
gratification engage constantly in the transcendental service of Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
One is in the material world when he thinks, "I am this body, and
everything with reference to my body is mine." Ato gåha-kñetra-sutäpta-vittair
janasya moho 'yam ahaà mameti [SB 5.5.8]. This is the symptom of material
life. In the materialistic conception of life, one thinks, "This is my house, this
is my land, this is my family, this is my state," and so on. But those who are
munayaù, saintly persons following in the footsteps of Närada Muni, simply
engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord without any personal
desire for sense gratification. Anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
[Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(76)]. Either in this life or in the next, the only
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
513
concern of such saintly devotees is to serve the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Thus they are also absolute because they have no other desires.
Being freed from the dualities of material desire, they are called çreyas-kämäù.
In other words, they are not concerned with dharma (religiosity), artha
(economic development), or käma (sense gratification). The only concern of
such devotees is mokña, liberation. This mokña does not refer to becoming one
with the Supreme like the Mäyävädé philosophers. Caitanya Mahäprabhu
explained that real mokña means taking shelter of the lotus feet of the
Personality of Godhead. The Lord clearly explained this fact while instructing
Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya. Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya wanted to correct the
word mukti-pade in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, but Caitanya Mahäprabhu informed
him that there is no need to correct any word in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. He
explained that mukti-pade refers to the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Viñëu, who offers mukti and is therefore called Mukunda. A pure
devotee is not concerned with material things. He is not concerned with
religiosity, economic development or sense gratification. He is interested only
in serving the lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 7
Tv& b]ø PaU<aRMaMa*Ta& ivGau<a& ivXaaek-‚
MaaNaNdMaa}aMaivk-arMaNaNYadNYaTa( )
ivìSYa heTauådYaiSQaiTaSa&YaMaaNaa‚
MaaTMaeìrê TadPae+aTaYaaNaPae+a" )) 7 ))
tvaà brahma pürëam amåtaà viguëaà viçokam
änanda-mätram avikäram ananyad anyat
viçvasya hetur udaya-sthiti-saàyamänäm
ätmeçvaraç ca tad-apekñatayänapekñaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
514
SYNONYMS
tvam—Your Lordship; brahma—the all-pervading Absolute Truth;
pürëam—fully complete; amåtam—never to be vanquished;
viguëam—spiritually situated, free from the material modes of nature;
viçokam—without lamentation; änanda-mätram—always in transcendental
bliss; avikäram—changeless; ananyat—separated from everything; anyat—yet
You are everything; viçvasya—of the cosmic manifestation; hetuù—the cause;
udaya—of the beginning; sthiti—maintenance; saàyamänäm—and of all the
directors controlling the various departments of the cosmic manifestation;
ätma-éçvaraù—the Supersoul giving direction to everyone; ca—also;
tat-apekñatayä—everyone depends upon You; anapekñaù—always fully
independent.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the Supreme Brahman, complete in everything. Being
completely spiritual, You are eternal, free from the material modes of nature,
and full of transcendental bliss. Indeed, for You there is no question of
lamentation. Since You are the supreme cause, the cause of all causes, nothing
can exist without You. Yet we are different from You in a relationship of cause
and effect, for in one sense the cause and effect are different. You are the
original cause of creation, manifestation and annihilation, and You bestow
benedictions upon all living entities. Everyone depends upon You for the results
of his activities, but You are always independent.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.4):
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
515
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings
are in Me, but I am not in them." This explains the philosophy of simultaneous
oneness and difference, known as acintya-bhedäbheda. Everything is the
Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Godhead, yet the Supreme Person is
differently situated from everything. Indeed, because the Lord is differently
situated from everything material, He is the Supreme Brahman, the supreme
cause, the supreme controller. Éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
[Bs. 5.1]. The Lord is the supreme cause, and His form has nothing to do with
the material modes of nature. The devotee prays: "As Your devotee is
completely free from all desires, Your Lordship is also completely free from
desires. You are fully independent. Although all living entities engage in Your
service, You do not depend on the service of anyone. Although this material
world is created complete by You, everything depends on Your sanction. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä, mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: [Bg. 15.15]
remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness come from You. Nothing can be
done independently, yet You act independently of the service rendered by
Your servants. The living entities depend on Your mercy for liberation, but
when You want to give them liberation, You do not depend on anyone else.
Indeed, by Your causeless mercy, You can give liberation to anyone. Those who
receive Your mercy are called kåpä-siddha. To reach the platform of perfection
takes many, many lives (bahünäà janmanäm ante jïänavän mäà prapadyate
[Bg. 7.19]). Nonetheless, even without undergoing severe austerities, one can
attain perfection by Your mercy. Devotional service should be unmotivated
and free from impediments (ahaituky apratihatä yayätmä suprasédati). This is
the position of niräçiñaù, or freedom from expectations for results. A pure
devotee continuously offers transcendental loving service to You, but You may
nonetheless offer mercy to anyone, without depending on his service."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
516
TEXT 8
Wk-STvMaev SadSad( ÜYaMaÜYa& c
Sv<a| k*-Taak*-TaiMaveh Na vSTau>aed" )
AjaNaTaSTviYa JaNaEivRihTaae ivk-LPaae
YaSMaad( Gau<aVYaiTak-rae iNaåPaaiDak-SYa )) 8 ))
ekas tvam eva sad asad dvayam advayaà ca
svarëaà kåtäkåtam iveha na vastu-bhedaù
ajïänatas tvayi janair vihito vikalpo
yasmäd guëa-vyatikaro nirupädhikasya
SYNONYMS
ekaù—the only one; tvam—Your Lordship; eva—indeed; sat—which is
existing, as the effect; asat—which is nonexistent, as the cause; dvayam—both
of them; advayam—without duality; ca—and; svarëam—gold;
kåta—manufactured into different forms; äkåtam—the original source of gold
(the gold mine); iva—like; iha—in this world; na—not;
vastu-bhedaù—difference in the substance; ajïänataù—only because of
ignorance; tvayi—unto You; janaiù—by the general mass of people; vihitaù—it
should be done; vikalpaù—differentiation; yasmät—because of;
guëa-vyatikaraù—free from the differences created by the material modes of
nature; nirupädhikasya—without any material designation.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, Your Lordship alone is the cause and the effect. Therefore,
although You appear to be two, You are the absolute one. As there is no
difference between the gold of a golden ornament and the gold in a mine, there
is no difference between cause and effect; both of them are the same. Only
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
517
because of ignorance do people concoct differences and dualities. You are free
from material contamination, and since the entire cosmos is caused by You and
cannot exist without You, it is an effect of Your transcendental qualities. Thus
the conception that Brahman is true and the world false cannot be maintained.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that the living entities are
representations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's marginal potency
whereas the various bodies accepted by the living entities are products of the
material energy. Thus the body is considered material, and the soul is
considered spiritual. The origin of them both, however, is the same Supreme
Personality of Godhead. As the Lord explains in Bhagavad-gétä (7.4-5):
bhümir äpo 'nalo väyuù
khaà mano buddhir eva ca
ahaìkära itéyaà me
bhinnä prakåtir añöadhä
apareyam itas tv anyäà
prakåtià viddhi me paräm
jéva-bhütäà mahä-bäho
yayedaà dhäryate jagat
"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all together
these eight comprise My separated material energies. But besides this inferior
nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior energy of Mine, which
consists of all living entities who are struggling with material nature and are
sustaining the universe." Thus both matter and the living entities are
manifestations of energy of the Supreme Lord. Since the energy and the
energetic are not different and since the material and marginal energies are
both energies of the supreme energetic, the Supreme Lord, ultimately the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
518
Supreme Personality of Godhead is everything. In this regard, the example
may be given of gold that has not been molded and gold that has been molded
into various ornaments. A gold earring and the gold in a mine are different
only as cause and effect; otherwise they are the same. The Vedänta-sütra
describes that Brahman is the cause of everything. Janmädy asya yataù [SB
1.1.1]. Everything is born of the Supreme Brahman, from which everything
emanates as different energies. None of these energies, therefore, should be
considered false. The Mäyävädés' differentiation between Brahman and mäyä
is only due to ignorance.
Çrémad Véraräghava Äcärya, in his Bhägavata-candra-candrikä, describes
the Vaiñëava philosophy as follows. The cosmic manifestation is described as
sat and asat, as cit and acit. Matter is acit, and the living force is cit, but their
origin is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in whom there is no difference
between matter and spirit. According to this conception, the cosmic
manifestation, consisting of both matter and spirit, is not different from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Idaà hi viçvaà bhagavän ivetaraù: "This
cosmic manifestation is also the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although it
appears different from Him." In Bhagavad-gétä (9.4) the Lord says:
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings
are in Me, but I am not in them." Thus although someone may say that the
Supreme Person is different from the cosmic manifestation, actually He is not.
The Lord says, mayä tatam idaà sarvam: "In My impersonal feature I am spread
throughout the world." Therefore, this world is not different from Him. The
difference is a difference in names. For example, whether we speak of gold
earrings, gold bangles or gold necklaces, ultimately they are all gold. In a
similar way, all the different manifestations of matter and spirit are ultimately
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
519
one in the Supreme Personality of Godhead. ekam evädvitéyaà brahma. This is
the Vedic version (Chändogya Upaniñad 6.2.1). There is oneness because
everything emanates from the Supreme Brahman. The example already given
is that there is no difference between a golden earring and the gold mine as it
is. The Vaiçeñika philosophers, however, because of their Mäyäväda
conception, create differences. They say, brahma satyaà jagan mithyä: "The
Absolute Truth is real, and the cosmic manifestation is false." But why should
the jagat be considered mithyä? The jagat is an emanation from Brahman.
Therefore the jagat is also truth.
Vaiñëavas, therefore, do not consider the jagat to be mithyä; rather, they
regard everything as reality in connection with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
anäsaktasya viñayän
yathärham upayuïjataù
nirbandhaù kåñëa-sambandhe
yuktaà vairägyam ucyate
präpaïcikatayä buddhyä
hari-sambandhi-vastunaù
mumukñubhiù parityägo
vairägyaà phalgu kathyate
"Things should be accepted for the Lord's service and not for one's personal
sense gratification. If one accepts something without attachment and accepts
it because it is related to Kåñëa, one's renunciation is called yuktaà vairägyam.
Whatever is favorable for the rendering of service to the Lord should be
accepted and should not be rejected as a material thing."
(Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.255-256) The jagat should not be rejected as
mithyä. It is truth, and the truth is realized when everything is engaged in the
service of the Lord. A flower accepted for one's sense gratification is material,
but when the same flower is offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
520
a devotee, it is spiritual. Food taken and cooked for oneself is material, but
food cooked for the Supreme Lord is spiritual prasäda. This is a question of
realization. Actually, everything is given by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and therefore everything is spiritual, but those who are not
advanced in proper knowledge make distinctions because of the interactions of
the three modes of material nature. In this regard, Çréla Jéva Gosvämé says that
although the sun is the only light, the sunshine, which is exhibited in seven
colors, and darkness, which is the absence of sunshine, are not different from
the sun, for without the existence of the sun such differentiations cannot
exist. There may be varied nomenclature because of different conditions, but
they are all the sun. The puräëas therefore say:
eka-deça-sthitasyägner
jyotsnä vistäriëé yathä
parasya brahmaëaù çaktis
tathedam akhilaà jagat
"Just as the illumination of a fire, which is situated in one place, is spread all
over, the energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Parabrahman, are
spread all over this universe." (Viñëu Puräëa 1.22.53) Materially, we can
directly perceive the sunshine spreading itself according to different names
and activities, but ultimately the sun is one. Similarly, sarvaà khalv idaà
brahma: everything is an expansion of the Supreme Brahman. Therefore, the
Supreme Lord is everything, and He is one without differentiation. There is no
existence separate from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 9
Tva& b]ø ke-icdvYaNTYauTa DaMaRMaeke-
Wke- Par& SadSaTaae" Pauåz& PareXaMa( )
ANYae_vYaiNTa NavXai¢-YauTa& Par& Tva&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
521
ke-icNMahaPauåzMaVYaYaMaaTMaTaN}aMa( )) 9 ))
tväà brahma kecid avayanty uta dharmam eke
eke paraà sad-asatoù puruñaà pareçam
anye 'vayanti nava-çakti-yutaà paraà tväà
kecin mahä-puruñam avyayam ätma-tantram
SYNONYMS
tväm—You; brahma—the supreme truth, the Absolute Truth, Brahman;
kecit—some people, namely the group of Mäyävädés known as the Vedäntists;
avayanti—consider; uta—certainly; dharmam—religion; eke—some others;
eke—some others; param—transcendental; sat-asatoù—to both cause and
effect; puruñam—the Supreme person; pareçam—the supreme controller;
anye—others; avayanti—describe; nava-çakti-yutam—endowed with nine
potencies; param—transcendental; tväm—unto You; kecit—some;
mahä-puruñam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; avyayam—without loss
of energy; ätma-tantram—supremely independent.
TRANSLATION
Those who are known as the impersonalist Vedäntists regard You as the
impersonal Brahman. Others, known as the Mémäàsaka philosophers, regard
You as religion. The Säìkhya philosophers regard You as the transcendental
person who is beyond prakåti and puruña and who is the controller of even the
demigods. The followers of the codes of devotional service known as the
Païcarätras regard You as being endowed with nine different potencies. And
the Pataïjala philosophers, the followers of Pataïjali Muni, regard You as the
supreme independent Personality of Godhead, who has no equal or superior.
TEXT 10
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
522
Naah& ParaYau‰RzYaae Na MarqicMau:Yaa
JaaNaiNTa YaiÜricTa& %lu/ SatvSaGaaR" )
YaNMaaYaYaa MauizTaceTaSa wRXa dETYa‚
MaTYaaRdYa" ik-MauTa Xaìd>ad]v*taa" )) 10 ))
nähaà paräyur åñayo na maréci-mukhyä
jänanti yad-viracitaà khalu sattva-sargäù
yan-mäyayä muñita-cetasa éça daityamartyädayaù
kim uta çaçvad-abhadra-våttäù
SYNONYMS
na—neither; aham—I; para-äyuù—that personality who lives for millions and
millions of years (Lord Brahmä); åñayaù—the seven åñis of the seven planets;
na—nor; maréci-mukhyäù—headed by Maréci Åñi; jänanti—know; yat—by
whom (the Supreme Lord); viracitam—this universe, which has been created;
khalu—indeed; sattva-sargäù—although born in the mode of material
goodness; yat-mäyayä—by the influence of whose energy;
muñita-cetasaù—their hearts are bewildered; éça—O my Lord; daitya—the
demons; martya-ädayaù—the human beings and others; kim uta—what to
speak of; çaçvat—always; abhadra-våttäù—influenced by the base qualities of
material nature.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, I, who am considered to be the best of the demigods, and Lord
Brahmä and the great åñis, headed by Maréci, are born of the mode of goodness.
Nonetheless, we are bewildered by Your illusory energy and cannot understand
what this creation is. Aside from us, what is to be said of others, like the
demons and human beings, who are in the base modes of material nature
[rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa]? How will they know You?
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
523
PURPORT
Factually speaking, even those who are situated in the material mode of
goodness cannot understand the position of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. What then is to be said of those who are situated in rajo-guëa and
tamo-guëa, the base qualities of material nature? How can we even imagine the
Supreme Personality of Godhead? There are so many philosophers trying to
understand the Absolute Truth, but since they are situated in the base
qualities of material nature and are addicted to so many bad habits, like
drinking, meat-eating, illicit sex and gambling, how can they conceive of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead? For them it is impossible. For the present
day, the päïcarätriké-vidhi as enunciated by Närada Muni is the only hope.
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, therefore, has quoted the following verse from the
Brahma-yämala:
çruti-småti-puräëädipaïcarätra-
vidhià vinä
aikäntiké harer bhaktir
utpätäyaiva kalpate
"Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic literatures
like the Upaniñads, puräëas and Närada-païcarätra is simply an unnecessary
disturbance in society." (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.101(77)) Those who are
very advanced in knowledge and are situated in the mode of goodness follow
the Vedic instructions of the çruti and småti and other religious scriptures,
including the päïcarätriké-vidhi. Without understanding the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in this way, one only creates a disturbance. In this age
of Kali, so many gurus have sprung up, and because they do not refer to the
çruti-småti-puräëädi-païcarätrika-vidhi, they are creating a great disturbance in
the world in regard to understanding the Absolute Truth. However, those who
follow the päïcarätriké-vidhi under the guidance of a proper spiritual master
can understand the Absolute Truth. It is said, païcarätrasya kåtsnasya vaktä tu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
524
bhagavän svayam: the païcarätra system is spoken by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, just like Bhagavad-gétä. Väsudeva-çaraëä vidur aïjasaiva: the truth
can be understood only by one who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of
Väsudeva.
bahünäà janmanäm ante
jïänavän mäà prapadyate
väsudevaù sarvam iti
sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù
"After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders
unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great
soul is very rare." (Bg. 7.19) Only those who have surrendered to the lotus feet
of Väsudeva can understand the Absolute Truth.
väsudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogaù prayojitaù
janayaty äçu vairägyaà
jïänaà ca yad ahaitukam
"By rendering devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa,
one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and detachment from the
world." (SB 1.2.7) Therefore, Väsudeva, Bhagavän Çré Kåñëa, personally teaches
in Bhagavad-gétä:
sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me." (Bg. 18.66)
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
"One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
525
service." (Bg. 18.55) The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not properly
understood even by Lord Çiva or Lord Brahmä, what to speak of others, but He
can be understood by the process of bhakti-yoga.
mayy äsakta-manäù pärtha
yogaà yuïjan mad-äçrayaù
asaàçayaà samagraà mäà
yathä jïäsyasi tac chåëu
(Bg. 7.1)
If one practices bhakti-yoga by taking shelter of Väsudeva, Kåñëa, simply by
hearing Väsudeva speak about Himself, one can understand everything about
Him. Indeed, one can understand Him completely (samagram).
TEXT 11
Sa Tv& SaMaqihTaMad" iSQaiTaJaNMaNaaXa&
>aUTaeihTa& c JaGaTaae >avbNDaMaae+aaE )
vaYauYaRQaa ivXaiTa %& c cracra:Ya&
Sav| TadaTMak-TaYaavGaMaae_våNTSae )) 11 ))
sa tvaà saméhitam adaù sthiti-janma-näçaà
bhütehitaà ca jagato bhava-bandha-mokñau
väyur yathä viçati khaà ca caräcaräkhyaà
sarvaà tad-ätmakatayävagamo 'varuntse
SYNONYMS
saù—Your Lordship; tvam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
saméhitam—which has been created (by You); adaù—of this material cosmic
manifestation; sthiti-janma-näçam—creation, maintenance and annihilation;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
526
bhüta—of the living entities; éhitam ca—and the different activities or
endeavors; jagataù—of the whole world; bhava-bandha-mokñau—in being
implicated and being liberated from material complications; väyuù—the air;
yathä—as; viçati—enters; kham—in the vast sky; ca—and;
cara-acara-äkhyam—and everything, moving and nonmoving;
sarvam—everything; tat—that; ätmakatayä—because of Your presence;
avagamaù—everything is known to You; avaruntse—You are all-pervading and
therefore know everything.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the supreme knowledge personified. You know everything
about this creation and its beginning, maintenance and annihilation, and You
know all the endeavors made by the living entities, by which they are either
implicated in this material world or liberated from it. As the air enters the vast
sky and also enters the bodies of all moving and nonmoving entities, You are
present everywhere, and therefore You are the knower of all.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä:
eko 'py asau racayituà jagad-aëòa-koöià
yac-chaktir asti jagad-aëòa-cayä yad-antaù
aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-sthaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who by one of His plenary
portions enters the existence of every universe and every atomic particle and
thus manifests His infinite energy unlimitedly throughout the material
creation." (Bs. 5.35)
änanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhävitäbhis
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
527
täbhir ya eva nija-rüpatayä kaläbhiù
goloka eva nivasaty akhilätma-bhüto
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who resides in His own realm, Goloka,
with Rädhä, who resembles His own spiritual figure and who embodies the
ecstatic potency [hlädiné]. Their companions are Her confidantes, who embody
extensions of Her bodily form and who are imbued and permeated with
ever-blissful spiritual rasa." (Bs. 5.37)
Although Govinda is always present in His abode (goloka eva nivasati), He
is simultaneously present everywhere. Nothing is unknown to Him, and
nothing can be hidden from Him. The example given here compares the Lord
to the air, which is within the vast sky and within every body but still is
different from everything.
TEXT 12
AvTaara MaYaa d*ía rMaMaa<aSYa Tae Gau<aE" )
Saae_h& Tad( d]íuiMaC^aiMa YaTa( Tae YaaeizÜPauDa*RTaMa( )) 12 ))
avatärä mayä dåñöä
ramamäëasya te guëaiù
so 'haà tad drañöum icchämi
yat te yoñid-vapur dhåtam
SYNONYMS
avatäräù—incarnations; mayä—by me; dåñöäù—have been seen;
ramamäëasya—while You demonstrate Your various pastimes; te—of You;
guëaiù—by the manifestations of transcendental qualities; saù—Lord Çiva;
aham—I; tat—that incarnation; drañöum icchämi—wish to see; yat—which;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
528
te—of You; yoñit-vapuù—the body of a woman; dhåtam—was accepted.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, I have seen all kinds of incarnations You have exhibited by Your
transcendental qualities, and now that You have appeared as a beautiful young
woman, I wish to see that form of Your Lordship.
PURPORT
When Lord Çiva approached Lord Viñëu, Lord Viñëu inquired about the
purpose for Lord Çiva's coming there. Now Lord Çiva discloses his desire. He
wanted to see the recent incarnation of Mohiné-mürti, which Lord Viñëu had
assumed to distribute the nectar generated from the churning of the ocean of
milk.
TEXT 13
YaeNa SaMMaaeihTaa dETYaa" PaaiYaTaaêaMa*Ta& Saura" )
Tad( idd*+av AaYaaTaa" Par& k-aETaUhl&/ ih Na" )) 13 ))
yena sammohitä daityäù
päyitäç cämåtaà suräù
tad didåkñava äyätäù
paraà kautühalaà hi naù
SYNONYMS
yena—by such an incarnation; sammohitäù—were captivated; daityäù—the
demons; päyitäù—were fed; ca—also; amåtam—nectar; suräù—the demigods;
tat—that form; didåkñavaù—desiring to see; äyätäù—we have come here;
param—very much; kautühalam—great eagerness; hi—indeed; naù—of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
529
ourselves.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, we have come here desiring to see that form of Your Lordship
which You showed to the demons to captivate them completely and in this way
enable the demigods to drink nectar. I am very eager to see that form.
TEXT 14
é[qéuk- ovac
WvMa>YaiQaRTaae ivZ<au>aRGavaNa( éUl/Paai<aNaa )
Pa[hSYa >aavGaM>aqr& iGairXa& Pa[TYa>aazTa )) 14 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evam abhyarthito viñëur
bhagavän çüla-päëinä
prahasya bhäva-gambhéraà
giriçaà pratyabhäñata
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—in this way;
abhyarthitaù—being requested; viñëuù bhagavän—Lord Viñëu, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; çüla-päëinä—by Lord Çiva, who carries a trident in
his hand; prahasya—laughing; bhäva-gambhéram—with serious gravity;
giriçam—unto Lord Çiva; pratyabhäñata—replied.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: When Lord Viñëu was thus requested by Lord Çiva,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
530
who carries a trident in his hand, He smiled with gravity and replied to Lord
Çiva as follows.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, is known as Yogeçvara. Yatra
yogeçvaraù kåñëaù [Bg. 18.78]. Mystic yogés want to acquire some power by
practicing the yoga system, but Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is
known as the Supreme Lord of all mystic power. Lord Çiva wanted to see the
Mohiné-mürti, which was captivating the entire world, and Lord Viñëu was
gravely thinking of how to captivate Lord Çiva also. Therefore the word
bhäva-gambhéram is used here. The illusory, material energy is represented by
Durgädevé, who is the wife of Giréça, or Lord Çiva. Durgädevé could not
captivate Lord Çiva's mind, but now that Lord Çiva wanted to see Lord Viñëu's
feminine form, Lord Viñëu, by His mystic power, would assume a form that
would captivate even Lord Çiva. Therefore Lord Viñëu was grave and at the
same time was smiling.
TEXT 15
é[q>aGavaNauvac
k-aETaUhl/aYa dETYaaNaa& YaaeizÜezae MaYaa Da*Ta" )
PaXYaTaa Saurk-aYaaRi<a GaTae PaqYaUz>aaJaNae )) 15 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
kautühaläya daityänäà
yoñid-veño mayä dhåtaù
paçyatä sura-käryäëi
gate péyüña-bhäjane
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
531
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
kautühaläya—for the bewildering; daityänäm—of the demons;
yoñit-veñaù—the form of a beautiful woman; mayä—by Me; dhåtaù—assumed;
paçyatä—seeing that it is necessary for Me; sura-käryäëi—for executing the
interests of the demigods; gate—having been taken away; péyüña-bhäjane—the
jug of nectar.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: When the demons took away the
jug of nectar, I assumed the form of a beautiful woman to bewilder them by
directly cheating them and thus to act in the interest of the demigods.
PURPORT
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead assumed the form of the
beautiful woman Mohiné-mürti, the demons were certainly captivated, but the
demigods present were not. In other words, those who maintain a demoniac
mentality are bewildered by the beauty of a woman, but those who are
advanced in Kåñëa consciousness, or even those on the platform of goodness,
are not bewildered. The Supreme Personality of Godhead knew that because
Lord Çiva is not an ordinary person, he cannot be bewildered even by the most
beautiful woman. Cupid himself tried to invoke Lord Çiva's lusty desires in the
presence of Pärvaté, but Lord Çiva was never agitated. Rather, the blazing fire
from Lord Çiva's eyes turned Cupid to ashes. Therefore, Lord Viñëu had to
think twice about what kind of beautiful form would bewilder even Lord Çiva.
Consequently He was smiling gravely, as stated in the previous verse (prahasya
bhäva-gambhéram). A beautiful woman generally cannot induce Lord Çiva to
be lusty, but Lord Viñëu was considering whether there was any form of
woman who could enchant him.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
532
TEXT 16
Tatae_h& dXaRiYaZYaaiMa idd*+aae" SaurSataMa )
k-aiMaNaa& bhu MaNTaVYa& SaªLPaPa[>avaedYaMa( )) 16 ))
tat te 'haà darçayiñyämi
didåkñoù sura-sattama
käminäà bahu mantavyaà
saìkalpa-prabhavodayam
SYNONYMS
tat—that; te—unto you; aham—I; darçayiñyämi—shall show;
didåkñoù—desirous of seeing; sura-sattama—O best of the demigods;
käminäm—of persons who are very lusty; bahu—very much; mantavyam—an
object of adoration; saìkalpa—lusty desires; prabhava-udayam—causing to be
strongly aroused.
TRANSLATION
O best of the demigods, I shall now show you My form that is very much
appreciated by those who are lusty. Since you want to see that form, I shall
reveal it in your presence.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva's desiring to see Lord Viñëu reveal the most attractive and
beautiful form of a woman was certainly a joking affair. Lord Çiva knew that
he could not be agitated by any so-called beautiful woman. "The Daityas may
have been bewildered," he thought, "but since even the demigods could not be
agitated, what to speak of me, who am the best of all the demigods?" However,
because Lord Çiva wanted to see Lord Viñëu's form as a woman, Lord Viñëu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
533
decided to impersonate a woman and show him a form that would immediately
put him in an ocean of lusty desires. In effect, therefore, Lord Viñëu told Lord
Çiva, "I will show you My form as a woman, and if you become agitated by lusty
desires, do not blame Me." The attractive features of a woman are appreciated
by those who are affected by lusty desires, but those who are above such
desires, who are on the platform of Kåñëa consciousness, are very difficult to
bewilder. Nonetheless, by the supreme desire of the Personality of Godhead,
everything can be done. This was to be a test of whether Lord Çiva could
remain unagitated.
TEXT 17
é[qéuk- ovac
wiTa b]uva<aae >aGava&STa}aEvaNTarDaqYaTa )
SavRTaêarYa&ê+au>aRv AaSTae SahaeMaYaa )) 17 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti bruväëo bhagaväàs
tatraiväntaradhéyata
sarvataç cärayaàç cakñur
bhava äste sahomayä
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; bruväëaù—while
speaking; bhagavän—Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tatra—there; eva—immediately; antaradhéyata—disappeared from the vision
of Lord Çiva and his associates; sarvataù—everywhere; cärayan—moving;
cakñuù—the eyes; bhavaù—Lord Çiva; äste—remained; saha-umayä—with his
wife, Umä.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
534
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After speaking in this way, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, immediately disappeared, and Lord Çiva
remained there with Umä, looking for Him all around with moving eyes.
TEXT 18
TaTaae ddXaaeRPavNae vriñYa&
ivic}aPauZPaaå<aPaçvd]uMae )
iv§-I@Taq& k-Nduk-l/Il/Yaa l/Sad(‚
dukU-l/PaYaRSTaiNaTaMbMae%l/aMa( )) 18 ))
tato dadarçopavane vara-striyaà
vicitra-puñpäruëa-pallava-drume
vikréòatéà kanduka-lélayä lasadduküla-
paryasta-nitamba-mekhaläm
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; dadarça—Lord Çiva saw; upavane—in a nice forest;
vara-striyam—a very beautiful woman; vicitra—of many varieties;
puñpa—flowers; aruëa—pink; pallava—leaves; drume—in the midst of the
trees; vikréòatém—engaged in playing; kanduka—with a ball; lélayä—by
pastimes of playing; lasat—shining; duküla—by a sari; paryasta—covered;
nitamba—on her hips; mekhaläm—dressed with a belt.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, in a nice forest nearby, full of trees with reddish-pink leaves and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
535
varieties of flowers, Lord Çiva saw a beautiful woman playing with a ball. Her
hips were covered with a shining sari and ornamented with a belt.
TEXT 19
AavTaRNaaeÜTaRNak-iMPaTaSTaNa‚
Pa[k*-íharaeå>arE" Pade Pade )
Pa[>aJYaMaaNaaiMav MaDYaTaêl/Ta(‚
PadPa[val&/ NaYaTaq& TaTaSTaTa" )) 19 ))
ävartanodvartana-kampita-stanaprakåñöa-
häroru-bharaiù pade pade
prabhajyamänäm iva madhyataç calatpada-
pravälaà nayatéà tatas tataù
SYNONYMS
ävartana—by the falling down; udvartana—and springing up;
kampita—trembling; stana—of the two breasts; prakåñöa—beautiful;
hära—and of garlands; uru-bharaiù—because of the heavy load; pade pade—at
every step; prabhajyamänäm iva—as if breaking; madhyataù—in the middle
portion of the body; calat—moving like that; pada-pravälam—feet reddish like
coral; nayatém—moving; tataù tataù—here and there.
TRANSLATION
Because the ball was falling down and bouncing up, as She played with it
Her breasts trembled, and because of the weight of those breasts and Her heavy
flower garlands, Her waist appeared to be all but breaking at every step, as Her
two soft feet, which were reddish like coral, moved here and there.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
536
TEXT 20
id+au >a]MaTk-Nduk-caPalE/>a*RXa&
Pa[aeiÜGanTaaraYaTal/ael/l/aecNaaMa( )
Svk-<aRiv>a]aiJaTaku-<@l/aeçSaTa(‚
k-Paael/Naql/al/k-Mai<@TaaNaNaaMa( )) 20 ))
dikñu bhramat-kanduka-cäpalair bhåçaà
prodvigna-täräyata-lola-locanäm
sva-karëa-vibhräjita-kuëòalollasatkapola-
nélälaka-maëòitänanäm
SYNONYMS
dikñu—in all directions; bhramat—moving; kanduka—of the ball;
cäpalaiù—restlessness; bhåçam—now and then; prodvigna—full of anxieties;
tära—eyes; äyata—broad; lola—restless; locanäm—with such eyes;
sva-karëa—on Her own two ears; vibhräjita—illuminating; kuëòala—earrings;
ullasat—shining; kapola—cheeks; néla—bluish; alaka—with hair;
maëòita—was decorated; änanäm—face.
TRANSLATION
The woman's face was decorated by broad, beautiful, restless eyes, which
moved as the ball bounced here and there from Her hand. The two brilliant
earrings on Her ears decorated Her shining cheeks like bluish reflections, and
the hair scattered on Her face made Her even more beautiful to see.
TEXT 21
ëQad( dukU-l&/ k-brq& c ivCYauTaa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
537
SaàùTaq& vaMak-re<a vLGauNaa )
iviNaganTaqMaNYak-re<a k-Nduk&-
ivMaaehYaNTaq& JaGadaTMaMaaYaYaa )) 21 ))
çlathad dukülaà kabaréà ca vicyutäà
sannahyatéà väma-kareëa valgunä
vinighnatém anya-kareëa kandukaà
vimohayantéà jagad-ätma-mäyayä
SYNONYMS
çlathat—slipping or slackening; dukülam—the sari; kabarém ca—and the hair
on the head; vicyutäm—being slackened and scattered; sannahyatém—trying
to bind; väma-kareëa—with the left hand; valgunä—very beautifully
attractive; vinighnatém—striking; anya-kareëa—with the right hand;
kandukam—the ball; vimohayantém—in this way captivating everyone;
jagat—the whole world; ätma-mäyayä—by the spiritual potency, the internal
energy.
TRANSLATION
As She played with the ball, the sari covering Her body became loose, and
Her hair scattered. She tried to bind Her hair with Her beautiful left hand, and
at the same time She played with the ball by striking it with Her right hand.
This was so attractive that the Supreme Lord, by His internal potency, in this
way captivated everyone.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (7.14) it is said, daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé mama mäyä
duratyayä: the external potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
extremely strong. Indeed, everyone is fully captivated by her activities. Lord
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
538
Çambhu (Çiva) was not to be captivated by the external potency, but because
Lord Viñëu wanted to captivate Him also, He exhibited His internal potency
to act the way that His external potency acts to captivate ordinary living
entities. Lord Viñëu can captivate anyone, even such a strong personality as
Lord Çambhu.
TEXT 22
Taa& vq+Ya dev wiTa k-Nduk-l/Il/Yaezd(‚
v]q@aSfu-$=iSMaTaivSa*ík-$=a+aMauí" )
ñqPa[e+a<aPa[iTaSaMaq+a<aivûl/aTMaa
NaaTMaaNaMaiNTak- oMaa& SvGa<aa&ê ved )) 22 ))
täà vékñya deva iti kanduka-lélayeñadvréòäsphuöa-
smita-visåñöa-kaöäkña-muñöaù
stré-prekñaëa-pratisamékñaëa-vihvalätmä
nätmänam antika umäà sva-gaëäàç ca veda
SYNONYMS
täm—Her; vékñya—after observing; devaù—Lord Çambhu; iti—in this way;
kanduka-lélayä—by playing with the ball; éñat—slight; vréòä—by bashfulness;
asphuöa—not very distinct; smita—with smiling; visåñöa—sent;
kaöäkña-muñöaù—defeated by the glances; stré-prekñaëa—by glancing at that
beautiful woman; pratisamékñaëa—and by constantly being watched by Her;
vihvala-ätmä—whose mind was agitated; na—not; ätmänam—himself;
antike—(situated) nearby; umäm—his wife, mother Umä; sva-gaëän ca—and
his associates; veda—Lord Çiva could understand.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
539
While Lord Çiva observed the beautiful woman playing with the ball, She
sometimes glanced at him and slightly smiled in bashfulness. As he looked at the
beautiful woman and She watched him, he forgot both himself and Umä, his
most beautiful wife, as well as his associates nearby.
PURPORT
The material bondage of this world is that a beautiful woman can captivate
a handsome man and that a handsome man can captivate a beautiful woman.
Such are the affairs that began when Lord Çiva observed the beautiful girl
playing with the ball. In such activities, the influence of Cupid is very
prominent. As both parties move their eyebrows and glance at one another,
their lusty desires increase more and more. Such reciprocations of lusty desire
took place between Lord Çiva and the beautiful woman, even though Umä and
Lord Çiva's associates were by Lord Çiva's side. Such is the attraction between
man and woman in the material world. Lord Çiva was supposed to be above all
this attraction, but he was victimized by the captivating power of Lord Viñëu.
Åñabhadeva thus explains the nature of lusty attraction:
puàsaù striyä mithuné-bhävam etaà
tayor mitho hådaya-granthim ähuù
ato gåha-kñetra-sutäpta-vittair
janasya moho 'yam ahaà mameti
"The attraction between male and female is the basic principle of material
existence. On the basis of this misconception, which ties together the hearts of
the male and female, one becomes attracted to his body, home, property,
children, relatives and wealth. In this way one increases life's illusions and
thinks in terms of 'I and mine.' " (SB 5.5.8) When a man and woman exchange
feelings of lust, both of them are victimized, and thus they are bound to this
material world in various ways.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
540
TEXT 23
TaSYaa" k-raGa]aTa( Sa Tau k-Nduk-ae Yada
GaTaae ivdUr& TaMaNauv]JaiTñYaa" )
vaSa" SaSaU}a& l/gau MaaåTaae_hrd(
>avSYa devSYa ik-l/aNauPaXYaTa" )) 23 ))
tasyäù karägrät sa tu kanduko yadä
gato vidüraà tam anuvrajat-striyäù
väsaù sasütraà laghu märuto 'harad
bhavasya devasya kilänupaçyataù
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—of the beautiful woman; kara-agrät—from the hand; saù—that;
tu—but; kandukaù—the ball; yadä—when; gataù—had gone; vidüram—far
off; tam—that ball; anuvrajat—began to follow; striyäù—of that woman;
väsaù—the covering dress; sa-sütram—with the belt; laghu—because of being
very fine; märutaù—the breeze; aharat—blew away; bhavasya—while Lord
Çiva; devasya—the chief demigod; kila—indeed; anupaçyataù—was always
looking.
TRANSLATION
When the ball leaped from Her hand and fell at a distance, the woman began
to follow it, but as Lord Çiva observed these activities, a breeze suddenly blew
away the fine dress and belt that covered her.
TEXT 24
Wv& Taa& åicraPaa(r)q& dXaRNaqYaa& MaNaaerMaaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
541
d*îa TaSYaa& MaNaê§e- ivzÂNTYaa& >av" ik-l/ )) 24 ))
evaà täà ruciräpäìgéà
darçanéyäà manoramäm
dåñövä tasyäà manaç cakre
viñajjantyäà bhavaù kila
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; täm—Her; rucira-apäìgém—possessing all attractive
features; darçanéyäm—pleasing to see; manoramäm—beautifully formed;
dåñövä—seeing; tasyäm—upon Her; manaù cakre—thought; viñajjantyäm—to
be attracted by him; bhavaù—Lord Çiva; kila—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Thus Lord Çiva saw the woman, every part of whose body was beautifully
formed, and the beautiful woman also looked at him. Therefore, thinking that
She was attracted to him, Lord Çiva became very much attracted to Her.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva was observing every part of the woman's body, and She was also
glancing at him with restless eyes. Thus Çiva thought that She was also
attracted to him, and now he wanted to touch Her.
TEXT 25
TaYaaPaôTaivjaNaSTaTk*-TaSMarivûl/" )
>avaNYaa AiPa PaXYaNTYaa GaTahqSTaTPad& YaYaaE )) 25 ))
tayäpahåta-vijïänas
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
542
tat-kåta-smara-vihvalaù
bhavänyä api paçyantyä
gata-hrés tat-padaà yayau
SYNONYMS
tayä—by Her; apahåta—taken away; vijïänaù—good sense; tat-kåta—done by
Her; smara—by the smiling; vihvalaù—having become mad for Her;
bhavänyäù—while Bhaväné, the wife of Lord Çiva; api—although;
paçyantyäù—was seeing all these incidents; gata-hréù—bereft of all shame;
tat-padam—to the place where She was situated; yayau—went.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çiva, his good sense taken away by the woman because of lusty desires
to enjoy with Her, became so mad for Her that even in the presence of Bhaväné
he did not hesitate to approach Her.
TEXT 26
Saa TaMaaYaaNTaMaal/aeKYa ivvña v]qi@Taa >a*XaMa( )
iNal/IYaMaaNaa v*+aezu hSaNTaq NaaNviTaïTa )) 26 ))
sä tam äyäntam älokya
vivasträ vréòitä bhåçam
niléyamänä våkñeñu
hasanté nänvatiñöhata
SYNONYMS
sä—that woman; tam—Lord Çiva; äyäntam—who was coming near;
älokya—seeing; vivasträ—She was naked; vréòitä—very bashful; bhåçam—so
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
543
much; niléyamänä—was hiding; våkñeñu—among the trees; hasanté—smiling;
na—not; anvatiñöhata—stood in one place.
TRANSLATION
The beautiful woman was already naked, and when She saw Lord Çiva
coming toward Her, She became extremely bashful. Thus She kept smiling, but
She hid Herself among the trees and did not stand in one place.
TEXT 27
TaaMaNvGaC^d( >aGavaNa( >av" Pa[MauizTaeiNd]Ya" )
k-aMaSYa c vXa& NaqTa" k-re<auiMav YaUQaPa" )) 27 ))
täm anvagacchad bhagavän
bhavaù pramuñitendriyaù
kämasya ca vaçaà nétaù
kareëum iva yüthapaù
SYNONYMS
täm—Her; anvagacchat—followed; bhagavän—Lord Çiva; bhavaù—known as
Bhava; pramuñita-indriyaù—whose senses were agitated; kämasya—of lusty
desires; ca—and; vaçam—victimized; nétaù—having become; kareëum—a
female elephant; iva—just as; yüthapaù—a male elephant.
TRANSLATION
His senses being agitated, Lord Çiva, victimized by lusty desires, began to
follow Her, just as a lusty elephant follows a she-elephant.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
544
TEXT 28
Saae_Nauv]JYaaiTaveGaeNa Ga*hqTvaiNaC^Taq& iñYaMa( )
ke-XabNDa oPaaNaqYa bahu>Yaa& PairzSvJae )) 28 ))
so 'nuvrajyätivegena
gåhétvänicchatéà striyam
keça-bandha upänéya
bähubhyäà pariñasvaje
SYNONYMS
saù—Lord Çiva; anuvrajya—following Her; ati-vegena—with great speed;
gåhétvä—catching; anicchatém—although She was not willing to be caught;
striyam—the woman; keça-bandhe—on the cluster of hair; upänéya—dragging
Her near; bähubhyäm—with his arms; pariñasvaje—embraced Her.
TRANSLATION
After following Her with great speed, Lord Çiva caught Her by the braid of
Her hair and dragged Her near him. Although She was unwilling, he embraced
Her with his arms.
TEXTS 29-30
SaaePaGaU!a >aGavTaa k-ir<aa k-ir<aq YaQaa )
wTaSTaTa" Pa[SaPaRNTaq ivPa[k-I<aRiXaraeåha )) 29 ))
AaTMaaNa& MaaeciYaTva(r) SaurzR>a>auJaaNTaraTa( )
Pa[ad]vTSaa Pa*Qaué[ae<aq MaaYaa deviviNaiMaRTaa )) 30 ))
sopagüòhä bhagavatä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
545
kariëä kariëé yathä
itas tataù prasarpanté
viprakérëa-çiroruhä
ätmänaà mocayitväìga
surarñabha-bhujäntarät
prädravat sä påthu-çroëé
mäyä deva-vinirmitä
SYNONYMS
sä—the woman; upagüòhä—being captured and embraced; bhagavatä—by
Lord Çiva; kariëä—by a male elephant; kariëé—a she-elephant; yathä—as; itaù
tataù—here and there; prasarpanté—swirling like a snake;
viprakérëa—scattered; çiroruhä—all the hair on Her head; ätmänam—Herself;
mocayitvä—releasing; aìga—O King; sura-åñabha—of the best of the
demigods (Lord Çiva); bhuja-antarät—from the entanglement in the midst of
the arms; prädravat—began to run very fast; sä—She; påthu-çroëé—bearing
very large hips; mäyä—internal potency; deva-vinirmitä—exhibited by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Being embraced by Lord Çiva like a female elephant embraced by a male, the
woman, whose hair was scattered, swirled like a snake. O King, this woman,
who had large, high hips, was a woman of yogamäyä presented by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. She released Herself somehow or other from the fond
embrace of Lord Çiva's arms and ran away.
TEXT 31
TaSYaaSaaE Padvq& åd]ae ivZ<aaerd(>auTak-MaR<a" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
546
Pa[TYaPaÛTa k-aMaeNa vEir<aev iviNaiJaRTa" )) 31 ))
tasyäsau padavéà rudro
viñëor adbhuta-karmaëaù
pratyapadyata kämena
vairiëeva vinirjitaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of He who is the Supreme Lord; asau—Lord Çiva; padavém—the place;
rudraù—Lord Çiva; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; adbhuta-karmaëaù—of He who
acts very wonderfully; pratyapadyata—began to follow; kämena—by lusty
desire; vairiëä iva—as if by an enemy; vinirjitaù—being harassed.
TRANSLATION
As if harassed by an enemy in the form of lusty desires, Lord Çiva followed
the path of Lord Viñëu, who acts very wonderfully and who had taken the form
of Mohiné.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva cannot be victimized by mäyä. Therefore it is to be understood
that Lord Çiva was being thus harassed by Lord Viñëu's internal potency. Lord
Viñëu can perform many wonderful activities through His various potencies.
paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate
sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca
(Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.8)
[Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]
The Supreme Lord has various potencies, by which He can act very efficiently.
To do anything expertly, He doesn't even need to contemplate. Since Lord
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
547
Çiva was being harassed by the woman, it is to be understood that this was
being done not by a woman but by Lord Viñëu Himself.
TEXT 32
TaSYaaNauDaavTaae reTaêSk-NdaMaaegareTaSa" )
éuiZMa<aae YaUQaPaSYaev vaiSaTaaMaNauDaavTa" )) 32 ))
tasyänudhävato retaç
caskandämogha-retasaù
çuñmiëo yüthapasyeva
väsitäm anudhävataù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of him (Lord Çiva); anudhävataù—who was following; retaù—the
semen; caskanda—discharged; amogha-retasaù—of that person whose
discharge of semen never goes in vain; çuñmiëaù—mad; yüthapasya—of a male
elephant; iva—just like; väsitäm—to a female elephant able to conceive
pregnancy; anudhävataù—following.
TRANSLATION
Just as a maddened bull elephant follows a female elephant who is able to
conceive pregnancy, Lord Çiva followed the beautiful woman and discharged
semen, even though his discharge of semen never goes in vain.
TEXT 33
Ya}a Ya}aaPaTaNMaùa& reTaSTaSYa MahaTMaNa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
548
TaaiNa æPYaSYa heManê +ae}aa<YaaSaNMahqPaTae )) 33 ))
yatra yaträpatan mahyäà
retas tasya mahätmanaù
täni rüpyasya hemnaç ca
kñeträëy äsan mahé-pate
SYNONYMS
yatra—wherever; yatra—and wherever; apatat—fell; mahyäm—on the surface
of the world; retaù—the semen; tasya—of him; mahä-ätmanaù—of the great
personality (Lord Çiva); täni—all those places; rüpyasya—of silver;
hemnaù—of gold; ca—and; kñeträëi—mines; äsan—became; mahé-pate—O
King.
TRANSLATION
O King, wheresoever on the surface of the globe fell the semen of the great
personality of Lord Çiva, mines of gold and silver later appeared.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments that those who seek gold
and silver can worship Lord Çiva for material opulences. Lord Çiva lives under
a bael tree and does not even construct a house in which to dwell, but although
he is apparently poverty-stricken, his devotees are sometimes opulently
endowed with large quantities of silver and gold. Parékñit Mahäräja later asks
about this, and Çukadeva Gosvämé replies.
TEXT 34
SairTSar"Sau XaEle/zu vNaezUPavNaezu c )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
549
Ya}a Kv caSaà*zYaSTa}a SaiàihTaae hr" )) 34 ))
sarit-saraùsu çaileñu
vaneñüpavaneñu ca
yatra kva cäsann åñayas
tatra sannihito haraù
SYNONYMS
sarit—near the shores of the rivers; saraùsu—and near the lakes; çaileñu—near
the mountains; vaneñu—in the forests; upavaneñu—in the gardens or small
forests; ca—also; yatra—wherever; kva—anywhere; ca—also; äsan—were
exiting; åñayaù—great sages; tatra—there; sannihitaù—was present;
haraù—Lord Çiva.
TRANSLATION
Following Mohiné, Lord Çiva went everywhere—near the shores of the
rivers and lakes, near the mountains, near the forests, near the gardens, and
wherever there lived great sages.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks that Mohiné-mürti dragged
Lord Çiva to so many places, especially to where the great sages lived, to
instruct the sages that their Lord Çiva had become mad for a beautiful woman.
Thus although they were all great sages and saintly persons, they should not
think themselves free, but should remain extremely cautious about beautiful
women. No one should think himself liberated in the presence of a beautiful
woman. The çästras enjoin:
mäträ svasrä duhiträ vä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
550
näviviktäsano bhavet
balavän indriya-grämo
vidväàsam api karñati
"One should not stay in a solitary place with a woman, even if she be his
mother, sister or daughter, for the senses are so uncontrollably powerful that in
the presence of a woman one may become agitated, even if he is very learned
and advanced." (SB 9.19.17)
TEXT 35
Sk-àe reTaiSa Saae_PaXYadaTMaaNa& devMaaYaYaa )
Ja@qk*-Ta& Na*Paé[eï SaNNYavTaRTa k-XMal/aTa( )) 35 ))
skanne retasi so 'paçyad
ätmänaà deva-mäyayä
jaòékåtaà nåpa-çreñöha
sannyavartata kaçmalät
SYNONYMS
skanne—when fully discharged; retasi—the semen; saù—Lord Çiva;
apaçyat—saw; ätmänam—his own self; deva-mäyayä—by the mäyä of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; jaòékåtam—had become victimized as a fool;
nåpa-çreñöha—O best of kings (Mahäräja Parékñit); sannyavartata—restrained
himself further; kaçmalät—from illusion.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, best of kings, when Lord Çiva had fully discharged
semen, he could see how he himself had been victimized by the illusion created
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus he restrained himself from any
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
551
further mäyä.
PURPORT
Once one is agitated by lusty desires upon seeing a woman, those desires
increase more and more, but when semen is discharged in the act of sex, the
lusty desires diminish. The same principle acted upon Lord Çiva. He was
allured by the beautiful woman Mohiné-mürti, but when his semen had been
fully discharged, he came to his senses and realized how he had been victimized
as soon as he saw the woman in the forest. If one is trained to protect his
semen by observing celibacy, naturally he is not attracted by the beauty of a
woman. If one can remain a brahmacäré, he saves himself so much trouble in
material existence. Material existence means enjoying the pleasure of sexual
intercourse (yan maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukham [SB 7.9.45]). If one is educated
about sex life and is trained to protect his semen, he is saved from the danger
of material existence.
TEXT 36
AQaavGaTaMaahaTMYa AaTMaNaae JaGadaTMaNa" )
APairjeYavqYaRSYa Na MaeNae Taduhad(>auTaMa( )) 36 ))
athävagata-mähätmya
ätmano jagad-ätmanaù
aparijïeya-véryasya
na mene tad u hädbhutam
SYNONYMS
atha—thus; avagata—being fully convinced about; mähätmyaù—the greatness;
ätmanaù—of himself; jagat-ätmanaù—and of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; aparijïeya-véryasya—who has unlimited potency; na—not;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
552
mene—did consider; tat—the miraculous activities of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in bewildering him; u ha—certainly; adbhutam—as wonderful.
TRANSLATION
Thus Lord Çiva could understand his position and that of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who has unlimited potencies. Having reached this
understanding, he was not at all surprised by the wonderful way Lord Viñëu
had acted upon him.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is known as all-powerful because no
one can excel Him in any activity. In Bhagavad-gétä (7.7) the Lord says, mattaù
parataraà nänyat kiïcid asti dhanaïjaya: "O conqueror of wealth, there is no
truth superior to Me." No one can equal the Lord or be greater than Him, for
He is the master of everyone. As stated in Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 5.142),
ekale éçvara kåñëa, ära saba bhåtya. The Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa, is the only master of everyone, including even Lord Çiva, what to speak
of others. Lord Çiva was already aware of the supreme power of Lord Viñëu,
but when he was actually put into bewilderment, he felt proud to have such an
exalted master.
TEXT 37
TaMaiv(c)-vMav]q@Maal/+Ya MaDauSaUdNa" )
ovac ParMaPa[qTaae ib>a]TSva& PaaEåzq& TaNauMa( )) 37 ))
tam aviklavam avréòam
älakñya madhusüdanaù
uväca parama-préto
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
553
bibhrat sväà pauruñéà tanum
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Lord Çiva); aviklavam—without being agitated by the incident
that had taken place; avréòam—without being ashamed; älakñya—seeing;
madhu-südanaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is known as
Madhusüdana, the killer of the demon Madhu; uväca—said;
parama-prétaù—being very pleased; bibhrat—assuming; sväm—His own;
pauruñém—original; tanum—form.
TRANSLATION
Seeing Lord Çiva unagitated and unashamed, Lord Viñëu [Madhusüdana]
was very pleased. Thus He resumed His original form and spoke as follows.
PURPORT
Although Lord Çiva was aghast at the potency of Lord Viñëu, he did not
feel ashamed. Rather, he was proud to be defeated by Lord Viñëu. Nothing is
hidden from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for He is in everyone's
heart. Indeed, the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), sarvasya cähaà hådi
sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: "I am seated in everyone's heart,
and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." Whatever
happened had taken place under the direction of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and therefore there was no cause to be sorry or ashamed. Although
Lord Çiva is never defeated by anyone, when defeated by Lord Viñëu he felt
proud that he had such an exalted and powerful master.
TEXT 38
é[q>aGavaNauvac
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
554
idíya Tv& ivbuDaé[eï Sva& iNaïaMaaTMaNaa iSQaTa" )
YaNMae ñqæPaYaa SvEr& MaaeihTaae_PYa(r) MaaYaYaa )) 38 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
diñöyä tvaà vibudha-çreñöha
sväà niñöhäm ätmanä sthitaù
yan me stré-rüpayä svairaà
mohito 'py aìga mäyayä
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; diñöyä—all
auspiciousness; tvam—unto you; vibudha-çreñöha—O best of all the demigods;
sväm—in your own; niñöhäm—fixed situation; ätmanä—of your own self;
sthitaù—you are situated; yat—as; me—Mine; stré-rüpayä—appearance like a
woman; svairam—sufficiently; mohitaù—enchanted; api—in spite of;
aìga—O Lord Çiva; mäyayä—by My potency.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O best of the demigods, although
you have been amply harassed because of My potency in assuming the form of a
woman, you are established in your position. Therefore, may all good fortune be
upon you.
PURPORT
Since Lord Çiva is the best of the demigods, he is the best of all devotees
(vaiñëavänäà yathä çambhuù). His exemplary character was therefore praised
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who gave His benediction by saying,
"May all good fortune be upon you." When a devotee becomes a little proud,
the Supreme Lord sometimes exhibits His supreme power to dissipate the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
555
devotee's misunderstanding. After being amply harassed by Lord Viñëu's
potency, Lord Çiva resumed his normal, unagitated condition. This is the
position of a devotee. A devotee should not be agitated under any
circumstances, even in the worst reverses. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä
(6.22), yasmin sthito na duùkhena guruëäpi vicälyate: because of his full faith in
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a devotee is never agitated, even in the
greatest trials. This pridelessness is possible only for the first-class devotees, of
whom Lord Çambhu is one.
TEXT 39
k-ae Nau Mae_iTaTareNMaaYaa& ivz¢-STvd*Tae PauMaaNa( )
Taa&STaaiNvSa*JaTaq& >aavaNduSTaraMak*-TaaTMai>a" )) 39 ))
ko nu me 'titaren mäyäà
viñaktas tvad-åte pumän
täàs tän visåjatéà bhävän
dustaräm akåtätmabhiù
SYNONYMS
kaù—what; nu—indeed; me—My; atitaret—can surpass; mäyäm—illusory
energy; viñaktaù—attached to material sense enjoyment; tvat-åte—except for
you; pumän—person; tän—such conditions; tän—unto the materially attached
persons; visåjatém—in surpassing; bhävän—reactions of material activities;
dustaräm—very difficult to surmount; akåta-ätmabhiù—by persons unable to
control their senses.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord Çambhu, who within this material world but you can surpass
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
556
My illusory energy? People are generally attached to sense enjoyment and
conquered by its influence. Indeed, the influence of material nature is very
difficult for them to surmount.
PURPORT
Of the three chief demigods—Brahmä, Viñëu and Maheçvara—all but
Viñëu are under the influence of mäyä. In Caitanya-caritämåta, they are
described as mäyé, which means "under mäyä's influence." But even though
Lord Çiva associates with mäyä, he is not influenced. The living entities are
affected by mäyä, but although Lord Çiva apparently associates with mäyä, he
is not affected. In other words, all living entities within this material world
except for Lord Çiva are swayed by mäyä. Lord Çiva is therefore neither
viñëu-tattva nor jéva-tattva. He is between the two.
TEXT 40
SaeYa& Gau<aMaYaq MaaYaa Na TvaMai>a>aivZYaiTa )
MaYaa SaMaeTaa k-ale/Na k-al/æPae<a >aaGaXa" )) 40 ))
seyaà guëa-mayé mäyä
na tväm abhibhaviñyati
mayä sametä kälena
käla-rüpeëa bhägaçaù
SYNONYMS
sä—that insurmountable; iyam—this; guëa-mayé—consisting of the three
modes of material nature; mäyä—illusory energy; na—not; tväm—you;
abhibhaviñyati—will be able to bewilder in the future; mayä—with Me;
sametä—joined; kälena—eternal time; käla-rüpeëa—in the form of time;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
557
bhägaçaù—with her different parts.
TRANSLATION
The material, external energy [mäyä], who cooperates with Me in creation
and who is manifested in the three modes of nature, will not be able to bewilder
you any longer.
PURPORT
When Lord Çiva was present, his wife, Durgä, was also there. Durgä works
in cooperation with the Supreme Personality of Godhead in creating the
cosmic manifestation. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10), mayädhyakñeëa
prakåtiù süyate sacaräcaram: "The material energy [prakåti] works under My
direction, O son of Kunté, and is producing all moving and unmoving beings."
Prakåti is Durgä.
såñöi-sthiti-pralaya-sädhana-çaktir ekä
chäyeva yasya bhuvanäni bibharti durgä
[Bs. 5.44]
The entire cosmos is created by Durgä in cooperation with Lord Viñëu in the
form of käla, time. Sa ékñata lokän nu såjä. Sa imäû lokän asåjata. This is the
version of the Vedas (Aitareya Upaniñad 1.1.1-2). Mäyä happens to be the wife
of Lord Çiva, and thus Lord Çiva is in association with mäyä, but Lord Viñëu
here assures Lord Çiva that this mäyä will no longer be able to captivate him.
TEXT 41
é[qéuk- ovac
Wv& >aGavTaa raJaNa( é[qvTSaaªeNa SaTk*-Ta" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
558
AaMaN}Ya Ta& Pair§-MYa SaGa<a" Sval/Ya& YaYaaE )) 41 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evaà bhagavatä räjan
çrévatsäìkena sat-kåtaù
ämantrya taà parikramya
sagaëaù svälayaà yayau
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; bhagavatä—by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; räjan—O King; çrévatsa-aìkena—who
always carries the mark of Çrévatsa on His breast; sat-kåtaù—being very much
applauded; ämantrya—taking permission from; tam—Him;
parikramya—circumambulating; sa-gaëaù—with his associates;
sva-älayam—to his own abode; yayau—went back.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, having thus been praised by the Supreme
Personality, who bears the mark of Çrévatsa on His chest, Lord Çiva
circumambulated Him. Then, after taking permission from Him, Lord Çiva
returned to his abode, Kailäsa, along with his associates.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks that when Lord Çiva was
offering obeisances unto Lord Viñëu, Lord Viñëu arose and embraced him.
Therefore the word çrévatsäìkena is used here. The mark of Çrévatsa adorns the
chest of Lord Viñëu, and therefore when Lord Viñëu embraced Lord Çiva while
being circumambulated, the Çrévatsa mark touched Lord Çiva's bosom.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
559
TEXT 42
AaTMaa&Xa>aUTaa& Taa& MaaYaa& >avaNaq& >aGavaN>av" )
SaMMaTaaMa*izMau:YaaNaa& Pa[qTYaacíaQa >aarTa )) 42 ))
ätmäàça-bhütäà täà mäyäà
bhavänéà bhagavän bhavaù
sammatäm åñi-mukhyänäà
prétyäcañöätha bhärata
SYNONYMS
ätma-aàça-bhütäm—a potency of the Supreme Soul; täm—unto her;
mäyäm—the illusory energy; bhaväném—who is the wife of Lord Çiva;
bhagavän—the powerful; bhavaù—Lord Çiva; sammatäm—accepted;
åñi-mukhyänäm—by the great sages; prétyä—in jubilation; äcañöa—began to
address; atha—then; bhärata—O Mahäräja Parékñit, descendant of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O descendant of Bharata Mahäräja, Lord Çiva, in jubilation, then addressed
his wife, Bhaväné, who is accepted by all authorities as the potency of Lord
Viñëu.
TEXT 43
AiYa VYaPaXYaSTvMaJaSYa MaaYaa&
ParSYa Pau&Sa" PardevTaaYaa" )
Ah& k-l/aNaaMa*z>aae_iPa Mauùe
YaYaavXaae_NYae ik-MauTaaSvTaN}aa" )) 43 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
560
ayi vyapaçyas tvam ajasya mäyäà
parasya puàsaù para-devatäyäù
ahaà kalänäm åñabho 'pi muhye
yayävaço 'nye kim utäsvatanträù
SYNONYMS
ayi—oh; vyapaçyaù—have seen; tvam—you; ajasya—of the unborn;
mäyäm—the illusory energy; parasya puàsaù—of the Supreme Person;
para-devatäyäù—the Absolute Truth; aham—myself; kalänäm—of plenary
portions; åñabhaù—the chief; api—although; muhye—became bewildered;
yayä—by her; avaçaù—imperceptibly; anye—others; kim uta—what to speak
of; asvatanträù—fully dependent on mäyä.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çiva said: O Goddess, you have now seen the illusory energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the unborn master of everyone.
Although I am one of the principal expansions of His Lordship, even I was
illusioned by His energy. What then is to be said of others, who are fully
dependent on mäyä?
TEXT 44
Ya& MaaMaPa*C^STvMauPaeTYa YaaeGaaTa(
SaMaaSahóaNTa oPaarTa& vE )
Sa Wz Saa+aaTa( Pauåz" Paura<aae
Na Ya}a k-al/ae ivXaTae Na ved" )) 44 ))
yaà mäm apåcchas tvam upetya yogät
samä-sahasränta upärataà vai
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
561
sa eña säkñät puruñaù puräëo
na yatra kälo viçate na vedaù
SYNONYMS
yam—about whom; mäm—from me; apåcchaù—inquired; tvam—you;
upetya—coming near me; yogät—from performing mystic yoga; samä—years;
sahasra-ante—at the end of one thousand; upäratam—ceasing; vai—indeed;
saù—He; eñaù—here is; säkñät—directly; puruñaù—the Supreme Person;
puräëaù—the original; na—not; yatra—where; kälaù—eternal time;
viçate—can enter; na—nor; vedaù—the Vedas.
TRANSLATION
When I finished performing mystic yoga for one thousand years, you asked
me upon whom I was meditating. Now, here is that Supreme Person to whom
time has no entrance and who the Vedas cannot understand.
PURPORT
Eternal time enters anywhere and everywhere, but it cannot enter the
kingdom of god. Nor can the Vedas understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This is an indication of the Lord's being omnipotent, omnipresent
and omniscient.
TEXT 45
é[qéuk- ovac
wiTa Tae_i>aihTaSTaaTa iv§-Ma" Xaa(r)RDaNvNa" )
iSaNDaaeiNaRMaRQaNae YaeNa Da*Ta" Pa*ïe Mahacl/" )) 45 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
562
çré-çuka uväca
iti te 'bhihitas täta
vikramaù çärìga-dhanvanaù
sindhor nirmathane yena
dhåtaù påñöhe mahäcalaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; te—unto you;
abhihitaù—explained; täta—my dear King; vikramaù—prowess;
çärìga-dhanvanaù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who carries the
Çärìga bow; sindhoù—of the ocean of milk; nirmathane—in the churning;
yena—by whom; dhåtaù—was held; påñöhe—on the back; mahä-acalaù—the
great mountain.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, the person who bore the great
mountain on His back for the churning of the ocean of milk is the same
Supreme Personality of Godhead, known as Çärìga-dhanvä. I have now
described to you His prowess.
TEXT 46
WTaNMauhu" k-ITaRYaTaae_Naué*<vTaae
Na irZYaTae JaaTau SaMauÛMa" KvicTa( )
YadutaMaëaek-Gau<aaNauv<aRNa&
SaMaSTaSa&SaarPairé[MaaPahMa( )) 46 ))
etan muhuù kértayato 'nuçåëvato
na riñyate jätu samudyamaù kvacit
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
563
yad uttamaçloka-guëänuvarëanaà
samasta-saàsära-pariçramäpaham
SYNONYMS
etat—this narration; muhuù—constantly; kértayataù—of one who chants;
anuçåëvataù—and also hears; na—not; riñyate—annihilated; jätu—at any
time; samudyamaù—the endeavor; kvacit—at any time; yat—because;
uttamaçloka—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
guëa-anuvarëanam—describing the transcendental qualities; samasta—all;
saàsära—of material existence; pariçrama—misery; apaham—finishing.
TRANSLATION
The endeavor of one who constantly hears or describes this narration of the
churning of the ocean of milk will never be fruitless. Indeed, chanting the
glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the only means to annihilate
all sufferings in this material world.
TEXT 47
ASadivzYaMax(iga]& >aavGaMYa& Pa[Paàa‚
NaMa*TaMaMarvYaaRNaaXaYaTa( iSaNDauMaQYaMa( )
k-Pa$=YauviTavezae MaaehYaNYa" Saurarq&‚
STaMahMauPaSa*TaaNaa& k-aMaPaUr& NaTaae_iSMa )) 47 ))
asad-aviñayam aìghrià bhäva-gamyaà prapannän
amåtam amara-varyän äçayat sindhu-mathyam
kapaöa-yuvati-veño mohayan yaù suräréàs
tam aham upasåtänäà käma-püraà nato 'smi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
564
SYNONYMS
asat-aviñayam—not understood by the atheists; aìghrim—unto the lotus feet
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhäva-gamyam—understood by
devotees; prapannän—fully surrendered; amåtam—the nectar;
amara-varyän—only unto the demigods; äçayat—gave to drink;
sindhu-mathyam—produced from the ocean of milk;
kapaöa-yuvati-veñaù—appearing as a false young girl; mohayan—captivating;
yaù—He who; sura-arén—the enemies of the demigods; tam—unto Him;
aham—I; upasåtänäm—of the devotees; käma-püram—who fulfills all desires;
nataù asmi—I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Assuming the form of a young woman and thus bewildering the demons, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead distributed to His devotees, the demigods, the
nectar produced from the churning of the ocean of milk. Unto that Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who always fulfills the desires of His devotees, I offer
my respectful obeisances.
PURPORT
The instruction of this narration concerning the churning of the milk
ocean is clearly manifested by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although
He is equal to everyone, because of natural affection He favors His devotees.
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.29):
samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu
na me dveñyo 'sti na priyaù
ye bhajanti tu mäà bhaktyä
mayi te teñu cäpy aham
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
565
"I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever
renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend
to him." This partiality of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is natural. A
person cares for his children not because of partiality but in a reciprocation of
love. The children depend on the father's affection, and the father
affectionately maintains the children. Similarly, because devotees do not know
anything but the lotus feet of the Lord, the Lord is always prepared to give
protection to His devotees and fulfill their desires. He therefore says, kaunteya
pratijänéhi na me bhaktaù praëaçyati: [Bg. 9.31] "O son of Kunté, declare it
boldly that My devotee never perishes."
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twelfth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Mohiné-mürti Incarnation Bewilders Lord
Çiva."
13. Description of Future Manus
Of the fourteen Manus, six Manus have already been described. Now, this
chapter will consecutively describe each Manu from the seventh to the
fourteenth.
The seventh Manu, who is the son of Vivasvän, is known as Çräddhadeva.
He has ten sons, named Ikñväku, Nabhaga, Dhåñöa, Çaryäti, Nariñyanta,
Näbhäga, Diñöa, Tarüña, Påñadhra and Vasumän. In this manvantara, or reign
of Manu, among the demigods are the Ädityas, Vasus, Rudras, Viçvedevas,
Maruts, Açviné-kumäras and Åbhus. The king of heaven, Indra, is known as
Purandara, and the seven sages are known as Kaçyapa, Atri, Vasiñöha,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
566
Viçvämitra, Gautama, Jamadagni and Bharadväja. During this period of Manu,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead Viñëu appears from the womb of Aditi in
His incarnation as the son of Kaçyapa.
In the period of the eighth Manu, the Manu is Sävarëi. His sons are headed
by Nirmoka, and among the demigods are the Sutapäs. Bali, the son of
Virocana, is Indra, and Gälava and Paraçuräma are among the seven sages. In
this age of Manu, the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
appears as Särvabhauma, the son of Devaguhya and Sarasvaté.
In the period of the ninth Manu, the Manu is Dakña-sävarëi. His sons are
headed by Bhütaketu, and among the demigods are the Marécigarbhas.
Adbhuta is Indra, and among the seven sages is Dyutimän. In this period of
Manu, the incarnation Åñabha is born of Äyuñmän and Ambudhärä.
In the period of the tenth Manu, the Manu is Brahma-sävarëi. Among his
sons is Bhüriñeëa, and the seven sages are Haviñmän and others. Among the
demigods are the Suväsanas, and Çambhu is Indra. The incarnation in this
period of Manu is Viñvaksena, who is a friend of Çambhu and who is born from
the womb of Viñücé in the house of a brähmaëa named Viçvasrañöä.
In the period of the eleventh Manu, the Manu is Dharma-sävarëi, who has
ten sons, headed by Satyadharma. Among the demigods are the Vihaìgamas,
Indra is known as Vaidhåta, and the seven sages are Aruëa and others. In this
manvantara, the incarnation is Dharmasetu, who is born of Vaidhåtä and
Äryaka.
In the period of the twelfth Manu, the Manu is Rudra-sävarëi, whose sons
are headed by Devavän. The demigods are the Haritas and others, Indra is
Åtadhämä, and the seven sages are Tapomürti and others. The incarnation in
this manvantara is Sudhämä, or Svadhämä, who is born from the womb of
Sunåtä. His father's name is Satyasahä.
In the period of the thirteenth Manu, the Manu is Deva-sävarëi. Among
his sons is Citrasena, the demigods are the Sukarmäs and others, Indra is
Divaspati, and Nirmoka is among the sages. The manvantara-avatära is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
567
Yogeçvara, who is born of Devahotra and Båhaté.
In the period of the fourteenth Manu, the Manu is Indra-sävarëi. Among
his sons are Uru and Gambhéra, the demigods are the Pavitras and others,
Indra is Çuci, and among the sages are Agni and Bähu. The incarnation of this
manvantara is known as Båhadbhänu. He is born of Saträyaëa from the womb
of Vitänä.
The total duration of the periods ruled by these Manus is calculated to be
one thousand catur-yugas, or 4,300,000 times 1,000 years.
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
MaNauivRvSvTa" Pau}a" é[aÖdev wiTa é[uTa" )
SaáMaae vTaRMaaNaae YaSTadPaTYaaiNa Mae é*<au )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
manur vivasvataù putraù
çräddhadeva iti çrutaù
saptamo vartamäno yas
tad-apatyäni me çåëu
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; manuù—Manu; vivasvataù—of
the sun-god; putraù—son; çräddhadevaù—as Çräddhadeva; iti—thus;
çrutaù—known, celebrated; saptamaù—seventh; vartamänaù—at the present
moment; yaù—he who; tat—his; apatyäni—children; me—from me;
çåëu—just hear.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
568
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: The present Manu, who is named Çräddhadeva, is
the son of Vivasvän, the predominating deity on the sun planet. Çräddhadeva is
the seventh Manu. Now please hear from me as I describe his sons.
TEXTS 2-3
w+vaku-NaR>aGaêEv Da*í" XaYaaRiTarev c )
NairZYaNTaae_Qa Naa>aaGa" SaáMaae idí oCYaTae )) 2 ))
Taæzê Pa*zDa]ê dXaMaae vSauMaaNSMa*Ta" )
MaNaaevOEvSvTaSYaETae dXaPau}aa" ParNTaPa )) 3 ))
ikñväkur nabhagaç caiva
dhåñöaù çaryätir eva ca
nariñyanto 'tha näbhägaù
saptamo diñöa ucyate
tarüñaç ca påñadhraç ca
daçamo vasumän småtaù
manor vaivasvatasyaite
daça-puträù parantapa
SYNONYMS
ikñväkuù—Ikñväku; nabhagaù—Nabhaga; ca—also; eva—indeed;
dhåñöaù—Dhåñöa; çaryätiù—Çaryäti; eva—certainly; ca—also;
nariñyantaù—Nariñyanta; atha—as well as; näbhägaù—Näbhäga;
saptamaù—the seventh one; diñöaù—Diñöa; ucyate—is so celebrated; tarüñaù
ca—and Tarüña; påñadhraù ca—and Påñadhra; daçamaù—the tenth one;
vasumän—Vasumän; småtaù—known; manoù—of Manu; vaivasvatasya—of
Vaivasvata; ete—all these; daça-puträù—ten sons; parantapa—O King.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
569
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, among the ten sons of Manu are Ikñväku, Nabhaga, Dhåñöa,
Çaryäti, Nariñyanta and Näbhäga. The seventh son is known as Diñöa. Then
come Tarüña and Påñadhra, and the tenth son is known as Vasumän.
TEXT 4
AaidTYaa vSavae åd]a ivìedeva MaåÓ<aa" )
AiìNaav*>avae raJaiàNd]STaeza& PaurNdr" )) 4 ))
ädityä vasavo rudrä
viçvedevä marud-gaëäù
açvinäv åbhavo räjann
indras teñäà purandaraù
SYNONYMS
ädityäù—the Ädityas; vasavaù—the Vasus; rudräù—the Rudras;
viçvedeväù—the Viçvedevas; marut-gaëäù—and the Maruts; açvinau—the two
Açviné brothers; åbhavaù—the Åbhus; räjan—O King; indraù—the king of
heaven; teñäm—of them; purandaraù—Purandara.
TRANSLATION
In this manvantara, O King, the Ädityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the
Viçvedevas, the Maruts, the two Açviné-kumära brothers and the Åbhus are the
demigods. Their head king [Indra] is Purandara.
TEXT 5
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
570
k-XYaPaae_i}avRiSaïê ivìaiMa}aae_Qa GaaETaMa" )
JaMadiGan>aRrÜaJa wiTa SaázRYa" SMa*Taa" )) 5 ))
kaçyapo 'trir vasiñöhaç ca
viçvämitro 'tha gautamaù
jamadagnir bharadväja
iti saptarñayaù småtäù
SYNONYMS
kaçyapaù—Kaçyapa; atriù—Atri; vasiñöhaù—Vasiñöha; ca—and;
viçvämitraù—Viçvämitra; atha—as well as; gautamaù—Gautama;
jamadagniù—Jamadagni; bharadväjaù—Bharadväja; iti—thus;
sapta-åñayaù—the seven sages; småtäù—celebrated.
TRANSLATION
Kaçyapa, Atri, Vasiñöha, Viçvämitra, Gautama, Jamadagni and Bharadväja
are known as the seven sages.
TEXT 6
A}aaiPa >aGavÂNMa k-XYaPaadidTaer>aUTa( )
AaidTYaaNaaMavrJaae ivZ<auvaRMaNaæPaDa*k(- )) 6 ))
aträpi bhagavaj-janma
kaçyapäd aditer abhüt
ädityänäm avarajo
viñëur vämana-rüpa-dhåk
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
571
atra—in this Manu's reign; api—certainly; bhagavat-janma—appearance of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kaçyapät—by Kaçyapa Muni; aditeù—of
mother Aditi; abhüt—became possible; ädityänäm—of the Ädityas;
avara-jaù—the youngest; viñëuù—Lord Viñëu Himself;
vämana-rüpa-dhåk—appearing as Lord Vämana.
TRANSLATION
In this manvantara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared as the
youngest of all the Ädityas, known as Vämana, the dwarf. His father was
Kaçyapa and His mother Aditi.
TEXT 7
Sa¿ePaTaae MaYaae¢-aiNa SaáMaNvNTarai<a Tae )
>aivZYaa<YaQa v+YaaiMa ivZ<aae" Xa¢-yaiNvTaaiNa c )) 7 ))
saìkñepato mayoktäni
sapta-manvantaräëi te
bhaviñyäëy atha vakñyämi
viñëoù çaktyänvitäni ca
SYNONYMS
saìkñepataù—in brief; mayä—by me; uktäni—explained; sapta—seven;
manu-antaräëi—changes of Manu; te—unto you; bhaviñyäëi—the future
Manus; atha—also; vakñyämi—I shall speak; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; çaktyä
anvitäni—empowered by the energy; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
572
I have briefly explained to you the position of the seven Manus. Now I shall
describe the future Manus, along with the incarnations of Lord Viñëu.
TEXT 8
ivvSvTaê Üe JaaYae ivìk-MaRSauTae o>ae )
Sa&ja ^aYaa c raJaeNd] Yae Pa[aGai>aihTae Tav )) 8 ))
vivasvataç ca dve jäye
viçvakarma-sute ubhe
saàjïä chäyä ca räjendra
ye präg abhihite tava
SYNONYMS
vivasvataù—of Vivasvän; ca—also; dve—two; jäye—wives;
viçvakarma-sute—the two daughters of Viçvakarmä; ubhe—both of them;
saàjïä—Saàjïä; chäyä—Chäyä; ca—and; räja-indra—O King; ye—both of
whom; präk—before; abhihite—described; tava—unto you.
TRANSLATION
O King, I have previously described [in the Sixth Canto] the two daughters
of Viçvakarmä, named Saàjïä and Chäyä, who were the first two wives of
Vivasvän.
TEXT 9
Ta*TaqYaa& v@vaMaeke- TaaSaa& Sa&jaSauTaañYa" )
YaMaae YaMaq é[aÖdevX^aYaaYaaê SauTaaH^*<au )) 9 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
573
tåtéyäà vaòaväm eke
täsäà saàjïä-sutäs trayaù
yamo yamé çräddhadevaç
chäyäyäç ca sutäï chåëu
SYNONYMS
tåtéyäm—the third wife; vaòaväm—Vaòavä; eke—some people; täsäm—of all
three wives; saàjïä-sutäù trayaù—three issues of Saàjïä; yamaù—one son
named Yama; yamé—Yamé, a daughter; çräddhadevaù—Çräddhadeva, another
son; chäyäyäù—of Chäyä; ca—and; sutän—the sons; çåëu—just hear about.
TRANSLATION
It is said that the sun-god had a third wife, named Vaòavä. Of the three
wives, the wife named Saàjïä had three children-Yama, Yamé and
Çräddhadeva. Now let me describe the children of Chäyä.
TEXT 10
Saavi<aRSTaPaTaq k-NYaa >aaYaaR Sa&vr<aSYa Yaa )
XaNaEêrSTa*TaqYaae_>aUdiìNaaE v@vaTMaJaaE )) 10 ))
sävarëis tapaté kanyä
bhäryä saàvaraëasya yä
çanaiçcaras tåtéyo 'bhüd
açvinau vaòavätmajau
SYNONYMS
sävarëiù—Sävarëi; tapaté—Tapaté; kanyä—the daughter; bhäryä—the wife;
saàvaraëasya—of King Saàvaraëa; yä—she who; çanaiçcaraù—Çanaiçcara;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
574
tåtéyaù—the third issue; abhüt—took birth; açvinau—the two Açviné-kumäras;
vaòavä-ätma-jau—the sons of the wife known as Vaòavä.
TRANSLATION
Chäyä had a son named Sävarëi and a daughter named Tapaté, who later
became the wife of King Saàvaraëa. Chäyä's third child is known as Çanaiçcara
[Saturn]. Vaòavä gave birth to two sons, namely the Açviné brothers.
TEXT 11
AíMae_NTar AaYaaTae Saavi<aR>aRivTaa MaNau" )
iNaMaaeRk-ivrJaSk-aÛa" Saavi<aRTaNaYaa Na*Pa )) 11 ))
añöame 'ntara äyäte
sävarëir bhavitä manuù
nirmoka-virajaskädyäù
sävarëi-tanayä nåpa
SYNONYMS
añöame—the eighth; antare—Manu's period; äyäte—when arrived;
sävarëiù—Sävarëi; bhavitä—will become; manuù—the eighth Manu;
nirmoka—Nirmoka; virajaska-ädyäù—Virajaska and others; sävarëi—of
Sävarëi; tanayäù—the sons; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, when the period of the eighth Manu arrives, Sävarëi will become
the Manu. Nirmoka and Virajaska will be among his sons.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
575
PURPORT
The present reign is that of Vaivasvata Manu. According to astronomical
calculations, we are now in the twenty-eighth yuga of Vaivasvata Manu. Each
Manu lives for seventy-one yugas, and fourteen such Manus rule in one day of
Lord Brahmä. We are now in the period of Vaivasvata Manu, the seventh
Manu, and the eighth Manu will come into existence after many millions of
years. But Çukadeva Gosvämé, having heard from authorities, foretells that the
eighth Manu will be Sävarëi and that Nirmoka and Virajaska will be among
his sons. Çästra can foretell what will happen millions and millions of years in
the future.
TEXT 12
Ta}a deva" SauTaPaSaae ivrJaa AMa*TaPa[>aa" )
Taeza& ivraecNaSauTaae bil/irNd]ae >aivZYaiTa )) 12 ))
tatra deväù sutapaso
virajä amåtaprabhäù
teñäà virocana-suto
balir indro bhaviñyati
SYNONYMS
tatra—in that period of Manu; deväù—the demigods; sutapasaù—the Sutapäs;
virajäù—the Virajas; amåtaprabhäù—the Amåtaprabhas; teñäm—of them;
virocana-sutaù—the son of Virocana; baliù—Mahäräja Bali; indraù—the king
of heaven; bhaviñyati—will become.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
576
In the period of the eighth Manu, among the demigods will be the Sutapäs,
the Virajas and the Amåtaprabhas. The king of the demigods, Indra, will be Bali
Mahäräja, the son of Virocana.
TEXT 13
dtveMaa& YaacMaaNaaYa ivZ<ave Ya" Pad}aYaMa( )
raÖiMaNd]Pad& ihTva TaTa" iSaiÖMavaPSYaiTa )) 13 ))
dattvemäà yäcamänäya
viñëave yaù pada-trayam
räddham indra-padaà hitvä
tataù siddhim aväpsyati
SYNONYMS
dattvä—giving in charity; imäm—this entire universe; yäcamänäya—who was
begging from him; viñëave—unto Lord Viñëu; yaù—Bali Mahäräja;
pada-trayam—three paces of land; räddham—achieved; indra-padam—the
post of Indra; hitvä—giving up; tataù—thereafter; siddhim—perfection;
aväpsyati—will achieve.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja gave a gift of three paces of land to Lord Viñëu, and because
of this charity he lost all the three worlds. Later, however, when Lord Viñëu is
pleased because of Bali's giving everything to Him, Bali Mahäräja will achieve
the perfection of life.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (7.3) it is stated, manuñyäëäà sahasreñu kaçcid yatati
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
577
siddhaye: out of many millions of people, one may attempt to achieve success
in life. This success is explained here. Räddham indra-padaà hitvä tataù
siddhim aväpsyati. Siddhi consists of achieving the favor of Lord Viñëu, not the
yoga-siddhis. The yoga-siddhis-aëimä, laghimä, mahimä, präpti, präkämya, éçitva,
vaçitva and kämävasäyitä—are temporary. The ultimate siddhi is to achieve the
favor of Lord Viñëu.
TEXT 14
Yaae_SaaE >aGavTaa bÖ" Pa[qTaeNa SauTale/ PauNa" )
iNaveiXaTaae_iDake- SvGaaRdDauNaaSTae Svrai@v )) 14 ))
yo 'sau bhagavatä baddhaù
prétena sutale punaù
niveçito 'dhike svargäd
adhunäste sva-räò iva
SYNONYMS
yaù—Bali Mahäräja; asau—he; bhagavatä—by the Personality of Godhead;
baddhaù—bound; prétena—because of favor; sutale—in the kingdom of Sutala;
punaù—again; niveçitaù—situated; adhike—more opulent; svargät—than the
heavenly planets; adhunä—at the present moment; äste—is situated; sva-räö
iva—equal to the position of Indra.
TRANSLATION
With great affection, the Personality of Godhead bound Bali and then
installed him in the kingdom of Sutala, which is more opulent than the
heavenly planets. Mahäräja Bali now resides on that planet and is more
comfortably situated than Indra.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
578
TEXTS 15-16
Gaal/vae dqiáMaaNraMaae d]ae<aPau}a" k*-PaSTaQaa )
‰ZYaé*(r)" iPaTaaSMaak&- >aGavaNbadraYa<a" )) 15 ))
wMae SaázRYaSTa}a >aivZYaiNTa SvYaaeGaTa" )
wdaNaqMaaSaTae raJaNa( Sve Sv Aaé[MaMa<@le/ )) 16 ))
gälavo déptimän rämo
droëa-putraù kåpas tathä
åñyaçåìgaù pitäsmäkaà
bhagavän bädaräyaëaù
ime saptarñayas tatra
bhaviñyanti sva-yogataù
idäném äsate räjan
sve sva äçrama-maëòale
SYNONYMS
gälavaù—Gälava; déptimän—Déptimän; rämaù—Paraçuräma;
droëa-putraù—the son of Droëäcärya, namely Açvatthämä;
kåpaù—Kåpäcärya; tathä—as well; åñyaçåìgaù—Åñyaçåìga; pitä asmäkam—our
father; bhagavän—the incarnation of Godhead; bädaräyaëaù—Vyäsadeva;
ime—all of them; sapta-åñayaù—the seven sages; tatra—in the eighth
manvantara; bhaviñyanti—will become; sva-yogataù—as a result of their
service to the Lord; idäném—at the present moment; äsate—they are all
existing; räjan—O King; sve sve—in their own; äçrama-maëòale—different
hermitages.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
579
O King, during the eighth manvantara, the great personalities Gälava,
Déptimän, Paraçuräma, Açvatthämä, Kåpäcärya, Åñyaçåìga and our father,
Vyäsadeva, the incarnation of Näräyaëa, will be the seven sages. For the
present, they are all residing in their respective äçramas.
TEXT 17
devGauùaTSarSvTYaa& SaavR>aaEMa wiTa Pa[>au" )
SQaaNa& PaurNdrad(Da*Tva bl/Yae daSYaTaqìr" )) 17 ))
devaguhyät sarasvatyäà
särvabhauma iti prabhuù
sthänaà purandaräd dhåtvä
balaye däsyatéçvaraù
SYNONYMS
devaguhyät—from His father, Devaguhya; sarasvatyäm—in the womb of
Sarasvaté; särvabhaumaù—Särvabhauma; iti—thus; prabhuù—the master;
sthänam—place; purandarät—from Lord Indra; håtvä—taking away by force;
balaye—unto Bali Mahäräja; däsyati—will give; éçvaraù—the master.
TRANSLATION
In the eighth manvantara, the greatly powerful Personality of Godhead
Särvabhauma will take birth. His father will be Devaguhya, and His mother
will be Sarasvaté. He will take the kingdom away from Purandara [Lord Indra]
and give it to Bali Mahäräja.
TEXT 18
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
580
NavMaae d+aSaavi<aRMaRNauvRå<aSaM>av" )
>aUTake-Taudsáke-TauirTYaaÛaSTaTSauTaa Na*Pa )) 18 ))
navamo dakña-sävarëir
manur varuëa-sambhavaù
bhütaketur déptaketur
ity ädyäs tat-sutä nåpa
SYNONYMS
navamaù—ninth; dakña-sävarëiù—Dakña-sävarëi; manuù—the Manu;
varuëa-sambhavaù—born as the son of Varuëa; bhütaketuù—Bhütaketu;
déptaketuù—Déptaketu; iti—thus; ädyäù—and so on; tat—his; sutäù—sons;
nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, the ninth Manu will be Dakña-sävarëi, who is born of Varuëa.
Among his sons will be Bhütaketu, and Déptaketu.
TEXT 19
PaaraMarqicGa>aaRÛa deva wNd]ae_d(>auTa" SMa*Ta" )
ÛuiTaMaTPa[Mau%aSTa}a >aivZYaNTYa*zYaSTaTa" )) 19 ))
pärä-marécigarbhädyä
devä indro 'dbhutaù småtaù
dyutimat-pramukhäs tatra
bhaviñyanty åñayas tataù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
581
pärä—the Päras; marécigarbha—the Marécigarbhas; ädyäù—like that;
deväù—the demigods; indraù—the king of heaven; adbhutaù—Adbhuta;
småtaù—known; dyutimat—Dyutimän; pramukhäù—headed by; tatra—in that
ninth period of Manu; bhaviñyanti—will become; åñayaù—the seven åñis;
tataù—then.
TRANSLATION
In this ninth manvantara, the Päras and Marécigarbhas will be among the
demigods. The king of heaven, Indra, will be named Adbhuta, and Dyutimän
will be among the seven sages.
TEXT 20
AaYauZMaTaae_MbuDaaraYaaMa*z>aae >aGavTk-l/a )
>aivTaa YaeNa Sa&raÖa& i}al/aek-I& >aae+YaTae_d(>auTa" )) 20 ))
äyuñmato 'mbudhäräyäm
åñabho bhagavat-kalä
bhavitä yena saàräddhäà
tri-lokéà bhokñyate 'dbhutaù
SYNONYMS
äyuñmataù—of the father, Äyuñmän; ambudhäräyäm—in the womb of the
mother, Ambudhärä; åñabhaù—Åñabha; bhagavat-kalä—a partial incarnation
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhavitä—will be; yena—by whom;
saàräddhäm—all-opulent; tri-lokém—the three worlds; bhokñyate—will enjoy;
adbhutaù—the Indra of the name Adbhuta.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
582
TRANSLATION
Åñabhadeva, a partial incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
will take birth from his father, Äyuñmän, and his mother, Ambudhärä. He will
enable the Indra named Adbhuta to enjoy the opulence of the three worlds.
TEXT 21
dXaMaae b]øSaavi<aRåPaëaek-SauTaae MaNau" )
TaTSauTaa >aUirze<aaÛa hivZMaTPa[Mau%a iÜJaa" )) 21 ))
daçamo brahma-sävarëir
upaçloka-suto manuù
tat-sutä bhüriñeëädyä
haviñmat pramukhä dvijäù
SYNONYMS
daçamaù—the tenth Manu; brahma-sävarëiù—Brahma-sävarëi;
upaçloka-sutaù—born of Upaçloka; manuù—will be Manu; tat-sutäù—his sons;
bhüriñeëa-ädyäù—Bhüriñeëa and others; haviñmat—Haviñmän;
pramukhäù—headed by; dvijäù—the seven sages.
TRANSLATION
The son of Upaçloka known as Brahma-sävarëi will be the tenth Manu.
Bhüriñeëa will be among his sons, and the brähmaëas headed by Haviñmän will
be the seven sages.
TEXT 22
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
583
hivZMaaNSauk*-Ta" SaTYaae JaYaae MaUiTaRSTada iÜJaa" )
SauvaSaNaivåÖaÛa deva" XaM>au" Saureìr" )) 22 ))
haviñmän sukåtaù satyo
jayo mürtis tadä dvijäù
suväsana-viruddhädyä
deväù çambhuù sureçvaraù
SYNONYMS
haviñmän—Haviñmän; sukåtaù—Sukåta; satyaù—Satya; jayaù—Jaya;
mürtiù—Mürti; tadä—at that time; dvijäù—the seven sages; suväsana—the
Suväsanas; viruddha—the Viruddhas; ädyäù—and so on; deväù—the demigods;
çambhuù—Çambhu; sura-éçvaraù—Indra, king of the demigods.
TRANSLATION
Haviñmän, Sukåta, Satya, Jaya, Mürti and others will be the seven sages, the
Suväsanas and Viruddhas will be among the demigods, and Çambhu will be their
king, Indra.
TEXT 23
ivZvKSaeNaae ivzUCYaa& Tau XaM>aae" Sa:Ya& k-irZYaiTa )
JaaTa" Sva&XaeNa >aGavaNGa*he ivìSa*Jaae iv>au" )) 23 ))
viñvakseno viñücyäà tu
çambhoù sakhyaà kariñyati
jätaù sväàçena bhagavän
gåhe viçvasåjo vibhuù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
584
SYNONYMS
viñvaksenaù—Viñvaksena; viñücyäm—in the womb of Viñücé; tu—then;
çambhoù—of Çambhu; sakhyam—friendship; kariñyati—will create;
jätaù—being born; sva-aàçena—by a plenary portion; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; gåhe—in the home; viçvasåjaù—of
Viçvasrañöä; vibhuù—the supremely powerful Lord.
TRANSLATION
In the home of Viçvasrañöä, a plenary portion of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead will appear from the womb of Viñücé as the incarnation known as
Viñvaksena. He will make friends with Çambhu.
TEXT 24
MaNauvOE DaMaRSaavi<aRrek-adXaMa AaTMavaNa( )
ANaaGaTaaSTaTSauTaaê SaTYaDaMaaRdYaae dXa )) 24 ))
manur vai dharma-sävarëir
ekädaçama ätmavän
anägatäs tat-sutäç ca
satyadharmädayo daça
SYNONYMS
manuù—the Manu; vai—indeed; dharma-sävarëiù—Dharmasävarëi;
ekädaçamaù—eleventh; ätmavän—the controller of the senses; anägatäù—will
come in the future; tat—his; sutäù—sons; ca—and;
satyadharma-ädayaù—Satyadharma and others; daça—ten.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
585
TRANSLATION
In the eleventh manvantara, the Manu will be Dharma-sävarëi, who will be
extremely learned in spiritual knowledge. From him there will come ten sons,
headed by Satyadharma.
TEXT 25
ivh(r)Maa" k-aMaGaMaa iNavaR<aåcYa" Saura" )
wNd]ê vEDa*TaSTaezaMa*zYaêaå<aadYa" )) 25 ))
vihaìgamäù kämagamä
nirväëarucayaù suräù
indraç ca vaidhåtas teñäm
åñayaç cäruëädayaù
SYNONYMS
vihaìgamäù—the Vihaìgamas; kämagamäù—the Kämagamas;
nirväëarucayaù—the Nirväëarucis; suräù—the demigods; indraù—the king of
heaven, Indra; ca—also; vaidhåtaù—Vaidhåta; teñäm—of them; åñayaù—the
seven sages; ca—also; aruëa-ädayaù—headed by Aruëa.
TRANSLATION
The Vihaìgamas, Kämagamas, Nirväëarucis and others will be the demigods.
The king of the demigods, Indra, will be Vaidhåta, and the seven sages will be
headed by Aruëa.
TEXT 26
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
586
AaYaRk-SYa SauTaSTa}a DaMaRSaeTauiriTa SMa*Ta" )
vEDa*TaaYaa& hrer&Xaiñl/aek-I& DaariYaZYaiTa )) 26 ))
äryakasya sutas tatra
dharmasetur iti småtaù
vaidhåtäyäà harer aàças
tri-lokéà dhärayiñyati
SYNONYMS
äryakasya—of Äryaka; sutaù—the son; tatra—in that period (the eleventh
manvantara); dharmasetuù—Dharmasetu; iti—thus; småtaù—celebrated;
vaidhåtäyäm—from the mother, Vaidhåtä; hareù—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; aàçaù—a partial incarnation; tri-lokém—the three worlds;
dhärayiñyati—will rule.
TRANSLATION
The son of Äryaka known as Dharmasetu, a partial incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, will appear from the womb of Vaidhåtä, the
wife of Äryaka, and will rule the three worlds.
TEXT 27
>aivTaa åd]Saav<as raJaNÜadXaMaae MaNau" )
devvaNauPadevê devé[eïadYa" SauTaa" )) 27 ))
bhavitä rudra-sävarëé
räjan dvädaçamo manuù
devavän upadevaç ca
devaçreñöhädayaù sutäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
587
SYNONYMS
bhavitä—will appear; rudra-sävarëiù—Rudra-sävarëi; räjan—O King;
dvädaçamaù—the twelfth; manuù—Manu; devavän—Devavän;
upadevaù—Upadeva; ca—and; devaçreñöha—Devaçreñöha; ädayaù—such
persons; sutäù—sons of the Manu.
TRANSLATION
O King, the twelfth Manu will be named Rudra-sävarëi. Devavän, Upadeva
and Devaçreñöha will be among his sons.
TEXT 28
‰TaDaaMaa c Ta}aeNd]ae devaê hirTaadYa" )
‰zYaê TaPaaeMaUiTaRSTaPaSVYaaGanqDa]k-adYa" )) 28 ))
åtadhämä ca tatrendro
deväç ca haritädayaù
åñayaç ca tapomürtis
tapasvy ägnédhrakädayaù
SYNONYMS
åtadhämä—Åtadhämä; ca—also; tatra—in that period; indraù—the king of
heaven; deväù—the demigods; ca—and; harita-ädayaù—headed by the
Haritas; åñayaù ca—and the seven sages; tapomürtiù—Tapomürti;
tapasvé—Tapasvé; ägnédhraka—Ägnédhraka; ädayaù—and so on.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
588
In this manvantara, the name of Indra will be Åtadhämä, and the demigods
will be headed by the Haritas. Among the sages will be Tapomürti, Tapasvé and
Ägnédhraka.
TEXT 29
SvDaaMaa:Yaae hrer&Xa" SaaDaiYaZYaiTa TaNMaNaae" )
ANTar& SaTYaSahSa" SauNa*TaaYaa" SauTaae iv>au" )) 29 ))
svadhämäkhyo harer aàçaù
sädhayiñyati tan-manoù
antaraà satyasahasaù
sunåtäyäù suto vibhuù
SYNONYMS
svadhämä-äkhyaù—Svadhämä; hareù aàçaù—a partial incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; sädhayiñyati—will rule; tat-manoù—of that
Manu; antaram—the manvantara; satyasahasaù—of Satyasahä; sunåtäyäù—of
Sunåtä; sutaù—the son; vibhuù—most powerful.
TRANSLATION
From the mother named Sunåtä and the father named Satyasahä will come
Svadhämä, a partial incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He
will rule that manvantara.
TEXT 30
MaNauñYaaedXaae >aaVYaae devSaavi<aRraTMavaNa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
589
ic}aSaeNaivic}aaÛa devSaavi<aRdehJaa" )) 30 ))
manus trayodaço bhävyo
deva-sävarëir ätmavän
citrasena-viciträdyä
deva-sävarëi-dehajäù
SYNONYMS
manuù—the Manu; trayodaçaù—thirteenth; bhävyaù—will become;
deva-sävarëiù—Deva-sävarëi; ätmavän—well advanced in spiritual knowledge;
citrasena—Citrasena; vicitra-ädyäù—and others, like Vicitra; deva-sävarëi—of
Deva-sävarëi; deha-jäù—sons.
TRANSLATION
The thirteenth Manu will be named Deva-sävarëi, and he will be very
advanced in spiritual knowledge. Among his sons will be Citrasena and Vicitra.
TEXT 31
deva" Sauk-MaRSau}aaMaSa&ja wNd]ae idvSPaiTa" )
iNaMaaeRk-TatvdXaaRÛa >aivZYaNTYa*zYaSTada )) 31 ))
deväù sukarma-suträmasaàjïä
indro divaspatiù
nirmoka-tattvadarçädyä
bhaviñyanty åñayas tadä
SYNONYMS
deväù—the demigods; sukarma—the Sukarmäs; suträma-saàjïäù—and the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
590
Suträmas; indraù—the king of heaven; divaspatiù—Divaspati;
nirmoka—Nirmoka; tattvadarça-ädyäù—and others, like Tattvadarça;
bhaviñyanti—will become; åñayaù—the seven sages; tadä—at that time.
TRANSLATION
In the thirteenth manvantara, the Sukarmäs and Suträmas will be among the
demigods, Divaspati will be the king of heaven, and Nirmoka and Tattvadarça
will be among the seven sages.
TEXT 32
devhae}aSYa TaNaYa oPahTaaR idvSPaTae" )
YaaeGaeìrae hrer&Xaae b*hTYaa& SaM>aivZYaiTa )) 32 ))
devahotrasya tanaya
upahartä divaspateù
yogeçvaro harer aàço
båhatyäà sambhaviñyati
SYNONYMS
devahotrasya—of Devahotra; tanayaù—the son; upahartä—the benefactor;
divaspateù—of Divaspati, the Indra at that time; yoga-éçvaraù—Yogeçvara, the
master of mystic powers; hareù aàçaù—a partial representation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; båhatyäm—in the womb of his mother,
Båhaté; sambhaviñyati—will appear.
TRANSLATION
The son of Devahotra known as Yogeçvara will appear as a partial
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
591
incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His mother's name will be
Båhaté. He will perform activities for the welfare of Divaspati.
TEXT 33
MaNauvaR wNd]Saavi<aRêTaudRXaMa WZYaiTa )
oåGaM>aqrbuDaaÛa wNd]Saavi<aRvqYaRJaa" )) 33 ))
manur vä indra-sävarëiç
caturdaçama eñyati
uru-gambhéra-budhädyä
indra-sävarëi-véryajäù
SYNONYMS
manuù—the Manu; vä—either; indra-sävarëiù—Indra-sävarëi;
caturdaçamaù—fourteenth; eñyati—will become; uru—Uru;
gambhéra—Gambhéra; budha-ädyäù—and others, such as Budha;
indra-sävarëi—of Indra-sävarëi; vérya-jäù—born of the semen.
TRANSLATION
The name of the fourteenth Manu will be Indra-sävarëi. He will have sons
like Uru, Gambhéra and Budha.
TEXT 34
Paiv}aaêa+auza deva" éuicirNd]ae >aivZYaiTa )
AiGanbaRhu" éuic" éuÖae MaaGaDaaÛaSTaPaiSvNa" )) 34 ))
paviträç cäkñuñä deväù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
592
çucir indro bhaviñyati
agnir bähuù çuciù çuddho
mägadhädyäs tapasvinaù
SYNONYMS
paviträù—the Pavitras; cäkñuñäù—the Cäkñuñas; deväù—the demigods;
çuciù—Çuci; indraù—the king of heaven; bhaviñyati—will become;
agniù—Agni; bähuù—Bähu; çuciù—Çuci; çuddhaù—Çuddha;
mägadha—Mägadha; ädyäù—and so on; tapasvinaù—the sages.
TRANSLATION
The Pavitras and Cäkñuñas will be among the demigods, and Çuci will be
Indra, the king of heaven. Agni, Bähu, Çuci, Çuddha, Mägadha and others of
great austerity will be the seven sages.
TEXT 35
Sa}aaYa<aSYa TaNaYaae b*hÙaNauSTada hir" )
ivTaaNaaYaa& MaharaJa i§-YaaTaNTaUiNvTaaiYaTaa )) 35 ))
saträyaëasya tanayo
båhadbhänus tadä hariù
vitänäyäà mahäräja
kriyä-tantün vitäyitä
SYNONYMS
saträyaëasya—of Saträyaëa; tanayaù—the son; båhadbhänuù—Båhadbhänu;
tadä—at that time; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vitänäyäm—in the womb of Vitänä; mahä-räja—O King; kriyä-tantün—all
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
593
spiritual activities; vitäyitä—will perform.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, in the fourteenth manvantara the Supreme Personality of
Godhead will appear from the womb of Vitänä, and His father's name will be
Saträyaëa. This incarnation will be celebrated as Båhadbhänu, and He will
administer spiritual activities.
TEXT 36
raJa&êTaudRXaETaaiNa i}ak-al/aNauGaTaaiNa Tae )
Pa[ae¢-aNYaei>aiMaRTa" k-LPaae YauGaSaahóPaYaRYa" )) 36 ))
räjaàç caturdaçaitäni
tri-kälänugatäni te
proktäny ebhir mitaù kalpo
yuga-sähasra-paryayaù
SYNONYMS
räjan—O King; caturdaça—fourteen; etäni—all these; tri-käla—the three
periods of time (past, present and future); anugatäni—covering; te—to you;
proktäni—described; ebhiù—by these; mitaù—estimated; kalpaù—one day of
Brahmä; yuga-sähasra—one thousand cycles of four yugas;
paryayaù—consisting of.
TRANSLATION
O King, I have now described to you the fourteen Manus appearing in the
past, present and future. The total duration of time ruled by these Manus is one
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
594
thousand yuga cycles. This is called a kalpa, or one day of Lord Brahmä.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Thirteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Description of Future Manus."
14. The System of Universal Management
This chapter describes the duties allotted to Manu by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. All the Manus, as well as their sons, the sages, the
demigods and the Indras, act under the orders of various incarnations of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. At the end of every catur-yuga, consisting of
Satya-yuga, Dväpara-yuga, Tretä-yuga and Kali-yuga, the sages, acting under
the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, distribute the Vedic
knowledge and thus reinstate eternal religious principles. Manu's duty is to
reestablish the system of religion. Manu's sons execute Manu's orders, and thus
the entire universe is maintained by Manu and his descendants. The Indras
are various rulers of the heavenly planets. Assisted by the demigods, they rule
the three worlds. The Supreme Personality of Godhead also appears as
incarnations in different yugas. He appears as Sanaka, Sanätana, Yäjïavalkya,
Dattätreya and others, and thus He gives instructions in spiritual knowledge,
prescribed duties, principles of mystic yoga, and so on. As Maréci and others,
He creates progeny; as the king, He punishes the miscreants; and in the form
of time, He annihilates the creation. One may argue, "If the all-powerful
Supreme Personality of Godhead can do anything simply by His will, why has
He arranged for so many personalities to manage?" How and why He does this
cannot be understood by those who are under the clutches of mäyä.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
595
TEXT 1
é[qraJaaevac
MaNvNTarezu >aGavNYaQaa MaNvadYaiSTvMae )
YaiSMaNk-MaRi<a Yae YaeNa iNaYau¢-aSTaÜdSv Mae )) 1 ))
çré-räjoväca
manvantareñu bhagavan
yathä manv-ädayas tv ime
yasmin karmaëi ye yena
niyuktäs tad vadasva me
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—King Parékñit said; manvantareñu—in the reign of each Manu;
bhagavan—O great sage; yathä—as; manu-ädayaù—the Manus and others;
tu—but; ime—these; yasmin—in which; karmaëi—activities; ye—which
persons; yena—by whom; niyuktäù—appointed; tat—that; vadasva—kindly
describe; me—to me.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit inquired: O most opulent Çukadeva Gosvämé, please
explain to me how Manu and the others in each manvantara are engaged in
their respective duties, and by whose order they are so engaged.
TEXT 2
é[q‰izåvac
MaNavae MaNauPau}aaê MauNaYaê MahqPaTae )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
596
wNd]a" SaurGa<aaêEv SaveR PauåzXaaSaNaa" )) 2 ))
çré-åñir uväca
manavo manu-puträç ca
munayaç ca mahé-pate
indräù sura-gaëäç caiva
sarve puruña-çäsanäù
SYNONYMS
çré-åñiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; manavaù—all the Manus;
manu-puträù—all the sons of Manu; ca—and; munayaù—all the great sages;
ca—and; mahé-pate—O King; indräù—all the Indras; sura-gaëäù—the
demigods; ca—and; eva—certainly; sarve—all of them; puruña-çäsanäù—under
the rule of the Supreme person.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: The Manus, the sons of Manu, the great sages, the
Indras and all the demigods, O King, are appointed by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in His various incarnations such as Yajïa.
TEXT 3
YajadYaae Yaa" k-iQaTaa" PaaEåZYaSTaNavae Na*Pa )
MaNvadYaae JaGaÛa}aa& NaYaNTYaai>a" Pa[caeidTaa" )) 3 ))
yajïädayo yäù kathitäù
pauruñyas tanavo nåpa
manv-ädayo jagad-yäträà
nayanty äbhiù pracoditäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
597
SYNONYMS
yajïa-ädayaù—the Lord's incarnation known as Yajïa and others; yäù—who;
kathitäù—already spoken of; pauruñyaù—of the Supreme Person;
tanavaù—incarnations; nåpa—O King; manu-ädayaù—the Manus and others;
jagat-yäträm—universal affairs; nayanti—conduct; äbhiù—by the
incarnations; pracoditäù—being inspired.
TRANSLATION
O King, I have already described to you various incarnations of the Lord,
such as Yajïa. The Manus and others are chosen by these incarnations, under
whose direction they conduct the universal affairs.
PURPORT
The Manus execute the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
His various incarnations.
TEXT 4
cTauYauRGaaNTae k-ale/Na Ga]STaaH^]uiTaGa<aaNYaQaa )
TaPaSaa ‰zYaae_PaXYaNYaTaae DaMaR" SaNaaTaNa" )) 4 ))
catur-yugänte kälena
grastäï chruti-gaëän yathä
tapasä åñayo 'paçyan
yato dharmaù sanätanaù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
598
catuù-yuga-ante—at the end of every four yugas (Satya, Dväpara, Tretä and
Kali); kälena—in due course of time; grastän—lost; çruti-gaëän—the Vedic
instruction; yathä—as; tapasä—by austerity; åñayaù—great saintly persons;
apaçyan—by seeing misuse; yataù—wherefrom; dharmaù—occupational
duties; sanätanaù—eternal.
TRANSLATION
At the end of every four yugas, the great saintly persons, upon seeing that
the eternal occupational duties of mankind have been misused, reestablish the
principles of religion.
PURPORT
In this verse, the words dharmaù and sanätanaù are very important.
Sanätana means "eternal," and dharma means "occupational duties." From
Satya-yuga to Kali-yuga, the principles of religion and occupational duty
gradually deteriorate. In Satya-yuga, the religious principles are observed in
full, without deviation. In Tretä-yuga, however, these principles are somewhat
neglected, and only three fourths of the religious duties continue. In
Dväpara-yuga only half of the religious principles continue, and in Kali-yuga
only one fourth of the religious principles, which gradually disappear. At the
end of Kali-yuga, the principles of religion, or the occupational duties of
humanity, are almost lost. Indeed, in this Kali-yuga we have passed through
only five thousand years, yet the decline of sanätana-dharma is very
prominent. The duty of saintly persons, therefore, is to take up seriously the
cause of sanätana-dharma and try to reestablish it for the benefit of the entire
human society. The Kåñëa consciousness movement has been started according
to this principle. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (12.3.51):
kaler doña-nidhe räjan
asti hy eko mahän guëaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
599
kértanäd eva kåñëasya
mukta-saìgaù paraà vrajet
The entire Kali-yuga is full of faults. It is like an unlimited ocean of faults. But
the Kåñëa consciousness movement is very authorized. Therefore, following in
the footsteps of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, who five hundred years ago
inaugurated the movement of saìkértana, kåñëa-kértana, we are trying to
introduce this movement, according to superior orders, all over the world.
Now, if the inaugurators of this movement strictly follow the regulative
principles and spread this movement for the benefit of all human society, they
will certainly usher in a new way of life by reestablishing sanätana-dharma, the
eternal occupational duties of humanity. The eternal occupational duty of the
human being is to serve Kåñëa. Jévera 'svarüpa' haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa.' [Cc.
Madhya 20.108]. This is the purport of sanätana-dharma. Sanätana means nitya,
or "eternal," and kåñëa-däsa means "servant of Kåñëa." The eternal
occupational duty of the human being is to serve Kåñëa. This is the sum and
substance of the Kåñëa consciousness movement.
TEXT 5
TaTaae DaMa| cTauZPaad& MaNavae hir<aaeidTaa" )
Yau¢-a" SaÄarYaNTYaÖa Sve Sve k-ale/ Mahq& Na*Pa )) 5 ))
tato dharmaà catuñpädaà
manavo hariëoditäù
yuktäù saïcärayanty addhä
sve sve käle mahéà nåpa
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter (at the end of Kali-yuga); dharmam—the religious principle;
catuù-pädam—in four parts; manavaù—all the Manus; hariëä—by the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
600
Supreme Personality of Godhead; uditäù—being instructed; yuktäù—being
engaged; saïcärayanti—reestablish; addhä—directly; sve sve—in their own;
käle—time; mahém—within this world; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, O King, the Manus, being fully engaged according to the
instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, directly reestablish the
principles of occupational duty in its full four parts.
PURPORT
Dharma, or occupational duty, can be established in its full four parts as
explained in Bhagavad-gétä. In Bhagavad-gétä (4.1) the Lord says:
imaà vivasvate yogaà
proktavän aham avyayam
vivasvän manave präha
manur ikñväkave 'bravét
"I instructed this imperishable science of yoga to the sun-god, Vivasvän, and
Vivasvän instructed it to Manu, the father of mankind, and Manu in turn
instructed it to Ikñväku." This is the process of disciplic succession. Following
the same process, the Kåñëa consciousness movement is teaching the principles
of Bhagavad-gétä as it is, without deviation, all over the world. If the fortunate
people of this time accept the instructions of Lord Kåñëa, they will certainly be
happy in Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu's mission. Caitanya Mahäprabhu wanted
everyone, at least in India, to become a preacher of this mission. In other
words, one should become a guru and preach the Lord's instructions all over
the world for the peace and prosperity of humanity.
TEXT 6
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
601
Paal/YaiNTa Pa[JaaPaal/a YaavdNTa& iv>aaGaXa" )
Yaj>aaGa>auJaae deva Yae c Ta}aaiNvTaaê TaE" )) 6 ))
pälayanti prajä-pälä
yävad antaà vibhägaçaù
yajïa-bhäga-bhujo devä
ye ca tatränvitäç ca taiù
SYNONYMS
pälayanti—execute the order; prajä-päläù—the rulers of the world, namely the
sons and grandsons of Manu; yävat antam—unto the end of Manu's reign;
vibhägaçaù—in divisions; yajïa-bhäga-bhujaù—the enjoyers of the result of
yajïas; deväù—the demigods; ye—others; ca—also; tatra anvitäù—engaged in
that business; ca—also; taiù—by them.
TRANSLATION
To enjoy the results of sacrifices [yajïas], the rulers of the world, namely
the sons and grandsons of Manu, discharge the orders of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead until the end of Manu's reign. The demigods also share
the results of these sacrifices.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.2):
evaà paramparä-präptam
imaà räjarñayo viduù
"This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way." This paramparä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
602
system extends from Manu to Ikñväku and from Ikñväku to his sons and
grandsons. The rulers of the world in the line of hierarchy execute the order of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the paramparä system. Anyone
interested in peaceful life must participate in this paramparä system and
perform yajïas. As Gauòéya Vaiñëavas in the paramparä system of Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu, we must perform saìkértana-yajïa all over the world
(yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair yajanti hi sumedhasaù [SB 11.5.32]). Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu is the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in this
age of Kali, and He will be easily satisfied if the saìkértana movement is spread
vigorously all over the world. This will also make people happy without a
doubt.
TEXT 7
wNd]ae >aGavTaa dtaa& }aEl/aeKYaié[YaMaUiJaRTaaMa( )
>auÅaNa" PaaiTa l/aek-a&ñqNa( k-aMa& l/aeke- Pa[vzRiTa )) 7 ))
indro bhagavatä dattäà
trailokya-çriyam ürjitäm
bhuïjänaù päti lokäàs trén
kämaà loke pravarñati
SYNONYMS
indraù—the King of heaven; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; dattäm—given; trailokya—of the three worlds; çriyam ürjitäm—the
great opulences; bhuïjänaù—enjoying; päti—maintains; lokän—all the
planets; trén—within the three worlds; kämam—as much as necessary;
loke—within the world; pravarñati—pours rain.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
603
TRANSLATION
Indra, King of heaven, receiving benedictions from the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and thus enjoying highly developed opulences, maintains the living
entities all over the three worlds by pouring sufficient rain on all the planets.
TEXT 8
jaNa& caNauYauGa& b]UTae hir" iSaÖSvæPaDa*k(- )
‰izæPaDar" k-MaR YaaeGa& YaaeGaeXaæPaDa*k(- )) 8 ))
jïänaà cänuyugaà brüte
hariù siddha-svarüpa-dhåk
åñi-rüpa-dharaù karma
yogaà yogeça-rüpa-dhåk
SYNONYMS
jïänam—transcendental knowledge; ca—and; anuyugam—according to the
age; brüte—explains; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
siddha-svarüpa-dhåk—assuming the form of liberated persons like Sanaka and
Sanätana; åñi-rüpa-dharaù—assuming the form of great saintly persons like
Yäjïavalkya; karma—karma; yogam—the mystic yoga system;
yoga-éça-rüpa-dhåk—by assuming the form of a great yogé like Dattätreya.
TRANSLATION
In every yuga, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, assumes the form
of Siddhas such as Sanaka to preach transcendental knowledge, He assumes the
form of great saintly persons such as Yäjïavalkya to teach the way of karma,
and He assumes the form of great yogés such as Dattätreya to teach the system
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
604
of mystic yoga.
PURPORT
For the benefit of all human society, not only does the Lord assume the
form of Manu as an incarnation to rule the universe properly, but He also
assumes the forms of a teacher, yogé, jïäné and so on, for the benefit of human
society. The duty of human society, therefore, is to accept the path of action
enunciated by the Supreme Lord. In the present age, the sum and substance of
all Vedic knowledge is to be found in Bhagavad-gétä, which is personally taught
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the same Supreme Godhead,
assuming the form of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, expands the teachings of
Bhagavad-gétä all over the world. In other words, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Hari, is so kind and merciful to human society that He is always
anxious to take the fallen souls back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 9
SaGa| Pa[JaeXaæPae<a dSYaUNhNYaaTa( SvraÍPau" )
k-al/æPae<a SaveRzaMa>aavaYa Pa*QaGGau<a" )) 9 ))
sargaà prajeça-rüpeëa
dasyün hanyät svaräò-vapuù
käla-rüpeëa sarveñäm
abhäväya påthag guëaù
SYNONYMS
sargam—creation of progeny; prajä-éça-rüpeëa—in the form of the Prajäpati
Maréci and others; dasyün—thieves and rogues; hanyät—kills;
sva-räö-vapuù—in the form of the king; käla-rüpeëa—in the form of time;
sarveñäm—of everything; abhäväya—for the annihilation; påthak—different;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
605
guëaù—possessing qualities.
TRANSLATION
In the form of Prajäpati Maréci, the Supreme Personality of Godhead creates
progeny; becoming the king, He kills the thieves and rogues; and in the form of
time, He annihilates everything. All the different qualities of material existence
should be understood to be qualities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 10
STaUYaMaaNaae JaNaErei>aMaaRYaYaa NaaMaæPaYaa )
ivMaaeihTaaTMai>aNaaRNaadXaRNaENaR c d*XYaTae )) 10 ))
stüyamäno janair ebhir
mäyayä näma-rüpayä
vimohitätmabhir nänädarçanair
na ca dåçyate
SYNONYMS
stüyamänaù—being sought; janaiù—by people in general; ebhiù—by all of
them; mäyayä—under the influence of mäyä; näma-rüpayä—possessing
different names and forms; vimohita—bewildered; ätmabhiù—by illusion;
nänä—various; darçanaiù—by philosophical approaches; na—not; ca—and;
dåçyate—the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be found.
TRANSLATION
People in general are bewildered by the illusory energy, and therefore they
try to find the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, through
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
606
various types of research and philosophical speculation. Nonetheless, they are
unable to see the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Whatever actions and reactions take place for the creation, maintenance
and annihilation of this material world are actually brought about by the one
Supreme Person. There are many varieties of philosophers trying to search for
the ultimate cause under different names and forms, but they are unable to
find the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, who explains in
Bhagavad-gétä that He is the origin of everything and the cause of all causes
(ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù [Bg. 10.8]). This inability is due to the illusory energy
of the Supreme Lord. Devotees, therefore, accept the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as He is and remain happy simply by chanting the glories of the Lord.
TEXT 11
WTaTa( k-LPaivk-LPaSYa Pa[Maa<a& Pairk-IiTaRTaMa( )
Ya}a MaNvNTara<YaahuêTaudRXa Pauraivd" )) 11 ))
etat kalpa-vikalpasya
pramäëaà parikértitam
yatra manvantaräëy ähuç
caturdaça purävidaù
SYNONYMS
etat—all these; kalpa—in one day of Lord Brahmä; vikalpasya—of the changes
in a kalpa, such as the change of Manus; pramäëam—evidences;
parikértitam—described (by me); yatra—wherein; manvantaräëi—periods of
Manu; ähuù—said; caturdaça—fourteen; purä-vidaù—learned scholars.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
607
TRANSLATION
In one kalpa, or one day of Brahmä, there take place the many changes called
vikalpas. O King, all of these have been previously described to you by me.
Learned scholars who know the past, present and future have ascertained that
in one day of Brahmä there are fourteen Manus.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The System of Universal Management."
15. Bali Mahäräja Conquers the Heavenly Planets
This chapter describes how Bali, after performing the Viçvajit-yajïa,
received the benediction of a chariot and various kinds of paraphernalia for
war, with which he attacked the King of heaven. All the demigods, being
afraid of him, left the heavenly planets and went away, following the
instructions of their guru.
Mahäräja Parékñit wanted to understand how Lord Vämanadeva, on the
plea of taking three paces of land from Bali Mahäräja, took everything away
from him and arrested him. Çukadeva Gosvämé responded to this inquiry with
the following explanation. In the fight between the demons and the demigods,
as described in the Eleventh Chapter of this canto, Bali was defeated, and he
died in the fight, but by the grace of Çukräcärya he regained his life. Thus he
engaged himself in the service of Çukräcärya, his spiritual master. The
descendants of Bhågu, being pleased with him, engaged him in the
Viçvajit-yajïa. When this yajïa was performed, from the fire of yajïa came a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
608
chariot, horses, a flag, a bow, armor and two quivers of arrows. Mahäräja
Prahläda, Bali Mahäräja's grandfather, gave Bali an eternal garland of flowers,
and Çukräcärya gave him a conchshell. Bali Mahäräja, after offering
obeisances to Prahläda, the brähmaëas and his spiritual master, Çukräcärya,
equipped himself to fight with Indra and went to Indrapuré with his soldiers.
Blowing his conchshell, he attacked the outskirts of Indra's kingdom. When
Indra saw Bali Mahäräja's prowess, he went to his own spiritual master,
Båhaspati, told him about Bali's strength, and inquired about his duty.
Båhaspati informed the demigods that because Bali had been endowed with
extraordinary power by the brähmaëas, the demigods could not fight with him.
Their only hope was to gain the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Indeed, there was no alternative. Under the circumstances, Båhaspati advised
the demigods to leave the heavenly planets and keep themselves somewhere
invisible. The demigods followed his orders, and Bali Mahäräja, along with his
associates, gained the entire kingdom of Indra. The descendants of Bhågu
Muni, being very affectionate to their disciple Bali Mahäräja, engaged him in
performing one hundred açvamedha-yajïas. In this way, Bali enjoyed the
opulences of the heavenly planets.
TEXTS 1-2
é[qraJaaevac
ble/" Pad}aYa& >aUMae" k-SMaaÖirrYaacTa )
>aUTveìr" k*-Pa<avçBDaaQaaeR_iPa bbNDa TaMa( )) 1 ))
WTad( veidTauiMaC^aMaae MahTa( k-aETaUhl&/ ih Na" )
YaaÁeìrSYa PaU<aRSYa bNDaNa& caPYaNaaGaSa" )) 2 ))
çré-räjoväca
baleù pada-trayaà bhümeù
kasmäd dharir ayäcata
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
609
bhüteçvaraù kåpaëa-val
labdhärtho 'pi babandha tam
etad veditum icchämo
mahat kautühalaà hi naù
yäcïeçvarasya pürëasya
bandhanaà cäpy anägasaù
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King said; baleù—of Bali Mahäräja; pada-trayam—three
steps; bhümeù—of land; kasmät—why; hariù—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (in the form of Vämana); ayäcata—begged; bhüta-éçvaraù—the
proprietor of all the universe; kåpaëa-vat—like a poor man;
labdha-arthaù—He got the gift; api—although; babandha—arrested; tam—him
(Bali); etat—all this; veditum—to understand; icchämaù—we desire;
mahat—very great; kautühalam—eagerness; hi—indeed; naù—our;
yäcïä—begging; éçvarasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
pürëasya—who is full in everything; bandhanam—arresting; ca—also;
api—although; anägasaù—of he who was faultless.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit inquired: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
proprietor of everything. Why did He beg three paces of land from Bali
Mahäräja like a poor man, and when He got the gift for which He had begged,
why did He nonetheless arrest Bali Mahäräja? I am very much anxious to know
the mystery of these contradictions.
TEXT 3
é[qéuk- ovac
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
610
ParaiJaTaé[qrSaui>aê haiPaTaae
hqNd]e<a raJaN>a*Gaui>a" Sa JaqivTa" )
SavaRTMaNaa TaaNa>aJad( >a*GaUNbil/"
iXaZYaae MahaTMaaQaRiNavedNaeNa )) 3 ))
çré-çuka uväca
paräjita-çrér asubhiç ca häpito
héndreëa räjan bhågubhiù sa jévitaù
sarvätmanä tän abhajad bhågün baliù
çiñyo mahätmärtha-nivedanena
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; paräjita—being defeated;
çréù—opulences; asubhiù ca—of life also; häpitaù—deprived; hi—indeed;
indreëa—by King Indra; räjan—O King; bhågubhiù—by the descendants of
Bhågu Muni; saù—he (Bali Mahäräja); jévitaù—brought back to life;
sarva-ätmanä—in full submission; tän—them; abhajat—worshiped;
bhågün—the descendants of Bhågu Muni; baliù—Mahäräja Bali; çiñyaù—a
disciple; mahätmä—the great soul; artha-nivedanena—by giving them
everything.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, when Bali Mahäräja lost all his opulence
and died in the fight, Çukräcärya, a descendant of Bhågu Muni, brought him
back to life. Because of this, the great soul Bali Mahäräja became a disciple of
Çukräcärya and began to serve him with great faith, offering everything he had.
TEXT 4
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
611
Ta& b]aø<aa >a*Gav" Pa[qYaMaa<aa
AYaaJaYaiNvìiJaTaa i}a<aak-Ma( )
iJaGaqzMaa<a& iviDaNaai>aizCYa
Mahai>azeke-<a MahaNau>aava" )) 4 ))
taà brähmaëä bhågavaù préyamäëä
ayäjayan viçvajitä tri-ëäkam
jigéñamäëaà vidhinäbhiñicya
mahäbhiñekeëa mahänubhäväù
SYNONYMS
tam—upon him (Bali Mahäräja); brähmaëäù—all the brähmaëas;
bhågavaù—the descendants of Bhågu Muni; préyamäëäù—being very pleased;
ayäjayan—engaged him in performing a sacrifice; viçvajitä—known as Viçvajit;
tri-näkam—the heavenly planets; jigéñamäëam—desiring to conquer;
vidhinä—according to regulative principles; abhiñicya—after purifying;
mahä-abhiñekeëa—by bathing him in a great abhiñeka ceremony;
mahä-anubhäväù—the exalted brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëa descendants of Bhågu Muni were very pleased with Bali
Mahäräja, who desired to conquer the kingdom of Indra. Therefore, after
purifying him and properly bathing him according to regulative principles, they
engaged him in performing the yajïa known as Viçvajit.
TEXT 5
TaTaae rQa" k-aÄNaPaÆNaÖae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
612
hYaaê hYaRìTaur(r)v<aaR" )
ßJaê iSa&heNa ivraJaMaaNaae
huTaaXaNaadaSa hivi>aRiríaTa( )) 5 ))
tato rathaù käïcana-paööa-naddho
hayäç ca haryaçva-turaìga-varëäù
dhvajaç ca siàhena viräjamäno
hutäçanäd äsa havirbhir iñöät
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; rathaù—a chariot; käïcana—with gold; paööa—and silk
garments; naddhaù—wrapped; hayäù ca—horses also;
haryaçva-turaìga-varëäù—exactly of the same color as the horses of Indra
(yellow); dhvajaù ca—a flag also; siàhena—with the mark of a lion;
viräjamänaù—existing; huta-açanät—from the blazing fire; äsa—there was;
havirbhiù—by offerings of clarified butter; iñöät—worshiped.
TRANSLATION
When ghee [clarified butter] was offered in the fire of sacrifice, there
appeared from the fire a celestial chariot covered with gold and silk. There also
appeared yellow horses like those of Indra, and a flag marked with a lion.
TEXT 6
DaNauê idVYa& Paur$=aePaNaÖ&
TaU<aavir¢-aE k-vc& c idVYaMa( )
iPaTaaMahSTaSYa ddaE c Maal/a‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
613
MaãaNaPauZPaa& Jal/Ja& c éu§-" )) 6 ))
dhanuç ca divyaà puraöopanaddhaà
tüëäv ariktau kavacaà ca divyam
pitämahas tasya dadau ca mäläm
amläna-puñpäà jalajaà ca çukraù
SYNONYMS
dhanuù—a bow; ca—also; divyam—uncommon; puraöa-upanaddham—covered
with gold; tüëau—two quivers; ariktau—infallible; kavacam ca—and armor;
divyam—celestial; pitämahaù tasya—his grandfather, namely Prahläda
Mahäräja; dadau—gave; ca—and; mäläm—a garland; amläna-puñpäm—made
of flowers that do not fade away; jala jam—a conchshell (which is born in
water); ca—as well as; çukraù—Çukräcärya.
TRANSLATION
A gilded bow, two quivers of infallible arrows, and celestial armor also
appeared. Bali Mahäräja's grandfather Prahläda Mahäräja offered Bali a garland
of flowers that would never fade, and Çukräcärya gave him a conchshell.
TEXT 7
Wv& Sa ivPa[aiJaRTaYaaeDaNaaQaR‚
STaE" k-iLPaTaSvSTYaYaNaae_Qa ivPa[aNa( )
Pa[di+a<aqk*-TYa k*-TaPa[<aaMa"
Pa[hadMaaMaN}Ya NaMaêk-ar )) 7 ))
evaà sa viprärjita-yodhanärthas
taiù kalpita-svastyayano 'tha viprän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
614
pradakñiëé-kåtya kåta-praëämaù
prahrädam ämantrya namaç-cakära
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; saù—he (Bali Mahäräja); vipra-arjita—gained by the grace
of the brähmaëas; yodhana-arthaù—possessing equipment for fighting;
taiù—by them (the brähmaëas); kalpita—advice; svastyayanaù—ritualistic
performance; atha—as; viprän—all the brähmaëas (Çukräcärya and others);
pradakñiëé-kåtya—circumambulating; kåta-praëämaù—offered his respectful
obeisances; prahrädam—unto Prahläda Mahäräja; ämantrya—addressing;
namaù-cakära—offered him obeisances.
TRANSLATION
When Mahäräja Bali had thus performed the special ritualistic ceremony
advised by the brähmaëas and had received, by their grace, the equipment for
fighting, he circumambulated the brähmaëas and offered them obeisances. He
also saluted Prahläda Mahäräja and offered obeisances to him.
TEXTS 8-9
AQaaåù rQa& idVYa& >a*Gaudta& MaharQa" )
SauóGDarae_Qa Saàù DaNvq %Éq Da*TaezuiDa" )) 8 ))
heMaa(r)dl/SaØahu" Sfu-rNMak-rku-<@l/" )
rraJa rQaMaaæ!ae iDaZ<YaSQa wv hVYava$( )) 9 ))
athäruhya rathaà divyaà
bhågu-dattaà mahärathaù
susrag-dharo 'tha sannahya
dhanvé khaògé dhåteñudhiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
615
hemäìgada-lasad-bähuù
sphuran-makara-kuëòalaù
raräja ratham ärüòho
dhiñëya-stha iva havyaväö
SYNONYMS
atha—thereupon; äruhya—getting on; ratham—the chariot;
divyam—celestial; bhågu-dattam—given by Çukräcärya; mahä-rathaù—Bali
Mahäräja, the great charioteer; su-srak-dharaù—decorated with a nice
garland; atha—thus; sannahya—covering his body with armor;
dhanvé—equipped with a bow; khaògé—taking a sword; dhåta-iñudhiù—taking a
quiver of arrows; hema-aìgada-lasat-bähuù—decorated with golden bangles on
his arms; sphurat-makara-kuëòalaù—decorated with brilliant earrings
resembling sapphires; raräja—was illuminating; ratham ärüòhaù—getting on
the chariot; dhiñëya-sthaù—situated on the altar of sacrifice; iva—like;
havya-väö—worshipable fire.
TRANSLATION
Then, after getting on the chariot given by Çukräcärya, Bali Mahäräja,
decorated with a nice garland, put protective armor on his body, equipped
himself with a bow, and took up a sword and a quiver of arrows. When he sat
down on the seat of the chariot, his arms decorated with golden bangles and his
ears with sapphire earrings, he shone like a worshipable fire.
TEXTS 10-11
TauLYaEìYaRbl/é[qi>a" SvYaUQaEdOETYaYaUQaPaE" )
iPabiÙirv %& d*iG>adRhiÙ" PairDaqiNav )) 10 ))
v*Taae ivk-zRNa( MahTaqMaaSaurq& ßiJaNaq& iv>au" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
616
YaYaaivNd]Paurq& Sv*Öa& k-MPaYaiàv raedSaq )) 11 ))
tulyaiçvarya-bala-çrébhiù
sva-yüthair daitya-yüthapaiù
pibadbhir iva khaà dågbhir
dahadbhiù paridhén iva
våto vikarñan mahatém
äsuréà dhvajinéà vibhuù
yayäv indra-puréà svåddhäà
kampayann iva rodasé
SYNONYMS
tulya-aiçvarya—equal in opulence; bala—strength; çrébhiù—and in beauty;
sva-yüthaiù—by his own men; daitya-yütha-paiù—and by the chiefs of the
demons; pibadbhiù—drinking; iva—as if; kham—the sky; dågbhiù—with the
sight; dahadbhiù—burning; paridhén—all directions; iva—as if;
våtaù—surrounded; vikarñan—attracting; mahatém—very great;
äsurém—demoniac; dhvajiném—soldiers; vibhuù—most powerful;
yayau—went; indra-purém—to the capital of King Indra; su-åddhäm—very
opulent; kampayan—causing to tremble; iva—as if; rodasé—the complete
surface of the world.
TRANSLATION
When he assembled with his own soldiers and the demon chiefs, who were
equal to him in strength, opulence and beauty, they appeared as if they would
swallow the sky and burn all directions with their vision. After thus gathering
the demoniac soldiers, Bali Mahäräja departed for the opulent capital of Indra.
Indeed, he seemed to make the entire surface of the world tremble.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
617
TEXT 12
rMYaaMauPavNaaeÛaNaE" é[qMaiÙNaRNdNaaidi>a" )
kU-JaiÜh(r)iMaQauNaEGaaRYaNMataMaDauv]TaE" )
Pa[val/f-l/PauZPaaeå>aarXaa%aMard]uMaE" )) 12 ))
ramyäm upavanodyänaiù
çrémadbhir nandanädibhiù
küjad-vihaìga-mithunair
gäyan-matta-madhuvrataiù
praväla-phala-puñporubhära-
çäkhämara-drumaiù
SYNONYMS
ramyäm—very pleasing; upavana—with orchards; udyänaiù—and gardens;
çrémadbhiù—very beautiful to see; nandana-ädibhiù—such as Nandana;
küjat—chirping; vihaìga—birds; mithunaiù—with pairs; gäyat—singing;
matta—mad; madhu-vrataiù—with bees; praväla—of leaves;
phala-puñpa—fruits and flowers; uru—very great; bhära—bearing the weight;
çäkhä—whose branches; amara-drumaiù—with eternal trees.
TRANSLATION
King Indra's city was full of pleasing orchards and gardens, such as the
Nandana garden. Because of the weight of the flowers, leaves and fruit, the
branches of the eternally existing trees were bending down. The gardens were
visited by pairs of chirping birds and singing bees. The entire atmosphere was
celestial.
TEXT 13
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
618
h&SaSaarSac§-aûk-ar<@vku-l/aku-l/a" )
Nail/NYaae Ya}a §-I@iNTa Pa[Mada" SaurSaeivTaa" )) 13 ))
haàsa-särasa-cakrähvakäraëòava-
kuläkuläù
nalinyo yatra kréòanti
pramadäù sura-sevitäù
SYNONYMS
haàsa—of swans; särasa—cranes; cakrähva—birds known as cakraväkas;
käraëòava—and water fowl; kula—by groups; äkuläù—congested;
nalinyaù—lotus flowers; yatra—where; kréòanti—enjoyed sporting;
pramadäù—beautiful women; sura-sevitäù—protected by the demigods.
TRANSLATION
Beautiful women protected by the demigods sported in the gardens, which
had lotus ponds full of swans, cranes, cakraväkas and ducks.
TEXT 14
Aak-aXaGa(r)Yaa deVYaa v*Taa& Pair%>aUTaYaa )
Pa[ak-are<aaiGanv<aeRNa SaaÆale/NaaeàTaeNa c )) 14 ))
äkäça-gaìgayä devyä
våtäà parikha-bhütayä
präkäreëägni-varëena
säööälenonnatena ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
619
SYNONYMS
äkäça-gaìgayä—by Ganges water known as Äkäça-gaìgä; devyä—the
always-worshipable goddess; våtäm—surrounded; parikha-bhütayä—as a
trench; präkäreëa—by ramparts; agni-varëena—resembling fire;
sa-aööälena—with places for fighting; unnatena—very high; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The city was surrounded by trenches full of Ganges water, known as
Äkäça-gaìgä, and by a high wall, which was the color of fire. Upon this wall
were parapets for fighting.
TEXT 15
åKMaPaÆk-Paa$E=ê ÜarE" Sf-i$=k-GaaePaurE" )
Jauía& iv>a¢-Pa[PaQaa& ivìk-MaRiviNaiMaRTaaMa( )) 15 ))
rukma-paööa-kapäöaiç ca
dväraiù sphaöika-gopuraiù
juñöäà vibhakta-prapathäà
viçvakarma-vinirmitäm
SYNONYMS
rukma-paööa—possessing plates made of gold; kapäöaiù—the doors of which;
ca—and; dväraiù—with entrances; sphaöika-gopuraiù—with gates made of
excellent marble; juñöäm—linked; vibhakta-prapathäm—with many different
public roads; viçvakarma-vinirmitäm—constructed by Viçvakarmä, the
heavenly architect.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
620
TRANSLATION
The doors were made of solid gold plates, and the gates were of excellent
marble. These were linked by various public roads. The entire city had been
constructed by Viçvakarmä.
TEXT 16
Sa>aacTvrrQYaa!ya& ivMaaNaENYaRbuRdEYauRTaaMa( )
é*(r)a$=kE-MaRi<aMaYaEvRJa]ivd]uMaveidi>a" )) 16 ))
sabhä-catvara-rathyäòhyäà
vimänair nyarbudair yutäm
çåìgäöakair maëimayair
vajra-vidruma-vedibhiù
SYNONYMS
sabhä—with assembly houses; catvara—courtyards; rathya—and public roads;
äòhyäm—opulent; vimänaiù—by airplanes; nyarbudaiù—not less than ten
crores (one hundred million); yutäm—endowed; çåìga-äöakaiù—with
crossroads; maëi-mayaiù—made of pearls; vajra—made of diamonds;
vidruma—and coral; vedibhiù—with places to sit.
TRANSLATION
The city was full of courtyards, wide roads, assembly houses, and not less
than one hundred million airplanes. The crossroads were made of pearl, and
there were sitting places made of diamond and coral.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
621
TEXT 17
Ya}a iNaTYavYaaeæPaa" XYaaMaa ivrJavaSaSa" )
>a]aJaNTae æPavàaYaaeR ùicRi>aRirv vöYa" )) 17 ))
yatra nitya-vayo-rüpäù
çyämä viraja-väsasaù
bhräjante rüpavan-näryo
hy arcirbhir iva vahnayaù
SYNONYMS
yatra—in that city; nitya-vayaù-rüpäù—who were ever beautiful and young;
çyämäù—possessing the quality of çyämä; viraja-väsasaù—always dressed with
clean garments; bhräjante—glitter; rüpa-vat—well decorated; näryaù—women;
hi—certainly; arcirbhiù—with many flames; iva—like; vahnayaù—fires.
TRANSLATION
Everlastingly beautiful and youthful women, who were dressed with clean
garments, glittered in the city like fires with flames. They all possessed the
quality of çyämä.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura gives a hint of the quality of the
çyämä woman.
çéta-käle bhaved uñëä
uñma-käle suçétaläù
stanau sukaöhinau yäsäà
täù çyämäù parikértitäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
622
A woman whose body is very warm during the winter and cool during the
summer and who generally has very firm breasts is called çyämä.
TEXT 18
Saurñqke-Xaiv>a]íNavSaaEGaiNDak-óJaaMa( )
Ya}aaMaaedMauPaadaYa MaaGaR AavaiTa MaaåTa" )) 18 ))
sura-stré-keça-vibhrañöanava-
saugandhika-srajäm
yaträmodam upädäya
märga äväti märutaù
SYNONYMS
sura-stré—of the women of the demigods; keça—from the hair;
vibhrañöa—fallen; nava-saugandhika—made of fresh, fragrant flowers;
srajäm—of the flower garlands; yatra—wherein; ämodam—the fragrance;
upädäya—carrying; märge—on the roads; äväti—blows; märutaù—the breeze.
TRANSLATION
The breezes blowing in the streets of the city bore the fragrance of the
flowers falling from the hair of the women of the demigods.
TEXT 19
heMaJaal/a+aiNaGaRC^d(DaUMaeNaaGauåGaiNDaNaa )
Paa<@ure<a Pa[iTaC^àMaaGaeR YaaiNTa SauriPa[Yaa" )) 19 ))
hema-jäläkña-nirgacchadcopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
623
dhümenäguru-gandhinä
päëòureëa praticchannamärge
yänti sura-priyäù
SYNONYMS
hema-jäla-akña—from dainty little windows made of networks of gold;
nirgacchat—emanating; dhümena—by smoke; aguru-gandhinä—fragrant due
to burning incense known as aguru; päëòureëa—very white;
praticchanna—covered; märge—on the street; yänti—pass;
sura-priyäù—beautiful public women known as Apsaräs, celestial girls.
TRANSLATION
Apsaräs passed on the streets, which were covered with the white, fragrant
smoke of aguru incense emanating from windows with golden filigree.
TEXT 20
Mau¢-aivTaaNaEMaRi<aheMake-Taui>a‚
NaaRNaaPaTaak-avl/>aqi>arav*TaaMa( )
iXa%i<@PaaravTa>a*(r)NaaidTaa&
vEMaaiNak-ñqk-l/GaqTaMa(r)l/aMa( )) 20 ))
muktä-vitänair maëi-hema-ketubhir
nänä-patäkä-valabhébhir ävåtäm
çikhaëòi-pärävata-bhåìga-näditäà
vaimänika-stré-kala-géta-maìgaläm
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
624
muktä-vitänaiù—by canopies decorated with pearls;
maëi-hema-ketubhiù—with flags made with pearls and gold;
nänä-patäkä—possessing various kinds of flags; valabhébhiù—with the domes
of the palaces; ävåtäm—covered; çikhaëòi—of birds like peacocks;
pärävata—pigeons; bhåìga—bees; näditäm—vibrated by the respective sounds;
vaimänika—getting on airplanes; stré—of women; kala-géta—from the choral
singing; maìgaläm—full of auspiciousness.
TRANSLATION
The city was shaded by canopies decorated with pearls, and the domes of the
palaces had flags of pearl and gold. The city always resounded with the
vibrations of peacocks, pigeons and bees, and above the city flew airplanes full
of beautiful women who constantly chanted auspicious songs that were very
pleasing to the ear.
TEXT 21
Ma*d(r)Xa«aNak-duNdui>aSvNaE"
SaTaal/vq<aaMaurJaeíve<aui>a" )
Na*TYaE" SavaÛEåPadevGaqTakE-‚
MaRNaaerMaa& SvPa[>aYaa iJaTaPa[>aaMa( )) 21 ))
mådaìga-çaìkhänaka-dundubhi-svanaiù
satäla-véëä-murajeñöa-veëubhiù
nåtyaiù savädyair upadeva-gétakair
manoramäà sva-prabhayä jita-prabhäm
SYNONYMS
mådaìga—of drums; çaìkha—conchshells; änaka-dundubhi—and kettledrums;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
625
svanaiù—by the sounds; sa-täla—in perfect tune; véëä—a stringed instrument;
muraja—a kind of drum; iñöa-veëubhiù—accompanied by the very nice sound
of the flute; nåtyaiù—with dancing; sa-vädyaiù—with concert instruments;
upadeva-gétakaiù—with singing by the secondary demigods like the
Gandharvas; manoramäm—beautiful and pleasing; sva-prabhayä—by its own
brilliance; jita-prabhäm—the personification of beauty was conquered.
TRANSLATION
The city was filled with the sounds of mådaìgas, conchshells, kettledrums,
flutes and well-tuned stringed instruments all playing in concert. There was
constant dancing and the Gandharvas sang. The combined beauty of Indrapuré
defeated beauty personified.
TEXT 22
Yaa& Na v]JaNTYaDaiMaRïa" %l/a >aUTad]uh" Xa#=a" )
MaaiNaNa" k-aiMaNaae lu/BDaa Wi>ahsNaa v]JaiNTa YaTa( )) 22 ))
yäà na vrajanty adharmiñöhäù
khalä bhüta-druhaù çaöhäù
mäninaù kämino lubdhä
ebhir hénä vrajanti yat
SYNONYMS
yäm—in the streets of the city; na—not; vrajanti—pass;
adharmiñöhäù—irreligious persons; khaläù—envious persons;
bhüta-druhaù—persons violent toward other living entities; çaöhäù—cheaters;
mäninaù—falsely prestigious; käminaù—lusty; lubdhäù—greedy; ebhiù—these;
hénäù—completely devoid of; vrajanti—walk; yat—on the street.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
626
TRANSLATION
No one who was sinful, envious, violent toward other living entities,
cunning, falsely proud, lusty or greedy could enter that city. The people who
lived there were all devoid of these faults.
TEXT 23
Taa& devDaaNaq& Sa væiQaNaqPaiTa‚
bRih" SaMaNTaad( ååDae Pa*TaNYaYaa )
AacaYaRdta& Jal/Ja& MahaSvNa&
dDMaaE Pa[YauÅN>aYaiMaNd]YaaeizTaaMa( )) 23 ))
täà deva-dhänéà sa varüthiné-patir
bahiù samantäd rurudhe påtanyayä
äcärya-dattaà jalajaà mahä-svanaà
dadhmau prayuïjan bhayam indra-yoñitäm
SYNONYMS
täm—that; deva-dhäném—place where Indra lived; saù—he (Bali Mahäräja);
varüthiné-patiù—the commander of the soldiers; bahiù—outside; samantät—in
all directions; rurudhe—attacked; påtanyayä—by soldiers;
äcärya-dattam—given by Çukräcärya; jala-jam—the conchshell;
mahä-svanam—a loud sound; dadhmau—resounded; prayuïjan—creating;
bhayam—fear; indra-yoñitäm—of all the ladies protected by Indra.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja, who was the commander of numberless soldiers, gathered his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
627
soldiers outside this abode of Indra and attacked it from all directions. He
sounded the conchshell given him by his spiritual master, Çukräcärya, thus
creating a fearful situation for the women protected by Indra.
TEXT 24
Magava&STaMai>aPa[eTYa ble/" ParMaMauÛMaMa( )
SavRdevGa<aaePaeTaae GauåMaeTaduvac h )) 24 ))
maghaväàs tam abhipretya
baleù paramam udyamam
sarva-deva-gaëopeto
gurum etad uväca ha
SYNONYMS
maghavän—Indra; tam—the situation; abhipretya—understanding; baleù—of
Bali Mahäräja; paramam udyamam—great enthusiasm; sarva-deva-gaëa—by all
the demigods; upetaù—accompanied; gurum—unto the spiritual master;
etat—the following words; uväca—said; ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Seeing Bali Mahäräja's indefatigable endeavor and understanding his motive,
King Indra, along with the other demigods, approached his spiritual master,
Båhaspati, and spoke as follows.
TEXT 25
>aGavàuÛMaae >aUYaaNble/NaR" PaUvRvEir<a" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
628
AivzùiMaMa& MaNYae ke-NaaSaqtaeJaSaaeiJaRTa" )) 25 ))
bhagavann udyamo bhüyän
baler naù pürva-vairiëaù
aviñahyam imaà manye
kenäsét tejasorjitaù
SYNONYMS
bhagavan—O my lord; udyamaù—enthusiasm; bhüyän—great; baleù—of Bali
Mahäräja; naù—our; pürva-vairiëaù—past enemy; aviñahyam—unbearable;
imam—this; manye—I think; kena—by whom; äsét—got; tejasä—prowess;
ürjitaù—achieved.
TRANSLATION
My lord, our old enemy Bali Mahäräja now has new enthusiasm, and he has
obtained such astonishing power that we think that perhaps we cannot resist his
prowess.
TEXT 26
NaENa& k-iêTa( ku-Taae vaiPa Pa[iTaVYaae!uMaDaqìr" )
iPabiàv Mau%eNaed& il/hiàv idXaae dXa )
dhiàv idXaae d*iG>a" Sa&vTaaRiGanirvaeiTQaTa" )) 26 ))
nainaà kaçcit kuto väpi
prativyoòhum adhéçvaraù
pibann iva mukhenedaà
lihann iva diço daça
dahann iva diço dågbhiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
629
saàvartägnir ivotthitaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; enam—this arrangement; kaçcit—anyone; kutaù—from anywhere; vä
api—either; prativyoòhum—to counteract; adhéçvaraù—capable; piban iva—as
if drinking; mukhena—by the mouth; idam—this (world); lihan iva—as if
licking up; diçaù daça—all ten directions; dahan iva—as if burning; diçaù—all
directions; dågbhiù—by his vision; saàvarta-agniù—the fire known as
saàvarta; iva—like; utthitaù—now arisen.
TRANSLATION
No one anywhere can counteract this military arrangement of Bali's. It now
appears that Bali is trying to drink up the entire universe with his mouth, lick
up the ten directions with his tongue, and raise fire in every direction with his
eyes. Indeed, he has arisen like the annihilating fire known as saàvartaka.
TEXT 27
b]Uih k-ar<aMaeTaSYa duDaRzRTvSYa Maid]Paae" )
AaeJa" Sahae bl&/ TaeJaae YaTa WTaTSaMauÛMa" )) 27 ))
brühi käraëam etasya
durdharñatvasya mad-ripoù
ojaù saho balaà tejo
yata etat samudyamaù
SYNONYMS
brühi—kindly inform us; käraëam—the cause; etasya—of all this;
durdharñatvasya—of the formidableness; mat-ripoù—of my enemy;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
630
ojaù—prowess; sahaù—energy; balam—strength; tejaù—influence;
yataù—wherefrom; etat—all this; samudyamaù—endeavor.
TRANSLATION
Kindly inform me. What is the cause for Bali Mahäräja's strength, endeavor,
influence and victory? How has he become so enthusiastic?
TEXT 28
é[qGauååvac
JaaNaaiMa MagavH^}aaeåàTaerSYa k-ar<aMa( )
iXaZYaaYaaePa>a*Ta& TaeJaae >a*Gaui>ab]Røvaidi>a" )) 28 ))
çré-gurur uväca
jänämi maghavaï chatror
unnater asya käraëam
çiñyäyopabhåtaà tejo
bhågubhir brahma-vädibhiù
SYNONYMS
çré-guruù uväca—Båhaspati said; jänämi—I know; maghavan—O Indra;
çatroù—of the enemy; unnateù—of the elevation; asya—of him;
käraëam—the cause; çiñyäya—unto the disciple; upabhåtam—endowed;
tejaù—power; bhågubhiù—by the descendants of Bhågu;
brahma-vädibhiù—all-powerful brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
Båhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, said: O Indra, I know the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
631
cause for your enemy's becoming so powerful. The brähmaëa descendants of
Bhågu Muni, being pleased by Bali Mahäräja, their disciple, endowed him with
such extraordinary power.
PURPORT
Båhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, informed Indra,
"Ordinarily, Bali and his forces could not achieve such strength, but it appears
that the brähmaëa descendants of Bhågu Muni, being pleased with Bali
Mahäräja, endowed them with this spiritual power." In other words, Båhaspati
informed Indra that Bali Mahäräja's prowess was not his own but that of his
exalted guru, Çukräcärya. We sing in our daily prayers, yasya prasädäd
bhagavat-prasädo yasyäprasädän na gatiù kuto 'pi **(78). By the pleasure of the
spiritual master, one can get extraordinary power, especially in spiritual
advancement. The blessings of the spiritual master are more powerful than
one's personal endeavor for such advancement. Narottama däsa Öhäkura
therefore says:
guru-mukha-padma-väkya, cittete kariyä aikya,
ära nä kariha mane äçä **(79)
Especially for spiritual advancement, one should carry out the bona fide order
of the spiritual master. By the paramparä system, one can thus be endowed
with the original spiritual power coming from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (evaà paramparä-präptam imaà räjarñayo viduù [Bg. 4.2]).
TEXT 29
AaeJaiSvNa& bil&/ JaeTau& Na SaMaQaaeR_iSTa k-êNa )
>aviÜDaae >avaNvaiPa vJaRiYaTveìr& hirMa( )
ivJaeZYaiTa Na k-ae_PYaeNa& b]øTaeJa"SaMaeiDaTaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
632
NaaSYa Xa¢-" Paur" SQaaTau& k*-TaaNTaSYa YaQaa JaNaa" )) 29 ))
ojasvinaà balià jetuà
na samartho 'sti kaçcana
bhavad-vidho bhavän väpi
varjayitveçvaraà harim
vijeñyati na ko 'py enaà
brahma-tejaù-samedhitam
näsya çaktaù puraù sthätuà
kåtäntasya yathä janäù
SYNONYMS
ojasvinam—so powerful; balim—Bali Mahäräja; jetum—to conquer; na—not;
samarthaù—able; asti—is; kaçcana—anyone; bhavat-vidhaù—like you;
bhavän—you yourself; vä api—either; varjayitvä—excepting; éçvaram—the
supreme controller; harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vijeñyati—will conquer; na—not; kaù api—anyone; enam—him (Bali
Mahäräja); brahma-tejaù-samedhitam—now empowered with brahma-tejas,
extraordinary spiritual power; na—not; asya—of him; çaktaù—is able;
puraù—in front; sthätum—to stay; kåta-antasya—of Yamaräja; yathä—as;
janäù—people.
TRANSLATION
Neither you nor your men can conquer the most powerful Bali. Indeed, no
one but the Supreme Personality of Godhead can conquer him, for he is now
equipped with the supreme spiritual power [brahma-tejas]. As no one can stand
before Yamaräja, no one can now stand before Bali Mahäräja.
TEXT 30
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
633
TaSMaaiàl/YaMauTSa*JYa YaUYa& SaveR i}aivíPaMa( )
YaaTa k-al&/ Pa[Taq+aNTaae YaTa" Xa}aaeivRPaYaRYa" )) 30 ))
tasmän nilayam utsåjya
yüyaà sarve tri-viñöapam
yäta kälaà pratékñanto
yataù çatror viparyayaù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; nilayam—not visible; utsåjya—giving up; yüyam—you;
sarve—all; tri-viñöapam—the heavenly kingdom; yäta—go somewhere else;
kälam—time; pratékñantaù—waiting for; yataù—whereof; çatroù—of your
enemy; viparyayaù—the reverse condition arrives.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, waiting until the situation of your enemies is reversed, you
should all leave this heavenly planet and go elsewhere, where you will not be
seen.
TEXT 31
Wz ivPa[bl/aedkR-" SaMPa[TYaUiJaRTaiv§-Ma" )
TaezaMaevaPaMaaNaeNa SaaNaubNDaae ivNax(+YaiTa )) 31 ))
eña vipra-balodarkaù
sampraty ürjita-vikramaù
teñäm eväpamänena
sänubandho vinaìkñyati
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
634
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this (Bali Mahäräja); vipra-bala-udarkaù—flourishing because of the
brahminical power invested in him; samprati—at the present moment;
ürjita-vikramaù—extremely powerful; teñäm—of the same brähmaëas;
eva—indeed; apamänena—by insult; sa-anubandhaù—with friends and
assistants; vinaìkñyati—will be vanquished.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja has now become extremely powerful because of the
benedictions given him by the brähmaëas, but when he later insults the
brähmaëas, he will be vanquished, along with his friends and assistants.
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja and Indra were enemies. Therefore, when Båhaspati, the
spiritual master of the demigods, predicted that Bali Mahäräja would be
vanquished when he insulted the brähmaëas by whose grace he had become so
powerful, Bali Mahäräja's enemies were naturally anxious to know when that
opportune moment would come. To pacify King Indra, Båhaspati assured him
that the time would certainly come, for Båhaspati could see that in the future
Bali Mahäräja would defy the orders of Çukräcärya in order to pacify Lord
Viñëu, Vämanadeva. Of course, to advance in Kåñëa consciousness, one can
take all risks. To please Vämanadeva, Bali Mahäräja risked defying the orders
of his spiritual master, Çukräcärya. Because of this, he would lose all his
property, yet because of devotional service to the Lord, he would get more
than he expected, and in the future, in the eighth manvantara, he would
occupy the throne of Indra again.
TEXT 32
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
635
Wv& SauMaiN}aTaaQaaRSTae Gauå<aaQaaRNaudiXaRNaa )
ihTva i}aivíPa& JaGMauGasvaR<aa" k-aMaæiPa<a" )) 32 ))
evaà sumantritärthäs te
guruëärthänudarçinä
hitvä tri-viñöapaà jagmur
gérväëäù käma-rüpiëaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; su-mantrita—being well advised; arthäù—about duties; te—they
(the demigods); guruëä—by their spiritual master; artha-anudarçinä—whose
instructions were quite befitting; hitvä—giving up; tri-viñöapam—the heavenly
kingdom; jagmuù—went; gérväëäù—the demigods; käma-rüpiëaù—who could
assume any form they liked.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: The demigods, being thus advised by
Båhaspati for their benefit, immediately accepted his words. Assuming forms
according to their desire, they left the heavenly kingdom and scattered, without
being observed by the demons.
PURPORT
The word käma-rüpiëaù indicates that the demigods, the inhabitants of the
heavenly planets, can assume any form they desire. Thus it was not at all
difficult for them to remain incognito before the eyes of the demons.
TEXT 33
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
636
deveZvQa iNal/INaezu bil/vOEraecNa" PaurqMa( )
devDaaNaqMaiDaïaYa vXa& iNaNYae JaGaT}aYaMa( )) 33 ))
deveñv atha niléneñu
balir vairocanaù purém
deva-dhäném adhiñöhäya
vaçaà ninye jagat-trayam
SYNONYMS
deveñu—all the demigods; atha—in this way; niléneñu—when they disappeared;
baliù—Bali Mahäräja; vairocanaù—the son of Virocana; purém—the heavenly
kingdom; deva-dhäném—the residence of the demigods; adhiñöhäya—taking
possession of; vaçam—under control; ninye—brought; jagat-trayam—the three
worlds.
TRANSLATION
When the demigods had disappeared, Bali Mahäräja, the son of Virocana,
entered the heavenly kingdom, and from there he brought the three worlds
under his control.
TEXT 34
Ta& ivìJaiYaNa& iXaZYa& >a*Gav" iXaZYavTSal/a" )
XaTaeNa hYaMaeDaaNaaMaNauv]TaMaYaaJaYaNa( )) 34 ))
taà viçva-jayinaà çiñyaà
bhågavaù çiñya-vatsaläù
çatena hayamedhänäm
anuvratam ayäjayan
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
637
SYNONYMS
tam—unto him (Bali Mahäräja); viçva-jayinam—the conqueror of the entire
universe; çiñyam—because of his being a disciple; bhågavaù—the brähmaëas,
descendants of Bhågu like Çukräcärya; çiñya-vatsaläù—being very pleased with
the disciple; çatena—by one hundred; haya-medhänäm—sacrifices known as
açvamedha; anuvratam—following the instruction of the brähmaëas;
ayäjayan—caused to execute.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëa descendants of Bhågu, being very pleased with their disciple,
who had conquered the entire universe, now engaged him in performing one
hundred açvamedha sacrifices.
PURPORT
We have seen in the dispute between Mahäräja Påthu and Indra that when
Mahäräja Påthu wanted to perform one hundred açvamedha-yajïas, Indra
wanted to impede him, for it is because of such great sacrifices that Indra was
made King of heaven. Here the brähmaëa descendants of Bhågu decided that
although Mahäräja Bali was situated on the throne of Indra, he would not be
able to stay there unless he performed such sacrifices. Therefore they advised
Mahäräja Bali to perform at least as many açvamedha-yajïas as Indra. The
word ayäjayan indicates that all the brähmaëas induced Bali Mahäräja to
perform such sacrifices.
TEXT 35
TaTaSTadNau>aaveNa >auvNa}aYaivé[uTaaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
638
k-IiTa| id+au ivTaNvaNa" Sa reJa o@urai@v )) 35 ))
tatas tad-anubhävena
bhuvana-traya-viçrutäm
kértià dikñu-vitanvänaù
sa reja uòuräò iva
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; tat-anubhävena—because of performing such great
sacrifices; bhuvana-traya—throughout the three worlds; viçrutäm—celebrated;
kértim—reputation; dikñu—in all directions; vitanvänaù—spreading; saù—he
(Bali Mahäräja); reje—became effulgent; uòuräö—the moon; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
When Bali Mahäräja performed these sacrifices, he gained a great reputation
in all directions, throughout the three worlds. Thus he shone in his position,
like the brilliant moon in the sky.
TEXT 36
bu>auJae c ié[Ya& Sv*Öa& iÜJadevaePal/iM>aTaaMa( )
k*-Tak*-TYaiMavaTMaaNa& MaNYaMaaNaae MahaMaNaa" )) 36 ))
bubhuje ca çriyaà svåddhäà
dvija-devopalambhitäm
kåta-kåtyam ivätmänaà
manyamäno mahämanäù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
639
bubhuje—enjoyed; ca—also; çriyam—opulence; su-åddhäm—prosperity;
dvija—of the brähmaëas; deva—as good as the demigods;
upalambhitäm—achieved because of the favor; kåta-kåtyam—very satisfied by
his activities; iva—like that; ätmänam—himself; manyamänaù—thinking;
mahä-manäù—the great-minded.
TRANSLATION
Because of the favor of the brähmaëas, the great soul Bali Mahäräja,
thinking himself very satisfied, became very opulent and prosperous and began
to enjoy the kingdom.
PURPORT
The brähmaëas are called dvija-deva, and kñatriyas are generally called
nara-deva. The word deva actually refers to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The brähmaëas guide human society in becoming happy by
satisfying Lord Viñëu, and according to their advice, the kñatriyas, who are
called nara-deva, keep law and order so that other people, namely the vaiçyas
and çüdras, may properly follow regulative principles. In this way, people are
gradually elevated to Kåñëa consciousness.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Fifteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Bali Mahäräja Conquers the Heavenly
Planets."
16. Executing the Payo-vrata Process of Worship
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
640
As described in this chapter, because Aditi, the mother of the demigods,
was very afflicted, her husband, Kaçyapa Muni, told her how to observe vows
in austerities for the benefit of her sons.
Since the demigods were not visible in the heavenly kingdom, their mother,
Aditi, because of separation from them, was very much aggrieved. One day
after many, many years, the great sage Kaçyapa emerged from a trance of
meditation and returned to his äçrama. He saw that the äçrama was no longer
beautiful and that his wife was very morose. Everywhere in the äçrama, he saw
signs of lamentation. The great sage therefore inquired from his wife about the
well-being of the äçrama and asked her why she looked so morose. After Aditi
informed Kaçyapa Muni about the äçrama's well-being, she told him that she
was lamenting for the absence of her sons. She then requested him to tell her
how her sons could return and reoccupy their positions. She wanted all good
fortune for her sons. Moved by Aditi's request, Kaçyapa Muni instructed her in
the philosophy of self-realization, the difference between matter and spirit,
and how to be unaffected by material loss. But when he saw that Aditi was not
satisfied even after he had given these instructions, he advised her to worship
Väsudeva, Janärdana. He assured her that only Lord Väsudeva could satisfy
her and fulfill all her desires. When Aditi then expressed her desire to worship
Lord Väsudeva, Prajäpati Kaçyapa told her about a process of worship known
as payo-vrata, which is executed in twelve days. Lord Brahmä had instructed
him how to satisfy Lord Kåñëa by this process, and thus he advised his wife to
observe this vow and its regulative principles.
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
Wv& Pau}aezu Naíezu devMaaTaaidiTaSTada )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
641
ôTae i}aivíPae dETYaE" PaYaRTaPYadNaaQavTa( )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evaà putreñu nañöeñu
deva-mätäditis tadä
håte tri-viñöape daityaiù
paryatapyad anäthavat
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—in this way;
putreñu—when her sons; nañöeñu—disappearing from their position;
deva-mätä—the mother of the demigods; aditiù—Aditi; tadä—at that time;
håte—because of being lost; tri-viñöape—the kingdom of heaven; daityaiù—by
the influence of the demons; paryatapyat—began to lament; anätha-vat—as if
she had no protector.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, when Aditi's sons, the demigods, had thus
disappeared from heaven and the demons had occupied their places, Aditi began
lamenting, as if she had no protector.
TEXT 2
Wk-da k-XYaPaSTaSYaa Aaé[Ma& >aGavaNaGaaTa( )
iNaåTSav& iNaraNaNd& SaMaaDaeivRrTaiêraTa( )) 2 ))
ekadä kaçyapas tasyä
äçramaà bhagavän agät
nirutsavaà niränandaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
642
samädher virataç cirät
SYNONYMS
ekadä—one day; kaçyapaù—the great sage Kaçyapa Muni; tasyäù—of Aditi;
äçramam—to the shelter; bhagavän—greatly powerful; agät—went;
nirutsavam—without enthusiasm; niränandam—without jubilation;
samädheù—his trance; virataù—stopping; cirät—after a long time.
TRANSLATION
After many, many days, the great powerful sage Kaçyapa Muni arose from a
trance of meditation and returned home to see the äçrama of Aditi neither
jubilant nor festive.
TEXT 3
Sa PaÒq& dqNavdNaa& k*-TaaSaNaPairGa]h" )
Sa>aaiJaTaae YaQaaNYaaYaiMadMaah ku-æÜh )) 3 ))
sa patnéà déna-vadanäà
kåtäsana-parigrahaù
sabhäjito yathä-nyäyam
idam äha kurüdvaha
SYNONYMS
saù—Kaçyapa Muni; patném—unto his wife; déna-vadanäm—having a dry face;
kåta-äsana-parigrahaù—after accepting a sitting place; sabhäjitaù—being
honored by Aditi; yathä-nyäyam—according to time and place; idam
äha—spoke as follows; kuru-udvaha—O Mahäräja Parékñit, the best of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
643
Kurus.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Kurus, when Kaçyapa Muni had been properly received and
welcomed, he took his seat and then spoke as follows to his wife, Aditi, who
was very morose.
TEXT 4
APYa>ad]& Na ivPa[a<aa& >ad]e l/aeke-_DauNaaGaTaMa( )
Na DaMaRSYa Na l/aek-SYa Ma*TYaaeX^NdaNauviTaRNa" )) 4 ))
apy abhadraà na vipräëäà
bhadre loke 'dhunägatam
na dharmasya na lokasya
måtyoç chandänuvartinaù
SYNONYMS
api—whether; abhadram—ill fortune; na—not; vipräëäm—of the brähmaëas;
bhadre—O most gentle Aditi; loke—in this world; adhunä—at the present
moment; ägatam—has come; na—not; dharmasya—of religious principles;
na—not; lokasya—of the people in general; måtyoù—death;
chanda-anuvartinaù—who are followers of the whims of death.
TRANSLATION
O most gentle one, I wonder whether anything inauspicious has now taken
place in regard to religious principles, the brähmaëas or the people in general,
who are subject to the whims of death.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
644
PURPORT
There are prescribed duties for all the inhabitants of this material world,
especially for the brähmaëas but also for the people in general, who are subject
to the whims of death. Kaçyapa Muni wondered whether the regulative
principles, which are meant for the well-being of everyone, had been
disobeyed. He accordingly continued his inquiries for seven verses.
TEXT 5
AiPa vaku-Xal&/ ik-iÄd( Ga*hezu Ga*hMaeiDaiNa )
DaMaRSYaaQaRSYa k-aMaSYa Ya}a YaaeGaae ùYaaeiGaNaaMa( )) 5 ))
api väkuçalaà kiïcid
gåheñu gåha-medhini
dharmasyärthasya kämasya
yatra yogo hy ayoginäm
SYNONYMS
api—I am wondering; vä—either; akuçalam—inauspiciousness; kiïcit—some;
gåheñu—at home; gåha-medhini—O my wife, who are attached to household
life; dharmasya—of the principles of religion; arthasya—of the economic
condition; kämasya—of satisfaction of desires; yatra—at home; yogaù—the
result of meditation; hi—indeed; ayoginäm—even of those who are not
transcendentalists.
TRANSLATION
O my wife, who are very much attached to household life, if the principles of
religion, economic development and satisfaction of the senses are properly
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
645
followed in household life, one's activities are as good as those of a
transcendentalist. I wonder whether there have been any discrepancies in
following these principles.
PURPORT
In this verse, Aditi has been addressed by her husband, Kaçyapa Muni, as
gåha-medhini, which means "one who is satisfied in household life for sense
gratification." Generally, those who are in household life pursue sense
gratification in the field of activities performed for material results. Such
gåhamedhés have only one aim in life—sense gratification. Therefore it is said,
yan maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukhaà hi tuccham: [SB 7.9.45] the householder's
life is based on sense gratification, and therefore the happiness derived from it
is very meager. Nonetheless, the Vedic process is so comprehensive that even
in householder life one can adjust his activities according to the regulative
principles of dharma, artha, käma and mokña. One's aim should be to achieve
liberation, but because one cannot at once give up sense gratification, in the
çästras there are injunctions prescribing how to follow the principles of
religion, economic development and sense gratification. As explained in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.9), dharmasya hy äpavargyasya närtho
'rthäyopakalpate: "All occupational engagements are certainly meant for
ultimate liberation. They should never be performed for material gain." Those
who are in household life should not think that religion is meant to improve
the process of the householder's sense gratification. Household life is also
meant for advancement in spiritual understanding, by which one can
ultimately gain liberation from the material clutches. One should remain in
household life with the aim of understanding the ultimate goal of life (tattva
jijïäsä). Then household life is as good as the life of a yogi. Kaçyapa Muni
therefore inquired from his wife whether the principles of religion, economic
development and sense gratification were being properly followed in terms of
the çästric injunctions. As soon as one deviates from the injunctions of the
çästra, the purpose of household life is immediately lost in confusion.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
646
TEXT 6
AiPa vaiTaQaYaae_>YaeTYa ku-$u=MbaSa¢-Yaa TvYaa )
Ga*hadPaUiJaTaa YaaTaa" Pa[TYauTQaaNaeNa va KvicTa( )) 6 ))
api vätithayo 'bhyetya
kuöumbäsaktayä tvayä
gåhäd apüjitä yätäù
pratyutthänena vä kvacit
SYNONYMS
api—whether; vä—either; atithayaù—guests who come without an invitation;
abhyetya—coming to the home; kuöumba-äsaktayä—who were too attached to
the family members; tvayä—by you; gåhät—from the house; apüjitäù—without
being properly welcomed; yätäù—went away; pratyutthänena—by standing up;
vä—either; kvacit—sometimes.
TRANSLATION
I wonder whether because of being too attached to the members of your
family, you failed to properly receive uninvited guests, who therefore were not
welcomed and went away.
PURPORT
It is the duty of a householder to receive guests, even if a guest be an enemy.
When a guest comes to one's home, one should properly receive him by
standing up and offering him a seat. It is enjoined, gåhe çatrum api präptaà
viçvastam akutobhayam: if even an enemy comes to one's home, one should
receive him in such a way that the guest will forget that his host is an enemy.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
647
According to one's position, one should properly receive anyone who comes to
one's home. At least a seat and a glass of water should be offered, so that the
guest will not be displeased. Kaçyapa Muni inquired from Aditi whether
disrespect had been shown to such guests, or atithis. The word atithi refers to
one who comes without an invitation.
TEXT 7
Ga*hezu YaeZviTaQaYaae NaaicRTaa" Sail/lE/riPa )
Yaid iNaYaaRiNTa Tae NaUNa& fe-åraJaGa*haePaMaa" )) 7 ))
gåheñu yeñv atithayo
närcitäù salilair api
yadi niryänti te nünaà
pheruräja-gåhopamäù
SYNONYMS
gåheñu—at home; yeñu—which; atithayaù—uninvited guests; na—not;
arcitäù—welcomed; salilaiù api—even by offering a glass of water; yadi—if;
niryänti—they go away; te—such household life; nünam—indeed;
pheru-räja—of jackals; gåha—the homes; upamäù—like.
TRANSLATION
Homes from which guests go away without having been received even with
an offering of a little water are like those holes in the field which are the homes
of jackals.
PURPORT
In a field there may be holes made by snakes and mice, but when there are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
648
very big holes, it may be supposed that jackals live there. Certainly no one goes
to take shelter in such homes. Thus the homes of human beings where atithis,
uninvited guests, are not properly received are like the homes of jackals.
TEXT 8
APYaGanYaSTau vel/aYaa& Na huTaa hivza SaiTa )
TvYaaeiÜGaniDaYaa >ad]e Pa[aeizTae MaiYa k-ihRicTa( )) 8 ))
apy agnayas tu veläyäà
na hutä haviñä sati
tvayodvigna-dhiyä bhadre
proñite mayi karhicit
SYNONYMS
api—whether; agnayaù—fires; tu—indeed; veläyäm—in the fire sacrifice;
na—not; hutäù—offered; haviñä—by ghee; sati—O chaste woman; tvayä—by
you; udvigna-dhiyä—because of some anxiety; bhadre—O auspicious woman;
proñite—was away from home; mayi—when I; karhicit—sometimes.
TRANSLATION
O chaste and auspicious woman, when I left home for other places, were you
in so much anxiety that you did not offer oblations of ghee into the fire?
TEXT 9
YaTPaUJaYaa k-aMadugaaNYaaiTa l/aek-aNGa*haiNvTa" )
b]aø<aae_iGanê vE ivZ<aae" SavRdevaTMaNaae Mau%Ma( )) 9 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
649
yat-püjayä käma-dughän
yäti lokän gåhänvitaù
brähmaëo 'gniç ca vai viñëoù
sarva-devätmano mukham
SYNONYMS
yat-püjayä—by worshiping the fire and brähmaëas; käma-dughän—which
fulfill one's desires; yäti—one goes; lokän—to the destination of the higher
planetary system; gåha-anvitaù—a person attached to household life;
brähmaëaù—the brähmaëas; agniù ca—and the fire; vai—indeed; viñëoù—of
Lord Viñëu; sarva-deva-ätmanaù—the soul of all the demigods; mukham—the
mouth.
TRANSLATION
By worshiping the fire and the brähmaëas, a householder can achieve the
desired goal of residing in the higher planets, for the sacrificial fire and the
brähmaëas are to be considered the mouth of Lord Viñëu, who is the Supersoul
of all the demigods.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic system, a fire sacrifice is held in order to offer
oblations of ghee, grains, fruits, flowers and so on, so that Lord Viñëu may eat
and be satisfied. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.26):
patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà
yo me bhaktyä prayacchati
tad ahaà bhakty-upahåtam
açnämi prayatätmanaù
"If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
650
accept it." Therefore, all these items may be offered in the sacrificial fire, and
Lord Viñëu will be satisfied. Similarly, brähmaëa-bhojana, feeding of the
brähmaëas, is also recommended, for when the brähmaëas eat sumptuous
remnants of food after yajïa, this is another way that Lord Viñëu Himself eats.
Therefore the Vedic principles recommend that in every festival or ceremony
one offer oblations to the fire and give sumptuous food for the brähmaëas to
eat. By such activities, a householder may be elevated to the heavenly planets
and similar places in the higher planetary systems.
TEXT 10
AiPa SaveR ku-Xail/NaSTav Pau}aa MaNaiSviNa )
l/+aYae_SvSQaMaaTMaaNa& >avTYaa l/+a<aErhMa( )) 10 ))
api sarve kuçalinas
tava puträ manasvini
lakñaye 'svastham ätmänaà
bhavatyä lakñaëair aham
SYNONYMS
api—whether; sarve—all; kuçalinaù—in full auspiciousness; tava—your;
puträù—sons; manasvini—O great-minded lady; lakñaye—I see;
asvastham—not in tranquillity; ätmänam—the mind; bhavatyäù—of you;
lakñaëaiù—by symptoms; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
O great-minded lady, are all your sons faring well? Seeing your withered
face, I can perceive that your mind is not tranquil. How is this so?
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
651
TEXT 11
é[qAidiTaåvac
>ad]& iÜJaGava& b]øNDaMaRSYaaSYa JaNaSYa c )
i}avGaRSYa Par& +ae}a& Ga*hMaeiDaNGa*ha wMae )) 11 ))
çré-aditir uväca
bhadraà dvija-gaväà brahman
dharmasyäsya janasya ca
tri-vargasya paraà kñetraà
gåhamedhin gåhä ime
SYNONYMS
çré-aditiù uväca—Çrématé Aditi said; bhadram—all auspiciousness;
dvija-gaväm—of the brähmaëas and the cows; brahman—O brähmaëa;
dharmasya asya—of the religious principles mentioned in çästra; janasya—of
the people in general; ca—and; tri-vargasya—of the three processes of
elevation (dharma, artha and käma); param—the supreme; kñetram—field;
gåhamedhin—O my husband, who are attached to household life; gåhäù—your
home; ime—all these things.
TRANSLATION
Aditi said: O my respected brähmaëa husband, all is well with the
brähmaëas, the cows, religion and the welfare of other people. O master of the
house, the three principles of dharma, artha and käma flourish in household
life, which is consequently full of good fortune.
PURPORT
In household life one can develop the three principles of religion, economic
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
652
development and sense gratification according to the regulations given in the
çästras, but to attain liberation one must give up household life and place
himself in the transcendental renounced order. Kaçyapa Muni was not in the
renounced order of life. Therefore he is addressed here once as brahman and
another time as gåhamedhin. Aditi, his wife, assured him that as far as
household life was concerned, everything was going nicely, and the brähmaëas
and cows were being honored and protected. In other words, there were no
disturbances; household life was duly progressing.
TEXT 12
AGanYaae_iTaQaYaae >a*TYaa i>a+avae Yae c il/PSav" )
Sav| >aGavTaae b]øàNauDYaaNaaà irZYaiTa )) 12 ))
agnayo 'tithayo bhåtyä
bhikñavo ye ca lipsavaù
sarvaà bhagavato brahmann
anudhyänän na riñyati
SYNONYMS
agnayaù—worshiping the fires; atithayaù—receiving the guests;
bhåtyäù—satisfying the servants; bhikñavaù—pleasing the beggars; ye—all of
them who; ca—and; lipsavaù—as they desire (are taken care of); sarvam—all
of them; bhagavataù—of you, my lord; brahman—O brähmaëa;
anudhyänät—from always thinking; na riñyati—nothing is missed (everything
is properly done).
TRANSLATION
O beloved husband, the fires, guests, servants and beggars are all being
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
653
properly cared for by me. Because I always think of you, there is no possibility
that any of the religious principles will be neglected.
TEXT 13
k-ae Nau Mae >aGavNk-aMaae Na SaMPaÛeTa MaaNaSa" )
YaSYaa >avaNPa[JaaDYa+a Wv& DaMaaRNPa[>aazTae )) 13 ))
ko nu me bhagavan kämo
na sampadyeta mänasaù
yasyä bhavän prajädhyakña
evaà dharmän prabhäñate
SYNONYMS
kaù—what; nu—indeed; me—my; bhagavan—O lord; kämaù—desire;
na—not; sampadyeta—can be fulfilled; mänasaù—within my mind;
yasyäù—of me; bhavän—your good self; prajä-adhyakñaù—Prajäpati;
evam—thus; dharmän—religious principles; prabhäñate—talks.
TRANSLATION
O my lord, since you are a Prajäpati and are personally my instructor in the
principles of religion, where is the possibility that all my desires will not be
fulfilled?
TEXT 14
TavEv Maarqc MaNa"XarqrJaa"
Pa[Jaa wMaa" SatvrJaSTaMaaeJauz" )
SaMaae >ava&STaaSvSauraidzu Pa[>aae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
654
TaQaaiPa >a¢&- >aJaTae Maheìr" )) 14 ))
tavaiva märéca manaù-çarérajäù
prajä imäù sattva-rajas-tamo-juñaù
samo bhaväàs täsv asurädiñu prabho
tathäpi bhaktaà bhajate maheçvaraù
SYNONYMS
tava—your; eva—indeed; märéca—O son of Maréci; manaù-çaréra-jäù—born
either of your body or of your mind (all the demons and demigods);
prajäù—born of you; imäù—all of them; sattva-rajaù-tamaù-juñaù—infected
with sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa or tamo-guëa; samaù—equal; bhavän—your good
self; täsu—to every one of them; asura-ädiñu—beginning with the asuras;
prabho—O my lord; tathä api—still; bhaktam—unto the devotees;
bhajate—takes care of; mahä-éçvaraù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the supreme controller.
TRANSLATION
O son of Maréci, because you are a great personality you are equal toward all
the demons and demigods, who are born either from your body or from your
mind and who possess one or another of the three qualities—sattva-guëa,
rajo-guëa or tamo-guëa. But although the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
supreme controller, is equal toward all living entities, He is especially favorable
to the devotees.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (9.29) the Lord says:
samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
655
na me dveñyo 'sti na priyaù
ye bhajanti tu mäà bhaktyä
mayi te teñu cäpy aham
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead is equal toward everyone, He is
especially inclined toward those who engage in His devotional service. The
Lord says, kaunteya pratijänéhi na me bhaktaù praëaçyati: [Bg. 9.31] "My dear
son of Kunté, please declare that My devotee will never be vanquished."
Elsewhere, Kåñëa also says:
ye yathä mäà prapadyante
täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham
mama vartmänuvartante
manuñyäù pärtha sarvaçaù
(Bg. 4.11)
Actually, everyone is trying to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
various ways, but according to their methods of approach, the Supreme Lord
endows them with different benedictions. Thus Aditi appealed to her husband
by saying that since even the supreme controller favors His devotees and since
Indra, Kaçyapa's devoted son, was in difficulty, Kaçyapa should bestow his
favor upon Indra.
TEXT 15
TaSMaadqXa >aJaNTYaa Mae é[eYaiêNTaYa Sauv]Ta )
ôTaié[Yaae ôTaSQaaNaaNSaPaÒE" Paaih Na" Pa[>aae )) 15 ))
tasmäd éça bhajantyä me
çreyaç cintaya suvrata
håta-çriyo håta-sthänän
sapatnaiù pähi naù prabho
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
656
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; éça—O powerful controller; bhajantyäù—of your servitor;
me—me; çreyaù—auspiciousness; cintaya—just consider; su-vrata—O most
gentle one; håta-çriyaù—bereft of all opulence; håta-sthänän—bereft of a
residence; sapatnaiù—by the competitors; pähi—please protect; naù—us;
prabho—O my lord.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, most gentle lord, kindly favor your maidservant. We have now
been deprived of our opulence and residence by our competitors, the demons.
Kindly give us protection.
PURPORT
Aditi, the mother of the demigods, appealed to Kaçyapa Muni to give the
demigods protection. When we speak of the demigods, this also includes their
mother.
TEXT 16
ParEivRvaiSaTaa Saah& MaGana VYaSaNaSaaGare )
WeìYa| é[qYaRXa" SQaaNa& ôTaaiNa Pa[blE/MaRMa )) 16 ))
parair viväsitä sähaà
magnä vyasana-sägare
aiçvaryaà çrér yaçaù sthänaà
håtäni prabalair mama
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
657
SYNONYMS
paraiù—by our enemies; viväsitä—taken away from our residential quarters;
sä—the same; aham—I; magnä—drowned; vyasana-sägare—in an ocean of
trouble; aiçvaryam—opulence; çréù—beauty; yaçaù—reputation;
sthänam—place; håtäni—all taken away; prabalaiù—very powerful;
mama—my.
TRANSLATION
The demons, our formidably powerful enemies, have taken away our
opulence, our beauty, our fame and even our residence. Indeed, we have now
been exiled, and we are drowning in an ocean of trouble.
TEXT 17
YaQaa TaaiNa PauNa" SaaDaae Pa[PaÛerNa( MaMaaTMaJaa" )
TaQaa ivDaeih k-LYaa<a& iDaYaa k-LYaa<ak*-taMa )) 17 ))
yathä täni punaù sädho
prapadyeran mamätmajäù
tathä vidhehi kalyäëaà
dhiyä kalyäëa-kåttama
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; täni—all of our lost things; punaù—again; sädho—O great saintly
person; prapadyeran—can regain; mama—my; ätmajäù—offspring (sons);
tathä—so; vidhehi—kindly do; kalyäëam—auspiciousness; dhiyä—by
consideration; kalyäëa-kåt-tama—O you who are the best person to act for our
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
658
welfare.
TRANSLATION
O best of sages, best of all those who grant auspicious benedictions, please
consider our situation and bestow upon my sons the benedictions by which they
can regain what they have lost.
TEXT 18
é[qéuk- ovac
WvMa>YaiQaRTaae_idTYaa k-STaaMaah SMaYaiàv )
Ahae MaaYaabl&/ ivZ<aae" òehbÖiMad& JaGaTa( )) 18 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evam abhyarthito 'dityä
kas täm äha smayann iva
aho mäyä-balaà viñëoù
sneha-baddham idaà jagat
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—in this way;
abhyarthitaù—being requested; adityä—by Aditi; kaù—Kaçyapa Muni;
täm—unto her; äha—said; smayan—smiling; iva—just like; aho—alas;
mäyä-balam—the influence of the illusory energy; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu;
sneha-baddham—influenced by this affection; idam—this; jagat—whole world.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: When Kaçyapa Muni was thus requested by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
659
Aditi, he slightly smiled. "Alas," he said, "how powerful is the illusory energy
of Lord Viñëu, by which the entire world is bound by affection for children!"
PURPORT
Kaçyapa Muni was surely sympathetic to his wife's affliction, yet he was
surprised at how the whole world is influenced by affection.
TEXT 19
Kv dehae >aaEiTak-ae_NaaTMaa Kv caTMaa Pa[k*-Tae" Par" )
k-SYa ke- PaiTaPau}aaÛa Maaeh Wv ih k-ar<aMa( )) 19 ))
kva deho bhautiko 'nätmä
kva cätmä prakåteù paraù
kasya ke pati-puträdyä
moha eva hi käraëam
SYNONYMS
kva—where is; dehaù—this material body; bhautikaù—made of five elements;
anätmä—not the spirit soul; kva—where is; ca—also; ätmä—the spirit soul;
prakåteù—to the material world; paraù—transcendental; kasya—of whom;
ke—who is; pati—husband; putra-ädyäù—or son and so on; mohaù—illusion;
eva—indeed; hi—certainly; käraëam—cause.
TRANSLATION
Kaçyapa Muni continued: What is this material body, made of five elements?
It is different from the spirit soul. Indeed, the spirit soul is completely different
from the material elements from which the body is made. But because of bodily
attachment, one is regarded as a husband or son. These illusory relationships
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
660
are caused by misunderstanding.
PURPORT
The spirit soul (ätmä or jéva) is certainly different from the body, which is a
combination of five material elements. This is a simple fact, but it is not
understood unless one is spiritually educated. Kaçyapa Muni met his wife,
Aditi, in the heavenly planets, but the same misconception extends
throughout the entire universe and is also here on earth. There are different
grades of living entities, but all of them are more or less under the impression
of the bodily conception of life. In other words, all living entities in this
material world are more or less devoid of spiritual education. The Vedic
civilization, however, is based on spiritual education, and spiritual education is
the special basis on which Bhagavad-gétä was spoken to Arjuna. In the
beginning of Bhagavad-gétä, Kåñëa instructed Arjuna to understand that the
spirit soul is different from the body.
dehino 'smin yathä dehe
kaumäraà yauvanaà jarä
tathä dehäntara-präptir
dhéras tatra na muhyati
"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth
to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." (Bg. 2.13) Unfortunately,
this spiritual education is completely absent from modern human civilization.
No one understands his real self-interest, which lies with the spirit soul, not
with the material body. Education means spiritual education. To work hard in
the bodily conception of life, without spiritual education, is to live like an
animal. Näyaà deho deha-bhäjäà nå-loke kañöän kämän arhate vid-bhujäà ye
(SB 5.5.1). People are working so hard simply for bodily comforts, without
education regarding the spirit soul. Thus they are living in a very risky
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
661
civilization, for it is a fact that the spirit soul has to transmigrate from one
body to another (tathä dehäntara-präptiù [Bg. 2.13]). Without spiritual
education, people are kept in dark ignorance and do not know what will
happen to them after the annihilation of the present body. They are working
blindly, and blind leaders are directing them. Andhä yathändhair
upanéyamänäs te 'péça-tantryäm uru-dämni baddhäù (SB 7.5.31). A foolish
person does not know that he is completely under the bondage of material
nature and that after death material nature will impose upon him a certain
type of body, which he will have to accept. He does not know that although in
his present body he may be a very important man, he may next get the body of
an animal or tree because of his ignorant activities in the modes of material
nature. Therefore the Kåñëa consciousness movement is trying to give the true
light of spiritual existence to all living entities. This movement is not very
difficult to understand, and people must take advantage of it, for it will save
them from the risky life of irresponsibility.
TEXT 20
oPaiTaïSv Pauåz& >aGavNTa& JaNaadRNaMa( )
SavR>aUTaGauhavaSa& vaSaudev& JaGad(GauåMa( )) 20 ))
upatiñöhasva puruñaà
bhagavantaà janärdanam
sarva-bhüta-guhä-väsaà
väsudevaà jagad-gurum
SYNONYMS
upatiñöhasva—just try to worship; puruñam—the Supreme Person;
bhagavantam—the Personality of Godhead; janärdanam—who can kill all the
enemies; sarva-bhüta-guhä-väsam—living within the core of the heart of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
662
everyone; väsudevam—Väsudeva, Kåñëa, who is all-pervading and is the son of
Vasudeva; jagat-gurum—the spiritual master and teacher of the whole world.
TRANSLATION
My dear Aditi, engage in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is the master of everything, who can subdue everyone's enemies,
and who sits within everyone's heart. Only that Supreme Person—Kåñëa, or
Väsudeva—can bestow all auspicious benedictions upon everyone, for He is the
spiritual master of the universe.
PURPORT
With these words, Kaçyapa Muni tried to pacify his wife. Aditi made her
appeal to her material husband. Of course, that is nice, but actually a material
relative cannot do anything good for anyone. If anything good can be done, it
is done by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva. Therefore, Kaçyapa
Muni advised his wife, Aditi, to begin worshiping Lord Väsudeva, who is
situated in everyone's heart. He is the friend of everyone and is known as
Janärdana because He can kill all enemies. There are three modes of material
nature—goodness, passion and ignorance—and above material nature,
transcendental to material nature, is another existence, which is called
çuddha-sattva. In the material world, the mode of goodness is considered the
best, but because of material contamination, even the mode of goodness is
sometimes overpowered by the modes of passion and ignorance. But when one
transcends the competition between these modes and engages himself in
devotional service, he rises above the three modes of material nature. In that
transcendental position, one is situated in pure consciousness. Sattvaà
viçuddhaà vasudeva-çabditam (SB 4.3.23). Above material nature is the
position called vasudeva, or freedom from material contamination. Only in
that position can one perceive the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Väsudeva. Thus the vasudeva condition fulfills a spiritual necessity. Väsudevaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
663
sarvam iti sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù [Bg. 7.19]. When one realizes Väsudeva, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he becomes most exalted.
Paramätmä (Väsudeva) is situated in everyone's heart, as confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä. The Lord says:
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
"To those who are constantly devoted and who worship Me with love, I give
the understanding by which they can come to Me." (Bg. 10.10)
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna." (Bg. 18.61)
bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram
suhådaà sarva-bhütänäà
jïätvä mäà çäntim åcchati
"The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and austerities,
the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the benefactor and
well-wisher of all living entities, attains peace from the pangs of material
miseries." (Bg. 5.29)
Whenever one is perplexed, let him take shelter of the lotus feet of
Väsudeva, Kåñëa, who will give the devotee intelligence to help him surpass all
difficulties and return home, back to Godhead. Kaçyapa Muni advised his wife
to seek shelter at the lotus feet of Väsudeva, Kåñëa, so that all her problems
would be very easily solved. Thus Kaçyapa Muni was an ideal spiritual master.
He was not so foolish that he would present himself as an exalted personality,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
664
as good as God. He was actually a bona fide guru because he advised his wife to
seek shelter at the lotus feet of Väsudeva. One who trains his subordinate or
disciple to worship Väsudeva is the truly bona fide spiritual master. The word
jagad-gurum is very important in this regard. Kaçyapa Muni did not falsely
declare himself to be jagad-guru, although he actually was jagad-guru because
he advocated the cause of Väsudeva. Actually, Väsudeva is jagad-guru, as
clearly stated here (väsudevaà jagad-gurum). One who teaches the instructions
of Väsudeva, Bhagavad-gétä, is as good as väsudevaà jagad-gurum. But when
one who does not teach this instruction—as it is—declares himself jagad-guru,
he simply cheats the public. Kåñëa is jagad-guru, and one who teaches the
instruction of Kåñëa as it is, on behalf of Kåñëa, may be accepted as jagad-guru.
One who manufactures his own theories cannot be accepted; he becomes
jagad-guru falsely.
TEXT 21
Sa ivDaaSYaiTa Tae k-aMaaNhirdsNaaNauk-MPaNa" )
AMaaegaa >aGavÙi¢-NaeRTareiTa MaiTaMaRMa )) 21 ))
sa vidhäsyati te kämän
harir dénänukampanaù
amoghä bhagavad-bhaktir
netareti matir mama
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Väsudeva); vidhäsyati—will undoubtedly fulfill; te—your;
kämän—desires; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; déna—unto the
poor; anukampanaù—very merciful; amoghä—infallible;
bhagavat-bhaktiù—devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; na—not; itarä—anything but bhagavad-bhakti; iti—thus;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
665
matiù—opinion; mama—my.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is very merciful to the poor, will
fulfill all of your desires, for devotional service unto Him is infallible. Any
method other than devotional service is useless. That is my opinion.
PURPORT
There are three kinds of men, who are called akäma, mokña-käma and
sarva-käma. One who tries to get liberation from this material world is called
mokña-käma, one who wants to enjoy this material world to its fullest extent is
called sarva-käma, and one who has fulfilled all his desires and has no further
material desires is called akäma. A bhakta has no desire.
Sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. He is
purified and free from material desires. The mokña-kämé wants to achieve
liberation by merging into the existence of the Supreme Brahman, and because
of this desire to merge into the existence of the Lord, he is not yet pure. And
since those who want liberation are impure, what to speak of the karmés, who
have so many desires to fulfill? Nonetheless, the çästra says:
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"Whether one desires everything or nothing or desires to merge into the
existence of the Lord, he is intelligent only if he worships Lord Kåñëa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, by rendering transcendental loving service."
(SB 2.3.10)
Kaçyapa Muni saw that his wife, Aditi, had some material desires for the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
666
welfare of her sons, but still he advised her to render devotional service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other words, everyone, regardless of
whether he is a karmé, jïäné, yogé or bhakta, should invariably take shelter of
the lotus feet of Väsudeva and render transcendental loving service unto Him
so that all his desires will be duly fulfilled. Kåñëa is déna-anukampana: He is
very merciful to everyone. Therefore if one wants to fulfill his material desires,
Kåñëa helps him. Of course, sometimes if a devotee is very sincere, the Lord, as
a special favor to him, refuses to fulfill his material desires and directly blesses
him with pure, unalloyed devotional service. It is said in Caitanya-caritämåta
(Madhya 22.38-39):
kåñëa kahe,—'ämä bhaje, mäge viñaya-sukha
amåta chäòi' viña mäge,—ei baòa mürkha
ämi—vijïa, ei mürkhe 'viñaya' kene diba?
sva-caraëämåta diyä 'viñaya' bhuläiba
"Kåñëa says, 'If one engages in My transcendental loving service but at the
same time wants the opulence of material enjoyment, he is very, very foolish.
Indeed, he is just like a person who gives up ambrosia to drink poison. Since I
am very intelligent, why should I give this fool material prosperity? Instead I
shall induce him to take the nectar of the shelter of My lotus feet and make
him forget illusory material enjoyment.' " If a devotee maintains some material
desire and at the same time very sincerely desires to engage at the lotus feet of
Kåñëa, Kåñëa may directly give him unalloyed devotional service and take
away all his material desires and possessions. This is the Lord's special favor to
devotees. Otherwise, if one takes to Kåñëa's devotional service but still has
material desires to fulfill, he may become free from all material desires, as
Dhruva Mahäräja did, but this may take some time. However, if a very sincere
devotee wants only Kåñëa's lotus feet, Kåñëa directly gives him the position of
çuddha-bhakti, unalloyed devotional service.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
667
TEXT 22
é[qAidiTaåvac
ke-Naah& iviDaNaa b]øàuPaSQaaSYae JaGaTPaiTaMa( )
YaQaa Mae SaTYaSaªLPaae ivdDYaaTa( Sa MaNaaerQaMa( )) 22 ))
çré-aditir uväca
kenähaà vidhinä brahmann
upasthäsye jagat-patim
yathä me satya-saìkalpo
vidadhyät sa manoratham
SYNONYMS
çré-aditiù uväca—Çrématé Aditi began to pray; kena—by which; aham—I;
vidhinä—by regulative principles; brahman—O brähmaëa; upasthäsye—can
please; jagat-patim—the Lord of the universe, Jagannätha; yathä—by which;
me—my; satya-saìkalpaù—desire may actually be fulfilled; vidadhyät—may
fulfill; saù—He (the Supreme Lord); manoratham—ambitions or desires.
TRANSLATION
Çrématé Aditi said: O brähmaëa, tell me the regulative principles by which I
may worship the supreme master of the world so that the Lord will be pleased
with me and fulfill all my desires.
PURPORT
It is said, "Man proposes, God disposes." Thus a person may desire many
things, but unless these desires are fulfilled by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, they cannot be fulfilled. Fulfillment of desire is called
satya-saìkalpa. Here the word satya-saìkalpa is very important. Aditi placed
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
668
herself at the mercy of her husband so that he would give her directions by
which to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead so that all her desires
would be fulfilled. A disciple must first decide that he should worship the
Supreme Lord, and then the spiritual master will give the disciple correct
directions. One cannot dictate to the spiritual master, just as a patient cannot
demand that his physician prescribe a certain type of medicine. Here is the
beginning of worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (7.16):
catur-vidhä bhajante mäà
janäù sukåtino 'rjuna
ärto jijïäsur arthärthé
jïäné ca bharatarñabha
"O best among the Bhäratas, four kinds of pious men render devotional service
unto Me—the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the inquisitive, and he who is
searching for knowledge of the Absolute." Aditi was ärta, a person in distress.
She was very much aggrieved because her sons, the demigods, were bereft of
everything. Thus she wanted to take shelter of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead under the direction of her husband, Kaçyapa Muni.
TEXT 23
AaidXa Tv& iÜJaé[eï iviDa& TaduPaDaavNaMa( )
Aaéu TauZYaiTa Mae dev" SaqdNTYaa" Sah Pau}akE-" )) 23 ))
ädiça tvaà dvija-çreñöha
vidhià tad-upadhävanam
äçu tuñyati me devaù
sédantyäù saha putrakaiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
669
SYNONYMS
ädiça—just instruct me; tvam—O my husband; dvija-çreñöha—O best of the
brähmaëas; vidhim—the regulative principles; tat—the Lord;
upadhävanam—the process of worshiping; äçu—very soon; tuñyati—becomes
satisfied; me—unto me; devaù—the Lord; sédantyäù—now lamenting;
saha—with; putrakaiù—all my sons, the demigods.
TRANSLATION
O best of the brähmaëas, kindly instruct me in the perfect method of
worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead in devotional service, by which
the Lord may very soon be pleased with me and save me, along with my sons,
from this most dangerous condition.
PURPORT
Sometimes less intelligent men ask whether one has to approach a guru to
be instructed in devotional service for spiritual advancement. The answer is
given here—indeed, not only here, but also in Bhagavad-gétä, where Arjuna
accepted Kåñëa as his guru (çiñyas te 'haà çädhi mäà tväà prapannam [Bg. 2.7]).
The Vedas also instruct, tad-vijïänärthaà sa guruà eväbhigacchet: [MU
1.2.12(80)] one must accept a guru for proper direction if one is seriously
inclined toward advancement in spiritual life. The Lord says that one must
worship the äcärya, who is the representative of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (äcäryaà mäà vijänéyät [SB 11.17.27]). One should definitely
understand this. In Caitanya-caritämåta it is said that the guru is the
manifestation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, according to
all the evidence given by the çästra and by the practical behavior of devotees,
one must accept a guru. Aditi accepted her husband as her guru, so that he
would direct her how to advance in spiritual consciousness, devotional service,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
670
by worshiping the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 24
é[qk-XYaPa ovac
WTaNMae >aGavaNPa*í" Pa[Jaak-aMaSYa PaÚJa" )
Yadah Tae Pa[v+YaaiMa v]Ta& ke-XavTaaez<aMa( )) 24 ))
çré-kaçyapa uväca
etan me bhagavän påñöaù
prajä-kämasya padmajaù
yad äha te pravakñyämi
vrataà keçava-toñaëam
SYNONYMS
çré-kaçyapaù uväca—Kaçyapa Muni said; etat—this; me—by me;
bhagavän—the most powerful; påñöaù—when he was requested;
prajä-kämasya—desiring offspring; padma-jaù—Lord Brahmä, who was born of
a lotus flower; yat—whatever; äha—he said; te—unto you; pravakñyämi—I
shall explain; vratam—in the form of worship; keçava-toñaëam—by which
Keçava, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is satisfied.
TRANSLATION
Çré Kaçyapa Muni said: When I desired offspring, I placed inquiries before
Lord Brahmä, who is born from a lotus flower. Now I shall explain to you the
same process Lord Brahmä instructed me, by which Keçava, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is satisfied.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
671
PURPORT
Here the process of devotional service is further explained. Kaçyapa Muni
wanted to instruct Aditi in the same process recommended to him by Brahmä
for satisfying the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is valuable. The guru
does not manufacture a new process to instruct the disciple. The disciple
receives from the guru an authorized process received by the guru from his
guru. This is called the system of disciplic succession (evaà paramparä-präptaà
imaà räjarñayo viduù [Bg. 4.2]). This is the bona fide Vedic system of receiving
the process of devotional service, by which the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is pleased. Therefore, to approach a bona fide guru, or spiritual
master, is essential. The bona fide spiritual master is he who has received the
mercy of his guru, who in turn is bona fide because he has received the mercy
of his guru. This is called the paramparä system. Unless one follows this
paramparä system, the mantra one receives will be chanted for no purpose.
Nowadays there are so many rascal gurus who manufacture their mantras as a
process for material advancement, not spiritual advancement. Still, the mantra
cannot be successful if it is manufactured. Mantras and the process of
devotional service have special power, provided they are received from the
authorized person.
TEXT 25
f-aLGauNaSYaaMale/ Pa+ae ÜadXaah& PaYaaev]TaMa( )
AcRYaedrivNda+a& >a¢-ya ParMaYaaiNvTa" )) 25 ))
phälgunasyämale pakñe
dvädaçähaà payo-vratam
arcayed aravindäkñaà
bhaktyä paramayänvitaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
672
SYNONYMS
phälgunasya—of the month of Phälguna (February and March);
amale—during the bright; pakñe—fortnight; dvädaça-aham—for twelve days,
ending with Dvädaçé, the day after Ekädaçé; payaù-vratam—accepting the vow
of taking only milk; arcayet—one should worship; aravinda-akñam—the
lotus-eyed Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhaktyä—with devotion;
paramayä—unalloyed; anvitaù—surcharged.
TRANSLATION
In the bright fortnight of the month of Phälguna [February and March], for
twelve days ending with Dvädaçé, one should observe the vow of subsisting only
on milk and should worship the lotus-eyed Supreme Personality of Godhead
with all devotion.
PURPORT
Worshiping the Supreme Lord Viñëu with devotion means following
arcana-märga.
çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù
smaraëaà päda-sevanam
arcanaà vandanaà däsyaà
sakhyam ätma-nivedanam
[SB 7.5.23]
One should install the Deity of Lord Viñëu or Kåñëa and worship Him nicely
by dressing Him, decorating Him with flower garlands, and offering Him all
kinds of fruits, flowers and cooked food, nicely prepared with ghee, sugar and
grains. One should also offer a flame, incense and so on, while ringing a bell, as
prescribed. This is called worship of the Lord. Here it is recommended that one
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
673
observe the vow of subsisting only by drinking milk. This is called payo-vrata.
As we generally perform devotional service on Ekädaçé by not eating grains, it
is generally recommended that on Dvädaçé one not consume anything but
milk. Payo-vrata and arcana devotional service to the Supreme Lord should be
performed with a pure devotional attitude (bhaktyä). Without bhakti, one
cannot worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù [Bg. 18.55]. If one wants to know the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and be directly connected with Him, knowing what
He wants to eat and how He is satisfied, one must take to the process of bhakti.
As recommended here also, bhaktyä paramayänvitaù: one should be surcharged
with unalloyed devotional service.
TEXT 26
iSaNaqvaLYaa& Ma*dail/PYa òaYaaTa( §-ae@ivdq<aRYaa )
Yaid l/>YaeTa vE óaeTaSYaeTa& MaN}aMaudqrYaeTa( )) 26 ))
sinévälyäà mådälipya
snäyät kroòa-vidérëayä
yadi labhyeta vai srotasy
etaà mantram udérayet
SYNONYMS
sinévälyäm—on the dark-moon day; mådä—with dirt; älipya—smearing the
body; snäyät—one should bathe; kroòa-vidérëayä—dug up by the tusk of a
boar; yadi—if; labhyeta—it is available; vai—indeed; srotasi—in a flowing
river; etam mantram—this mantra; udérayet—one should chant.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
674
If dirt dug up by a boar is available, on the day of the dark moon one should
smear this dirt on his body and then bathe in a flowing river. While bathing,
one should chant the following mantra.
TEXT 27
Tv& deVYaaidvrahe<a rSaaYaa" SQaaNaiMaC^Taa )
od(Da*TaaiSa NaMaSTau>Ya& PaaPMaaNa& Mae Pa[<aaXaYa )) 27 ))
tvaà devy ädi-varäheëa
rasäyäù sthänam icchatä
uddhåtäsi namas tubhyaà
päpmänaà me praëäçaya
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; devi—O mother earth; ädi-varäheëa—by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in the form of a boar; rasäyäù—from the bottom of the universe;
sthänam—a place; icchatä—desiring; uddhåtä asi—you have been raised;
namaù tubhyam—I offer my respectful obeisances unto you; päpmänam—all
sinful activities and their reactions; me—of me; praëäçaya—please undo.
TRANSLATION
O mother earth, you were raised by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
the form of a boar because of your desiring to have a place to stay. I pray that
you kindly vanquish all the reactions of my sinful life. I offer my respectful
obeisances unto you.
TEXT 28
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
675
iNavRiTaRTaaTMaiNaYaMaae devMaceRTa( SaMaaihTa" )
AcaRYaa& SQai<@le/ SaUYaeR Jale/ vöaE GauraviPa )) 28 ))
nirvartitätma-niyamo
devam arcet samähitaù
arcäyäà sthaëòile sürye
jale vahnau guräv api
SYNONYMS
nirvartita—finished; ätma-niyamaù—the daily duties of washing, chanting
other mantras and so on, according to one's practice; devam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; arcet—one should worship; samähitaù—with full
attention; arcäyäm—unto the Deities; sthaëòile—unto the altar; sürye—unto
the sun; jale—unto the water; vahnau—unto the fire; gurau—unto the
spiritual master; api—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, one should perform his daily spiritual duties and then, with great
attention, offer worship to the Deity of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and also to the altar, the sun, water, fire and the spiritual master.
TEXT 29
NaMaSTau>Ya& >aGavTae PauåzaYa MahqYaSae )
SavR>aUTaiNavaSaaYa vaSaudevaYa Saai+a<ae )) 29 ))
namas tubhyaà bhagavate
puruñäya mahéyase
sarva-bhüta-niväsäya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
676
väsudeväya säkñiëe
SYNONYMS
namaù tubhyam—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; bhagavate—unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puruñäya—the Supreme Person;
mahéyase—the best of all personalities; sarva-bhüta-niväsäya—the person who
lives in everyone's heart; väsudeväya—the Lord who lives everywhere;
säkñiëe—the witness of everything.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, greatest of all, who lives in everyone's
heart and in whom everyone lives, O witness of everything, O Väsudeva,
supreme and all-pervading person, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 30
NaMaae_VYa¢-aYa SaU+MaaYa Pa[DaaNaPauåzaYa c )
cTauiv|Xad(Gau<ajaYa Gau<aSa&:YaaNaheTave )) 30 ))
namo 'vyaktäya sükñmäya
pradhäna-puruñäya ca
catur-viàçad-guëa-jïäya
guëa-saìkhyäna-hetave
SYNONYMS
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; avyaktäya—who are never
seen by material eyes; sükñmäya—transcendental; pradhäna-puruñäya—the
Supreme Person; ca—also; catuù-viàçat—twenty-four; guëa-jïäya—the
knower of the elements; guëa-saìkhyäna—of the säìkhya-yoga system;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
677
hetave—the original cause.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, the Supreme Person. Being very
subtle, You are never visible to material eyes. You are the knower of the
twenty-four elements, and You are the inaugurator of the säìkhya-yoga system.
PURPORT
Catur-viàçad-guëa, the twenty-four elements, are the five gross elements
(earth, water, fire, air and ether), the three subtle elements (mind, intelligence
and false ego), the ten senses (five for working and five for acquiring
knowledge), the five sense objects, and contaminated consciousness. These are
the subject matter of säìkhya-yoga, which was inaugurated by Lord
Kapiladeva. This säìkhya-yoga was again propounded by another Kapila, but
he was an atheist, and his system is not accepted as bona fide.
TEXT 31
NaMaae iÜXaqZ<aeR i}aPade cTau"é*(r)aYa TaNTave )
SaáhSTaaYa YajaYa }aYaqivÛaTMaNae NaMa" )) 31 ))
namo dvi-çérñëe tri-pade
catuù-çåìgäya tantave
sapta-hastäya yajïäya
trayé-vidyätmane namaù
SYNONYMS
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; dvi-çérñëe—who have two
heads; tri-pade—who have three legs; catuù-çåìgäya—who have four horns;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
678
tantave—who expand; sapta-hastäya—who have seven hands; yajïäya—unto
the yajïa-puruña, the supreme enjoyer; trayé—the three modes of Vedic
ritualistic ceremonies; vidyä-ätmane—the Personality of Godhead, the
embodiment of all knowledge; namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances unto
You.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who have two heads [präyaëéya and udäyanéya], three legs
[savana-traya], four horns [the four Vedas] and seven hands [the seven
chandas, such as Gäyatré]. I offer my obeisances unto You, whose heart and
soul are the three Vedic rituals [karma-käëòa, jïäna-käëòa and upäsanä-käëòa]
and who expand these rituals in the form of sacrifice.
TEXT 32
NaMa" iXavaYa åd]aYa NaMa" Xai¢-DaraYa c )
SavRivÛaiDaPaTaYae >aUTaaNaa& PaTaYae NaMa" )) 32 ))
namaù çiväya rudräya
namaù çakti-dharäya ca
sarva-vidyädhipataye
bhütänäà pataye namaù
SYNONYMS
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; çiväya—the incarnation
named Lord Çiva; rudräya—the expansion named Rudra; namaù—obeisances;
çakti-dharäya—the reservoir of all potencies; ca—and;
sarva-vidyä-adhipataye—the reservoir of all knowledge; bhütänäm—of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
679
living entities; pataye—the supreme master; namaù—I offer my respectful
obeisances unto You.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, Lord Çiva, or Rudra, who are the
reservoir of all potencies, the reservoir of all knowledge, and the master of
everyone.
PURPORT
It is the system for one to offer obeisances unto the expansion or
incarnation of the Lord. Lord Çiva is the incarnation of ignorance, one of the
material modes of nature.
TEXT 33
NaMaae ihr<YaGa>aaRYa Pa[a<aaYa JaGadaTMaNae )
YaaeGaEìYaRXarqraYa NaMaSTae YaaeGaheTave )) 33 ))
namo hiraëyagarbhäya
präëäya jagad-ätmane
yogaiçvarya-çaréräya
namas te yoga-hetave
SYNONYMS
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; hiraëyagarbhäya—situated
as the four-headed Hiraëyagarbha, Brahmä; präëäya—the source of everyone's
life; jagat-ätmane—the Supersoul of the entire universe;
yoga-aiçvarya-çaréräya—whose body is full of opulences and mystic power;
namaù te—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; yoga-hetave—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
680
original master of all mystic power.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are situated as
Hiraëyagarbha, the source of life, the Supersoul of every living entity. Your
body is the source of the opulence of all mystic power. I offer my respectful
obeisances unto You.
TEXT 34
NaMaSTa AaiddevaYa Saai+a>aUTaaYa Tae NaMa" )
NaaraYa<aaYa ‰zYae NaraYa hrYae NaMa" )) 34 ))
namas ta ädi-deväya
säkñi-bhütäya te namaù
näräyaëäya åñaye
naräya haraye namaù
SYNONYMS
namaù te—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; ädi-deväya—who are the
original Personality of Godhead; säkñi-bhütäya—the witness of everything
within the heart of everyone; te—unto You; namaù—I offer my respectful
obeisances; näräyaëäya—who take the incarnation of Näräyaëa; åñaye—the
sage; naräya—the incarnation of a human being; haraye—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are the original Personality
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
681
of Godhead, the witness in everyone's heart, and the incarnation of
Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi in the form of a human being. O Personality of Godhead, I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 35
NaMaae Mark-TaXYaaMavPauze_iDaGaTaié[Yae )
ke-XavaYa NaMaSTau>Ya& NaMaSTae PaqTavaSaSae )) 35 ))
namo marakata-çyämavapuñe
'dhigata-çriye
keçaväya namas tubhyaà
namas te péta-väsase
SYNONYMS
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You;
marakata-çyäma-vapuñe—whose bodily hue is blackish like the marakata gem;
adhigata-çriye—under whose control is mother Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune;
keçaväya—Lord Keçava, who killed the Keçé demon; namaù tubhyam—I offer
my respectful obeisances unto You; namaù te—again I offer my respectful
obeisances unto You; péta-väsase—whose garment is yellow.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are dressed in
yellow garments, whose bodily hue resembles the marakata gem, and who have
full control over the goddess of fortune. O my Lord Keçava, I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 36
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
682
Tv& SavRvrd" Pau&Saa& vre<Ya vrdzR>a )
ATaSTae é[eYaSae Daqra" Paadre<auMauPaaSaTae )) 36 ))
tvaà sarva-varadaù puàsäà
vareëya varadarñabha
atas te çreyase dhéräù
päda-reëum upäsate
SYNONYMS
tvam—You; sarva-vara-daù—who can give all kinds of benedictions;
puàsäm—to all living entities; vareëya—O most worshipable;
vara-da-åñabha—O most powerful of all givers of benediction; ataù—for this
reason; te—Your; çreyase—the source of all auspiciousness; dhéräù—the most
sober; päda-reëum upäsate—worship the dust of the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
O most exalted and worshipable Lord, best of those who bestow benediction,
You can fulfill the desires of everyone, and therefore those who are sober, for
their own welfare, worship the dust of Your lotus feet.
TEXT 37
ANvvTaRNTa Ya& deva" é[qê TaTPaadPaÚYaae" )
SPa*hYaNTa wvaMaaed& >aGavaNMae Pa[SaqdTaaMa( )) 37 ))
anvavartanta yaà deväù
çréç ca tat-päda-padmayoù
spåhayanta ivämodaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
683
bhagavän me prasédatäm
SYNONYMS
anvavartanta—engaged in devotional service; yam—unto whom; deväù—all
the demigods; çréù ca—and the goddess of fortune; tat-päda-padmayoù—of the
lotus feet of His Lordship; spåhayantaù—desiring; iva—exactly;
ämodam—celestial bliss; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
me—upon me; prasédatäm—may be pleased.
TRANSLATION
All the demigods, as well as the goddess of fortune, engage in the service of
His lotus feet. Indeed, they respect the fragrance of those lotus feet. May the
Supreme Personality of Godhead be pleased with me.
TEXT 38
WTaEMaRN}aEôRzqke-XaMaavahNaPaurSk*-TaMa( )
AcRYaeC^\ÖYaa Yau¢-" PaaÛaePaSPaXaRNaaidi>a" )) 38 ))
etair mantrair håñékeçam
ävähana-puraskåtam
arcayec chraddhayä yuktaù
pädyopasparçanädibhiù
SYNONYMS
etaiù mantraiù—by chanting all these mantras; håñékeçam—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the master of all senses; ävähana—calling;
puraskåtam—honoring Him in all respects; arcayet—one should worship;
çraddhayä—with faith and devotion; yuktaù—engaged;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
684
pädya-upasparçana-ädibhiù—with the paraphernalia of worship (pädya, arghya,
etc.).
TRANSLATION
Kaçyapa Muni continued: By chanting all these mantras, welcoming the
Supreme Personality of Godhead with faith and devotion, and offering Him
items of worship [such as pädya and arghya], one should worship Keçava,
Håñékeça, Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 39
AicRTva GaNDaMaaLYaaÛE" PaYaSaa òPaYaed( iv>auMa( )
vñaePavqTaa>ar<aPaaÛaePaSPaXaRNaESTaTa" )
GaNDaDaUPaaidi>aêaceRd( ÜadXaa+arivÛYaa )) 39 ))
arcitvä gandha-mälyädyaiù
payasä snapayed vibhum
vastropavétäbharaëapädyopasparçanais
tataù
gandha-dhüpädibhiç cärced
dvädaçäkñara-vidyayä
SYNONYMS
arcitvä—worshiping in this way; gandha-mälya-ädyaiù—with incense, flower
garlands, etc.; payasä—with milk; snapayet—should bathe; vibhum—the Lord;
vastra—dress; upavéta—sacred thread; äbharaëa—ornaments; pädya—water
for washing the lotus feet; upasparçanaiù—touching; tataù—thereafter;
gandha—fragrance; dhüpa—incense; ädibhiù—with all of these; ca—and;
arcet—should worship; dvädaça-akñara-vidyayä—with the mantra of twelve
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
685
syllables.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning, the devotee should chant the dvädaçäkñara-mantra and
offer flower garlands, incense and so on. After worshiping the Lord in this way,
one should bathe the Lord with milk and dress Him with proper garments, a
sacred thread, and ornaments. After offering water to wash the Lord's feet, one
should again worship the Lord with fragrant flowers, incense and other
paraphernalia.
PURPORT
The dvädaçäkñara-mantra is oà namo bhagavate väsudeväya. While
worshiping the Deity, one should ring a bell with his left hand and offer pädya,
arghya, vastra, gandha, mälä, äbharaëa, bhüñaëa and so on. In this way, one
should bathe the Lord with milk, dress Him and again worship Him with all
paraphernalia.
TEXT 40
é*Ta& PaYaiSa NaEveÛ& XaaLYaà& iv>ave SaiTa )
SaSaiPaR" SaGau@& dtva JauhuYaaNMaUl/ivÛYaa )) 40 ))
çåtaà payasi naivedyaà
çäly-annaà vibhave sati
sasarpiù saguòaà dattvä
juhuyän müla-vidyayä
SYNONYMS
çåtam—cooked; payasi—in milk; naivedyam—offering to the Deity;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
686
çäli-annam—fine rice; vibhave—if available; sati—in this way; sa-sarpiù—with
ghee (clarified butter); sa-guòam—with molasses; dattvä—offering Him;
juhuyät—should offer oblations in the fire; müla-vidyayä—with chanting of
the same dvädaçäkñara-mantra
TRANSLATION
If one can afford to, one should offer the Deity fine rice boiled in milk with
clarified butter and molasses. While chanting the same original mantra, one
should offer all this to the fire.
TEXT 41
iNaveidTa& Tad( >a¢-aYa dÛad( >auÅqTa va SvYaMa( )
dtvacMaNaMaicRTva TaaMbUl&/ c iNavedYaeTa( )) 41 ))
niveditaà tad-bhaktäya
dadyäd bhuïjéta vä svayam
dattväcamanam arcitvä
tämbülaà ca nivedayet
SYNONYMS
niveditam—this offering of prasäda; tat-bhaktäya—unto His devotee;
dadyät—should be offered; bhuïjéta—one should take; vä—either;
svayam—personally; dattvä äcamanam—giving water to wash the hands and
mouth; arcitvä—in this way worshiping the Deity; tämbülam—betel nuts with
spices; ca—also; nivedayet—one should offer.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
687
One should offer all the prasäda to a Vaiñëava or offer him some of the
prasäda and then take some oneself. After this, one should offer the Deity
äcamana and then betel nut and then again worship the Lord.
TEXT 42
JaPaedíaetarXaTa& STauvqTa STauiTai>a" Pa[>auMa( )
k*-Tva Pa[di+a<a& >aUMaaE Pa[<aMaed( d<@vNMauda )) 42 ))
japed añöottara-çataà
stuvéta stutibhiù prabhum
kåtvä pradakñiëaà bhümau
praëamed daëòavan mudä
SYNONYMS
japet—should silently murmur; añöottara-çatam—108 times; stuvéta—should
offer prayers; stutibhiù—by various prayers of glorification; prabhum—unto
the Lord; kåtvä—thereafter doing; pradakñiëam—circumambulation;
bhümau—on the ground; praëamet—should offer obeisances;
daëòavat—straight, with the whole body; mudä—with great satisfaction.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, one should silently murmur the mantra 108 times and offer
prayers to the Lord for His glorification. Then one should circumambulate the
Lord and finally, with great delight and satisfaction, offer obeisances, falling
straight like a rod [daëòavat].
TEXT 43
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
688
k*-Tva iXariSa TaC^eza& devMauÜaSaYaeTa( TaTa" )
ÜyvraN>aaeJaYaed( ivPa[aNPaaYaSaeNa YaQaaeicTaMa( )) 43 ))
kåtvä çirasi tac-cheñäà
devam udväsayet tataù
dvy-avarän bhojayed viprän
päyasena yathocitam
SYNONYMS
kåtvä—taking; çirasi—on the head; tat-çeñäm—all the remnants (the water
and flowers offered to the Deity); devam—unto the Deity; udväsayet—should
be thrown into a sacred place; tataù—thereafter; dvi-avarän—a minimum of
two; bhojayet—should feed; viprän—brähmaëas; päyasena—with sweet rice;
yathä-ucitam—as each deserves.
TRANSLATION
After touching to one's head all the flowers and water offered to the Deity,
one should throw them into a sacred place. Then one should feed at least two
brähmaëas with sweet rice.
TEXTS 44-45
>auÅqTa TaErNaujaTa" Saeí" Xaez& Sa>aaiJaTaE" )
b]øcaYaRQa Tad]a}Yaa& ìae>aUTae Pa[QaMae_hiNa )) 44 ))
òaTa" éuicYaRQaae¢e-Na iviDaNaa SauSaMaaihTa" )
PaYaSaa òaPaiYaTvaceRd( Yaavd(v]TaSaMaaPaNaMa( )) 45 ))
bhuïjéta tair anujïätaù
señöaù çeñaà sabhäjitaiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
689
brahmacäry atha tad-rätryäà
çvo bhüte prathame 'hani
snätaù çucir yathoktena
vidhinä susamähitaù
payasä snäpayitvärced
yävad vrata-samäpanam
SYNONYMS
bhuïjéta—should take the prasäda; taiù—by the brähmaëas; anujïätaù—being
permitted; sa-iñöaù—with friends and relatives; çeñam—the remnants;
sabhäjitaiù—properly honored; brahmacäré—observance of celibacy; atha—of
course; tat-rätryäm—at night; çvaù bhüte—at the end of the night, when the
morning comes; prathame ahani—on the first day; snätaù—bathing;
çuciù—becoming purified; yathä-uktena—as stated before; vidhinä—by
following the regulative principles; su-samähitaù—with great attention;
payasä—with milk; snäpayitvä—bathing the Deity; arcet—should offer
worship; yävat—as long as; vrata-samäpanam—the period of worship is not
over.
TRANSLATION
One should perfectly honor the respectable brähmaëas one has fed, and then,
after taking their permission, one should take prasäda with his friends and
relatives. For that night, one should observe strict celibacy, and the next
morning, after bathing again, with purity and attention one should bathe the
Deity of Viñëu with milk and worship Him according to the methods formerly
stated in detail.
TEXT 46
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
690
PaYaae>a+aae v]TaiMad& cred( ivZ<vcRNaad*Ta" )
PaUvRvÂuhuYaadiGan& b]aø<aa&êaiPa >aaeJaYaeTa( )) 46 ))
payo-bhakño vratam idaà
cared viñëv-arcanädåtaù
pürvavaj juhuyäd agnià
brähmaëäàç cäpi bhojayet
SYNONYMS
payaù-bhakñaù—one who drinks milk only; vratam idam—this process of
worshiping with a vow; caret—one should execute;
viñëu-arcana-ädåtaù—worshiping Lord Viñëu with great faith and devotion;
pürva-vat—as prescribed previously; juhuyät—one should offer oblations;
agnim—into the fire; brähmaëän—unto the brähmaëas; ca api—as well as;
bhojayet—should feed.
TRANSLATION
Worshiping Lord Viñëu with great faith and devotion and living only by
drinking milk, one should follow this vow. One should also offer oblations to
the fire and feed the brähmaëas as mentioned before.
TEXT 47
Wv& Tvhrh" ku-YaaRd( ÜadXaah& PaYaaev]TaMa( )
hreraraDaNa& haeMaMahR<a& iÜJaTaPaR<aMa( )) 47 ))
evaà tv ahar ahaù kuryäd
dvädaçähaà payo-vratam
harer ärädhanaà homam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
691
arhaëaà dvija-tarpaëam
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; tu—indeed; ahaù ahaù—day after day; kuryät—should
execute; dvädaça-aham—until twelve days; payaù-vratam—the observance of
the vrata known as payo-vrata; hareù ärädhanam—worshiping the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; homam—by executing a fire sacrifice;
arhaëam—worshiping the Deity; dvija-tarpaëam—and satisfying the
brähmaëas by feeding them.
TRANSLATION
In this way, until twelve days have passed, one should observe this
payo-vrata, worshiping the Lord every day, executing the routine duties,
performing sacrifices and feeding the brähmaëas.
TEXT 48
Pa[iTaPaiÕNaMaar>Ya YaavC^u(c)-}aYaaedXaqMa( )
b]øcYaRMaDa"SvPan& òaNa& i}azv<a& creTa( )) 48 ))
pratipad-dinam ärabhya
yävac chukla-trayodaçém
brahmacaryam adhaù-svapnaà
snänaà tri-ñavaëaà caret
SYNONYMS
pratipat-dinam—on the day of pratipat; ärabhya—beginning; yävat—until;
çukla—of the bright fortnight; trayodaçém—the thirteenth day of the moon
(the second day after Ekädaçé); brahmacaryam—observing complete celibacy;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
692
adhaù-svapnam—lying down on the floor; snänam—bathing;
tri-savanam—three times (morning, evening and noon); caret—one should
execute.
TRANSLATION
From pratipat until the thirteenth day of the next bright moon
[çukla-trayodaçé], one should observe complete celibacy, sleep on the floor,
bathe three times a day and thus execute the vow.
TEXT 49
vJaRYaedSadal/aPa& >aaeGaaNauÀavca&STaQaa )
Aih&ó" SavR>aUTaaNaa& vaSaudevParaYa<a" )) 49 ))
varjayed asad-äläpaà
bhogän uccävacäàs tathä
ahiàsraù sarva-bhütänäà
väsudeva-paräyaëaù
SYNONYMS
varjayet—one should give up; asat-äläpam—unnecessary talk on material
subject matters; bhogän—sense gratification; ucca-avacän—superior or
inferior; tathä—as well as; ahiàsraù—without being envious;
sarva-bhütänäm—of all living entities; väsudeva-paräyaëaù—simply being a
devotee of Lord Väsudeva.
TRANSLATION
During this period, one should not unnecessarily talk of material subjects or
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
693
topics of sense gratification, one should be completely free from envy of all
living entities, and one should be a pure and simple devotee of Lord Väsudeva.
TEXT 50
}aYaaedXYaaMaQaae ivZ<aae" òPaNa& PaÄkE-ivR>aae" )
k-arYaeC^añd*íeNa iviDaNaa iviDak-aeivdE" )) 50 ))
trayodaçyäm atho viñëoù
snapanaà païcakair vibhoù
kärayec chästra-dåñöena
vidhinä vidhi-kovidaiù
SYNONYMS
trayodaçyäm—on the thirteenth day of the moon; atho—thereafter;
viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; snapanam—bathing; païcakaiù—by païcämåta, five
substances; vibhoù—the Lord; kärayet—one should execute;
çästra-dåñöena—enjoined in the scripture; vidhinä—under regulative
principles; vidhi-kovidaiù—assisted by the priests who know the regulative
principles.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, following the directions of the çästra with help from brähmaëas
who know the çästra, on the thirteenth day of the moon one should bathe Lord
Viñëu with five substances [milk, yogurt, ghee, sugar and honey].
TEXTS 51-52
PaUJaa& c MahTaq& ku-YaaRd( ivtaXaa#yivviJaRTa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
694
cå& iNaæPYa PaYaiSa iXaiPaivíaYa ivZ<ave )) 51 ))
SaU¢e-Na TaeNa Pauåz& YaJaeTa SauSaMaaihTa" )
NaEveÛ& caiTaGau<avd( dÛaTPauåzTauiídMa( )) 52 ))
püjäà ca mahatéà kuryäd
vitta-çäöhya-vivarjitaù
caruà nirüpya payasi
çipiviñöäya viñëave
süktena tena puruñaà
yajeta susamähitaù
naivedyaà cätiguëavad
dadyät puruña-tuñöidam
SYNONYMS
püjäm—worship; ca—also; mahatém—very gorgeous; kuryät—should do;
vitta-çäöhya—miserly mentality (not spending sufficient money);
vivarjitaù—giving up; carum—grains offered in the yajïa; nirüpya—seeing
properly; payasi—with milk; çipiviñöäya—unto the Supersoul, who is situated
in the heart of every living entity; viñëave—unto Lord Viñëu; süktena—by
chanting the Vedic mantra known as puruña-sükta; tena—by that;
puruñam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajeta—one should worship;
su-samähitaù—with great attention; naivedyam—food offered to the Deity;
ca—and; ati-guëa-vat—prepared very gorgeously with all varieties of taste;
dadyät—should offer; puruña-tuñöi-dam—everything extremely pleasing to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Giving up the miserly habit of not spending money, one should arrange for
the gorgeous worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, who is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
695
situated in the heart of every living entity. With great attention, one must
prepare an oblation of grains boiled in ghee and milk and must chant the
Puruña-sükta mantra. The offerings of food should be of varieties of tastes. In
this way, one should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 53
AacaYa| jaNaSaMPaà& vña>ar<aDaeNaui>a" )
TaaezYaed*iTvJaêEv TaiÜÖyaraDaNa& hre" )) 53 ))
äcäryaà jïäna-sampannaà
vasträbharaëa-dhenubhiù
toñayed åtvijaç caiva
tad viddhy ärädhanaà hareù
SYNONYMS
äcäryam—the spiritual master; jïäna-sampannam—very advanced in spiritual
knowledge; vastra-äbharaëa-dhenubhiù—with clothing, ornaments and many
cows; toñayet—should satisfy; åtvijaù—the priests recommended by the
spiritual master; ca eva—as well as; tat viddhi—try to understand that;
ärädhanam—worship; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
One should satisfy the spiritual master [äcärya], who is very learned in
Vedic literature, and should satisfy his assistant priests [known as hotä, udgätä,
adhvaryu and brahma]. One should please them by offering them clothing,
ornaments and cows. This is the ceremony called viñëu-ärädhana, or worship of
Lord Viñëu.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
696
TEXT 54
>aaeJaYaeTa( TaaNa( Gau<avTaa SadàeNa éuiciSMaTae )
ANYaa&ê b]aø<aaH^¢-ya Yae c Ta}a SaMaaGaTaa" )) 54 ))
bhojayet tän guëavatä
sad-annena çuci-smite
anyäàç ca brähmaëäï chaktyä
ye ca tatra samägatäù
SYNONYMS
bhojayet—should distribute prasäda; tän—unto all of them; guëa-vatä—by
rich foods; sat-annena—with food prepared with ghee and milk, which is
supposed to be very pure; çuci-smite—O most pious lady; anyän ca—others
also; brähmaëän—brähmaëas; çaktyä—as far as possible; ye—all of them who;
ca—also; tatra—there (at the ceremonies); samägatäù—assembled.
TRANSLATION
O most auspicious lady, one should perform all the ceremonies under the
direction of learned äcäryas and should satisfy them and their priests. By
distributing prasäda, one should also satisfy the brähmaëas and others who have
assembled.
TEXT 55
di+a<aa& Gaurve dÛad*iTvG>Yaê YaQaahRTa" )
AàaÛeNaaìPaak-a&ê Pa[q<aYaeTSaMauPaaGaTaaNa( )) 55 ))
dakñiëäà gurave dadyäd
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
697
åtvigbhyaç ca yathärhataù
annädyenäçva-päkäàç ca
préëayet samupägatän
SYNONYMS
dakñiëäm—some contribution of money or gold; gurave—unto the spiritual
master; dadyät—one should give; åtvigbhyaù ca—and to the priests engaged by
the spiritual master; yathä-arhataù—as far as possible; anna-adyena—by
distributing prasäda; äçva-päkän—even to the caëòälas, persons habituated to
eating the flesh of dogs; ca—also; préëayet—one should please;
samupägatän—because they have assembled there for the ceremony.
TRANSLATION
One should satisfy the spiritual master and assistant priests by giving them
cloth, ornaments, cows and also some monetary contribution. And by
distributing prasäda one should satisfy everyone assembled, including even the
lowest of men, the caëòälas [eaters of dog flesh].
PURPORT
In the Vedic system, prasäda is distributed, as recommended here, without
discrimination as to who may take the prasäda. Regardless of whether one be a
brähmaëa, çüdra, vaiçya, kñatriya, or even the lowest of men, a caëòäla, he
should be welcome to accept prasäda. However, when the caëòälas, the lower
class or poorer class, are taking prasäda, this does not mean that they have
become Näräyaëa or Viñëu. Näräyaëa is situated in everyone's heart, but this
does not mean Näräyaëa is a caëòäla or poor man. The Mäyäväda philosophy
of accepting a poor man as Näräyaëa is the most envious and atheistic
movement in Vedic culture. This mentality should be completely given up.
Everyone should be given the opportunity to take prasäda, but this does not
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
698
mean that everyone has the right to become Näräyaëa.
TEXT 56
>au¢-vTSau c SaveRzu dqNaaNDak*-Pa<aaidzu )
ivZ<aaeSTaTPa[q<aNa& ivÜaN>auÅqTa Sah bNDaui>a" )) 56 ))
bhuktavatsu ca sarveñu
dénändha-kåpaëädiñu
viñëos tat préëanaà vidvän
bhuïjéta saha bandhubhiù
SYNONYMS
bhuktavatsu—after feeding; ca—also; sarveñu—everyone present there;
déna—very poor; andha—blind; kåpaëa—those who are not brähmaëas;
ädiñu—and so on; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu, who is situated in everyone's heart;
tat—that (prasäda); préëanam—pleasing; vidvän—one who understands this
philosophy; bhuïjéta—should take prasäda himself; saha—with;
bandhubhiù—friends and relatives.
TRANSLATION
One should distribute viñëu-prasäda to everyone, including the poor man,
the blind man, the nondevotee and the non-brähmaëa. Knowing that Lord
Viñëu is very pleased when everyone is sumptuously fed with viñëu-prasäda,
the performer of yajïa should then take prasäda with his friends and relatives.
TEXT 57
Na*TYavaid}aGaqTaEê STauiTai>a" SviSTavackE-" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
699
k-arYaetaTk-Qaai>aê PaUJaa& >aGavTaae_NvhMa( )) 57 ))
nåtya-väditra-gétaiç ca
stutibhiù svasti-väcakaiù
kärayet tat-kathäbhiç ca
püjäà bhagavato 'nvaham
SYNONYMS
nåtya—by dancing; väditra—by beating the drum; gétaiù—and by singing;
ca—also; stutibhiù—by chanting auspicious mantras; svasti-väcakaiù—by
offering prayers; kärayet—should execute; tat-kathäbhiù—by reciting the
Bhägavatam, Bhagavad-gétä and similar literature; ca—also; püjäm—worship;
bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu; anvaham—every
day (from pratipat to trayodaçé).
TRANSLATION
Every day from pratipat to trayodaçé, one should continue the ceremony, to
the accompaniment of dancing, singing, the beating of a drum, the chanting of
prayers and all-auspicious mantras, and recitation of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. In
this way, one should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 58
WTaTPaYaaev]Ta& NaaMa PauåzaraDaNa& ParMa( )
iPaTaaMaheNaai>aihTa& MaYaa Tae SaMaudaôTaMa( )) 58 ))
etat payo-vrataà näma
puruñärädhanaà param
pitämahenäbhihitaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
700
mayä te samudähåtam
SYNONYMS
etat—this; payaù-vratam—ceremony known as payo-vrata; näma—by that
name; puruña-ärädhanam—the process of worshiping the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; param—the best; pitämahena—by my grandfather, Lord Brahmä;
abhihitam—stated; mayä—by me; te—unto you; samudähåtam—described in
all details.
TRANSLATION
This is the religious ritualistic ceremony known as payo-vrata, by which one
may worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I received this information
from Brahmä, my grandfather, and now I have described it to you in all details.
TEXT 59
Tv& caNaeNa Maha>aaGae SaMYak(- cq<aeRNa ke-XavMa( )
AaTMaNaa éuÖ>aaveNa iNaYaTaaTMaa >aJaaVYaYaMa( )) 59 ))
tvaà cänena mahä-bhäge
samyak cérëena keçavam
ätmanä çuddha-bhävena
niyatätmä bhajävyayam
SYNONYMS
tvam ca—you also; anena—by this process; mahä-bhäge—O greatly fortunate
one; samyak cérëena—executed properly; keçavam—unto Lord Keçava;
ätmanä—by oneself; çuddha-bhävena—in a pure state of mind;
niyata-ätmä—controlling oneself; bhaja—go on worshiping; avyayam—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
701
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
O most fortunate lady, establishing your mind in a good spirit, execute this
process of payo-vrata and thus worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Keçava, who is inexhaustible.
TEXT 60
AYa& vE SavRYaja:Ya" SavRv]TaiMaiTa SMa*TaMa( )
TaPa"SaariMad& >ad]e daNa& ceìrTaPaR<aMa( )) 60 ))
ayaà vai sarva-yajïäkhyaù
sarva-vratam iti småtam
tapaù-säram idaà bhadre
dänaà ceçvara-tarpaëam
SYNONYMS
ayam—this; vai—indeed; sarva-yajïa—all kinds of religious rituals and
sacrifices; äkhyaù—called; sarva-vratam—all religious ceremonies; iti—thus;
småtam—understood; tapaù-säram—the essence of all austerities; idam—this;
bhadre—O good lady; dänam—acts of charity; ca—and; éçvara—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; tarpaëam—the process of pleasing.
TRANSLATION
This payo-vrata is also known as sarva-yajïa. In other words, by performing
this sacrifice one can perform all other sacrifices automatically. This is also
acknowledged to be the best of all ritualistic ceremonies. O gentle lady, it is the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
702
essence of all austerities, and it is the process of giving charity and pleasing the
supreme controller.
PURPORT
Ärädhanänäà sarveñäà viñëor ärädhanaà param. This is a statement made
by Lord Çiva to Pärvaté. Worshiping Lord Viñëu is the supreme process of
worship. And how Lord Viñëu is worshiped in this payo-vrata ceremony has
now been fully described. The ultimate goal of life is to please Lord Viñëu by
varëäçrama-dharma. The Vedic principles of four varëas and four äçramas are
meant for worship of Viñëu (viñëur ärädhyate puàsäà nänyat
tat-toña-käraëam). The Kåñëa consciousness movement is also
viñëu-ärädhanam, or worship of Lord Viñëu, according to the age. The
payo-vrata method of viñëu-ärädhanam was enunciated long, long ago by
Kaçyapa Muni to his wife, Aditi, in the heavenly planets, and the same process
is bona fide on earth even now. Especially for this age of Kali, the process
accepted by the Kåñëa consciousness movement is to open hundreds and
thousands of Viñëu temples (temples of Rädhä-Kåñëa, Jagannätha, Balaräma,
Sétä-Räma, Gaura-Nitäi and so on). Performing prescribed worship in such
temples of Viñëu and thus worshiping the Lord is as good as performing the
payo-vrata ceremony recommended here. The payo-vrata ceremony is
performed from the first to the thirteenth day of the bright fortnight of the
moon, but in our Kåñëa consciousness movement Lord Viñëu is worshiped in
every temple according to a schedule of twenty-four hours of engagement in
performing kértana, chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra, offering palatable
food to Lord Viñëu and distributing this food to Vaiñëavas and others. These
are authorized activities, and if the members of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement stick to these principles, they will achieve the same result one gains
by observing the payo-vrata ceremony. Thus the essence of all auspicious
activities, such as performing yajïa, giving in charity, observing vratas, and
undergoing austerities, is included in the Kåñëa consciousness movement. The
members of this movement should immediately and sincerely follow the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
703
processes already recommended. Of course, sacrifice is meant to please Lord
Viñëu. Yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair yajanti hi sumedhasaù: [SB 11.5.32] in
Kali-yuga, those who are intelligent perform the saìkértana-yajïa. One should
follow this process conscientiously.
TEXT 61
Ta Wv iNaYaMaa" Saa+aata Wv c YaMaaetaMaa" )
TaPaae daNa& v]Ta& Yajae YaeNa TauZYaTYaDaae+aJa" )) 61 ))
ta eva niyamäù säkñät
ta eva ca yamottamäù
tapo dänaà vrataà yajïo
yena tuñyaty adhokñajaù
SYNONYMS
te—that is; eva—indeed; niyamäù—all regulative principles; säkñät—directly;
te—that is; eva—indeed; ca—also; yama-uttamäù—the best process of
controlling the senses; tapaù—austerities; dänam—charity; vratam—observing
vows; yajïaù—sacrifice; yena—by which process; tuñyati—is very pleased;
adhokñajaù—the Supreme Lord, who is not perceived by material senses.
TRANSLATION
This is the best process for pleasing the transcendental Supreme Personality
of Godhead, known as Adhokñaja. It is the best of all regulative principles, the
best austerity, the best process of giving charity, and the best process of
sacrifice.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
704
The Supreme Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.66):
sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù
"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver
you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." Unless one pleases the Supreme
Personality of Godhead according to His demand, no good result will come
from any of his actions.
dharmaù svanuñöhitaù puàsäà
viñvaksena-kathäsu yaù
notpädayed yadi ratià
çrama eva hi kevalam
"The occupational activities a man performs according to his own position are
only so much useless labor if they do not provoke attraction for the message of
the Personality of Godhead." (SB 1.2.8) If one is not interested in satisfying
Lord Viñëu, Väsudeva, all his so-called auspicious activities are fruitless.
Moghäçä mogha-karmäëo mogha-jïänä vicetasaù: [Bg. 9.12] because he is
bewildered, he is baffled in his hopes, baffled in his activities, and baffled in
his knowledge. In this regard, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté remarks,
napuàsakam anapuàsakenety-ädinaikatvam. One cannot equate the potent
and the impotent. Among modern Mäyävädés it has become fashionable to say
that whatever one does or whatever path one follows is all right. But these are
all foolish statements. Here it is forcefully affirmed that this is the only
method for success in life. Éçvara-tarpaëaà vinä sarvam eva viphalam. Unless
Lord Viñëu is satisfied, all of one's pious activities, ritualistic ceremonies and
yajïas are simply for show and have no value. Unfortunately, foolish people do
not know the secret of success. Na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum [SB 7.5.31].
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
705
They do not know that real self-interest ends in pleasing Lord Viñëu.
TEXT 62
TaSMaadeTad(v]Ta& >ad]e Pa[YaTaa é[ÖYaacr )
>aGavaNPairTauíSTae vraNaaéu ivDaaSYaiTa )) 62 ))
tasmäd etad vrataà bhadre
prayatä çraddhayäcara
bhagavän parituñöas te
varän äçu vidhäsyati
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; etat—this; vratam—observance of a vrata ceremony;
bhadre—my dear gentle lady; prayatä—by observing rules and regulations;
çraddhayä—with faith; äcara—execute; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; parituñöaù—being very satisfied; te—unto you;
varän—benedictions; äçu—very soon; vidhäsyati—will bestow.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, my dear gentle lady, follow this ritualistic vow, strictly observing
the regulative principles. By this process, the Supreme Person will very soon be
pleased with you and will satisfy all your desires.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Sixteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Executing the Payo-vrata Process of Worship."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
706
17. The Supreme Lord Agrees to Become Aditi's Son
As explained in this chapter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, being
very pleased by the payo-vrata ceremony performed by Aditi, appeared before
her in full opulence. At her request, the Lord agreed to become her son.
After Aditi performed the payo-vrata ceremony for twelve continuous days,
the Lord, who was certainly very pleased with her, appeared before her with
four hands and dressed in yellow garments. As soon as Aditi saw the Supreme
Personality of Godhead present before her, she immediately got up, and with
great ecstatic love for the Lord she fell to the ground to offer respectful
obeisances. Aditi's throat was choked because of ecstatic feelings, and her
entire body trembled with devotion. Although she wanted to offer suitable
prayers to the Lord, she could not do anything, and thus she remained silent
for some time. Then, feeling solace, observing the beauty of the Lord, she
offered her prayers. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul of all
living entities, was very pleased with her, and He agreed to become her son by
incarnating as a plenary expansion. He was already pleased by Kaçyapa Muni's
austerities, and thus He agreed to become their son and maintain the
demigods. After giving His word of honor to this effect, the Lord disappeared.
Following the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Aditi engaged in
the service of Kaçyapa Muni, who could see by samädhi that the Lord was
within him and who thus placed his semen in the womb of Aditi. Lord
Brahmä, who is known as Hiraëyagarbha, understood that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead had entered Aditi's womb. Thus he offered prayers to
the Lord.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
707
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
wTYau¢-a SaaidTaq raJaNSv>a}aaR k-XYaPaeNa vE )
ANviTaïd( v]TaiMad& ÜadXaahMaTaiNd]Taa )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ity uktä sädité räjan
sva-bharträ kaçyapena vai
anv atiñöhad vratam idaà
dvädaçäham atandritä
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; uktä—being advised;
sä—that lady; aditiù—Aditi; räjan—O King; sva-bharträ—by her husband;
kaçyapena—Kaçyapa Muni; vai—indeed; anu—similarly; atiñöhat—executed;
vratam idam—this payo-vrata ritualistic ceremony; dvädaça-aham—for twelve
days; atandritä—without any laziness.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, after Aditi was thus advised by her
husband, Kaçyapa Muni, she strictly followed his instructions without laziness
and in this way performed the payo-vrata ritualistic ceremony.
PURPORT
For advancement in anything, especially in spiritual life, one must strictly
follow the bona fide instructions of the teacher. Aditi did this. She strictly
followed the instructions of her husband and guru. As confirmed in the Vedic
injunctions, yasya deve parä bhaktir yathä deve tathä gurau [ÇU 6.23(81)]. One
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
708
should have complete faith in the guru, who helps the disciple make progress
in spiritual life. As soon as the disciple thinks independently, not caring for
the instructions of the spiritual master, he is a failure (yasyäprasädän na gatiù
kuto 'pi). Aditi very strictly followed the instructions of her husband and
spiritual master, and thus she was successful.
TEXTS 2-3
icNTaYaNTYaek-Yaa buÖya MahaPauåzMaqìrMa( )
Pa[Ga*ùeiNd]YaduíaìaNMaNaSaa buiÖSaariQa" )) 2 ))
MaNaêEk-aGa]Yaa buÖya >aGavTYai%l/aTMaiNa )
vaSaudeve SaMaaDaaYa ccar h PaYaaev]TaMa( )) 3 ))
cintayanty ekayä buddhyä
mahä-puruñam éçvaram
pragåhyendriya-duñöäçvän
manasä buddhi-särathiù
manaç caikägrayä buddhyä
bhagavaty akhilätmani
väsudeve samädhäya
cacära ha payo-vratam
SYNONYMS
cintayanti—constantly thinking; ekayä—with one attention; buddhyä—and
intelligence; mahä-puruñam—upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
éçvaram—the supreme controller, Lord Viñëu; pragåhya—completely
controlling; indriya—the senses; duñöa—formidable, powerful; açvän—horses;
manasä—by the mind; buddhi-särathiù—with the help of intelligence, the
chariot driver; manaù—the mind; ca—also; eka-agrayä—with full attention;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
709
buddhyä—with the intelligence; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; akhila-ätmani—the Supreme Soul, the Supersoul of all living
entities; väsudeve—unto Lord Väsudeva; samädhäya—keeping full attention;
cacära—executed; ha—thus; payaù-vratam—the ritualistic ceremony known
as payo-vrata.
TRANSLATION
With full, undiverted attention, Aditi thought of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and in this way brought under full control her mind and senses, which
resembled forceful horses. She concentrated her mind upon the Supreme Lord,
Väsudeva. Thus she performed the ritualistic ceremony known as payo-vrata.
PURPORT
This is the process of bhakti-yoga.
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanaà
bhaktir uttamä
[Cc. Madhya 19.167]
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kåñëa
favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive
activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."
One simply has to concentrate upon the lotus feet of Väsudeva, Kåñëa (sa vai
manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]). Then the mind and senses will be
controlled, and one can engage himself fully in the devotional service of the
Lord. The devotee does not need to practice the haöha-yoga system to control
the mind and senses; his mind and senses are automatically controlled because
of unalloyed devotional service to the Lord.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
710
TEXT 4
TaSYaa" Pa[adur>aUtaaTa >aGavaNaaidPauåz" )
PaqTavaSaaêTaubaRhu" Xa«c§-GadaDar" )) 4 ))
tasyäù prädurabhüt täta
bhagavän ädi-puruñaù
péta-väsäç catur-bähuù
çaìkha-cakra-gadä-dharaù
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—before her; prädurabhüt—appeared; täta—my dear King;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ädi-puruñaù—the original
person; péta-väsäù—dressed in yellow garments; catuù-bähuù—with four arms;
çaìkha-cakra-gadä-dharaù—bearing the conchshell, disc, club and lotus
flower.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, dressed in
yellow garments and bearing a conchshell, disc, club and lotus in His four
hands, then appeared before Aditi.
TEXT 5
Ta& Nae}aGaaecr& vq+Ya SahSaaeTQaaYa SaadrMa( )
NaNaaMa >auiv k-aYaeNa d<@vTPa[qiTaivûl/a )) 5 ))
taà netra-gocaraà vékñya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
711
sahasotthäya sädaram
nanäma bhuvi käyena
daëòavat-préti-vihvalä
SYNONYMS
tam—Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); netra-gocaram—visible by
her eyes; vékñya—after seeing; sahasä—all of a sudden; utthäya—getting up;
sa-ädaram—with great respect; nanäma—offered respectful obeisances;
bhuvi—on the ground; käyena—by the whole body; daëòa-vat—falling like a
rod; préti-vihvalä—almost puzzled because of transcendental bliss.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead became visible to Aditi's eyes,
Aditi was so overwhelmed by transcendental bliss that she at once stood up and
then fell to the ground like a rod to offer the Lord her respectful obeisances.
TEXT 6
SaaeTQaaYa bÖaÅil/rqi@Tau& iSQaTaa
NaaeTSaeh AaNaNdJal/aku-le/+a<aa )
b>aUv TaUZ<aq& Paul/k-aku-l/ak*-iTa‚
STaÕXaRNaaTYauTSavGaa}avePaQau" )) 6 ))
sotthäya baddhäïjalir éòituà sthitä
notseha änanda-jaläkulekñaëä
babhüva tüñëéà pulakäkuläkåtis
tad-darçanätyutsava-gätra-vepathuù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
712
SYNONYMS
sä—she; utthäya—standing up; baddha-aïjaliù—with folded hands; éòitum—to
worship the Lord; sthitä—situated; na utsehe—could not endeavor;
änanda—from transcendental bliss; jala—with water; äkula-ékñaëä—her eyes
were filled; babhüva—remained; tüñëém—silent; pulaka—with standing of the
hairs of the body; äkula—overwhelmed; äkåtiù—her form; tat-darçana—by
seeing the Lord; ati-utsava—with great pleasure; gätra—her body;
vepathuù—began to tremble.
TRANSLATION
Aditi stood silently with folded hands, unable to offer prayers to the Lord.
Because of transcendental bliss, tears filled her eyes, and the hairs on her body
stood on end. Because she could see the Supreme Personality of Godhead face
to face, she felt ecstasy, and her body trembled.
TEXT 7
Pa[qTYaa XaNaEGaRÓdYaa iGara hir&
Tauíav Saa deVYaidiTa" ku-æÜh )
oÜq+aTaq Saa iPabTaqv c+auza
rMaaPaiTa& YajPaiTa& JaGaTPaiTaMa( )) 7 ))
prétyä çanair gadgadayä girä harià
tuñöäva sä devy aditiù kurüdvaha
udvékñaté sä pibatéva cakñuñä
ramä-patià yajïa-patià jagat-patim
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
713
SYNONYMS
prétyä—because of love; çanaiù—again and again; gadgadayä—faltering;
girä—with a voice; harim—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tuñöäva—pleased; sä—she; devé—the demigoddess; aditiù—Aditi;
kuru-udvaha—O Mahäräja Parékñit; udvékñaté—while staring; sä—she; pibaté
iva—appeared as if she were drinking; cakñuñä—through the eyes;
ramä-patim—unto the Lord, the husband of the goddess of fortune;
yajïa-patim—unto the Lord, the enjoyer of all sacrificial ceremonies;
jagat-patim—the master and Lord of the entire universe.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, the demigoddess Aditi then began offering her prayers
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead in a faltering voice and with great love.
She appeared as though drinking through her eyes the Supreme Lord, who is
the husband of the goddess of fortune, the enjoyer of all sacrificial ceremonies,
and the master and Lord of the entire universe.
PURPORT
After observing the payo-vrata, Aditi was certain that the Lord had
appeared before her as Ramä-pati, the husband of all good fortune, just to offer
her sons all opulences. She had performed the yajïa of payo-vrata under the
direction of her husband, Kaçyapa, and therefore she thought of the Lord as
Yajïa-pati. She was completely satisfied to see the master and Lord of the
entire universe come before her to fulfill her desire.
TEXT 8
é[qAidiTaåvac
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
714
YajeXa YajPauåzaCYauTa TaqQaRPaad
TaqQaRé[v" é[v<aMa(r)l/NaaMaDaeYa )
AaPaàl/aek-v*iJaNaaePaXaMaaedYaaÛ
Xa& Na" k*-DaqXa >aGavàiSa dqNaNaaQa" )) 8 ))
çré-aditir uväca
yajïeça yajïa-puruñäcyuta tértha-päda
tértha-çravaù çravaëa-maìgala-nämadheya
äpanna-loka-våjinopaçamodayädya
çaà naù kådhéça bhagavann asi déna-näthaù
SYNONYMS
çré-aditiù uväca—the demigoddess Aditi said; yajïa-éça—O controller of all
sacrificial ceremonies; yajïa-puruña—the person who enjoys the benefits of all
sacrifices; acyuta—infallible; tértha-päda—at whose lotus feet stand all the
holy places of pilgrimage; tértha-çravaù—celebrated as the ultimate shelter of
all saintly persons; çravaëa—hearing about whom; maìgala—is auspicious;
nämadheya—to chant His name is also auspicious; äpanna—surrendered;
loka—of people; våjina—dangerous material position; upaçama—diminishing;
udaya—who has appeared; ädya—the original Personality of Godhead;
çam—auspiciousness; naù—our; kådhi—kindly bestow upon us; éça—O
supreme controller; bhagavan—O Lord; asi—You are; déna-näthaù—the only
shelter of the down-trodden.
TRANSLATION
The goddess Aditi said: O master and enjoyer of all sacrificial ceremonies, O
infallible and most famous person, whose name, when chanted, spreads all good
fortune! O original Supreme Personality of Godhead, supreme controller,
shelter of all holy places, You are the shelter of all poor, suffering living
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
715
entities, and You have appeared to diminish their suffering. Please be kind to us
and spread our good fortune.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master of those who observe
vows and austerities, and it is He who bestows benedictions upon them. He is
worshipable for the devotee throughout the devotee's life, for He never breaks
His promises. As He says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.31), kaunteya pratijänéhi na me
bhaktaù praëaçyati: "O son of Kunté, declare it boldly that My devotee never
perishes." The Lord is addressed here as acyuta, the infallible, because He takes
care of His devotees. Anyone inimical to the devotees is certainly vanquished
by the mercy of the Lord. The Lord is the source of the Ganges water, and
therefore He is addressed here as tértha-päda, indicating that all the holy places
are at His lotus feet, or that whatever He touches with His foot becomes a holy
place. Bhagavad-gétä, for example, begins with the words dharma-kñetre
kuru-kñetre [Bg. 1.1]. Because the Lord was present on the Battlefield of
Kurukñetra, it became a dharma-kñetra, a place of pilgrimage. Therefore the
Päëòavas, who were extremely religious, were assured of victory. Any place
where the Supreme Personality of Godhead displays His pastimes, such as
Våndävana or Dvärakä, becomes a holy place. The chanting of the holy name
of the Lord—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma,
Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare—is pleasing to the ear, and it expands
good fortune to the audience who hears it chanted. Owing to the presence of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Aditi was fully assured that the
troublesome condition created for her by the demons would now be ended.
TEXT 9
ivìaYa ivì>avNaiSQaiTaSa&YaMaaYa
SvEr& Ga*hqTaPauåXai¢-Gau<aaYa >aUMane )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
716
SvSQaaYa XaìduPab*&ihTaPaU<aRbaeDa‚
VYaaPaaidTaaTMaTaMaSae hrYae NaMaSTae )) 9 ))
viçväya viçva-bhavana-sthiti-saàyamäya
svairaà gåhéta-puru-çakti-guëäya bhümne
sva-sthäya çaçvad-upabåàhita-pürëa-bodhavyäpäditätma-
tamase haraye namas te
SYNONYMS
viçväya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is actually the entire
universe; viçva—of the universe; bhavana—creation; sthiti—maintenance;
saàyamäya—and annihilation; svairam—fully independent; gåhéta—taking in
hand; puru—completely; çakti-guëäya—controlling the three modes of
material nature; bhümne—the supreme great; sva-sthäya—who is always
situated in His original form; çaçvat—eternally; upabåàhita—achieved;
pürëa—complete; bodha—knowledge; vyäpädita—completely vanquished;
ätma-tamase—the illusory energy of Your Lordship; haraye—unto the
Supreme Lord; namaù te—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the all-pervading universal form, the fully independent
creator, maintainer and destroyer of this universe. Although You engage Your
energy in matter, You are always situated in Your original form and never fall
from that position, for Your knowledge is infallible and always suitable to any
situation. You are never bewildered by illusion. O my Lord, let me offer my
respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
In the Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 2.117) it is said:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
717
siddhänta baliyä citte nä kara alasa
ihä ha-ite kåñëe läge sudåòha mänasa
Anyone trying to become fully Kåñëa conscious must know the Lord's glories as
far as they are possible to understand. Here Aditi hints at these glories. The
universe is nothing but the external potency of the Lord. This is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.4): mayä tatam idaà sarvam. Whatever we see in this universe
is but an expansion of the potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
just as the sunshine and heat all over the universe are expansions of the sun.
When one surrenders unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he surpasses
the influence of the illusory energy, for the Supreme Lord, being fully wise and
being situated in the heart of everyone, especially in the heart of the devotee,
gives one intelligence by which one is sure never to fall into illusion.
TEXT 10
AaYau" Par& vPaur>aqíMaTauLYal/+Maq‚
ÛaRe>aUrSaa" Sak-l/YaaeGaGau<aaiñvGaR" )
jaNa& c ke-vl/MaNaNTa >aviNTa TauíaTa(
Tvtaae Na*<aa& ik-Mau SaPaÒJaYaaidraXaq" )) 10 ))
äyuù paraà vapur abhéñöam atulya-lakñmér
dyo-bhü-rasäù sakala-yoga-guëäs tri-vargaù
jïänaà ca kevalam ananta bhavanti tuñöät
tvatto nåëäà kim u sapatna-jayädir äçéù
SYNONYMS
äyuù—duration of life; param—as long as that of Lord Brahmä; vapuù—a
particular type of body; abhéñöam—the goal of life;
atulya-lakñméù—unparalleled opulence in material existence; dyo—the upper
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
718
planetary system; bhü—Bhüloka; rasäù—the lower planetary system;
sakala—all kinds of; yoga-guëäù—the eight mystic perfections;
tri-vargaù—the principles of religiosity, economic development and sense
gratification; jïänam—transcendental knowledge; ca—and;
kevalam—complete; ananta—O unlimited one; bhavanti—all become possible;
tuñöät—by Your satisfaction; tvattaù—from You; nåëäm—of all living entities;
kim u—what to speak of; sapatna—enemies; jaya—conquering; ädiù—and
others; äçéù—such benedictions.
TRANSLATION
O unlimited one, if Your Lordship is satisfied, one can very easily obtain a
lifetime as long as that of Lord Brahmä, a body either in the upper, lower or
middle planetary systems, unlimited material opulence, religion, economic
development and satisfaction of the senses, full transcendental knowledge, and
the eight yogic perfections, what to speak of such petty achievements as
conquering one's rivals.
TEXT 11
é[qéuk- ovac
AidTYaEv& STauTaae raJaN>aGavaNPauZk-re+a<a" )
+ae}aj" SavR>aUTaaNaaiMaiTa haevac >aarTa )) 11 ))
çré-çuka uväca
adityaivaà stuto räjan
bhagavän puñkarekñaëaù
kñetra-jïaù sarva-bhütänäm
iti hoväca bhärata
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
719
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; adityä—by Aditi; evam—thus;
stutaù—being worshiped; räjan—O King (Mahäräja Parékñit); bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; puñkara-ékñaëaù—whose eyes are like lotus
flowers; kñetra-jïaù—the Supersoul; sarva-bhütänäm—of all living entities;
iti—thus; ha—indeed; uväca—replied; bhärata—O best of the Bharata
dynasty.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King Parékñit, best of the Bharata dynasty, when
the lotus-eyed Lord, the Supersoul of all living entities, was thus worshiped by
Aditi, He replied as follows.
TEXT 12
é[q>aGavaNauvac
devMaaTa>aRvTYaa Mae ivjaTa& icrk-ai¿TaMa( )
YaTa( SaPaÒEôRTaé[q<aa& CYaaivTaaNaa& SvDaaMaTa" )) 12 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
deva-mätar bhavatyä me
vijïätaà cira-käìkñitam
yat sapatnair håta-çréëäà
cyävitänäà sva-dhämataù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
deva-mätaù—O mother of the demigods; bhavatyäù—of you; me—by Me;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
720
vijïätam—understood; cira-käìkñitam—what You have desired for a long
time; yat—because; sapatnaiù—by the rivals; håta-çréëäm—of your sons, who
are bereft of all opulences; cyävitänäm—vanquished; sva-dhämataù—from
their own residential quarters.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O mother of the demigods, I have
already understood your long-cherished desires for the welfare of your sons,
who have been deprived of all opulences and driven from their residence by
their enemies.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being situated in everyone's heart,
and especially in the hearts of His devotees, is always ready to help devotees in
adversity. Since He knows everything, He knows how things are to be
adjusted, and He does the needful to relieve the suffering of His devotee.
TEXT 13
TaaiNviNaiJaRTYa SaMare duMaRdaNaSaurzR>aaNa( )
Pa[iTal/BDaJaYaé[qi>a" Pau}aEirC^SYauPaaiSaTauMa( )) 13 ))
tän vinirjitya samare
durmadän asurarñabhän
pratilabdha-jaya-çrébhiù
putrair icchasy upäsitum
SYNONYMS
tän—them; vinirjitya—defeating; samare—in the fight; durmadän—puffed up
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
721
by strength; asura-åñabhän—the leaders of the demons; pratilabdha—getting
back; jaya—victory; çrébhiù—as well as the opulence; putraiù—with your sons;
icchasi—you are desiring; upäsitum—to come together and worship Me.
TRANSLATION
O Devé, O goddess, I can understand that you want to regain your sons and
be together with them to worship Me, after defeating the enemies in battle and
retrieving your abode and opulences.
TEXT 14
wNd]JYaeïE" SvTaNaYaEhRTaaNaa& YauiDa iviÜzaMa( )
iñYaae ådNTaqraSaaÛ d]íuiMaC^iSa du"i%Taa" )) 14 ))
indra-jyeñöhaiù sva-tanayair
hatänäà yudhi vidviñäm
striyo rudantér äsädya
drañöum icchasi duùkhitäù
SYNONYMS
indra-jyeñöhaiù—persons of whom King Indra is the eldest; sva-tanayaiù—by
your own sons; hatänäm—who are killed; yudhi—in the fight; vidviñäm—of the
enemies; striyaù—the wives; rudantéù—lamenting; äsädya—coming near the
dead bodies of their husbands; drañöum icchasi—you want to see;
duùkhitäù—very much aggrieved.
TRANSLATION
You want to see the wives of the demons lamenting for the death of their
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
722
husbands when those demons, the enemies of your sons, are killed in battle by
the demigods, of whom Indra is the chief.
TEXT 15
AaTMaJaaNSauSaMa*Öa&STv& Pa[TYaaôTaYaXa"ié[Ya" )
Naak-Pa*ïMaiDaïaYa §-I@Taae d]íuiMaC^iSa )) 15 ))
ätmajän susamåddhäàs tvaà
pratyähåta-yaçaù-çriyaù
näka-påñöham adhiñöhäya
kréòato drañöum icchasi
SYNONYMS
ätma-jän—your own sons; su-samåddhän—completely opulent; tvam—you;
pratyähåta—having received back; yaçaù—reputation; çriyaù—opulence;
näka-påñöham—in the heavenly kingdom; adhiñöhäya—situated;
kréòataù—enjoying their life; drañöum—to see; icchasi—you are desiring.
TRANSLATION
You want your sons to regain their lost reputation and opulence and live
again on their heavenly planet as usual.
TEXT 16
Pa[aYaae_DauNaa Tae_SaurYaUQaNaaQaa
APaar<aqYaa wiTa deiv Mae MaiTa" )
Yatae_NaukU-le/ìrivPa[Gauáa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
723
Na iv§-MaSTa}a Sau%& ddaiTa )) 16 ))
präyo 'dhunä te 'sura-yütha-näthä
apäraëéyä iti devi me matiù
yat te 'nuküleçvara-vipra-guptä
na vikramas tatra sukhaà dadäti
SYNONYMS
präyaù—almost; adhunä—at the present moment; te—all of them;
asura-yütha-näthäù—the chiefs of the demons; apäraëéyäù—unconquerable;
iti—thus; devi—O mother Aditi; me—My; matiù—opinion; yat—because;
te—all the demons; anuküla-éçvara-vipra-guptäù—protected by brähmaëas, by
whose favor the supreme controller is always present; na—not; vikramaù—the
use of power; tatra—there; sukham—happiness; dadäti—can give.
TRANSLATION
O mother of the demigods, in My opinion almost all the chiefs of the demons
are now unconquerable, for they are being protected by brähmaëas, whom the
Supreme Lord always favors. Thus the use of power against them now will not
at all be a source of happiness.
PURPORT
When a person is favored by brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas, no one can defeat
him. Even the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not interfere when one is
protected by a brähmaëa. It is said, go-brähmaëa-hitäya ca. The Lord's first
inclination is to give all benedictions to the cows and brähmaëas. Therefore if
brähmaëas favor someone, the Lord does not interfere, nor can anyone
interfere with the happiness of such a person.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
724
TEXT 17
AQaaPYauPaaYaae MaMa deiv icNTYa"
SaNTaaeizTaSYa v]TacYaRYaa Tae )
MaMaacRNa& NaahRiTa GaNTauMaNYaQaa
é[ÖaNauæPa& f-l/heTauk-TvaTa( )) 17 ))
athäpy upäyo mama devi cintyaù
santoñitasya vrata-caryayä te
mamärcanaà närhati gantum anyathä
çraddhänurüpaà phala-hetukatvät
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; api—in spite of this situation; upäyaù—some means;
mama—by Me; devi—O goddess; cintyaù—must be considered;
santoñitasya—very pleased; vrata-caryayä—observing the vow; te—by you;
mama arcanam—worshiping Me; na—never; arhati—deserves; gantum
anyathä—to become otherwise; çraddhä-anurüpam—according to one's faith
and devotion; phala—of the result; hetukatvät—from being the cause.
TRANSLATION
Yet because I have been satisfied by the activities of your vow, O goddess
Aditi, I must find some means to favor you, for worship of Me never goes in
vain but certainly gives the desired result according to what one deserves.
TEXT 18
TvYaaicRTaêahMaPaTYaGauáYae
PaYaaev]TaeNaaNauGau<a& SaMaqi@Ta" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
725
Sva&XaeNa Pau}aTvMauPaeTYa Tae SauTaaNa(
GaaeáaiSMa MaarqcTaPaSYaiDaiïTa" )) 18 ))
tvayärcitaç cäham apatya-guptaye
payo-vratenänuguëaà saméòitaù
sväàçena putratvam upetya te sutän
goptäsmi märéca-tapasy adhiñöhitaù
SYNONYMS
tvayä—by you; arcitaù—being worshiped; ca—also; aham—I;
apatya-guptaye—giving protection to your sons; payaù-vratena—by the
payo-vrata vow; anuguëam—as far as possible; saméòitaù—properly worshiped;
sva-aàçena—by My plenary portion; putratvam—becoming your son;
upetya—taking this opportunity; te sutän—to your other sons; goptä asmi—I
shall give protection; märéca—of Kaçyapa Muni; tapasi—in the austerity;
adhiñöhitaù—situated.
TRANSLATION
You have prayed to Me and properly worshiped Me by performing the great
payo-vrata ceremony for the sake of protecting your sons. Because of Kaçyapa
Muni's austerities, I shall agree to become your son and thus protect your other
sons.
TEXT 19
oPaDaav PaiTa& >ad]e Pa[JaaPaiTaMak-LMazMa( )
Maa& c >aavYaTaq PaTYaavev& æPaMaviSQaTaMa( )) 19 ))
upadhäva patià bhadre
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
726
prajäpatim akalmañam
mäà ca bhävayaté patyäv
evaà rüpam avasthitam
SYNONYMS
upadhäva—just go worship; patim—your husband; bhadre—O gentle woman;
prajäpatim—who is a Prajäpati; akalmañam—very much purified because of his
austerity; mäm—Me; ca—as well as; bhävayaté—thinking of; patyau—within
your husband; evam—thus; rüpam—form; avasthitam—situated there.
TRANSLATION
Always thinking of Me as being situated within the body of your husband,
Kaçyapa, go worship your husband, who has been purified by his austerity.
TEXT 20
NaETaTa( ParSMaa Aa:YaeYa& Pa*íYaaiPa k-QaÄNa )
Sav| SaMPaÛTae deiv devGauù& SauSa&v*TaMa( )) 20 ))
naitat parasmä äkhyeyaà
påñöayäpi kathaïcana
sarvaà sampadyate devi
deva-guhyaà susaàvåtam
SYNONYMS
na—not; etat—this; parasmai—to outsiders; äkhyeyam—is to be disclosed;
påñöayä api—even though questioned; kathaïcana—by anyone;
sarvam—everything; sampadyate—becomes successful; devi—O lady;
deva-guhyam—very confidential even to the demigods; su-saàvåtam—very
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
727
carefully kept confidential.
TRANSLATION
O lady, even if someone inquires, you should not disclose this fact to anyone.
That which is very confidential is successful if kept secret.
TEXT 21
é[qéuk- ovac
WTaavdu¤-a >aGava&STa}aEvaNTarDaqYaTa )
AidiTaduRlR/>a& l/Bßa hreJaRNMaaTMaiNa Pa[>aae"
oPaaDaavTa( PaiTa& >a¢-ya ParYaa k*-Tak*-TYavTa( )) 21 ))
çré-çuka uväca
etävad uktvä bhagaväàs
tatraiväntaradhéyata
aditir durlabhaà labdhvä
harer janmätmani prabhoù
upädhävat patià bhaktyä
parayä kåta-kåtyavat
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; etävat—in this way;
uktvä—saying (to her); bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tatra
eva—in that very spot; antaù-adhéyata—disappeared; aditiù—Aditi;
durlabham—a very rare achievement; labdhvä—getting; hareù—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; janma—birth; ätmani—in herself;
prabhoù—of the Lord; upädhävat—immediately went; patim—unto her
husband; bhaktyä—with devotion; parayä—great; kåta-kåtya-vat—thinking
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
728
herself very successful.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After speaking in this way, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead disappeared from that very spot. Aditi, having received
the extremely valuable benediction that the Lord would appear as her son,
considered herself very successful, and with great devotion she approached her
husband.
TEXT 22
Sa vE SaMaaiDaYaaeGaeNa k-XYaPaSTadbuDYaTa )
Pa[ivíMaaTMaiNa hrer&Xa& ùivTaQae+a<a" )) 22 ))
sa vai samädhi-yogena
kaçyapas tad abudhyata
praviñöam ätmani harer
aàçaà hy avitathekñaëaù
SYNONYMS
saù—Kaçyapa Muni; vai—indeed; samädhi-yogena—by mystic meditation;
kaçyapaù—Kaçyapa Muni; tat—then; abudhyata—could understand;
praviñöam—entered; ätmani—within himself; hareù—of the Supreme Lord;
aàçam—a plenary portion; hi—indeed; avitatha-ékñaëaù—whose vision is
never mistaken.
TRANSLATION
Being situated in a meditational trance, Kaçyapa Muni, whose vision is never
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
729
mistaken, could see that a plenary portion of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead had entered within him.
TEXT 23
Saae_idTYaa& vqYaRMaaData TaPaSaa icrSaM>a*TaMa( )
SaMaaihTaMaNaa raJaNdaå<YaiGan& YaQaaiNal/" )) 23 ))
so 'dityäà véryam ädhatta
tapasä cira-sambhåtam
samähita-manä räjan
däruëy agnià yathänilaù
SYNONYMS
saù—Kaçyapa; adityäm—unto Aditi; véryam—semen; ädhatta—placed;
tapasä—by austerity; cira-sambhåtam—restrained for long, long years;
samähita-manäù—being fully in trance upon the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; räjan—O King; däruëi—as in firewood; agnim—fire; yathä—as;
anilaù—wind.
TRANSLATION
O King, as the wind promotes friction between two pieces of wood and thus
gives rise to fire, Kaçyapa Muni, whose transcendental position was fully
absorbed in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, transferred his potency into
the womb of Aditi.
PURPORT
A forest fire begins when two pieces of wood rub against one another, being
agitated by the wind. Actually, however, fire belongs neither to the wood nor
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
730
to the wind; it is always different from both. Similarly, here it is to be
understood that the union of Kaçyapa Muni and Aditi was not like the sexual
intercourse of ordinary human beings. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
has nothing to do with the human secretions of sexual intercourse. He is
always completely aloof from such material combinations.
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.29), samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu: "I am equal
toward all living entities." Nonetheless, to protect the devotees and kill the
demons, who were a disturbing element, the Lord entered the womb of Aditi.
Therefore this is a transcendental pastime of the Lord. This should not be
misunderstood. One should not think that the Lord became the son of Aditi
the way an ordinary child is born because of sexual intercourse between man
and woman.
Here it may also be appropriate to explain, in these days of controversy, the
origin of life. The life force of the living entity—the soul—is different from
the ovum and semen of the human being. Although the conditioned soul has
nothing to do with the reproductive cells of man and woman, he is placed into
the proper situation because of his work (karmaëä daiva-netreëa [SB 3.31.1]).
Life is not, however, a product of two secretions, but is independent of all
material elements. As fully described in Bhagavad-gétä, the living entity is not
subject to any material reactions. He can neither be burnt by fire, cut by sharp
weapons, moistened by water, nor dried by the air. He is completely different
from the physical elements, but by a superior arrangement he is put into these
material elements. He is always aloof from material contact (asaìgo hy ayaà
puruñaù) but because he is placed in a material condition, he suffers the
reactions of the material modes of nature.
puruñaù prakåti-stho hi
bhuìkte prakåtijän guëän
käraëaà guëa-saìgo 'sya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu
"The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life, enjoying the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
731
three modes of nature. This is due to his association with that material nature.
Thus he meets with good and evil amongst various species." (Bg. 13.22)
Although the living entity is aloof from the material elements, he is put into
material conditions, and thus he must suffer the reactions of material
activities.
TEXT 24
AidTaeiDaRiïTa& Ga>a| >aGavNTa& SaNaaTaNaMa( )
ihr<YaGa>aaeR ivjaYa SaMaq@e GauùNaaMai>a" )) 24 ))
aditer dhiñöhitaà garbhaà
bhagavantaà sanätanam
hiraëyagarbho vijïäya
saméòe guhya-nämabhiù
SYNONYMS
aditeù—into the womb of Aditi; dhiñöhitam—being established;
garbham—pregnancy; bhagavantam—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sanätanam—who is eternal; hiraëyagarbhaù—Lord Brahmä;
vijïäya—knowing this; saméòe—offered prayers; guhya-nämabhiù—with
transcendental names.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Brahmä understood that the Supreme Personality of Godhead
was now within the womb of Aditi, he began to offer prayers to the Lord by
reciting transcendental names.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
732
The Supreme Personality of Godhead exists everywhere
(aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]). Therefore when one
chants His transcendental names—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa,
Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is automatically pleased by such saìkértana. It is not
that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is absent; He is present there. And
when a devotee utters the transcendental name, it is not a material sound.
Therefore, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is naturally pleased. A
devotee knows that the Lord is present everywhere and that one can please
Him simply by chanting His holy name.
TEXT 25
é[qb]øaevac
JaYaaeåGaaYa >aGavàuå§-Ma NaMaae_STau Tae )
NaMaae b]ø<YadevaYa i}aGau<aaYa NaMaae NaMa" )) 25 ))
çré-brahmoväca
jayorugäya bhagavann
urukrama namo 'stu te
namo brahmaëya-deväya
tri-guëäya namo namaù
SYNONYMS
çré-brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä offered prayers; jaya—all glories;
urugäya—unto the Lord, who is constantly glorified; bhagavan—O my Lord;
urukrama—whose activities are very glorious; namaù astu te—I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You; namaù—my respectful obeisances;
brahmaëya-deväya—unto the Lord of the transcendentalists; tri-guëäya—the
controller of the three modes of nature; namaù namaù—I offer my respectful
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
733
obeisances unto You again and again.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, all glories unto You,
who are glorified by all and whose activities are all uncommon. I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You, O Lord of the transcendentalists, controller of
the three modes of nature. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You again and
again.
TEXT 26
NaMaSTae Pa*iénGa>aaRYa vedGa>aaRYa veDaSae )
i}aNaa>aaYa i}aPa*ïaYa iXaiPaivíaYa ivZ<ave )) 26 ))
namas te påçni-garbhäya
veda-garbhäya vedhase
tri-näbhäya tri-påñöhäya
çipi-viñöäya viñëave
SYNONYMS
namaù te—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; påçni-garbhäya—who
formerly lived within the womb of Påçni (Aditi in her previous birth);
veda-garbhäya—who always remain within Vedic knowledge; vedhase—who
are full of knowledge; tri-näbhäya—within the stem growing from whose navel
live all the three worlds; tri-påñöhäya—who are transcendental to the three
worlds; çipi-viñöäya—who are within the cores of the hearts of all living
entities; viñëave—unto the all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
734
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, the all-pervading Lord Viñëu,
who have entered the cores of the hearts of all living entities. All the three
worlds reside within Your navel, yet You are above the three worlds. Formerly
You appeared as the son of Påçni. To You, the supreme creator, who are
understood only through Vedic knowledge, I offer my respectful obeisances.
TEXT 27
TvMaaidrNTaae >auvNaSYa MaDYa‚
MaNaNTaXai¢&- Pauåz& YaMaahu" )
k-al/ae >avaNaai+aPaTaqXa ivì&
óaeTaae YaQaaNTa" PaiTaTa& Ga>aqrMa( )) 27 ))
tvam ädir anto bhuvanasya madhyam
ananta-çaktià puruñaà yam ähuù
kälo bhavän äkñipatéça viçvaà
sroto yathäntaù patitaà gabhéram
SYNONYMS
tvam—Your Lordship; ädiù—the original cause; antaù—the cause of
dissolution; bhuvanasya—of the universe; madhyam—maintenance of the
present manifestation; ananta-çaktim—the reservoir of unlimited potencies;
puruñam—the Supreme Person; yam—whom; ähuù—they say; kälaù—the
principle of eternal time; bhavän—Your Lordship; äkñipati—attracting;
éça—the Supreme Lord; viçvam—the whole universe; srotaù—waves;
yathä—as; antaù patitam—fallen within the water; gabhéram—very deep.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
735
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, You are the beginning, the manifestation and the ultimate
dissolution of the three worlds, and You are celebrated in the Vedas as the
reservoir of unlimited potencies, the Supreme Person. O my Lord, as waves
attract branches and leaves that have fallen into deep water, You, the supreme
eternal time factor, attract everything in this universe.
PURPORT
The time factor is sometimes described as käla-strota, waves of time.
Everything in this material world is within the time factor and is being carried
away by waves of attraction, which represent the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 28
Tv& vE Pa[JaaNaa& iSQarJa(r)MaaNaa&
Pa[JaaPaTaqNaaMaiSa SaM>aivZ<au" )
idvaEk-Saa& dev idvXCYauTaaNaa&
ParaYa<a& NaaEirv MaÂTaae_PSau )) 28 ))
tvaà vai prajänäà sthira-jaìgamänäà
prajäpaténäm asi sambhaviñëuù
divaukasäà deva divaç cyutänäà
paräyaëaà naur iva majjato 'psu
SYNONYMS
tvam—Your Lordship; vai—indeed; prajänäm—of all living entities;
sthira-jaìgamänäm—either stationary or moving; prajäpaténäm—of all the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
736
Prajäpatis; asi—You are; sambhaviñëuù—the generator of everyone;
diva-okasäm—of the inhabitants of the upper planetary system; deva—O
Supreme Lord; divaù cyutänäm—of the demigods, who have now fallen from
their residential quarters; paräyaëam—the supreme shelter; nauù—boat;
iva—like; majjataù—of one drowning; apsu—in the water.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the original generator of all living entities, stationary or
moving, and You are also the generator of the Prajäpatis. O my Lord, as a boat
is the only hope for a person drowning in the water, You are the only shelter
for the demigods, who are now bereft of their heavenly position.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Seventeenth Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Supreme Lord Agrees to Become Aditi's
Son."
18. Lord Vämanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation
This chapter describes how Lord Vämanadeva appeared and how He went
to the sacrificial arena of Mahäräja Bali, who received Him well and fulfilled
His desire by offering Him benedictions.
Lord Vämanadeva appeared in this world from the womb of Aditi
completely equipped with conchshell, disc, club and lotus. His bodily hue was
blackish, and He was dressed in yellow garments. Lord Viñëu appeared at an
auspicious moment on Çravaëa-dvädaçé when the Abhijit star had arisen. At
that time, in all the three worlds (including the higher planetary system, outer
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
737
space and this earth), all the demigods, the cows, the brähmaëas and even the
seasons were happy because of God's appearance. Therefore this auspicious day
is called Vijayä. When the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has a
sac-cid-änanda [Bs. 5.1] body, appeared as the son of Kaçyapa and Aditi, both of
His parents were very astonished. After His appearance, the Lord assumed the
form of a dwarf (Vämana). All the great sages expressed their jubilation, and
with Kaçyapa Muni before them they performed the birthday ceremony of
Lord Vämana. At the time of Lord Vämanadeva's sacred thread ceremony, He
was honored by the sun-god, Båhaspati, the goddess presiding over the planet
earth, the deity of the heavenly planets, His mother, Lord Brahmä, Kuvera, the
seven åñis and others. Lord Vämanadeva then visited the sacrificial arena on
the northern side of the Narmadä River, at the field known as Bhågukaccha,
where brähmaëas of the Bhågu dynasty were performing yajïas. Wearing a belt
made of muïja straw, an upper garment of deerskin and a sacred thread and
carrying in His hands a daëòa, an umbrella and a waterpot (kamaëòalu), Lord
Vämanadeva appeared in the sacrificial arena of Mahäräja Bali. Because of His
transcendentally effulgent presence, all the priests were diminished in their
prowess, and thus they all stood from their seats and offered prayers to Lord
Vämanadeva. Even Lord Çiva accepts on his head the Ganges water generated
from the toe of Lord Vämanadeva. Therefore, after washing the Lord's feet,
Bali Mahäräja immediately accepted the water from the Lord's feet on his head
and felt that he and his predecessors had certainly been glorified. Then Bali
Mahäräja inquired of Lord Vämanadeva's welfare and requested the Lord to
ask him for money, jewels or anything He might desire.
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
wTQa& ivirÄSTauTak-MaRvqYaR"
Pa[adubR>aUvaMa*Ta>aUridTYaaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
738
cTau>auRJa" Xa«GadaBJac§-"
iPaXa(r)vaSaa Nail/NaaYaTae+a<a" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
itthaà viriïca-stuta-karma-véryaù
prädurbabhüvämåta-bhür adityäm
catur-bhujaù çaìkha-gadäbja-cakraù
piçaìga-väsä nalinäyatekñaëaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; ittham—in this way;
viriïca-stuta-karma-véryaù—the Personality of Godhead, whose activities and
prowess are always praised by Lord Brahmä; prädurbabhüva—became
manifested; amåta-bhüù—whose appearance is always deathless;
adityäm—from the womb of Aditi; catuù-bhujaù—having four arms;
çaìkha-gadä-abja-cakraù—decorated with conchshell, club, lotus and disc;
piçaìga-väsäù—dressed in yellow garments; nalina-äyata-ékñaëaù—having
blooming eyes like the petals of a lotus.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After Lord Brahmä had thus spoken, glorifying the
Supreme Lord's activities and prowess, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is never subject to death like an ordinary living being, appeared from the
womb of Aditi. His four hands were decorated with a conchshell, club, lotus
and disc, He was dressed in yellow garments, and His eyes appeared like the
petals of a blooming lotus.
PURPORT
The word amåta-bhüù is significant in this verse. The Lord sometimes
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
739
appears like an ordinary child taking birth, but this does not mean that He is
subject to birth, death or old age. One must be very intelligent to understand
the appearance and activities of the Supreme Lord in His incarnations. This is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9): janma karma ca me divyam evaà yo vetti
tattvataù. One should try to understand that the Lord's appearance and
disappearance and His activities are all divyam, or transcendental. The Lord
has nothing to do with material activities. One who understands the
appearance, disappearance and activities of the Lord is immediately liberated.
After giving up his body, he never again has to accept a material body, but is
transferred to the spiritual world (tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm eti so
'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]).
TEXT 2
XYaaMaavdaTaae ‡zraJaku-<@l/‚
iTvzaeçSaC^\qvdNaaMbuJa" PauMaaNa( )
é[qvTSav+aa bl/Yaa(r)daeçSa‚
iTk-rq$=k-aÄqGau<acaåNaUPaur" )) 2 ))
çyämävadäto jhaña-räja-kuëòalatviñollasac-
chré-vadanämbujaù pumän
çrévatsa-vakñä balayäìgadollasatkiréöa-
käïcé-guëa-cäru-nüpuraù
SYNONYMS
çyäma-avadätaù—whose body is blackish and free from inebriety;
jhaña-räja-kuëòala—of the two earrings, made in the shape of sharks;
tviñä—by the luster; ullasat—dazzling; çré-vadana-ambujaù—having a beautiful
lotus face; pumän—the Supreme Person; çrévatsa-vakñäù—with the mark of
Çrévatsa on His bosom; balaya—bracelets; aìgada—arm bands;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
740
ullasat—dazzling; kiréöa—helmet; käïcé—belt; guëa—sacred thread;
cäru—beautiful; nüpuraù—ankle bells.
TRANSLATION
The body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, blackish in complexion,
was free from all inebrieties. His lotus face, decorated with earrings resembling
sharks, appeared very beautiful, and on His bosom was the mark of Çrévatsa. He
wore bangles on His wrists, armlets on His arms, a helmet on His head, a belt
on His waist, a sacred thread across His chest, and ankle bells decorating His
lotus feet.
TEXT 3
MaDauv]Tav]aTaivgauíYaa SvYaa
ivraiJaTa" é[qvNaMaal/Yaa hir" )
Pa[JaaPaTaeveRXMaTaMa" Svraeicza
ivNaaXaYaNa( k-<#=iNaivík-aESTau>a" )) 3 ))
madhu-vrata-vräta-vighuñöayä svayä
viräjitaù çré-vanamälayä hariù
prajäpater veçma-tamaù svarociñä
vinäçayan kaëöha-niviñöa-kaustubhaù
SYNONYMS
madhu-vrata—of bees always hankering for honey; vräta—with a bunch;
vighuñöayä—resounding; svayä—uncommon; viräjitaù—situated;
çré—beautiful; vana-mälayä—with a flower garland; hariù—the Supreme Lord;
prajäpateù—of Kaçyapa Muni, the Prajäpati; veçma-tamaù—the darkness of
the house; sva-rociñä—by His own effulgence; vinäçayan—vanquishing;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
741
kaëöha—on the neck; niviñöa—worn; kaustubhaù—the Kaustubha gem.
TRANSLATION
An uncommonly beautiful garland of flowers decorated His bosom, and
because the flowers were extremely fragrant, a large group of bees, making their
natural humming sounds, invaded them for honey. When the Lord appeared,
wearing the Kaustubha gem on His neck, His effulgence vanquished the
darkness in the home of the Prajäpati Kaçyapa.
TEXT 4
idXa" Pa[Saedu" Sail/l/aXaYaaSTada
Pa[Jaa" Pa[ôía ‰Tavae Gau<aaiNvTaa" )
ÛaErNTarq+a& i+aiTariGaniJaûa
Gaavae iÜJaa" SaÅôzuNaRGaaê )) 4 ))
diçaù praseduù saliläçayäs tadä
prajäù prahåñöä åtavo guëänvitäù
dyaur antarékñaà kñitir agni-jihvä
gävo dvijäù saïjahåñur nagäç ca
SYNONYMS
diçaù—all directions; praseduù—became happy; salila—of water; äçayäù—the
reservoirs; tadä—at that time; prajäù—all living entities; prahåñöäù—very
happy; åtavaù—the seasons; guëa-anvitäù—full of their respective qualities;
dyauù—the upper planetary system; antarékñam—outer space; kñitiù—the
surface of the earth; agni-jihväù—the demigods; gävaù—the cows; dvijäù—the
brähmaëas; saïjahåñuù—all became happy; nagäù ca—and the mountains.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
742
TRANSLATION
At that time, there was happiness in all directions, in the reservoirs of water
like the rivers and oceans, and in the core of everyone's heart. The various
seasons displayed their respective qualities, and all living entities in the upper
planetary system, in outer space and on the surface of the earth were jubilant.
The demigods, the cows, the brähmaëas and the hills and mountains were all
filled with joy.
TEXT 5
é[ae<aaYaa& é[v<aÜadXYaa& MauhUTaeR_i>aiJaiTa Pa[>au" )
SaveR Na+a}aTaaraÛaê§u-STaÂNMa di+a<aMa( )) 5 ))
çroëäyäà çravaëa-dvädaçyäà
muhürte 'bhijiti prabhuù
sarve nakñatra-tärädyäç
cakrus taj-janma dakñiëam
SYNONYMS
çroëäyäm—when the moon was situated in the Çravaëa lunar mansion;
çravaëa-dvädaçyäm—on the twelfth lunar day of the bright fortnight in the
month of Bhädra, the day famous as the Çravaëa-dvädaçé; muhürte—in the
auspicious moment; abhijiti—in the first portion of the Çravaëa lunar mansion
known as the Abhijit-nakñatra and in the Abhijit-muhürta (occurring at
midday); prabhuù—the Lord; sarve—all; nakñatra—stars; tärä—planets;
ädyäù—beginning with the sun and followed by the other planets;
cakruù—made; tat-janma—the birthday of the Lord; dakñiëam—very
munificent.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
743
TRANSLATION
On the day of Çravaëa-dvädaçé [the twelfth day of the bright fortnight in the
month of Bhädra], when the moon came into the lunar mansion Çravaëa, at the
auspicious moment of Abhijit, the Lord appeared in this universe. Considering
the Lord's appearance very auspicious, all the stars and planets, from the sun to
Saturn, were munificently charitable.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, an expert astrologer, explains the
word nakñatra-tärädyäù. The word nakñatra means "the stars," the word tära in
this context refers to the planets, and ädyäù means "the first one specifically
mentioned." Among the planets, the first is Sürya, the sun, not the moon.
Therefore, according to the Vedic version, the modern astronomer's
proposition that the moon is nearest to the earth should not be accepted. The
chronological order in which people all over the world refer to the days of the
week—Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and
Saturday—corresponds to the Vedic order of the planets and thus
circumstantiates the Vedic version. Apart from this, when the Lord appeared
the planets and stars became situated very auspiciously, according to
astrological calculations, to celebrate the birth of the Lord.
TEXT 6
ÜadXYaa& SaivTaaiTaïNMaDYaiNdNaGaTaae Na*Pa )
ivJaYaaNaaMa Saa Pa[ae¢-a YaSYaa& JaNMa ivduhRre" )) 6 ))
dvädaçyäà savitätiñöhan
madhyandina-gato nåpa
vijayä-näma sä proktä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
744
yasyäà janma vidur hareù
SYNONYMS
dvädaçyäm—on the twelfth day of the moon; savitä—the sun; atiñöhat—was
staying; madhyam-dina-gataù—on the meridian; nåpa—O King;
vijayä-näma—by the name Vijayä; sä—that day; proktä—is called;
yasyäm—on which; janma—the appearance; viduù—they know; hareù—of
Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
O King, when the Lord appeared—on dvädaçé, the twelfth day of the
moon—the sun was at the meridian, as every learned scholar knows. This
dvädaçé is called Vijayä.
TEXT 7
Xa«duNdu>aYaae NaeduMa*Rd(r)Pa<avaNak-a" )
ic}avaid}aTaUYaaR<aa& iNagaaeRzSTauMaul/ae_>avTa( )) 7 ))
çaìkha-dundubhayo nedur
mådaìga-paëavänakäù
citra-väditra-türyäëäà
nirghoñas tumulo 'bhavat
SYNONYMS
çaìkha—conchshells; dundubhayaù—kettledrums; neduù—vibrated;
mådaìga—drums; paëava-änakäù—drums named paëavas and änakas;
citra—various; väditra—of these vibrations of musical sound; türyäëäm—and
of other instruments; nirghoñaù—the loud sound; tumulaù—tumultuous;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
745
abhavat—became.
TRANSLATION
Conchshells, kettledrums, drums, paëavas and änakas vibrated in concert.
The sound of these and various other instruments was tumultuous.
TEXT 8
Pa[qTaaêaPSarSaae_Na*TYaNGaNDavRPa[vra JaGau" )
TauíuvuMauRNaYaae deva MaNav" iPaTarae_GanYa" )) 8 ))
prétäç cäpsaraso 'nåtyan
gandharva-pravarä jaguù
tuñöuvur munayo devä
manavaù pitaro 'gnayaù
SYNONYMS
prétäù—being very pleased; ca—also; apsarasaù—the celestial dancing girls;
anåtyan—danced; gandharva-pravaräù—the best of the Gandharvas;
jaguù—sang; tuñöuvuù—satisfied the Lord by offering prayers; munayaù—the
great sages; deväù—the demigods; manavaù—the Manus; pitaraù—the
inhabitants of Pitåloka; agnayaù—the fire-gods.
TRANSLATION
Being very pleased, the celestial dancing girls [Apsaräs] danced in jubilation,
the best of the Gandharvas sang songs, and the great sages, demigods, Manus,
Pitäs and fire—gods offered prayers to satisfy the Lord.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
746
TEXTS 9-10
iSaÖivÛaDarGa<aa" Saik-MPauåzik-àra" )
car<aa Ya+ar+aa&iSa SauPa<aaR >auJaGaaetaMaa" )) 9 ))
GaaYaNTaae_iTaPa[Xa&SaNTaae Na*TYaNTaae ivbuDaaNauGaa" )
AidTYaa Aaé[MaPad& ku-SauMaE" SaMavaik-rNa( )) 10 ))
siddha-vidyädhara-gaëäù
sakimpuruña-kinnaräù
cäraëä yakña-rakñäàsi
suparëä bhujagottamäù
gäyanto 'tipraçaàsanto
nåtyanto vibudhänugäù
adityä äçrama-padaà
kusumaiù samaväkiran
SYNONYMS
siddha—the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; vidyädhara-gaëäù—the inhabitants of
Vidyädhara-loka; sa—with; kimpuruña—the inhabitants of Kimpuruña-loka;
kinnaräù—the inhabitants of Kinnaraloka; cäraëäù—the inhabitants of
Cäraëaloka; yakña—the Yakñas; rakñäàsi—the Räkñasas; suparëäù—the
Suparëas; bhujaga-uttamäù—the best of the inhabitants of the serpent loka;
gäyantaù—glorifying the Lord; ati-praçaàsantaù—praising the Lord;
nåtyantaù—dancing; vibudhänugäù—the followers of the demigods;
adityäù—of Aditi; äçrama-padam—the place of residence; kusumaiù—by
flowers; samaväkiran—covered.
TRANSLATION
The Siddhas, Vidyädharas, Kimpuruñas, Kinnaras, Cäraëas, Yakñas,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
747
Räkñasas, Suparëas, the best of serpents, and the followers of the demigods all
showered flowers on Aditi's residence, covering the entire house, while
glorifying and praising the Lord and dancing.
TEXT 11
d*îaidiTaSTa& iNaJaGa>aRSaM>av&
Par& PauMaa&Sa& MaudMaaPa iviSMaTaa )
Ga*hqTadeh& iNaJaYaaeGaMaaYaYaa
Pa[JaaPaiTaêah JaYaeiTa iviSMaTa" )) 11 ))
dåñöväditis taà nija-garbha-sambhavaà
paraà pumäàsaà mudam äpa vismitä
gåhéta-dehaà nija-yoga-mäyayä
prajäpatiç cäha jayeti vismitaù
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—seeing; aditiù—mother Aditi; tam—Him (the Supreme Personality of
Godhead); nija-garbha-sambhavam—born of her own womb; param—the
Supreme; pumäàsam—the Personality of Godhead; mudam—great happiness;
äpa—conceived; vismitä—being very much astonished; gåhéta—accepted;
deham—body, or transcendental form; nija-yoga-mäyayä—by His own spiritual
potency; prajäpatiù—Kaçyapa Muni; ca—also; äha—said; jaya—all glories;
iti—thus; vismitaù—being astonished.
TRANSLATION
When Aditi saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had appeared
from her own womb, having accepted a transcendental body by His own
spiritual potency, she was struck with wonder and was very happy. Upon seeing
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
748
the child, Prajäpati Kaçyapa exclaimed, "Jaya! Jaya!" in great happiness and
wonder.
TEXT 12
YaTa( Tad( vPau>aaRiTa iv>aUz<aaYauDaE‚
rVYa¢-icÜy¢-MaDaarYaÖir" )
b>aUv TaeNaEv Sa vaMaNaae v$u="
SaMPaXYaTaaeidRVYaGaiTaYaRQaa Na$=" )) 12 ))
yat tad vapur bhäti vibhüñaëäyudhair
avyakta-cid-vyaktam adhärayad dhariù
babhüva tenaiva sa vämano vaöuù
sampaçyator divya-gatir yathä naöaù
SYNONYMS
yat—which; tat—that; vapuù—transcendental body; bhäti—manifests;
vibhüñaëa—with regular ornaments; äyudhaiù—and with weapons;
avyakta—unmanifested; cit-vyaktam—spiritually manifested;
adhärayat—assumed; hariù—the Lord; babhüva—immediately became;
tena—with that; eva—certainly; saù—He (the Lord); vämanaù—dwarf;
vaöuù—a brähmaëa brahmacäré; sampaçyatoù—while both His father and
mother were seeing; divya-gatiù—whose movements are wonderful; yathä—as;
naöaù—a theatrical actor.
TRANSLATION
The Lord appeared in His original form, with ornaments and weapons in His
hands. Although this ever-existing form is not visible in the material world, He
nonetheless appeared in this form. Then, in the presence of His father and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
749
mother, He assumed the form of Vämana, a brähmaëa-dwarf, a brahmacäré, just
like a theatrical actor.
PURPORT
The word naöaù is significant. An actor changes dress to play different
parts, but is always the same man. Similarly, as described in the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.33, 39), the Lord assumes many thousands and millions of
forms (advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam ädyaà puräëa-puruñam). He is
always present with innumerable incarnations (rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena
tiñöhan nänävatäram akarod bhuvaneñu kintu). Nonetheless, although He
appears in various incarnations, they are not different from one another. He is
the same person, with the same potency, the same eternity and the same
spiritual existence, but He can simultaneously assume various forms. When
Vämanadeva appeared from the womb of His mother, He appeared in the form
of Näräyaëa, with four hands equipped with the necessary symbolic weapons,
and then immediately transformed Himself into a brahmacäré (vaöu). This
means that His body is not material. One who thinks that the Supreme Lord
assumes a material body is not intelligent. He has to learn more about the
Lord's position. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9), janma karma ca me
divyam evaà yo vetti tattvataù. One has to understand the transcendental
appearance of the Lord in His original transcendental body
(sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]).
TEXT 13
Ta& v$u=& vaMaNa& d*îa MaaedMaaNaa MahzRYa" )
k-MaaRi<a k-arYaaMaaSau" PaurSk*-TYa Pa[JaaPaiTaMa( )) 13 ))
taà vaöuà vämanaà dåñövä
modamänä maharñayaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
750
karmäëi kärayäm äsuù
puraskåtya prajäpatim
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; vaöum—the brahmacäré; vämanam—dwarf; dåñövä—seeing;
modamänäù—in a happy mood; mahä-åñayaù—the great saintly persons;
karmäëi—ritualistic ceremonies; kärayäm äsuù—performed;
puraskåtya—keeping in front; prajäpatim—Kaçyapa Muni, the Prajäpati.
TRANSLATION
When the great sages saw the Lord as the brahmacäré-dwarf Vämana, they
were certainly very pleased. Thus they placed before them Kaçyapa Muni, the
Prajäpati, and performed all the ritualistic ceremonies, such as the birthday
ceremony.
PURPORT
According to Vedic civilization, when a child is born in the family of a
brähmaëa, the birthday ceremony, known as jäta-karma, is first performed, and
then other ceremonies are also gradually performed. But when this
vämana-rüpa appeared in the form of a vaöu, or brahmacäré, His sacred thread
ceremony was also performed immediately.
TEXT 14
TaSYaaePaNaqYaMaaNaSYa Saaiv}aq& SaivTaab]vqTa( )
b*hSPaiTab]RøSaU}a& Mae%l/a& k-XYaPaae_ddaTa( )) 14 ))
tasyopanéyamänasya
sävitréà savitäbravét
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
751
båhaspatir brahma-sütraà
mekhaläà kaçyapo 'dadät
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Lord Vämanadeva; upanéyamänasya—at the time of His being
offered the sacred thread ceremony; sävitrém—the Gäyatré mantra;
savitä—the sun-god; abravét—chanted; båhaspatiù—Båhaspati, the guru of the
demigods; brahma-sütram—the sacred thread; mekhaläm—the belt of straw;
kaçyapaù—Kaçyapa Muni; adadät—offered.
TRANSLATION
At the sacred thread ceremony of Vämanadeva, the sun-god personally
uttered the Gäyatré mantra, Båhaspati offered the sacred thread, and Kaçyapa
Muni offered a straw belt.
TEXT 15
ddaE k*-Z<aaiJaNa& >aUiMadR<@& SaaeMaae vNaSPaiTa" )
k-aEPaqNaaC^adNa& MaaTaa ÛaEX^}a& JaGaTa" PaTae" )) 15 ))
dadau kåñëäjinaà bhümir
daëòaà somo vanaspatiù
kaupénäcchädanaà mätä
dyauç chatraà jagataù pateù
SYNONYMS
dadau—gave, offered; kåñëa-ajinam—the skin of a deer; bhümiù—mother
earth; daëòam—a brahmacäré's rod; somaù—the moon-god; vanaù-patiù—the
king of the forest; kaupéna—the underwear; äcchädanam—covering the body;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
752
mätä—His mother, Aditi; dyauù—the heavenly kingdom; chatram—an
umbrella; jagataù—of the whole universe; pateù—of the master.
TRANSLATION
Mother earth gave Him a deerskin, and the demigod of the moon, who is the
king of the forest, gave Him a brahma-daëòa [the rod of a brahmacäré]. His
mother, Aditi, gave Him cloth for underwear, and the deity presiding over the
heavenly kingdom offered Him an umbrella.
TEXT 16
k-Ma<@lu/& vedGa>aR" ku-XaaNSaázRYaae ddu" )
A+aMaal/a& MaharaJa SarSvTYaVYaYaaTMaNa" )) 16 ))
kamaëòaluà veda-garbhaù
kuçän saptarñayo daduù
akña-mäläà mahäräja
sarasvaty avyayätmanaù
SYNONYMS
kamaëòalum—a waterpot; veda-garbhaù—Lord Brahmä; kuçän—kuça grass;
sapta-åñayaù—the seven sages; daduù—offered; akña-mäläm—a string of
Rudräkña beads; mahäräja—O King; sarasvaté—the goddess Sarasvaté;
avyaya-ätmanaù—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
O King, Lord Brahmä offered a waterpot to the inexhaustible Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the seven sages offered Him kuça grass, and mother
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
753
Sarasvaté gave Him a string of Rudräkña beads.
TEXT 17
TaSMaa wTYauPaNaqTaaYa Ya+ara$( Paai}ak-aMadaTa( )
i>a+aa& >aGavTaq Saa+aaduMaadadiMbk-a SaTaq )) 17 ))
tasmä ity upanétäya
yakña-räö pätrikäm adät
bhikñäà bhagavaté säkñäd
umädäd ambikä saté
SYNONYMS
tasmai—unto Him (Lord Vämanadeva); iti—in this way; upanétäya—who had
undergone His sacred thread ceremony; yakña-räö—Kuvera, the treasurer of
heaven and King of the Yakñas; pätrikäm—a pot for begging alms;
adät—delivered; bhikñäm—alms; bhagavaté—mother Bhaväné, the wife of Lord
Çiva; säkñät—directly; umä—Umä; adät—gave; ambikä—the mother of the
universe; saté—the chaste.
TRANSLATION
When Vämanadeva had thus been given the sacred thread, Kuvera, King of
the Yakñas, gave Him a pot for begging alms, and mother Bhagavaté, the wife of
Lord Çiva and most chaste mother of the entire universe, gave Him His first
alms.
TEXT 18
Sa b]øvcRSaeNaEv& Sa>aa& SaM>aaivTaae v$u=" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
754
b]øizRGa<aSaÅuíaMaTYaraecTa Maairz" )) 18 ))
sa brahma-varcasenaivaà
sabhäà sambhävito vaöuù
brahmarñi-gaëa-saïjuñöäm
atyarocata märiñaù
SYNONYMS
saù—He (Vämanadeva); brahma-varcasena—by His Brahman effulgence;
evam—in this way; sabhäm—the assembly; sambhävitaù—having been
welcomed by everyone; vaöuù—the brahmacäré;
brahma-åñi-gaëa-saïjuñöäm—filled with great brähmaëa sages;
ati-arocata—surpassing, appeared beautiful; märiñaù—the best of the
brahmacärés.
TRANSLATION
Having thus been welcomed by everyone, Lord Vämanadeva, the best of the
brahmacärés, exhibited His Brahman effulgence. Thus He surpassed in beauty
that entire assembly, which was filled with great saintly brähmaëas.
TEXT 19
SaiMaÖMaaihTa& viö& k*-Tva PairSaMaUhNaMa( )
PairSTaqYaR SaMa>YaCYaR SaiMaiÙrJauhaed( iÜJa" )) 19 ))
samiddham ähitaà vahnià
kåtvä parisamühanam
paristérya samabhyarcya
samidbhir ajuhod dvijaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
755
SYNONYMS
samiddham—blazing; ähitam—being situated; vahnim—the fire; kåtvä—after
making; parisamühanam—properly; paristérya—surpassing;
samabhyarcya—after offering worship; samidbhiù—with sacrificial offerings;
ajuhot—completed the fire sacrifice; dvijaù—the best of the brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
After Lord Çré Vämanadeva set a sacrificial fire, He offered worship and
performed a fire sacrifice on the sacrificial field.
TEXT 20
é[uTvaìMaeDaEYaRJaMaaNaMaUiJaRTa&
bil&/ >a*GaU<aaMauPak-iLPaTaESTaTa" )
JaGaaMa Ta}aai%l/SaarSaM>a*Taae
>aare<a Gaa& SaàMaYaNPade Pade )) 20 ))
çrutväçvamedhair yajamänam ürjitaà
balià bhågüëäm upakalpitais tataù
jagäma taträkhila-sära-sambhåto
bhäreëa gäà sannamayan pade pade
SYNONYMS
çrutvä—after hearing; açvamedhaiù—by açvamedha sacrifices;
yajamänam—the performer; ürjitam—very glorious; balim—Bali Mahäräja;
bhågüëäm—under the guidance of the brähmaëas born in the Bhågu dynasty;
upakalpitaiù—performed; tataù—from that place; jagäma—went; tatra—there;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
756
akhila-sära-sambhåtaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the essence of
all creation; bhäreëa—with the weight; gäm—the earth;
sannamayan—depressing; pade pade—at every step.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord heard that Bali Mahäräja was performing açvamedha
sacrifices under the patronage of brähmaëas belonging to the Bhågu dynasty,
the Supreme Lord, who is full in every respect, proceeded there to show His
mercy to Bali Mahäräja. By His weight, He pushed down the earth with every
step.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is akhila-sära-sambhåta. In other
words, He is the proprietor of everything essential in this material world. Thus
although the Lord was going to Bali Mahäräja to beg something, He is always
complete and has nothing to beg from anyone. Indeed, He is so powerful that
in His full opulence He pressed down the surface of the earth at every step.
TEXT 21
Ta& NaMaRdaYaaSTa$= otare ble/‚
YaR ‰iTvJaSTae >a*Gauk-C^Sa&jke- )
Pa[vTaRYaNTaae >a*Gav" §-TaUtaMa&
VYac+aTaaraduidTa& YaQaa rivMa( )) 21 ))
taà narmadäyäs taöa uttare baler
ya åtvijas te bhågukaccha-saàjïake
pravartayanto bhågavaù kratüttamaà
vyacakñatäräd uditaà yathä ravim
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
757
SYNONYMS
tam—Him (Vämanadeva); narmadäyäù—of the River Narmadä; taöe—on the
bank; uttare—northern; baleù—of Mahäräja Bali; ye—who; åtvijaù—the
priests engaged in ritualistic ceremonies; te—all of them;
bhågukaccha-saàjïake—in the field named Bhågukaccha;
pravartayantaù—performing; bhågavaù—all the descendants of Bhågu;
kratu-uttamam—the most important sacrifice, named açvamedha;
vyacakñata—they observed; ärät—nearby; uditam—risen; yathä—like;
ravim—the sun.
TRANSLATION
While engaged in performing the sacrifice in the field known as
Bhågukaccha, on the northern bank of the Narmadä River, the brahminical
priests, the descendants of Bhågu, saw Vämanadeva to be like the sun rising
nearby.
TEXT 22
Tae ‰iTvJaae YaJaMaaNa" SadSYaa
hTaiTvzae vaMaNaTaeJaSaa Na*Pa )
SaUYaR" ik-l/aYaaTYauTa va iv>aavSau"
SaNaTku-Maarae_Qa idd*+aYaa §-Taae" )) 22 ))
te åtvijo yajamänaù sadasyä
hata-tviño vämana-tejasä nåpa
süryaù kiläyäty uta vä vibhävasuù
sanat-kumäro 'tha didåkñayä kratoù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
758
SYNONYMS
te—all of them; åtvijaù—the priests; yajamänaù—as well as Bali Mahäräja, who
had engaged them in performing the yajïa; sadasyäù—all the members of the
assembly; hata-tviñaù—decreased in their bodily effulgence; vämana-tejasä—by
the brilliant effulgence of Lord Vämana; nåpa—O King; süryaù—the sun;
kila—whether; äyäti—is coming; uta vä—either; vibhävasuù—the fire-god;
sanat-kumäraù—the Kumära known as Sanat-kumära; atha—either;
didåkñayä—with a desire to observe; kratoù—the sacrificial ceremony.
TRANSLATION
O King, because of Vämanadeva's bright effulgence, the priests, along with
Bali Mahäräja and all the members of the assembly, were robbed of their
splendor. Thus they began to ask one another whether the sun-god himself,
Sanat-kumära or the fire-god had personally come to see the sacrificial
ceremony.
TEXT 23
wTQa& SaiXaZYaezu >a*GauZvNaek-Daa
ivTaKYaRMaa<aae >aGavaNSa vaMaNa" )
^}a& Sad<@& SaJal&/ k-Ma<@lu/&
ivveXa ib>a]ÖYaMaeDava$=Ma( )) 23 ))
itthaà saçiñyeñu bhåguñv anekadhä
vitarkyamäëo bhagavän sa vämanaù
chatraà sadaëòaà sajalaà kamaëòaluà
viveça bibhrad dhayamedha-väöam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
759
SYNONYMS
ittham—in this way; sa-çiñyeñu—with their disciples; bhåguñu—among the
Bhågus; anekadhä—in many ways; vitarkyamäëaù—being talked and argued
about; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; saù—that;
vämanaù—Lord Vämana; chatram—umbrella; sadaëòam—with the rod;
sa-jalam—filled with water; kamaëòalum—waterpot; viveça—entered;
bibhrat—taking in hand; hayamedha—of the açvamedha sacrifice; väöam—the
arena.
TRANSLATION
While the priests of the Bhågu dynasty and their disciples talked and argued
in various ways, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vämanadeva, holding in
His hands the rod, the umbrella and a waterpot full of water, entered the arena
of the açvamedha sacrifice.
TEXTS 24-25
MaaEHJYaa Mae%l/Yaa vqTaMauPavqTaaiJaNaaetarMa( )
Jai$=l&/ vaMaNa& ivPa[& MaaYaaMaa<avk&- hirMa( )) 24 ))
Pa[iví& vq+Ya >a*Gav" SaiXaZYaaSTae SahaiGani>a" )
Pa[TYaGa*õNSaMauTQaaYa Sai¿áaSTaSYa TaeJaSaa )) 25 ))
mauïjyä mekhalayä vétam
upavétäjinottaram
jaöilaà vämanaà vipraà
mäyä-mäëavakaà harim
praviñöaà vékñya bhågavaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
760
saçiñyäs te sahägnibhiù
pratyagåhëan samutthäya
saìkñiptäs tasya tejasä
SYNONYMS
mauïjyä—made of muïja straw; mekhalayä—with a belt; vétam—circled;
upavéta—sacred thread; ajina-uttaram—wearing a deerskin upper garment;
jaöilam—having matted locks of hair; vämanam—Lord Vämana; vipram—a
brähmaëa; mäyä-mäëavakam—the illusory son of a human being; harim—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; praviñöam—entered; vékñya—seeing;
bhågavaù—the priests who were descendants of Bhågu; sa-çiñyäù—with their
disciples; te—all of them; saha-agnibhiù—with the fire sacrifice;
pratyagåhëan—properly welcomed; samutthäya—standing up;
saìkñiptäù—being diminished; tasya—His; tejasä—by brilliance.
TRANSLATION
Appearing as a brähmaëa boy, wearing a belt of straw, a sacred thread, an
upper garment of deerskin, and matted locks of hair, Lord Vämanadeva entered
the arena of sacrifice. His brilliant effulgence diminished the brilliance of all the
priests and their disciples, who thus stood from their seats and welcomed the
Lord properly by offering obeisances.
TEXT 26
YaJaMaaNa" Pa[MauidTaae dXaRNaqYa& MaNaaerMaMa(
æPaaNauæPaavYav& TaSMaa AaSaNaMaahrTa( )) 26 ))
yajamänaù pramudito
darçanéyaà manoramam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
761
rüpänurüpävayavaà
tasmä äsanam äharat
SYNONYMS
yajamänaù—Bali Mahäräja, who had engaged all the priests in performing the
sacrifice; pramuditaù—being very jubilant; darçanéyam—pleasing to see;
manoramam—so beautiful; rüpa—with beauty; anurüpa—equal to His bodily
beauty; avayavam—all the different parts of the body; tasmai—unto Him;
äsanam—a sitting place; äharat—offered.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja, jubilant at seeing Lord Vämanadeva, whose beautiful limbs
contributed equally to the beauty of His entire body, offered Him a seat with
great satisfaction.
TEXT 27
SvaGaTaeNaai>aNaNÛaQa PaadaE >aGavTaae bil/" )
AviNaJYaacRYaaMaaSa Mau¢-Sa(r)MaNaaerMaMa( )) 27 ))
svägatenäbhinandyätha
pädau bhagavato baliù
avanijyärcayäm äsa
mukta-saìga-manoramam
SYNONYMS
su-ägatena—by words of welcome; abhinandya—welcoming; atha—thus;
pädau—the two lotus feet; bhagavataù—of the Lord; baliù—Bali Mahäräja;
avanijya—washing; arcayäm äsa—worshiped; mukta-saìga-manoramam—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
762
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beautiful to the liberated souls.
TRANSLATION
Thus offering a proper reception to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is always beautiful to the liberated souls, Bali Mahäräja worshiped Him by
washing His lotus feet.
TEXT 28
TaTPaadXaaEc& JaNak-LMazaPah&
Sa DaMaRivNMaUDNYaRdDaaTa( SauMa(r)l/Ma( )
Yad( devdevae iGairXaêNd]MaaEil/‚
dRDaar MaUDNaaR ParYaa c >a¢-ya )) 28 ))
tat-päda-çaucaà jana-kalmañäpahaà
sa dharma-vin mürdhny adadhät sumaìgalam
yad deva-devo giriçaç candra-maulir
dadhära mürdhnä parayä ca bhaktyä
SYNONYMS
tat-päda-çaucam—the water that washed the lotus feet of the Lord;
jana-kalmaña-apaham—which washes away all the sinful reactions of the
people in general; saù—he (Bali Mahäräja); dharma-vit—completely aware of
religious principles; mürdhni—on the head; adadhät—carried;
su-maìgalam—all-auspicious; yat—which; deva-devaù—the best of the
demigods; giriçaù—Lord Çiva; candra-mauliù—who carries on his forehead the
emblem of the moon; dadhära—carried; mürdhnä—on the head;
parayä—supreme; ca—also; bhaktyä—with devotion.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
763
TRANSLATION
Lord Çiva, the best of demigods, who carries on his forehead the emblem of
the moon, receives on his head with great devotion the Ganges water emanating
from the toe of Viñëu. Being aware of religious principles, Bali Mahäräja knew
this. Consequently, following in the footsteps of Lord Çiva, he also placed on his
head the water that had washed the Lord's lotus feet.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva is known as Gaìgä-dhara, or one who carries the water of the
Ganges on his head. On Lord Çiva's forehead is the emblem of the half-moon,
yet to give supreme respect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Çiva
placed the water of the Ganges above this emblem. This example should be
followed by everyone, or at least by every devotee, because Lord Çiva is one of
the mahäjanas. Similarly, Mahäräja Bali also later became a mahäjana. One
mahäjana follows another mahäjana, and by following the paramparä system of
mahäjana activities one can become advanced in spiritual consciousness. The
water of the Ganges is sanctified because it emanates from the toe of Lord
Viñëu. Bali Mahäräja washed the lotus feet of Vämanadeva, and the water with
which he did so became equal to the Ganges. Bali Mahäräja, who perfectly
knew all religious principles, therefore took that water on his head, following
in the footsteps of Lord Çiva.
TEXT 29
é[qbil/åvac
SvaGaTa& Tae NaMaSTau>Ya& b]øiNk&- k-rvaMa Tae )
b]øzs<aa& TaPa" Saa+aaNMaNYae TvaYaR vPauDaRrMa( )) 29 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
764
çré-balir uväca
svägataà te namas tubhyaà
brahman kià karaväma te
brahmarñéëäà tapaù säkñän
manye tvärya vapur-dharam
SYNONYMS
çré-baliù uväca—Bali Mahäräja said; su-ägatam—all welcome; te—unto You;
namaù tubhyam—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; brahman—O
brähmaëa; kim—what; karaväma—can we do; te—for You;
brahma-åñéëäm—of the great brähmaëa sages; tapaù—austerity;
säkñät—directly; manye—I think; tvä—You; ärya—O noble one;
vapuù-dharam—personified.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja then said to Lord Vämanadeva: O brähmaëa, I offer You my
hearty welcome and my respectful obeisances. Please let us know what we may
do for You. We think of You as the personified austerity of the great
brähmaëa-sages.
TEXT 30
AÛ Na" iPaTarSTa*áa AÛ Na" PaaivTa& ku-l/Ma( )
AÛ iSví" §-TaurYa& Yad( >avaNaaGaTaae Ga*haNa( )) 30 ))
adya naù pitaras tåptä
adya naù pävitaà kulam
adya sviñöaù kratur ayaà
yad bhavän ägato gåhän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
765
SYNONYMS
adya—today; naù—our; pitaraù—forefathers; tåptäù—satisfied; adya—today;
naù—our; pävitam—purified; kulam—the whole family; adya—today;
su-iñöaù—properly executed; kratuù—the sacrifice; ayam—this; yat—because;
bhavän—Your Lordship; ägataù—arrived; gåhän—at our residence.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, because You have kindly arrived at our home, all my forefathers
are satisfied, our family and entire dynasty have been sanctified, and the
sacrifice we are performing is now complete because of Your presence.
TEXT 31
AÛaGanYaae Mae SauhuTaa YaQaaiviDa
iÜJaaTMaJa TvÀr<aavNaeJaNaE" )
hTaa&hSaae vai>aRirYa& c >aUrhae
TaQaa PauNaqTaa TaNaui>a" PadESTav )) 31 ))
adyägnayo me suhutä yathä-vidhi
dvijätmaja tvac-caraëävanejanaiù
hatäàhaso värbhir iyaà ca bhür aho
tathä punétä tanubhiù padais tava
SYNONYMS
adya—today; agnayaù—the sacrificial fires; me—executed by me;
su-hutäù—properly offered oblations; yathä-vidhi—in terms of the çästric
injunction; dvija-ätmaja—O son of a brähmaëa;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
766
tvat-caraëa-avanejanaiù—which washed Your lotus feet; hata-aàhasaù—who
have become cleansed of all sinful reactions; värbhiù—by the water;
iyam—this; ca—also; bhüù—the surface of the globe; aho—oh; tathä—as well;
punétä—sanctified; tanubhiù—small; padaiù—by the touch of the lotus feet;
tava—Your.
TRANSLATION
O son of a brähmaëa, today the fire of sacrifice is ablaze according to the
injunction of the çästra, and I have been freed from all the sinful reactions of
my life by the water that has washed Your lotus feet. O my Lord, by the touch
of Your small lotus feet the entire surface of the world has been sanctified.
TEXT 32
Yad( Yad( v$=ae vaH^iSa TaTPa[TaqC^ Mae
TvaMaiQaRNa& ivPa[SauTaaNauTakR-Yae )
Gaa& k-aÄNa& Gau<avd( DaaMa Ma*í&
TaQaaàPaeYaMauTa va ivPa[k-NYaaMa( )
Ga]aMaaNa( SaMa*Öa&STaurGaaNa( GaJaaNa( va
rQaa&STaQaahRtaMa SaMPa[TaqC^ )) 32 ))
yad yad vaöo väïchasi tat pratéccha me
tväm arthinaà vipra-sutänutarkaye
gäà käïcanaà guëavad dhäma måñöaà
tathänna-peyam uta vä vipra-kanyäm
grämän samåddhäàs turagän gajän vä
rathäàs tathärhattama sampratéccha
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
767
SYNONYMS
yat yat—whatever; vaöo—O brahmacäré; väïchasi—You desire; tat—that;
pratéccha—You may take; me—from me; tväm—You; arthinam—desiring
something; vipra-suta—O son of a brähmaëa; anutarkaye—I consider; gäm—a
cow; käïcanam—gold; guëavat dhäma—a furnished residence;
måñöam—palatable; tathä—as well as; anna—food grains; peyam—drink;
uta—indeed; vä—either; vipra-kanyäm—the daughter of a brähmaëa;
grämän—villages; samåddhän—prosperous; turagän—horses;
gajän—elephants; vä—either; rathän—chariots; tathä—as well as;
arhat-tama—O best of those who are worshipable; sampratéccha—You may
take.
TRANSLATION
O son of a brähmaëa, it appears that You have come here to ask me for
something. Therefore, whatever You want You may take from me. O best of
those who are worshipable. You may take from me a cow, gold, a furnished
house, palatable food and drink, the daughter of a brähmaëa for Your wife,
prosperous villages, horses, elephants, chariots or whatever You desire.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Eighteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Vämanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation."
19. Lord Vämanadeva Begs Charity from Bali Mahäräja
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
768
This Nineteenth Chapter describes how Lord Vämanadeva asked for three
paces of land in charity, how Bali Mahäräja agreed to His proposal, and how
Çukräcärya forbade Bali Mahäräja to fulfill Lord Vämanadeva's request.
When Bali Mahäräja, thinking Vämanadeva to be the son of a brähmaëa,
told Him to ask for anything He liked, Lord Vämanadeva praised
Hiraëyakaçipu and Hiraëyäkña for their heroic activities, and after thus
praising the family in which Bali Mahäräja had been born, He begged the King
for three paces of land. Bali Mahäräja agreed to give this land in charity, since
this was very insignificant, but Çukräcärya, who could understand that
Vämanadeva was Viñëu, the friend of the demigods, forbade Bali Mahäräja to
give this land. Çukräcärya advised Bali Mahäräja to withdraw his promise. He
explained that in subduing others, in joking, in responding to danger, in acting
for the welfare of others, and so on, one could refuse to fulfill one's promise,
and there would be no fault. By this philosophy, Çukräcärya tried to dissuade
Bali Mahäräja from giving land to Lord Vämanadeva.
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
wiTa vEraecNaevaRKYa& DaMaRYau¢&- Sa SaUNa*TaMa( )
iNaXaMYa >aGavaNPa[qTa" Pa[iTaNaNÛedMab]vqTa( )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti vairocaner väkyaà
dharma-yuktaà sa sünåtam
niçamya bhagavän prétaù
pratinandyedam abravét
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; vairocaneù—of the son
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
769
of Virocana; väkyam—the words; dharma-yuktam—in terms of religious
principles; saù—He; sü-nåtam—very pleasing; niçamya—hearing;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prétaù—completely pleased;
pratinandya—congratulating him; idam—the following words; abravét—said.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: When the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Vämanadeva, heard Bali Mahäräja speaking in this pleasing way, He was very
satisfied, for Bali Mahäräja had spoken in terms of religious principles. Thus the
Lord began to praise him.
TEXT 2
é[q>aGavaNauvac
vcSTavETaÂNadev SaUNa*Ta&
ku-l/aeicTa& DaMaRYauTa& YaXaSk-rMa( )
YaSYa Pa[Maa<a& >a*Gav" SaaMParaYae
iPaTaaMah" ku-l/v*Ö" Pa[XaaNTa" )) 2 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
vacas tavaitaj jana-deva sünåtaà
kulocitaà dharma-yutaà yaças-karam
yasya pramäëaà bhågavaù sämparäye
pitämahaù kula-våddhaù praçäntaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; vacaù—words;
tava—your; etat—this kind of; jana-deva—O King of the people;
sü-nåtam—very true; kula-ucitam—exactly befitting your dynasty;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
770
dharma-yutam—completely in accord with the principles of religion;
yaçaù-karam—fit for spreading your reputation; yasya—of whom;
pramäëam—the evidence; bhågavaù—the brähmaëas of the Bhågu dynasty;
sämparäye—in the next world; pitämahaù—your grandfather;
kula-våddhaù—the oldest in the family; praçäntaù—very peaceful (Prahläda
Mahäräja).
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O King, you are indeed exalted
because your present advisors are the brähmaëas who are descendants of Bhågu
and because your instructor for your future life is your grandfather, the
peaceful and venerable Prahläda Mahäräja. Your statements are very true, and
they completely agree with religious etiquette. They are in keeping with the
behavior of your family, and they enhance your reputation.
PURPORT
Prahläda Mahäräja is a vivid example of a pure devotee. Someone might
argue that since Prahläda Mahäräja, even though very old, was attached to his
family, and specifically to his grandson Bali Mahäräja, how could he be an
ideal example? Therefore this verse uses the word praçäntaù. A devotee is
always sober. He is never disturbed by any conditions. Even if a devotee
remains in gåhastha life and does not renounce material possessions, he should
still be understood to be praçänta, sober, because of his pure devotion to the
Lord. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore said:
kibä vipra, kibä nyäsé, çüdra kene naya
yei kåñëa-tattva-vettä, sei 'guru' haya
"Whether one is a brähmaëa, a sannyäsé or a çüdra-regardless of what he is-he
can become a spiritual master if he knows the science of Kåñëa." (Cc. Madhya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
771
8.128) Anyone completely aware of the science of Kåñëa, regardless of his
status in life, is a guru. Thus Prahläda Mahäräja is a guru in all circumstances.
Here His Lordship Vämanadeva also teaches sannyäsés and brahmacärés that
one should not ask more than necessary. He wanted only three paces of land,
although Bali Mahäräja wanted to give Him anything He wanted.
TEXT 3
Na ùeTaiSMaNku-le/ k-iêià"Satv" k*-Pa<a" PauMaaNa( )
Pa[TYaa:YaaTaa Pa[iTaé[uTYa Yaae vadaTaa iÜJaaTaYae )) 3 ))
na hy etasmin kule kaçcin
niùsattvaù kåpaëaù pumän
pratyäkhyätä pratiçrutya
yo vädätä dvijätaye
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—indeed; etasmin—in this; kule—in the dynasty or family;
kaçcit—anyone; niùsattvaù—poor-minded; kåpaëaù—miser; pumän—any
person; pratyäkhyätä—refuses; pratiçrutya—after promising to give; yaù
vä—either; adätä—not being charitable; dvijätaye—unto the brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
I know that even until now, no one taking birth in your family has been
poor-minded or miserly. No one has refused to give charity to brähmaëas, nor
after promising to give charity has anyone failed to fulfill his promise.
TEXT 4
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
772
Na SaiNTa TaqQaeR YauiDa caiQaRNaaiQaRTaa"
Parax(Mau%a Yae TvMaNaiSvNaae Na*Pa )
YauZMaTku-le/ YaÛXaSaaMale/Na
Pa[had oÙaiTa YaQaae@uPa" %e )) 4 ))
na santi térthe yudhi cärthinärthitäù
paräìmukhä ye tv amanasvino nåpa
yuñmat-kule yad yaçasämalena
prahräda udbhäti yathoòupaù khe
SYNONYMS
na—not; santi—there are; térthe—in holy places (where charity is given);
yudhi—in the battlefield; ca—also; arthinä—by a brähmaëa or a kñatriya;
arthitäù—who have been asked; paräìmukhäù—who refused their prayers;
ye—such persons; tu—indeed; amanasvinaù—such low-minded, low-grade
kings; nåpa—O King (Bali Mahäräja); yuñmat-kule—in your dynasty;
yat—therein; yaçasä amalena—by impeccable reputation;
prahrädaù—Prahläda Mahäräja; udbhäti—arises; yathä—as; uòupaù—the
moon; khe—in the sky.
TRANSLATION
O King Bali, never in your dynasty has the low-minded King been born who
upon being requested has refused charity to brähmaëas in holy places or a fight
to kñatriyas on a battlefield. And your dynasty is even more glorious due to the
presence of Prahläda Mahäräja, who is like the beautiful moon in the sky.
PURPORT
The symptoms of a kñatriya are given in Bhagavad-gétä. One of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
773
qualifications is the willingness to give charity (däna). A kñatriya does not
refuse to give charity when requested by a brähmaëa, nor can he refuse to fight
another kñatriya. A king who does refuse is called low-minded. In the dynasty
of Bali Mahäräja there were no such low-minded kings.
TEXT 5
YaTaae JaaTaae ihr<Yaa+aêràek- wMaa& MahqMa( )
Pa[iTavqr& idiGvJaYae NaaivNdTa GadaYauDa" )) 5 ))
yato jäto hiraëyäkñaç
carann eka imäà mahém
prativéraà dig-vijaye
nävindata gadäyudhaù
SYNONYMS
yataù—in which dynasty; jätaù—was born; hiraëyäkñaù—the king named
Hiraëyäkña; caran—wandering; ekaù—alone; imäm—this; mahém—surface of
the globe; prativéram—a rival hero; dik-vijaye—for conquering all directions;
na avindata—could not get; gadä-äyudhaù—bearing his own club.
TRANSLATION
It was in your dynasty that Hiraëyäkña was born. Carrying only his own
club, he wandered the globe alone, without assistance, to conquer all directions,
and no hero he met could rival him.
TEXT 6
Ya& iviNaiJaRTYa k*-C^\e<a ivZ<au" +MaaeÖar AaGaTaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
774
AaTMaaNa& JaiYaNa& MaeNae TaÜqYa| >aUYaRNauSMarNa( )) 6 ))
yaà vinirjitya kåcchreëa
viñëuù kñmoddhära ägatam
ätmänaà jayinaà mene
tad-véryaà bhüry anusmaran
SYNONYMS
yam—whom; vinirjitya—after conquering; kåcchreëa—with great difficulty;
viñëuù—Lord Viñëu in His incarnation as a boar; kñmä-uddhäre—at the time
when the earth was delivered; ägatam—appeared before Him;
ätmänam—personally, Himself; jayinam—victorious; mene—considered;
tat-véryam—the prowess of Hiraëyäkña; bhüri—constantly, or more and more;
anusmaran—thinking about.
TRANSLATION
When delivering the earth from the Garbhodaka Sea, Lord Viñëu, in His
incarnation as a boar, killed Hiraëyäkña, who had appeared before Him. The
fight was severe, and the Lord killed Hiraëyäkña with great difficulty. Later, as
the Lord thought about the uncommon prowess of Hiraëyäkña, He felt Himself
victorious indeed.
TEXT 7
iNaXaMYa TaÜDa& >a]aTaa ihr<Yak-iXaPau" Paura )
hNTau& >a]aTa*h<a& §u-Öae JaGaaMa iNal/Ya& hre" )) 7 ))
niçamya tad-vadhaà bhrätä
hiraëyakaçipuù purä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
775
hantuà bhrätå-haëaà kruddho
jagäma nilayaà hareù
SYNONYMS
niçamya—after hearing; tat-vadham—the killing of Hiraëyäkña; bhrätä—the
brother; hiraëyakaçipuù—Hiraëyakaçipu; purä—formerly; hantum—just to
kill; bhrätå-haëam—the killer of his brother; kruddhaù—very angry;
jagäma—went; nilayam—to the residence; hareù—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
When Hiraëyakaçipu heard the news of his brother's being killed, with great
anger he went to the residence of Viñëu, the killer of his brother, wanting to
kill Lord Viñëu.
TEXT 8
TaMaaYaaNTa& SaMaal/aeKYa éUl/Paai<a& k*-TaaNTavTa( )
icNTaYaaMaaSa k-al/jae ivZ<auMaaRYaaivNaa& vr" )) 8 ))
tam äyäntaà samälokya
çüla-päëià kåtäntavat
cintayäm äsa käla-jïo
viñëur mäyävinäà varaù
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Hiraëyakaçipu); äyäntam—coming forward; samälokya—observing
minutely; çüla-päëim—with a trident in his hand; kåtänta-vat—just like death
personified; cintayäm äsa—thought; käla-jïaù—who knows the progress of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
776
time; viñëuù—Lord Viñëu; mäyävinäm—of all kinds of mystics; varaù—the
chief.
TRANSLATION
Seeing Hiraëyakaçipu coming forward bearing a trident in his hand like
personified death, Lord Viñëu, the best of all mystics and the knower of the
progress of time, thought as follows.
TEXT 9
YaTaae YaTaae_h& Ta}aaSaaE Ma*TYau" Pa[a<a>a*TaaiMav )
ATaae_hMaSYa ôdYa& Pa[ve+YaaiMa ParaGd*Xa" )) 9 ))
yato yato 'haà taträsau
måtyuù präëa-bhåtäm iva
ato 'ham asya hådayaà
pravekñyämi paräg-dåçaù
SYNONYMS
yataù yataù—wheresoever; aham—I; tatra—there indeed; asau—this
Hiraëyakaçipu; måtyuù—death; präëa-bhåtäm—of all living entities; iva—just
like; ataù—therefore; aham—I; asya—of him; hådayam—within the core of
the heart; pravekñyämi—shall enter; paräk-dåçaù—of a person who has only
external vision.
TRANSLATION
Wheresoever I go, Hiraëyakaçipu will follow Me, as death follows all living
entities. Therefore it is better for Me to enter the core of his heart, for then,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
777
because of his power to see only externally, he will not see Me.
TEXT 10
Wv& Sa iNaiêTYa irPaae" Xarqr‚
MaaDaavTaae iNaivRivXae_SaureNd] )
ìaSaaiNal/aNTaihRTaSaU+Madeh‚
STaTPa[a<arNDa]e<a ivivGanceTaa" )) 10 ))
evaà sa niçcitya ripoù çaréram
ädhävato nirviviçe 'surendra
çväsäniläntarhita-sükñma-dehas
tat-präëa-randhreëa vivigna-cetäù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; saù—He (Lord Viñëu); niçcitya—deciding; ripoù—of the
enemy; çaréram—the body; ädhävataù—who was running after Him with great
force; nirviviçe—entered; asura-indra—O King of the demons (Mahäräja Bali);
çväsa-anila—through the breathing; antarhita—invisible; sükñma-dehaù—in
his finer body; tat-präëa-randhreëa—through the hole of the nostril;
vivigna-cetäù—being very anxious.
TRANSLATION
Lord Vämanadeva continued: O King of the demons, after Lord Viñëu made
this decision, He entered the body of His enemy Hiraëyakaçipu, who was
running after Him with great force. In a subtle body inconceivable to
Hiraëyakaçipu, Lord Viñëu, who was in great anxiety, entered Hiraëyakaçipu's
nostril along with his breath.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
778
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is already in the core of everyone's
heart. Éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati (Bg. 18.61). Logically,
therefore, it was not at all difficult for Lord Viñëu to enter Hiraëyakaçipu's
body. The word vivigna-cetäù, "very anxious," is significant. It is not that Lord
Viñëu was afraid of Hiraëyakaçipu; rather, because of compassion, Lord Viñëu
was in anxiety about how to act for his welfare.
TEXT 11
Sa Taiàke-Ta& PairMa*XYa éUNYa‚
MaPaXYaMaaNa" ku-iPaTaae NaNaad )
+Maa& Ûa& idXa" %& ivvraNSaMaud]aNa(
ivZ<au& ivicNvNa( Na ddXaR vqr" )) 11 ))
sa tan-niketaà parimåçya çünyam
apaçyamänaù kupito nanäda
kñmäà dyäà diçaù khaà vivarän samudrän
viñëuà vicinvan na dadarça véraù
SYNONYMS
saù—that Hiraëyakaçipu; tat-niketam—the residence of Lord Viñëu;
parimåçya—searching; çünyam—vacant; apaçyamänaù—not seeing Lord
Viñëu; kupitaù—being very angry; nanäda—cried very loudly; kñmäm—on the
surface of the earth; dyäm—in outer space; diçaù—in all directions; kham—in
the sky; vivarän—in all the caves; samudrän—all the oceans; viñëum—Lord
Viñëu; vicinvan—searching for; na—not; dadarça—did see; véraù—although
he was very powerful.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
779
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing that the residence of Lord Viñëu was vacant, Hiraëyakaçipu
began searching for Lord Viñëu everywhere. Angry at not seeing Him,
Hiraëyakaçipu screamed loudly and searched the entire universe, including the
surface of the earth, the higher planetary systems, all directions and all the
caves and oceans. But Hiraëyakaçipu, the greatest hero, did not see Viñëu
anywhere.
TEXT 12
APaXYaiàiTa haevac MaYaaiNvíiMad& JaGaTa( )
>a]aTa*ha Mae GaTaae NaUNa& YaTaae NaavTaRTae PauMaaNa( )) 12 ))
apaçyann iti hoväca
mayänviñöam idaà jagat
bhrätå-hä me gato nünaà
yato nävartate pumän
SYNONYMS
apaçyan—not seeing Him; iti—in this way; ha uväca—uttered; mayä—by me;
anviñöam—has been sought; idam—the whole; jagat—universe;
bhrätå-hä—Lord Viñëu, who killed the brother; me—my; gataù—must have
gone; nünam—indeed; yataù—from where; na—not; ävartate—comes back;
pumän—a person.
TRANSLATION
Unable to see Him, Hiraëyakaçipu said, "I have searched the entire
universe, but I could not find Viñëu, who has killed my brother. Therefore, He
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
780
must certainly have gone to that place from which no one returns. [In other
words, He must now be dead.]"
PURPORT
Atheists generally follow the Bauddha philosophical conclusion that at
death everything is finished. Hiraëyakaçipu, being an atheist, thought this
way. Because Lord Viñëu was not visible to him, he thought that the Lord was
dead. Even today, many people follow the philosophy that God is dead. But
God is never dead. Even the living entity, who is part of God, never dies. Na
jäyate mriyate vä kadäcit: "For the soul there is never birth or death." This is
the statement of Bhagavad-gétä (2.20). Even the ordinary living entity never
takes birth or dies. What then is to be said of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is the chief of all living entities? He certainly never takes birth
or dies. Ajo'pi sann avyayätmä (Bg. 4.6). Both the Lord and the living entity
exist as unborn and inexhaustible personalities. Thus Hiraëyakaçipu's
conclusion that Viñëu was dead was wrong.
As indicated by the words yato nävartate pumän, there is certainly a
spiritual kingdom, and if the living entity goes there, he never returns to this
material world. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9): tyaktvä dehaà
punar janma naiti mäm eti so'rjuna. Materially speaking, every living entity
dies; death is inevitable. But those who are karmés, jïänés and yogés return to
this material world after death, whereas bhaktas do not. Of course, if a bhakta
is not completely perfect he takes birth in the material world again, but in a
very exalted position, either in a rich family or a family of the purest
brähmaëas (çucénäm çrématäà gehe [Bg. 6.41]), just to finish his development in
spiritual consciousness. Those who have completed the course of Kåñëa
consciousness and are free from material desire return to the abode of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (yad gatvä na nivartante tad dhäma paramaà
mama [Bg. 15.6]). Here the same fact is stated: yato nävartate pumän. Any
person who goes back home, back to Godhead, does not return to this material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
781
world.
TEXT 13
vEraNaubNDa WTaavaNaaMa*TYaaeirh deihNaaMa( )
AjaNaPa[>avae MaNYaurh&MaaNaaePab*&ihTa" )) 13 ))
vairänubandha etävän
ämåtyor iha dehinäm
ajïäna-prabhavo manyur
ahaà-mänopabåàhitaù
SYNONYMS
vaira-anubandhaù—enmity; etävän—so great; ämåtyoù—up to the point of
death; iha—in this; dehinäm—of persons too involved in the bodily concept of
life; ajïäna-prabhavaù—because of the great influence of ignorance;
manyuù—anger; aham-mäna—by egotism; upabåàhitaù—expanded.
TRANSLATION
Hiraëyakaçipu's anger against Lord Viñëu persisted until his death. Other
people in the bodily concept of life maintain anger only because of false ego and
the great influence of ignorance.
PURPORT
Generally speaking, even though the conditioned soul is angry, his anger is
not perpetual but temporary. It is due to the influence of ignorance.
Hiraëyakaçipu, however, maintained his enmity and his anger against Lord
Viñëu until the point of death. He never forgot his vengeful attitude toward
Viñëu for having killed his brother, Hiraëyäkña. Others in the bodily concept
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
782
of life are angry at their enemies but not at Lord Viñëu. Hiraëyakaçipu,
however, was everlastingly angry. He was angry not only because of false
prestige but also because of continuous enmity toward Viñëu.
TEXT 14
iPaTaa Pa[hadPau}aSTae TaiÜÜaiNÜJavTSal/" )
SvMaaYauiÜRJail/(r)e>Yaae deve>Yaae_daTa( Sa YaaicTa" )) 14 ))
pitä prahräda-putras te
tad-vidvän dvija-vatsalaù
svam äyur dvija-liìgebhyo
devebhyo 'dät sa yäcitaù
SYNONYMS
pitä—father; prahräda-putraù—the son of Mahäräja Prahläda; te—your;
tat-vidvän—although it was known to him; dvija-vatsalaù—still, because of his
affinity for brähmaëas; svam—his own; äyuù—duration of life;
dvija-liìgebhyaù—who were dressed like brähmaëas; devebhyaù—unto the
demigods; adät—delivered; saù—he; yäcitaù—being so requested.
TRANSLATION
Your father, Virocana, the son of Mahäräja Prahläda, was very affectionate
toward brähmaëas. Although he knew very well that it was the demigods who
had come to him in the dress of brähmaëas, at their request he delivered to
them the duration of his life.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Virocana, Bali's father, was so pleased with the brähmaëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
783
community that even though he knew that those approaching him for charity
were the demigods in the dress of brähmaëas, he nonetheless agreed to give it.
TEXT 15
>avaNaacirTaaNDaMaaRNaaiSQaTaae Ga*hMaeiDai>a" )
b]aø<aE" PaUvRJaE" éUrErNYaEêaeÕaMak-IiTaRi>a" )) 15 ))
bhavän äcaritän dharmän
ästhito gåhamedhibhiù
brähmaëaiù pürvajaiù çürair
anyaiç coddäma-kértibhiù
SYNONYMS
bhavän—your good self; äcaritän—executed; dharmän—religious principles;
ästhitaù—being situated; gåhamedhibhiù—by persons in household life;
brähmaëaiù—by the brähmaëas; pürva-jaiù—by your forefathers; çüraiù—by
great heroes; anyaiù ca—and others also; uddäma-kértibhiù—very highly
elevated and famous.
TRANSLATION
You also have observed the principles followed by great personalities who are
householder brähmaëas, by your forefathers and by great heroes who are
extremely famous for their exalted activities.
TEXT 16
TaSMaaTa( Tvtaae MahqMaqzd( v*<ae_h& vrdzR>aaTa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
784
PadaiNa }aqi<a dETYaeNd] SaiMMaTaaiNa Pada MaMa )) 16 ))
tasmät tvatto mahém éñad
våëe 'haà varadarñabhät
padäni tréëi daityendra
sammitäni padä mama
SYNONYMS
tasmät—from such a person; tvattaù—from Your Majesty; mahém—land;
éñat—very little; våëe—am asking for; aham—I; varada-åñabhät—from the
personality who can give charity munificently; padäni—footsteps; tréëi—three;
daitya-indra—O King of the Daityas; sammitäni—to the measurement of;
padä—by a foot; mama—My.
TRANSLATION
O King of the Daityas, from Your Majesty, who come from such a noble
family and who are able to give charity munificently, I ask only three paces of
land, to the measurement of My steps.
PURPORT
Lord Vämanadeva wanted three paces of land according to the
measurement of His footsteps. He did not want more than necessary. But
although He pretended to be an ordinary human child, He actually wanted the
land comprising the upper, middle and lower planetary systems. This was just
to show the prowess of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 17
NaaNYaTa( Tae k-aMaYae raJaNvdaNYaaÂGadqìraTa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
785
NaENa" Pa[aPanaeiTa vE ivÜaNYaavdQaRPa[iTaGa]h" )) 17 ))
nänyat te kämaye räjan
vadänyäj jagad-éçvarät
nainaù präpnoti vai vidvän
yävad-artha-pratigrahaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; anyat—anything else; te—from you; kämaye—I beg; räjan—O King;
vadänyät—who are so munificent; jagat-éçvarät—who are the king of the
entire universe; na—not; enaù—distress; präpnoti—gets; vai—indeed;
vidvän—one who is learned; yävat-artha—as much as one needs;
pratigrahaù—taking charity from others.
TRANSLATION
O King, controller of the entire universe, although you are very munificent
and are able to give Me as much land as I want, I do not want anything from
you that is unnecessary. If a learned brähmaëa takes charity from others only
according to his needs, he does not become entangled in sinful activities.
PURPORT
A brähmaëa or sannyäsé is qualified to ask charity from others, but if he
takes more than necessary he is punishable. No one can use more of the
Supreme Lord's property than necessary. Lord Vämanadeva indirectly
indicated to Bali Mahäräja that he was occupying more land than he needed.
In the material world, all distresses are due to extravagance. One acquires
money extravagantly and also spends it extravagantly. Such activities are
sinful. All property belongs to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and all
living beings, who are sons of the Supreme Lord, have the right to use the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
786
Supreme Father's property, but one cannot take more than necessary. This
principle should especially be followed by brähmaëas and sannyäsés who live at
the cost of others. Thus Vämanadeva was an ideal beggar, for He asked only
three paces of land. Of course, there is a difference between His footsteps and
those of an ordinary human being. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, by
His inconceivable prowess, can occupy the entire universe, including the
upper, lower and middle planetary systems, by the unlimited measurement of
His footsteps.
TEXT 18
é[qbil/åvac
Ahae b]aø<adaYaad vacSTae v*ÖSaMMaTaa" )
Tv& bal/ae bail/XaMaiTa" SvaQa| Pa[TYabuDaae YaQaa )) 18 ))
çré-balir uväca
aho brähmaëa-däyäda
väcas te våddha-sammatäù
tvaà bälo bäliça-matiù
svärthaà praty abudho yathä
SYNONYMS
çré-baliù uväca—Bali Mahäräja said; aho—alas; brähmaëa-däyäda—O son of a
brähmaëa; väcaù—the words; te—of You; våddha-sammatäù—are certainly
acceptable to learned and elderly persons; tvam—You; bälaù—a boy;
bäliça-matiù—without sufficient knowledge; sva-artham—self-interest;
prati—toward; abudhaù—not knowing sufficiently; yathä—as it should have
been.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
787
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja said: O son of a brähmaëa, Your instructions are as good as
those of learned and elderly persons. Nonetheless, You are a boy, and Your
intelligence is insufficient. Thus You are not very prudent in regard to Your
self-interest.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being full in Himself, actually has
nothing to want for His self-interest. Lord Vämanadeva, therefore, had not
gone to Bali Mahäräja for His own self-interest. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(5.29), bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà sarva-loka-maheçvaram. The Lord is the
proprietor of all planets, in both the material and spiritual worlds. Why should
He be in want of land? Bali Mahäräja rightly said that Lord Vämanadeva was
not at all prudent in regard to His own personal interests. Lord Vämanadeva
had approached Bali not for His personal welfare but for the welfare of His
devotees. Devotees sacrifice all personal interests to satisfy the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and similarly the Supreme Lord, although having no
personal interests, can do anything for the interests of His devotees. One who
is full in himself has no personal interests.
TEXT 19
Maa& vcaei>a" SaMaaraDYa l/aek-aNaaMaek-MaqìrMa( )
Pad}aYa& v*<aqTae Yaae_buiÖMaaNa( ÜqPadaéuzMa( )) 19 ))
mäà vacobhiù samärädhya
lokänäm ekam éçvaram
pada-trayaà våëéte yo
'buddhimän dvépa-däçuñam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
788
SYNONYMS
mäm—me; vacobhiù—by sweet words; samärädhya—after sufficiently pleasing;
lokänäm—of all the planets in this universe; ekam—the one and only;
éçvaram—master, controller; pada-trayam—three feet; våëéte—is asking for;
yaù—He who; abuddhimän—not very intelligent; dvépa-däçuñam—because I
can give You an entire island.
TRANSLATION
I am able to give You an entire island because I am the proprietor of the
three divisions of the universe. You have come to take something from me and
have pleased me by Your sweet words, but You are asking only three paces of
land. Therefore You are not very intelligent.
PURPORT
According to Vedic understanding, the entire universe is regarded as an
ocean of space. In that ocean there are innumerable planets, and each planet is
called a dvépa, or island. When approached by Lord Vämanadeva, Bali
Mahäräja was actually in possession of all the dvépas, or islands in space. Bali
Mahäräja was very pleased to see the features of Vämanadeva and was ready to
give Him as much land as He could ask, but because Lord Vämanadeva asked
only three paces of land, Bali Mahäräja considered Him not very intelligent.
TEXT 20
Na PauMaaNa( MaaMauPav]JYa >aUYaae YaaicTauMahRiTa )
TaSMaad( v*itak-rq& >aUiMa& v$=ae k-aMa& Pa[TaqC^ Mae )) 20 ))
na pumän mäm upavrajya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
789
bhüyo yäcitum arhati
tasmäd våttikaréà bhümià
vaöo kämaà pratéccha me
SYNONYMS
na—not; pumän—any person; mäm—unto me; upavrajya—after approaching;
bhüyaù—again; yäcitum—to beg; arhati—deserves; tasmät—therefore;
våtti-karém—suitable to maintain Yourself; bhümim—such land; vaöo—O small
brahmacäré; kämam—according to the necessities of life; pratéccha—take;
me—from me.
TRANSLATION
O small boy, one who approaches me to beg something should not have to
ask anything more, anywhere. Therefore, if You wish, You may ask from me as
much land as will suffice to maintain You according to Your needs.
TEXT 21
é[q>aGavaNauvac
YaavNTaae ivzYaa" Pa[eïaiñl/aeKYaaMaiJaTaeiNd]YaMa( )
Na Xa¥u-viNTa Tae SaveR Pa[iTaPaUriYaTau& Na*Pa )) 21 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
yävanto viñayäù preñöhäs
tri-lokyäm ajitendriyam
na çaknuvanti te sarve
pratipürayituà nåpa
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
790
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; yävantaù—as
far as possible; viñayäù—the objects of sense enjoyment; preñöhäù—pleasing to
anyone; tri-lokyäm—within these three worlds; ajita-indriyam—a person who
is not self-controlled; na çaknuvanti—are unable; te—all those; sarve—taken
together; pratipürayitum—to satisfy; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead said: O my dear King, even the entirety of
whatever there may be within the three worlds to satisfy one's senses cannot
satisfy a person whose senses are uncontrolled.
PURPORT
The material world is an illusory energy to deviate the living entities from
the path of self-realization. Anyone who is in this material world is extremely
anxious to get more and more things for sense gratification. Actually, however,
the purpose of life is not sense gratification but self-realization. Therefore,
those who are too addicted to sense gratification are advised to practice the
mystic yoga system, or añöäìga-yoga system, consisting of yama, niyama, äsana,
präëäyäma, pratyähära and so on. In this way, one can control the senses. The
purpose of controlling the senses is to stop one's implication in the cycle of
birth and death. As stated by Åñabhadeva:
nünaà pramattaù kurute vikarma
yad indriya-prétaya äpåëoti
na sädhu manye yata ätmano 'yam
asann api kleçada äsa dehaù
"When a person considers sense gratification the aim of life, he certainly
becomes mad after materialistic living and engages in all kinds of sinful
activity. He does not know that due to his past misdeeds he has already
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
791
received a body which, although temporary, is the cause of his misery. Actually
the living entity should not have taken on a material body, but he has been
awarded the material body for sense gratification. Therefore I think it not
befitting an intelligent man to involve himself again in the activities of sense
gratification, by which he perpetually gets material bodies one after another."
(SB 5.5.4)
Thus according to Åñabhadeva the human beings in this material world are
just like madmen engaged in activities which they should not perform but
which they do perform only for sense gratification. Such activities are not
good because in this way one creates another body for his next life, as
punishment for his nefarious activities. And as soon as he gets another
material body, he is put into repeated suffering in material existence.
Therefore the Vedic culture or brahminical culture teaches one how to be
satisfied with possessing the minimum necessities in life.
To teach this highest culture, varëäçrama-dharma is recommended. The
aim of the varëäçrama divisions—brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya, çüdra,
brahmacarya, gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa—is to train one to control
the senses and be content with the bare necessities. Here Lord Vämanadeva, as
an ideal brahmacäré, refuses Bali Mahäräja's offer to give Him anything He
might want. He says that without contentment one could not be happy even if
he possessed the property of the entire world or the entire universe. In human
society, therefore, the brahminical culture, kñatriya culture and vaiçya culture
must be maintained, and people must be taught how to be satisfied with only
what they need. In modern civilization there is no such education; everyone
tries to possess more and more, and everyone is dissatisfied and unhappy. The
Kåñëa consciousness movement is therefore establishing various farms,
especially in America, to show how to be happy and content with minimum
necessities of life and to save time for self-realization, which one can very
easily achieve by chanting the mahä-mantra—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa
Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
792
TEXT 22
i}ai>a" §-MaErSaNTauíae ÜqPaeNaaiPa Na PaUYaRTae )
NavvzRSaMaeTaeNa SaáÜqPavreC^Yaa )) 22 ))
tribhiù kramair asantuñöo
dvépenäpi na püryate
nava-varña-sametena
sapta-dvépa-varecchayä
SYNONYMS
tribhiù—three; kramaiù—by steps; asantuñöaù—one who is dissatisfied;
dvépena—by a complete island; api—although; na püryate—cannot be
satisfied; nava-varña-sametena—even by possessing nine varñas;
sapta-dvépa-vara-icchayä—by the desire to take possession of seven islands.
TRANSLATION
If I were not satisfied with three paces of land, then surely I would not be
satisfied even with possessing one of the seven islands, consisting of nine varñas.
Even if I possessed one island, I would hope to get others.
TEXT 23
SaáÜqPaaiDaPaTaYaae Na*Paa vE<YaGaYaadYa" )
AQaOE" k-aMaEGaRTaa NaaNTa& Ta*Z<aaYaa wiTa Na" é[uTaMa( )) 23 ))
sapta-dvépädhipatayo
nåpä vaiëya-gayädayaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
793
arthaiù kämair gatä näntaà
tåñëäyä iti naù çrutam
SYNONYMS
sapta-dvépa-adhipatayaù—those who are proprietors of the seven islands;
nåpäù—such kings; vaiëya-gaya-ädayaù—Mahäräja Påthu, Mahäräja Gaya and
others; arthaiù—for fulfillment of ambition; kämaiù—for satisfying one's
desires; gatäù na—could not reach; antam—the end; tåñëäyäù—of their
ambitions; iti—thus; naù—by Us; çrutam—has been heard.
TRANSLATION
We have heard that although powerful kings like Mahäräja Påthu and
Mahäräja Gaya achieved proprietorship over the seven dvépas, they could not
achieve satisfaction or find the end of their ambitions.
TEXT 24
Yad*C^YaaePaPaàeNa SaNTauíae vTaRTae Sau%Ma( )
NaaSaNTauíiñi>al/aeRkE-riJaTaaTMaaePaSaaidTaE" )) 24 ))
yadåcchayopapannena
santuñöo vartate sukham
näsantuñöas tribhir lokair
ajitätmopasäditaiù
SYNONYMS
yadåcchayä—as offered by the supreme authority according to one's karma;
upapannena—by whatever is obtained; santuñöaù—one should be satisfied;
vartate—there is; sukham—happiness; na—not; asantuñöaù—one who is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
794
dissatisfied; tribhiù lokaiù—even by possessing the three worlds;
ajita-ätmä—one who cannot control his senses; upasäditaiù—even though
obtained.
TRANSLATION
One should be satisfied with whatever he achieves by his previous destiny,
for discontent can never bring happiness. A person who is not self-controlled
will not be happy even with possessing the three worlds.
PURPORT
If happiness is the ultimate goal of life, one must be satisfied with the
position in which he is placed by providence. This instruction is also given by
Prahläda Mahäräja:
sukham aindriyakaà daityä
deha-yogena dehinäm
sarvatra labhyate daiväd
yathä duùkham ayatnataù
"My dear friends born of demoniac families, the happiness perceived with
reference to the sense objects by contact with the body can be obtained in any
form of life, according to one's past fruitive activities. Such happiness is
automatically obtained without endeavor, just as we obtain distress." (SB 7.6.3)
This philosophy is perfect in regard to obtaining happiness.
Real happiness is described in Bhagavad-gétä (6.21):
sukham ätyantikaà yat tad
buddhi-grähyam aténdriyam
vetti yatra na caiväyaà
sthitaç calati tattvataù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
795
"In the spiritually joyous state, one is situated in boundless transcendental
happiness and enjoys himself through transcendental senses. Established thus,
one never departs from the truth." One has to perceive happiness by the
supersenses. The supersenses are not the senses of the material elements. Every
one of us is a spiritual being (ahaà brahmäsmi(82)), and every one of us is an
individual person. Our senses are now covered by material elements, and
because of ignorance we consider the material senses that cover us to be our
real senses. The real senses, however, are within the material covering.
Dehino'smin yathä dehe: [Bg. 2.13] within the covering of the material elements
are the spiritual senses. Sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà tat-paratvena nirmalam: [Cc.
Madhya 19.170] when the spiritual senses are uncovered, by these senses we can
be happy. Satisfaction of the spiritual senses is thus described: håñékeëa
håñékeça-sevanaà bhaktir ucyate. When the senses are engaged in devotional
service to Håñékeça, then the senses are completely satisfied. Without this
superior knowledge of sense gratification, one may try to satisfy his material
senses, but happiness will never be possible. One may increase his ambition for
sense gratification and even achieve what he desires for the gratification of his
senses, but because this is on the material platform, he will never achieve
satisfaction and contentment.
According to brahminical culture, one should be content with whatever he
obtains without special endeavor and should cultivate spiritual consciousness.
Then he will be happy. The purpose of the Kåñëa consciousness movement is
to spread this understanding. People who do not have scientific spiritual
knowledge mistakenly think that the members of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement are escapists trying to avoid material activities. In fact, however, we
are engaged in real activities for obtaining the ultimate happiness in life. If
one is not trained to satisfy the spiritual senses and continues in material sense
gratification, he will never obtain happiness that is eternal and blissful.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (5.5.1) therefore recommends:
tapo divyaà putrakä yena sattvaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
796
çuddhyed yasmäd brahma-saukhyaà tv anantam
One must practice austerity so that his existential position will be purified and
he will achieve unlimited blissful life.
TEXT 25
Pau&Saae_Ya& Sa&Sa*TaeheRTaurSaNTaaezae_QaRk-aMaYaae" )
Yad*C^YaaePaPaàeNa SaNTaaezae Mau¢-Yae SMa*Ta" )) 25 ))
puàso 'yaà saàsåter hetur
asantoño 'rtha-kämayoù
yadåcchayopapannena
santoño muktaye småtaù
SYNONYMS
puàsaù—of the living entity; ayam—this; saàsåteù—of the continuation of
material existence; hetuù—the cause; asantoñaù—dissatisfaction with his
destined achievement; artha-kämayoù—for the sake of lusty desires and
getting more and more money; yadåcchayä—with the gift of destiny;
upapannena—which has been achieved; santoñaù—satisfaction; muktaye—for
liberation; småtaù—is considered fit.
TRANSLATION
Material existence causes discontent in regard to fulfilling one's lusty desires
and achieving more and more money. This is the cause for the continuation of
material life, which is full of repeated birth and death. But one who is satisfied
by that which is obtained by destiny is fit for liberation from this material
existence.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
797
TEXT 26
Yad*C^al/a>aTauíSYa TaeJaae ivPa[SYa vDaRTae )
TaTa( Pa[XaaMYaTYaSaNTaaezadM>aSaevaéuéu+ai<a" )) 26 ))
yadåcchä-läbha-tuñöasya
tejo viprasya vardhate
tat praçämyaty asantoñäd
ambhaseväçuçukñaëiù
SYNONYMS
yadåcchä-läbha-tuñöasya—who is satisfied by things obtained by the grace of
God; tejaù—the brilliant effulgence; viprasya—of a brähmaëa;
vardhate—increases; tat—that (effulgence); praçämyati—is diminished;
asantoñät—because of dissatisfaction; ambhasä—by pouring of water; iva—as;
äçuçukñaëiù—a fire.
TRANSLATION
A brähmaëa who is satisfied with whatever is providentially obtained is
increasingly enlightened with spiritual power, but the spiritual potency of a
dissatisfied brähmaëa decreases, as fire diminishes in potency when water is
sprinkled upon it.
TEXT 27
TaSMaaTa( }aqi<a PadaNYaev v*<ae Tvd( vrdzR>aaTa( )
WTaavTaEv iSaÖae_h& ivta& YaavTPa[YaaeJaNaMa( )) 27 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
798
tasmät tréëi padäny eva
våëe tvad varadarñabhät
etävataiva siddho 'haà
vittaà yävat prayojanam
SYNONYMS
tasmät—because of being satisfied by things easily obtained; tréëi—three;
padäni—steps; eva—indeed; våëe—I ask; tvat—from your good self;
varada-åñabhät—who are a munificent benedictor; etävatä eva—merely by
such an endowment; siddhaù aham—I shall feel full satisfaction;
vittam—achievement; yävat—as far as; prayojanam—is needed.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O King, from you, the best of those who give charity, I ask only
three paces of land. By such a gift I shall be very pleased, for the way of
happiness is to be fully satisfied to receive that which is absolutely needed.
TEXT 28
é[qéuk- ovac
wTYau¢-" Sa hSaàah vaH^aTa" Pa[iTaGa*ùTaaMa( )
vaMaNaaYa Mahq& daTau& JaGa]ah Jal/>aaJaNaMa( )) 28 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ity uktaù sa hasann äha
väïchätaù pratigåhyatäm
vämanäya mahéà dätuà
jagräha jala-bhäjanam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
799
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti uktaù—thus being addressed;
saù—he (Bali Mahäräja); hasan—smiling; äha—said; väïchätaù—as You have
desired; pratigåhyatäm—now take from me; vämanäya—unto Lord Vämana;
mahém—land; dätum—to give; jagräha—took; jala-bhäjanam—the waterpot.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: When the Supreme Personality of Godhead
had thus spoken to Bali Mahäräja, Bali smiled and told Him, "All right. Take
whatever You like." To confirm his promise to give Vämanadeva the desired
land, he then took up his waterpot.
TEXT 29
ivZ<ave +Maa& Pa[daSYaNTaMauXaNaa ASaureìrMa( )
JaaNa&iêk-IizRTa& ivZ<aae" iXaZYa& Pa[ah ivda& vr" )) 29 ))
viñëave kñmäà pradäsyantam
uçanä asureçvaram
jänaàç cikérñitaà viñëoù
çiñyaà präha vidäà varaù
SYNONYMS
viñëave—unto Lord Viñëu (Vämanadeva); kñmäm—the land;
pradäsyantam—who was ready to deliver; uçanäù—Çukräcärya;
asura-éçvaram—unto the King of the demons (Bali Mahäräja);
jänan—knowing well; cikérñitam—what was the plan; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu;
çiñyam—unto his disciple; präha—said; vidäm varaù—the best of the knowers
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
800
of everything.
TRANSLATION
Understanding Lord Viñëu's purpose, Çukräcärya, the best of the learned,
immediately spoke as follows to his disciple, who was about to offer everything
to Lord Vämanadeva.
TEXT 30
é[qéu§- ovac
Wz vEraecNae Saa+aad( >aGavaiNvZ<aurVYaYa" )
k-XYaPaadidTaeJaaRTaae devaNaa& k-aYaRSaaDak-" )) 30 ))
çré-çukra uväca
eña vairocane säkñäd
bhagavän viñëur avyayaù
kaçyapäd aditer jäto
devänäà kärya-sädhakaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukraù uväca—Çukräcärya said; eñaù—this (boy in the form of a dwarf);
vairocane—O son of Virocana; säkñät—directly; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; viñëuù—Lord Viñëu; avyayaù—without deterioration;
kaçyapät—from His father, Kaçyapa; aditeù—in the womb of His mother,
Aditi; jätaù—was born; devänäm—of the demigods; kärya-sädhakaù—working
in the interest.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
801
Çukräcärya said: O son of Virocana, this brahmacäré in the form of a dwarf
is directly the imperishable Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu. Accepting
Kaçyapa Muni as His father and Aditi as His mother, He has now appeared in
order to fulfill the interests of the demigods.
TEXT 31
Pa[iTaé[uTa& TvYaETaSMaE YadNaQaRMaJaaNaTaa )
Na SaaDau MaNYae dETYaaNaa& MahaNauPaGaTaae_NaYa" )) 31 ))
pratiçrutaà tvayaitasmai
yad anartham ajänatä
na sädhu manye daityänäà
mahän upagato 'nayaù
SYNONYMS
pratiçrutam—promised; tvayä—by you; etasmai—unto Him; yat
anartham—which is repugnant; ajänatä—by you who have no knowledge;
na—not; sädhu—very good; manye—I think; daityänäm—of the demons;
mahän—great; upagataù—has been achieved; anayaù—inauspiciousness.
TRANSLATION
You do not know what a dangerous position you have accepted by promising
to give Him land. I do not think that this promise is good for you. It will bring
great harm to the demons.
TEXT 32
Wz Tae SQaaNaMaEìYa| ié[Ya& TaeJaae YaXa" é[uTaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
802
daSYaTYaaiC^Û Xa§-aYa MaaYaaMaa<avk-ae hir" )) 32 ))
eña te sthänam aiçvaryaà
çriyaà tejo yaçaù çrutam
däsyaty äcchidya çakräya
mäyä-mäëavako hariù
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this person falsely appearing as a brahmacäré; te—of you; sthänam—the
land in possession; aiçvaryam—the riches; çriyam—the material beauty;
tejaù—the material power; yaçaù—the reputation; çrutam—the education;
däsyati—will give; äcchidya—taking from you; çakräya—unto your enemy,
Lord Indra; mäyä—falsely appearing; mäëavakaù—a brahmacäré son of a living
being; hariù—He is actually the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari.
TRANSLATION
This person falsely appearing as a brahmacäré is actually the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Hari, who has come in this form to take away all your
land, wealth, beauty, power, fame and education. After taking everything from
you, He will deliver it to Indra, your enemy.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains in this regard that the very
word hariù means "one who takes away." If one connects himself with Hari, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord takes away all his miseries, and in
the beginning the Lord also superficially appears to take away all his material
possessions, reputation, education and beauty. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(10.88.8), yasyäham anugåhëämi hariñye tad-dhanaà çanaiù. The Lord said to
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, "The first installment of My mercy toward a devotee is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
803
that I take away all his possessions, especially his material opulence, his
money." This is the special favor of the Lord toward a sincere devotee. If a
sincere devotee wants Kåñëa above everything but at the same time is attached
to material possessions, which hinder his advancement in Kåñëa consciousness,
by tactics the Lord takes away all his possessions. Here Çukräcärya says that
this dwarf brahmacäré would take away everything. Thus he indicates that the
Lord will take away all one's material possessions and also one's mind. If one
delivers his mind to the lotus feet of Kåñëa (sa vai manaù
kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]), one can naturally sacrifice everything to
satisfy Him. Although Bali Mahäräja was a devotee, he was attached to
material possessions, and therefore the Lord, being very kind to him, showed
him special favor by appearing as Lord Vämana to take away all his material
possessions, and his mind as well.
TEXT 33
i}ai>a" §-MaEirMaaçaek-aiNvìk-aYa" §-iMaZYaiTa )
SavRSv& ivZ<ave dtva MaU! viTaRZYaSae k-QaMa( )) 33 ))
tribhiù kramair imäl lokän
viçva-käyaù kramiñyati
sarvasvaà viñëave dattvä
müòha vartiñyase katham
SYNONYMS
tribhiù—three; kramaiù—by steps; imän—all these; lokän—three planetary
systems; viçva-käyaù—becoming the universal form; kramiñyati—gradually He
will expand; sarvasvam—everything; viñëave—unto Lord Viñëu; dattvä—after
giving charity; müòha—O you rascal; vartiñyase—you will execute your means
of livelihood; katham—how.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
804
TRANSLATION
You have promised to give Him three steps of land in charity, but when you
give it He will occupy the three worlds. You are a rascal! You do not know
what a great mistake you have made. After giving everything to Lord Viñëu,
you will have no means of livelihood. How then shall you live?
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja might argue that he had promised only three steps of land.
But Çukräcärya, being a very learned brähmaëa, immediately understood that
this was a plan of Hari, who had falsely appeared there as a brahmacäré. The
words müòha vartiñyase katham reveal that Çukräcärya was a brähmaëa of the
priestly class. Such priestly brähmaëas are mostly interested in receiving
remuneration from their disciples. Therefore when Çukräcärya saw that Bali
Mahäräja had risked all of his possessions, he understood that this would cause
havoc not only to the King but also to the family of Çukräcärya, who was
dependent on Mahäräja Bali's mercy. This is the difference between a
Vaiñëava and a smärta-brähmaëa. A smärta-brähmaëa is always interested in
material profit, whereas a Vaiñëava is interested only in satisfying the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. From the statement of Çukräcärya, it appears that he
was in all respects a smärta-brähmaëa interested only in personal gain.
TEXT 34
§-MaTaae Gaa& PadEke-Na iÜTaqYaeNa idv& iv>aae" )
%& c k-aYaeNa MahTaa TaaTasYaSYa ku-Taae GaiTa" )) 34 ))
kramato gäà padaikena
dvitéyena divaà vibhoù
khaà ca käyena mahatä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
805
tärtéyasya kuto gatiù
SYNONYMS
kramataù—gradually; gäm—the surface of the land; padä ekena—by one step;
dvitéyena—by the second step; divam—the whole of outer space; vibhoù—of
the universal form; kham ca—the sky also; käyena—by the expansion of His
transcendental body; mahatä—by the universal form; tärtéyasya—as far as the
third step is concerned; kutaù—where is; gatiù—to keep His step.
TRANSLATION
Vämanadeva will first occupy the three worlds with one step, then He will
take His second step and occupy everything in outer space, and then He will
expand His universal body to occupy everything. Where will you offer Him the
third step?
PURPORT
Çukräcärya wanted to tell Bali Mahäräja how he would be cheated by Lord
Vämana. "You have promised three steps," he said. "But with only two steps, all
your possessions will be finished. How then will you give Him a place for His
third step?" Çukräcärya did not know how the Lord protects His devotee. The
devotee must risk everything in his possession for the service of the Lord, but
he is always protected and never defeated. By materialistic calculations,
Çukräcärya thought that Bali Mahäräja would under no circumstances be able
to keep his promise to the brahmacäré, Lord Vämanadeva.
TEXT 35
iNaïa& Tae Narke- MaNYae ùPa[daTau" Pa[iTaé[uTaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
806
Pa[iTaé[uTaSYa Yaae_NaqXa" Pa[iTaPaadiYaTau& >avaNa( )) 35 ))
niñöhäà te narake manye
hy apradätuù pratiçrutam
pratiçrutasya yo 'néçaù
pratipädayituà bhavän
SYNONYMS
niñöhäm—perpetual residence; te—of you; narake—in hell; manye—I think;
hi—indeed; apradätuù—of a person who cannot fulfill; pratiçrutam—what has
been promised; pratiçrutasya—of the promise one has made; yaù anéçaù—one
who is unable; pratipädayitum—to fulfill properly; bhavän—you are that
person.
TRANSLATION
You will certainly be unable to fulfill your promise, and I think that because
of this inability your eternal residence will be in hell.
TEXT 36
Na TaÕaNa& Pa[Xa&SaiNTa YaeNa v*itaivRPaÛTae )
daNa& YajSTaPa" k-MaR l/aeke- v*itaMaTaae YaTa" )) 36 ))
na tad dänaà praçaàsanti
yena våttir vipadyate
dänaà yajïas tapaù karma
loke våttimato yataù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
807
na—not; tat—that; dänam—charity; praçaàsanti—the saintly persons praise;
yena—by which; våttiù—one's livelihood; vipadyate—becomes endangered;
dänam—charity; yajïaù—sacrifice; tapaù—austerity; karma—fruitive
activities; loke—in this world; våttimataù—according to one's means of
livelihood; yataù—as it is so.
TRANSLATION
Learned scholars do not praise that charity which endangers one's own
livelihood. Charity, sacrifice, austerity and fruitive activities are possible for
one who is competent to earn his livelihood properly. [They are not possible for
one who cannot maintain himself.]
TEXT 37
DaMaaRYa YaXaSae_QaaRYa k-aMaaYa SvJaNaaYa c )
PaÄDaa iv>aJaiNvtaiMahaMau}a c MaaedTae )) 37 ))
dharmäya yaçase 'rthäya
kämäya sva-janäya ca
païcadhä vibhajan vittam
ihämutra ca modate
SYNONYMS
dharmäya—for religion; yaçase—for one's reputation; arthäya—for increasing
one's opulence; kämäya—for increasing sense gratification; sva-janäya
ca—and for maintaining one's family members; païcadhä—for these five
different objectives; vibhajan—dividing; vittam—his accumulated wealth;
iha—in this world; amutra—the next world; ca—and; modate—he enjoys.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
808
TRANSLATION
Therefore one who is in full knowledge should divide his accumulated
wealth in five parts—for religion, for reputation, for opulence, for sense
gratification and for the maintenance of his family members. Such a person is
happy in this world and in the next.
PURPORT
The çästras enjoin that if one has money one should divide all that he has
accumulated into five divisions—one part for religion, one part for reputation,
one part for opulence, one part for sense gratification and one part to
maintain the members of his family. At the present, however, because people
are bereft of all knowledge, they spend all their money for the satisfaction of
their family. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé taught us by his own example by using fifty
percent of his accumulated wealth for Kåñëa, twenty-five percent for his own
self, and twenty-five percent for the members of his family. One's main
purpose should be to advance in Kåñëa consciousness. This will include
dharma, artha and käma. However, because one's family members expect some
profit, one should also satisfy them by giving them a portion of one's
accumulated wealth. This is a çästric injunction.
TEXT 38
A}aaiPa bû*cEGasTa& é*<au Mae_SaurSataMa )
SaTYaMaaeiMaiTa YaTa( Pa[ae¢&- YaàeTYaahaNa*Ta& ih TaTa( )) 38 ))
aträpi bahvåcair gétaà
çåëu me 'sura-sattama
satyam om iti yat proktaà
yan nety ähänåtaà hi tat
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
809
SYNONYMS
atra api—in this regard also (in deciding what is truth and what is not truth);
bahu-åcaiù—by the çruti-mantras known as Bahvåca-çruti, which are evidence
from the Vedas; gétam—what has been spoken; çåëu—just hear; me—from me;
asura-sattama—O best of the asuras; satyam—the truth is; om iti—preceded
by the word oà; yat—that which; proktam—has been spoken; yat—that which
is; na—not preceded by oà; iti—thus; äha—it is said; anåtam—untruth;
hi—indeed; tat—that.
TRANSLATION
One might argue that since you have already promised, how can you refuse?
O best of the demons, just take from me the evidence of the Bahvåca-çruti,
which says that a promise is truthful preceded by the word oà and untruthful if
not.
TEXT 39
SaTYa& PauZPaf-l&/ ivÛadaTMav*+aSYa GaqYaTae )
v*+ae_JaqviTa Taà SYaadNa*Ta& MaUl/MaaTMaNa" )) 39 ))
satyaà puñpa-phalaà vidyäd
ätma-våkñasya géyate
våkñe 'jévati tan na syäd
anåtaà mülam ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
satyam—the factual truth; puñpa-phalam—the flower and the fruit;
vidyät—one should understand; ätma-våkñasya—of the tree of the body;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
810
géyate—as described in the Vedas; våkñe ajévati—if the tree is not living;
tat—that (puñpa-phalam); na—not; syät—is possible; anåtam—untruth;
mülam—the root; ätmanaù—of the body.
TRANSLATION
The Vedas enjoin that the factual result of the tree of the body is the good
fruits and flowers derived from it. But if the bodily tree does not exist, there is
no possibility of factual fruits and flowers. Even if the body is based on untruth,
there cannot be factual fruits and flowers without the help of the bodily tree.
PURPORT
This çloka explains that in relation to the material body even the factual
truth cannot exist without a touch of untruth. The Mäyävädés say, brahma
satyaà jagan mithyä: "The spirit soul is truth, and the external energy is
untruth." The Vaiñëava philosophers, however, do not agree with the
Mäyäväda philosophy. Even if for the sake of argument the material world is
accepted as untruth, the living entity entangled in the illusory energy cannot
come out of it without the help of the body. Without the help of the body, one
cannot follow a system of religion, nor can one speculate on philosophical
perfection. Therefore, the flower and fruit (puñpa-phalam) have to be obtained
as a result of the body. Without the help of the body, that fruit cannot be
gained. The Vaiñëava philosophy therefore recommends yukta-vairägya. It is
not that all attention should be diverted for the maintenance of the body, but
at the same time one's bodily maintenance should not be neglected. As long as
the body exists one can thoroughly study the Vedic instructions, and thus at
the end of life one can achieve perfection. This is explained in Bhagavad-gétä
[Bg. 8.6]: yaà yaà väpi smaran bhävaà tyajaty ante kalevaram. Everything is
examined at the time of death. Therefore, although the body is temporary, not
eternal, one can take from it the best service and make one's life perfect.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
811
TEXT 40
Tad( YaQaa v*+a oNMaUl/" éuZYaTYauÜTaRTae_icraTa( )
Wv& NaíaNa*Ta" SaÛ AaTMaa éuZYaeà Sa&XaYa" )) 40 ))
tad yathä våkña unmülaù
çuñyaty udvartate 'cirät
evaà nañöänåtaù sadya
ätmä çuñyen na saàçayaù
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; yathä—as; våkñaù—a tree; unmülaù—being uprooted;
çuñyati—dries up; udvartate—falls down; acirät—very soon; evam—in this
way; nañöa—lost; anåtaù—the temporary body; sadyaù—immediately;
ätmä—the body; çuñyet—dries up; na—not; saàçayaù—any doubt.
TRANSLATION
When a tree is uprooted it immediately falls down and begins to dry up.
Similarly, if one doesn't take care of the body, which is supposed to be
untruth—in other words, if the untruth is uprooted—the body undoubtedly
becomes dry.
PURPORT
In this regard, Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé says:
präpaïcikatayä buddhyä
hari-sambandhi-vastunaù
mumukñubhiù parityägo
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
812
vairägyaà phalgu kathyate
"One who rejects things without knowledge of their relationship to Kåñëa is
incomplete in his renunciation." (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.66) When the
body is engaged in the service of the Lord, one should not consider the body
material. Sometimes the spiritual body of the spiritual master is misunderstood.
But Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé instructs, präpaïcikatayä buddhyä
hari-sambandhi-vastunaù. The body fully engaged in Kåñëa's service should not
be neglected as material. One who does neglect it is false in his renunciation.
If the body is not properly maintained, it falls down and dries up like an
uprooted tree, from which flowers and fruit can no longer be obtained. The
Vedas therefore enjoin:
om iti satyaà nety anåtaà tad etat-puñpaà phalaà väco yat satyaà saheçvaro
yaçasvé kalyäëa-kértir bhavitä; puñpaà hi phalaà väcaù satyaà vadaty
athaitan-mülaà väco yad anåtaà yad yathä våkña ävirmülaù çuñyati, sa udvartata
evam evänåtaà vadann ävirmülam ätmanäà karoti, sa çuñyati sa udvartate,
tasmäd anåtaà na vaded dayeta tv etena.
The purport is that activities performed with the help of the body for the
satisfaction of the Absolute Truth (oà tat sat) are never temporary, although
performed by the temporary body. Indeed, such activities are everlasting.
Therefore, the body should be properly cared for. Because the body is
temporary, not permanent, one cannot expose the body to being devoured by a
tiger or killed by an enemy. All precautions should be taken to protect the
body.
TEXT 41
ParaGa( ir¢-MaPaU<a| va A+ar& YaTa( TadaeiMaiTa )
YaTa( ik-iÄdaeiMaiTa b]UYaaTa( TaeNa irCYaeTa vE PauMaaNa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
813
i>a+ave SavRMaae&ku-vRàal&/ k-aMaeNa caTMaNae )) 41 ))
paräg riktam apürëaà vä
akñaraà yat tad om iti
yat kiïcid om iti brüyät
tena ricyeta vai pumän
bhikñave sarvam oà kurvan
nälaà kämena cätmane
SYNONYMS
paräk—that which separates; riktam—that which makes one free from
attachment; apürëam—that which is insufficient; vä—either; akñaram—this
syllable; yat—that; tat—which; om—oàkära; iti—thus stated; yat—which;
kiïcit—whatever; oà—this word oà; iti—thus; brüyät—if you say; tena—by
such an utterance; ricyeta—one becomes free; vai—indeed; pumän—a person;
bhikñave—unto a beggar; sarvam—everything; oà kurvan—giving charity by
uttering the word oà; na—not; alam—sufficiently; kämena—for sense
gratification; ca—also; ätmane—for self-realization.
TRANSLATION
The utterance of the word oà signifies separation from one's monetary
assets. In other words, by uttering this word one becomes free from attachment
to money because his money is taken away from him. To be without money is
not very satisfactory, for in that position one cannot fulfill one's desires. In
other words, by using the word oà one becomes poverty-stricken. Especially
when one gives charity to a poor man or beggar, one remains unfulfilled in
self-realization and in sense gratification.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
814
Mahäräja Bali wanted to give everything to Vämanadeva, who had
appeared as a beggar, but Çukräcärya, being Mahäräja Bali's familial spiritual
master in the line of seminal succession, could not appreciate Mahäräja Bali's
promise. Çukräcärya gave Vedic evidence that one should not give everything
to a poor man. Rather, when a poor man comes for charity one should
untruthfully say, "Whatever I have I have given you. I have no more." It is not
that one should give everything to him. Actually the word oà is meant for oà
tat sat, the Absolute Truth. Oàkära is meant for freedom from all attachment
to money because money should be spent for the purpose of the Supreme. The
tendency of modern civilization is to give money in charity to the poor. Such
charity has no spiritual value because we actually see that although there are
so many hospitals and other foundations and institutions for the poor,
according to the three modes of material nature a class of poor men is always
destined to continue. Even though there are so many charitable institutions,
poverty has not been driven from human society. Therefore it is recommended
here, bhikñave sarvam oà kurvan nälaà kämena cätmane. One should not give
everything to the beggars among the poor.
The best solution is that of the Kåñëa consciousness movement. This
movement is always kind to the poor, not only because it feeds them but also
because it gives them enlightenment by teaching them how to become Kåñëa
conscious. We are therefore opening hundreds and thousands of centers for
those who are poor, both in money and in knowledge, to enlighten them in
Kåñëa consciousness and reform their character by teaching them how to
avoid illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling, which are the most
sinful activities and which cause people to suffer, life after life. The best way to
use money is to open such a center, where all may come live and reform their
character. They may live very comfortably, without denial of any of the body's
necessities, but they live under spiritual control, and thus they live happily and
save time for advancement in Kåñëa consciousness. If one has money, it should
not be squandered away on nothing. It should be used to push forward the
Kåñëa consciousness movement so that all of human society will become
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
815
happy, prosperous and hopeful of being promoted back home, back to
Godhead. The Vedic mantra in this regard reads as follows:
paräg vä etad riktam akñaraà yad etad om iti tad yat kiïcid om iti
ähätraiväsmai tad ricyate; sa yat sarvam oà kuryäd ricyäd ätmänaà sa
kämebhyo nälaà syät.
TEXT 42
AQaETaTa( PaU<aRMa>YaaTMa& YaÀ NaeTYaNa*Ta& vc" )
Sav| NaeTYaNa*Ta& b]UYaaTa( Sa duZk-IiTaR" ìSaNMa*Ta" )) 42 ))
athaitat pürëam abhyätmaà
yac ca nety anåtaà vacaù
sarvaà nety anåtaà brüyät
sa duñkértiù çvasan måtaù
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; etat—that; pürëam—completely; abhyätmam—drawing the
compassion of others by presenting oneself as always poverty-stricken;
yat—that; ca—also; na—not; iti—thus; anåtam—false; vacaù—words;
sarvam—completely; na—not; iti—thus; anåtam—falsity; brüyät—who should
say; saù—such a person; duñkértiù—infamous; çvasan—while breathing or
while alive; måtaù—is dead or should be killed.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, the safe course is to say no. Although it is a falsehood, it protects
one completely, it draws the compassion of others toward oneself, and it gives
one full facility to collect money from others for oneself. Nonetheless, if one
always pleads that he has nothing, he is condemned, for he is a dead body while
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
816
living, or while still breathing he should be killed.
PURPORT
Beggars always present themselves as possessing nothing, and this may be
very good for them because in this way they are assured of not losing their
money and of always drawing the attention and compassion of others for the
sake of collection. But this is also condemned. If one purposely continues this
professional begging, he is supposed to be dead while breathing, or, according
to another interpretation, such a man of falsity should be killed while still
breathing. The Vedic injunction in this regard is as follows: athaitat pürëam
abhyätmaà yan neti sa yat sarvaà neti brüyät päpikäsya kértir jäyate. sainaà
tatraiva hanyät. If one continuously poses himself as possessing nothing and
collects money by begging, he should be killed (sainaà tatraiva hanyät).
TEXT 43
ñqzu NaMaRivvahe c v*tYaQaeR Pa[a<aSaª$e= )
Gaaeb]aø<aaQaeR ih&SaaYaa& NaaNa*Ta& SYaaÂuGauiPSaTaMa( )) 43 ))
stréñu narma-vivähe ca
våtty-arthe präëa-saìkaöe
go-brähmaëärthe hiàsäyäà
nänåtaà syäj jugupsitam
SYNONYMS
stréñu—to encourage a woman and bring her under control; narma-vivähe—in
joking or in a marriage ceremony; ca—also; våtti-arthe—for earning one's
livelihood, as in business; präëa-saìkaöe—or in time of danger;
go-brähmaëa-arthe—for the sake of cow protection and brahminical culture;
hiàsäyäm—for any person who is going to be killed because of enmity;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
817
na—not; anåtam—falsity; syät—becomes; jugupsitam—abominable.
TRANSLATION
In flattering a woman to bring her under control, in joking, in a marriage
ceremony, in earning one's livelihood, when one's life is in danger, in protecting
cows and brahminical culture, or in protecting a person from an enemy's hand,
falsity is never condemned.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Nineteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled, "Lord Vämanadeva Begs Charity from Bali
Mahäräja."
20. Bali Mahäräja Surrenders the Universe
The summary of this Twentieth Chapter is as follows. Despite his
knowledge that Lord Vämanadeva was cheating him, Bali Mahäräja gave
everything to the Lord in charity, and thus the Lord extended His body and
assumed a gigantic form as Lord Viñëu.
After hearing the instructive advice of Çukräcärya, Bali Mahäräja became
contemplative. Because it is the duty of a householder to maintain the
principles of religion, economic development and sense gratification, Bali
Mahäräja thought it improper to withdraw his promise to the brahmacäré. To
lie or fail to honor a promise given to a brahmacäré is never proper, for lying is
the most sinful activity. Everyone should be afraid of the sinful reactions to
lying, for mother earth cannot even bear the weight of a sinful liar. The
spreading of a kingdom or empire is temporary; if there is no benefit for the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
818
general public, such expansion has no value. Previously, all the great kings and
emperors expanded their kingdoms with a regard for the welfare of the people
in general. Indeed, while engaged in such activities for the benefit of the
general public, eminent men sometimes even sacrificed their lives. It is said
that one who is glorious in his activities is always living and never dies.
Therefore, fame should be the aim of life, and even if one becomes
poverty-stricken for the sake of a good reputation, that is not a loss. Bali
Mahäräja thought that even if this brahmacäré, Vämanadeva, were Lord Viñëu,
if the Lord accepted his charity and then again arrested him, Bali Mahäräja
would not envy Him. Considering all these points, Bali Mahäräja finally gave
in charity everything he possessed.
Lord Vämanadeva then immediately extended Himself into a universal
body. By the mercy of Lord Vämanadeva, Bali Mahäräja could see that the
Lord is all-pervading and that everything rests in His body. Bali Mahäräja
could see Lord Vämanadeva as the supreme Viñëu, wearing a helmet, yellow
garments, the mark of Çrévatsa, the Kaustubha jewel, a flower garland, and
ornaments decorating His entire body. The Lord gradually covered the entire
surface of the world, and by extending His body He covered the entire sky.
With His hands He covered all directions, and with His second footstep He
covered the entire upper planetary system. Therefore there was no vacant
place where He could take His third footstep.
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
bil/rev& Ga*hPaiTa" ku-l/acaYaeR<a >aaizTa" )
TaUZ<aq& >aUTva +a<a& raJaàuvacavihTaae GauåMa( )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
balir evaà gåha-patiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
819
kuläcäryeëa bhäñitaù
tüñëéà bhütvä kñaëaà räjann
uväcävahito gurum
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; baliù—Bali Mahäräja;
evam—thus; gåha-patiù—the master of the household affairs, although guided
by the priests; kula-äcäryeëa—by the family äcärya or guide; bhäñitaù—being
thus addressed; tüñëém—silent; bhütvä—becoming; kñaëam—for a moment;
räjan—O King (Mahäräja Parékñit); uväca—said; avahitaù—after full
deliberation; gurum—unto his spiritual master.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King Parékñit, when Bali Mahäräja was thus
advised by his spiritual master, Çukräcärya, his family priest, he remained silent
for some time, and then, after full deliberation, he replied to his spiritual master
as follows.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks that Bali Mahäräja remained
silent at a critical point. How could he disobey the instruction of Çukräcärya,
his spiritual master? It is the duty of such a sober personality as Bali Mahäräja
to abide by the orders of his spiritual master immediately, as his spiritual
master had advised. But Bali Mahäräja also considered that Çukräcärya was no
longer to be accepted as a spiritual master, for he had deviated from the duty of
a spiritual master. According to çästra, the duty of the guru is to take the
disciple back home, back to Godhead. If he is unable to do so and instead
hinders the disciple in going back to Godhead, he should not be a guru. Gurur
na sa syät (SB 5.5.18). One should not become a guru if he cannot enable his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
820
disciple to advance in Kåñëa consciousness. The goal of life is to become a
devotee of Lord Kåñëa so that one may be freed from the bondage of material
existence (tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mam eti so 'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]). The
spiritual master helps the disciple attain this stage by developing Kåñëa
consciousness. Now Çukräcärya has advised Bali Mahäräja to deny the promise
to Vämanadeva. Under the circumstances, therefore, Bali Mahäräja thought
that there would be no fault if he disobeyed the order of his spiritual master.
He deliberated on this point—should he refuse to accept the advice of his
spiritual master, or should he independently do everything to please the
Supreme Personality of Godhead? He took some time. Therefore it is said,
tüñëéà bhütvä kñaëaà rajann uväcävahito gurum. After deliberating on this
point, he decided that Lord Viñëu should be pleased in all circumstances, even
at the risk of ignoring the guru's advice to the contrary.
Anyone who is supposed to be a guru but who goes against the principle of
viñëu-bhakti cannot be accepted as guru. If one has falsely accepted such a guru,
one should reject him. Such a guru is described as follows (Mahäbhärata,
Udyoga 179.25):
guror apy avaliptasya
käryäkäryam ajänataù
utpatha-pratipannasya
parityägo vidhéyate
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has advised that such a useless guru, a family priest acting as
guru, should be given up, and that the proper, bona-fide guru should be
accepted.
ñaö-karma-nipuëo vipro
mantra-tantra-viçäradaù
avaiñëavo gurur na syäd
vaiñëavaù çvapaco guruù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
821
"A scholarly brähmaëa expert in all subjects of Vedic knowledge is unfit to
become a spiritual master without being a Vaiñëava, but if a person born in a
family of a lower caste is a Vaiñëava, he can become a spiritual master."
(Padma Puräëa)
TEXT 2
é[qbil/åvac
SaTYa& >aGavTaa Pa[ae¢&- DaMaaeR_Ya& Ga*hMaeiDaNaaMa( )
AQa| k-aMa& YaXaae v*ita& Yaae Na baDaeTa k-ihRicTa( )) 2 ))
çré-balir uväca
satyaà bhagavatä proktaà
dharmo 'yaà gåhamedhinäm
arthaà kämaà yaço våttià
yo na bädheta karhicit
SYNONYMS
çré-baliù uväca—Bali Mahäräja said; satyam—it is truth; bhagavatä—by Your
Greatness; proktam—what has already been spoken; dharmaù—a religious
principle; ayam—that is; gåhamedhinäm—especially for the householders;
artham—economic development; kämam—sense gratification; yaçaù
våttim—reputation and means of livelihood; yaù—which religious principle;
na—not; bädheta—hinders; karhicit—at any time.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja said: As you have already stated, the principle of religion that
does not hinder one's economic development, sense gratification, fame and
means of livelihood is the real occupational duty of the householder. I also think
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
822
that this religious principle is correct.
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja's grave answer to Çukräcärya is meaningful. Çukräcärya
stressed that one's material means of livelihood and one's material reputation,
sense gratification and economic development must continue properly. To see
to this is the first duty of a man who is a householder, especially one who is
interested in material affairs. If a religious principle does not affect one's
material condition, it is to be accepted. At the present time, in this age of Kali,
this idea is extremely prominent. No one is prepared to accept any religious
principle if it hampers material prosperity. Çukräcärya, being a person of this
material world, did not know the principles of a devotee. A devotee is
determined to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead to His full
satisfaction. Anything that hampers such determination should certainly be
rejected. This is the principle of bhakti. Änukülyasya saìkalpaù prätikülyasya
varjanam (Cc. Madhya 22.100). To perform devotional service, one must accept
only that which is favorable and reject that which is unfavorable. Bali
Mahäräja had the opportunity to contribute everything he possessed to the
lotus feet of Lord Vämanadeva, but Çukräcärya was putting forward a material
argument to hamper this process of devotional service. Under the
circumstances, Bali Mahäräja decided that such hindrances should certainly be
avoided. In other words, he decided immediately to reject the advice of
Çukräcärya and go on with his duty. Thus he gave all his possessions to Lord
Vämanadeva.
TEXT 3
Sa cah& ivtal/ae>aeNa Pa[TYaac+ae k-Qa& iÜJaMa( )
Pa[iTaé[uTYa ddaMaqiTa Pa[ahaid" ik-Tavae YaQaa )) 3 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
823
sa cähaà vitta-lobhena
pratyäcakñe kathaà dvijam
pratiçrutya dadäméti
prährädiù kitavo yathä
SYNONYMS
saù—such a person as I am; ca—also; aham—I am; vitta-lobhena—for being
allured by greed for money; pratyäcakñe—I shall cheat or say no when I have
already said yes; katham—how; dvijam—especially to a brähmaëa;
pratiçrutya—after already having promised; dadämi—that I shall give;
iti—thus; prährädiù—I who am famous as the grandson of Mahäräja Prahläda;
kitavaù—an ordinary cheater; yathä—just like.
TRANSLATION
I am the grandson of Mahäräja Prahläda. How can I withdraw my promise
because of greed for money when I have already said that I shall give this land?
How can I behave like an ordinary cheater, especially toward a brähmaëa?
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja had already been blessed by his grandfather Prahläda
Mahäräja. Therefore, he was a pure devotee, although born in a family of
demons. There are two kinds of highly elevated devotees, called
sädhana-siddha and kåpä-siddha. Sädhana-siddha refers to one who has become
a devotee by regular execution of the regulative principles mentioned in the
çästras, as ordered and directed by the spiritual master. If one regularly
executes such devotional service, he will certainly attain perfection in due
course of time. But there are other devotees, who may not have undergone all
the required details of devotional service but who, by the special mercy of guru
and Kåñëa—the spiritual master and the Supreme Personality of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
824
Godhead—have immediately attained the perfection of pure devotional
service. Examples of such devotees are the yajïa-patnés, Mahäräja Bali and
Çukadeva Gosvämé. The yajïa-patnés were the wives of ordinary brähmaëas
engaged in fruitive activities. Although the brähmaëas were very learned and
advanced in Vedic knowledge, they could not achieve the mercy of
Kåñëa-Balaräma, whereas their wives achieved complete perfection in
devotional service, despite their being women. Similarly, Vairocani, Bali
Mahäräja, received the mercy of Prahläda Mahäräja, and by Prahläda
Mahäräja's mercy he also received the mercy of Lord Viñëu, who appeared
before him as a brahmacäré beggar. Thus Bali Mahäräja became a kåpä-siddha
because of the special mercy of both guru and Kåñëa. Caitanya Mahäprabhu
confirms this favor: guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja (Cc. Madhya
19.151). Bali Mahäräja, by the grace of Prahläda Mahäräja, got the seed of
devotional service, and when that seed developed, he achieved the ultimate
fruit of that service, namely love of Godhead (premä pum-artho mahän),
immediately upon the appearance of Lord Vämanadeva. Bali Mahäräja
regularly maintained devotion for the Lord, and because he was purified, the
Lord appeared before him. Because of unalloyed love for the Lord, he then
immediately decided, "I shall give this little dwarf brähmaëa whatever He asks
from me." This is a sign of love. Thus Bali Mahäräja is understood to be one
who received the highest perfection of devotional service by special mercy.
TEXT 4
Na ùSaTYaaTa( Parae_DaMaR wiTa haevac >aUirYaMa( )
Sav| Saae!uMal&/ MaNYae ‰Tae_l/Ik-Par& NarMa( )) 4 ))
na hy asatyät paro 'dharma
iti hoväca bhür iyam
sarvaà soòhum alaà manye
åte 'léka-paraà naram
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
825
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—indeed; asatyät—than compulsion to untruthfulness;
paraù—more; adharmaù—irreligion; iti—thus; ha uväca—indeed had spoken;
bhüù—mother earth; iyam—this; sarvam—everything; soòhum—to bear;
alam—I am able; manye—although I think; åte—except; aléka-param—the
most heinous liar; naram—a human being.
TRANSLATION
There is nothing more sinful than untruthfulness. Because of this, mother
earth once said, "I can bear any heavy thing except a person who is a liar."
PURPORT
On the surface of the earth there are many great mountains and oceans
that are very heavy, and mother earth has no difficulty carrying them. But she
feels very much overburdened when she carries even one person who is a liar.
It is said that in Kali-yuga lying is a common affair: mäyaiva vyävahärike (SB
12.2.3). Even in the most common dealings, people are accustomed to speaking
so many lies. No one is free from the sinful reactions of speaking lies. Under
the circumstances, one can just imagine how this has overburdened the earth,
and indeed the entire universe.
TEXT 5
Naah& ib>aeiMa iNarYaaàaDaNYaadSau%a<aRvaTa( )
Na SQaaNaCYavNaaNMa*TYaaeYaRQaa ivPa[Pa[l/M>aNaaTa( )) 5 ))
nähaà bibhemi nirayän
nädhanyäd asukhärëavät
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
826
na sthäna-cyavanän måtyor
yathä vipra-pralambhanät
SYNONYMS
na—not; aham—I; bibhemi—am afraid of; nirayät—from a hellish condition of
life; na—nor; adhanyät—from a poverty-stricken condition;
asukha-arëavät—nor from an ocean of distresses; na—nor;
sthäna-cyavanät—from falling from a position; måtyoù—nor from death;
yathä—as; vipra-pralambhanät—from the cheating of a brähmaëa.
TRANSLATION
I do not fear hell, poverty, an ocean of distress, falldown from my position or
even death itself as much as I fear cheating a brähmaëa.
TEXT 6
Yad( YaÖaSYaiTa l/aeke-_iSMaNSaMPareTa& DaNaaidk-Ma( )
TaSYa TYaaGae iNaiMata& ik&- ivPa[STauZYaeà TaeNa ceTa( )) 6 ))
yad yad dhäsyati loke 'smin
samparetaà dhanädikam
tasya tyäge nimittaà kià
vipras tuñyen na tena cet
SYNONYMS
yat yat—whatsoever; häsyati—will leave; loke—in the world; asmin—in this;
samparetam—one who is already dead; dhana-ädikam—his wealth and riches;
tasya—of such wealth; tyäge—in renunciation; nimittam—the purpose;
kim—what is; vipraù—the brähmaëa who is confidentially Lord Viñëu;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
827
tuñyet—must be pleased; na—is not; tena—by such (riches); cet—if there is a
possibility.
TRANSLATION
My lord, you can also see that all the material opulences of this world are
certainly separated from their possessor at death. Therefore, if the brähmaëa
Vämanadeva is not satisfied by whatever gifts one has given, why not please
Him with the riches one is destined to lose at death?
PURPORT
The word vipra means brähmaëa, and at the same time "confidential." Bali
Mahäräja had confidentially decided to give the gift to Lord Vämanadeva
without discussion, but because such a decision would hurt the hearts of the
asuras and his spiritual master, Çukräcärya, he spoke equivocally. Bali
Mahäräja, as a pure devotee, had already decided to give all the land to Lord
Viñëu.
TEXT 7
é[eYa" ku-vRiNTa >aUTaaNaa& SaaDavae duSTYaJaaSaui>a" )
dDYax(iXaibPa[>a*TaYa" k-ae ivk-LPaae Daraidzu )) 7 ))
çreyaù kurvanti bhütänäà
sädhavo dustyajäsubhiù
dadhyaì-çibi-prabhåtayaù
ko vikalpo dharädiñu
SYNONYMS
çreyaù—activities of the utmost importance; kurvanti—execute; bhütänäm—of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
828
the general mass of people; sädhavaù—the saintly persons; dustyaja—which
are extremely hard to give up; asubhiù—by their lives; dadhyaì—Mahäräja
Dadhéci; çibi—Mahäräja Çibi; prabhåtayaù—and similar great personalities;
kaù—what; vikalpaù—consideration; dharä-ädiñu—in giving the land to the
brähmaëa.
TRANSLATION
Dadhéci, Çibi and many other great personalities were willing to sacrifice
even their lives for the benefit of the people in general. This is the evidence of
history. So why not give up this insignificant land? What is the serious
consideration against it?
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja was prepared to give everything to Lord Viñëu, and
Çukräcärya, being a professional priest, might have been anxiously waiting,
doubting whether there had been any such instance in history in which one
had given everything in charity. Bali Mahäräja, however, cited the tangible
examples of Mahäräja Çibi and Mahäräja Dadhéci, who had given up their lives
for the benefit of the general public. Certainly one has attachment for
everything material, especially one's land, but land and other possessions are
forcibly taken away at the time of death, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (måtyuù
sarva-haraç cäham [Bg. 10.34]). The Lord personally appeared to Bali Mahäräja
to take away everything he had, and thus he was so fortunate that he could see
the Lord face to face. Nondevotees, however, cannot see the Lord face to face;
to such persons the Lord appears as death and takes away all their possessions
by force. Under the circumstances, why should we not part with our
possessions and deliver them to Lord Viñëu for His satisfaction? Çré Cäëakya
Paëòita says in this regard, san-nimitte varaà tyägo vinäçe niyate sati
(Cäëakya-çloka 36). Since our money and possessions do not last but will
somehow or other be taken away, as long as they are in our possession it is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
829
better to use them for charity to a noble cause. Therefore Bali Mahäräja defied
the order of his so-called spiritual master.
TEXT 8
YaEirYa& bu>auJae b]øNdETYaeNd]EriNaviTaRi>a" )
Taeza& k-al/ae_Ga]Saqçaek-aNa( Na YaXaae_iDaGaTa& >auiv )) 8 ))
yair iyaà bubhuje brahman
daityendrair anivartibhiù
teñäà kälo 'grasél lokän
na yaço 'dhigataà bhuvi
SYNONYMS
yaiù—by whom; iyam—this world; bubhuje—was enjoyed; brahman—O best of
the brähmaëas; daitya-indraiù—by great heroes and kings born in demoniac
families; anivartibhiù—by those who were determined to fight, either to lay
down their lives or to win victory; teñäm—of such persons; kälaù—the time
factor; agrasét—took away; lokän—all possessions, all objects of enjoyment;
na—not; yaçaù—the reputation; adhigatam—achieved; bhuvi—in this world.
TRANSLATION
O best of the brähmaëas, certainly the great demoniac kings who were never
reluctant to fight enjoyed this world, but in due course of time everything they
had was taken away, except their reputation, by which they continue to exist.
In other words, one should try to achieve a good reputation instead of anything
else.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
830
In this regard, Cäëakya Paëòita (Cäëakya-çloka 34) also says, äyuñaù kñaëa
eko 'pi na labhya svarëa-koöibhiù. The duration of one's life is extremely short,
but if in that short lifetime one can do something that enhances his good
reputation, that may continue to exist for many millions of years. Bali
Mahäräja therefore decided not to follow his spiritual master's instruction that
he deny his promise to Vämanadeva; instead, he decided to give the land
according to the promise and be everlastingly celebrated as one of the twelve
mahäjanas (balir vaiyäsakir vayam).
TEXT 9
Saul/>aa YauiDa ivPa[zeR ùiNav*taaSTaNauTYaJa" )
Na TaQaa TaqQaR AaYaaTae é[ÖYaa Yae DaNaTYaJa" )) 9 ))
sulabhä yudhi viprarñe
hy anivåttäs tanu-tyajaù
na tathä tértha äyäte
çraddhayä ye dhana-tyajaù
SYNONYMS
su-labhäù—very easily obtained; yudhi—in the battlefield; vipra-åñe—O best of
the brähmaëas; hi—indeed; anivåttäù—not being afraid of fighting;
tanu-tyajaù—and thus lay down their lives; na—not; tathä—as; térthe
äyäte—on the arrival of a saintly person who creates holy places;
çraddhayä—with faith and devotion; ye—those who; dhana-tyajaù—can give
up their accumulated wealth.
TRANSLATION
O best of the brähmaëas, many men have laid down their lives on the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
831
battlefield, being unafraid of fighting, but rarely has one gotten the chance to
give his accumulated wealth faithfully to a saintly person who creates holy
places.
PURPORT
Many kñatriyas have laid down their lives on the battlefield for their
nations, but hardly a person can be found who has given up all his property
and his accumulated wealth in charity to a person worthy of the gift. As stated
in Bhagavad-gétä (17.20):
dätavyam iti yad dänaà
déyate 'nupakäriëe
deçe käle ca pätre ca
tad dänaà sättvikaà småtam
"That gift which is given out of duty, at the proper time and place, to a worthy
person, and without expectation of return is considered to be charity in the
mode of goodness." Thus charity given in the proper place is called sättvika.
And above this charity in goodness is transcendental charity, in which
everything is sacrificed for the sake of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Vämanadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, had come to Bali Mahäräja
for alms. How could one get such an opportunity to give charity? Therefore,
Bali Mahäräja decided without hesitation to give the Lord whatever He
wanted. One may get various opportunities to lay down his life on the
battlefield, but such an opportunity as this is hardly ever obtained.
TEXT 10
MaNaiSvNa" k-aåi<ak-SYa Xaae>aNa&
YadiQaRk-aMaaePaNaYaeNa duGaRiTa" )
ku-Ta" PauNab]Røivda& >avad*Xaa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
832
TaTaae v$=aerSYa ddaiMa vaiH^TaMa( )) 10 ))
manasvinaù käruëikasya çobhanaà
yad arthi-kämopanayena durgatiù
kutaù punar brahma-vidäà bhavädåçäà
tato vaöor asya dadämi väïchitam
SYNONYMS
manasvinaù—of persons who are greatly munificent; käruëikasya—of persons
celebrated as very merciful; çobhanam—very auspicious; yat—that; arthi—of
persons in need of money; käma-upanayena—by satisfying;
durgatiù—becoming poverty-stricken; kutaù—what; punaù—again (is to be
said); brahma-vidäm—of persons well versed in transcendental science
(brahma-vidyä); bhavädåçäm—like your good self; tataù—therefore; vaöoù—of
the brahmacäré; asya—of this Vämanadeva; dadämi—I shall give;
väïchitam—whatever He wants.
TRANSLATION
By giving charity, a benevolent and merciful person undoubtedly becomes
even more auspicious, especially when he gives charity to a person like your
good self. Under the circumstances, I must give this little brahmacäré whatever
charity He wants from me.
PURPORT
If one accepts a poverty-stricken position because of losing money in
business, gambling, prostitution or intoxication, no one will praise him, but if
one becomes poverty-stricken by giving all of his possessions in charity, he
becomes adored all over the world. Aside from this, if a benevolent and
merciful person exhibits his pride in becoming poverty-stricken by giving his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
833
possessions in charity for good causes, his poverty is a welcome and auspicious
sign of a great personality. Bali Mahäräja decided that even though he would
become poverty-stricken by giving everything to Vämanadeva, this is what he
would prefer.
TEXT 11
YaJaiNTa Yaj&§-Taui>aYaRMaad*Taa
>avNTa AaManaYaivDaaNak-aeivda" )
Sa Wv ivZ<auvRrdae_STau va Parae
daSYaaMYaMauZMaE i+aiTaMaqiPSaTaa& MauNae )) 11 ))
yajanti yajïaà kratubhir yam ädåtä
bhavanta ämnäya-vidhäna-kovidäù
sa eva viñëur varado 'stu vä paro
däsyämy amuñmai kñitim épsitäà mune
SYNONYMS
yajanti—worship; yajïam—who is the enjoyer of sacrifice; kratubhiù—by the
different paraphernalia for sacrifice; yam—unto the Supreme Person;
ädåtäù—very respectfully; bhavantaù—all of you;
ämnäya-vidhäna-kovidäù—great saintly persons fully aware of the Vedic
principles of performing sacrifice; saù—that; eva—indeed; viñëuù—is Lord
Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; varadaù—either He is prepared
to give benedictions; astu—He becomes; vä—or; paraù—comes as an enemy;
däsyämi—I shall give; amuñmai—unto Him (unto Lord Viñëu, Vämanadeva);
kñitim—the tract of land; épsitäm—whatever He has desired; mune—O great
sage.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
834
TRANSLATION
O great sage, great saintly persons like you, being completely aware of the
Vedic principles for performing ritualistic ceremonies and yajïas, worship Lord
Viñëu in all circumstances. Therefore, whether that same Lord Viñëu has come
here to give me all benedictions or to punish me as an enemy, I must carry out
His order and give Him the requested tract of land without hesitation.
PURPORT
As stated by Lord Çiva:
ärädhanänäà sarveñäà
viñëor ärädhanaà param
tasmät parataraà devi
tadéyänäà samarcanam
(Padma Puräëa)
Although in the Vedas there are recommendations for worshiping many
demigods, Lord Viñëu is the Supreme Person, and worship of Viñëu is the
ultimate goal of life. The Vedic principles of the varëäçrama institution are
meant to organize society to prepare everyone to worship Lord Viñëu.
varëäçramäcäravatä
puruñeëa paraù pumän
viñëur ärädhyate panthä
nänyat tat-toña-käraëam
[Cc. Madhya 8.58]
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu, is worshiped by the proper
execution of prescribed duties in the system of varëa and äçrama. There is no
other way to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead." (Viñëu Puräëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
835
3.8.9) One must ultimately worship Lord Viñëu, and for that purpose the
varëäçrama system organizes society into brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas, çüdras,
brahmacärés, gåhasthas, vänaprasthas and sannyäsés. Bali Mahäräja, having been
perfectly educated in devotional service by his grandfather Prahläda Mahäräja,
knew how things are to be done. He was never to be misguided by anyone,
even by a person who happened to be his so-called spiritual master. This is the
sign of full surrender. Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura said:
märabi räkhabi—yo icchä tohärä
nitya-däsa-prati tuyä adhikärä
When one surrenders to Lord Viñëu, one must be prepared to abide by His
orders in all circumstances, whether He kills one or gives one protection. Lord
Viñëu must be worshiped in all circumstances.
TEXT 12
YaÛPYaSaavDaMaeR<a Maa& bDNaqYaadNaaGaSaMa( )
TaQaaPYaeNa& Na ih&iSaZYae >aqTa& b]øTaNau& irPauMa( )) 12 ))
yadyapy asäv adharmeëa
mäà badhnéyäd anägasam
tathäpy enaà na hiàsiñye
bhétaà brahma-tanuà ripum
SYNONYMS
yadyapi—although; asau—Lord Viñëu; adharmeëa—crookedly, without
reference to the straight way; mäm—me; badhnéyät—kills;
anägasam—although I am not sinful; tathäpi—still; enam—against Him;
na—not; hiàsiñye—I shall take any retaliation; bhétam—because He is afraid;
brahma-tanum—having assumed the form of a brähmaëa-brahmacäré;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
836
ripum—even though He is my enemy.
TRANSLATION
Although He is Viñëu Himself, out of fear He has covered Himself in the
form of a brähmaëa to come to me begging. Under the circumstances, because
He has assumed the form of a brähmaëa, even if He irreligiously arrests me or
even kills me, I shall not retaliate, although He is my enemy.
PURPORT
If Lord Viñëu as He is had come to Bali Mahäräja and asked him to do
something, Bali Mahäräja certainly would not have refused His request. But to
enjoy a little humor between Himself and His devotee, the Lord covered
Himself as a brähmaëa-brahmacäré and thus came to Bali Mahäräja to beg for
only three feet of land.
TEXT 13
Wz va otaMaëaek-ae Na iJahaSaiTa Yad( YaXa" )
hTva MaENaa& hred( YauÖe XaYaqTa iNahTaae MaYaa )) 13 ))
eña vä uttamaçloko
na jihäsati yad yaçaù
hatvä mainäà hared yuddhe
çayéta nihato mayä
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this (brahmacäré); vä—either; uttama-çlokaù—is Lord Viñëu, who is
worshiped by Vedic prayers; na—not; jihäsati—desires to give up;
yat—because; yaçaù—perpetual fame; hatvä—after killing; mä—me;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
837
enäm—all this land; haret—will take away; yuddhe—in the fight; çayéta—will
lie down; nihataù—being killed; mayä—by me.
TRANSLATION
If this brähmaëa really is Lord Viñëu, who is worshiped by Vedic hymns,
He would never give up His widespread reputation; either He would lie down
having been killed by me, or He would kill me in a fight.
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja's statement that Viñëu would lie down having been killed is
not the direct meaning, for Viñëu cannot be killed by anyone. Lord Viñëu can
kill everyone, but He cannot be killed. Thus the real meaning of the words "lie
down" is that Lord Viñëu would reside within the core of Bali Mahäräja's heart.
Lord Viñëu is defeated by a devotee through devotional service; otherwise, no
one can defeat Lord Viñëu.
TEXT 14
é[qéuk- ovac
WvMaé[iÖTa& iXaZYaMaNaadeXak-r& Gauå" )
XaXaaPa dEvPa[ihTa" SaTYaSaNDa& MaNaiSvNaMa( )) 14 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evam açraddhitaà çiñyam
anädeçakaraà guruù
çaçäpa daiva-prahitaù
satya-sandhaà manasvinam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
838
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; açraddhitam—who
was not very respectful to the instruction of the spiritual master; çiñyam—unto
such a disciple; anädeça-karam—who was not prepared to carry out the order
of his spiritual master; guruù—the spiritual master (Çukräcärya);
çaçäpa—cursed; daiva-prahitaù—being inspired by the Supreme Lord;
satya-sandham—one who was fixed in his truthfulness; manasvinam—who was
of a highly elevated character.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Thereafter, the spiritual master,
Çukräcärya, being inspired by the Supreme Lord, cursed his exalted disciple Bali
Mahäräja, who was so magnanimous and fixed in truthfulness that instead of
respecting his spiritual master's instructions, he wanted to disobey his order.
PURPORT
The difference between the behavior of Bali Mahäräja and that of his
spiritual master, Çukräcärya, was that Bali Mahäräja had already developed
love of Godhead, whereas Çukräcärya, being merely a priest of routine rituals,
had not. Thus Çukräcärya was never inspired by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead to develop in devotional service. As stated by the Lord Himself in
Bhagavad-gétä (10.10):
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
839
understanding by which they can come to Me."
Devotees who actually engage in devotional service with faith and love are
inspired by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vaiñëavas are never
concerned with ritualistic smärta-brähmaëas. Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé has
therefore compiled Hari-bhakti-viläsa to guide the Vaiñëavas, who never follow
the smärta-viddhi. Although the Supreme Lord is situated in the core of
everyone's heart, unless one is a Vaiñëava, unless one is engaged in devotional
service, one does not get sound advice by which to return home, back to
Godhead. Such instructions are meant only for devotees. Therefore in this
verse the word daiva-prahitaù, "being inspired by the Supreme Lord," is
important. Çukräcärya should have encouraged Bali Mahäräja to give
everything to Lord Viñëu. This would have been a sign of love for the Supreme
Lord. But he did not do so. On the contrary, he wanted to punish his devoted
disciple by cursing him.
TEXT 15
d*!& Pai<@TaMaaNYaj" STaBDaae_SYaSMaduPae+aYaa )
MaC^aSaNaaiTaGaae YaSTvMaicrad(>a]XYaSae ié[Ya" )) 15 ))
dåòhaà paëòita-mäny ajïaù
stabdho 'sy asmad-upekñayä
mac-chäsanätigo yas tvam
aciräd bhraçyase çriyaù
SYNONYMS
dåòham—so firmly convinced or fixed in your decision;
paëòita-mäné—considering yourself very learned; ajïaù—at the same time
foolish; stabdhaù—impudent; asi—you have become; asmat—of us;
upekñayä—by disregarding; mat-çäsana-atigaù—surpassing the jurisdiction of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
840
my administration; yaù—such a person (as you); tvam—yourself; acirät—very
soon; bhraçyase—will fall down; çriyaù—from all opulence.
TRANSLATION
Although you have no knowledge, you have become a so-called learned
person, and therefore you dare be so impudent as to disobey my order. Because
of disobeying me, you shall very soon be bereft of all your opulence.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that Bali Mahäräja was not
paëòita-mäné, or one who falsely assumes himself learned; rather, he was
paëòita-mänya-jïaù, one who is so learned that all other learned persons
worship him. And because he was so learned, he could disobey the order of his
so-called spiritual master. He had no fear of any condition of material
existence. Anyone cared for by Lord Viñëu does not need to care about anyone
else. Thus Bali Mahäräja could never be bereft of all opulences. The opulences
offered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead are not to be compared to the
opulences obtained by karma-käëòa. In other words, if a devotee becomes very
opulent, it is to be understood that his opulence is a gift of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Such opulence will never be vanquished, whereas the
opulence achieved by one's fruitive activity may be vanquished at any
moment.
TEXT 16
Wv& Xaá" SvGauå<aa SaTYaaà cil/Taae MahaNa( )
vaMaNaaYa ddaveNaaMaicRTvaedk-PaUvRk-Ma( )) 16 ))
evaà çaptaù sva-guruëä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
841
satyän na calito mahän
vämanäya dadäv enäm
arcitvodaka-pürvakam
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; çaptaù—being cursed; sva-guruëä—by his own spiritual
master; satyät—from truthfulness; na—not; calitaù—who moved; mahän—the
great personality; vämanäya—unto Lord Vämanadeva; dadau—gave in
charity; enäm—all the land; arcitvä—after worshiping;
udaka-pürvakam—preceded by offering of water.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Even after being cursed in this way by his
own spiritual master, Bali Mahäräja, being a great personality, never deviated
from his determination. Therefore, according to custom, he first offered water
to Vämanadeva and then offered Him the gift of land he had promised.
TEXT 17
ivNDYaavil/STadaGaTYa PaÒq Jaal/k-Maail/Naq )
AaiNaNYae k-l/Xa& hEMaMavNaeJaNYaPaa& >a*TaMa( )) 17 ))
vindhyävalis tadägatya
patné jälaka-mäliné
äninye kalaçaà haimam
avanejany-apäà bhåtam
SYNONYMS
vindhyävaliù—Vindhyävali; tadä—at that time; ägatya—coming there;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
842
patné—the wife of Mahäräja Bali; jälaka-mäliné—decorated with a necklace of
pearls; äninye—caused to be brought; kalaçam—a waterpot; haimam—made of
gold; avanejani-apäm—with water for the sake of washing the Lord's feet;
bhåtam—filled.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja's wife, known as Vindhyävali, who was decorated with a
necklace of pearls, immediately came and had a large golden waterpot brought
there, full of water with which to worship the Lord by washing His feet.
TEXT 18
YaJaMaaNa" SvYa& TaSYa é[qMaTa( PaadYauGa& Mauda )
AviNaJYaavhNMaUiDNaR TadPaae ivìPaavNaq" )) 18 ))
yajamänaù svayaà tasya
çrémat päda-yugaà mudä
avanijyävahan mürdhni
tad apo viçva-pävanéù
SYNONYMS
yajamänaù—the worshiper (Bali Mahäräja); svayam—personally; tasya—of
Lord Vämanadeva; çrémat päda-yugam—the most auspicious and beautiful pair
of lotus feet; mudä—with great jubilation; avanijya—properly washing;
avahat—took; mürdhni—on his head; tat—that; apaù—water;
viçva-pävanéù—which gives liberation to the whole universe.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
843
Bali Mahäräja, the worshiper of Lord Vämanadeva, jubilantly washed the
Lord's lotus feet and then took the water on his head, for that water delivers
the entire universe.
TEXT 19
TadaSaureNd]& idiv devTaaGa<aa
GaNDavRivÛaDariSaÖcar<aa" )
TaTk-MaR SaveR_iPa Ga*<aNTa AaJaRv&
Pa[SaUNavzOEvRv*zuMauRdaiNvTaa" )) 19 ))
tadäsurendraà divi devatä-gaëä
gandharva-vidyädhara-siddha-cäraëäù
tat karma sarve 'pi gåëanta ärjavaà
prasüna-varñair vavåñur mudänvitäù
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; asura-indram—unto the King of the demons, Bali
Mahäräja; divi—in the higher planetary system; devatä-gaëäù—the residents
known as the demigods; gandharva—the Gandharvas; vidyädhara—the
Vidyädharas; siddha—the residents of Siddhaloka; cäraëäù—the residents of
Cäraëaloka; tat—that; karma—action; sarve api—all of them;
gåëantaù—declaring; ärjavam—plain and simple; prasüna-varñaiù—with a
shower of flowers; vavåñuù—released; mudä-anvitäù—being very pleased with
him.
TRANSLATION
At that time, the residents of the higher planetary system, namely the
demigods, the Gandharvas, the Vidyädharas, the Siddhas and the Cäraëas, all
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
844
being very pleased by Bali Mahäräja's simple, nonduplicitous act, praised his
qualities and showered upon him millions of flowers.
PURPORT
Ärjavam—simplicity or freedom from duplicity—is a qualification of a
brähmaëa and a Vaiñëava. A Vaiñëava automatically acquires all the qualities
of a brähmaëa.
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
(SB 5.18.12)
A Vaiñëava should possess the brahminical qualities such as satya, çama, dama,
titikñä and ärjava [Bg. 18.42]. There cannot be any duplicity in the character of
a Vaiñëava. When Bali Mahäräja acted with unflinching faith and devotion
unto the lotus feet of Lord Viñëu, this was very much appreciated by all the
residents of the higher planetary system.
TEXT 20
NaeduMauRhuduRNdu>aYa" SahóXaae
GaNDavRik-MPaUåzik-àra JaGau" )
MaNaiSvNaaNaeNa k*-Ta& SauduZk-r&
ivÜaNadad( Yad( irPave JaGaT}aYaMa( )) 20 ))
nedur muhur dundubhayaù sahasraço
gandharva-kimpüruña-kinnarä jaguù
manasvinänena kåtaà suduñkaraà
vidvän adäd yad ripave jagat-trayam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
845
SYNONYMS
neduù—began to beat; muhuù—again and again; dundubhayaù—trumpets and
kettledrums; sahasraçaù—by thousands and thousands; gandharva—the
residents of Gandharvaloka; kimpüruña—the residents of Kimpuruñaloka;
kinnaräù—and the residents of Kinnaraloka; jaguù—began to sing and
declare; manasvinä—by the most exalted personality; anena—by Bali
Mahäräja; kåtam—was done; su-duñkaram—an extremely difficult task;
vidvän—because of his being the most learned person; adät—gave Him a gift;
yat—that; ripave—unto the enemy, Lord Viñëu, who was siding with Bali
Mahäräja's enemies, the demigods; jagat-trayam—the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
The Gandharvas, the Kimpuruñas and the Kinnaras sounded thousands and
thousands of kettledrums and trumpets again and again, and they sang in great
jubilation, declaring, "How exalted a person is Bali Mahäräja, and what a
difficult task he has performed! Even though he knew that Lord Viñëu was on
the side of his enemies, he nonetheless gave the Lord the entire three worlds in
charity."
TEXT 21
Tad( vaMaNa& æPaMavDaRTaad(>auTa&
hrerNaNTaSYa Gau<a}aYaaTMak-Ma( )
>aU" %& idXaae ÛaEivRvra" PaYaaeDaYa‚
iSTaYaRx(Na*deva ‰zYaae YadaSaTa )) 21 ))
tad vämanaà rüpam avardhatädbhutaà
harer anantasya guëa-trayätmakam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
846
bhüù khaà diço dyaur vivaräù payodhayas
tiryaì-nå-devä åñayo yad-äsata
SYNONYMS
tat—that; vämanam—incarnation of Lord Vämana; rüpam—form;
avardhata—began to increase more and more; adbhutam—certainly very
wonderful; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anantasya—of the
unlimited; guëa-traya-ätmakam—whose body is expanded by the material
energy, consisting of three modes (goodness, passion and ignorance);
bhüù—the land; kham—the sky; diçaù—all directions; dyauù—the planetary
systems; vivaräù—different holes of the universe; payodhayaù—great seas and
oceans; tiryak—lower animals, birds and beasts; nå—human beings;
deväù—demigods; åñayaù—great saintly persons; yat—wherein; äsata—lived.
TRANSLATION
The unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had assumed the form
of Vämana, then began increasing in size, acting in terms of the material
energy, until everything in the universe was within His body, including the
earth, the planetary systems, the sky, the directions, the various holes in the
universe, the seas, the oceans, the birds, beasts, human beings, the demigods
and the great saintly persons.
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja wanted to give charity to Vämanadeva, but the Lord
expanded His body in such a way that He showed Bali Mahäräja that
everything in the universe is already in His body. Actually, no one can give
anything to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for He is full in everything.
Sometimes we see a devotee offering Ganges water to the Ganges. After taking
his bath in the Ganges, a devotee takes a palmful of water and offers it back to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
847
the Ganges. Actually, when one takes a palmful of water from the Ganges, the
Ganges does not lose anything, and similarly if a devotee offers a palmful of
water to the Ganges, the Ganges does not increase in any way. But by such an
offering, the devotee becomes celebrated as a devotee of mother Ganges.
Similarly, when we offer anything with devotion and faith, what we offer does
not belong to us, nor does it enrich the opulence of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. But if one offers whatever he has in his possession, he becomes a
recognized devotee. In this regard, the example is given that when one's face is
decorated with a garland and sandalwood pulp, the reflection of one's face in a
mirror automatically becomes beautiful. The original source of everything is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is our original source also.
Therefore when the Supreme Personality of Godhead is decorated, the
devotees and all living entities are decorated automatically.
TEXT 22
k-aYae bil/STaSYa Mahaiv>aUTae"
SahiTvRGaacaYaRSadSYa WTaTa( )
ddXaR ivì& i}aGau<a& Gau<aaTMake-
>aUTaeiNd]YaaQaaRXaYaJaqvYau¢-Ma( )) 22 ))
käye balis tasya mahä-vibhüteù
sahartvig-äcärya-sadasya etat
dadarça viçvaà tri-guëaà guëätmake
bhütendriyärthäçaya-jéva-yuktam
SYNONYMS
käye—in the body; baliù—Mahäräja Bali; tasya—of the Personality of
Godhead; mahä-vibhüteù—of that person who is equipped with all wonderful
opulences; saha-åtvik-äcärya-sadasyaù—with all the priests, äcäryas and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
848
members of the holy assembly; etat—this; dadarça—saw; viçvam—the whole
universe; tri-guëam—made of three modes of material nature;
guëa-ätmake—in that which is the source of all such qualities; bhüta—with all
the gross material elements; indriya—with the senses; artha—with the sense
objects; äçaya—with mind, intelligence and false ego; jéva-yuktam—with all
the living entities.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja, along with all the priests, äcäryas and members of the
assembly, observed the Supreme Personality of Godhead's universal body,
which was full of six opulences. That body contained everything within the
universe, including all the gross material elements, the senses, the sense objects,
the mind, intelligence and false ego, the various kinds of living entities, and the
actions and reactions of the three modes of material nature.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä, the Supreme Personality of Godhead says, ahaà sarvasya
prabhavo mattaù sarvaà pravartate: [Bg. 10.8] Kåñëa is the origin of everything.
Väsudevaù sarvam iti: [Bg. 7.19] Kåñëa is everything. Mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù: [Bg. 9.4] everything rests in the body of the Lord, yet
the Lord is not everywhere. Mäyävädé philosophers think that since the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, has become everything,
He has no separate existence. Their philosophy is called advaita-väda.
Actually, however, their philosophy is not correct. Here, Bali Mahäräja was
the seer of the Personality of Godhead's universal body, and that body was that
which was seen. Thus there is dvaita-väda; there are always two entities—the
seer and the seen. The seer is a part of the whole, but he is not equal to the
whole. The part of the whole, the seer, is also one with the whole, but since he
is but a part, he cannot be the complete whole at any time. This
acintya-bhedäbheda—simultaneous oneness and difference—is the perfect
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
849
philosophy propounded by Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
TEXT 23
rSaaMacíax(iga]Tale/_Qa PaadYaae‚
MaRhq& MahqDa]aNPauåzSYa JaºYaae" )
PaTaiT}a<aae JaaNauiNa ivìMaUTaeR‚
ævaeRGaR<a& MaaåTaiMaNd]SaeNa" )) 23 ))
rasäm acañöäìghri-tale 'tha pädayor
mahéà mahédhrän puruñasya jaìghayoù
patattriëo jänuni viçva-mürter
ürvor gaëaà märutam indrasenaù
SYNONYMS
rasäm—the lower planetary system; acañöa—observed; aìghri-tale—beneath
the feet, or on the sole; atha—thereafter; pädayoù—on the feet; mahém—the
surface of the land; mahédhrän—the mountains; puruñasya—of the giant
Personality of Godhead; jaìghayoù—on the calves; patattriëaù—the flying
living entities; jänuni—on the knees; viçva-mürteù—of the form of the
gigantic Lord; ürvoù—on the thighs; gaëam märutam—varieties of air;
indra-senaù—Bali Mahäräja, who had obtained the soldiers of King Indra and
who was situated in the post of Indra.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Bali Mahäräja, who was occupying the seat of King Indra, could
see the lower planetary systems, such as Rasätala, on the soles of the feet of the
Lord's universal form. He saw on the Lord's feet the surface of the globe, on
the surface of His calves all the mountains, on His knees the various birds, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
850
on His thighs the varieties of air.
PURPORT
The universal situation is described herein in regard to the complete
constitution of the Lord's gigantic universal form. The study of this universal
form begins from the sole. Above the soles are the feet, above the feet are the
calves, above the calves are the knees, and above the knees are the thighs.
Thus the parts of the universal body, one after another, are described herein.
The knees are the place of birds, and above that are varieties of air. The birds
can fly over the mountains, and above the birds are varieties of air.
TEXT 24
SaNDYaa& iv>aaevaRSaiSa Gauù We+aTa(
Pa[JaaPaTaqÅgaNae AaTMaMau:YaaNa( )
Naa>Yaa& Na>a" ku-i+azu SaáiSaNDaU‚
Nauå§-MaSYaaeriSa c+aRMaal/aMa( )) 24 ))
sandhyäà vibhor väsasi guhya aikñat
prajäpatéï jaghane ätma-mukhyän
näbhyäà nabhaù kukñiñu sapta-sindhün
urukramasyorasi carkña-mäläm
SYNONYMS
sandhyäm—the evening twilight; vibhoù—of the Supreme; väsasi—in the
garment; guhye—on the private parts; aikñat—he saw; prajäpatén—the various
Prajäpatis, who had given birth to all living entities; jaghane—on the hips;
ätma-mukhyän—the confidential ministers of Bali Mahäräja; näbhyäm—on
the navel; nabhaù—the whole sky; kukñiñu—on the waist; sapta—seven;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
851
sindhün—oceans; urukramasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
was acting wonderfully; urasi—on the bosom; ca—also; åkña-mäläm—the
clusters of stars.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja saw beneath the garments of the Lord, who acts wonderfully,
the evening twilight. In the Lord's private parts he saw the Prajäpatis, and in
the round portion of the waist he saw himself with his confidential associates.
In the Lord's navel he saw the sky, on the Lord's waist he saw the seven
oceans, and on the Lord's bosom he saw all the clusters of stars.
TEXTS 25-29
ôÛ(r) DaMa| STaNaYaaeMauRrare‚
‰RTa& c SaTYa& c MaNaSYaQaeNduMa( )
ié[Ya& c v+aSYarivNdhSTaa&
k-<#e= c SaaMaaiNa SaMaSTaref-aNa( )) 25 ))
wNd]Pa[DaaNaaNaMaraN>auJaezu
TaTk-<aRYaae" k-ku->aae ÛaEê MaUiDNaR )
ke-Xaezu MaegaaH^(vSaNa& NaaiSak-aYaa‚
Ma+<aaeê SaUYa| vdNae c viöMa( )) 26 ))
va<Yaa& c ^Nda&iSa rSae Jale/Xa&
>a]uvaeiNaRzeDa& c iviDa& c Pa+MaSau )
Ahê rai}a& c ParSYa Pau&Saae
MaNYau& l/l/a$e=_Dar Wv l/ae>aMa( )) 27 ))
SPaXaeR c k-aMa& Na*Pa reTaSaaM>a"
Pa*ïe TvDaMa| §-Ma<aezu YajMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
852
^aYaaSau Ma*TYau& hiSaTae c MaaYaa&
TaNaUåheZvaeziDaJaaTaYaê )) 28 ))
Nadqê Naa@qzu iXal/a Na%ezu
buÖavJa& devGa<aaNa*zq&ê )
Pa[a<aezu Gaa}ae iSQarJa(r)MaaiNa
SavaRi<a >aUTaaiNa ddXaR vqr" )) 29 ))
hådy aìga dharmaà stanayor murärer
åtaà ca satyaà ca manasy athendum
çriyaà ca vakñasy aravinda-hastäà
kaëöhe ca sämäni samasta-rephän
indra-pradhänän amarän bhujeñu
tat-karëayoù kakubho dyauç ca mürdhni
keçeñu meghäï chvasanaà näsikäyäm
akñëoç ca süryaà vadane ca vahnim
väëyäà ca chandäàsi rase jaleçaà
bhruvor niñedhaà ca vidhià ca pakñmasu
ahaç ca rätrià ca parasya puàso
manyuà laläöe 'dhara eva lobham
sparçe ca kämaà nåpa retasämbhaù
påñöhe tv adharmaà kramaëeñu yajïam
chäyäsu måtyuà hasite ca mäyäà
tanü-ruheñv oñadhi-jätayaç ca
nadéç ca näòéñu çilä nakheñu
buddhäv ajaà deva-gaëän åñéàç ca
präëeñu gätre sthira-jaìgamäni
sarväëi bhütäni dadarça véraù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
853
SYNONYMS
hådi—within the heart; aìga—my dear King Parékñit; dharmam—religion;
stanayoù—on the bosom; muräreù—of Muräri, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; åtam—very pleasing words; ca—also; satyam—truthfulness;
ca—also; manasi—in the mind; atha—thereafter; indum—the moon;
çriyam—the goddess of fortune; ca—also; vakñasi—on the chest;
aravinda-hastäm—who always carries a lotus flower in her hand; kaëöhe—on
the neck; ca—also; sämäni—all the Vedas (Säma, Yajur, Åg and Atharva);
samasta-rephän—all sound vibrations; indra-pradhänän—headed by King
Indra; amarän—all the demigods; bhujeñu—on the arms; tat-karëayoù—on the
ears; kakubhaù—all the directions; dyauù ca—the luminaries; mürdhni—on
the top of the head; keçeñu—within the hair; meghän—the clouds;
çvasanam—breathing air; näsikäyäm—on the nostrils; akñëoù ca—in the eyes;
süryam—the sun; vadane—in the mouth; ca—also; vahnim—fire; väëyäm—in
His speech; ca—also; chandäàsi—the Vedic hymns; rase—in the tongue;
jala-éçam—the demigod of the water; bhruvoù—on the eyebrows;
niñedham—warnings; ca—also; vidhim—regulative principles; ca—also;
pakñmasu—in the eyelids; ahaù ca—daytime; rätrim—night; ca—also;
parasya—of the supreme; puàsaù—of the person; manyum—anger; laläöe—on
the forehead; adhare—on the lips; eva—indeed; lobham—greed; sparçe—in
His touch; ca—also; kämam—lusty desires; nåpa—O King; retasä—by semen;
ambhaù—water; påñöhe—on the back; tu—but; adharmam—irreligion;
kramaëeñu—in the wonderful activities; yajïam—fire sacrifice; chäyäsu—in
the shadows; måtyum—death; hasite—in His smiling; ca—also; mäyäm—the
illusory energy; tanü-ruheñu—in the hair on the body; oñadhi-jätayaù—all
species of drugs, herbs and plants; ca—and; nadéù—the rivers; ca—also;
näòéñu—in the veins; çiläù—stones; nakheñu—in the nails; buddhau—in the
intelligence; ajam—Lord Brahmä; deva-gaëän—the demigods; åñén ca—and
the great sages; präëeñu—in the senses; gätre—in the body;
sthira-jaìgamäni—moving and stationary; sarväëi—all of them;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
854
bhütäni—living entities; dadarça—saw; véraù—Bali Mahäräja.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, on the heart of Lord Muräri he saw religion; on the chest,
both pleasing words and truthfulness; in the mind, the moon; on the bosom, the
goddess of fortune, with a lotus flower in her hand; on the neck, all the Vedas
and all sound vibrations; on the arms, all the demigods, headed by King Indra;
in both ears, all the directions; on the head, the upper planetary systems; on the
hair, the clouds; in the nostrils, the wind; on the eyes, the sun; and in the
mouth, fire. From His words came all the Vedic mantras, on His tongue was the
demigod of water, Varuëadeva, on His eyebrows were the regulative principles,
and on His eyelids were day and night. [When His eyes were open it was
daytime, and when they were closed it was night.] On His forehead was anger,
and on His lips was greed. O King, in His touch were lusty desires, in His
semen were all the waters, on His back was irreligion, and in His wonderful
activities or steps was the fire of sacrifice. On His shadow was death, in His
smile was the illusory energy, and on the hairs of His body were all the drugs
and herbs. In His veins were all the rivers, on His nails were all the stones, in
His intelligence were Lord Brahmä, the demigods and the great saintly persons,
and throughout His entire body and senses were all living entities, moving and
stationary. Bali Mahäräja thus saw everything in the gigantic body of the Lord.
TEXT 30
SavaRTMaNaqd& >auvNa& iNarq+Ya
SaveR_Saura" k-XMal/MaaPaur(r) )
SaudXaRNa& c§-MaSaùTaeJaae
DaNauê Xaa(r)| STaNaiYaÒugaaezMa( )) 30 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
855
sarvätmanédaà bhuvanaà nirékñya
sarve 'suräù kaçmalam äpur aìga
sudarçanaà cakram asahya-tejo
dhanuç ca çärìgaà stanayitnu-ghoñam
SYNONYMS
sarva-ätmani—in the supreme whole, the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
idam—this universe; bhuvanam—the three worlds; nirékñya—by observing;
sarve—all; asuräù—the demons, the associates of Bali Mahäräja;
kaçmalam—lamentation; äpuù—received; aìga—O King;
sudarçanam—named Sudarçana; cakram—the disc; asahya—unbearable;
tejaù—the heat of which; dhanuù ca—and the bow; çärìgam—named Çärìga;
stanayitnu—the resounding of assembled clouds; ghoñam—sounding like.
TRANSLATION
O King, when all the demons, the followers of Mahäräja Bali, saw the
universal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who held everything
within His body, when they saw in the Lord's hand His disc, known as the
Sudarçana cakra, which generates intolerable heat, and when they heard the
tumultuous sound of His bow, all of these caused lamentation within their
hearts.
TEXT 31
PaJaRNYagaaezae Jal/Ja" PaaÄJaNYa"
k-aEMaaedk-I ivZ<auGada TariSvNaq )
ivÛaDarae_iSa" XaTacNd]Yau¢-‚
STaU<aaetaMaav+aYaSaaYak-aE c )) 31 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
856
parjanya-ghoño jalajaù päïcajanyaù
kaumodaké viñëu-gadä tarasviné
vidyädharo 'siù çata-candra-yuktas
tüëottamäv akñayasäyakau ca
SYNONYMS
parjanya-ghoñaù—having a sound vibration like that of the clouds;
jalajaù—the Lord's conchshell; päïcajanyaù—which is known as Päïcajanya;
kaumodaké—known by the name Kaumodaké; viñëu-gadä—the club of Lord
Viñëu; tarasviné—with great force; vidyädharaù—named Vidyädhara;
asiù—the sword; çata-candra-yuktaù—with a shield decorated with hundreds
of moons; tüëa-uttamau—the best of quivers; akñayasäyakau—named
Akñayasäyaka; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The Lord's conchshell, named Päïcajanya, which made sounds like that of a
cloud; the very forceful club named Kaumodaké; the sword named Vidyädhara,
with a shield decorated with hundreds of moonlike spots; and also
Akñayasäyaka, the best of quivers—all of these appeared together to offer
prayers to the Lord.
TEXTS 32-33
SauNaNdMau:Yaa oPaTaSQaurqXa&
PaazRdMau:Yaa" Sahl/aek-Paal/a" )
Sfu-riTk-rq$=a(r)dMaqNaku-<@l/"
é[qvTSarÒaetaMaMae%l/aMbrE" )) 32 ))
MaDauv]TaóGvNaMaal/Yaav*Taae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
857
rraJa raJaN>aGavaNauå§-Ma" )
i+aiTa& PadEke-Na ble/ivRc§-Mae
Na>a" Xarqre<a idXaê bahui>a" )) 33 ))
sunanda-mukhyä upatasthur éçaà
pärñada-mukhyäù saha-loka-päläù
sphurat-kiréöäìgada-ména-kuëòalaù
çrévatsa-ratnottama-mekhalämbaraiù
madhuvrata-srag-vanamälayävåto
raräja räjan bhagavän urukramaù
kñitià padaikena baler vicakrame
nabhaù çaréreëa diçaç ca bähubhiù
SYNONYMS
sunanda-mukhyäù—the associates of the Lord headed by Sunanda;
upatasthuù—began to offer prayers; éçam—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; pärñada-mukhyäù—other chiefs of the associates;
saha-loka-päläù—with the predominant deities of all the planets;
sphurat-kiréöa—with a brilliant helmet; aìgada—bracelets;
ména-kuëòalaù—and earrings in the shape of fish; çrévatsa—the hair named
Çrévatsa on His bosom; ratna-uttama—the best of jewels (Kaustubha);
mekhalä—belt; ambaraiù—with yellow garments; madhu-vrata—of bees;
srak—in which there was a garland; vanamälayä—by a flower garland;
ävåtaù—covered; raräja—predominantly manifested; räjan—O King;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; urukramaù—who is
prominent by His wonderful activities; kñitim—the whole surface of the world;
padä ekena—by one footstep; baleù—of Bali Mahäräja; vicakrame—covered;
nabhaù—the sky; çaréreëa—by His body; diçaù ca—and all directions;
bähubhiù—by His arms.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
858
TRANSLATION
These associates, headed by Sunanda and other chief associates and
accompanied by all the predominating deities of the various planets, offered
prayers to the Lord, who wore a brilliant helmet, bracelets, and glittering
earrings that resembled fish. On the Lord's bosom were the lock of hair called
Çrévatsa and the transcendental jewel named Kaustubha. He wore a yellow
garment, covered by a belt, and He was decorated by a flower garland,
surrounded by bees. Manifesting Himself in this way, O King, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whose activities are wonderful, covered the entire
surface of the earth with one footstep, the sky with His body, and all directions
with His arms.
PURPORT
One might argue, "Since Bali Mahäräja promised Vämanadeva only the
land occupied by His steps, why did Lord Vämanadeva occupy the sky also?" In
this regard, Çréla Jéva Gosvämé says that the steps include everything,
downward and upward. When one stands up, he certainly occupies certain
parts of the sky and certain portions of the earth below his feet. Thus there
was nothing uncommon for the Supreme Personality of Godhead when He
occupied the entire sky with His body.
TEXT 34
Pad& iÜTaqYa& §-MaTaiñivíPa&
Na vE Ta*TaqYaaYa TadqYaMa<viPa )
oå§-MaSYaax(iga]åPaYauRPaYaRQaae
MahJaRNaa>Yaa& TaPaSa" Par& GaTa" )) 34 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
859
padaà dvitéyaà kramatas triviñöapaà
na vai tåtéyäya tadéyam aëv api
urukramasyäìghrir upary upary atho
mahar-janäbhyäà tapasaù paraà gataù
SYNONYMS
padam—step; dvitéyam—second; kramataù—advancing; tri-viñöapam—all of
the heavenly planets; na—not; vai—indeed; tåtéyäya—for the third step;
tadéyam—of the Lord; aëu api—only a spot of land remained;
urukramasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who performs
uncommon activities; aìghriù—steps occupying above and below; upari
upari—higher and higher; atho—now; mahaù-janäbhyäm—than Maharloka
and Janaloka; tapasaù—that Tapoloka; param—beyond that;
gataù—approached.
TRANSLATION
As the Lord took His second step, He covered the heavenly planets. And not
even a spot remained for the third step, for the Lord's foot extended higher and
higher, beyond Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka and even Satyaloka.
PURPORT
When the Lord's footstep exceeded the height of all the lokas, including
Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka, His nails certainly pierced the
covering of the universe. The universe is covered by the five material elements
(bhümir äpo 'nalo väyuù kham [Bg. 7.4]). As stated in the çästra, these elements
are in layers, each ten times thicker than the previous one. Nonetheless, the
nails of the Lord pierced through all these layers and made a hole penetrating
into the spiritual world. From this hole, the water of the Ganges infiltrated
into this material world, and therefore it is said, pada-nakha-néra janita
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
860
jana-pävana (Daçävatära-stotra 5). Because the Lord kicked a hole in the
covering of the universe, the water of the Ganges came into this material
world to deliver all the fallen souls.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twentieth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Bali Mahäräja Surrenders the Universe."
21. Bali Mahäräja Arrested by the Lord
This chapter describes how Lord Viñëu, desiring to advertise the glories of
Bali Mahäräja, arrested him for not fulfilling his promise in regard to the
Lord's third step.
With the second step the Supreme Personality of Godhead reached the
topmost planet of the universe, Brahmaloka, which He diminished in beauty
by the effulgence of His toenails. Thus Lord Brahmä, accompanied by great
sages like Maréci and the predominating deities of all the higher planets,
offered humble prayers and worship to the Lord. They washed the Lord's feet
and worshiped Him with all paraphernalia. Åkñaräja, Jämbavän, played his
bugle to vibrate the glories of the Lord. When Bali Mahäräja was deprived of
all his possessions, the demons were very angry. Although Bali Mahäräja
warned them not to do so, they took up weapons against Lord Viñëu. All of
them were defeated, however, by Lord Viñëu's eternal associates, and, in
accordance with Bali Mahäräja's order, they all entered the lower planets of
the universe. Understanding Lord Viñëu's purpose, Garuòa, the carrier of Lord
Viñëu, immediately arrested Bali Mahäräja with the ropes of Varuëa. When
Bali Mahäräja was thus reduced to a helpless position, Lord Viñëu asked him
for the third step of land. Because Lord Viñëu appreciated Bali Mahäräja's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
861
determination and integrity, when Bali Mahäräja was unable to fulfill his
promise, Lord Viñëu ascertained that the place for him would be the planet
Sutala, which is better than the planets of heaven.
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
SaTYa& SaMaq+YaaBJa>avae Na%eNdui>a‚
hRTaSvDaaMaÛuiTarav*Taae_>YaGaaTa( )
MarqiciMaé[a ‰zYaae b*hd(v]Taa"
SaNaNdNaaÛa Nardev YaaeiGaNa" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
satyaà samékñyäbja-bhavo nakhendubhir
hata-svadhäma-dyutir ävåto 'bhyagät
maréci-miçrä åñayo båhad-vratäù
sanandanädyä nara-deva yoginaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; satyam—the planet Satyaloka;
samékñya—by observing; abja-bhavaù—Lord Brahmä, who appeared on the
lotus flower; nakha-indubhiù—by the effulgence of the nails; hata—having
been reduced; sva-dhäma-dyutiù—the illumination of his own residence;
ävåtaù—being covered; abhyagät—came; maréci-miçräù—with sages like
Maréci; åñayaù—great saintly persons; båhat-vratäù—all of them absolutely
brahmacäré; sanandana-ädyäù—like Sanaka, Sanätana, Sanandana and
Sanat-kumära; nara-deva—O King; yoginaù—greatly powerful mystics.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
862
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: When Lord Brahmä, who was born of a lotus
flower, saw that the effulgence of his residence, Brahmaloka, had been reduced
by the glaring effulgence from the toenails of Lord Vämanadeva, he approached
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Brahmä was accompanied by all the
great sages, headed by Maréci, and by yogés like Sanandana, but in the presence
of that glaring effulgence, O King, even Lord Brahmä and his associates seemed
insignificant.
TEXTS 2-3
vedaePaveda iNaYaMaa YaMaaiNvTaa‚
STakeR-iTahaSaa(r)Paura<aSa&ihTaa" )
Yae caPare YaaeGaSaMaqrdqiPaTa‚
jaNaaiGanNaa riNDaTak-MaRk-LMaza" )) 2 ))
vviNdre YaTSMar<aaNau>aavTa"
SvaYaM>auv& DaaMa GaTaa Ak-MaRk-Ma( )
AQaax(ga]Yae Pa[aeàiMaTaaYa ivZ<aae‚
åPaahrTa( PaÚ>avae_hR<aaedk-Ma( )
SaMaCYaR >a¢-ya>YaGa*<aaC^uicé[va
Yaàai>aPaªeåhSaM>av" SvYaMa( )) 3 ))
vedopavedä niyamä yamänvitäs
tarketihäsäìga-puräëa-saàhitäù
ye cäpare yoga-saméra-dépitajïänägninä
randhita-karma-kalmañäù
vavandire yat-smaraëänubhävataù
sväyambhuvaà dhäma gatä akarmakam
athäìghraye pronnamitäya viñëor
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
863
upäharat padma-bhavo 'rhaëodakam
samarcya bhaktyäbhyagåëäc chuci-çravä
yan-näbhi-paìkeruha-sambhavaù svayam
SYNONYMS
veda—the four Vedas (Säma, Yajur, Åg and Atharva), the original knowledge
given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; upavedäù—the complementary
and supplementary Vedic knowledge, like Äyur-veda and Dhanur-veda;
niyamäù—regulative principles; yama—controlling processes; anvitäù—fully
expert in such matters; tarka—logic; itihäsa—history; aìga—Vedic education;
puräëa—old history recorded in the stories of the puräëas; saàhitäù—Vedic
complementary studies like the Brahma-saàhitä; ye—others; ca—also;
apare—other than Lord Brahmä and his associates;
yoga-saméra-dépita—ignited by the air of mystic yoga practice;
jïäna-agninä—by the fire of knowledge; randhita-karma-kalmañäù—those for
whom all pollution of fruitive activities has been stopped; vavandire—offered
their prayers; yat-smaraëa-anubhävataù—simply by meditating on whom;
sväyambhuvam—of Lord Brahmä; dhäma—the residence; gatäù—had
achieved; akarmakam—which cannot be achieved by fruitive activities;
atha—thereupon; aìghraye—unto the lotus feet; pronnamitäya—offered
obeisances; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; upäharat—offered worship;
padma-bhavaù—Lord Brahmä, who appeared from the lotus flower;
arhaëa-udakam—oblation by water; samarcya—worshiping; bhaktyä—in
devotional service; abhyagåëät—pleased him; çuci-çraväù—the most celebrated
Vedic authority; yat-näbhi-paìkeruha-sambhavaù svayam—Lord Brahmä, who
personally appeared from the lotus in the navel of whom (the Personality of
Godhead).
TRANSLATION
Among the great personalities who came to worship the lotus feet of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
864
Lord were those who had attained perfection in self-control and regulative
principles, as well as experts in logic, history, general education and the Vedic
literature known as kalpe [dealing with old historical incidents]. Others were
experts in the Vedic corollaries like Brahma-saàhitä, all the other knowledge of
the Vedas [Säma, Yajur, Åg and Atharva], and also the supplementary Vedic
knowledge [Äyur-veda, Dhanur-veda, etc.]. Others were those who had been
freed of the reactions to fruitive activities by transcendental knowledge
awakened by practice of yoga. And still others were those who had attained
residence in Brahmaloka not by ordinary karma but by advanced Vedic
knowledge. After devotedly worshiping the upraised lotus feet of the Supreme
Lord with oblations of water, Lord Brahmä, who was born of the lotus
emanating from Lord Viñëu's navel, offered prayers to the Lord.
TEXT 4
DaaTau" k-Ma<@lu/Jal&/ Taduå§-MaSYa
PaadavNaeJaNaPaiv}aTaYaa NareNd] )
SvDauRNYa>aUà>aiSa Saa PaTaTaq iNaMaaiíR
l/aek-}aYa& >aGavTaae ivXadev k-IiTaR" )) 4 ))
dhätuù kamaëòalu-jalaà tad urukramasya
pädävanejana-pavitratayä narendra
svardhuny abhün nabhasi sä pataté nimärñöi
loka-trayaà bhagavato viçadeva kértiù
SYNONYMS
dhätuù—of Lord Brahmä; kamaëòalu-jalam—water from the kamaëòalu;
tat—that; urukramasya—of Lord Viñëu; päda-avanejana-pavitratayä—because
of washing the lotus feet of Lord Viñëu and thus being transcendentally pure;
nara-indra—O King; svardhuné—the river named Svardhuné of the celestial
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
865
world; abhüt—so became; nabhasi—in outer space; sä—that water;
pataté—flowing down; nimärñöi—purifying; loka-trayam—the three worlds;
bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viçadä—so purified;
iva—just like; kértiù—the fame or the glorious activities.
TRANSLATION
O King, the water from Lord Brahmä's kamaëòalu washed the lotus feet of
Lord Vämanadeva, who is known as Urukrama, the wonderful actor. Thus that
water became so pure that it was transformed into the water of the Ganges,
which went flowing down from the sky, purifying the three worlds like the pure
fame of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Here we understand that the Ganges began when the water from Lord
Brahmä's kamaëòalu washed the lotus feet of Lord Vämanadeva. But in the
Fifth Canto it is stated that the Ganges began when Vämanadeva's left foot
pierced the covering of the universe so that the transcendental water of the
Causal Ocean leaked through. And elsewhere it is also stated that Lord
Näräyaëa appeared as the water of the Ganges. The water of the Ganges,
therefore, is a combination of three transcendental waters, and thus the
Ganges is able to purify the three worlds. This is the description given by Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura.
TEXT 5
b]øadYaae l/aek-NaaQaa" SvNaaQaaYa SaMaad*Taa" )
SaaNauGaa bil/MaaJahu" Sai¿áaTMaiv>aUTaYae )) 5 ))
brahmädayo loka-näthäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
866
sva-näthäya samädåtäù
sänugä balim äjahruù
saìkñiptätma-vibhütaye
SYNONYMS
brahma-ädayaù—great personalities, headed by Lord Brahmä;
loka-näthäù—the predominating deities of various planets; sva-näthäya—unto
their supreme master; samädåtäù—with great respect; sa-anugäù—with their
respective followers; balim—different paraphernalia of worship;
äjahruù—collected; saìkñipta-ätma-vibhütaye—unto the Lord, who had
expanded His personal opulence but had now reduced His size to the Vämana
form.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä and all the predominating deities of the various planetary
systems began to worship Lord Vämanadeva, their supreme master, who had
reduced Himself from His all-pervading form to His original form. They
collected all the ingredients and paraphernalia for this worship.
PURPORT
Vämanadeva first expanded Himself to the universal form and then
reduced Himself to the original Vämana-rüpa. Thus He acted exactly like Lord
Kåñëa, who, at the request of Arjuna, first showed His universal form and later
resumed His original form as Kåñëa. The Lord can assume any form He likes,
but His original form is that of Kåñëa (kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam [SB 1.3.28]).
According to the capacity of the devotee, the Lord assumes various forms so
that the devotee can handle Him. This is His causeless mercy. When Lord
Vämanadeva resumed His original form, Lord Brahmä and his associates
collected various paraphernalia for worship with which to please Him.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
867
TEXTS 6-7
TaaeYaE" SaMahR<aE" óiG>aidRVYaGaNDaaNaule/PaNaE" )
DaUPaEdsPaE" Sauri>ai>al/aRJaa+aTaf-l/ax(ku-rE" )) 6 ))
STavNaEJaRYaXaBdEê TaÜqYaRMaihMaaiªTaE" )
Na*TYavaid}aGaqTaEê Xa«duNdui>aiNa"SvNaE" )) 7 ))
toyaiù samarhaëaiù sragbhir
divya-gandhänulepanaiù
dhüpair dépaiù surabhibhir
läjäkñata-phaläìkuraiù
stavanair jaya-çabdaiç ca
tad-vérya-mahimäìkitaiù
nåtya-väditra-gétaiç ca
çaìkha-dundubhi-niùsvanaiù
SYNONYMS
toyaiù—by water required for washing the lotus feet and bathing;
samarhaëaiù—by pädya, arghya and other such items for worshiping the Lord;
sragbhiù—by flower garlands; divya-gandha-anulepanaiù—by many kinds of
pulp, like sandalwood and aguru, to smear upon the body of Lord Vämanadeva;
dhüpaiù—by incense; dépaiù—by lamps; surabhibhiù—all of them extremely
fragrant; läja—by fried paddies; akñata—by unbroken grains; phala—by fruits;
aìkuraiù—by roots and sprouts; stavanaiù—by offering prayers;
jaya-çabdaiù—by saying "jaya, jaya"; ca—also;
tat-vérya-mahimä-aìkitaiù—which indicated the glorious activities of the Lord;
nåtya-väditra-gétaiù ca—by dancing, playing various musical instruments, and
singing songs; çaìkha—of vibrating conchshells; dundubhi—of the beating on
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
868
kettledrums; niùsvanaiù—by the sound vibrations.
TRANSLATION
They worshiped the Lord by offering fragrant flowers, water, pädya and
arghya, sandalwood pulp and aguru pulp, incense, lamps, fused rice, unbroken
grains, fruits, roots and sprouts. While so doing, they offered prayers indicating
the glorious activities of the Lord and shouted "Jaya! Jaya!" They also danced,
played instruments, sang, sounded conchshells and beat kettledrums, in this
way worshiping the Lord.
TEXT 8
JaaMbvaNa*+araJaSTau >aerqXaBdEMaRNaaeJav" )
ivJaYa& id+au SavaRSau MahaeTSavMagaaezYaTa( )) 8 ))
jämbavän åkña-räjas tu
bheré-çabdair mano-javaù
vijayaà dikñu sarväsu
mahotsavam aghoñayat
SYNONYMS
jämbavän—who was named Jämbavän; åkña-räjaù tu—the king in the form of a
bear also; bheré-çabdaiù—by sounding the bugle; manaù-javaù—in mental
ecstasy; vijayam—victory; dikñu—in all directions; sarväsu—everywhere;
mahä-utsavam—festival; aghoñayat—declared.
TRANSLATION
Jämbavän, king of the bears, also joined in the ceremony. Sounding his bugle
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
869
in all directions, he declared a great festival for Lord Vämanadeva's victory.
TEXT 9
Mahq& Sava| ôTaa& d*îa i}aPadVYaaJaYaaÁYaa )
Ocu" Sv>aTauRrSaura dqi+aTaSYaaTYaMaizRTaa" )) 9 ))
mahéà sarväà håtäà dåñövä
tripada-vyäja-yäcïayä
ücuù sva-bhartur asurä
dékñitasyätyamarñitäù
SYNONYMS
mahém—land; sarväm—all; håtäm—lost; dåñövä—after seeing;
tri-pada-vyäja-yäcïayä—by simply asking three steps of land; ücuù—said;
sva-bhartuù—of their master; asuräù—the demons; dékñitasya—of Bali
Mahäräja, who was so determined in the sacrifice; ati—very much;
amarñitäù—for whom the function was unbearable.
TRANSLATION
When the demoniac followers of Mahäräja Bali saw that their master, who
had been determined in performing sacrifice, had lost all his possessions to
Vämanadeva, who had taken them away on the plea of begging three paces of
land, they were very angry and spoke as follows.
TEXT 10
Na vaYa& b]øbNDauivRZ<auMaaRYaaivNaa& vr" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
870
iÜJaæPaPa[iTaC^àae devk-aYa| ick-IzRiTa )) 10 ))
na väyaà brahma-bandhur
viñëur mäyävinäà varaù
dvija-rüpa-praticchanno
deva-käryaà cikérñati
SYNONYMS
na—not; vä—either; ayam—this; brahma-bandhuù—Vämanadeva, in the
form of a brähmaëa; viñëuù—He is Lord Viñëu Himself; mäyävinäm—of all
cheaters; varaù—the greatest; dvija-rüpa—by assuming the form of a
brähmaëa; praticchannaù—is disguised for the purpose of cheating;
deva-käryam—the interest of the demigods; cikérñati—He is trying for.
TRANSLATION
"This Vämana is certainly not a brähmaëa but the best of cheaters, Lord
Viñëu. Assuming the form of a brähmaëa, He has covered His own form, and
thus He is working for the interests of the demigods.
TEXT 11
ANaeNa YaacMaaNaeNa Xa}au<aa v$u=æiPa<aa )
SavRSv& Naae ôTa& >aTauRNYaRSTad<@SYa bihRiz )) 11 ))
anena yäcamänena
çatruëä vaöu-rüpiëä
sarvasvaà no håtaà bhartur
nyasta-daëòasya barhiñi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
871
SYNONYMS
anena—by Him; yäcamänena—who is in the position of a beggar; çatruëä—by
the enemy; vaöu-rüpiëä—in the form of a brahmacäré; sarvasvam—everything;
naù—our; håtam—has been taken away; bhartuù—of our master; nyasta—had
been given up; daëòasya—of whom the power of giving punishment;
barhiñi—because of taking the vow of a ritualistic ceremony.
TRANSLATION
"Our lord, Bali Mahäräja, because of his position in performing the yajïa,
has given up the power to punish. Taking advantage of this, our eternal enemy,
Viñëu, dressed in the form of a brahmacäré beggar, has taken away all his
possessions.
TEXT 12
SaTYav]TaSYa SaTaTa& dqi+aTaSYa ivXaezTa" )
NaaNa*Ta& >aaizTau& XaKYa& b]ø<YaSYa dYaavTa" )) 12 ))
satya-vratasya satataà
dékñitasya viçeñataù
nänåtaà bhäñituà çakyaà
brahmaëyasya dayävataù
SYNONYMS
satya-vratasya—of Mahäräja Bali, who is fixed in truthfulness;
satatam—always; dékñitasya—of he who was initiated into performing yajïa;
viçeñataù—specifically; na—not; anåtam—untruth; bhäñitum—to speak;
çakyam—is able; brahmaëyasya—to the brahminical culture, or to the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
872
brähmaëa; dayä-vataù—of he who is always kind.
TRANSLATION
"Our lord, Bali Mahäräja, is always fixed in truthfulness, and this is
especially so at present, since he has been initiated into performing a sacrifice.
He is always kind and merciful toward the brähmaëas, and he cannot at any
time speak lies.
TEXT 13
TaSMaadSYa vDaae DaMaaeR >aTauR" éué[Uz<a& c Na" )
wTYaaYauDaaiNa JaGa*hubRle/rNaucraSaura" )) 13 ))
tasmäd asya vadho dharmo
bhartuù çuçrüñaëaà ca naù
ity äyudhäni jagåhur
baler anucaräsuräù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; asya—of this brahmacäré Vämana; vadhaù—the killing;
dharmaù—is our duty; bhartuù—of our master; çuçrüñaëam ca—and it is the
way of serving; naù—our; iti—thus; äyudhäni—all kinds of weapons;
jagåhuù—they took up; baleù—of Bali Mahäräja; anucara—followers;
asuräù—all the demons.
TRANSLATION
"Therefore it is our duty to kill this Vämanadeva, Lord Viñëu. It is our
religious principle and the way to serve our master." After making this decision,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
873
the demoniac followers of Mahäräja Bali took up their various weapons with a
view to killing Vämanadeva.
TEXT 14
Tae SaveR vaMaNa& hNTau& éUl/PaiÆXaPaa<aYa" )
AiNaC^NTaae ble/ raJaNa( Pa[ad]vÅaTaMaNYav" )) 14 ))
te sarve vämanaà hantuà
çüla-paööiça-päëayaù
anicchanto bale räjan
prädravaï jäta-manyavaù
SYNONYMS
te—the demons; sarve—all of them; vämanam—Lord Vämanadeva;
hantum—to kill; çüla—tridents; paööiça—lances; päëayaù—all taking in hand;
anicchantaù—against the will; baleù—of Bali Mahäräja; räjan—O King;
prädravan—they pushed forward; jäta-manyavaù—aggravated by usual anger.
TRANSLATION
O King, the demons, aggravated by their usual anger, took their lances and
tridents in hand, and against the will of Bali Mahäräja they pushed forward to
kill Lord Vämanadeva.
TEXT 15
TaaNai>ad]vTaae d*îa idiTaJaaNaqk-PaaNa( Na*Pa )
Pa[hSYaaNaucra ivZ<aae" Pa[TYazeDaàudaYauDaa" )) 15 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
874
tän abhidravato dåñövä
ditijänékapän nåpa
prahasyänucarä viñëoù
pratyañedhann udäyudhäù
SYNONYMS
tän—them; abhidravataù—thus going forward; dåñövä—seeing;
ditija-anéka-pän—the soldiers of the demons; nåpa—O King;
prahasya—smiling; anucaräù—the associates; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu;
pratyañedhan—forbade; udäyudhäù—taking up their weapons.
TRANSLATION
O King, when the associates of Lord Viñëu saw the soldiers of the demons
coming forward in violence, they smiled. Taking up their weapons, they forbade
the demons to continue their attempt.
TEXTS 16-17
NaNd" SauNaNdae_Qa JaYaae ivJaYa" Pa[bl/ae bl/" )
ku-Maud" ku-Mauda+aê ivZvKSaeNa" PaTaiT}ara$( )) 16 ))
JaYaNTa" é[uTadevê PauZPadNTaae_Qa SaaTvTa" )
SaveR NaaGaaYauTaPa[a<aaêMaU& Tae JaganuraSaurqMa( )) 17 ))
nandaù sunando 'tha jayo
vijayaù prabalo balaù
kumudaù kumudäkñaç ca
viñvaksenaù patattriräö
jayantaù çrutadevaç ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
875
puñpadanto 'tha sätvataù
sarve nägäyuta-präëäç
camüà te jaghnur äsurém
SYNONYMS
nandaù sunandaù—the associates of Lord Viñëu such as Nanda and Sunanda;
atha—in this way; jayaù vijayaù prabalaù balaù kumudaù kumudäkñaù ca
viñvaksenaù—as well as Jaya, Vijaya, Prabala, Bala, Kumada, Kumudäkña and
Viñvaksena; patattri-räö—Garuòa, the king of the birds; jayantaù çrutadevaù ca
puñpadantaù atha sätvataù—Jayanta, Çrutadeva, Puñpadanta and Sätvata;
sarve—all of them; näga-ayuta-präëäù—as powerful as ten thousand
elephants; camüm—the soldiers of the demons; te—they; jaghnuù—killed;
äsurém—demoniac.
TRANSLATION
Nanda, Sunanda, Jaya, Vijaya, Prabala, Bala, Kumuda, Kumudäkña,
Viñvaksena, Patattriräö [Garuòa], Jayanta, Çrutadeva, Puñpadanta and Sätvata
were all associates of Lord Viñëu. They were as powerful as ten thousand
elephants, and now they began killing the soldiers of the demons.
TEXT 18
hNYaMaaNaaNa( Svk-aNa( d*îa PauåzaNaucrEbRil/" )
varYaaMaaSa Sa&rBDaaNa( k-aVYaXaaPaMaNauSMarNa( )) 18 ))
hanyamänän svakän dåñövä
puruñänucarair baliù
värayäm äsa saàrabdhän
kävya-çäpam anusmaran
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
876
SYNONYMS
hanyamänän—being killed; svakän—his own soldiers; dåñövä—after seeing;
puruña-anucaraiù—by the associates of the Supreme Person; baliù—Bali
Mahäräja; värayäm äsa—forbade; saàrabdhän—even though they were very
angry; kävya-çäpam—the curse given by Çukräcärya;
anusmaran—remembering.
TRANSLATION
When Bali Mahäräja saw that his own soldiers were being killed by the
associates of Lord Viñëu, he remembered the curse of Çukräcärya and forbade
his soldiers to continue fighting.
TEXT 19
he ivPa[ictae he rahae he NaeMae é[UYaTaa& vc" )
Maa YauDYaTa iNavTaRß& Na Na" k-al/ae_YaMaQaRk*-Ta( )) 19 ))
he vipracitte he räho
he neme çrüyatäà vacaù
mä yudhyata nivartadhvaà
na naù kälo 'yam artha-kåt
SYNONYMS
he vipracitte—O Vipracitti; he räho—O Rähu; he neme—O Nemi;
çrüyatäm—kindly hear; vacaù—my words; mä—do not; yudhyata—fight;
nivartadhvam—stop this fighting; na—not; naù—our; kälaù—favorable time;
ayam—this; artha-kåt—which can give us success.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
877
TRANSLATION
O Vipracitti, O Rähu, O Nemi, please hear my words! Don't fight. Stop
immediately, for the present time is not in our favor.
TEXT 20
Ya" Pa[>au" SavR>aUTaaNaa& Sau%du"%aePaPataYae )
Ta& NaaiTaviTaRTau& dETYaa" PaaEåzErqìr" PauMaaNa( )) 20 ))
yaù prabhuù sarva-bhütänäà
sukha-duùkhopapattaye
taà nätivartituà daityäù
pauruñair éçvaraù pumän
SYNONYMS
yaù prabhuù—that Supreme Person, the master; sarva-bhütänäm—of all living
entities; sukha-duùkha-upapattaye—for administering happiness and distress;
tam—Him; na—not; ativartitum—to overcome; daityäù—O demons;
pauruñaiù—by human endeavors; éçvaraù—the supreme controller; pumän—a
person.
TRANSLATION
O Daityas, by human efforts no one can supersede the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who can bring happiness and distress to all living entities.
TEXT 21
Yaae Naae >avaYa Pa[aGaaSaqd>avaYa idvaEk-SaaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
878
Sa Wv >aGavaNaÛ vTaRTae TaiÜPaYaRYaMa( )) 21 ))
yo no bhaväya präg äséd
abhaväya divaukasäm
sa eva bhagavän adya
vartate tad-viparyayam
SYNONYMS
yaù—the time factor, which represents the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
naù—of us; bhaväya—for the improvement; präk—formerly; äsét—was
situated; abhaväya—for the defeat; diva-okasäm—of the demigods; saù—that
time factor; eva—indeed; bhagavän—the representative of the Supreme
Person; adya—today; vartate—is existing; tat-viparyayam—just the opposite of
our favor.
TRANSLATION
The supreme time factor, which represents the Supreme Person, was
previously in our favor and not in favor of the demigods, but now that same
time factor is against us.
TEXT 22
ble/Na SaicvEbuRÖya duGaOEMaRN}aaEzDaaidi>a" )
SaaMaaidi>aåPaaYaEê k-al&/ NaaTYaeiTa vE JaNa" )) 22 ))
balena sacivair buddhyä
durgair mantrauñadhädibhiù
sämädibhir upäyaiç ca
kälaà nätyeti vai janaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
879
SYNONYMS
balena—by material power; sacivaiù—by the counsel of ministers;
buddhyä—by intelligence; durgaiù—by fortresses; mantra-auñadha-ädibhiù—by
mystic chanting or the influence of drugs and herbs; säma-ädibhiù—by
diplomacy and other such means; upäyaiù ca—by similar other attempts;
kälam—the time factor, representing the Supreme Lord; na—never;
atyeti—can overcome; vai—indeed; janaù—any person.
TRANSLATION
No one can surpass the time representation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead by material power, by the counsel of ministers, by intelligence, by
diplomacy, by fortresses, by mystic mantras, by drugs, by herbs or by any other
means.
TEXT 23
>aviÙiNaRiJaRTaa ùeTae bhuXaae_Naucra hre" )
dEveNaÖOESTa WvaÛ YauiDa iJaTva NadiNTa Na" )) 23 ))
bhavadbhir nirjitä hy ete
bahuço 'nucarä hareù
daivenarddhais ta evädya
yudhi jitvä nadanti naù
SYNONYMS
bhavadbhiù—by all of you demons; nirjitäù—have been defeated; hi—indeed;
ete—all these soldiers of the demigods; bahuçaù—in great number;
anucaräù—followers; hareù—of Lord Viñëu; daivena—by providence;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
880
åddhaiù—whose opulence was increased; te—they (the demigods);
eva—indeed; adya—today; yudhi—in the fight; jitvä—defeating; nadanti—are
vibrating in jubilation; naù—us.
TRANSLATION
Previously, being empowered by providence, you defeated a great number of
such followers of Lord Viñëu. But today those same followers, having defeated
us, are roaring in jubilation like lions.
PURPORT
Bhagavad-gétä mentions five causes of defeat or victory. Of these five, daiva
(providence) is the most powerful (na ca daivät paraà balam). Bali Mahäräja
knew the secret of how he had formerly been victorious because providence
was in his favor. Now, since that same providence was not in his favor, there
was no possibility of his victory. Thus he very intelligently forbade his
associates to fight.
TEXT 24
WTaaNa( vYa& ivJaeZYaaMaae Yaid dEv& Pa[SaqdiTa )
TaSMaaTa( k-al&/ Pa[Taq+aß& Yaae Naae_QaRTvaYa k-LPaTae )) 24 ))
etän vayaà vijeñyämo
yadi daivaà prasédati
tasmät kälaà pratékñadhvaà
yo no 'rthatväya kalpate
SYNONYMS
etän—all these soldiers of the demigods; vayam—we; vijeñyämaù—shall gain
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
881
victory over them; yadi—if; daivam—providence; prasédati—is in favor;
tasmät—therefore; kälam—that favorable time; pratékñadhvam—wait until;
yaù—which; naù—our; arthatväya kalpate—should be considered in our favor.
TRANSLATION
Unless providence is in our favor, we shall not be able to gain victory.
Therefore we must wait for that favorable time when our defeating them will be
possible.
TEXT 25
é[qéuk- ovac
PaTYauiNaRGaidTa& é[uTva dETYadaNavYaUQaPaa" )
rSaa& iNaivRivéU raJaNa( ivZ<auPaazRdTaai@Taa" )) 25 ))
çré-çuka uväca
patyur nigaditaà çrutvä
daitya-dänava-yüthapäù
rasäà nirviviçü räjan
viñëu-pärñada täòitäù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; patyuù—of their master (Bali
Mahäräja); nigaditam—what had been thus described; çrutvä—after hearing;
daitya-dänava-yütha-päù—the leaders of the Daityas and demons; rasäm—the
lower regions of the universe; nirviviçüù—entered; räjan—O King;
viñëu-pärñada—by the associates of Lord Viñëu; täòitäù—driven.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
882
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: O King, in accordance with the order of their
master, Bali Mahäräja, all the chiefs of the demons and the Daityas entered the
lower regions of the universe, to which they were driven by the soldiers of
Viñëu.
TEXT 26
AQa Taa+YaRSauTaae jaTva ivra$( Pa[>auick-IizRTaMa( )
bbNDa vaå<aE" PaaXaEbRil&/ SaUTYae_hiNa §-TaaE )) 26 ))
atha tärkñya-suto jïätvä
viräö prabhu-cikérñitam
babandha väruëaiù päçair
balià sütye 'hani kratau
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; tärkñya-sutaù—Garuòa; jïätvä—knowing; viräö—the king of
birds; prabhu-cikérñitam—the desire of Lord Viñëu as Vämanadeva;
babandha—arrested; väruëaiù—belonging to Varuëa; päçaiù—by the ropes;
balim—Bali; sütye—when soma-rasa is taken; ahani—on the day; kratau—at
the time of sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, on the day of soma-päna, after the sacrifice was finished,
Garuòa, king of the birds, understanding the desire of his master, arrested Bali
Mahäräja with the ropes of Varuëa.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
883
PURPORT
Garuòa, the constant companion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
knows the confidential part of the Lord's desire. Bali Mahäräja's tolerance and
devotion were undoubtedly superexcellent. Garuòa arrested Bali Mahäräja to
show the entire universe the greatness of the King's tolerance.
TEXT 27
hahak-arae MahaNaaSaqd( raedSYaae" SavRTaaeidXaMa( )
iNaGa*ùMaa<ae_SaurPaTaaE ivZ<auNaa Pa[>aivZ<auNaa )) 27 ))
hähäkäro mahän äséd
rodasyoù sarvato diçam
nigåhyamäëe 'sura-patau
viñëunä prabhaviñëunä
SYNONYMS
hähä-käraù—a tumultuous roar of lamentation; mahän—great; äsét—there
was; rodasyoù—in both the lower and upper planetary systems;
sarvataù—everywhere; diçam—all directions; nigåhyamäëe—because of being
suppressed; asura-patau—when Bali Mahäräja, the King of the demons;
viñëunä—by Lord Viñëu; prabhaviñëunä—who is the most powerful
everywhere.
TRANSLATION
When Bali Mahäräja was thus arrested by Lord Viñëu, who is the most
powerful, there was a great roar of lamentation in all directions throughout the
upper and lower planetary systems of the universe.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
884
TEXT 28
Ta& bÖ& vaå<aE" PaaXaE>aRGavaNaah vaMaNa" )
Naíié[Ya& iSQarPa[jMaudarYaXaSa& Na*Pa )) 28 ))
taà baddhaà väruëaiù päçair
bhagavän äha vämanaù
nañöa-çriyaà sthira-prajïam
udära-yaçasaà nåpa
SYNONYMS
tam—unto him; baddham—who was so arrested; väruëaiù päçaiù—by the ropes
of Varuëa; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; äha—said;
vämanaù—Vämanadeva; nañöa-çriyam—unto Bali Mahäräja, who had lost his
bodily luster; sthira-prajïam—but was all the same determined in his decision;
udära-yaçasam—the most magnanimous and celebrated; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vämanadeva, then spoke to
Bali Mahäräja, the most liberal and celebrated personality whom He had
arrested with the ropes of Varuëa. Bali Mahäräja had lost all bodily luster, but
he was nonetheless fixed in his determination.
PURPORT
When one is bereft of all his possessions, he is certainly reduced in bodily
luster. But although Bali Mahäräja had lost everything, he was fixed in his
determination to satisfy Vämanadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In
Bhagavad-gétä, such a person is called sthita-prajïa. A pure devotee is never
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
885
deviated from the service of the Lord, despite all difficulties and impediments
offered by the illusory energy. Generally men who have wealth and opulence
are famous, but Bali Mahäräja became famous for all time by being deprived of
all his possessions. This is the special mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead toward His devotees. The Lord says, yasyäham anugåhëämi hariñye
tad-dhanaà çanaiù [SB 10.88.8]. As the first installment of His special favor,
the Lord takes away all the possessions of His devotee. A devotee, however, is
never disturbed by such a loss. He continues his service, and the Lord amply
rewards him, beyond the expectations of any common man.
TEXT 29
PadaiNa }aqi<a dtaaiNa >aUMaeMaRù& TvYaaSaur )
Üa>Yaa& §-aNTaa Mahq SavaR Ta*TaqYaMauPak-LPaYa )) 29 ))
padäni tréëi dattäni
bhümer mahyaà tvayäsura
dväbhyäà kräntä mahé sarvä
tåtéyam upakalpaya
SYNONYMS
padäni—footsteps; tréëi—three; dattäni—have been given; bhümeù—of land;
mahyam—unto Me; tvayä—by you; asura—O King of the demons;
dväbhyäm—by two steps; kräntä—have been occupied; mahé—all the land;
sarvä—completely; tåtéyam—for the third step; upakalpaya—now find the
means.
TRANSLATION
O King of the demons, you have promised to give Me three steps of land, but
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
886
I have occupied the entire universe with two steps. Now think about where I
should put My third.
TEXT 30
YaavTa( TaPaTYaSaaE Gaaei>aYaaRvidNdu" Sahae@ui>a" )
Yaavd( vzRiTa PaJaRNYaSTaavTaq >aUirYa& Tav )) 30 ))
yävat tapaty asau gobhir
yävad induù sahoòubhiù
yävad varñati parjanyas
tävaté bhür iyaà tava
SYNONYMS
yävat—as far as; tapati—is shining; asau—the sun; gobhiù—by the sunshine;
yävat—as long or as far as; induù—the moon; saha-uòubhiù—with the
luminaries or stars; yävat—as far as; varñati—are pouring rain; parjanyaù—the
clouds; tävaté—to that much distance; bhüù—land; iyam—this; tava—in your
possession.
TRANSLATION
As far as the sun and moon shine with the stars and as far as the clouds pour
rain, all the land throughout the universe is in your possession.
TEXT 31
PadEke-Na MaYaa§-aNTaae >aUl/aeRk-" %& idXaSTaNaae" )
Svl/aeRk-STae iÜTaqYaeNa PaXYaTaSTae SvMaaTMaNaa )) 31 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
887
padaikena mayäkränto
bhürlokaù khaà diças tanoù
svarlokas te dvitéyena
paçyatas te svam ätmanä
SYNONYMS
padä ekena—by one step only; mayä—by Me; äkräntaù—have been covered;
bhürlokaù—the entire planetary system known as Bhürloka; kham—the sky;
diçaù—and all directions; tanoù—by My body; svarlokaù—the upper planetary
system; te—in your possession; dvitéyena—by the second step; paçyataù
te—while you were seeing; svam—your own; ätmanä—by Myself.
TRANSLATION
Of these possessions, with one step I have occupied Bhürloka, and with My
body I have occupied the entire sky and all directions. And in your presence,
with My second step, I have occupied the upper planetary system.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic description of the planetary system, all the planets
move from east to west. The sun, the moon and five other planets, such as
Mars and Jupiter, orbit one above another. Vämanadeva, however, expanding
His body and extending His steps, occupied the entire planetary system.
TEXT 32
Pa[iTaé[uTaMadaTauSTae iNarYae vaSa wZYaTae )
ivXa Tv& iNarYa& TaSMaad( Gauå<aa caNauMaaeidTa" )) 32 ))
pratiçrutam adätus te
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
888
niraye väsa iñyate
viça tvaà nirayaà tasmäd
guruëä cänumoditaù
SYNONYMS
pratiçrutam—what had been promised; adätuù—who could not give; te—of
you; niraye—in hell; väsaù—residence; iñyate—prescribed; viça—now enter;
tvam—yourself; nirayam—the hellish planet; tasmät—therefore; guruëä—by
your spiritual master; ca—also; anumoditaù—approved.
TRANSLATION
Because you have been unable to give charity according to your promise, the
rule is that you should go down to live in the hellish planets. Therefore, in
accordance with the order of Çukräcärya, your spiritual master, now go down
and live there.
PURPORT
It is said:
näräyaëa-paräù sarve
na kutaçcana bibhyati
svargäpavarga-narakeñv
api tulyärtha-darçinaù
"Devotees solely engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Näräyaëa, never fear any condition of life. For them the heavenly
planets, liberation and the hellish planets are all the same, for such devotees
are interested only in the service of the Lord." (SB 6.17.28) A devotee engaged
in the service of Näräyaëa is always in equilibrium. A devotee actually lives
transcendentally. Although he may appear to have gone to hell or heaven, he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
889
does not live in either place; rather, he always lives in Vaikuëöha (sa guëän
samatétyaitän brahma-bhüyäya kalpate [Bg. 14.26]). Vämanadeva asked Bali
Mahäräja to go to the hellish planets, apparently just to show the entire
universe how tolerant he was, and Bali Mahäräja did not hesitate to carry out
the order. A devotee does not live alone. Of course, everyone lives with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but because the devotee is engaged in His
service, he actually does not live in any material condition. Bhaktivinoda
Öhäkura says, kéöa janma hao yathä tuyä däsa. Thus he prays to take birth as an
insignificant insect in the association of devotees. Because devotees are
engaged in the service of the Lord, anyone who lives with them also lives in
Vaikuëöha.
TEXT 33
v*Qaa MaNaaerQaSTaSYa dUr" SvGaR" PaTaTYaDa" )
Pa[iTaé[uTaSYaadaNaeNa Yaae_iQaRNa& ivPa[l/M>aTae )) 33 ))
våthä manorathas tasya
düraù svargaù pataty adhaù
pratiçrutasyädänena
yo 'rthinaà vipralambhate
SYNONYMS
våthä—without any good result; manorathaù—mental concoction; tasya—of
him; düraù—far away; svargaù—elevation to the higher planetary system;
patati—falls down; adhaù—to a hellish condition of life; pratiçrutasya—things
promised; adänena—being unable to give; yaù—anyone who; arthinam—a
beggar; vipralambhate—cheats.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
890
TRANSLATION
Far from being elevated to the heavenly planets or fulfilling one's desire, one
who does not properly give a beggar what he has promised falls down to a hellish
condition of life.
TEXT 34
ivPa[l/BDaae ddaMaqiTa TvYaah& ca!yMaaiNaNaa )
Tad( VYal/Ik-f-l&/ >au&+v iNarYa& k-iTaicTa( SaMaa" )) 34 ))
vipralabdho dadäméti
tvayähaà cäòhya-mäninä
tad vyaléka-phalaà bhuìkñva
nirayaà katicit samäù
SYNONYMS
vipralabdhaù—now I am cheated; dadämi—I promise I shall give you; iti—thus;
tvayä—by you; aham—I am; ca—also; äòhya-mäninä—by being very proud of
your opulence; tat—therefore; vyaléka-phalam—as a result of cheating;
bhuìkñva—you enjoy; nirayam—in hellish life; katicit—a few; samäù—years.
TRANSLATION
Being falsely proud of your possessions, you promised to give Me land, but
you could not fulfill your promise. Therefore, because your promise was false,
you must live for a few years in hellish life.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
891
The false prestige of thinking "I am very rich, and I possess such vast
property" is another side of material life. Everything belongs to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and no one else possesses anything. This is the real
fact. Éçäväsyam idaà samaà yat kiïca jagatyäà jagat. Bali Mahäräja was
undoubtedly the most exalted devotee, whereas previously he had maintained
a misunderstanding due to false prestige. By the supreme will of the Lord, he
now had to go to the hellish planets, but because he went there by the order of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he lived there more opulently than one
could expect to live in the planets of heaven. A devotee always lives with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, engaging in His service, and therefore he is
always transcendental to hellish or heavenly residences.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twenty-first Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Bali Mahäräja Arrested by the Lord"
22. Bali Mahäräja Surrenders His Life
The summary of this Twenty-second Chapter is as follows. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead was pleased by the behavior of Bali Mahäräja. Thus
the Lord placed him on the planet Sutala, and there, after bestowing
benedictions upon him, the Lord agreed to become his doorman.
Bali Mahäräja was extremely truthful. Being unable to keep his promise, he
was very much afraid, for he knew that one who has deviated from
truthfulness is insignificant in the eyes of society. An exalted person can suffer
the consequences of hellish life, but he is very much afraid of being defamed
for deviation from the truth. Bali Mahäräja agreed with great pleasure to
accept the punishment awarded him by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
892
In Bali Mahäräja's dynasty there were many asuras who because of their
enmity toward Viñëu had achieved a destination more exalted than that of
many mystic yogés. Bali Mahäräja specifically remembered the determination
of Prahläda Mahäräja in devotional service. Considering all these points, he
decided to give his head in charity as the place for Viñëu's third step. Bali
Mahäräja also considered how great personalities give up their family
relationships and material possessions to satisfy the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Indeed, they sometimes even sacrifice their lives for the satisfaction
of the Lord, just to become His personal servants. Accordingly, by following in
the footsteps of previous äcäryas and devotees, Bali Mahäräja perceived
himself successful.
While Bali Mahäräja, having been arrested by the ropes of Varuëa, was
offering prayers to the Lord, his grandfather Prahläda Mahäräja appeared
there and described how the Supreme Personality of Godhead had delivered
Bali Mahäräja by taking his possessions in a tricky way. While Prahläda
Mahäräja was present, Lord Brahmä and Bali's wife, Vindhyävali, described the
supremacy of the Supreme Lord. Since Bali Mahäräja had given everything to
the Lord, they prayed for his release. The Lord then described how a
nondevotee's possession of wealth is a danger whereas a devotee's opulence is a
benediction from the Lord. Then, being pleased with Bali Mahäräja, the
Supreme Lord offered His disc to protect Bali Mahäräja and promised to
remain with him.
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
Wv& ivPa[k*-Taae raJaNa( bil/>aRGavTaaSaur" )
i>aÛMaaNaae_PYai>aàaTMaa Pa[TYaahaiv(c)-v& vc" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
893
evaà viprakåto räjan
balir bhagavatäsuraù
bhidyamäno 'py abhinnätmä
pratyähäviklavaà vacaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus, as aforementioned;
viprakåtaù—having been put into difficulty; räjan—O King; baliù—Mahäräja
Bali; bhagavatä—by the Personality of Godhead Vämanadeva; asuraù—the
King of the asuras; bhidyamänaù api—although situated in this uncomfortable
position; abhinna-ätmä—without being disturbed in body or mind;
pratyäha—replied; aviklavam—undisturbed; vacaù—the following words.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, although the Supreme Personality of
Godhead was superficially seen to have acted mischievously toward Bali
Mahäräja, Bali Mahäräja was fixed in his determination. Considering himself
not to have fulfilled his promise, he spoke as follows.
TEXT 2
é[qbil/åvac
YaÛutaMaëaek- >avaNa( MaMaeirTa&
vcae VYal/Ik&- SaurvYaR MaNYaTae )
k-raeMYa*Ta& Taà >aveTa( Pa[l/M>aNa&
Pad& Ta*TaqYa& ku-å XaqiZ<aR Mae iNaJaMa( )) 2 ))
çré-balir uväca
yady uttamaçloka bhavän mameritaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
894
vaco vyalékaà sura-varya manyate
karomy åtaà tan na bhavet pralambhanaà
padaà tåtéyaà kuru çérñëi me nijam
SYNONYMS
çré-baliù uväca—Bali Mahäräja said; yadi—if; uttamaçloka—O Supreme Lord;
bhavän—Your good self; mama—my; éritam—promised; vacaù—words;
vyalékam—false; sura-varya—O greatest of all suras (demigods);
manyate—You think so; karomi—I shall make it; åtam—truth; tat—that
(promise); na—not; bhavet—will become; pralambhanam—cheating;
padam—step; tåtéyam—the third; kuru—just do it; çérñëi—on the head;
me—my; nijam—Your lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja said: O best Personality of Godhead, most worshipable for all
the demigods, if You think that my promise has become false, I shall certainly
rectify matters to make it truthful. I cannot allow my promise to be false.
Please, therefore, place Your third lotus footstep on my head.
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja could understand the pretense of Lord Vämanadeva, who
had taken the side of the demigods and come before him as a beggar. Although
the Lord's purpose was to cheat him, Bali Mahäräja took pleasure in
understanding how the Lord will cheat His devotee to glorify the devotee's
position. It is said that God is good, and this is a fact. Whether He cheats or
rewards, He is always good. Bali Mahäräja therefore addressed Him as
Uttamaçloka. "Your Lordship," he said, "You are always praised with the best of
selected verses. On behalf of the demigods, You disguised Yourself to cheat me,
saying that You wanted only three paces of land, but later You expanded Your
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
895
body to such an extent that with two footsteps You covered the entire
universe. Because You were working on behalf of Your devotees, You do not
regard this as cheating. Never mind. I cannot be considered a devotee.
Nonetheless, because although You are the husband of the goddess of fortune
You have come to me to beg, I must satisfy You to the best of my ability. So
please do not think that I wanted to cheat You; I must fulfill my promise. I still
have my body. When I place my body for Your satisfaction, please put Your
third step on my head." Since the Lord had covered the entire universe with
two steps, one might ask how Bali Mahäräja's head could be sufficient for His
third step? Bali Mahäräja, however, thought that the possessor of wealth must
be greater than the possession. Therefore although the Lord had taken all his
possessions, the head of Bali Mahäräja, the possessor, would provide adequate
place for the Lord's third step.
TEXT 3
ib>aeiMa Naah& iNarYaaTa( PadCYauTaae
Na PaaXabNDaad( VYaSaNaad( durTYaYaaTa( )
NaEvaQaRk*-C^\ad( >avTaae iviNaGa]ha‚
dSaaDauvadad( >a*XaMauiÜJae YaQaa )) 3 ))
bibhemi nähaà nirayät pada-cyuto
na päça-bandhäd vyasanäd duratyayät
naivärtha-kåcchräd bhavato vinigrahäd
asädhu-vädäd bhåçam udvije yathä
SYNONYMS
bibhemi—I do fear; na—not; aham—I; nirayät—from a position in hell;
pada-cyutaù—nor do I fear being deprived of my position; na—nor;
päça-bandhät—from being arrested by the ropes of Varuëa; vyasanät—nor
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
896
from the distress; duratyayät—which was unbearable for me; na—nor;
eva—certainly; artha-kåcchrät—because of poverty, or scarcity of money;
bhavataù—of Your Lordship; vinigrahät—from the punishment I am now
suffering; asädhu-vädät—from defamation; bhåçam—very much; udvije—I
become anxious; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
I do not fear being deprived of all my possessions, living in hellish life, being
arrested for poverty by the ropes of Varuëa or being punished by You as much
as I fear defamation.
PURPORT
Although Bali Mahäräja fully surrendered to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, he could not tolerate being defamed for cheating a
brähmaëa-brahmacäré. Being quite alert in regard to his reputation, he thought
deeply about how to prevent being defamed. The Lord, therefore, gave him the
good counsel to prevent defamation by offering his head. A Vaiñëava does not
fear any punishment. Näräyaëa-paräù sarve na kutaçcana bibhyati (SB 6.17.28).
TEXT 4
Pau&Saa& ëagYaTaMa& MaNYae d<@MahRtaMaaiPaRTaMa( )
Ya& Na MaaTaa iPaTaa >a]aTaa SauôdêaidXaiNTa ih )) 4 ))
puàsäà çläghyatamaà manye
daëòam arhattamärpitam
yaà na mätä pitä bhrätä
suhådaç cädiçanti hi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
897
SYNONYMS
puàsäm—of men; çläghya-tamam—the most exalted; manye—I consider;
daëòam—punishment; arhattama-arpitam—given by You, the supreme
worshipable Lord; yam—which; na—neither; mätä—mother; pitä—father;
bhrätä—brother; suhådaù—friends; ca—also; ädiçanti—offer; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Although a father, mother, brother or friend may sometimes punish one as a
well-wisher, they never punish their subordinate like this. But because You are
the most worshipable Lord, I regard the punishment You have given me as most
exalted.
PURPORT
Punishment meted out by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is accepted
by the devotee as the greatest mercy.
tat te 'nukampäà susamékñamäëo
bhuïjäna evätma-kåtaà vipäkam
håd-väg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te
jéveta yo mukti-pade sa däya-bhäk
"One who seeks Your compassion and thus tolerates all kinds of adverse
conditions due to the karma of his past deeds, who engages always in Your
devotional service with his mind, words and body, and who always offers
obeisances to You is certainly a bona fide candidate for liberation." (SB 10.14.8)
A devotee knows that so-called punishment by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is only His favor to correct His devotee and bring him to the right
path. Therefore the punishment awarded by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead cannot be compared to even the greatest benefit awarded by one's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
898
material father, mother, brother or friend.
TEXT 5
Tv& NaUNaMaSaura<aa& Na" Paarae+a" ParMaae Gauå" )
Yaae Naae_Naek-MadaNDaaNaa& iv>a]&Xa& c+auraidXaTa( )) 5 ))
tvaà nünam asuräëäà naù
parokñaù paramo guruù
yo no 'neka-madändhänäà
vibhraàçaà cakñur ädiçat
SYNONYMS
tvam—Your Lordship; nünam—indeed; asuräëäm—of the demons; naù—as
we are; parokñaù—indirect; paramaù—the supreme; guruù—spiritual master;
yaù—Your Lordship; naù—of us; aneka—many; mada-andhänäm—blinded by
material opulences; vibhraàçam—destroying our false prestige; cakñuù—the
eye of knowledge; ädiçat—gave.
TRANSLATION
Since Your Lordship is indirectly the greatest well-wisher of us demons, You
act for our best welfare by posing as if our enemy. Because demons like us
always aspire for a position of false prestige, by chastising us You give us the
eyes by which to see the right path.
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja considered the Supreme Personality of Godhead a better
friend to the demons than to the demigods. In the material world, the more
one gets material possessions, the more he becomes blind to spiritual life. The
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
899
demigods are devotees of the Lord for the sake of material possessions, but
although the demons apparently do not have the Supreme Personality of
Godhead on their side, He always acts as their well-wisher by depriving them
of their positions of false prestige. By false prestige one is misguided, so the
Supreme Lord takes away their position of false prestige as a special favor.
TEXTS 6-7
YaiSMaNa( vEraNaubNDaeNa VYaU!eNa ivbuDaeTara" )
bhvae le/i>are iSaiÖ& YaaMauhEk-aNTaYaaeiGaNa" )) 6 ))
TaeNaah& iNaGa*hqTaae_iSMa >avTaa >aUirk-MaR<aa )
bÖê vaå<aE" PaaXaENaaRiTav]q@e Na c VYaQae )) 7 ))
yasmin vairänubandhena
vyüòhena vibudhetaräù
bahavo lebhire siddhià
yäm u haikänta-yoginaù
tenähaà nigåhéto 'smi
bhavatä bhüri-karmaëä
baddhaç ca väruëaiù päçair
nätivréòe na ca vyathe
SYNONYMS
yasmin—unto You; vaira-anubandhena—by continuously treating as an
enemy; vyüòhena—firmly fixed by such intelligence; vibudha-itaräù—the
demons (those other than the demigods); bahavaù—many of them;
lebhire—achieved; siddhim—perfection; yäm—which; u ha—it is well known;
ekänta-yoginaù—equal to the achievements of the greatly successful mystic
yogés; tena—therefore; aham—I; nigåhétaù asmi—although I am being
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
900
punished; bhavatä—by Your Lordship; bhüri-karmaëä—who can do many
wonderful things; baddhaù ca—I am arrested and bound; väruëaiù päçaiù—by
the ropes of Varuëa; na ati-vréòe—I am not at all ashamed of this; na ca
vyathe—nor am I suffering very much.
TRANSLATION
Many demons who were continuously inimical toward You finally achieved
the perfection of great mystic yogés. Your Lordship can perform one work to
serve many purposes, and consequently, although You have punished me in
many ways, I do not feel ashamed of having been arrested by the ropes of
Varuëa, nor do I feel aggrieved.
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja appreciated the Lord's mercy not only upon him but upon
many other demons. Because this mercy is liberally distributed, the Supreme
Lord is called all-merciful. Bali Mahäräja was indeed a fully surrendered
devotee, but even some demons who were not at all devotees but merely
enemies of the Lord attained the same exalted position achieved by many
mystic yogés. Thus Bali Mahäräja could understand that the Lord had some
hidden purpose in punishing him. Consequently he was neither unhappy nor
ashamed because of the awkward position in which he had been put by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 8
iPaTaaMahae Mae >avdqYaSaMMaTa"
Pa[had AaivZk*-TaSaaDauvad" )
>aviÜPa+ae<a ivic}avEXaSa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
901
SaMPa[aiPaTaSTv&ParMa" SviPa}aa )) 8 ))
pitämaho me bhavadéya-sammataù
prahräda äviñkåta-sädhu-vädaù
bhavad-vipakñeëa vicitra-vaiçasaà
sampräpitas tvaà paramaù sva-piträ
SYNONYMS
pitämahaù—grandfather; me—my; bhavadéya-sammataù—approved by the
devotees of Your Lordship; prahrädaù—Prahläda Mahäräja;
äviñkåta-sädhu-vädaù—famous, being celebrated everywhere as a devotee;
bhavat-vipakñeëa—simply going against You; vicitra-vaiçasam—inventing
different kinds of harassments; sampräpitaù—suffered; tvam—You;
paramaù—the supreme shelter; sva-piträ—by his own father.
TRANSLATION
My grandfather Prahläda Mahäräja is famous, being recognized by all Your
devotees. Although harassed in many ways by his father, Hiraëyakaçipu, he still
remained faithful, taking shelter at Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
A pure devotee like Prahläda Mahäräja, although harassed circumstantially
in many ways, never gives up the shelter of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead to take shelter of anyone else. A pure devotee never complains
against the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A vivid example is
Prahläda Mahäräja. Examining the life of Prahläda Mahäräja, we can see how
severely he was harassed by his own father, Hiraëyakaçipu, yet he did not
divert his attention from the Lord even to the smallest extent. Bali Mahäräja,
following in the footsteps of his grandfather Prahläda Mahäräja, remained
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
902
fixed in his devotion to the Lord, despite the Lord's having punished him.
TEXT 9
ik-MaaTMaNaaNaeNa JahaiTa Yaae_NTaTa"
ik&- irKQaharE" SvJaNaa:YadSYaui>a" )
ik&- JaaYaYaa Sa&Sa*iTaheTau>aUTaYaa
MaTYaRSYa GaehE" ik-iMahaYauzae VYaYa" )) 9 ))
kim ätmanänena jahäti yo 'ntataù
kià riktha-häraiù svajanäkhya-dasyubhiù
kià jäyayä saàsåti-hetu-bhütayä
martyasya gehaiù kim ihäyuño vyayaù
SYNONYMS
kim—what is the use; ätmanä anena—of this body; jahäti—gives up;
yaù—which (body); antataù—at the end of life; kim—what is the use;
riktha-häraiù—the plunderers of wealth; svajana-äkhya-dasyubhiù—they who
are actually plunderers but who pass by the name of relatives; kim—what is the
use; jäyayä—of a wife; saàsåti-hetu-bhütayä—who is the source of increasing
material conditions; martyasya—of a person sure to die; gehaiù—of houses,
family and community; kim—what is the use; iha—in which house; äyuñaù—of
the duration of life; vyayaù—simply wasting.
TRANSLATION
What is the use of the material body, which automatically leaves its owner at
the end of life? And what is the use of all one's family members, who are
actually plunderers taking away money that is useful for the service of the Lord
in spiritual opulence? What is the use of a wife? She is only the source of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
903
increasing material conditions. And what is the use of family, home, country
and community? Attachment for them merely wastes the valuable energy of
one's lifetime.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, advises, sarva-dharmän
parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja: "Give up all other varieties of religion and
just surrender unto Me." The common man does not appreciate such a
statement by the Supreme Personality of Godhead because he thinks that
during his lifetime his family, society, country, body and relatives are
everything. Why should one give up any one of them and take shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead? But from the behavior of great personalities
like Prahläda Mahäräja and Bali Mahäräja we understand that surrendering to
the Lord is the right action for an intelligent person. Prahläda Mahäräja took
shelter of Viñëu against the will of his father. Similarly, Bali Mahäräja took
shelter of Vämanadeva against the will of his spiritual master, Çukräcärya, and
all the leading demons. People may be surprised that devotees like Prahläda
Mahäräja and Bali Mahäräja could seek shelter of the side of the enemy, giving
up the natural affinity for family, hearth and home. In this connection, Bali
Mahäräja explains that the body, which is the center of all material activities,
is also a foreign element. Even though we want to keep the body fit and
helpful to our activities, the body cannot continue eternally. Although I am
the soul, which is eternal, after using the body for some time I have to accept
another body (tathä dehäntara-präptiù [Bg. 2.13]), according to the laws of
nature, unless I render some service with the body for advancement in
devotional service. One should not use the body for any other purpose. One
must know that if he uses the body for any other purpose he is simply wasting
time, for as soon as the time is ripe, the soul will automatically leave the body.
We are very interested in society, friendship and love, but what are they?
Those in the garb of friends and relatives merely plunder the hard-earned
money of the bewildered soul. Everyone is affectionate toward his wife and is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
904
attached to her, but what is this wife? The wife is called stré, which means, "one
who expands the material condition." If a person lives without a wife, his
material conditions are less extensive. As soon as one marries and is connected
with a wife, his material necessities increase.
puàsaù striyä mithuné-bhävam etaà
tayor mitho hådaya-granthim ähuù
ato gåha-kñetra-sutäpta-vittair
janasya moho 'yam ahaà mameti
"The attraction between male and female is the basic principle of material
existence. On the basis of this misconception, which ties together the hearts of
the male and female, one becomes attracted to his body, home, property,
children, relatives and wealth. In this way one increases life's illusions and
thinks in terms of 'I and mine.' " (SB 5.5.8) Human life is meant for
self-realization, not for increasing unwanted things. Actually, a wife increases
unwanted things. One's lifetime, one's home and everything one has, if not
properly used in the service of the Lord, are all sources of material conditions
of perpetual suffering under the threefold miseries (adhyätmika, adhibhautika
and adhidaivika). Unfortunately, there is no institution in human society for
education on this subject. People are kept in darkness about the goal of life,
and thus there is a continuous struggle for existence. We speak of "survival of
the fittest," but no one survives, for no one is free under material conditions.
TEXT 10
wTQa& Sa iNaiêTYa iPaTaaMahae Maha‚
NaGaaDabaeDaae >avTa" PaadPaÚMa( )
Da]uv& Pa[Paede ùku-Taae>aYa& JaNaad(
>aqTa" SvPa+a+aPa<aSYa SataMa )) 10 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
905
itthaà sa niçcitya pitämaho mahän
agädha-bodho bhavataù päda-padmam
dhruvaà prapede hy akutobhayaà janäd
bhétaù svapakña-kñapaëasya sattama
SYNONYMS
ittham—because of this (as stated above); saù—he, Prahläda Mahäräja;
niçcitya—definitely deciding on this point; pitämahaù—my grandfather;
mahän—the great devotee; agädha-bodhaù—my grandfather, who received
unlimited knowledge because of his devotional service; bhavataù—of Your
Lordship; päda-padmam—the lotus feet; dhruvam—the infallible, eternal
shelter; prapede—surrendered; hi—indeed; akutaù-bhayam—completely free
of fear; janät—from ordinary common people; bhétaù—being afraid;
svapakña-kñapaëasya—of Your Lordship, who kill the demons on our own side;
sat-tama—O best of the best.
TRANSLATION
My grandfather, the best of all men, who achieved unlimited knowledge and
was worshipable for everyone, was afraid of the common men in this world.
Being fully convinced of the substantiality afforded by shelter at Your lotus
feet, He took shelter of Your lotus feet, against the will of his father and
demoniac friends, who were killed by Your own self.
TEXT 11
AQaahMaPYaaTMairPaaeSTavaiNTak&-
dEveNa NaqTa" Pa[Sa>a& TYaaiJaTaé[q" )
wd& k*-TaaNTaaiNTak-viTaR JaqivTa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
906
YaYaaDa]uv& STaBDaMaiTaNaR buDYaTae )) 11 ))
athäham apy ätma-ripos taväntikaà
daivena nétaù prasabhaà tyäjita-çréù
idaà kåtäntäntika-varti jévitaà
yayädhruvaà stabdha-matir na budhyate
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; aham—I; api—also; ätma-ripoù—who are the traditional
enemy of the family; tava—of Your good self; antikam—the shelter;
daivena—by providence; nétaù—brought in; prasabham—by force;
tyäjita—bereft of; çréù—all opulence; idam—this philosophy of life;
kåta-anta-antika-varti—always given the facility for death; jévitam—the
duration of life; yayä—by such material opulence; adhruvam—as temporary;
stabdha-matiù—such an unintelligent person; na budhyate—cannot
understand.
TRANSLATION
Only by providence have I been forcibly brought under Your lotus feet and
deprived of all my opulence. Because of the illusion created by temporary
opulence, people in general, who live under material conditions, facing
accidental death at every moment, do not understand that this life is temporary.
Only by providence have I been saved from that condition.
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja appreciated the actions of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, although all the members of the demoniac families except Prahläda
Mahäräja and Bali Mahäräja considered Viñëu their eternal traditional enemy.
As described by Bali Mahäräja, Lord Viñëu was actually not the enemy of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
907
family but the best friend of the family. The principle of this friendship has
already been stated. Yasyäham anugåhnämi hariñye tad-dhanaà çanaiù: [SB
10.88.8] the Lord bestows special favor upon His devotee by taking away all his
material opulences. Bali Mahäräja appreciated this behavior by the Lord.
Therefore he said, daivena nétaù prasabhaà tyäjita-çréù: "It is to bring me to the
right platform of eternal life that You have put me into these circumstances."
Actually, everyone should fear the so-called society, friendship and love for
which he works so hard all day and night. As indicated by Bali Mahäräja by
the words janäd bhétaù, every devotee in Kåñëa consciousness should always be
afraid of the common man engaged in pursuing material prosperity. Such a
person is described as pramatta, a madman chasing the will-o'-the-wisp. Such
men do not know that after a hard struggle for life one must change his body,
with no certainty of what kind of body he will receive next. Those who are
completely established in Kåñëa conscious philosophy and who therefore
understand the aim of life will never take to the activities of the materialistic
dog race. But if a sincere devotee somehow does fall down, the Lord corrects
him and saves him from gliding down to the darkest region of hellish life.
adänta-gobhir viçatäà tamisraà
punaù punaç carvita-carvaëänäm
(SB 7.5.30)
The materialistic way of life is nothing but the repeated chewing of that which
has already been chewed. Although there is no profit in such a life, people are
enamored of it because of uncontrolled senses. Nünaà pramattaù kurute
vikarma [SB 5.5.4]. Because of uncontrolled senses, people fully engage in sinful
activities by which they get a body full of suffering. Bali Mahäräja appreciated
how the Lord had saved him from such a bewildered life of ignorance. He
therefore said that his intelligence had been stunned. Stabdha-matir na
budhyate. He could not understand how the Supreme Personality of Godhead
favors His devotees by forcibly stopping their materialistic activities.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
908
TEXT 12
é[qéuk- ovac
TaSYaeTQa& >aazMaa<aSYa Pa[hadae >aGaviTPa[Ya" )
AaJaGaaMa ku-åé[eï rak-aPaiTairvaeiTQaTa" )) 12 ))
çré-çuka uväca
tasyetthaà bhäñamäëasya
prahrädo bhagavat-priyaù
äjagäma kuru-çreñöha
räkä-patir ivotthitaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tasya—Bali Mahäräja;
ittham—in this way; bhäñamäëasya—while describing his fortunate position;
prahrädaù—Mahäräja Prahläda, his grandfather; bhagavat-priyaù—the most
favored devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; äjagäma—appeared
there; kuru-çreñöha—O best of the Kurus, Mahäräja Parékñit; räkä-patiù—the
moon; iva—like; utthitaù—having risen.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O best of the Kurus, while Bali Mahäräja was
describing his fortunate position in this way, the most dear devotee of the Lord,
Prahläda Mahäräja, appeared there, like the moon rising in the nighttime.
TEXT 13
TaiMaNd]SaeNa" SviPaTaaMah& ié[Yaa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
909
ivraJaMaaNa& Nail/NaaYaTae+a<aMa( )
Pa[a&éu& iPaXa(r)aMbrMaÅNaiTvz&
Pa[l/Mbbahu& éu>aGazR>aMaE+aTa )) 13 ))
tam indra-senaù sva-pitämahaà çriyä
viräjamänaà nalinäyatekñaëam
präàçuà piçaìgämbaram aïjana-tviñaà
pralamba-bähuà çubhagarñabham aikñata
SYNONYMS
tam—that Prahläda Mahäräja; indra-senaù—Bali Mahäräja, who now
possessed all the military force of Indra; sva-pitämaham—unto his grandfather;
çriyä—present with all beautiful features; viräjamänam—standing there;
nalina-äyata-ékñaëam—with eyes as broad as the petals of a lotus; präàçum—a
very beautiful body; piçaìga-ambaram—dressed in yellow garments;
aïjana-tviñam—with his body resembling black ointment for the eyes;
pralamba-bähum—very long arms; çubhaga-åñabham—the best of all auspicious
persons; aikñata—he saw.
TRANSLATION
Then Bali Mahäräja saw his grandfather Prahläda Mahäräja, the most
fortunate personality, whose dark body resembled black ointment for the eyes.
His tall, elegant figure was dressed in yellow garments, he had long arms, and
his beautiful eyes were like the petals of a lotus. He was very dear and pleasing
to everyone.
TEXT 14
TaSMaE bil/vaRå<aPaaXaYaiN}aTa"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
910
SaMahR<a& NaaePaJahar PaUvRvTa( )
NaNaaMa MaUDNaaRé[uivl/ael/l/aecNa"
Sav]q@NaqcqNaMau%ae b>aUv h )) 14 ))
tasmai balir väruëa-päça-yantritaù
samarhaëaà nopajahära pürvavat
nanäma mürdhnäçru-vilola-locanaù
sa-vréòa-nécéna-mukho babhüva ha
SYNONYMS
tasmai—unto Prahläda Mahäräja; baliù—Bali Mahäräja;
väruëa-päça-yantritaù—being bound by the ropes of Varuëa;
samarhaëam—befitting respect; na—not; upajahära—offered; pürva-vat—like
before; nanäma—he offered obeisances; mürdhnä—with the head;
açru-vilola-locanaù—eyes inundated with tears; sa-vréòa—with shyness;
nécéna—downward; mukhaù—face; babhüva ha—he so became.
TRANSLATION
Being bound by the ropes of Varuëa, Bali Mahäräja could not offer befitting
respect to Prahläda Mahäräja as he had before. Rather, he simply offered
respectful obeisances with his head, his eyes being inundated with tears and his
face lowered in shame.
PURPORT
Since Bali Mahäräja had been arrested by Lord Vämanadeva, he was
certainly to be considered an offender. Bali Mahäräja seriously felt that he was
an offender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Certainly Prahläda
Mahäräja would not like this. Therefore Bali Mahäräja was ashamed and hung
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
911
his head.
TEXT 15
Sa Ta}a haSaqNaMaudq+Ya SaTPaiTa&
hir& SauNaNdaÛNauGaEåPaaiSaTaMa( )
oPaeTYa >aUMaaE iXarSaa MahaMaNaa
NaNaaMa MaUDNaaR Paul/k-aé[uiv(c)-v" )) 15 ))
sa tatra häsénam udékñya sat-patià
harià sunandädy-anugair upäsitam
upetya bhümau çirasä mahä-manä
nanäma mürdhnä pulakäçru-viklavaù
SYNONYMS
saù—Prahläda Mahäräja; tatra—there; ha äsénam—seated; udékñya—after
seeing; sat-patim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, master of the
liberated souls; harim—Lord Hari; sunanda-ädi-anugaiù—by His followers, like
Sunanda; upäsitam—being worshiped; upetya—reaching nearby; bhümau—on
the ground; çirasä—with his head (bowed down); mahä-manäù—the great
devotee; nanäma—offered obeisances; mürdhnä—with his head;
pulaka-açru-viklavaù—agitated by tears of jubilation.
TRANSLATION
When the great personality Prahläda Mahäräja saw that the Supreme Lord
was sitting there, surrounded and worshiped by His intimate associates like
Sunanda, he was overwhelmed with tears of jubilation. Approaching the Lord
and falling to the ground, he offered obeisances to the Lord with his head.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
912
TEXT 16
é[qPa[had ovac
TvYaEv dta& PadMaENd]MaUiJaRTa&
ôTa& TadevaÛ TaQaEv Xaae>aNaMa( )
MaNYae MahaNaSYa k*-Taae ùNauGa]hae
iv>a]&iXaTaae YaiC^\Ya AaTMaMaaehNaaTa( )) 16 ))
çré-prahräda uväca
tvayaiva dattaà padam aindram ürjitaà
håtaà tad evädya tathaiva çobhanam
manye mahän asya kåto hy anugraho
vibhraàçito yac chriya ätma-mohanät
SYNONYMS
çré-prahrädaù uväca—Prahläda Mahäräja said; tvayä—by Your Lordship;
eva—indeed; dattam—which had been given; padam—this position;
aindram—of the King of heaven; ürjitam—very, very great; håtam—has been
taken away; tat—that; eva—indeed; adya—today; tathä—as; eva—indeed;
çobhanam—beautiful; manye—I consider; mahän—very great; asya—of him
(Bali Mahäräja); kåtaù—has been done by You; hi—indeed;
anugrahaù—mercy; vibhraàçitaù—being bereft of; yat—because; çriyaù—from
that opulence; ätma-mohanät—which was covering the process of
self-realization.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja said: My Lord, it is Your Lordship who gave this Bali the
very great opulence of the post of heavenly king, and now, today, it is You who
have taken it all away. I think You have acted with equal beauty in both ways.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
913
Because his exalted position as King of heaven was putting him in the darkness
of ignorance, You have done him a very merciful favor by taking away all his
opulence.
PURPORT
As it is said, yasyäham anugåhëämi hariñye tad-dhanaà çanaiù (SB 10.88.8).
It is by the mercy of the Lord that one gets all material opulence, but if such
material opulence causes one to become puffed up and forget the process of
self-realization, the Lord certainly takes all the opulence away. The Lord
bestows mercy upon His devotee by helping him find out his constitutional
position. For that purpose, the Lord is always ready to help the devotee in
every way. But material opulence is sometimes dangerous because it diverts
one's attention to false prestige by giving one the impression that he is the
owner and master of everything he surveys, although actually this is not the
fact. To protect the devotee from such a misunderstanding, the Lord, showing
special mercy, sometimes takes away his material possessions. Yasyäham
anugåhëämi hariñye tad-dhanaà çanaiù.
TEXT 17
YaYaa ih ivÜaNaiPa MauùTae YaTa‚
STaTa( k-ae ivcíe GaiTaMaaTMaNaae YaQaa )
TaSMaE NaMaSTae JaGadqìraYa vE
NaaraYa<aaYaai%l/l/aek-Saai+a<ae )) 17 ))
yayä hi vidvän api muhyate yatas
tat ko vicañöe gatim ätmano yathä
tasmai namas te jagad-éçvaräya vai
näräyaëäyäkhila-loka-säkñiëe
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
914
SYNONYMS
yayä—by which material opulence; hi—indeed; vidvän api—even a person
fortunately advanced in education; muhyate—becomes bewildered;
yataù—self-controlled; tat—that; kaù—who; vicañöe—can search for;
gatim—the progress; ätmanaù—of the self; yathä—properly; tasmai—unto
Him; namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances; te—unto You;
jagat-éçvaräya—unto the Lord of the universe; vai—indeed; näräyaëäya—unto
His Lordship Näräyaëa; akhila-loka-säkñiëe—who are the witness of all
creation.
TRANSLATION
Material opulence is so bewildering that it makes even a learned,
self-controlled man forget to search for the goal of self-realization. But the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, the Lord of the universe, can see
everything by His will. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
The words ko vicañöe gatim ätmano yathä indicate that when one is puffed
up by the false prestige of possessing material opulence, he certainly neglects
the goal of self-realization. This is the position of the modern world. Because of
so-called scientific improvements in material opulence, people have entirely
given up the path of self-realization. Practically no one is interested in God,
one's relationship with God or how one should act. Modern men have
altogether forgotten such questions because they are mad for material
possessions. If this kind of civilization continues, the time will soon come when
the Supreme Personality of Godhead will take away all the material opulences.
Then people will come to their senses.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
915
TEXT 18
é[qéuk- ovac
TaSYaaNaué*<vTaae raJaNa( Pa[hadSYa k*-TaaÅle/" )
ihr<YaGa>aaeR >aGavaNauvac MaDauSaUdNaMa( )) 18 ))
çré-çuka uväca
tasyänuçåëvato räjan
prahrädasya kåtäïjaleù
hiraëyagarbho bhagavän
uväca madhusüdanam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tasya—of Prahläda Mahäräja;
anuçåëvataù—so that he could hear; räjan—O King Parékñit; prahrädasya—of
Prahläda Mahäräja; kåta-aïjaleù—who was standing with folded hands;
hiraëyagarbhaù—Lord Brahmä; bhagavän—the most powerful; uväca—said;
madhusüdanam—unto Madhusüdana, the Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: O King Parékñit, Lord Brahmä then began to
speak to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, within the hearing of Prahläda
Mahäräja, who stood nearby with folded hands.
TEXT 19
bÖ& vq+Ya PaiTa& Saaßq TaTPaÒq >aYaivûl/a )
Pa[aÅil/" Pa[<aTaaePaeNd]& b>aaze_vax(Mau%q Na*Pa )) 19 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
916
baddhaà vékñya patià sädhvé
tat-patné bhaya-vihvalä
präïjaliù praëatopendraà
babhäñe 'väì-mukhé nåpa
SYNONYMS
baddham—arrested; vékñya—seeing; patim—her husband; sädhvé—the chaste
woman; tat-patné—Bali Mahäräja's wife; bhaya-vihvalä—being very disturbed
by fear; präïjaliù—with folded hands; praëatä—having offered obeisances;
upendram—unto Vämanadeva; babhäñe—addressed; aväk-mukhé—with face
downward; nåpa—O Mahäräja Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
But Bali Mahäräja's chaste wife, afraid and aggrieved at seeing her husband
arrested, immediately offered obeisances to Lord Vämanadeva [Upendra]. She
folded her hands and spoke as follows.
PURPORT
Although Lord Brahmä was speaking, he had to stop for a while because
Bali Mahäräja's wife, Vindhyävali, who was very agitated and afraid, wanted to
say something.
TEXT 20
é[qivNDYaavil/åvac
§-I@aQaRMaaTMaNa wd& i}aJaGaTa( k*-Ta& Tae
SvaMYa& Tau Ta}a ku-iDaYaae_Par wRXa ku-YauR" )
k-TauR" Pa[>aaeSTav ik-MaSYaTa AavhiNTa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
917
TYa¢-ihYaSTvdvraeiPaTak-Ta*Rvada" )) 20 ))
çré-vindhyävalir uväca
kréòärtham ätmana idaà tri-jagat kåtaà te
svämyaà tu tatra kudhiyo 'para éça kuryuù
kartuù prabhos tava kim asyata ävahanti
tyakta-hriyas tvad-avaropita-kartå-vädäù
SYNONYMS
çré-vindhyävaliù uväca—Vindhyävali, the wife of Bali Mahäräja, said;
kréòä-artham—for the sake of pastimes; ätmanaù—of Yourself; idam—this;
tri-jagat—the three worlds (this universe); kåtam—was created; te—by You;
svämyam—proprietorship; tu—but; tatra—thereon; kudhiyaù—foolish rascals;
apare—others; éça—O my Lord; kuryuù—have established; kartuù—for the
supreme creator; prabhoù—for the supreme maintainer; tava—for Your good
self; kim—what; asyataù—for the supreme annihilator; ävahanti—they can
offer; tyakta-hriyaù—shameless, without intelligence; tvat—by You;
avaropita—falsely imposed because of a poor fund of knowledge;
kartå-vädäù—the proprietorship of such foolish agnostics.
TRANSLATION
Çrématé Vindhyävali said: O my Lord, You have created the entire universe
for the enjoyment of Your personal pastimes, but foolish, unintelligent men
have claimed proprietorship for material enjoyment. Certainly they are
shameless agnostics. Falsely claiming proprietorship, they think they can give
charity and enjoy. In such a condition, what good can they do for You, who are
the independent creator, maintainer and annihilator of this universe?
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
918
Bali Mahäräja's wife, who was most intelligent, supported the arrest of her
husband and accused him of having no intelligence because he had claimed
proprietorship of the property of the Lord. Such a claim is a sign of demoniac
life. Although the demigods, who are officials appointed by the Lord for
management, are attached to materialistic enjoyment, they never claim to be
proprietors of the universe, for they know that the actual proprietor of
everything is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the qualification of
the demigods. But the demons, instead of accepting the exclusive
proprietorship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, claim the property of
the universe for themselves through demarcations of nationalism. "This part is
mine, and that part is yours," they say. "This part I can give in charity, and this
part I can keep for my enjoyment." These are all demoniac conceptions. This is
described in Bhagavad-gétä (16.13): idam adya mayä labdham imaà präpsye
manoratham. "Thus far I have acquired so much money and land. Now I have
to add more and more. In this way I shall be the greatest proprietor of
everything. Who can compete with me?" These are all demoniac conceptions.
Bali Mahäräja's wife accused Bali Mahäräja by saying that although the
Supreme Personality of Godhead had arrested him, showing him extraordinary
mercy, and although Bali Mahäräja was offering his body to the Supreme Lord
for the Lord's third step, he was still in the darkness of ignorance. Actually the
body did not belong to him, but because of his long-standing demoniac
mentality he could not understand this. He thought that since he had been
defamed for his inability to fulfill his promise of charity, and since the body
belonged to him, he would free himself from defamation by offering his body.
Actually, however, the body does not belong to anyone but the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, by whom the body is given. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(18.61):
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
919
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
The Lord is situated in the core of everyone's heart, and, according to the
material desires of the living entity, the Lord offers a particular type of
machine—the body—through the agency of the material energy. The body
actually does not belong to the living entity; it belongs to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Under the circumstances, how could Bali Mahäräja
claim that the body belonged to him?
Thus Vindhyävali, Bali Mahäräja's intelligent wife, prayed that her husband
be released, by the Lord's causeless mercy. Otherwise, Bali Mahäräja was
nothing but a shameless demon, specifically described as tyakta-hriyas
tvad-avaropita-kartå-vädäù, a foolish person claiming proprietorship over the
property of the Supreme Person. In the present age, Kali-yuga, the number of
such shameless men, who are agnostics disbelieving in the existence of God,
has increased. Trying to defy the authority of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, so-called scientists, philosophers and politicians manufacture plans
and schemes for the destruction of the world. They cannot do anything good
for the world, and unfortunately, because of Kali-yuga, they have plunged the
affairs of the world into mismanagement. Thus there is a great need for the
Kåñëa consciousness movement for the benefit of innocent people who are
being carried away by propaganda of such demons. If the present status quo is
allowed to continue, people will certainly suffer more and more under the
leadership of these demoniac agnostics.
TEXT 21
é[qb]øaevac
>aUTa>aavNa >aUTaeXa devdev JaGaNMaYa )
MauÄENa& ôTaSavRSv& NaaYaMahRiTa iNaGa]hMa( )) 21 ))
çré-brahmoväca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
920
bhüta-bhävana bhüteça
deva-deva jaganmaya
muïcainaà håta-sarvasvaà
näyam arhati nigraham
SYNONYMS
çré-brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; bhüta-bhävana—O Supreme Being,
well-wisher of everyone, who can cause one to flourish; bhüta-éça—O master of
everyone; deva-deva—O worshipable Deity of the demigods; jagat-maya—O
all-pervading one; muïca—please release; enam—this poor Bali Mahäräja;
håta-sarvasvam—now bereft of everything; na—not; ayam—such a poor man;
arhati—deserves; nigraham—punishment.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: O well-wisher and master of all living entities, O
worshipable Deity of all the demigods, O all-pervading Personality of Godhead,
now this man has been sufficiently punished, for You have taken everything.
Now You can release him. He does not deserve to be punished more.
PURPORT
When Lord Brahmä saw that Prahläda Mahäräja and Vindhyävali had
already approached the Lord to ask mercy for Bali Mahäräja, he joined them
and recommended Bali Mahäräja's release on the grounds of worldly
calculations.
TEXT 22
k*-Tòa Tae_NaeNa dtaa >aUl/aeRk-a" k-MaaRiJaRTaaê Yae )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
921
iNaveidTa& c SavRSvMaaTMaaiv(c)-vYaa iDaYaa )) 22 ))
kåtsnä te 'nena dattä bhür
lokäù karmärjitäç ca ye
niveditaà ca sarvasvam
ätmäviklavayä dhiyä
SYNONYMS
kåtsnäù—all; te—unto You; anena—by Bali Mahäräja; dattäù—have been
given or returned; bhüù lokäù—all land and all planets; karma-arjitäù
ca—whatever he achieved by his pious activities; ye—all of which; niveditam
ca—have been offered to You; sarvasvam—everything he possessed;
ätmä—even his body; aviklavayä—without hesitation; dhiyä—by such
intelligence.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja had already offered everything to Your Lordship. Without
hesitation, he has offered his land, the planets and whatever else he earned by
his pious activities, including even his own body.
TEXT 23
YaTPaadYaaerXa#=Daq" Sail/l&/ Pa[daYa
dUvaRx(ku-rEriPa ivDaaYa SaTaq& SaPaYaaRMa( )
APYautaMaa& GaiTaMaSaaE >aJaTae i}al/aek-I&
daìaNaiv(c)-vMaNaa" k-QaMaaiTaRMa*C^eTa( )) 23 ))
yat-pädayor açaöha-dhéù salilaà pradäya
dürväìkurair api vidhäya satéà saparyäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
922
apy uttamäà gatim asau bhajate tri-lokéà
däçvän aviklava-manäù katham ärtim åcchet
SYNONYMS
yat-pädayoù—at the lotus feet of Your Lordship; açaöha-dhéù—a great-minded
person who is without duplicity; salilam—water; pradäya—offering;
dürvä—with fully grown grass; aìkuraiù—and with buds of flowers;
api—although; vidhäya—offering; satém—most exalted; saparyäm—with
worship; api—although; uttamäm—the most highly elevated;
gatim—destination; asau—such a worshiper; bhajate—deserves; tri-lokém—the
three worlds; däçvän—giving to You; aviklava-manäù—without mental
duplicity; katham—how; ärtim—the distressed condition of being arrested;
åcchet—he deserves.
TRANSLATION
By offering even water, newly grown grass, or flower buds at Your lotus feet,
those who maintain no mental duplicity can achieve the most exalted position
within the spiritual world. This Bali Mahäräja, without duplicity, has now
offered everything in the three worlds. How then can he deserve to suffer from
arrest?
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (9.26) it is stated:
patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà
yo me bhaktyä prayacchati
tad ahaà bhakty-upahåtam
açnämi prayatätmanaù
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is so kind that if an unsophisticated
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
923
person, with devotion and without duplicity, offers at the lotus feet of the Lord
a little water, a flower, a fruit or a leaf, the Lord accepts it. Then the devotee is
promoted to Vaikuëöha, the spiritual world. Brahmä drew the Lord's attention
to this subject and requested that He release Bali Mahäräja, who was suffering,
being bound by the ropes of Varuëa, and who had already given everything,
including the three worlds and whatever he possessed.
TEXT 24
é[q>aGavaNauvac
b]øNa( YaMaNauGa*õaiMa TaiÜXaae ivDauNaaeMYahMa( )
YaNMad" Pauåz" STaBDaae l/aek&- Maa& cavMaNYaTae )) 24 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
brahman yam anugåhëämi
tad-viço vidhunomy aham
yan-madaù puruñaù stabdho
lokaà mäà cävamanyate
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; brahman—O
Lord Brahmä; yam—unto anyone to whom; anugåhëämi—I show My mercy;
tat—his; viçaù—material opulence or riches; vidhunomi—take away; aham—I;
yat-madaù—having false prestige due to this money; puruñaù—such a person;
stabdhaù—being dull-minded; lokam—the three worlds; mäm ca—unto Me
also; avamanyate—derides.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Lord Brahmä, because
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
924
of material opulence a foolish person becomes dull-witted and mad. Thus he has
no respect for anyone within the three worlds and defies even My authority. To
such a person I show special favor by first taking away all his possessions.
PURPORT
A civilization that has become godless because of material advancement in
opulence is extremely dangerous. Because of great opulence, a materialist
becomes so proud that he has no regard for anyone and even refuses to accept
the authority of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The result of such a
mentality is certainly very dangerous. To show special favor, the Lord
sometimes makes an example of someone like Bali Mahäräja, who was now
bereft of all his possessions.
TEXT 25
Yada k-daicÂqvaTMaa Sa&SarNa( iNaJak-MaRi>a" )
NaaNaaYaaeiNaZvNaqXaae_Ya& PaaEåzq& GaiTaMaav]JaeTa( )) 25 ))
yadä kadäcij jévätmä
saàsaran nija-karmabhiù
nänä-yoniñv anéço 'yaà
pauruñéà gatim ävrajet
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; kadäcit—sometimes; jéva-ätmä—the living entity;
saàsaran—rotating in the cycle of birth and death; nija-karmabhiù—because
of his own fruitive activities; nänä-yoniñu—in different species of life;
anéçaù—not independent (completely under the control of material nature);
ayam—this living entity; pauruñém gatim—the situation of being human;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
925
ävrajet—wants to obtain.
TRANSLATION
While rotating in the cycle of birth and death again and again in different
species because of his own fruitive activities, the dependent living entity, by
good fortune, may happen to become a human being. This human birth is very
rarely obtained.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is fully independent. Thus it is not
always a fact that a living being's loss of all opulence is a sign of the Supreme
Lord's mercy upon him. The Lord can act any way He likes. He may take away
one's opulence, or He may not. There are varieties of forms of life, and the
Lord treats them according to the circumstances, as He chooses. Generally it is
to be understood that the human form of life is one of great responsibility.
puruñaù prakåti-stho hi
bhuìkte prakåtijän guëän
käraëaà guëa-saìgo 'sya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu
"The living entity in material nature follows the ways of life, enjoying the
three modes of nature. This is due to his association with that material nature.
Thus he meets with good and evil amongst various species." (Bg. 13.22) After
thus rotating through many, many forms of life in the cycle of birth and death,
the living being gets a chance for a human form. Therefore every human
being, especially one belonging to a civilized nation or culture, must be
extremely responsible in his activities. He should not risk degradation in the
next life. Because the body will change (tathä dehäntara-präptir), we should be
extremely careful. To see to the proper use of life is the purpose of Kåñëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
926
consciousness. The foolish living entity declares freedom from all control, but
factually he is not free; he is fully under the control of material nature. He
must therefore be most careful and responsible in the activities of his life.
TEXT 26
JaNMak-MaRvYaaeæPaivÛEìYaRDaNaaidi>a" )
YaÛSYa Na >aveTa( STaM>aSTa}aaYa& MadNauGa]h" )) 26 ))
janma-karma-vayo-rüpavidyaiçvarya-
dhanädibhiù
yady asya na bhavet stambhas
taträyaà mad-anugrahaù
SYNONYMS
janma—by birth in an aristocratic family; karma—by wonderful activities,
pious activities; vayaù—by age, especially youth, when one is capable of doing
many things; rüpa—by personal beauty, which attracts everyone; vidyä—by
education; aiçvarya—by opulence; dhana—by wealth; ädibhiù—by other
opulences also; yadi—if; asya—of the possessor; na—not; bhavet—there is;
stambhaù—pride; tatra—in such a condition; ayam—a person;
mat-anugrahaù—should be considered to have received My special mercy.
TRANSLATION
If a human being is born in an aristocratic family or a higher status of life, if
he performs wonderful activities, if he is youthful, if he has personal beauty, a
good education and good wealth, and if he is nonetheless not proud of his
opulences, it is to be understood that he is especially favored by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
927
PURPORT
When in spite of possessing all these opulences a person is not proud, this
means that he is fully aware that all his opulences are due to the mercy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He therefore engages all his possessions in
the service of the Lord. A devotee knows very well that everything, even his
body, belongs to the Supreme Lord. If one lives perfectly in such Kåñëa
consciousness, it is to be understood that he is especially favored by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The conclusion is that one's being deprived
of his wealth is not to be considered the special mercy of the Lord. If one
continues in his opulent position but does not become unnecessarily proud,
falsely thinking that he is the proprietor of everything, this is the Lord's special
mercy.
TEXT 27
MaaNaSTaM>aiNaiMataaNaa& JaNMaadqNaa& SaMaNTaTa" )
SavRé[eYa"Pa[TaqPaaNaa& hNTa Mauùeà MaTPar" )) 27 ))
mäna-stambha-nimittänäà
janmädénäà samantataù
sarva-çreyaù-pratépänäà
hanta muhyen na mat-paraù
SYNONYMS
mäna—of false prestige; stambha—because of this impudence;
nimittänäm—which are the causes; janma-ädénäm—such as birth in a high
family; samantataù—taken together; sarva-çreyaù—for the supreme benefit of
life; pratépänäm—which are impediments; hanta—also; muhyet—becomes
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
928
bewildered; na—not; mat-paraù—My pure devotee.
TRANSLATION
Although aristocratic birth and other such opulences are impediments to
advancement in devotional service because they are causes of false prestige and
pride, these opulences never disturb a pure devotee of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
PURPORT
Devotees like Dhruva Mahäräja, who was given unlimited material
opulence, have the special mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Once Kuvera wanted to give Dhruva Mahäräja a benediction, but although
Dhruva Mahäräja could have asked him for any amount of material opulence,
he instead begged Kuvera that he might continue his devotional service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. When a devotee is fixed in his devotional
service, there is no need for the Lord to deprive him of his material opulences.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead never takes away material opulences
achieved because of devotional service, although He sometimes takes away
opulences achieved by pious activities. He does this to make a devotee prideless
or put him in a better position in devotional service. If a special devotee is
meant for preaching but does not give up his family life or material opulences
to take to the service of the Lord, the Lord surely takes away his material
opulences and establishes him in devotional service. Thus the pure devotee
becomes fully engaged in propagating Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 28
Wz daNavdETYaaNaaMaGa]Naq" k-IiTaRvDaRNa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
929
AJaEzqdJaYaa& MaaYaa& SaqdàiPa Na MauùiTa )) 28 ))
eña dänava-daityänäm
agranéù kérti-vardhanaù
ajaiñéd ajayäà mäyäà
sédann api na muhyati
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this Bali Mahäräja; dänava-daityänäm—among the demons and
unbelievers; agranéù—the foremost devotee; kérti-vardhanaù—the most
famous; ajaiñét—has already surpassed; ajayäm—the insurmountable;
mäyäm—material energy; sédan—being bereft (of all material opulences);
api—although; na—not; muhyati—is bewildered.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja has become the most famous among the demons and
nonbelievers, for in spite of being bereft of all material opulences, he is fixed in
his devotional service.
PURPORT
In this verse, the words sédann api na muhyati are very important. A
devotee is sometimes put into adversity while executing devotional service. In
adversity, everyone laments and becomes aggrieved, but by the grace of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, a devotee, even in the worst condition, can
understand that he is going through a severe examination by the Personality of
Godhead. Bali Mahäräja passed all such examinations, as explained in the
following verses.
TEXTS 29-30
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
930
+aq<airKQaXCYauTa" SQaaNaaTa( i+aáae bÖê Xa}aui>a" )
jaiTai>aê PairTYa¢-ae YaaTaNaaMaNauYaaiPaTa" )) 29 ))
Gauå<aa >aiTSaRTa" Xaáae JahaE SaTYa& Na Sauv]Ta" )
^lE/å¢-ae MaYaa DaMaaeR NaaYa& TYaJaiTa SaTYavak(- )) 30 ))
kñéëa-rikthaç cyutaù sthänät
kñipto baddhaç ca çatrubhiù
jïätibhiç ca parityakto
yätanäm anuyäpitaù
guruëä bhartsitaù çapto
jahau satyaà na suvrataù
chalair ukto mayä dharmo
näyaà tyajati satya-väk
SYNONYMS
kñéëa-rikthaù—although bereft of all riches; cyutaù—fallen; sthänät—from his
superior position; kñiptaù—forcefully thrown away; baddhaù ca—and
forcefully bound; çatrubhiù—by his enemies; jïätibhiù ca—and by his family
members or relatives; parityaktaù—deserted; yätanäm—all kinds of suffering;
anuyäpitaù—unusually severely suffered; guruëä—by his spiritual master;
bhartsitaù—rebuked; çaptaù—and cursed; jahau—gave up;
satyam—truthfulness; na—not; su-vrataù—being fixed in his vow;
chalaiù—pretentiously; uktaù—spoken; mayä—by Me; dharmaù—the religious
principles; na—not; ayam—this Bali Mahäräja; tyajati—does give up;
satya-väk—being true to his word.
TRANSLATION
Although bereft of his riches, fallen from his original position, defeated and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
931
arrested by his enemies, rebuked and deserted by his relatives and friends,
although suffering the pain of being bound and although rebuked and cursed by
his spiritual master, Bali Mahäräja, being fixed in his vow, did not give up his
truthfulness. It was certainly with pretension that I spoke about religious
principles, but he did not give up religious principles, for he is true to his word.
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja passed the severe test put before him by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This is further proof of the Lord's mercy toward His
devotee. The Supreme Personality of Godhead sometimes puts a devotee to
severe tests that are almost unbearable. One could hardly even live under the
conditions forced upon Bali Mahäräja. That Bali Mahäräja endured all these
severe tests and austerities is the mercy of the Supreme Lord. The Lord
certainly appreciates the devotee's forbearance, and it is recorded for the
future glorification of the devotee. This was not an ordinary test. As described
in this verse, hardly anyone could survive such a test, but for the future
glorification of Bali Mahäräja, one of the mahäjanas, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead not only tested him but also gave him the strength to tolerate such
adversity. The Lord is so kind to His devotee that when severely testing him
the Lord gives him the necessary strength to be tolerant and continue to
remain a glorious devotee.
TEXT 31
Wz Mae Pa[aiPaTa" SQaaNa& duZPa[aPaMaMarEriPa )
Saav<aeRrNTarSYaaYa& >aivTaeNd]ae Madaé[Ya" )) 31 ))
eña me präpitaù sthänaà
duñpräpam amarair api
sävarëer antarasyäyaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
932
bhavitendro mad-äçrayaù
SYNONYMS
eñaù—Bali Mahäräja; me—by Me; präpitaù—has achieved; sthänam—a place;
duñpräpam—extremely difficult to obtain; amaraiù api—even by the demigods;
sävarëeù antarasya—during the period of the Manu known as Sävarëi;
ayam—this Bali Mahäräja; bhavitä—will become; indraù—the lord of the
heavenly planet; mat-äçrayaù—completely under My protection.
TRANSLATION
The Lord continued: Because of his great tolerance, I have given him a place
not obtainable even by the demigods. He will become King of the heavenly
planets during the period of the Manu known as Sävarëi.
PURPORT
This is the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even if the Lord
takes away a devotee's material opulences, the Lord immediately offers him a
position of which the demigods cannot even dream. There are many examples
of this in the history of devotional service. One of them is the opulence of
Sudämä Vipra. Sudämä Vipra suffered severe material scarcity, but he was not
disturbed and did not deviate from devotional service. Thus he was ultimately
given an exalted position by the mercy of Lord Kåñëa. Here the word
mad-äçrayaù is very significant. Because the Lord wanted to give Bali Mahäräja
the exalted position of Indra, the demigods might naturally have been envious
of him and might have fought to disturb his position. But the Supreme
Personality of Godhead assured Bali Mahäräja that he would always remain
under the Lord's protection (mad-äçrayaù).
TEXT 32
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
933
TaavTa( SauTal/MaDYaaSTaa& ivìk-MaRiviNaiMaRTaMa( )
YadaDaYaae VYaaDaYaê (c)-MaSTaNd]a Para>av" )
NaaePaSaGaaR iNavSaTaa& SaM>aviNTa MaMae+aYaa )) 32 ))
tävat sutalam adhyästäà
viçvakarma-vinirmitam
yad ädhayo vyädhayaç ca
klamas tandrä paräbhavaù
nopasargä nivasatäà
sambhavanti mamekñayä
SYNONYMS
tävat—as long as you are not in the post of Lord Indra; sutalam—in the planet
known as Sutala; adhyästäm—go live there and occupy the place;
viçvakarma-vinirmitam—which is especially created by Viçvakarmä;
yat—wherein; ädhayaù—miseries pertaining to the mind; vyädhayaù—miseries
pertaining to the body; ca—also; klamaù—fatigue; tandrä—dizziness or
laziness; paräbhavaù—becoming defeated; na—not; upasargäù—symptoms of
other disturbances; nivasatäm—of those who live there; sambhavanti—become
possible; mama—of Me; ékñayä—by the special vigilance.
TRANSLATION
Until Bali Mahäräja achieves the position of King of heaven, he shall live on
the planet Sutala, which was made by Viçvakarmä according to My order.
Because it is especially protected by Me, it is free from mental and bodily
miseries, fatigue, dizziness, defeat and all other disturbances. Bali Mahäräja, you
may now go live there peacefully.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
934
PURPORT
Viçvakarmä is the engineer or architect for the palatial buildings in the
heavenly planets. Therefore, since he was engaged to construct the residential
quarters of Bali Mahäräja, the buildings and palaces on the planet Sutala must
at least equal those on the heavenly planets. A further advantage of this place
designed for Bali Mahäräja was that he would not be disturbed by any outward
calamity. Moreover, he would not be disturbed by mental or bodily miseries.
These are all extraordinary features of the planet Sutala, where Bali Mahäräja
would live.
In the Vedic literatures we find descriptions of many different planets
where there are many, many palaces, hundreds and thousands of times better
than those of which we have experience on this planet earth. When we speak
of palaces, this naturally includes the idea of great cities and towns.
Unfortunately, when modern scientists try to explore other planets they see
nothing but rocks and sand. Of course, they may go on their frivolous
excursions, but the students of the Vedic literature will never believe them or
give them any credit for exploring other planets.
TEXT 33
wNd]SaeNa MaharaJa Yaaih >aae >ad]MaSTau Tae )
SauTal&/ SviGaRi>a" Pa[aQYa| jaiTai>a" PairvairTa" )) 33 ))
indrasena mahäräja
yähi bho bhadram astu te
sutalaà svargibhiù prärthyaà
jïätibhiù pariväritaù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
935
indrasena—O Mahäräja Bali; mahäräja—O King; yähi—better go; bhoù—O
King; bhadram—all auspiciousness; astu—let there be; te—unto you;
sutalam—in the planet known as Sutala; svargibhiù—by the demigods;
prärthyam—desirable; jïätibhiù—by your family members;
pariväritaù—surrounded.
TRANSLATION
O Bali Mahäräja [Indrasena], now you may go to the planet Sutala, which is
desired even by the demigods. Live there peacefully, surrounded by your friends
and relatives. All good fortune unto you.
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja was transferred from the heavenly planet to the planet
Sutala, which is hundreds of times better than heaven, as indicated by the
words svargibhiù prärthyam. When the Supreme Personality of Godhead
deprives His devotee of material opulences, this does not mean that the Lord
puts him into poverty; rather, the Lord promotes him to a higher position. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead did not ask Bali Mahäräja to separate from
his family; instead, the Lord allowed him to stay with his family members
(jïätibhiù pariväritaù).
TEXT 34
Na TvaMai>a>aivZYaiNTa l/aeke-Xaa" ik-MauTaaPare )
TvC^aSaNaaiTaGaaNa( dETYaa&ê§&- Mae SaUdiYaZYaiTa )) 34 ))
na tväm abhibhaviñyanti
lokeçäù kim utäpare
tvac-chäsanätigän daityäàç
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
936
cakraà me südayiñyati
SYNONYMS
na—not; tväm—unto you; abhibhaviñyanti—will be able to conquer;
loka-éçäù—the predominating deities of the various planets; kim uta
apare—what to speak of ordinary people; tvat-çäsana-atigän—who transgress
your rulings; daityän—such demons; cakram—disc; me—My; südayiñyati—will
kill.
TRANSLATION
On the planet Sutala, not even the predominating deities of other planets,
what to speak of ordinary people, will be able to conquer you. As far as the
demons are concerned, if they transgress your rule, My disc will kill them.
TEXT 35
ri+aZYae SavRTaae_h& Tva& SaaNauGa& SaPairC^dMa( )
Sada SaiàihTa& vqr Ta}a Maa& d]+YaTae >avaNa( )) 35 ))
rakñiñye sarvato 'haà tväà
sänugaà saparicchadam
sadä sannihitaà véra
tatra mäà drakñyate bhavän
SYNONYMS
rakñiñye—shall protect; sarvataù—in all respects; aham—I; tväm—you;
sa-anugam—with your associates; sa-paricchadam—with your paraphernalia;
sadä—always; sannihitam—situated nearby; véra—O great hero; tatra—there,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
937
in your place; mäm—Me; drakñyate—will be able to see; bhavän—you.
TRANSLATION
O great hero, I shall always be with you and give you protection in all
respects along with your associates and paraphernalia. Moreover, you will
always be able to see Me there.
TEXT 36
Ta}a daNavdETYaaNaa& Sa(r)aTa( Tae >aav AaSaur" )
d*îa MadNau>aav& vE SaÛ" ku-<#=ae ivNax(+YaiTa )) 36 ))
tatra dänava-daityänäà
saìgät te bhäva äsuraù
dåñövä mad-anubhävaà vai
sadyaù kuëöho vinaìkñyati
SYNONYMS
tatra—in that place; dänava-daityänäm—of the demons and the Dänavas;
saìgät—because of the association; te—your; bhävaù—mentality;
äsuraù—demoniac; dåñövä—by observing; mat-anubhävam—My superexcellent
power; vai—indeed; sadyaù—immediately; kuëöhaù—anxiety;
vinaìkñyati—will be destroyed.
TRANSLATION
Because there you will see My supreme prowess, your materialistic ideas and
anxieties that have arisen from your association with the demons and Dänavas
will immediately be vanquished.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
938
PURPORT
The Lord assured Bali Mahäräja of all protection, and finally the Lord
assured him of protection from the effects of bad association with the demons.
Bali Mahäräja certainly became an exalted devotee, but he was somewhat
anxious because his association was not purely devotional. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead therefore assured him that his demoniac mentality
would be annihilated. In other words, by the association of devotees, the
demoniac mentality is vanquished.
satäà prasaìgän mama vérya-saàvido
bhavanti håt-karëa-rasäyanäù kathäù
(SB 3.25.25)
When a demon associates with devotees engaged in glorifying the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he gradually becomes a pure devotee.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twenty-second
Chapter, of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Bali Mahäräja Surrenders His
Life."
23. The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets
This chapter describes how Bali Mahäräja, along with his grandfather
Prahläda Mahäräja, entered the planet Sutala and how the Supreme
Personality of Godhead allowed Indra to reenter the heavenly planet.
The great soul Bali Mahäräja experienced that the highest gain in life is to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
939
attain devotional service under the shelter of the Lord's lotus feet in full
surrender. Being fixed in this conclusion, his heart full of ecstatic devotion
and his eyes full of tears, he offered obeisances to the Personality of Godhead
and then, with his associates, entered the planet known as Sutala. Thus the
Supreme Personality of Godhead satisfied the desire of Aditi and reinstalled
Lord Indra. Prahläda Mahäräja, being aware of Bali's release from arrest, then
described the transcendental pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in this material world. Prahläda Mahäräja praised the Supreme Lord for
creating the material world, for being equal to everyone and for being
extremely liberal to the devotees, just like a desire tree. Indeed, Prahläda
Mahäräja said that the Lord is kind not only to His devotees but also to the
demons. In this way he described the unlimited causeless mercy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then, with folded hands, he offered his
respectful obeisances unto the Lord, and after circumambulating the Lord he
also entered the planet Sutala in accordance with the Lord's order. The Lord
then ordered Çukräcärya to describe Bali Mahäräja's faults and discrepancies
in executing the sacrificial ceremony. Çukräcärya became free from fruitive
actions by chanting the holy name of the Lord, and he explained how
chanting can diminish all the faults of the conditioned soul. He then
completed Bali Mahäräja's sacrificial ceremony. All the great saintly persons
accepted Lord Vämanadeva as the benefactor of Lord Indra because He had
returned Indra to his heavenly planet. They accepted the Supreme Personality
of Godhead as the maintainer of all the affairs of the universe. Being very
happy, Indra, along with his associates, placed Vämanadeva before him and
reentered the heavenly planet in their airplane. Having seen the wonderful
activities of Lord Viñëu in the sacrificial arena of Bali Mahäräja, all the
demigods, saintly persons, Pitäs, Bhütas and Siddhas glorified the Lord again
and again. The chapter concludes by saying that the most auspicious function
of the conditioned soul is to chant and hear about the glorious activities of
Lord Viñëu.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
940
TEXT 1
é[qéuk- ovac
wTYau¢-vNTa& Pauåz& PauraTaNa&
MahaNau>aavae_i%l/SaaDauSaMMaTa" )
bÖaÅil/baRZPak-l/aku-le/+a<aae
>a¢-yuTk-l/ae GaÓdYaa iGarab]vqTa( )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ity uktavantaà puruñaà purätanaà
mahänubhävo 'khila-sädhu-sammataù
baddhäïjalir bäñpa-kaläkulekñaëo
bhakty-utkalo gadgadayä giräbravét
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; uktavantam—upon the
order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puruñam—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; purätanam—the oldest of everyone;
mahä-anubhävaù—Bali Mahäräja, who was a great and exalted soul;
akhila-sädhu-sammataù—as approved by all saintly persons;
baddha-aïjaliù—with folded hands; bäñpa-kala-äkula-ékñaëaù—whose eyes
were filled with tears; bhakti-utkalaù—full of ecstatic devotion;
gadgadayä—which were faltering in devotional ecstasy; girä—by such words;
abravét—said.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: When the supreme, ancient, eternal Personality of
Godhead had thus spoken to Bali Mahäräja, who is universally accepted as a
pure devotee of the Lord and therefore a great soul, Bali Mahäräja, his eyes
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
941
filled with tears, his hands folded and his voice faltering in devotional ecstasy,
responded as follows.
TEXT 2
é[qbil/åvac
Ahae Pa[<aaMaaYa k*-Ta" SaMauÛMa"
Pa[Paà>a¢-aQaRivDaaE SaMaaihTa" )
Yaçaek-PaalE/STvdNauGa]hae_MarE‚
rl/BDaPaUvaeR_PaSade_Saure_iPaRTa" )) 2 ))
çré-balir uväca
aho praëämäya kåtaù samudyamaù
prapanna-bhaktärtha-vidhau samähitaù
yal loka-pälais tvad-anugraho 'marair
alabdha-pürvo 'pasade 'sure 'rpitaù
SYNONYMS
çré-baliù uväca—Bali Mahäräja said; aho—alas; praëämäya—to offer my
respectful obeisances; kåtaù—I did; samudyamaù—only an endeavor;
prapanna-bhakta-artha-vidhau—in the regulative principles observed by pure
devotees; samähitaù—is capable; yat—that; loka-pälaiù—by the leaders of
various planets; tvat-anugrahaù—Your causeless mercy; amaraiù—by the
demigods; alabdha-pürvaù—not achieved previously; apasade—unto a fallen
person like me; asure—belonging to the asura community; arpitaù—endowed.
TRANSLATION
Bali Mahäräja said: What a wonderful effect there is in even attempting to
offer respectful obeisances to You! I merely endeavored to offer You obeisances,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
942
but nonetheless the attempt was as successful as those of pure devotees. The
causeless mercy You have shown to me, a fallen demon, was never achieved
even by the demigods or the leaders of the various planets.
PURPORT
When Vämanadeva appeared before Bali Mahäräja, Bali Mahäräja
immediately wanted to offer Him respectful obeisances, but he was unable to
do so because of the presence of Çukräcärya and other demoniac associates.
The Lord is so merciful, however, that although Bali Mahäräja did not actually
offer obeisances but only endeavored to do so within his mind, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead blessed him with more mercy than even the demigods
could ever expect. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (2.40), svalpam apy asya
dharmasya träyate mahato bhayät: "Even a little advancement on this path can
protect one from the most dangerous type of fear." The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is known as bhäva-grähé janärdana because He takes only the essence
of a devotee's attitude. If a devotee sincerely surrenders, the Lord, as the
Supersoul in everyone's heart, immediately understands this. Thus even
though, externally, a devotee may not render full service, if he is internally
sincere and serious the Lord welcomes his service nonetheless. Thus the Lord
is known as bhäva-grähé janärdana because He takes the essence of one's
devotional mentality.
TEXT 3
é[qéuk- ovac
wTYau¤-a hirMaaNaTYa b]øa<a& Sa>av& TaTa" )
ivveXa SauTal&/ Pa[qTaae bil/MauR¢-" SahaSaurE" )) 3 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ity uktvä harim änatya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
943
brahmäëaà sabhavaà tataù
viveça sutalaà préto
balir muktaù sahäsuraiù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti uktvä—saying this;
harim—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari; änatya—offering
obeisances; brahmäëam—unto Lord Brahmä; sa-bhavam—with Lord Çiva;
tataù—thereafter; viveça—he entered; sutalam—the planet Sutala;
prétaù—being fully satisfied; baliù—Bali Mahäräja; muktaù—thus released;
saha asuraiù—with his asura associates.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After speaking in this way, Bali Mahäräja
offered his obeisances first to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, and
then to Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva. Thus he was released from the bondage of
the näga-päça [the ropes of Varuëa], and in full satisfaction he entered the
planet known as Sutala.
TEXT 4
WviMaNd]aYa >aGavaNa( Pa[TYaaNaqYa i}aivíPaMa( )
PaUriYaTvaidTae" k-aMaMaXaaSaTa( Sak-l&/ JaGaTa( )) 4 ))
evam indräya bhagavän
pratyänéya triviñöapam
pürayitväditeù kämam
açäsat sakalaà jagat
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
944
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; indräya—unto King Indra; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; pratyänéya—giving back; tri-viñöapam—his supremacy
in the heavenly planets; pürayitvä—fulfilling; aditeù—of Aditi; kämam—the
desire; açäsat—ruled; sakalam—complete; jagat—universe.
TRANSLATION
Thus having delivered the proprietorship of the heavenly planets to Indra
and having fulfilled the desire of Aditi, mother of the demigods, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead ruled the affairs of the universe.
TEXT 5
l/BDaPa[Saad& iNaMauR¢&- PaaE}a& v&XaDar& bil/Ma( )
iNaXaaMYa >ai¢-Pa[v<a" Pa[had wdMab]vqTa( )) 5 ))
labdha-prasädaà nirmuktaà
pautraà vaàça-dharaà balim
niçämya bhakti-pravaëaù
prahräda idam abravét
SYNONYMS
labdha-prasädam—who had achieved the blessings of the Lord;
nirmuktam—who was released from bondage; pautram—his grandson;
vaàça-dharam—the descendant; balim—Bali Mahäräja; niçämya—after
overhearing; bhakti-pravaëaù—in fully ecstatic devotion;
prahrädaù—Prahläda Mahäräja; idam—this; abravét—spoke.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
945
TRANSLATION
When Prahläda Mahäräja heard how Bali Mahäräja, his grandson and
descendant, had been released from bondage and had achieved the benediction
of the Lord, he spoke as follows in a tone of greatly ecstatic devotion.
TEXT 6
é[qPa[had ovac
NaeMa& ivirÄae l/>aTae Pa[Saad&
Na é[qNaR XavR" ik-MauTaaPare_NYae )
Yaàae_Saura<aaMaiSa duGaRPaal/ae
ivìai>avNÛEri>aviNdTaax(iga]" )) 6 ))
çré-prahräda uväca
nemaà viriïco labhate prasädaà
na çrér na çarvaù kim utäpare 'nye
yan no 'suräëäm asi durga-pälo
viçväbhivandyair abhivanditäìghriù
SYNONYMS
çré-prahrädaù uväca—Prahläda Mahäräja said; na—not; imam—this;
viriïcaù—even Lord Brahmä; labhate—can achieve; prasädam—benediction;
na—nor; çréù—the goddess of fortune; na—nor; çarvaù—Lord Çiva; kim
uta—what to speak of; apare anye—others; yat—which benediction; naù—of
us; asuräëäm—the demons; asi—You have become; durga-pälaù—the
maintainer; viçva-abhivandyaiù—by personalities like Lord Brahmä and Lord
Çiva, who are worshiped all over the universe; abhivandita-aìghriù—whose
lotus feet are worshiped.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
946
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja said: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, You are
universally worshiped; even Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva worship Your lotus
feet. Yet although You are such a great personality, You have kindly promised
to protect us, the demons. I think that such kindness has never been achieved
even by Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva or the goddess of fortune, Lakñmé, what to
speak of other demigods or common people.
PURPORT
The word durga-päla is significant. The word durga means "that which does
not go very easily." Generally durga refers to a fort, which one cannot very
easily enter. Another meaning of durga is "difficulty." Because the Supreme
Personality of Godhead promised to protect Bali Mahäräja and his associates
from all dangers, He is addressed here as durga-päla, the Lord who gives
protection from all miserable conditions.
TEXT 7
YaTPaadPaÚMak-rNdiNazev<aeNa
b]øadYa" Xar<adaénuvTae iv>aUTaq" )
k-SMaad( vYa& ku-Sa*TaYa" %l/YaaeNaYaSTae
dai+a<Yad*iíPadvq& >avTa" Pa[<aqTaa" )) 7 ))
yat-päda-padma-makaranda-niñevaëena
brahmädayaù çaraëadäçnuvate vibhütéù
kasmäd vayaà kusåtayaù khala-yonayas te
däkñiëya-dåñöi-padavéà bhavataù praëétäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
947
SYNONYMS
yat—of whom; päda-padma—of the lotus flower of the feet; makaranda—of
the honey; niñevaëena—by tasting the sweetness of rendering service;
brahma-ädayaù—great personalities like Lord Brahmä; çaraëa-da—O my Lord,
supreme shelter of everyone; açnuvate—enjoy; vibhütéù—benedictions given
by You; kasmät—how; vayam—we; ku-såtayaù—all the rogues and thieves;
khala-yonayaù—born of an envious dynasty, namely that of the demons;
te—those asuras; däkñiëya-dåñöi-padavém—the position bestowed by the
merciful glance; bhavataù—of Your Lordship; praëétäù—have achieved.
TRANSLATION
O supreme shelter of everyone, great personalities like Brahmä enjoy their
perfection simply by tasting the honey of rendering service at Your lotus feet.
But as for us, who are all rogues and debauchees born of an envious family of
demons, how have we received Your mercy? It has been possible only because
Your mercy is causeless.
TEXT 8
ic}a& TaveihTaMahae_iMaTaYaaeGaMaaYaa‚
l/Il/aivSa*í>auvNaSYa ivXaardSYa )
SavaRTMaNa" SaMad*Xaae_ivzMa" Sv>aavae
>a¢-iPa[Yaae YadiSa k-LPaTaåSv>aav" )) 8 ))
citraà tavehitam aho 'mita-yogamäyälélä-
visåñöa-bhuvanasya viçäradasya
sarvätmanaù samadåço 'viñamaù svabhävo
bhakta-priyo yad asi kalpataru-svabhävaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
948
SYNONYMS
citram—very wonderful; tava éhitam—all Your activities; aho—alas;
amita—unlimited; yogamäyä—of Your spiritual potency; lélä—by the pastimes;
visåñöa-bhuvanasya—of Your Lordship, by whom all the universes have been
created; viçäradasya—of Your Lordship, who are expert in all respects;
sarva-ätmanaù—of Your Lordship, who pervade all; sama-dåçaù—and who are
equal toward all; aviñamaù—without differentiation; svabhävaù—that is Your
characteristic; bhakta-priyaù—under the circumstances You become favorable
to the devotees; yat—because; asi—You are; kalpataru-svabhävaù—having the
characteristic of a desire tree.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, Your pastimes are all wonderfully performed by Your
inconceivable spiritual energy; and by her perverted reflection, the material
energy, You have created all the universes. As the Supersoul of all living
entities, You are aware of everything, and therefore You are certainly equal
toward everyone. Nonetheless, You favor Your devotees. This is not partiality,
however, for Your characteristic is just like that of a desire tree, which yields
everything according to one's desire.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.29):
samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu
na me dveñyo 'sti na priyaù
ye bhajanti tu mäà bhaktyä
mayi te teñu cäpy aham
"I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
949
renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend
to him." The Supreme Personality of Godhead is certainly equal toward all
living entities, but a devotee who fully surrenders at the lotus feet of the Lord
is different from a nondevotee. In other words, everyone can take shelter at
the lotus feet of the Lord to enjoy equal benedictions from the Lord, but
nondevotees do not do so, and therefore they suffer the consequences created
by the material energy. We can understand this fact by a simple example. The
king or government is equal to all citizens. Therefore, if a citizen capable of
receiving special favors from the government is offered such favors, this does
not mean that the government is partial. One who knows how to receive
favors from the authority can receive them, but one who does not neglects
these favors and does not receive them. There are two classes of men—the
demons and the demigods. The demigods are fully aware of the Supreme Lord's
position, and therefore they are obedient to Him, but even if demons know
about the supremacy of the Lord they purposely defy His authority. Therefore,
the Lord makes distinctions according to the mentality of the living being, but
otherwise He is equal to everyone. Like a desire tree, the Lord fulfills the
desires of one who takes shelter of Him, but one who does not take such
shelter is distinct from the surrendered soul. One who takes shelter at the lotus
feet of the Lord is favored by the Lord, regardless of whether such a person is a
demon or a demigod.
TEXT 9
é[q>aGavaNauvac
vTSa Pa[had >ad]& Tae Pa[Yaaih SauTal/al/YaMa( )
MaaedMaaNa" SvPaaE}ae<a jaTaqNaa& Sau%Maavh )) 9 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
vatsa prahräda bhadraà te
prayähi sutalälayam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
950
modamänaù sva-pautreëa
jïäténäà sukham ävaha
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Personality of Godhead said; vatsa—O My dear son;
prahräda—O Prahläda Mahäräja; bhadram te—all auspiciousness unto you;
prayähi—please go; sutala-älayam—to the place known as Sutala;
modamänaù—in a spirit of jubilation; sva-pautreëa—with your grandson (Bali
Mahäräja); jïäténäm—of your relatives and friends; sukham—happiness;
ävaha—just enjoy.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear son Prahläda, all good
fortune unto you. For the time being, please go to the place known as Sutala
and there enjoy happiness with your grandson and your other relatives and
friends.
TEXT 10
iNaTYa& d]íaiSa Maa& Ta}a GadaPaai<aMaviSQaTaMa( )
MaÕXaRNaMahaúadßSTak-MaRiNabNDaNa" )) 10 ))
nityaà drañöäsi mäà tatra
gadä-päëim avasthitam
mad-darçana-mahählädadhvasta-
karma-nibandhanaù
SYNONYMS
nityam—constantly; drañöä—the seer; asi—you shall be; mäm—unto Me;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
951
tatra—there (in Sutalaloka); gadä-päëim—with a club in My hand;
avasthitam—situated there; mat-darçana—by seeing Me in that form;
mahä-ähläda—by the great transcendental bliss; dhvasta—having been
vanquished; karma-nibandhanaù—the bondage of fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead assured Prahläda Mahäräja: You shall
be able to see Me there in My usual feature with conchshell, disc, club and lotus
in My hand. Because of your transcendental bliss due to always personally
seeing Me, you will have no further bondage to fruitive activities.
PURPORT
Karma-bandha, the bondage of fruitive activities, entails the repetition of
birth and death. One performs fruitive activities in such a way that he creates
another body for his next life. As long as one is attached to fruitive activities,
he must accept another material body. This repeated acceptance of material
bodies is called saàsära-bandhana. To stop this, a devotee is advised to see the
Supreme Lord constantly. The kaniñöha-adhikäré, or neophyte devotee, is
therefore advised to visit the temple every day and see the form of the Lord
regularly. Thus the neophyte devotee can be freed from the bondage of fruitive
activities.
TEXTS 11-12
é[qéuk- ovac
Aaja& >aGavTaae raJaNPa[hadae bil/Naa Sah )
ba!iMaTYaMal/Pa[jae MaUDNYaaRDaaYa k*-TaaÅil/" )) 11 ))
Pair§-MYaaidPauåz& SavaRSaurcMaUPaiTa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
952
Pa[<aTaSTadNaujaTa" Pa[ivveXa Mahaibl/Ma( )) 12 ))
çré-çuka uväca
äjïäà bhagavato räjan
prahrädo balinä saha
bäòham ity amala-prajïo
mürdhny ädhäya kåtäïjaliù
parikramyädi-puruñaà
sarväsura-camüpatiù
praëatas tad-anujïätaù
praviveça mahä-bilam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; äjïäm—the order;
bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; räjan—O King
(Mahäräja Parékñit); prahrädaù—Mahäräja Prahläda; balinä
saha—accompanied by Bali Mahäräja; bäòham—yes, sir, what You say is all
right; iti—thus; amala-prajïaù—Prahläda Mahäräja, who had clear
intelligence; mürdhni—on his head; ädhäya—accepting; kåta-aïjaliù—with
folded hands; parikramya—after circumambulating; ädi-puruñam—the
supreme original person, Bhagavän; sarva-asura-camüpatiù—the master of all
the chiefs of the demons; praëataù—after offering obeisances;
tat-anujïätaù—being permitted by Him (Lord Vämana); praviveça—entered;
mahä-bilam—the planet known as Sutala.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Accompanied by Bali Mahäräja, my dear King
Parékñit, Prahläda Mahäräja, the master of all the chiefs of the demons, took the
Supreme Lord's order on his head with folded hands. After saying yes to the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
953
Lord, circumambulating Him and offering Him respectful obeisances, he
entered the lower planetary system known as Sutala.
TEXT 13
AQaahaeXaNaSa& raJaNa( hirNaaRraYa<aae_iNTake- )
AaSaqNaMa*iTvJaa& MaDYae SadiSa b]øvaidNaaMa( )) 13 ))
athähoçanasaà räjan
harir näräyaëo 'ntike
äsénam åtvijäà madhye
sadasi brahma-vädinäm
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; äha—said; uçanasam—unto Çukräcärya; räjan—O King;
hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; näräyaëaù—the Lord;
antike—nearby; äsénam—who was sitting; åtvijäm madhye—in the group of all
the priests; sadasi—in the assembly; brahma-vädinäm—of the followers of
Vedic principles.
TRANSLATION
Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, thereafter addressed
Çukräcärya, who was sitting nearby in the midst of the assembly with the
priests [brahma, hotä, udgätä and adhvaryu]. O Mahäräja Parékñit, these priests
were all brahma-vädés, followers of the Vedic principles for performing
sacrifices.
TEXT 14
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
954
b]øNa( SaNTaNau iXaZYaSYa k-MaRiC^d]& ivTaNvTa" )
YaTa( TaTa( k-MaRSau vEzMYa& b]ød*í& SaMa& >aveTa( )) 14 ))
brahman santanu çiñyasya
karma-cchidraà vitanvataù
yat tat karmasu vaiñamyaà
brahma-dåñöaà samaà bhavet
SYNONYMS
brahman—O brähmaëa; santanu—please describe; çiñyasya—of your disciple;
karma-chidram—the discrepancies in the fruitive activities; vitanvataù—of he
who was performing sacrifices; yat tat—that which; karmasu—in the fruitive
activities; vaiñamyam—discrepancy; brahma-dåñöam—when it is judged by the
brähmaëas; samam—equipoised; bhavet—it so becomes.
TRANSLATION
O best of the brähmaëas, Çukräcärya, please describe the fault or discrepancy
in your disciple Bali Mahäräja, who engaged in performing sacrifices. This fault
will be nullified when judged in the presence of qualified brähmaëas.
PURPORT
When Bali Mahäräja and Prahläda Mahäräja had departed for the planet
Sutala, Lord Viñëu asked Çukräcärya what the fault was in Bali Mahäräja for
which Çukräcärya had cursed him. It might be argued that since Bali Mahäräja
had now left the scene, how could his faults be judged? In reply to this, Lord
Viñëu informed Çukräcärya that there was no need for Bali Mahäräja's
presence, for his faults and discrepancies could be nullified if judged before the
brähmaëas. As will be seen in the next verse, Bali Mahäräja had no faults;
Çukräcärya had unnecessarily cursed him. Nonetheless, this was better for Bali
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
955
Mahäräja. Being cursed by Çukräcärya, Bali Mahäräja was deprived of all his
possessions, with the result that the Supreme Personality of Godhead favored
him for his strong faith in devotional service. Of course, a devotee is not
required to engage in fruitive activities. As stated in the çästra, sarvärhaëam
acyutejyä (SB 4.31.14). By worshiping Acyuta, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one satisfies everyone. Because Bali Mahäräja had satisfied the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, there were no discrepancies in his
performance of sacrifices.
TEXT 15
é[qéu§- ovac
ku-TaSTaTk-MaRvEzMYa& YaSYa k-MaeRìrae >avaNa( )
YajeXaae YajPauåz" SavR>aaveNa PaUiJaTa" )) 15 ))
çré-çukra uväca
kutas tat-karma-vaiñamyaà
yasya karmeçvaro bhavän
yajïeço yajïa-puruñaù
sarva-bhävena püjitaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukraù uväca—Çré Çukräcärya said; kutaù—where is that; tat—of him (Bali
Mahäräja); karma-vaiñamyam—discrepancy in discharging fruitive activities;
yasya—of whom (Bali Mahäräja); karma-éçvaraù—the master of all fruitive
activities; bhavän—Your Lordship; yajïa-éçaù—You are the enjoyer of all
sacrifices; yajïa-puruñaù—You are the person for whose pleasure all sacrifices
are offered; sarva-bhävena—in all respects; püjitaù—having worshiped.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
956
TRANSLATION
Çukräcärya said: My Lord, You are the enjoyer and lawgiver in all
performances of sacrifice, and You are the yajïa-puruña, the person to whom all
sacrifices are offered. If one has fully satisfied You, where is the chance of
discrepancies or faults in his performances of sacrifice?
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (5.29) the Lord says, bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram: the Lord, the supreme proprietor, is the actual person
to be satisfied by the performance of yajïas. The Viñëu Puräëa (3.8.9) says:
varëäçramäcäravatä
puruñeëa paraù pumän
viñëur ärädhyate panthä
nanyat tat-toña-käraëam
[Cc. Madhya 8.58]
All the Vedic ritualistic sacrifices are performed for the purpose of satisfying
Lord Viñëu, the yajïa-puruña. The divisions of society—brähmaëa, kñatriya,
vaiçya, çüdra, brahmacarya, gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa—are all meant
to satisfy the Supreme Lord, Viñëu. To act according to this principle of the
varëäçrama institution is called varëäçramäcaraëa. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(1.2.13), Süta Gosvämé says:
ataù pumbhir dvija-çreñöhä
varëäçrama-vibhägaçaù
svanuñöhitasya dharmasya
saàsiddhir hari-toñaëam
"O best among the twice-born, it is therefore concluded that the highest
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
957
perfection one can achieve by discharging his prescribed duties according to
caste divisions and orders of life is to please the Personality of Godhead."
Everything is meant to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore,
since Bali Mahäräja had satisfied the Lord, he had no faults, and Çukräcärya
admitted that cursing him was not good.
TEXT 16
MaN}aTaSTaN}aTaiX^d]& deXak-al/ahRvSTauTa" )
Sav| k-raeiTa iNaiX^d]MaNauSaªqTaRNa& Tav )) 16 ))
mantratas tantrataç chidraà
deça-kälärha-vastutaù
sarvaà karoti niçchidram
anusaìkértanaà tava
SYNONYMS
mantrataù—in pronouncing the Vedic mantras improperly; tantrataù—in
insufficient knowledge for following regulative principles;
chidram—discrepancy; deça—in the matter of country; käla—and time;
arha—and recipient; vastutaù—and paraphernalia; sarvam—all these;
karoti—makes; niçchidram—without discrepancy;
anusaìkértanam—constantly chanting the holy name; tava—of Your Lordship.
TRANSLATION
There may be discrepancies in pronouncing the mantras and observing the
regulative principles, and, moreover, there may be discrepancies in regard to
time, place, person and paraphernalia. But when Your Lordship's holy name is
chanted, everything becomes faultless.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
958
PURPORT
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has recommended:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting
the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way.
There is no other way." (Båhan-näradéya Puräëa 38.126) In this age of Kali, it is
extremely difficult to perform Vedic ritualistic ceremonies or sacrifices
perfectly. Hardly anyone can chant the Vedic mantras with perfect
pronunciation or accumulate the paraphernalia for Vedic performances.
Therefore the sacrifice recommended in this age is saìkértana, constant
chanting of the holy name of the Lord. Yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair yajanti hi
sumedhasaù (SB 11.5.29). Instead of wasting time performing Vedic sacrifices,
those who are intelligent, those who possess good brain substance, should take
to the chanting of the Lord's holy name and thus perform sacrifice perfectly. I
have seen that many religious leaders are addicted to performing yajïas and
spending hundreds and thousands of rupees for imperfect sacrificial
performances. This is a lesson for those who unnecessarily execute such
imperfect sacrifices. We should take the advice of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
(yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair yajanti hi sumedhasaù). Although Çukräcärya was a
strict brähmaëa addicted to ritualistic activities, he also admitted, niçchidram
anusaìkértanaà tava: "My Lord, constant chanting of the holy name of Your
Lordship makes everything perfect." In Kali-yuga the Vedic ritualistic
ceremonies cannot be performed as perfectly as before. Therefore Çréla Jéva
Gosvämé has recommended that although one should take care to follow all the
principles in every kind of spiritual activity, especially in worship of the Deity,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
959
there is still a chance of discrepancies, and one should compensate for this by
chanting the holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In our Kåñëa
consciousness movement we therefore give special stress to the chanting of the
Hare Kåñëa mantra in all activities.
TEXT 17
TaQaaiPa vdTaae >aUMaNa( k-irZYaaMYaNauXaaSaNaMa( )
WTaC^\eYa" Par& Pau&Saa& YaTa( TavajaNauPaal/NaMa( )) 17 ))
tathäpi vadato bhüman
kariñyämy anuçäsanam
etac chreyaù paraà puàsäà
yat taväjïänupälanam
SYNONYMS
tathäpi—although there was no fault on the part of Bali Mahäräja;
vadataù—because of your order; bhüman—O Supreme; kariñyämi—I must
execute; anuçäsanam—because it is Your order; etat—this is; çreyaù—that
which is the most auspicious; param—supreme; puàsäm—of all persons;
yat—because; tava äjïä-anupälanam—to obey Your order.
TRANSLATION
Lord Viñëu, I must nonetheless act in obedience to Your order because
obeying Your order is most auspicious and is the first duty of everyone.
TEXT 18
é[qéuk- ovac
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
960
Pa[iTaNaNÛ hrerajaMauXaNaa >aGavaiNaiTa )
YajiC^d]& SaMaaData ble/ivRPa[izRi>a" Sah )) 18 ))
çré-çuka uväca
pratinandya harer äjïäm
uçanä bhagavän iti
yajïa-cchidraà samädhatta
baler viprarñibhiù saha
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; pratinandya—offering all
obeisances; hareù—of the Personality of Godhead; äjïäm—the order;
uçanäù—Çukräcärya; bhagavän—the most powerful; iti—thus;
yajïa-chidram—discrepancies in the performance of sacrifices;
samädhatta—made it a point to fulfill; baleù—of Bali Mahäräja;
vipra-åñibhiù—the best brähmaëas; saha—along with.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: In this way, the most powerful Çukräcärya
accepted the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead with full respect.
Along with the best brähmaëas, he began to compensate for the discrepancies in
the sacrifices performed by Bali Mahäräja.
TEXT 19
Wv& ble/MaRhq& raJaNa( i>ai+aTva vaMaNaae hir" )
ddaE >a]a}ae MaheNd]aYa i}aidv& YaTa( ParEôRTaMa( )) 19 ))
evaà baler mahéà räjan
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
961
bhikñitvä vämano hariù
dadau bhrätre mahendräya
tridivaà yat parair håtam
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; baleù—from Bali Mahäräja; mahém—the land; räjan—O King
Parékñit; bhikñitvä—after begging; vämanaù—His Lordship Vämana;
hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dadau—delivered; bhrätre—unto
His brother; mahä-indräya—Indra, the King of heaven; tridivam—the
planetary system of the demigods; yat—which; paraiù—by others; håtam—was
taken.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, thus having taken all the land of Bali Mahäräja by begging,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Vämanadeva, delivered to His
brother Indra all the land taken away by Indra's enemy.
TEXTS 20-21
Pa[JaaPaiTaPaiTab]Røa devizRiPaTa*>aUiMaPaE" )
d+a>a*Gvi(r)raeMau:YaE" ku-Maare<a >aveNa c )) 20 ))
k-XYaPaSYaaidTae" Pa[qTYaE SavR>aUTa>avaYa c )
l/aek-aNaa& l/aek-Paal/aNaaMak-raed( vaMaNa& PaiTaMa( )) 21 ))
prajäpati-patir brahmä
devarñi-pitå-bhümipaiù
dakña-bhågv-aìgiro-mukhyaiù
kumäreëa bhavena ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
962
kaçyapasyäditeù prétyai
sarva-bhüta-bhaväya ca
lokänäà loka-pälänäm
akarod vämanaà patim
SYNONYMS
prajäpati-patiù—the master of all Prajäpatis; brahmä—Lord Brahmä;
deva—with the demigods; åñi—with the great saintly persons; pitå—with the
inhabitants of Pitåloka; bhümipaiù—with the Manus; dakña—with Dakña;
bhågu—with Bhågu Muni; aìgiraù—with Aìgirä Muni; mukhyaiù—with all
the chiefs of the various planetary systems; kumäreëa—with Kärttikeya;
bhavena—with Lord Çiva; ca—also; kaçyapasya—of Kaçyapa Muni; aditeù—of
Aditi; prétyai—f or the pleasure; sarva-bhüta-bhaväya—for the auspiciousness
of all living entities; ca—also; lokänäm—of all planetary systems;
loka-pälänäm—of the predominating persons in all planets; akarot—made;
vämanam—Lord Vämana; patim—the supreme leader.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä [the master of King Dakña and all other Prajäpatis],
accompanied by all the demigods, the great saintly persons, the inhabitants of
Pitåloka, the Manus, the munis, and such leaders as Dakña, Bhågu and Aìgirä,
as well as Kärttikeya and Lord Çiva, accepted Lord Vämanadeva as the protector
of everyone. He did this for the pleasure of Kaçyapa Muni and his wife Aditi
and for the welfare of all the inhabitants of the universe, including their various
leaders.
TEXTS 22-23
vedaNaa& SavRdevaNaa& DaMaRSYa YaXaSa" ié[Ya" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
963
Ma(r)l/aNaa& v]TaaNaa& c k-LPa& SvGaaRPavGaRYaae" )) 22 ))
oPaeNd]& k-LPaYaa& c§e- PaiTa& SavRiv>aUTaYae )
Tada SavaRi<a >aUTaaiNa >a*Xa& MauMauidre Na*Pa )) 23 ))
vedänäà sarva-devänäà
dharmasya yaçasaù çriyaù
maìgalänäà vratänäà ca
kalpaà svargäpavargayoù
upendraà kalpayäà cakre
patià sarva-vibhütaye
tadä sarväëi bhütäni
bhåçaà mumudire nåpa
SYNONYMS
vedänäm—(for the protection) of all the Vedas; sarva-devänäm—of all the
demigods; dharmasya—of all principles of religion; yaçasaù—of all fame;
çriyaù—of all opulences; maìgalänäm—of all auspiciousness; vratänäm
ca—and of all vows; kalpam—the most expert; svarga-apavargayoù—of
elevation to the heavenly planets or liberation from material bondage;
upendram—Lord Vämanadeva; kalpayäm cakre—they made it the plan;
patim—the master; sarva-vibhütaye—for all purposes; tadä—at that time;
sarväëi—all; bhütäni—living entities; bhåçam—very much;
mumudire—became happy; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, Indra was considered the King of all the universe, but the
demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä, wanted Upendra, Lord Vämanadeva, as the
protector of the Vedas, the principles of religion, fame, opulence,
auspiciousness, vows, elevation to the higher planetary system, and liberation.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
964
Thus they accepted Upendra, Lord Vämanadeva, as the supreme master of
everything. This decision made all living entities extremely happy.
TEXT 24
TaTaiSTvNd]" PaurSk*-TYa devYaaNaeNa vaMaNaMa( )
l/aek-PaalE/idRv& iNaNYae b]ø<aa caNauMaaeidTa" )) 24 ))
tatas tv indraù puraskåtya
deva-yänena vämanam
loka-pälair divaà ninye
brahmaëä cänumoditaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; tu—but; indraù—the King of heaven; puraskåtya—keeping
forward; deva-yänena—by an airplane used by the demigods; vämanam—Lord
Vämana; loka-pälaiù—with the chiefs of all other planets; divam—to the
heavenly planets; ninye—brought; brahmaëä—by Lord Brahmä; ca—also;
anumoditaù—being approved.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, along with all the leaders of the heavenly planets, Indra, the
King of heaven, placed Lord Vämanadeva before him and, with the approval of
Lord Brahmä, brought Him to the heavenly planet in a celestial airplane.
TEXT 25
Pa[aPYa i}a>auvNa& ceNd] oPaeNd]>auJaPaail/Ta" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
965
ié[Yaa ParMaYaa Jauíae MauMaude GaTaSaaßSa" )) 25 ))
präpya tri-bhuvanaà cendra
upendra-bhuja-pälitaù
çriyä paramayä juñöo
mumude gata-sädhvasaù
SYNONYMS
präpya—after obtaining; tri-bhuvanam—the three worlds; ca—also;
indraù—the King of heaven; upendra-bhuja-pälitaù—being protected by the
arms of Vämanadeva, Upendra; çriyä—by opulence; paramayä—by supreme;
juñöaù—thus being served; mumude—enjoyed; gata-sädhvasaù—without fear
of the demons.
TRANSLATION
Indra, King of heaven, being protected by the arms of Vämanadeva, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, thus regained his rule of the three worlds and
was reinstated in his own position, supremely opulent, fearless and fully
satisfied.
TEXTS 26-27
b]øa XavR" ku-Maarê >a*GvaÛa MauNaYaae Na*Pa )
iPaTar" SavR>aUTaaiNa iSaÖa vEMaaiNak-aê Yae )) 26 ))
SauMahTa( k-MaR Tad( ivZ<aaeGaaRYaNTa" ParMad(>auTaMa( )
iDaZ<YaaiNa SvaiNa Tae JaGMauridiTa& c XaXa&iSare )) 27 ))
brahmä çarvaù kumäraç ca
bhågv-ädyä munayo nåpa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
966
pitaraù sarva-bhütäni
siddhä vaimänikäç ca ye
sumahat karma tad viñëor
gäyantaù param adbhutam
dhiñëyäni sväni te jagmur
aditià ca çaçaàsire
SYNONYMS
brahmä—Lord Brahmä; çarvaù—Lord Çiva; kumäraù ca—also Lord Kärttikeya;
bhågu-ädyäù—headed by Bhågu Muni, one of the seven åñis; munayaù—the
saintly persons; nåpa—O King; pitaraù—the inhabitants of Pitåloka;
sarva-bhütäni—other living entities; siddhäù—the residents of Siddhaloka;
vaimänikäù ca—human beings who can travel everywhere in outer space by
airplane; ye—such persons; sumahat—highly praiseworthy; karma—activities;
tat—all those (activities); viñëoù—done by Lord Viñëu; gäyantaù—glorifying;
param adbhutam—uncommon and wonderful; dhiñëyäni—to their respective
planets; sväni—own; te—all of them; jagmuù—departed; aditim ca—as well as
Aditi; çaçaàsire—praised all these activities of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, Lord Kärttikeya, the great sage Bhågu, other
saintly persons, the inhabitants of Pitåloka and all other living entities present,
including the inhabitants of Siddhaloka and living entities who travel in outer
space by airplane, all glorified the uncommon activities of Lord Vämanadeva. O
King, while chanting about and glorifying the Lord, they returned to their
respective heavenly planets. They also praised the position of Aditi.
TEXT 28
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
967
SavRMaeTaNMaYaa:YaaTa& >avTa" ku-l/NaNdNa )
oå§-MaSYa cirTa& é[aeTa›<aaMagaMaaecNaMa( )) 28 ))
sarvam etan mayäkhyätaà
bhavataù kula-nandana
urukramasya caritaà
çrotèëäm agha-mocanam
SYNONYMS
sarvam—all; etat—these incidents; mayä—by me; äkhyätam—have been
described; bhavataù—of you; kula-nandana—O Mahäräja Parékñit, the
pleasure of your dynasty; urukramasya—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; caritam—activities; çrotèëäm—of the audience;
agha-mocanam—such hearing of the Lord's activities certainly vanquishes the
results of sinful activities.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, pleasure of your dynasty, I have now described to you
everything about the wonderful activities of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Vämanadeva. Those who hear about this are certainly freed from all
the results of sinful activities.
TEXT 29
Paar& MaihMan oåiv§-MaTaae Ga*<aaNaae
Ya" PaaiQaRvaiNa ivMaMae Sa rJaa&iSa MaTYaR" )
ik&- JaaYaMaaNa oTa JaaTa oPaEiTa MaTYaR
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
968
wTYaah MaN}ad*Ga*iz" PauåzSYa YaSYa )) 29 ))
päraà mahimna uruvikramato gåëäno
yaù pärthiväni vimame sa rajäàsi martyaù
kià jäyamäna uta jäta upaiti martya
ity äha mantra-dåg åñiù puruñasya yasya
SYNONYMS
päram—the measurement; mahimnaù—of the glories; uruvikramataù—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who acts wonderfully; gåëänaù—can count;
yaù—a person who; pärthiväni—of the whole planet earth; vimame—can
count; saù—he; rajäàsi—the atoms; martyaù—a human being who is subject
to death; kim—what; jäyamänaù—one who will take birth in the future;
uta—either; jätaù—one who is already born; upaiti—can do; martyaù—a
person subject to death; iti—thus; äha—said; mantra-dåk—who could foresee
the Vedic mantras; åñiù—the great saintly Vasiñöha Muni; puruñasya—of the
supreme person; yasya—of whom.
TRANSLATION
One who is subject to death cannot measure the glories of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Trivikrama, Lord Viñëu, any more than he can count
the number of atoms on the entire planet earth. No one, whether born already
or destined to take birth, is able to do this. This has been sung by the great sage
Vasiñöha.
PURPORT
Vasiñöha Muni has given a mantra about Lord Viñëu: na te viñëor jäyamäno
na jäto mahimnaù päram anantam äpa. No one can estimate the extent of the
uncommonly glorious activities of Lord Viñëu. Unfortunately, there are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
969
so-called scientists who are subject to death at every moment but are trying to
understand by speculation the wonderful creation of the cosmos. This is a
foolish attempt. Long, long ago, Vasiñöha Muni said that no one in the past
could measure the glories of the Lord and that no one can do so in the future.
One must simply be satisfied with seeing the glorious activities of the Supreme
Lord's creation. The Lord therefore says in Bhagavad-gétä (10.42), viñöabhyäham
idaà kåtsnam ekäàçena sthito jagat: "With a single fragment of Myself, I
pervade and support this entire universe." The material world consists of
innumerable universes, each one full of innumerable planets, which are all
considered to be products of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's material
energy. Yet this is only one fourth of God's creation. The other three fourths
of creation constitute the spiritual world. Among the innumerable planets in
only one universe, the so-called scientists cannot understand even the moon
and Mars, but they try to defy the creation of the Supreme Lord and His
uncommon energy. Such men have been described as crazy. Nünaà pramattaù
kurute vikarma (SB 5.5.4). Such crazy men unnecessarily waste time, energy
and money in attempting to defy the glorious activities of Urukrama, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 30
Ya wd& devdevSYa hrerd(>auTak-MaR<a" )
AvTaaraNaucirTa& é*<vNa( YaaiTa Para& GaiTaMa( )) 30 ))
ya idaà deva-devasya
harer adbhuta-karmaëaù
avatäränucaritaà
çåëvan yäti paräà gatim
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
970
yaù—anyone who; idam—this; deva-devasya—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is worshiped by the demigods; hareù—of Lord Kåñëa, Hari;
adbhuta-karmaëaù—whose activities are all wonderful;
avatära-anucaritam—activities performed in His different incarnations;
çåëvan—if one continues to hear; yäti—he goes; paräm gatim—to the supreme
perfection, back home, back to Godhead.
TRANSLATION
If one hears about the uncommon activities of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in His various incarnations, he is certainly elevated to the higher
planetary system or even brought back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 31
i§-YaMaa<ae k-MaR<aqd& dEve iPa}Yae_Qa MaaNauze )
Ya}a Ya}aaNauk-ITYaeRTa TaTa( Taeza& Sauk*-Ta& ivdu" )) 31 ))
kriyamäëe karmaëédaà
daive pitrye 'tha mänuñe
yatra yatränukértyeta
tat teñäà sukåtaà viduù
SYNONYMS
kriyamäëe—upon the performance; karmaëi—of a ritualistic ceremony;
idam—this description of the characteristics of Vämanadeva; daive—to please
the demigods; pitrye—or to please the forefathers, as in a çräddha ceremony;
atha—either; mänuñe—for the pleasure of human society, as in marriages;
yatra—wherever; yatra—whenever; anukértyeta—is described; tat—that;
teñäm—for them; sukåtam—auspicious; viduù—everyone should understand.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
971
TRANSLATION
Whenever the activities of Vämanadeva are described in the course of a
ritualistic ceremony, whether the ceremony be performed to please the
demigods, to please one's forefathers in Pitåloka, or to celebrate a social event
like a marriage, that ceremony should be understood to be extremely auspicious.
PURPORT
There are three kinds of ceremonies—specifically, ceremonies to please the
Supreme Personality of Godhead or the demigods, those performed for social
celebrations like marriages and birthdays, and those meant to please the
forefathers, like the çräddha ceremony. In all these ceremonies, large amounts
of money are spent for various activities, but here it is suggested that if along
with this there is recitation of the wonderful activities of Vämanadeva,
certainly the ceremony will be carried out successfully and will be free of all
discrepancies.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twenty-third Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Demigods Regain the Heavenly
planets."
24. Matsya, the Lord's Fish Incarnation
This chapter describes the Supreme Personality of Godhead's incarnation
as a fish, and it also describes the saving of Mahäräja Satyavrata from an
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
972
inundation.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead expands Himself by sväàça (His
personal expansions) and vibhinnäàça (His expansions as the living entities).
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.8), pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm:
the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears on this planet for the protection
of the sädhus, or devotees, and for the destruction of the miscreants, or
nondevotees. He especially descends to give protection to the cows, the
brähmaëas, the demigods, the devotees and the Vedic system of religion. Thus
He appears in various forms-sometimes as a fish, sometimes a boar, sometimes
Nåsiàhadeva, sometimes Vämanadeva and so on-but in any form or
incarnation, although He comes within the atmosphere of the material modes
of nature, He is unaffected. This is a sign of His supreme controlling power.
Although He comes within the material atmosphere, mäyä cannot touch Him.
Therefore, no material qualities can be attributed to Him in any degree.
Once, at the end of the previous kalpa, a demon named Hayagréva wanted
to take the Vedic knowledge away from Lord Brahmä at the time of
annihilation. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead took the
incarnation of a fish at the beginning of the period of Sväyambhuva Manu and
saved the Vedas. During the reign of Cäkñuña Manu there was a king named
Satyavrata, who was a great pious ruler. To save him, the Lord appeared as the
fish incarnation for a second time. King Satyavrata later became the son of the
sun-god and was known as Çräddhadeva. He was established as Manu by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
To receive the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, King
Satyavrata engaged in the austerity of subsisting only by drinking water. Once,
while performing this austerity on the bank of the Kåtamälä River and offering
oblations of water with the palm of his hand, he found a small fish. The fish
appealed to the King for protection, asking the King to keep Him in a safe
place. Although the King did not know that the small fish was the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself, as a king he gave shelter to the fish and kept
Him in a water jug. The fish, being the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
973
wanted to show His potency to King Satyavrata, and thus He immediately
expanded His body in such a way that He could no longer be kept in the jug of
water. The King then put the fish in a big well, but the well was also too small.
Then the King put the fish in a lake, but the lake was also unsuitable. Finally
the King put the fish in the sea, but even the sea could not accommodate Him.
Thus the King understood that the fish was no one else but the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and he requested the Lord to describe His incarnation
as a fish. The Personality of Godhead, being pleased with the King, informed
him that within a week there would be an inundation throughout the universe
and that the fish incarnation would protect the King, along with the åñis,
herbs, seeds and other living entities, in a boat, which would be attached to the
fish's horn. After saying this, the Lord disappeared. King Satyavrata offered
respectful obeisances to the Supreme Lord and continued to meditate upon
Him. In due course of time, annihilation took place, and the King saw a boat
coming near. After getting aboard with learned brähmaëas and saintly persons,
he offered prayers to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, and thus he taught Mahäräja
Satyavrata and the saintly persons about Vedic knowledge from the core of the
heart. King Satyavrata took his next birth as Vaivasvata Manu, who is
mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä. Vivasvän manave präha: the sun-god spoke the
science of Bhagavad-gétä to his son Manu. Because of being the son of
Vivasvän, this Manu is known as Vaivasvata Manu.
TEXT 1
é[qraJaaevac
>aGavH^\aeTauiMaC^aiMa hrerd(>auTak-MaR<a" )
AvTaark-QaaMaaÛa& MaaYaaMaTSYaiv@MbNaMa( )) 1 ))
çré-räjoväca
bhagavaï chrotum icchämi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
974
harer adbhuta-karmaëaù
avatära-kathäm ädyäà
mäyä-matsya-viòambanam
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—King Parékñit said; bhagavan—O most powerful; çrotum—to
hear; icchämi—I desire; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari;
adbhuta-karmaëaù—whose activities are wonderful;
avatära-kathäm—pastimes of the incarnation; ädyäm—first;
mäyä-matsya-viòambanam—which is simply an imitation of a fish.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is
eternally situated in His transcendental position, yet He descends to this
material world and manifests Himself in various incarnations. His first
incarnation was that of a great fish. O most powerful Çukadeva Gosvämé, I wish
to hear from you the pastimes of that fish incarnation.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is all-powerful, yet He accepted the
form of an uncommon fish. This is one of the ten original incarnations of the
Lord.
TEXTS 2-3
YadQaRMadDaad( æPa& MaaTSYa& l/aek-JauGauiPSaTaMa( )
TaMa"Pa[k*-iTaduMaRz| k-MaRGa]STa wveìr" )) 2 ))
WTaàae >aGavNa( Sav| YaQaavd( v¢u-MahRiSa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
975
otaMaëaek-cirTa& SavRl/aek-Sau%avhMa( )) 3 ))
yad-artham adadhäd rüpaà
mätsyaà loka-jugupsitam
tamaù-prakåti-durmarñaà
karma-grasta iveçvaraù
etan no bhagavan sarvaà
yathävad vaktum arhasi
uttamaçloka-caritaà
sarva-loka-sukhävaham
SYNONYMS
yat-artham—for what purpose; adadhät—accepted; rüpam—form;
mätsyam—of a fish; loka-jugupsitam—which is certainly not very favorable in
this world; tamaù—in the mode of ignorance; prakåti—such behavior;
durmarñam—which is certainly very painful and condemned;
karma-grastaù—one who is under the laws of karma; iva—like; éçvaraù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; etat—all these facts; naù—unto us;
bhagavan—O most powerful sage; sarvam—everything; yathävat—properly;
vaktum arhasi—kindly describe; uttamaçloka-caritam—the pastimes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-loka-sukha-ävaham—by hearing of
which everyone becomes happy.
TRANSLATION
What was the purpose for which the Supreme Personality of Godhead
accepted the abominable form of a fish, exactly as an ordinary living being
accepts different forms under the laws of karma? The form of a fish is certainly
condemned and full of terrible pain. O my lord, what was the purpose of this
incarnation? Kindly explain this to us, for hearing about the pastimes of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
976
Lord is auspicious for everyone.
PURPORT
Parékñit Mahäräja's question to Çukadeva Gosvämé was based on this
principle stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (4.7):
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend
Myself." The Lord appears in each incarnation to save the world from
irreligious principles and especially to protect His devotees (pariträëäya
sädhünäm [Bg. 4.8]). Vämanadeva, for example, appeared to save the devotee
Bali Mahäräja. Similarly, when the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepted
the abominable form of a fish, He must have done so to favor some devotee.
Parékñit Mahäräja was eager to know about the devotee for whom the Supreme
Lord accepted this form.
TEXT 4
é[qSaUTa ovac
wTYau¢-ae ivZ<auraTaeNa >aGavaNa( badraYai<a" )
ovac cirTa& ivZ<aaeMaRTSYaæPae<a YaTa( k*-TaMa( )) 4 ))
çré-süta uväca
ity ukto viñëu-rätena
bhagavän bädaräyaëiù
uväca caritaà viñëor
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
977
matsya-rüpeëa yat kåtam
SYNONYMS
çré-sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; iti uktaù—thus being questioned;
viñëu-rätena—by Mahäräja Parékñit, known as Viñëuräta; bhagavän—the most
powerful; bädaräyaëiù—the son of Vyäsadeva, Çukadeva Gosvämé;
uväca—said; caritam—the pastimes; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu;
matsya-rüpeëa—by Him in the form of a fish; yat—whatever; kåtam—was
done.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: When Parékñit Mahäräja thus inquired from Çukadeva
Gosvämé, that most powerful saintly person began describing the pastimes of the
Lord's incarnation as a fish.
TEXT 5
é[qéuk- ovac
GaaeivPa[SaurSaaDaUNaa& ^NdSaaMaiPa ceìr" )
r+aaiMaC^&STaNaUDaRtae DaMaRSYaaQaRSYa cEv ih )) 5 ))
çré-çuka uväca
go-vipra-sura-sädhünäà
chandasäm api ceçvaraù
rakñäm icchaàs tanür dhatte
dharmasyärthasya caiva hi
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; go—of the cows; vipra—of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
978
brähmaëas; sura—of the demigods; sädhünäm—and of the devotees;
chandasäm api—even of the Vedic literature; ca—and; éçvaraù—the supreme
controller; rakñäm—the protection; icchan—desiring; tanüù dhatte—accepts
the forms of incarnations; dharmasya—of the principles of religion;
arthasya—of the principles of the purpose of life; ca—and; eva—indeed;
hi—certainly.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, for the sake of protecting the cows,
brähmaëas, demigods, devotees, the Vedic literature, religious principles, and
principles to fulfill the purpose of life, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
accepts the forms of incarnations.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead generally appears in various types of
incarnations to give protection to the cows and brähmaëas. The Lord is
described as go-brähmaëa-hitäya ca; in other words, He is always eager to
benefit the cows and brähmaëas. When Lord Kåñëa appeared, He purposefully
became a cowherd boy and showed personally how to give protection to the
cows and calves. Similarly, He showed respect to Sudämä Vipra, a real
brähmaëa. From the Lord's personal activities, human society should learn how
to give protection specifically to the brähmaëas and cows. Then the protection
of religious principles, fulfillment of the aim of life and protection of Vedic
knowledge can be achieved. Without protection of cows, brahminical culture
cannot be maintained; and without brahminical culture, the aim of life cannot
be fulfilled. The Lord, therefore, is described as go-brähmaëa-hitäya because
His incarnation is only for the protection of the cows and brähmaëas.
Unfortunately, because in Kali-yuga there is no protection of the cows and
brahminical culture, everything is in a precarious position. If human society
wants to be exalted, the leaders of society must follow the instructions of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
979
Bhagavad-gétä and give protection to the cows, the brähmaëas and brahminical
culture.
TEXT 6
oÀavcezu >aUTaezu crNa( vaYauirveìr" )
NaaeÀavcTv& >aJaTae iNaGauR<aTvaiÖYaae Gau<aE" )) 6 ))
uccävaceñu bhüteñu
caran väyur iveçvaraù
noccävacatvaà bhajate
nirguëatväd dhiyo guëaiù
SYNONYMS
ucca-avaceñu—having higher or lower bodily forms; bhüteñu—among the
living entities; caran—behaving; väyuù iva—exactly like the air; éçvaraù—the
Supreme Lord; na—not; ucca-avacatvam—the quality of higher or lower
grades of life; bhajate—accepts; nirguëatvät—because of being transcendental,
above all material qualities; dhiyaù—generally; guëaiù—by the modes of
material nature.
TRANSLATION
Like the air passing through different types of atmosphere, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, although appearing sometimes as a human being and
sometimes as a lower animal, is always transcendental. Because He is above the
material modes of nature, He is unaffected by higher and lower forms.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master of the material nature
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
980
(mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sacaräcaram [Bg. 9.10]). Therefore, being the
supreme controller of the laws of nature, the Lord cannot be under their
influence. An example given in this regard is that although the wind blows
through many places, the air is not affected by the qualities of these places.
Although the air sometimes carries the odor of a filthy place, the air has
nothing to do with such a place. Similarly, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, being all-good and all-auspicious, is never affected by the material
qualities like an ordinary living entity. puruñaù prakåti-stho hi bhuìkte
prakåtijän guëän [Bg. 13.22]. When the living entity is in the material nature,
he is affected by its qualities. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, however,
is not affected. Disrespectfully, one who does not know this considers the
Supreme Personality of Godhead an ordinary living being (avajänanti mäà
müòhäù [Bg. 9.11]). Paraà bhävam ajänantaù: such a conclusion is reached by
the unintelligent because they are unaware of the transcendental qualities of
the Lord.
TEXT 7
AaSaqdTaqTak-LPaaNTae b]aøae NaEiMaitak-ae l/Ya" )
SaMaud]aePaPlu/TaaSTa}a l/aek-a >aUradYaae Na*Pa )) 7 ))
äséd atéta-kalpänte
brähmo naimittiko layaù
samudropaplutäs tatra
lokä bhür-ädayo nåpa
SYNONYMS
äsét—there was; atéta—past; kalpa-ante—at the end of the kalpa; brähmaù—of
Lord Brahmä's day; naimittikaù—because of that; layaù—inundation;
samudra—in the ocean; upaplutäù—were inundated; tatra—there; lokäù—all
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
981
the planets; bhüù-ädayaù—Bhüù, Bhuvaù and Svaù, the three lokas; nåpa—O
King.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, at the end of the past millennium, at the end of Brahmä's
day, because Lord Brahmä sleeps during the night, annihilation took place, and
the three worlds were covered by the water of the ocean.
TEXT 8
k-ale/NaaGaTaiNad]SYa DaaTau" iXaXaiYazaebRl/I )
Mau%Taae iNa"Sa*TaaNa( vedaNa( hYaGa]qvae_iNTake-_hrTa( )) 8 ))
kälenägata-nidrasya
dhätuù çiçayiñor balé
mukhato niùsåtän vedän
hayagrévo 'ntike 'harat
SYNONYMS
kälena—because of time (the end of Brahmä's day); ägata-nidrasya—when he
felt sleepy; dhätuù—of Brahmä; çiçayiñoù—desiring to lie down to sleep;
balé—very powerful; mukhataù—from the mouth; niùsåtän—emanating;
vedän—the Vedic knowledge; hayagrévaù—the great demon named Hayagréva;
antike—nearby; aharat—stole.
TRANSLATION
At the end of Brahmä's day, when Brahmä felt sleepy and desired to lie
down, the Vedas were emanating from his mouth, and the great demon named
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
982
Hayagréva stole the Vedic knowledge.
TEXT 9
jaTva Tad( daNaveNd]SYa hYaGa]qvSYa ceiíTaMa( )
dDaar Xaf-rqæPa& >aGavaNa( hirrqìr" )) 9 ))
jïätvä tad dänavendrasya
hayagrévasya ceñöitam
dadhära çapharé-rüpaà
bhagavän harir éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
jïätvä—after understanding; tat—that; dänava-indrasya—of the great demon;
hayagrévasya—of Hayagréva; ceñöitam—activity; dadhära—accepted;
çapharé-rüpam—the form of a fish; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; hariù—the Lord; éçvaraù—the supreme controller.
TRANSLATION
Understanding the acts of the great demon Hayagréva, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Hari, who is full of all opulences, assumed the form of
a fish and saved the Vedas by killing the demon.
PURPORT
Because everything was inundated by water, to save the Vedas it was
necessary for the Lord to assume the form of a fish.
TEXT 10
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
983
Ta}a raJa‰iz" k-iêàaMana SaTYav]Taae MahaNa( )
NaaraYa<aParae_TaPaTa( TaPa" Sa Sail/l/aXaNa" )) 10 ))
tatra räja-åñiù kaçcin
nämnä satyavrato mahän
näräyaëa-paro 'tapat
tapaù sa saliläçanaù
SYNONYMS
tatra—in that connection; räja-åñiù—a king equally qualified as a great saintly
person; kaçcit—someone; nämnä—by the name; satyavrataù—Satyavrata;
mahän—a great personality; näräyaëa-paraù—a great devotee of Lord
Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; atapat—performed
austerities; tapaù—penances; saù—he; salila-äçanaù—only drinking water.
TRANSLATION
During the Cäkñuña-manvantara there was a great king named Satyavrata
who was a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Satyavrata
performed austerities by subsisting only on water.
PURPORT
The Lord assumed one fish incarnation to save the Vedas at the beginning
of the Sväyambhuva-manvantara, and at the end of the Cäkñuña-manvantara
the Lord again assumed the form of a fish just to favor the great king named
Satyavrata. As there were two incarnations of Varäha, there were also two
incarnations of fish. The Lord appeared as one fish incarnation to save the
Vedas by killing Hayagréva, and He assumed the other fish incarnation to show
favor to King Satyavrata.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
984
TEXT 11
Yaae_SaaviSMaNa( Mahak-LPae TaNaYa" Sa ivvSvTa" )
é[aÖdev wiTa :YaaTaae MaNauTve hir<aaiPaRTa" )) 11 ))
yo 'säv asmin mahä-kalpe
tanayaù sa vivasvataù
çräddhadeva iti khyäto
manutve hariëärpitaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; asau—He (the Supreme Person); asmin—in this;
mahä-kalpe—great millennium; tanayaù—son; saù—he; vivasvataù—of the
sun-god; çräddhadevaù—by the name Çräddhadeva; iti—thus;
khyätaù—celebrated; manutve—in the position of Manu; hariëä—by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; arpitaù—was situated.
TRANSLATION
In this [the present] millennium King Satyavrata later became the son of
Vivasvän, the king of the sun planet, and was known as Çräddhadeva. By the
mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he was given the post of Manu.
TEXT 12
Wk-da k*-TaMaal/aYaa& ku-vRTaae Jal/TaPaR<aMa( )
TaSYaaÅLYaudke- k-aicC^f-YaeRk-a>YaPaÛTa )) 12 ))
ekadä kåtamäläyäà
kurvato jala-tarpaëam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
985
tasyäïjaly-udake käcic
chaphary ekäbhyapadyata
SYNONYMS
ekadä—one day; kåtamäläyäm—on the bank of the Kåtamälä River;
kurvataù—executing; jala-tarpaëam—the offering of oblations of water;
tasya—his; aïjali—palmful; udake—in the water; käcit—some; çapharé—a
small fish; ekä—one; abhyapadyata—was generated.
TRANSLATION
One day while King Satyavrata was performing austerities by offering water
on the bank of the River Kåtamälä, a small fish appeared in the water in his
palms.
TEXT 13
SaTYav]Taae_Åil/GaTaa& Sah TaaeYaeNa >aarTa )
oTSaSaJaR NadqTaaeYae Xaf-rq& d]iv@eìr" )) 13 ))
satyavrato 'ïjali-gatäà
saha toyena bhärata
utsasarja nadé-toye
çapharéà draviòeçvaraù
SYNONYMS
satyavrataù—King Satyavrata; aïjali-gatäm—in the water held in the palms of
the King; saha—with; toyena—water; bhärata—O King Parékñit;
utsasarja—threw; nadé-toye—in the water of the river; çapharém—that small
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
986
fish; draviòa-éçvaraù—Satyavrata, the King of Draviòa.
TRANSLATION
Satyavrata, the King of Draviòadeça, threw the fish into the water of the
river along with the water in his palm, O King Parékñit, descendant of Bharata.
TEXT 14
TaMaah SaaiTak-å<a& Mahak-aåi<ak&- Na*PaMa( )
Yaadae>Yaae jaiTagaaiTa>Yaae dqNaa& Maa& dqNavTSal/ )
k-Qa& ivSa*JaSae raJaNa( >aqTaaMaiSMaNa( SairÂle/ )) 14 ))
tam äha sätikaruëaà
mahä-käruëikaà nåpam
yädobhyo jïäti-ghätibhyo
dénäà mäà déna-vatsala
kathaà visåjase räjan
bhétäm asmin sarij-jale
SYNONYMS
tam—unto him (Satyavrata); äha—said; sä—that small fish;
ati-karuëam—extremely compassionate; mahä-käruëikam—extremely
merciful; nåpam—unto King Satyavrata; yädobhyaù—to the aquatics;
jïäti-ghätibhyaù—who are always eager to kill the smaller fish; dénäm—very
poor; mäm—me; déna-vatsala—O protector of the poor; katham—why;
visåjase—you are throwing; räjan—O King; bhétäm—very much afraid;
asmin—within this; sarit-jale—in the water of the river.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
987
TRANSLATION
With an appealing voice, the poor small fish said to King Satyavrata, who
was very merciful: My dear King, protector of the poor, why are you throwing
Me in the water of the river, where there are other aquatics who can kill Me? I
am very much afraid of them.
PURPORT
In the Matsya Puräëa it is said:
ananta-çaktir bhagavän
matsya-rüpé janärdanaù
kréòärthaà yäcayäm äsa
svayaà satyavrataà nåpam
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead possesses unlimited potency.
Nonetheless, in His pastime in the form of a fish He begged protection from
King Satyavrata."
TEXT 15
TaMaaTMaNaae_NauGa]haQa| Pa[qTYaa MaTSYavPauDaRrMa( )
AJaaNaNa( r+a<aaQaaRYa Xaf-YaaR" Sa MaNaae dDae )) 15 ))
tam ätmano 'nugrahärthaà
prétyä matsya-vapur-dharam
ajänan rakñaëärthäya
çapharyäù sa mano dadhe
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
988
tam—unto the fish; ätmanaù—personal; anugraha-artham—to show favor;
prétyä—very much pleased; matsya-vapuù-dharam—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who had assumed the form of a fish; ajänan—without knowledge
of this; rakñaëa-arthäya—just to give protection; çapharyäù—of the fish;
saù—the King; manaù—mind; dadhe—decided.
TRANSLATION
To please himself, King Satyavrata, not knowing that the fish was the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, decided with great pleasure to give the fish
protection.
PURPORT
Here is an example of giving service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead even without knowledge. Such service is called ajïäta-sukåti. King
Satyavrata wanted to show his own mercy, not knowing that the fish was Lord
Viñëu. By such unknowing devotional service, one is favored by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Service rendered to the Supreme Lord, knowingly or
unknowingly, never goes in vain.
TEXT 16
TaSYaa dqNaTar& vaKYaMaaé[uTYa Sa MahqPaiTa" )
k-l/XaaPSau iNaDaaYaENaa& dYaalu/iNaRNYa Aaé[MaMa( )) 16 ))
tasyä dénataraà väkyam
äçrutya sa mahépatiù
kalaçäpsu nidhäyainäà
dayälur ninya äçramam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
989
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—of the fish; déna-taram—pitiable; väkyam—words; äçrutya—hearing;
saù—that; mahé-patiù—the King; kalaça-apsu—in the water contained in the
water jug; nidhäya—taking; enäm—the fish; dayäluù—merciful;
ninye—brought; äçramam—to his residence.
TRANSLATION
The merciful King, being moved by the pitiable words of the fish, placed the
fish in a water jug and brought Him to his own residence.
TEXT 17
Saa Tau Ta}aEk-ra}ae<a vDaRMaaNaa k-Ma<@l/aE )
Al/BßaTMaavk-aXa& va wdMaah MahqPaiTaMa( )) 17 ))
sä tu tatraika-rätreëa
vardhamänä kamaëòalau
alabdhvätmävakäçaà vä
idam äha mahépatim
SYNONYMS
sä—that fish; tu—but; tatra—therein; eka-rätreëa—in one night;
vardhamänä—expanding; kamaëòalau—in the waterpot; alabdhvä—without
attaining; ätma-avakäçam—a comfortable position for His body; vä—either;
idam—this; äha—said; mahé-patim—unto the King.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
990
But in one night that fish grew so much that He could not move His body
comfortably in the water of the pot. He then spoke to the King as follows.
TEXT 18
Naah& k-Ma<@l/aviSMaNa( k*-C^\& vSTauiMahaeTSahe )
k-LPaYaaEk-" SauivPaul&/ Ya}aah& iNavSae Sau%Ma( )) 18 ))
nähaà kamaëòaläv asmin
kåcchraà vastum ihotsahe
kalpayaukaù suvipulaà
yaträhaà nivase sukham
SYNONYMS
na—not; aham—I; kamaëòalau—in this waterpot; asmin—in this;
kåcchram—with great difficulty; vastum—to live; iha—here; utsahe—like;
kalpaya—just consider; okaù—residential place; su-vipulam—more expanded;
yatra—wherein; aham—I; nivase—can live; sukham—in pleasure.
TRANSLATION
O My dear King, I do not like living in this waterpot with such great
difficulty. Therefore, please find some better reservoir of water where I can live
comfortably.
TEXT 19
Sa WNaa& TaTa AadaYa NYaDaadaEdÄNaaedke- )
Ta}a i+aáa MauhUTaeRNa hSTa}aYaMavDaRTa )) 19 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
991
sa enäà tata ädäya
nyadhäd audaïcanodake
tatra kñiptä muhürtena
hasta-trayam avardhata
SYNONYMS
saù—the King; enäm—unto the fish; tataù—thereafter; ädäya—taking out;
nyadhät—placed; audaïcana-udake—in a well of water; tatra—therein;
kñiptä—being thrown; muhürtena—within a moment; hasta-trayam—three
cubits; avardhata—immediately developed.
TRANSLATION
Then, taking the fish out of the waterpot, the King threw Him in a large
well. But within a moment the fish developed to the length of three cubits.
TEXT 20
Na Ma WTadl&/ raJaNa( Sau%& vSTauMaudÄNaMa( )
Pa*Qau deih Pad& Maù& YaTa( Tvah& Xar<a& GaTaa )) 20 ))
na ma etad alaà räjan
sukhaà vastum udaïcanam
påthu dehi padaà mahyaà
yat tvähaà çaraëaà gatä
SYNONYMS
na—not; me—unto Me; etat—this; alam—fit; räjan—O King; sukham—in
happiness; vastum—to live; udaïcanam—reservoir of water; påthu—very great;
dehi—give; padam—a place; mahyam—unto Me; yat—which; tvä—unto you;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
992
aham—I; çaraëam—shelter; gatä—have taken.
TRANSLATION
The fish then said: My dear King, this reservoir of water is not fit for My
happy residence. Please give Me a more extensive pool of water, for I have
taken shelter of you.
TEXT 21
TaTa AadaYa Saa raja i+aáa raJaNa( Saraevre )
Tadav*TYaaTMaNaa Saae_Ya& MahaMaqNaae_NvvDaRTa )) 21 ))
tata ädäya sä räjïä
kñiptä räjan sarovare
tad ävåtyätmanä so 'yaà
mahä-méno 'nvavardhata
SYNONYMS
tataù—from there; ädäya—taking away; sä—the fish; räjïä—by the King;
kñiptä—being thrown; räjan—O King (Mahäräja Parékñit); sarovare—in a
lake; tat—that; ävåtya—covering; ätmanä—by the body; saù—the fish;
ayam—this; mahä-ménaù—gigantic fish; anvavardhata—immediately
developed.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, the King took the fish from the well and threw Him in
a lake, but the fish then assumed a gigantic form exceeding the extent of the
water.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
993
TEXT 22
NaETaNMae SvSTaYae raJaàudk&- Sail/l/aEk-Sa" )
iNaDaeih r+aaYaaeGaeNa hde MaaMaivdaiSaiNa )) 22 ))
naitan me svastaye räjann
udakaà salilaukasaù
nidhehi rakñä-yogena
hrade mäm avidäsini
SYNONYMS
na—not; etat—this; me—unto Me; svastaye—comfortable; räjan—O King;
udakam—water; salila-okasaù—because I am a big aquatic; nidhehi—put;
rakñä-yogena—by some means; hrade—in a lake; mäm—Me;
avidäsini—perpetual.
TRANSLATION
The fish then said: O King, I am a large aquatic, and this water is not at all
suitable for Me. Now kindly find some way to save Me. It would be better to
put Me in the water of a lake that will never reduce.
TEXT 23
wTYau¢-" Saae_NaYaNMaTSYa& Ta}a Ta}aaivdaiSaiNa )
Jal/aXaYae_SaiMMaTa& Ta& SaMaud]e Pa[ai+aPaJ‡zMa( )) 23 ))
ity uktaù so 'nayan matsyaà
tatra taträvidäsini
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
994
jaläçaye 'sammitaà taà
samudre präkñipaj jhañam
SYNONYMS
iti uktaù—thus being requested; saù—the King; anayat—brought;
matsyam—the fish; tatra—therein; tatra—therein; avidäsini—where the
water never diminishes; jala-äçaye—in the reservoir of water;
asammitam—unlimited; tam—unto the fish; samudre—in the ocean;
präkñipat—threw; jhañam—the gigantic fish.
TRANSLATION
When thus requested, King Satyavrata took the fish to the largest reservoir
of water. But when that also proved insufficient, the King at last threw the
gigantic fish into the ocean.
TEXT 24
i+aPYaMaa<aSTaMaahediMah Maa& Mak-radYa" )
AdNTYaiTabl/a vqr Maa& NaehaeTóíuMahRiSa )) 24 ))
kñipyamäëas tam ähedam
iha mäà makarädayaù
adanty atibalä véra
mäà nehotsrañöum arhasi
SYNONYMS
kñipyamäëaù—being thrown in the ocean; tam—unto the King; äha—the fish
said; idam—this; iha—in this place; mäm—Me; makara-ädayaù—dangerous
aquatics like sharks; adanti—will eat; ati-baläù—because of being too
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
995
powerful; véra—O heroic King; mäm—Me; na—not; iha—in this water;
utsrañöum—to throw; arhasi—you deserve.
TRANSLATION
While being thrown in the ocean, the fish said to King Satyavrata: O hero,
in this water there are very powerful and dangerous sharks that will eat Me.
Therefore you should not throw Me in this place.
TEXT 25
Wv& ivMaaeihTaSTaeNa vdTaa vLGau>aarTaqMa( )
TaMaah k-ae >avaNaSMaaNa( MaTSYaæPae<a MaaehYaNa( )) 25 ))
evaà vimohitas tena
vadatä valgu-bhäratém
tam äha ko bhavän asmän
matsya-rüpeëa mohayan
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; vimohitaù—bewildered; tena—by the fish; vadatä—speaking;
valgu-bhäratém—sweet words; tam—unto him; äha—said; kaù—who;
bhavän—You; asmän—us; matsya-rüpeëa—in the form of a fish;
mohayan—bewildering.
TRANSLATION
After hearing these sweet words from the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in the form of a fish, the King, being bewildered, asked Him: Who are You, sir?
You simply bewilder us.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
996
TEXT 26
NaEv& vqYaaeR Jal/crae d*íae_SMaai>a" é[uTaae_iPa va )
Yaae >avaNa( YaaeJaNaXaTaMaöai>aVYaaNaXae Sar" )) 26 ))
naivaà véryo jalacaro
dåñöo 'smäbhiù çruto 'pi vä
yo bhavän yojana-çatam
ahnäbhivyänaçe saraù
SYNONYMS
na—not; evam—thus; véryaù—powerful; jala-caraù—aquatic; dåñöaù—seen;
asmäbhiù—by us; çrutaù api—nor heard of; vä—either; yaù—who;
bhavän—Your Lordship; yojana-çatam—hundreds of miles; ahnä—in one day;
abhivyänaçe—expanding; saraù—water.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, in one day You have expanded Yourself for hundreds of miles,
covering the water of the river and the ocean. Before this I had never seen or
heard of such an aquatic animal.
TEXT 27
NaUNa& Tv& >aGavaNa( Saa+aaÖirNaaRraYa<aae_VYaYa" )
ANauGa]haYa >aUTaaNaa& DaTSae æPa& Jal/aEk-SaaMa( )) 27 ))
nünaà tvaà bhagavän säkñäd
dharir näräyaëo 'vyayaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
997
anugrahäya bhütänäà
dhatse rüpaà jalaukasäm
SYNONYMS
nünam—certainly; tvam—You (are); bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; säkñät—directly; hariù—the Lord; näräyaëaù—the Personality of
Godhead; avyayaù—inexhaustible; anugrahäya—to show mercy;
bhütänäm—to all living entities; dhatse—You have assumed; rüpam—a form;
jala-okasäm—like an aquatic.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are certainly the inexhaustible Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Näräyaëa, Çré Hari. It is to show Your mercy to the living entities
that You have now assumed the form of an aquatic.
TEXT 28
NaMaSTae Pauåzé[eï iSQaTYauTPatYaPYaYaeìr )
>a¢-aNaa& Na" Pa[PaàaNaa& Mau:Yaae ùaTMaGaiTaivR>aae )) 28 ))
namas te puruña-çreñöha
sthity-utpatty-apyayeçvara
bhaktänäà naù prapannänäà
mukhyo hy ätma-gatir vibho
SYNONYMS
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances; te—unto You; puruña-çreñöha—the
best of all living entities, the best of all enjoyers; sthiti—of maintenance;
utpatti—creation; apyaya—and destruction; éçvara—the Supreme Lord;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
998
bhaktänäm—of Your devotees; naù—like us; prapannänäm—those who are
surrendered; mukhyaù—the supreme; hi—indeed; ätma-gatiù—the supreme
destination; vibho—Lord Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, master of creation, maintenance and annihilation, O best of
enjoyers, Lord Viñëu, You are the leader and destination of surrendered
devotees like us. Therefore let me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 29
SaveR l/Il/avTaaraSTae >aUTaaNaa& >aUiTaheTav" )
jaTauiMaC^aMYadae æPa& YadQa| >avTaa Da*TaMa( )) 29 ))
sarve lélävatäräs te
bhütänäà bhüti-hetavaù
jïätum icchämy ado rüpaà
yad-arthaà bhavatä dhåtam
SYNONYMS
sarve—everything; lélä—pastimes; avatäräù—incarnations; te—of Your
Lordship; bhütänäm—of all living entities; bhüti—of a flourishing condition;
hetavaù—the causes; jïätum—to know; icchämi—I wish; adaù—this;
rüpam—form; yat-artham—for what purpose; bhavatä—by Your Lordship;
dhåtam—assumed.
TRANSLATION
All Your pastimes and incarnations certainly appear for the welfare of all
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
999
living entities. Therefore, my Lord, I wish to know the purpose for which You
have assumed this form of a fish.
TEXT 30
Na Tae_rivNda+a PadaePaSaPaR<a&
Ma*za >aveTa( SavRSauôiTPa[YaaTMaNa" )
YaQaeTareza& Pa*QaGaaTMaNaa& SaTaa‚
Madqd*Xaae Yad( vPaurd(>auTa& ih Na" )) 30 ))
na te 'ravindäkña padopasarpaëaà
måñä bhavet sarva-suhåt-priyätmanaù
yathetareñäà påthag-ätmanäà satäm
adédåço yad vapur adbhutaà hi naù
SYNONYMS
na—never; te—of Your Lordship; aravinda-akña—My Lord, whose eyes are
like the petals of a lotus; pada-upasarpaëam—worship of the lotus feet;
måñä—useless; bhavet—can become; sarva-suhåt—the friend of everyone;
priya—dear to everyone; ätmanaù—the Supersoul of everyone; yathä—as;
itareñäm—of others (the demigods); påthak-ätmanäm—living entities who
have material bodies different from the soul; satäm—of those who are
spiritually fixed; adédåçaù—You have manifested; yat—that; vapuù—body;
adbhutam—wonderful; hi—indeed; naù—unto us.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, possessing eyes like the petals of a lotus, the worship of the
demigods, who are in the bodily concept of life, is fruitless in all respects. But
because You are the supreme friend and dearmost Supersoul of everyone,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1000
worship of Your lotus feet is never useless. You have therefore manifested Your
form as a fish.
PURPORT
The demigods like Indra, Candra and Sürya are ordinary living entities who
are differentiated parts and parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The Lord expands Himself through the living beings (nityo nityänäà cetanaç
cetanänäm (Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13)). His personal viñëu-tattva forms, which are
all spiritual, are called sväàça, and the living entities who are differentiated
parts are called vibhinnäàça. Some of the vibhinnäàça forms are spiritual, and
some are a combination of matter and spirit. The conditioned souls in the
material world are different from their external bodies made of material
energy. Thus the demigods living in the upper planetary systems and the living
entities living in the lower planetary system are of the same nature.
Nonetheless, those living as human beings on this planet are sometimes
attracted to worshiping the demigods in the higher planetary systems. Such
worship is temporary. As the human beings on this planet have to change their
bodies (tathä dehäntara-präptiù [Bg. 2.13]), the living entities known as Indra,
Candra, Varuëa and so on will also have to change their bodies in due course
of time. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, antavat tu phalaà teñäà tad bhavaty
alpa-medhasäm: [Bg. 7.23] "Men of small intelligence worship the demigods,
and their fruits are limited and temporary." Kämais tais tair håta jïänäù
prapadyante 'nya-devatäù: [Bg. 7.20] those who do not know the position of the
demigods are inclined to worship the demigods for some material purpose, but
the results of such worship are never permanent. Consequently, here it is said,
yathetareñäà påthag-ätmanäà satäm, padopasarpaëaà måñä bhavet. In other
words, if one is to worship someone else, he must worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Then his worship will never be fruitless. Svalpam apy
asya dharmasya träyate mahato bhayät: even a slight attempt to worship the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is a permanent asset. Therefore, as
recommended in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, tyaktvä sva-dharmaà caraëämbujaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1001
hareù. One should take to the worship of the lotus feet of Hari, even if this
means giving up the so-called occupational duty assigned because of the
particular body one has accepted. Because worship in terms of the body is
temporary, it does not bear any permanent fruit. But worship of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead gives immense benefit.
TEXT 31
é[qéuk- ovac
wiTa b]uva<a& Na*PaiTa& JaGaTPaiTa"
SaTYav]Ta& MaTSYavPauYauRGa+aYae )
ivhTauRk-aMa" Pa[l/Yaa<aRve_b]vq‚
iÀk-IzuRrek-aNTaJaNaiPa[Ya" iPa[YaMa( )) 31 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti bruväëaà nåpatià jagat-patiù
satyavrataà matsya-vapur yuga-kñaye
vihartu-kämaù pralayärëave 'bravéc
cikérñur ekänta-jana-priyaù priyam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; bruväëam—speaking
like that; nåpatim—unto the King; jagat-patiù—the master of the entire
universe; satyavratam—unto Satyavrata; matsya-vapuù—the Lord, who had
assumed the form of a fish; yuga-kñaye—at the end of a yuga;
vihartu-kämaù—to enjoy His own pastimes; pralaya-arëave—in the water of
inundation; abravét—said; cikérñuù—desiring to do; ekänta-jana-priyaù—most
beloved by the devotees; priyam—something very beneficial.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1002
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: When King Satyavrata spoke in this way, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who at the end of the yuga had assumed the
form of a fish to benefit His devotee and enjoy His pastimes in the water of
inundation, responded as follows.
TEXT 32
é[q>aGavaNauvac
SaáMae ùÛTaNaadUßRMahNYaeTadirNdMa )
iNaMa&+YaTYaPYaYaaM>aaeDaaE }aEl/aeKYa& >aU>auRvaidk-Ma( )) 32 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
saptame hy adyatanäd ürdhvam
ahany etad arindama
nimaìkñyaty apyayämbhodhau
trailokyaà bhür-bhuvädikam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; saptame—on
the seventh; hi—indeed; adyatanät—from today; ürdhvam—forward;
ahani—on the day; etat—this creation; arimdama—O King who can subdue
your enemies; nimaìkñyati—shall be inundated; apyaya-ambhodhau—in the
ocean of destruction; trailokyam—the three lokas;
bhüù-bhuva-ädikam—namely Bhürloka, Bhuvarloka and Svarloka.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O King, who can subdue your
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1003
enemies, on the seventh day from today the three worlds—Bhüù, Bhuvaù and
Svaù—will all merge into the water of inundation.
TEXT 33
i}al/aeKYaa& l/IYaMaaNaaYaa& Sa&vTaaRM>aiSa vE Tada )
oPaSQaaSYaiTa NaaE" k-aicd( ivXaal/a Tva& MaYaeirTaa )) 33 ))
tri-lokyäà léyamänäyäà
saàvartämbhasi vai tadä
upasthäsyati nauù käcid
viçälä tväà mayeritä
SYNONYMS
tri-lokyäm—the three lokas; léyamänäyäm—upon being merged;
saàvarta-ambhasi—in the water of destruction; vai—indeed; tadä—at that
time; upasthäsyati—will appear; nauù—boat; käcit—one; viçälä—very big;
tväm—unto you; mayä—by Me; éritä—sent.
TRANSLATION
When all the three worlds merge into the water, a large boat sent by Me will
appear before you.
TEXTS 34-35
Tv& TaavdaezDaq" SavaR bqJaaNYauÀavcaiNa c )
SaáizRi>a" Pairv*Ta" SavRSatvaePab*&ihTa" )) 34 ))
Aaåù b*hTaq& Naav& ivcirZYaSYaiv(c)-v" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1004
Wk-a<aRve iNaral/aeke- ‰zq<aaMaev vcRSaa )) 35 ))
tvaà tävad oñadhéù sarvä
béjäny uccävacäni ca
saptarñibhiù parivåtaù
sarva-sattvopabåàhitaù
äruhya båhatéà nävaà
vicariñyasy aviklavaù
ekärëave niräloke
åñéëäm eva varcasä
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; tävat—until that time; oñadhéù—herbs; sarväù—all kinds of;
béjäni—seeds; ucca-avacäni—lower and higher; ca—and; sapta-åñibhiù—by the
seven åñis; parivåtaù—surrounded; sarva-sattva—all kinds of living entities;
upabåàhitaù—surrounded by; äruhya—getting on; båhatém—very large;
nävam—boat; vicariñyasi—shall travel; aviklavaù—without moroseness;
eka-arëave—in the ocean of inundation; niräloke—without being illuminated;
åñéëäm—of the great åñis; eva—indeed; varcasä—by the effulgence.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, O King, you shall collect all types of herbs and seeds and load
them on that great boat. Then, accompanied by the seven åñis and surrounded
by all kinds of living entities, you shall get aboard that boat, and without
moroseness you shall easily travel with your companions on the ocean of
inundation, the only illumination being the effulgence of the great åñis.
TEXT 36
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1005
daeDaUYaMaaNaa& Taa& Naav& SaMaqre<a bl/IYaSaa )
oPaiSQaTaSYa Mae é*(r)e iNabDNaqih MahaihNaa )) 36 ))
dodhüyamänäà täà nävaà
saméreëa baléyasä
upasthitasya me çåìge
nibadhnéhi mahähinä
SYNONYMS
dodhüyamänäm—being tossed about; täm—that; nävam—boat; saméreëa—by
the wind; baléyasä—very powerful; upasthitasya—situated nearby; me—of Me;
çåìge—to the horn; nibadhnéhi—bind; mahä-ahinä—by the large serpent
(Väsuki).
TRANSLATION
Then, as the boat is tossed about by the powerful winds, attach the vessel to
My horn by means of the great serpent Väsuki, for I shall be present by your
side.
TEXT 37
Ah& TvaMa*izi>a" SaaDa| SahNaavMaudNviTa )
ivk-zRNa( ivcirZYaaiMa Yaavd( b]aøq iNaXaa Pa[>aae )) 37 ))
ahaà tväm åñibhiù särdhaà
saha-nävam udanvati
vikarñan vicariñyämi
yävad brähmé niçä prabho
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1006
SYNONYMS
aham—I; tväm—unto you; åñibhiù—with all the saintly persons; särdham—all
together; saha—with; nävam—the boat; udanvati—in the water of
devastation; vikarñan—contacting; vicariñyämi—I shall travel; yävat—as long
as; brähmé—pertaining to Lord Brahmä; niçä—night; prabho—O King.
TRANSLATION
Pulling the boat, with you and all the åñis in it, O King, I shall travel in the
water of devastation until the night of Lord Brahmä's slumber is over.
PURPORT
This particular devastation actually took place not during the night of Lord
Brahmä but during his day, for it was during the time of Cäkñuña Manu.
Brahmä's night takes place when Brahmä goes to sleep, but in the daytime
there are fourteen Manus, one of whom is Cäkñuña Manu. Therefore, Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments that although it was daytime for
Lord Brahmä, Brahmä felt sleepy for a short time by the supreme will of the
Lord. This short period is regarded as Lord Brahmä's night. This has been
elaborately discussed by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé in his Laghu-bhägavatämåta. The
following is a summary of his analysis. Because Agastya Muni cursed
Sväyambhuva Manu, during the time of Sväyambhuva Manu a devastation
took place. This devastation is mentioned in the Matsya Puräëa. During the
time of Cäkñuña Manu, by the supreme will of the Lord, there was suddenly
another pralaya, or devastation. This is mentioned by Märkaëòeya Åñi in the
Viñëu-dharmottara. At the end of Manu's time there is not necessarily a
devastation, but at the end of the Cäkñuña-manvantara, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, by His illusory energy, wanted to show Satyavrata the
effects of devastation. Çréla Çrédhara Svämé also agrees with this opinion. The
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1007
Laghu-bhägavatämåta says:
madhye manvantarasyaiva
muneù çäpän manuà prati
pralayo 'sau babhüveti
puräëe kvacid éryate
ayam äkasmiko jätaç
cäkñuñasyäntare manoù
pralayaù padmanäbhasya
lélayeti ca kutracit
sarva-manvantarasyänte
pralayo niçcitaà bhavet
viñëu-dharmottare tv etat
märkaëòeyeëa bhäñitam
manor ante layo nästi
manave 'darçi mäyayä
viñëuneti bruväëais tu
svämibhir naiña manyate
TEXT 38
MadqYa& MaihMaaNa& c Par& b]øeiTa XaiBdTaMa( )
veTSYaSYaNauGa*hqTa& Mae SaMPa[énEivRv*Ta& ôid )) 38 ))
madéyaà mahimänaà ca
paraà brahmeti çabditam
vetsyasy anugåhétaà me
sampraçnair vivåtaà hådi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1008
SYNONYMS
madéyam—pertaining to Me; mahimänam—glories; ca—and; param
brahma—the Supreme Brahman, the Absolute Truth; iti—thus;
çabditam—celebrated; vetsyasi—you shall understand; anugåhétam—being
favored; me—by Me; sampraçnaiù—by inquiries; vivåtam—thoroughly
explained; hådi—within the heart.
TRANSLATION
You will be thoroughly advised and favored by Me, and because of your
inquiries, everything about My glories, which are known as paraà brahma, will
be manifest within your heart. Thus you will know everything about Me.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo mattaù
småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramätmä,
is situated in everyone's heart, and from Him come remembrance, knowledge
and forgetfulness. The Lord reveals Himself in proportion to one's surrender to
Him. Ye yathä mäà prapadyante täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham [Bg. 4.11]. In
responsive cooperation, the Lord reveals Himself in proportion to one's
surrender. That which is revealed to one who fully surrenders is different from
what is revealed to one who surrenders partially. Everyone naturally
surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, either directly or
indirectly. The conditioned soul surrenders to the laws of nature in material
existence, but when one fully surrenders to the Lord, material nature does not
act upon him. Such a fully surrendered soul is favored by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead directly. Mäm eva ye prapadyante mäyäm etäà taranti
te [Bg. 7.14]. One who has fully surrendered to the Lord has no fear of the
modes of material nature, for everything is but an expansion of the Lord's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1009
glories (sarvaà khalv idaà brahma), and these glories are gradually revealed
and realized. The Lord is the supreme purifier (paraà brahma paraà dhäma
pavitraà paramaà bhavän [Bg. 10.12]). The more one is purified and the more
he wants to know about the Supreme, the more the Lord reveals to him. Full
knowledge of Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän is revealed to the pure
devotees. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (10.11):
teñäm evänukampärtham
aham ajïäna-jaà tamaù
näçayämy ätma-bhävastho
jïäna-dépena bhäsvatä
"Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with the
shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance."
TEXT 39
wTQaMaaidXYa raJaaNa& hirrNTarDaqYaTa )
Saae_NvvE+aTa Ta& k-al&/ Ya& ôzqke-Xa AaidXaTa( )) 39 ))
ittham ädiçya räjänaà
harir antaradhéyata
so 'nvavaikñata taà kälaà
yaà håñékeça ädiçat
SYNONYMS
ittham—as aforementioned; ädiçya—instructing; räjänam—the King
(Satyavrata); hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
antaradhéyata—disappeared from that place; saù—he (the King);
anvavaikñata—began to wait for; tam kälam—that time; yam—which;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1010
håñéka-éçaù—Lord Håñékeça, the master of all the senses; ädiçat—instructed.
TRANSLATION
After thus instructing the King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
immediately disappeared. Then King Satyavrata began to wait for that time of
which the Lord had instructed.
TEXT 40
AaSTaqYaR d>aaRNa( Pa[aKkU-l/aNa( raJaizR" Pa[aGaudx(Mau%" )
iNazSaad hre" PaadaE icNTaYaNa( MaTSYaæiPa<a" )) 40 ))
ästérya darbhän präk-külän
räjarñiù präg-udaì-mukhaù
niñasäda hareù pädau
cintayan matsya-rüpiëaù
SYNONYMS
ästérya—spreading; darbhän—kuça grass; präk-külän—the upper portion
facing east; räja-åñiù—Satyavrata, the saintly King;
präk-udak-mukhaù—looking toward the northeast (éçäna); niñasäda—sat
down; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pädau—upon the lotus
feet; cintayan—meditating; matsya-rüpiëaù—who had assumed the form of a
fish.
TRANSLATION
After spreading kuça with its tips pointing east, the saintly King, himself
facing the northeast, sat down on the grass and began to meditate upon the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1011
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, who had assumed the form of a fish.
TEXT 41
TaTa" SaMaud] oÜel/" SavRTa" âavYaNa( MahqMa( )
vDaRMaaNaae MahaMaegaEvRzRiÙ" SaMad*XYaTa )) 41 ))
tataù samudra udvelaù
sarvataù plävayan mahém
vardhamäno mahä-meghair
varñadbhiù samadåçyata
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; samudraù—the ocean; udvelaù—overflowing;
sarvataù—everywhere; plävayan—inundating; mahém—the earth;
vardhamänaù—increasing more and more; mahä-meghaiù—by gigantic clouds;
varñadbhiù—incessantly pouring rain; samadåçyata—King Satyavrata saw it.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, gigantic clouds pouring incessant water swelled the ocean more
and more. Thus the ocean began to overflow onto the land and inundate the
entire world.
TEXT 42
DYaaYaNa( >aGavdadeXa& dd*Xae NaavMaaGaTaaMa( )
TaaMaaåraeh ivPa[eNd]EradaYaaEziDavqåDa" )) 42 ))
dhyäyan bhagavad-ädeçaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1012
dadåçe nävam ägatäm
täm äruroha viprendrair
ädäyauñadhi-vérudhaù
SYNONYMS
dhyäyan—remembering; bhagavat-ädeçam—the order of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; dadåçe—he saw; nävam—a boat; ägatäm—coming
near; täm—aboard the boat; äruroha—got up; vipra-indraiù—with the saintly
brähmaëas; ädäya—taking; auñadhi—herbs; vérudhaù—and creepers.
TRANSLATION
As Satyavrata remembered the order of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, he saw a boat coming near him. Thus he collected herbs and creepers,
and, accompanied by saintly brähmaëas, he got aboard the boat.
TEXT 43
TaMaUcuMauRNaYa" Pa[qTaa raJaNa( DYaaYaSv ke-XavMa( )
Sa vE Na" Saª$=adSMaadivTaa Xa& ivDaaSYaiTa )) 43 ))
tam ücur munayaù prétä
räjan dhyäyasva keçavam
sa vai naù saìkaöäd asmäd
avitä çaà vidhäsyati
SYNONYMS
tam—unto the King; ücuù—said; munayaù—all the saintly brähmaëas;
prétäù—being pleased; räjan—O King; dhyäyasva—meditate; keçavam—upon
the Supreme Lord, Keçava; saù—His Lordship; vai—indeed; naù—us;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1013
saìkaöät—from the great danger; asmät—as now visible; avitä—will save;
çam—auspiciousness; vidhäsyati—He will arrange.
TRANSLATION
The saintly brähmaëas, being pleased with the King, said to him: O King,
please meditate upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Keçava. He will save
us from this impending danger and arrange for our well-being.
TEXT 44
Saae_NauDYaaTaSTaTaae raja Pa[aduraSaqNMaha<aRve )
Wk-é*(r)Darae MaTSYaae hEMaae iNaYauTaYaaeJaNa" )) 44 ))
so 'nudhyätas tato räjïä
präduräsén mahärëave
eka-çåìga-dharo matsyo
haimo niyuta-yojanaù
SYNONYMS
saù—the Lord; anudhyätaù—being meditated upon; tataù—thereafter
(hearing the words of the saintly brähmaëas); räjïä—by the King;
präduräsét—appeared (before him); mahä-arëave—in the great ocean of
inundation; eka-çåìga-dharaù—with one horn; matsyaù—a big fish;
haimaù—made of gold; niyuta-yojanaù—eight million miles long.
TRANSLATION
Then, while the King constantly meditated upon the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, a large golden fish appeared in the ocean of inundation. The fish had
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1014
one horn and was eight million miles long.
TEXT 45
iNabDYa Naav& TaC^*(r)e YaQaae¢-ae hir<aa Paura )
vr}ae<aaihNaa TauíSTauíav MaDauSaUdNaMa( )) 45 ))
nibadhya nävaà tac-chåìge
yathokto hariëä purä
varatreëähinä tuñöas
tuñöäva madhusüdanam
SYNONYMS
nibadhya—anchoring; nävam—the boat; tat-çåìge—onto the horn of the big
fish; yathä-uktaù—as advised; hariëä—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; purä—before; varatreëa—used as a rope; ahinä—by the great
serpent (of the name Väsuki); tuñöaù—being pleased; tuñöäva—he satisfied;
madhusüdanam—the Supreme Lord, the killer of Madhu.
TRANSLATION
Following the instructions formerly given by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the King anchored the boat to the fish's horn, using the serpent
Väsuki as a rope. Thus being satisfied, he began offering prayers to the Lord.
TEXT 46
é[qraJaaevac
ANaaÛivÛaePahTaaTMaSa&ivd‚
STaNMaUl/Sa&SaarPairé[MaaTaura" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1015
Yad*C^YaaePaSa*Taa YaMaaPanuYau‚
ivRMaui¢-dae Na" ParMaae Gauå>aRvaNa( )) 46 ))
çré-räjoväca
anädy-avidyopahatätma-saàvidas
tan-müla-saàsära-pariçramäturäù
yadåcchayopasåtä yam äpnuyur
vimuktido naù paramo gurur bhavän
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King offered prayers as follows; anädi—from time
immemorial; avidyä—by ignorance; upahata—has been lost;
ätma-saàvidaù—knowledge about the self; tat—that is; müla—the root;
saàsära—material bondage; pariçrama—full of miserable conditions and hard
work; äturäù—suffering; yadåcchayä—by the supreme will; upasåtäù—being
favored by the äcärya; yam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
äpnuyuù—can achieve; vimukti-daù—the process of liberation; naù—our;
paramaù—the supreme; guruù—spiritual master; bhavän—Your Lordship.
TRANSLATION
The King said: By the grace of the Lord, those who have lost their
self-knowledge since time immemorial, and who because of this ignorance are
involved in a material, conditional life full of miseries, obtain the chance to
meet the Lord's devotee. I accept that Supreme Personality of Godhead as the
supreme spiritual master.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is actually the supreme spiritual
master. The Supreme Lord knows everything about the suffering of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1016
conditioned soul, and therefore He appears in this material world, sometimes
personally, sometimes by an incarnation and sometimes by authorizing a living
being to act on His behalf. In all cases, however, He is the original spiritual
master who enlightens the conditioned souls who are suffering in the material
world. The Lord is always busy helping the conditioned souls in many ways.
Therefore He is addressed here as paramo gurur bhavän. The representative of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead who acts to spread Kåñëa consciousness is
also guided by the Supreme Lord to act properly in executing the Lord's order.
Such a person may appear to be an ordinary human being, but because he acts
on behalf of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme spiritual
master, he is not to be neglected as ordinary. It is therefore said, äcäryaà mäà
vijänéyät [SB 11.17.27]: an äcärya who acts on behalf of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead should be understood to be as good as the Supreme Lord Himself.
säkñäd dharitvena samasta-çästrair
uktas tathä bhävyata eva sadbhiù
kintu prabhor yaù priya eva tasya
vande guroù çré-caraëäravindam **(83)
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has advised that the spiritual master acting on
the Supreme Lord's behalf must be worshiped as being as good as the Supreme
Lord, for he is the Lord's most confidential servant in broadcasting the Lord's
message for the benefit of the conditioned souls involved in the material
world.
TEXT 47
JaNaae_buDaae_Ya& iNaJak-MaRbNDaNa"
Sau%eC^Yaa k-MaR SaMaqhTae_Sau%Ma( )
YaTSaevYaa Taa& ivDauNaaeTYaSaNMaiTa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1017
Ga]iNQa& Sa i>aNÛad( Da*dYa& Sa Naae Gauå" )) 47 ))
jano 'budho 'yaà nija-karma-bandhanaù
sukhecchayä karma saméhate 'sukham
yat-sevayä täà vidhunoty asan-matià
granthià sa bhindyäd dhådayaà sa no guruù
SYNONYMS
janaù—the conditioned soul subjected to birth and death; abudhaù—most
foolish because of accepting the body as the self; ayam—he;
nija-karma-bandhanaù—accepting different bodily forms as a result of his
sinful activities; sukha-icchayä—desiring to be happy within this material
world; karma—fruitive activities; saméhate—plans; asukham—but it is for
distress only; yat-sevayä—by rendering service unto whom; täm—the
entanglement of karma; vidhunoti—clears up; asat-matim—the unclean
mentality (accepting the body as the self); granthim—hard knot; saù—His
Lordship the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhindyät—being cut off;
hådayam—in the core of the heart; saù—He (the Lord); naù—our; guruù—the
supreme spiritual master.
TRANSLATION
In hopes of becoming happy in this material world, the foolish conditioned
soul performs fruitive activities that result only in suffering. But by rendering
service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one becomes free from such
false desires for happiness. May my supreme spiritual master cut the knot of
false desires from the core of my heart.
PURPORT
For material happiness, the conditioned soul involves himself in fruitive
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1018
activities, which actually put him into material distress. Because the
conditioned soul does not know this, he is said to be in avidyä, or ignorance.
Because of a false hope for happiness, the conditioned soul becomes involved
in various plans for material activity. Here Mahäräja Satyavrata prays that the
Lord sever this hard knot of false happiness and thus become his supreme
spiritual master.
TEXT 48
YaTSaevYaaGaneirv åd]raedNa&
PauMaaNa( ivJaùaNMal/MaaTMaNaSTaMa" )
>aJaeTa v<a| iNaJaMaez Saae_VYaYaae
>aUYaaTa( Sa wRXa" ParMaae GauraeGauRå" )) 48 ))
yat-sevayägner iva rudra-rodanaà
pumän vijahyän malam ätmanas tamaù
bhajeta varëaà nijam eña so 'vyayo
bhüyät sa éçaù paramo guror guruù
SYNONYMS
yat-sevayä—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by serving whom; agneù—in
touch with fire; iva—as it is; rudra-rodanam—a block of silver or gold becomes
purified; pumän—a person; vijahyät—can give up; malam—all the dirty things
of material existence; ätmanaù—of one's self; tamaù—the mode of ignorance,
by which one performs pious and impious activities; bhajeta—may revive;
varëam—his original identity; nijam—one's own; eñaù—such; saù—He;
avyayaù—inexhaustible; bhüyät—let Him become; saù—He; éçaù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; paramaù—the supreme; guroù guruù—the
spiritual master of all other spiritual masters.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1019
TRANSLATION
One who wants to be free of material entanglement should take to the
service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and give up the contamination
of ignorance, involving pious and impious activities. Thus one regains his
original identity, just as a block of gold or silver sheds all dirt and becomes
purified when treated with fire. May that inexhaustible Supreme Personality of
Godhead become our spiritual master, for He is the original spiritual master of
all other spiritual masters.
PURPORT
In human life one is meant to undergo austerity to purify one's existence.
Tapo divyaà putrakä yena sattvaà çuddhyet [SB 5.5.1]. Because of
contamination by the modes of material nature, one continues in the cycle of
birth and death (käraëaà guëa-saìgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni janmasu [Bg. 13.22]).
Therefore the purpose of human life is to purify oneself of this contamination
so that one can regain his spiritual form and not undergo this cycle of birth
and death. The recommended process of decontamination is devotional service
to the Lord. There are various processes for self-realization, such as karma,
jïäna and yoga, but none of them is equal to the process of devotional service.
As gold and silver can be freed from all dirty contamination by being put into
a fire but not merely by being washed, the living entity can be awakened to his
own identity by performing devotional service (yat-sevayä), but not by karma,
jïäna or yoga. Cultivation of speculative knowledge or practice of yogic
gymnastics will not be helpful.
The word varëam refers to the luster of one's original identity. The original
luster of gold or silver is brilliant. Similarly, the original luster of the living
being, who is part of the sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], is the luster of
änanda, or pleasure. Änandamayo bhyäsät. Every living entity has the right to
become änandamaya, joyful, because he is part of the sac-cid-änanda-vigraha,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1020
Kåñëa. Why should the living being be put into tribulation because of dirty
contamination by the material modes of nature? The living entity should
become purified and regain his svarüpa, his original identity. This he can do
only by devotional service. Therefore, one should adopt the instructions of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is described here as guror guruù, the
spiritual master of all other spiritual masters.
Even though we may not have the fortune to contact the Supreme Lord
personally, the Lord's representative is as good as the Lord Himself because
such a representative does not say anything unless it is spoken by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore gives a definition
of guru. Yäre dekha, täre kaha 'kåñëa'-upadeça: [Cc. Madhya 7.128] the bona fide
guru is he who advises his disciples exactly in accordance with the principles
spoken by Kåñëa. The bona fide guru is he who has accepted Kåñëa as guru.
This is the guru-paramparä system. The original guru is Vyäsadeva because he
is the speaker of Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam, wherein everything
spoken relates to Kåñëa. Therefore guru-püjä is known as Vyäsa-püjä. In the
final analysis, the original guru is Kåñëa, His disciple is Närada, whose disciple
is Vyäsa, and in this way we gradually come in touch with the guru-paramparä.
One cannot become a guru if he does not know what the Personality of
Godhead Kåñëa or His incarnation wants. The mission of the guru is the
mission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: to spread Kåñëa consciousness
all over the world.
TEXT 49
Na YaTPa[SaadaYauTa>aaGale/Xa‚
MaNYae c deva Gaurvae JaNaa" SvYaMa( )
k-Tau| SaMaeTaa" Pa[>aviNTa Pau&Sa‚
STaMaqìr& Tva& Xar<a& Pa[PaÛe )) 49 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1021
na yat-prasädäyuta-bhäga-leçam
anye ca devä guravo janäù svayam
kartuà sametäù prabhavanti puàsas
tam éçvaraà tväà çaraëaà prapadye
SYNONYMS
na—not; yat-prasäda—of the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ayuta-bhäga-leçam—only one ten-thousandth; anye—others; ca—also;
deväù—even the demigods; guravaù—the so-called gurus; janäù—the total
population; svayam—personally; kartum—to execute; sametäù—all together;
prabhavanti—can become equally able; puàsaù—by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; tam—unto Him; éçvaram—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tväm—unto You; çaraëam—shelter; prapadye—let me surrender.
TRANSLATION
Neither all the demigods, nor the so-called gurus nor all other people, either
independently or together, can offer mercy that equals even one ten-thousandth
of Yours. Therefore I wish to take shelter of Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
It is said, kämais tais tair håta jïänäù prapadyante 'nya-devatäù: [Bg. 7.20]
people in general, being motivated by material desires, worship the demigods to
get fruitive results very quickly. People generally do not become devotees of
Lord Viñëu, since Lord Viñëu never becomes the order-supplier of His devotee.
Lord Viñëu does not give a devotee benedictions that will create a further
demand for benedictions. By worshiping the demigods one may get results, but,
as described in Bhagavad-gétä, antavat tu phalaà teñäà tad bhavaty
alpa-medhasäm: [Bg. 7.23] whatever great benedictions one may achieve from
the demigods are all temporary. Because the demigods themselves are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1022
temporary, their benedictions are also temporary and have no permanent
value. Those who aspire for such benedictions have a poor fund of knowledge
(tad bhavaty alpa-medhasäm). The benedictions of Lord Viñëu are different. By
the mercy of the Lord Viñëu, one can be completely freed from material
contamination and go back home, back to Godhead. Therefore the
benedictions offered by the demigods cannot compare to even one
ten-thousandth of the Lord's benedictions. One should not, therefore, try to
obtain benedictions from the demigods or false gurus. One should aspire only
for the benediction offered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As the
Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.66):
sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù
"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver
you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." This is the greatest benediction.
TEXT 50
Ac+aurNDaSYa YaQaaGa]<aq" k*-Ta‚
STaQaa JaNaSYaaivduzae_buDaae Gauå" )
TvMakR-d*k(- SavRd*Xaa& SaMaq+a<aae
v*Taae GauåNaR" SvGaiTa& bu>auTSaTaaMa( )) 50 ))
acakñur andhasya yathägraëéù kåtas
tathä janasyäviduño 'budho guruù
tvam arka-dåk sarva-dåçäà samékñaëo
våto gurur naù sva-gatià bubhutsatäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1023
SYNONYMS
acakñuù—one who does not have his power of sight; andhasya—for such a
blind person; yathä—as; agraëéù—the leader, who goes first; kåtaù—accepted;
tathä—similarly; janasya—such a person; aviduñaù—who has no knowledge of
the goal of life; abudhaù—a foolish rascal; guruù—the spiritual master;
tvam—Your Lordship; arka-dåk—appear like the sun; sarva-dåçäm—of all
sources of knowledge; samékñaëaù—the complete seer; våtaù—accepted;
guruù—the spiritual master; naù—our; sva-gatim—one who knows his real
self-interest; bubhutsatäm—such an enlightened person.
TRANSLATION
As a blind man, being unable to see, accepts another blind man as his leader,
people who do not know the goal of life accept someone as a guru who is a rascal
and a fool. But we are interested in self-realization. Therefore we accept You,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as our spiritual master, for You are able to
see in all directions and are omniscient like the sun.
PURPORT
The conditioned soul, being wrapped in ignorance and therefore not
knowing the goal of life, accepts a guru who can juggle words and make some
display of magic that is wonderful to a fool. Sometimes a foolish person accepts
someone as a guru because he can manufacture a small quantity of gold by
mystic yogic power. Because such a disciple has a poor fund of knowledge, he
cannot judge whether the manufacture of gold is the criterion for a guru. Why
should one not accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, from
whom unlimited numbers of gold mines come into being? Ahaà sarvasya
prabhavo mattaù sarvaà pravartate [Bg. 10.8]. All the gold mines are created by
the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, why should one
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1024
accept a magician who can manufacture only a small portion of gold? Such
gurus are accepted by those who are blind, not knowing the goal of life.
Mahäräja Satyavrata, however, knew the goal of life. He knew the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and therefore he accepted the Lord as his guru. Either
the Supreme Lord or His representative can become guru. The Lord says, mäm
eva ye prapadyante mäyäm etäà taranti te: [Bg. 7.14] "One can get relief from
the clutches of mäyä as soon as he surrenders unto Me." Therefore it is the
guru's business to instruct his disciple to surrender to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead if he wants relief from the material clutches. This is the symptom
of the guru. This same principle was instructed by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu:
yäre dekha, täre kaha 'kåñëa'-upadeça [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. In other words, one is
advised not to accept a guru who does not follow the path of instruction given
by Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 51
JaNaae JaNaSYaaidXaTae_SaTaq& GaiTa&
YaYaa Pa[PaÛeTa durTYaYa& TaMa" )
Tv& TvVYaYa& jaNaMaMaaegaMaÅSaa
Pa[PaÛTae YaeNa JaNaae iNaJa& PadMa( )) 51 ))
jano janasyädiçate 'satéà gatià
yayä prapadyeta duratyayaà tamaù
tvaà tv avyayaà jïänam amogham aïjasä
prapadyate yena jano nijaà padam
SYNONYMS
janaù—a person who is not a bona fide guru (an ordinary person); janasya—of
an ordinary person who does not know the goal of life; ädiçate—instructs;
asatém—impermanent, material; gatim—the goal of life; yayä—by such
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1025
knowledge; prapadyeta—he surrenders; duratyayam—insurmountable;
tamaù—to ignorance; tvam—Your Lordship; tu—but;
avyayam—indestructible; jïänam—knowledge; amogham—without material
contamination; aïjasä—very soon; prapadyate—achieves; yena—by such
knowledge; janaù—a person; nijam—his own; padam—original position.
TRANSLATION
A materialistic so-called guru instructs his materialistic disciples about
economic development and sense gratification, and because of such instructions
the foolish disciples continue in the materialistic existence of ignorance. But
Your Lordship gives knowledge that is eternal, and the intelligent person
receiving such knowledge is quickly situated in his original constitutional
position.
PURPORT
So-called gurus instruct their disciples for the sake of material profit. Some
guru advises that one meditate in such a way that his intelligence will increase
in regard to keeping his body fit for sense gratification. Another guru advises
that sex is the ultimate goal of life and that one should therefore engage in sex
to the best of his ability. These are the instructions of foolish gurus. In other
words, because of the instructions of a foolish guru one remains perpetually in
material existence and suffers its tribulations. But if one is intelligent enough
to take instructions from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as enunciated
in Bhagavad-gétä or the Säìkhya philosophy of Kapiladeva, one can very soon
attain liberation and be situated in his original position of spiritual life. The
words nijaà padam are significant. The living entity, being part and parcel of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has the birthright to a position in
Vaikuëöhaloka, or the spiritual world, where there is no anxiety. Therefore,
one should follow the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Then, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä, tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm eti so
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1026
'rjuna: [Bg. 4.9] after giving up one's body, one will return home, back to
Godhead. The Lord lives in the spiritual world in His original personality, and
a devotee who follows the instructions of the Lord approaches Him (mäm eti).
As a spiritual person, such a devotee returns to the Personality of Godhead
and plays and dances with Him. That is the ultimate goal of life.
TEXT 52
Tv& SavRl/aek-SYa SauôTa( iPa[Yaeìrae
ùaTMaa GauåjaRNaMa>aqíiSaiÖ" )
TaQaaiPa l/aek-ae Na >avNTaMaNDaDaq‚
JaaRNaaiTa SaNTa& ôid bÖk-aMa" )) 52 ))
tvaà sarva-lokasya suhåt priyeçvaro
hy ätmä gurur jïänam abhéñöa-siddhiù
tathäpi loko na bhavantam andha-dhér
jänäti santaà hådi baddha-kämaù
SYNONYMS
tvam—You, my dear Lord; sarva-lokasya—of all planets and their inhabitants;
suhåt—the most well-wishing friend; priya—the most dear; éçvaraù—the
supreme controller; hi—also; ätmä—the supreme soul; guruù—the supreme
teacher; jïänam—the supreme knowledge; abhéñöa-siddhiù—the fulfillment of
all desires; tathä api—still; lokaù—persons; na—not; bhavantam—unto You;
andha-dhéù—because of blind intelligence; jänäti—can know;
santam—situated; hådi—in his heart; baddha-kämaù—because of being
bewildered by material lusty desires.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1027
My Lord, You are the supreme well-wishing friend of everyone, the
dearmost friend, the controller, the Supersoul, the supreme instructor and the
giver of supreme knowledge and the fulfillment of all desires. But although You
are within the heart, the foolish, because of lusty desires in the heart, cannot
understand You.
PURPORT
Herein the reason for foolishness is described. Because the conditioned soul
in this material world is full of materialistic lusty desires, he cannot
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although the Lord is situated
in everyone's heart (éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati [Bg. 18.61]).
It is because of this foolishness that one cannot take instructions from the
Lord, although the Lord is ready to instruct everyone both externally and
internally. The Lord says, dadämi buddhi-yogaà tam yena mäm upayänti te. In
other words, the Lord can give instructions on devotional service by which one
can return home, back to Godhead. Unfortunately, however, people do not
take this devotional service. The Lord, being situated in everyone's heart, can
give one complete instructions on going back to Godhead, but because of lusty
desires one engages himself in materialistic activities and does not render
service to the Lord. Therefore one is bereft of the value of the Lord's
instructions. By mental speculation one can understand that one is not the
body but a spirit soul, but unless one engages in devotional service, the real
purpose of life is never fulfilled. The real purpose of life is to go back home,
back to Godhead, and live with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, play
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, dance with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and eat with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
These are different items of änanda, spiritual happiness in spiritual
variegatedness. Even though one may come to the platform of brahma-bhüta
[SB 4.30.20] and understand his spiritual identity by speculative knowledge,
one cannot enjoy spiritual life without understanding the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. This is indicated here by the word abhéñöa-siddhiù. One can fulfill
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1028
the ultimate goal of life only by engaging in devotional service to the Lord.
Then the Lord will give one proper instructions on how to go back home, back
to Godhead.
TEXT 53
Tv& TvaMah& devvr& vre<Ya&
Pa[PaÛ wRXa& Pa[iTabaeDaNaaYa )
i^NDYaQaRdqPaE>aRGavNa( vcaei>a‚
GaR]NQaqNa( ôdYYaaNa( ivv*<au SvMaaek-" )) 53 ))
tvaà tväm ahaà deva-varaà vareëyaà
prapadya éçaà pratibodhanäya
chindhy artha-dépair bhagavan vacobhir
granthén hådayyän vivåëu svam okaù
SYNONYMS
tvam—how exalted You are; tväm—unto You; aham—myself;
deva-varam—worshiped by the demigods; vareëyam—the greatest of all;
prapadye—fully surrendering; éçam—unto the supreme controller;
pratibodhanäya—for understanding the real purpose of life; chindhi—cut off;
artha-dépaiù—by the light of purposeful instruction; bhagavan—O Supreme
Lord; vacobhiù—by Your words; granthén—knots; hådayyän—fixed within the
core of the heart; vivåëu—kindly explain; svam okaù—my destination in life.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Lord, for self-realization I surrender unto You, who are
worshiped by the demigods as the supreme controller of everything. By Your
instructions, exposing life's purpose, kindly cut the knot from the core of my
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1029
heart and let me know the destination of my life.
PURPORT
Sometimes it is argued that people do not know who is a spiritual master
and that finding a spiritual master from whom to get enlightenment in regard
to the destination of life is very difficult. To answer all these questions, King
Satyavrata shows us the way to accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead as
the real spiritual master. The Supreme Lord has given full directions in
Bhagavad-gétä about how to deal with everything in this material world and
how to return home, back to Godhead. Therefore, one should not be misled by
so-called gurus who are rascals and fools. Rather, one should directly see the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as the guru or instructor. It is difficult,
however, to understand Bhagavad-gétä without the help of the guru. Therefore
the guru appears in the paramparä system. In Bhagavad-gétä (4.34) the Supreme
Personality of Godhead recommends:
tad viddhi praëipätena
paripraçnena sevayä
upadekñyanti te jïänaà
jïäninas tattva-darçinaù
"Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him
submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart
knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth." Lord Kåñëa directly
instructed Arjuna. Arjuna is therefore tattva-darçé or guru. Arjuna accepted
the Supreme Personality of Godhead (paraà brahma paraà dhäma pavitraà
paramaà bhavän [Bg. 10.12]). Similarly, following in the footsteps of Çré
Arjuna, who is a personal devotee of the Lord, one should accept the
supremacy of Lord Kåñëa, as supported by Vyäsa, Devala, Asita, Närada and
later by the äcäryas Rämänujäcärya, Madhväcärya, Nimbärka and Viñëu Svämé
and still later by the greatest äcärya, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Where, then,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1030
is the difficulty in finding a guru? If one is sincere he can find the guru and
learn everything. One should take lessons from the guru and find out the goal
of life. Mahäräja Satyavrata, therefore, shows us the way of the mahäjana.
Mahäjano yena gataù sa panthäù [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. One should surrender to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead (daçävatära) and learn from Him about
the spiritual world and the goal of life.
TEXT 54
é[qéuk- ovac
wTYau¢-vNTa& Na*PaiTa& >aGavaNaaidPaUåz" )
MaTSYaæPaq MahaM>aaeDaaE ivhr&STatvMab]vqTa( )) 54 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ity uktavantaà nåpatià
bhagavän ädi-püruñaù
matsya-rüpé mahämbhodhau
viharaàs tattvam abravét
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; uktavantam—being
addressed by Mahäräja Satyavrata; nåpatim—unto the King; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; ädi-püruñaù—the original person;
matsya-rüpé—who had assumed the form of a fish; mahä-ambhodhau—in that
water of inundation; viharan—while moving; tattvam abravét—explained the
Absolute Truth.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: When Satyavrata had thus prayed to the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1031
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had assumed the form of a fish, the Lord,
while moving in the water of inundation, explained to him the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 55
Paura<aSa&ihTaa& idVYaa& Saa&:YaYaaeGai§-YaavTaqMa( )
SaTYav]TaSYa raJazeRraTMaGauùMaXaezTa" )) 55 ))
puräëa-saàhitäà divyäà
säìkhya-yoga-kriyävatém
satyavratasya räjarñer
ätma-guhyam açeñataù
SYNONYMS
puräëa—the subject matter explained in the Puräëas, the old histories,
especially the Matsya Puräëa; saàhitäm—the Vedic instructions contained in
Brahma-saàhitä and other saàhitäs; divyäm—all transcendental literatures;
säìkhya—the philosophical way of säìkhya-yoga; yoga—the science of
self-realization or bhakti-yoga; kriyävatém—practically applied in life;
satyavratasya—of King Satyavrata; räja-åñeù—the great king and saint;
ätma-guhyam—all the mysteries of self-realization; açeñataù—including all
branches.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead thus explained to King Satyavrata the
spiritual science known as säìkhya-yoga, the science by which one
distinguishes between matter and spirit [in other words, bhakti-yoga], along
with the instructions contained in the Puräëas [the old histories] and the
saàhitäs. The Lord explained Himself in all these literatures.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1032
TEXT 56
Aé[aEzqd*izi>a" Saak-MaaTMaTatvMaSa&XaYaMa( )
NaaVYaaSaqNaae >aGavTaa Pa[ae¢&- b]ø SaNaaTaNaMa( )) 56 ))
açrauñéd åñibhiù säkam
ätma-tattvam asaàçayam
nävy äséno bhagavatä
proktaà brahma sanätanam
SYNONYMS
açrauñét—he heard; åñibhiù—the great saintly persons; säkam—with;
ätma-tattvam—the science of self-realization; asaàçayam—without any doubt
(because it was spoken by the Supreme Lord); nävi äsénaù—sitting in the boat;
bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; proktam—explained;
brahma—all transcendental literatures; sanätanam—eternally existing.
TRANSLATION
While sitting in the boat, King Satyavrata, accompanied by the great saintly
persons, listened to the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
regard to self-realization. These instructions were all from the eternal Vedic
literature [brahma]. Thus the King and sages had no doubt about the Absolute
Truth.
TEXT 57
ATaqTaPa[l/YaaPaaYa oiTQaTaaYa Sa veDaSae )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1033
hTvaSaur& hYaGa]qv& vedaNa( Pa[TYaahrÖir" )) 57 ))
atéta-pralayäpäya
utthitäya sa vedhase
hatväsuraà hayagrévaà
vedän pratyäharad dhariù
SYNONYMS
atéta—passed; pralaya-apäye—at the end of the inundation; utthitäya—to
bring him to his senses after sleeping; saù—the Supreme Lord; vedhase—unto
Lord Brahmä; hatvä—after killing; asuram—the demon; hayagrévam—by the
name Hayagréva; vedän—all the Vedic records; pratyäharat—delivered;
hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
At the end of the last inundation [during the period of Sväyambhuva Manu]
the Supreme Personality of Godhead killed the demon named Hayagréva and
delivered all the Vedic literatures to Lord Brahmä when Lord Brahmä
awakened from sleeping.
TEXT 58
Sa Tau SaTYav]Taae raJaa jaNaivjaNaSa&YauTa" )
ivZ<aae" Pa[SaadaTa( k-LPae_iSMaàaSaqd( vEvSvTaae MaNau" )) 58 ))
sa tu satyavrato räjä
jïäna-vijïäna-saàyutaù
viñëoù prasädät kalpe 'sminn
äséd vaivasvato manuù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1034
SYNONYMS
saù—he; tu—indeed; satyavrataù—Satyavrata; räjä—the King;
jïäna-vijïäna-saàyutaù—enlightened in full knowledge and its practical use;
viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; prasädät—by the mercy; kalpe asmin—in this period
(ruled by Vaivasvata Manu); äsét—became; vaivasvataù manuù—Vaivasvata
Manu.
TRANSLATION
King Satyavrata was illuminated with all Vedic knowledge by the mercy of
Lord Viñëu, and in this period he has now taken birth as Vaivasvata Manu, the
son of the sun-god.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura gives his verdict that Satyavrata
appeared in the Cäkñuña-manvantara. When the Cäkñuña-manvantara ended,
the period of Vaivasvata Manu began. By the grace of Lord Viñëu, Satyavrata
received instructions from the second fish incarnation and was thus
enlightened in all spiritual knowledge.
TEXT 59
SaTYav]TaSYa raJazeRMaaRYaaMaTSYaSYa Xaai(r)R<a" )
Sa&vad& Mahda:YaaNa& é[uTva MauCYaeTa ik-iLbzaTa( )) 59 ))
satyavratasya räjarñer
mäyä-matsyasya çärìgiëaù
saàvädaà mahad-äkhyänaà
çrutvä mucyeta kilbiñät
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1035
SYNONYMS
satyavratasya—of King Satyavrata; räja-åñeù—of the great king;
mäyä-matsyasya—and the fish incarnation; çärìgiëaù—who had one horn on
His head; saàvädam—the description or dealings; mahat-äkhyänam—the great
story; çrutvä—by hearing; mucyeta—is delivered; kilbiñät—from all sinful
reactions.
TRANSLATION
This story concerning the great King Satyavrata and the fish incarnation of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, is a great transcendental narration.
Anyone who hears it is delivered from the reactions of sinful life.
TEXT 60
AvTaar& hreYaaeR_Ya& k-ITaRYaedNvh& Nar" )
SaªLPaaSTaSYa iSaDYaiNTa Sa YaaiTa ParMaa& GaiTaMa( )) 60 ))
avatäraà harer yo 'yaà
kértayed anvahaà naraù
saìkalpäs tasya sidhyanti
sa yäti paramäà gatim
SYNONYMS
avatäram—incarnation; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
yaù—whoever; ayam—he; kértayet—narrates and chants; anvaham—daily;
naraù—such a person; saìkalpäù—all ambitions; tasya—of him;
sidhyanti—become successful; saù—such a person; yäti—goes back; paramäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1036
gatim—back home to Godhead, the supreme place.
TRANSLATION
One who narrates this description of the Matsya incarnation and King
Satyavrata will certainly have all his ambitions fulfilled, and he will
undoubtedly return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 61
Pa[l/YaPaYaiSa DaaTau" SauáXa¢e-MauR%e>Ya"
é[uiTaGa<aMaPaNaqTa& Pa[TYauPaadta hTva )
idiTaJaMak-QaYad( Yaae b]ø SaTYav]TaaNaa&
TaMahMai%l/heTau& iJaøMaqNa& NaTaae_iSMa )) 61 ))
pralaya-payasi dhätuù supta-çakter mukhebhyaù
çruti-gaëam apanétaà pratyupädatta hatvä
ditijam akathayad yo brahma satyavratänäà
tam aham akhila-hetuà jihma-ménaà nato 'smi
SYNONYMS
pralaya-payasi—in the water of inundation; dhätuù—from Lord Brahmä;
supta-çakteù—who was inert because of sleeping; mukhebhyaù—from the
mouths; çruti-gaëam—Vedic records; apanétam—stolen; pratyupädatta—gave
back to him; hatvä—by killing; ditijam—the great demon;
akathayat—explained; yaù—one who; brahma—Vedic knowledge;
satyavratänäm—for the enlightenment of Satyavrata and the great saintly
persons; tam—unto Him; aham—I; akhila-hetum—unto the cause of all causes;
jihma-ménam—appearing as and pretending to be a great fish; nataù asmi—I
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1037
offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who pretended to be a gigantic fish, who restored the Vedic literature to Lord
Brahmä when Lord Brahmä awakened from sleep, and who explained the
essence of Vedic literature to King Satyavrata and the great saintly persons.
PURPORT
Here is a summary of Satyavrata's meeting with the fish incarnation of Lord
Viñëu. Lord Viñëu's purpose was to take back all the Vedic literatures from the
demon Hayagréva and restore them to Lord Brahmä. Incidentally, by His
causeless mercy, the Lord spoke with Satyavrata. The word satyavratänäm is
significant because it indicates that those on the level of Satyavrata can take
knowledge from the Vedas delivered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Whatever is spoken by the Supreme Lord is accepted as Veda. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä, vedänta-kåd veda-vit: the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the compiler of all Vedic knowledge, and He knows the purport of the Vedas.
Therefore, anyone who takes knowledge from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa, or from Bhagavad-gétä as it is, knows the purpose of the Vedas
(vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15]). One cannot understand Vedic
knowledge from the veda-väda-ratäs, who read the Vedas and misconstrue
their subject matter. One has to know the Vedas from the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twenty-fourth
Chapter, of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Matsya, the Lord's Fish
Incarnation."
—This commentation has been finished in our New Delhi center today, the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1038
first of September, 1976, the day of Rädhäñöamé, by the grace of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and the äcäryas. Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura says,
täìdera caraëa sevi bhakta-sane väsa janame janame haya, ei abhiläña. I am
attempting to present Çrémad-Bhägavatam in the English language by the order
of my spiritual master, Çrémad Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, and by his
grace the work of translation is gradually progressing, and the European and
American devotees who have joined the Kåñëa consciousness movement are
helping me considerably. Thus we have expectations of finishing the great task
before my passing away. All glories to Çré Guru and Gauräìga.
END OF THE EIGHTH CANTO
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com

Srimad Bhagavatam
Eigth Canto
e-book
This e-book and others are available for download at:
www.e-vedas.com
Hard bound books may be purchased at:
www.thekrishnastore.com
Email comments or questions to:
comments@evedas.com
This e-book was completed on March 12,2006
e-books copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved
www.krishna.com
Distributed by e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers